Information Technology Self-Efficacy and Confidence Amongst Health Professions 
Students Enrolling in a Telehealth Educational Course  
Rodrigo Mariño 
Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
e-mail: r.marino@unimelb.edu.au 
Mark Merolli 
Dept of Physiotherapy, School of Health Sciences, 
University of Melbourne; Centre for Digital 
Transformation of Health 
Melbourne, Australia 
e-mail: merollim@unimelb.edu.au 
Daniel Capurro 
Melbourne School of Engineering 
School of Computing and Information Systems 
University of Melbourne; Centre for Digital Transformation of Health 
Melbourne, Australia 
e-mail: dcapurro@unimelb.edu.au 
 
Abstract—A telehealth course was designed to provide entry-
to-practice health professions students with a set of 
foundational knowledge and skills needed to succeed as a 
virtual health care practitioner in an age where remote care 
has become increasingly needed. In preparation for the large-
scale testing and validation of the course, this study examined 
the level of technology proficiency (reported as self-assessed 
‘confidence’) amongst the future healthcare workforce. This 
assessment was undertaken among students from four health 
sciences departments at the University of Melbourne, 
Australia. Students were invited to participate in the study by 
completing an online, anonymous, 68-item questionnaire. 
Relevant to this manuscript, the questionnaire included 22 
items pertaining to Internet and Information Communication 
Technology (ICT) use, adapted from Technology Proficiency 
Self-Assessment Questionnaire for 21st Century Learning 
(TPSA C-21). Results indicated that access to technology and 
frequency of use of the Internet was high, with 57.7% of the 
students accessing the Internet, at least, every 30 minutes. 
When students were asked about their level of confidence with 
ICT, responses suggested that students were confident in their 
ability to perform all the task included in the TPSA C-21. 
Nonetheless, students felt less confident with the administrative 
aspects of mobile technology and in its use as a tool for their 
future role as health professionals. Findings indicate that 
students have adequate proficiency. The study identified some 
areas in which support, and further development may be 
required. 
Keywords – students; use of ICT; technology proficiency 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Telehealth 
(telemedicine, 
virtual 
care, 
etc.) 
has 
developed and continues to advance rapidly for several 
reasons. These include but are not limited to progress in 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), 
increasing patient’s expectations and preferences, and a 
need for flexible models of care [1][2]. Telehealth is a 
useful vehicle to improve equity of access and opportunity 
for care to patients, help solve specific health problems, and 
expand the possibilities of continuous training/furthering 
development for health professionals [1]. 
More recently, it has been observed how, in a short 
period of time, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, an 
expansion in the use of telehealth and ICT from all its 
modalities of practices, to ensure that health services are 
provided and made available to the population [3][4]. This 
situation has highlighted the urgent need and obligation to 
train our future health workforce to new, modalities of 
practice, which undoubtedly will involve some form of 
telehealth to operate effectively [5][6]. Health professionals 
of the digital age must develop proficiencies and 
competencies in this area and understand its opportunities 
and limitations of working under this “new normal”. 
The Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry, and Health 
Sciences, The University of Melbourne developed and 
evaluated a blended learning experience to provide entry-to-
practice health professions students with a set of 
foundational skills and knowledge needed to succeed as a 
virtual health care practitioner [7]. This learning experience 
will equip health professionals with the core capabilities that 
are necessary to work in diverse multidisciplinary scenarios 
and address current and new demands in health care using 
telehealth and ICT. 
The modules in this course provide access to theoretical 
elements of the state of the art in telehealth and generate 
spaces for reflection that allow health professional students 
to acquire the basic core knowledge to go beyond 
teleconsultation and remote triage. The course also allows 
students to identify those healthcare services and procedures 
that could be successfully provided through telehealth. The 
emphasis is not on technology, but on the ability of students 
to: 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
communicate with various stakeholders (i.e., 
patients, other clinicians, care teams) 
 
deliver patient-centered education and care 
 
effectively adopt new technologies 
 
identify barriers and facilitators to care using this 
model 
 
work in multidisciplinary healthcare teams. 
This paper is organized in five sections. The first Section 
provides the foundation for understanding the need for a 
telehealth course and the structure of such a course and 
presents the aims and objectives of the study. Section II 
describes the methodology used in the pilot test the course. 
Section III presents the results of the trial, including students 
involved in the course. Sections IV and V discuss the results 
of the trial and conclude on its findings, respectively. 
Further steps are also discussed in last section. 
The specific objective of this study was to assess the level 
of self-assessed technology proficiency amongst the future 
healthcare workforce. This assessment was undertaken with 
students across four interprofessional health sciences 
Departments/Schools at the University of Melbourne, 
Australia: Dentistry, Physiotherapy, Social Work, and 
Audiology and Speech Pathology. 
This evaluation was considered an important first step 
alongside an understanding of implementation challenges 
and associated issues to aid in integrating telehealth into the 
educational environment. 
II. 
METHODS 
With the approval of the Human Research Ethics 
Committee from The University of Melbourne (Study ID: 
20529), students from five health science award courses 
(across four departments) at the University of Melbourne 
were recruited to participate in this project. These courses 
were: Dentistry, Oral Health Therapy, Physiotherapy, Social 
Work, and Clinical Audiology. 
Data was collected between August and September 2021. 
During this period students were invited to participate in the 
study by first completing an online anonymous, 68-item 
questionnaire. The questionnaire included items on socio-
demographic characteristics and course level data, as well as 
Internet utilization information (i.e., frequency and devices 
used). Additionally, the instrument included 22 items asking 
about Internet and information communication technology 
(ICT) use, adapted from Technology Proficiency Self-
Assessment Questionnaire for 21st Century Learning (TPSA 
C-21) [8]. The instrument also contained a subsequent 34 
items about perceptions surrounding using telehealth [9]. 
Students’ perceptions around telehealth were captured 
according to the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of 
Technology (UTAUT2). The UTAUT2 is a validated and 
reliable framework for examining elements of technology 
acceptance and has been adopted in several studies [10][11]. 
Socio-demographic information reported in this analysis 
included age, sex, and course of study.  
Internet utilization information included: Frequency of 
online access; participants classified themselves according to 
frequency of visit to Internet sites, as ‘At least hourly, ‘At 
least daily, ‘At least weekly’, ‘At least monthly’, and ‘Less 
than once a month’. The device use list included 9 
alternatives: Mobile smartphone; tablet (i.e., iPad); desktop 
computer; laptop; smart TV; gaming console (i.e., Xbox, 
PlayStation); smartwatch (i.e., Apple watch, Fitbit); eBook 
reader (i.e., Kindle, Kobo, etc.); and smart home assistant 
(i.e., Google Home, Amazon Alexa). 
The TPSA C-21 was assessed on a 5-point ordinal Likert 
scale, according to the response that best described their 
confidence in using the Internet and ICT as ‘Strongly 
disagree’ to ‘Strongly agree’. These responses were 
weighted as ‘Somewhat agree’= 0.5, ‘Strongly agree’= 1, all 
other responses = 0. The weighted values were added to 
yield a total confidence (proficiency) score.  
Sample size calculation were based on the minimum 
requirements to detect a change from pre- to post-
intervention (i.e., participation in the telehealth course), it 
was estimated that a total sample size of 26 participants 
would be necessary to detect a mean difference of five-tenths 
(0.50) of the standard deviation in major outcomes between 
paired observations of participants (pre-test vs. post-test), at 
the uni-dimensional significance criterion of 0.05, and a 
power of 0.80 [12]. The study used convenience samples of 
male and female students, 18 years or older, enrolled in the 
aforementioned courses.  
Data were analysed using IBM SPSS to statistically 
compare results between different socio-demographic and 
Internet use variables. Given the small sample size, only 
basic descriptive information on the distribution of selected 
socio-demographic and study variables was performed. 
Categorical and ordinal variables were analysed utilizing Chi 
square analysis (). For continuous variables (technology 
proficiency results), data were analysed using one-way 
analysis of variance (ANOVA) to examine main effects of 
each of the independent variables on the dependent variable 
under study. 
III. 
RESULTS 
In total, 26 students enrolled in the training course and 
completed the pre-assessment instrument. The majority 
(82.6%) were female and aged 29 years-old or younger 
(76.9%). Nine participants were from the Dental School 
(34.6%), 23.1% were from Physiotherapy, another 23.1% 
were Social Work students, and the remaining 19.2% were 
Audiology students.  
All participants had access to a smartphone and a laptop. 
Frequency of use of the Internet was high (Table I), 57.7% of 
the students accessed the Internet at least, every 30 minutes. 
Another 23.1% access very hour. No statistically significant 
differences in frequency of use were found by profession, 
sex, or age group.  
TABLE I.  
FREQUENCY OF ONLINE ACCESS (%)A 
Every 10 
minutes 
Every 30 
minutes 
Every hour 
at least once 
a day 
42.3 
15.4 
23.1 
19.2 
a. 
N= 26 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

When students were asked about their level of confidence 
with technology (their self-assessed proficiency), results 
indicated (Table II) that they were confident in their ability 
to perform most of the tasks. Confidence scores ranged from 
13.0 to 22.0, with an overall mean of 19.8 (s.d. 2.5). Half of 
the participants scored 18.0 points or more in the confidence 
scale. There were no significant differences by gender, age 
group, frequency of use, or profession.  
Except for one item (item 11), participants scored highly 
in all the items (>55.0%). In particular, they all (100%) 
strongly agreed that they were able to: find webpages related 
to my subject matter interests (Item 1); use the computer to 
create a slideshow presentation (Item 7); and download and 
view streaming movies/video clips (Item 20). In another 
seven items, all students were either Strongly or Somewhat 
confident that they would (Items 3,6,9,18,19,21,22); and that 
they confidently would download podcasts and audio books; 
or send phots via a smartphone; or and safe and retrieve files 
from the cloud. 
On the other hand, although the majority (> 50%) were 
strongly/somewhat confident in their proficiency, they were 
less confident in areas requiring deeper skills such as: 
creating a database of information (26.9%) (Item 8); 
integrating mobile technology in their work or creating a 
blog (26.9%) (Item 14). Students were also less confident in 
describing software programs or apps they would use in their 
role as healthcare professionals (19.2%) (Item 10), and to a 
lesser extent using social media tools as part of their role as 
health professional (7.6%) (Item 13).  
Healthcare profession students felt less confident in two 
items: writing a plan with a budget to buy technology that 
would support me in my role as health professional (Item 
11); and on how to create their own webpage (Item 2). When 
asked about how satisfied they were writing a plan with a 
budget to buy technology that would support me in my role 
as health professional, although the majority was either 
somewhat confident or slightly confident (57.7%), 15.4% 
was neutral and, more importantly, another 26.9% somewhat 
or strongly disagree with the statement.  
The majority were also confident (strongly: 30.8%; or 
somewhat: 30.8%) that they could create their own webpage. 
However, 15.4% were neutral, and another 19.2% were 
somewhat confident and 3.8% was not confident. 
TABLE II.  
STUDENTS’ RESPONSES TO TECHNOLOGY PROFICIENCY 
QUESTIONNAIRE (%)A 
I FEEL CONFIDENT THAT I COULD.....  
Strongly 
disagree 
Somewhat 
disagree 
Neutral 
Somewhat 
agree 
Strongly 
agree 
1. Use an Internet search engine (e.g., Google) to find webpages 
related to my subject matter interests? a 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100.0 
2. Create my own webpage? 
3.8 
19.2 
15.4 
30.8 
30.8 
3. Find primary sources of information on the Internet that I can use in 
my role as a health professional 
- 
- 
- 
11.5 
88.5 
4. Use a spreadsheet to create a bar graph? 
- 
- 
3.8 
26.9 
69.2 
5. Create a newsletter with graphics 
- 
- 
11.5 
38.5 
50.0 
6. Save documents in formats so that others can read them if they have 
different word processing programs  
- 
- 
- 
7.7 
92.3 
7. Use the computer to create a slideshow presentation 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100.0 
8. Create a database of information 
- 
7.7 
19.2 
23.1 
50.0 
9. Use technology to collaborate with other people who are distant 
from where I am 
- 
- 
- 
3.8 
96.2 
10. Describe 5 software programs or apps that I would use in my role 
as health professional 
- 
11.5 
7.7 
30.8 
50.0 
11. Write a plan with a budget to buy technology that would support 
me in my role as health professional 
11.5 
15.4 
15.4 
34.6 
23.1 
12. Integrate mobile technologies into my role as health professional 
- 
3.8 
23.1 
19.2 
53.8 
13. Use social media tools as part of my role as health professional 
- 
3.8 
3.8 
23.1 
69.2 
14. Create a wiki or blog to have peers collaborate 
- 
11.5 
15.4 
34.6 
38.5 
15. Use online tools to communicate from a distance in my role as 
health professional 
- 
- 
3.8 
15.4 
80.8 
16. Communicate with someone in a one-to-one environment in which 
the other person has their own device 
- 
- 
11.5 
11.5 
76.9 
17. Find a way to use a smartphone in my dole as a health professional 
to collect people’s responses 
- 
- 
7.7 
19.2 
73.1 
18. Use mobile devices to connect to others for my professional 
development 
- 
- 
- 
19.2 
80.8 
19. Download and listen to podcasts/audio books 
- 
- 
- 
3.8 
96.2 
20. Download and view streaming movies/video clips 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100.0 
21. Send/transfer photos or other data via a smartphone 
- 
- 
- 
3.8 
96.2 
22. Save and retrieve files in a cloud-based environment 
- 
- 
- 
19.2 
80.8 
b. 
N= 26 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The ability to integrate 21st century technology for 
learning is an expectation for educators. If educators want to 
ensure that the future healthcare work forces are digitally 
trained, then self-efficacy and technological abilities are 
important constructs [13]. The information provided by this 
cohort of students would indicate that students in healthcare 
professional courses at the University of Melbourne are 
highly proficient, and able to use a wide range of 
technologies regularly in their daily lives.  
This was a cohort of students who have been exposed to 
ICT in education since, at least, high school. Present results 
demonstrated how technology skills have evolved in the 21st 
century among digital natives [14]. Students were confident 
in their ability to perform all the task included in the 
TPSA\C-21. This scale is widely used as a measurement 
tool for research about technology proficiency in 21st 
century learning. This was important to verify, as it has been 
found among healthcare students that not all are frequent 
users of ICT [14]. Furthermore, studies have also purported 
that Internet use by students was mostly for non-
professional related purposes [15][16]. Students in this 
study felt less confident in some administrative uses of ICT 
technology and in its use as a tool for their future role as 
health professionals. Thus, although students seem to have 
adequate proficiency and confidence, the study also 
identified some areas in which support, and further 
development may be required. It points to important issues 
to be considered in the design and delivery of technology-
enhanced curricula in the future.  
Although this study provides valuable insights into the 
technology proficiency and confidence in the ability to 
perform among dentistry and health professions students, it 
is not without limitations. The most obvious one was the 
cross-sectional nature of the study, which precludes a strong 
conclusion about technology proficiencies amongst the 
future healthcare workforces. Additionally, this assessment 
was undertaken using a self-selected sample. This 
introduces the influences of variation between participants 
and non-participants in terms of technical self-competency, 
experience with technology, and other factors. Also, the 
study relied on self-reported data, which may not be an 
accurate reflection of the relationship between self-
perceived and actual technical competency. However, 
considering these limitations, we believe that the current 
approach was adequate given the exploratory nature of the 
study. 
Finally, it points to the different areas of competence 
that healthcare students must acquire for the use of ICT and 
Digital Health as a competence [13,17]. These and other 
developments of ICT, such as with artificial intelligence, 
robotics, self-learning machines or the need to analyse large 
amounts of data, will require the development of new 
competencies among healthcare professionals [13,18]. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A telehealth course was designed to provide health 
professions students with a set of foundational knowledge 
and skills needed to succeed as a virtual health care 
practitioner. This study examined the level of technology 
proficiency (reported as self-assessed ‘confidence’) amongst 
the future healthcare workforce. Students in healthcare 
professional entry-to-practice degrees at the University of 
Melbourne are technologically proficient, able to use a wide 
range of technologies regularly in their daily lives. They 
seem to have adequate proficiency and confidence in their 
ability to perform all the tasks explored in this evaluation. 
Nonetheless, the study identified some areas in which 
support, and further development may be required.  
Large-scale testing and validation of the course will 
follow. However, this initial evaluation provides valuable 
information, which could be used during the redesign of 
health science curriculum. It would enable curriculum 
which meets the needs of students, the healthcare 
profession, and the community. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project was funded by a Learning and Teaching 
Initiative grant and from The University of Melbourne and a 
Universitas 21 Health Sciences Group International Projects 
Fund grant. We would also like to acknowledge the students 
who participated in this study and Dr Diego López, Mr. 
Luke Davies for their work in this project as assistants, and 
Prof Alastair Sloan and Prof Linda Denehy for their support, 
advice, and feedback through this project. Finally, our 
project advisory committee. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. R. Dorsey and E. J. Topol, “State of Telehealth,” N Engl J 
Med, vol. 375, pp. 1400, 2016.  
[2] M. W. L. Moreira, J. J., P. C. Rodrigues, V. Korotaev, J. Al-
Muhtadi and N. Kumar, "A Comprehensive Review on Smart 
Decision Support Systems for Health Care," in IEEE Systems 
Journal, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 3536-3545, Sept. 2019, doi: 
10.1109/JSYST.2018.2890121T.  
[3] Greenhalgh, J Wherton, S. Shaw, and C. Morrison, “Video 
Consultations for Covid-19,” BMJ; vol. 368, m998, 2020. 
[4] D. Garcia-Huidobro, S. Rivera, S. V. Chang, P. Bravo, and D.  
Capurro, “System-wide 
accelerated 
implementation 
of 
telemedicine in response to COVID-19: mixed methods 
evaluation,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 22:e22146, 2020. 
[5] M. Alcocer, et al. ”Teaching Telemedicine: The Next Frontier 
for Medical Educators,” JMIR Med Educ, vol. 7, e29099, 
2021 
[6] S. Edirippulige, and N. R. Armfield, “Education and Training 
to Support the Use of Clinical Telehealth: A Review of The 
Literature,” J Telemed Telecare, vol. 23, pp. 273-282, 2017. 
[7] 
M. Merolli, D. Capurro, L Davies, D. Lopez, and R. Mariño, 
“Telehealth 
Education for 
Entry to 
Practice 
Health 
Professional 
Students”. 
Available 
from: 
https://mdhs.unimelb.edu.au/engage/learning-and-
teaching/2021-learning-and-teaching-symposium#thursday-
program/ [retrived: March 2022]. 
[8] R. Christensen and G. Knezek, “Validating the Technology 
Proficiency Self-Assessment Questionnaire for 21st Century 
Learning (TPSA C-21),” J. Digit Learn Teach Educ, vol. 33, 
pp. 20-31, 2017. 
[9] J. Tavares and T. Oliveira, “Electronic Health Record Patient 
Portal Adoption by Health Care Consumers: An Acceptance 
Model and Survey,” J Med Internet Res, vol.18:e49, 2016.  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[10] V. Venkatesh, J.Y.L. Thong, and X. Xu, “Consumer 
Acceptance and Use of Information Technology: Extending 
the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology,” 
MIS Quarterly vol, 36, pp. 157–78, 2012.  
[11] K. Tamilmani, N.P. Rana, S. Fosso Wamba, and R. Dwivedi, 
“The extended Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of 
Technology (UTAUT2): A systematic literature review and 
theory evaluation,” Int J Inf Manage, vol. 57, 2021, 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102269 
[12] J. Cohen, Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral 
Sciences. 2nd ed., Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
publishers, 1988. 
[13] M. Brunner, et al. “An eHealth Capabilities Framework for 
Graduates and Health Professionals: Mixed-Methods Study,” 
J Med Internet Res, vol. 20, e10229, 2018. 
[14]  A.E. Cowey and H. Potts, “What Can We Learn From 
Second Generation Digital Natives? A Qualitative Study of 
Undergraduates’ Views of Digital Health at One London 
University,” Proceedings of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, pp2102-2106, 2018.  
[15]  R. Mariño, E. Habibi, W. Au-Yeung and M. Morgan, “Use of 
Communication 
and 
Information 
Technology 
among 
Victorian and South Australian Oral Health Profession 
Students,” J Dent Educ,vol, 76, pp. 1667-74, 2012. 
[16] G. Kennedy, et al., Questioning the Net Generation: A 
Collaborative Project in Australian Higher Education. In: 
Who's 
Learning? 
Whose 
Technology? 
Proceedings 
ASCILITE 2006. Sydney: Sydney University Press, pp. 413-
417, 2006. 
[17] R. Mariño, C. Delany, K. Reid, et al., Investigation of the 
Preparation for Practice of Newly Qualified Dental 
Practitioners in Australia. Final Report. Melbourne Dental 
School, The University of Melbourne. 2021. Available from: 
https://www.adc.org.au/files/research/Preparation_for_Practic
e_of_Newly_Qualified_Dental_Practitioners_in_Austraila.pdf 
[retrived: March 2022]. 
[18] O. Fejerskov, S. Uribe and R., Mariño, Dentistry in a 
Historical Perspective and a Likely Future of the Profession. 
In: Mariño R, Morgan M, Walmsley D. (Eds.) Career Paths in 
Oral Health. Springer International Publishing. pp. 3-19. 
2018.
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

