A Cloud Scalable Platform for DICOM Image Analysis  
as a Tool for Remote Medical Support 
Iuliana Ojog 
NeonLobster Ltd. 
Bloxham Mill Business Centre 
Barford Road 
Bloxham OX15 4FF, England 
oiuliana@neonlobster.co.uk 
Miguel Arias-Estrada, Jesus A. Gonzalez,  
Beatriz Flores 
INAOE – Computer Science Dept. 
A.P. 51 y 216,  
Puebla, Pue. 72000, Mexico 
ariasmo@inaoep.mx, jagonzalez@inaoep.mx, 
baflores@ccc.inaoep.mx
 
Abstract—Remote diagnosis has become an important research 
field to provide high quality health care services to larger 
communities.  Even when the importance of providing these 
services is undisputed, the computational cost of performing 
such processes is high. In order to deliver this kind of services, 
we present a scalable platform in the cloud able to process 
DICOM files with a modular structure. Our platform extracts 
and processes relevant information from the DICOM file to be 
used for support in diagnosis in medical applications. The 
paper presents a discussion about the cloud infrastructures 
and our choice of storage and HPC processing capabilities on 
Amazon AWS infrastructure. We also propose an HTML5 and 
WebGL web based access interface to allow remote access, 
visualization and manipulation from the user side, but keeping 
the computational cost on the cloud. The platform offers Cloud 
processing for computationally expensive tasks (from DICOM 
image segmentation to data mining in order to extract relevant 
information from the DICOM file). We present a basic proof of 
concept and describe the relevant modules of our platform.   
Keywords—DICOM; X3D; WebGL; HTML5; 3D graphics; 
mobile medical applications; medical cloud DICOM processing; 
GPU processing on the cloud; Amazon AWS. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
There has been extensive research on using the web for 
medical image processing, remote support diagnosis and 
visualization [1][2]. Unfortunately, the large amount of data 
of DICOM files limits the applicability on mobile devices or 
require high computational cost to extract relevant 
information that even desktop computers are limited to do. 
On the other hand, the adoption of the WebGL [3] and 
HTML5 standards for the new generation of browsers brings 
back the interest of web based 3D rendering with WebGL 
and declarative X3D [5], since it will be supported without 
plug-ins, allowing the same functionality across platforms. 
Further, WebGL will make possible to render 3D models in 
real time with the computational capabilities of the new 
smartphones and tablets. Some attempts to build WebGL-
based medical visualization systems have been reported [4], 
but these only considered the X3D model creation from 
DICOM on the server side for visualization in a remote 
platform. In this work, we propose a cloud based platform 
where DICOMs are stored but also processed, so a remote 
(desktop or mobile) computer can access and manipulate 
visual data and extracted information. Our approach is 
modular, so different kind of studies and data analysis can be 
applied to the DICOM file, and 2D or 3D data structures can 
be visualized by the user, in order to help interpretation and 
support for diagnosis.  
The paper is organized as follows: Section II gives an 
overview of the cloud infrastructure choice. Section III 
details the processing architecture, and Section IV the 
implementation and preliminary results. We give some 
conclusions and directions in Section V. 
 
II. 
CLOUD STORAGE AND PROCESSING INFRASTRUCTURE 
Many PACS like platforms in the cloud only consider 
data storage. For general PACS functionality, data must be 
stored and accessed via HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act of 1996) compliant procedures [8], 
for security and integrity reasons.  
In our case, we are also interested on data processing in 
the cloud, so the storage infrastructure must be coupled or 
connected with a fast link in the cloud with a High 
Performance Computing (HPC) infrastructure. The Amazon 
AWS infrastructure provides both solutions in the cloud as 
separate services.  
On one side, the Amazon S3 (Simple Storage Service) 
allows cloud data storage of large files. It also offers easy 
solutions to develop HIPAA compliant medical applications. 
Basically, the Amazon infrastructure offers solutions for: 
Identification & Authentication, Authorized Privileges & 
Access Control, Confidentiality, Integrity, Accountability, 
Security and Protection, Disaster Recovery. 
On the other hand, the Amazon EC2 infrastructure 
provides on demand processing nodes, either multicore 
processor nodes, or HPC nodes with Nvidia Tesla boards. 
The later are parallel processing platforms based on CUDA-
C, a parallel C version suited for multi thread programming 
on Nvidia GPUs and HPC boards. Typical acceleration with 
an Nvidia board goes from 10 to 100 times compared to a 
traditional CPU node.  
There are other cloud solutions but for the architecture 
we are proposing, Amazon AWS provides a scalable 
environment for storage and processing suitable for medical 
image processing and analysis.  
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE 
The proposed platform is based on a client – server 
architecture, where the server is in the cloud (Amazon S3 
and EC2). Traditional architectures allow physicians/ 
radiologists to visualize, analyze, and interact with patient 
information stored in a DICOM repository. This approach 
has the drawback of requiring large data transfers between 
the user and the cloud, and limits the amount of processing 
on the DICOM data in the local computer to basic image 
enhancement algorithms.  
In our case, once the DICOM is stored in the cloud, it can 
be processed / analyzed on the cloud side, using a large 
number of nodes (reaching HPC performance), and sending 
to the final user only relevant information, either data, 
images or 3D models, as in [7]. 
 
 
A. High Performance Computing on the Cloud architecture 
 
Figure 1 depicts the general architecture. On the client 
side, there is a visualization tool based on a web interface. 
On the cloud side, there is an S3 server that contains the 
DICOM repository where the patient data is stored. A file 
subsystem and HIPAA compliant access is implemented for 
file upload, storage, management, and traditional DICOM 
access for visualization through the net. An administration 
module (m3DicomAdmin) is in charge of authenticating 
users and initiate task requests. The general steps are:  
 
1. A user is authenticated 
2. The user uploads a DICOM file (or is already stored 
in the S3 server) and a request for a particular image 
processing task 
3. The m3DicomAdmin communicates the file to the 
EC2 server,  
4. The master node in the m3DicomProcessing 
configures the HPC nodes for the particular image 
processing task (plug-in). 
5. The image analysis/processing is carried out and the 
result is sent back to the S3 server 
6. The user is notified and he/she can download the 
results of the type of study into the viewer.  
 
The most elaborate and complex processes of DICOM 
data analysis are based on advanced segmentation algorithms 
that locate specific organs or tissue in the data. The 
architecture allows the EC2 unit to allocate several nodes or 
HPC resources (ie. Nvidia HPC boards) to solve in short 
time the tasks.  
If the cloud processing generates 3D data or 3D models, 
they can be embedded into a X3D representation that is sent 
back into the user visualization interface for visual 
exploration, alleviating the amount of data compared to 
visualizing only the DICOM file [7]. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Server-Client architecture of the scalable platform. The S3 
service is used for storage and the EC2 infrastructure for cloud processing 
where several “plug-ins” for each modality can be integrated. 
 
B. Client – web user interface 
 
Figure 2 shows a simplified version of the web interface 
architecture. On top of figure 2: the cloud processing engine 
sends X3D files and additional data extracted during the 
analysis phase and both types of data are integrated into 
HTML using embedded X3D as a mixed-namespace 
document (X3DOM implementation [5]). This allows a 
simple interaction (HTML events) and navigation (zoom, 
rotate) on resulted 3D objects. The interface is designed to 
provide cross-browser support (for both desktop and 
mobiles), using the JQuery Mobile framework [6]. 
Through the user interface, it is possible to set up 
algorithm parameters (such as a threshold or other 
parameters), which are used by the cloud engine to extract 
and label relevant information from the DICOM file. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  DICOM/X3D data structure from cloud and viewer 
interpretation for user interaction 
 
 
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. The Processing plug-in architecture 
 
Figure 3 presents the HPC platform where the algorithm 
associated to a particular type of study, is considered at a 
high level as a plug-in module, but actually it corresponds to 
a particular software / algorithm configurations for the multi-
node HPC part. The platform has a service manager that 
routes the task requests into a queue, where each task is 
individually routed to a master node of the HPC. The master 
node configures the parallel node section of the HPC with a 
particular algorithm required by the task, i.e. Mammography 
for a set of DICOMs to be processed in batch.  
Amazon EC2 allows to configure a set of nodes with a 
specific software algorithm, but that can be reconfigured on 
the fly depending on demand, so the Master node could set 
up more nodes if there is a large demand of task requests.  
The result of the processing is routed back to the Amazon 
S3 repository and associated with the patient in the database, 
and signaling the end of processing to the remote user.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Multi configurable HPC for Image Analysis. Each Node set 
configuration is treated as a “plug-in” that the m3Dicom Processing node 
configures on the flight depending on the kind of study to be performed.  
 
IV. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS ON CLOUD PROCESSING 
An implementation of the platform was carried out. We 
used the Amazon AWS infrastructure with a basic 4-node 
server with Nvidia Tesla GPU boards for HPC. For DICOM 
storage we used Amazon S3. The basic 4-node configuration 
was chosen to test parallelization and multiple node 
configuration for the basic test algorithms, but the 
configuration could be grown to larger setups to reduce 
processing time. In a multi-user configuration, an additional 
workload manager is required in order to queue task requests 
into the server or to dynamically setup more processing 
nodes. 
Some results are discussed below.  
A. Mammography analysis in the cloud 
Once the user uploads a mammogram DICOM file, it is 
processed to identify micro-calcifications. This process 
requires extensive computing in order to segment Regions 
Of Interest (ROIs), which are possible micro-calcifications, 
extract features (statistical, texture, and geometric) from the 
ROIs to be used by a classifier that works on the cloud. The 
classifier finds the micro-calcifications (eliminating as many 
false positives as possible) and creates a new mammogram 
image in which it identifies the micro-calcifications found 
(adding a mark and id to each possible micro-calcification). 
This new image is returned to the user to be used as a 
support tool for medical diagnosis [9, 10, 11]. 
 
B. Visualization tool 
Figure 4 shows the visualization tool interface. The tool 
is a web application developed using HTML5 and JavaScript 
suitable for mobile and desktop browsers. The tool connects 
to the cloud platform and offers options to select one patient 
or upload a new DICOM image, to start a processing task 
and visualize the results, depending on the type of study 
uploaded. The interface integrates a 3D viewer and a 2D 
viewer, using X3D objects and HTML5 functionalities to 
manipulate 
the 
3D 
objects 
and 
images 
 
(zoom, 
brightness/contrast, etc.) 
 
 
Figure 4.  View of the mobile device interface showing a mammography. 
The detected micro-calcifications are signaled with an arrow.  
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 5.  Mobile device interface showing a 3D model extracted in the 
cloud from a DICOM dental file. 
Figure 5 shows the viewer displaying a 3D model from a 
dental DICOM where the segmentation process was carried 
in the cloud, following same technique described in [7].  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
We have presented a proof of concept of a cloud platform 
for DICOM processing. The platform stores DICOM files, 
processes them on a HPC infrastructure and delivers 
information to a web client using WebGL and HTML5. The 
platform is the basis for a larger system where different kind 
of image data processing will be integrated. A basic proof of 
concept was implemented with mammography analysis 
based 
on 
data 
mining 
algorithms 
and 
bone/tissue 
segmentation for dental applications. Some ideas to be 
explored are pre-computation of volumetric rendering, a 
scaled up version of the mammography analysis for batch 
processing large sets of studies and advanced 3D data 
segmentation.  
On the user side, WebGL and HTML allow flexible 
visualization. Future work will concentrate on an improved 
front-end tool that can be used in desktop and mobile 
devices, 
and 
define 
a 
standard 
for 
plug-in 
processing/integration that could be used by others to grow 
functionalities of the system.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. K. Yoo, J. Key, K. Choi, and J. Jo, “Web-Based Hybrid 
Visualization of Medical Images,” Image and Video 
Retrieval, LNCS, Vol 3568. 2005, pp. 588-588. 
[2] A. Poliakov, E. Albright, K. Hinshaw, D. Corina, G. 
Ojemann, R. Martin, and J. Brinkley, “Server-based Approach 
to Web Visualization of Integrated Three-dimensional Brain 
Imaging Data,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, 2005 Mar–Apr 12(2), pp. 140–151. 
[3] WebGL, OpenGL ES 2.0 for the Web, 2011. Available: 
http://www.khronos.org/webgl/ <retrieved: February, 2013> 
[4] D. Cantor-Rivera, R. Bartha, and T. M. Peters, “Efficient 3D 
rendering for Web-based medical imaging software: a proof 
of concept,” SPIE Medical Imaging 2011: Visualization, 
Image-Guided Procedures, and Modeling, Volume 7964 Feb 
2011, pp. 79643A-79643A-4. 
[5] J. Behr , Y. Jung , J. Keil , T. Drevensek , M. Zoellner , P. 
Eschler and, D. Fellner, “A scalable architecture for the 
HTML5/X3D integration model X3DOM”, Proc. 15th 
International Conference on 3D Web Technology (Web3D 
2010), ACM Press, 2010, pp. 185-193.  
[6] JQuery, “JQuery Mobile Framework,” 2013. Available: 
http://jquerymobile.com/ <retrieved: February, 2013> 
[7] I. Ojog, M. Arias-Estrada, “m3DICOM: A Platform for 
Mobile DICOM Visualization Based on X3D,“ eTelemed 
2012, The Foruth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine. Valencia, Spain. Jan 30, 
2012, pp. 40-42.  
[8] HIPAA 
Law, 
“Health 
Insurance 
Portability 
and 
Accountability 
Act 
of 
1996,” 
1996. 
Available: 
https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/HIPAA-
Administrative-
Simplification/HIPAAGenInfo/downloads/HIPAALaw.pdf 
<retrieved: January, 2013> 
[9] Rodriguez, Gabriela; Gonzalez, Jesus A.; Altamirano, 
Leopoldo; Guichar, Jose. “Microcalcifications Detection 
Using Fisher Linear Discriminant and Breast Density”. in 
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology (AEMB), 
Software Tools and Algorithms for Biological Systems, 
Springer Verlag, 2011. pp. 451-459. 
[10] Rodriguez, Gabriela; Gonzalez, Jesus A.; Altamirano, 
Leopoldo; Guichard, Jose S.; and Diaz, Raquel. “A 
Supervised Method for Microcalcifications Detection Using 
Breast 
Density”. 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
23rd 
FLAIRS 
Conference, 2010. 
[11] Flores, Beatriz A. and Gonzalez, Jesus A., “Data Mining with 
Decision Trees and Neural Networks for Calcification 
Detection in Mammograms”, Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence, Vol. 2972, Springer Verlag, ISSN 0302-9743, 
April 2004. pp 232 – 241. 
 
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

