Re-establishing Interaction Through Design of Alternative Interfaces 
Exploring new radio interfaces for elderly people with psychomotor disabilities
Suhas Govind Joshi 
Department of Informatics 
Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
joshi@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract— This paper explores new opportunities for elderly 
people who are no longer able to use their radio due to changes 
in psychomotor capacities in hands and fingers. We explore 
whether three alternative self-developed radio interfaces can 
provide these elderly people with new interaction mechanisms 
in the radio that allow them to re-establish use. The three 
radios are used to conduct measurements of psychomotor 
performance among 52 elderly participants. Our main findings 
indicate that providing elderly people suffering from reduced 
psychomotor capacities with appropriate interfaces cannot 
only re-establish interaction but also yield performance scores 
comparable to the scores of elderly people without any 
apparent reduction in psychomotor capacities. We further 
present our additional findings from a quantitative analysis of 
performance and discuss discovered opportunities. 
Keywords — psychomotor abilities; elderly; radio; assistive 
technology. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
One of the most appreciated and well-used devices for 
elderly people in Norway are radios. The radio has been 
with them throughout most of their long life, and in a world 
of rapid technological development, the radio as a piece of 
technology has withstood the test of time. Phones have 
become mobile, smart, small, and multi-purpose devices, 
and televisions have become bigger, flatter and expanded 
with secondary functions. In a local care home in Oslo (with 
the average resident age of 84 years), which was part of our 
empirical context, we observed that 91% of the 90 elderly 
residents had a radio device in the home that they would use 
on an average day. However, as much as the residents desire 
to hold on to their radios, the process of aging introduces a 
variety of cognitive and motor challenges that complicate 
the use of even familiar and simple technologies. Our prior 
studies have demonstrated how something seemingly simple 
as a radio is not considered as simple or functional when 
aging symptoms appear [1]. 
The purpose of this paper is to discuss the need for 
alternative radio interfaces for older people who, because of 
disabilities or other bodily challenges, are unable to operate 
normal radios. We investigate whether new interfaces can 
re-enable interaction between radios and users who are no 
longer able to operate them. We present three different 
functioning radios that are specifically designed for older 
people and discuss the psychomotor properties of these 
interfaces regarding the interaction opportunities they offer. 
This study involved 52 participants from 2013 through 2015 
in a systematic testing of our proposed interfaces. We use 
Fleishman’s taxonomy of psychomotor abilities and skills 
[2] to identify and measure the participants' ability to 
operate the three different radios. To support our discussion, 
we present a statistical analysis of the gathered data. The 
results are used to demonstrate how various participants 
preferred different interfaces based on their psychomotor 
capacities, and how participants with motor challenges in 
certain cases were able to match the performance of elderly 
people without these challenges. 
The paper is structured as follows. We introduce the 
motivation for focusing on the radio in Section 2, and we 
present related work on psychomotor and age-related studies 
within HCI in Section 3. In Section 4, the taxonomy used to 
describe and measure psychomotor abilities is defined. The 
research methods and three developed radios are described 
in Section 5 followed by results and analysis in Section 6. 
The paper ends with a discussion of why we believe new 
radio interfaces can help re-establishing psychomotor 
interaction with radios. 
 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
According to statistics from Statistics Norway (SSB), 
the older part of the population (aged 67-79) remains stable 
in the national average of radio listening in Norway [3]. The 
red line in Figure 1 shows an overview of the average 
percentage of the population who listens to the radio while 
the blue line shows the corresponding percentage for people 
aged 67-79. 
The number of minutes in average spent listening to the 
radio is illustrated in Figure 2, and as we can read from the 
graph, there is only one recorded case in the past 23 years 
(1997) where the elderly fraction of the population on 
average would listen less to the radio compared to the 
general population. We can also read from Figures 1 and 2 
that even in years where the number of elderly radio 
listeners was lower than the national average (i.e., 1994, 
1995, 2001, 2009, and 2010), the number of minutes spent 
in front of the radio was higher for the elderly radio 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

listeners. The difference between the older generation and 
the rest of the population seems to have diverged over time, 
and the difference in a ten-year perspective is now greater 
than ever. The mean difference between the amount of time 
the elderly used for radio listening compared with the rest of 
the population in the period from 1991 to 2000 was 7.0 
minutes while the corresponding difference in the period 
from 2005 to 2014 was over four times larger (33.1 
minutes). This difference demonstrates an interesting 
phenomenon, namely that the radio as a piece of technology 
is not on its way to extinction. Quite the contrary, they are 
on the rise again regarding both share of the population that 
listens to the radio (Figure 1), and the number of minutes 
spent in front of the radio per day (Figure 2). 
 
Figure 1. Percentage of population listening to the radio on an average day  
 
Figure 2. Number of minutes spent listening to the radio on an average day  
 
In our prior research (e.g., [4] and [1]) we have 
discussed aspects of the role technology has in the lives of 
elderly people. We have touched upon related topics such as 
the 
social 
importance 
of 
being 
able 
to 
operate 
communicative technologies such as radios to stay in touch 
with the outside world [4]. We also explored deeper issues 
concerning the ability to operate such devices and the way 
such devices are presented, for instance, design that is 
oversimplified or stigmatizing [1]. These studies have 
concentrated on the experience of interacting with 
technology and would consequently be better suited to 
further discuss the social and contextual aspects of 
interaction with technologies, for instance, loneliness and 
boredom. However, in this paper, the focus remains on the 
psychomotor ability to interact with the radio, and more 
precisely re-establishing a lost relationship between old 
users and technology. 
 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
A long time has passed since researchers began 
systematically investigating the relationship between aging-
related disabilities such as arthritis and the ability to interact 
with computers [5]. Morgan et al. [6] described significant 
differences in the execution of movement when comparing 
young adults with older adults, and more precisely the 
speed, sub-movements, and smoothness in movement. 
Similarly, Riviere & Thakor [7] use a comparative study 
between young, old, and motor-disabled subjects with 
regards to performance when operating tracking with a 
computer mouse. Their study claims that both aging and 
motor disability affect performance by increasing the 
inaccuracy and nonlinearity. Age has an apparent impact on 
our ability to interact and the extent to which we are able to 
adapt to new interaction mechanisms. This partly manifests 
itself through changes in psychomotor capacities. A recent 
study [8] claims the existence of age-related differences in 
the strategic repertoire, distribution, and execution within 
the sensorimotor domain. Regardless of the age of the 
intended user group, fine psychomotor abilities should be 
included in the determining of successful interactions [9].  
One of the very few laws that attempt to descriptively 
explain 
the 
psychomotor 
role 
of 
human-computer 
interaction through mathematical formulas is Fitts’ law. The 
original model was formulated over six decades ago and 
attempted described the linear relationship between 
movement time and index of difficulty. The model is still 
used today to quantify the difficulty of performing tasks and 
was in 2002 included in the ISO standard ISO 9241-9, 
which concerns non-keyboard input devices. However, 
since its conception, the model has undergone several 
modifications and refinements and does not pertain a 
universally accepted formulation today [10]. A shortcoming 
of Fitts’ law is its ability to properly determine and evaluate 
differently observed result in the psychomotor performance 
when studying different task types, varying motor skills and 
differences in motor performance [11]. Others have argued 
that there are several factors affecting our endpoint 
performance that are not properly captured in the 
mathematical model [12]. 
In the context of aging, studies on how psychomotor 
abilities affect user performance with computer tasks within 
the field of HCI can also be traced back to at least the early 
90s where researchers claimed and studied a relationship 
between the two [7]. Studies have been conducted within 
the field of HCI focusing on traditional interfaces, including 
WIMP and trackpads. For instance, psychomotor skills are 
an important part of the ability to operate a computer mouse, 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

and several studies have investigated the relation between 
psychomotor abilities and use performance operating a 
mouse or trackpad [5][9][13]-[16]. Common for most of 
these studies is that they include several components that 
make up the list of psychomotor abilities described in 
Fleishman taxonomy, e.g., precision control, arm-hand 
steadiness, manual dexterity and wrist-finger speed [12]. [5, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16] 
 
IV. 
PSYCHOMOTOR ABILITIES 
People undergo multiple reductions in both cognitive 
and motor skills as when entering later stages of life. In this 
study, we have chosen to focus on reduced psychomotor 
capacities in the hands and fingers, and how these changes 
affect the likeability to interact with radios. We have chosen 
not to describe this change as a limitation in the ability to 
interact since that would indicate an impossibility in an 
interaction between these individuals and the radio as 
technology. Instead, we believe that despite the undeniable 
changes in bodily capacities, our ability to interact with 
technology is not deprived, or necessarily not even reduced. 
We aim to demonstrate how adapting the technology to 
these changes in bodily capacities can prolong and re-
establish interaction. Nevertheless, the focus of this study is 
older people with symptoms, illnesses, and diagnoses 
associated with reduced capabilities in the hands and 
fingers. This includes individual types of rheumatic disorder 
associated with hands and fingers, osteoarthritis, as well as 
more general motor system disabilities such as Parkinson’s 
disease. Non-diagnosed elderly people showing symptoms 
affecting hands and fingers, such as trembling, involuntary 
movements, spasms were also included, as fine motor skills 
tend to decline with age [17]. We expanded our 
experimental group with elderly people claiming inability to 
operate radios, despite not being able to provide a medical 
record of a specific disability, as challenges associated with 
aging like inadequate blood flow and circulation to the 
muscles, injuries, stress, fatigue may also produce spasm in 
muscles that would reduce the psychomotor capacities. 
Several residents in our empirical context also reported 
similar symptoms of cramps from medical side effects, in 
particular from medication related to Parkinson's disease 
and Osteoporosis. Other types of developmental or genetic 
disorders that may have an impact on psychomotor 
capabilities, but that are not particularly prominent 
symptoms among the elderly people, were not included in 
this study (e.g., Down's syndrome, cerebral palsy and 
dystonia). 
 
A. Fleishman’s taxonomy 
Based on cognitive, sensory, physical, and psychomotor 
factors, Fleishman derived 52 skills and abilities describing 
human performance. Although this model was initially 
developed for a job-related environment, the taxonomy of 
Fleishman describes abilities and skills that can be 
associated with performance in everyday tasks [18]. The 
taxonomy separates abilities from skills; abilities are defined 
as characteristics and traits shaped throughout the first phase 
of our lives while skills describe the degree to which we can 
effectively carry out an action directly related to a given 
task. Common for the two is that both skills and abilities 
related to psychomotor capacities involve complex 
movement patterns and require practice and maintenance in 
order to remain intact [19]. 
As the aging process does not follow a schematic or 
linear development, it is difficult to consider any abilities or 
skills as less relevant than others. For instance, the cognitive 
factor constitutes the biggest share of skills and abilities and 
is obviously relevant also in the discussion of aging-related 
reduction of interaction capacities. It is further apparent that 
some of the motoric challenges stem from changes in the 
cognitive capacities, e.g., ideomotor apraxia where changes 
in semantic memory capacity reduce the ability to plan or 
complete motor actions. Studying this category involves 
abilities and skills that fuse cognitive, perceptual and 
physical abilities [20].  
Studies that focus on elderly people with motor 
challenges in their hands tend to carry an increased attention 
towards the abilities and skills that fall under the taxonomic 
category of physical factors. This is because the muscular 
restrictions and reduced bodily capabilities in the hands 
mainly tend to affect the abilities and skills covered by this 
category. Examples of abilities and skills included in this 
category are stamina, physical strength and flexibility, 
balance, and coordination. In previous studies of digital 
devices in the context of elderly people, we have been 
concerned with both stamina and physical strength (e.g., in 
[1]), but in this paper, we mainly focus on psychomotor 
factors. This is because most of the actions associated with 
the operation of a radio and other similar digital devices 
require movement and a configuration of hands and body 
that relies on the ability to combine physical movement with 
cognitive functions. Thus, psychomotor factors constitute 
our main interest, as this organically includes physical skills 
such as coordination, dexterity, reaction and manipulation. 
Unlike physical factors, psychomotor factors are also 
subjected to the influence of reduction in skills and abilities 
associated 
with 
secondary 
categories; 
psychomotor 
capacities often depend on a supportive capacity in addition 
to the physical. A reduction in other seemingly unrelated 
features (e.g., visual impairment) may, as Jacko & Vitense 
[20] point out, have an impact on psychomotor skills. 
 
B. Scope 
Our study is limited to psychomotor challenges of hands 
and fingers. Due to inadequate access to fully medically-
assessed participants, as well as claimed expertise, we do 
not address the impact of the decline in cognitive abilities 
and skills in this paper (e.g., dementia, depression, and 
forgetfulness). Our scope does not allow us to identify the 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

Figure 3. The three radios included in the study 
best interfaces for a given disease but instead let us study 
the relationship and possible correlation between motor 
challenges and performance when interacting with radio 
interfaces. Nor do we want to identify all skills and abilities 
that are included in the performance of work-related tasks; 
we aim to identify the specific abilities and skills that are 
involved in the operation of radios, and affected by reduced 
capacity in the hands and fingers. Abilities and skills in the 
taxonomy of Fleishmann are described as independent of 
each other [12], and it should consequently be possible only 
to study a selection of these. A similar approach has been 
conducted in prior research, more specifically in the 
research of [12, 14, 15, 16]. Table 1 gives an overview of 
the psychomotor abilities included in our study. A 
description is provided for each ability based on the original 
taxonomy of Fleishman [2] in the right column of the table. 
 
TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF PSYCHOMOTOR ABILITIES 
 
Psychomotor ability 
Description 
Precision control 
Ability to move control and the degree to 
which they can be moved quickly and 
repeatedly to exact positions. 
Arm-hand steadiness 
Ability to keep the hand and arm steady, 
both when suspended in air and while 
moving. Independent of strength and speed. 
Manual dexterity 
Ability to make quick and skillful 
coordinated movements with arms and one 
or both hands, as well as the ability to 
assemble, grab and move objects. 
Finger dexterity 
Ability to make quick, skillful, and 
coordinated movements with fingers of one 
or both hands. 
Wrist-finger speed 
Ability to repeat fast movements with wrist 
and fingers. 
Multi-limb 
coordination 
Ability to use two or more limbs 
simultaneously to coordinate movements 
when the body is not in motion. 
 
While all the abilities and skills described in the 
psychomotor category of the taxonomy are relevant in a 
broader scope, we have excluded certain abilities and skills 
from our test. These are abilities that are not relevant for our 
purposes, and the decision is taken by both the physical 
challenges we are focusing on, and the digital components 
and interfaces included in the study. Not all abilities are 
relevant for the operation of our radios; hence, measuring 
these abilities would be difficult with the radios. More 
precisely, rate control, reaction time, speed of limb 
movement, and response orientation have been excluded. 
The reason is that these four abilities are not directly 
determining the capacity to interact with our three radios, 
but instead, describe the degree to which we can interact 
with them, as well as the performance during use. Rate 
control is not appropriate in situations where speed and 
direction of an object are perfectly predictable [20] while 
the other three (reaction time, speed of limb movement, and 
orientation 
response) 
mainly 
concern 
efficiency 
of 
performance, rather than the distinctive ability to perform 
them. Also, both reaction time and response orientation are 
intended to capture our reaction to a given signal and our 
ability to quickly initiate the response routine, something 
which would be unnatural in a context where our 
participants are testing our radios. Thus, these four abilities 
have not been included in our tests. 
 
V. RESEARCH METHOD 
A. Radio #1 
The first radio is the leftmost radio in Figure 3, and it 
was developed in 2013. The focus of the radio is to provide 
an interface that provides users with similar experiences and 
interaction mechanisms as they are used to from their 
traditional radios. The feedback one gets from operating 
radio is reminiscent of interaction found in traditional radios 
with a distinct response to actions. The focus has also been 
on finding the materials that provide the best grip and 
resistance during the interaction. We have explored the 
properties of various materials (wood, steel, plastic) to find 
the best functioning design for the knobs. The main 
interaction takes place by turning on a coarse switch that 
clearly snaps in place when selecting the channel. A second 
switch is used to adjust the volume.  
 
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

B. Radio #2 
The second radio is the middle radio from Figure 3, and 
was developed in 2014. This radio depends on physical 
interaction and does not use traditional switches or buttons. 
As with the other two radios, this radio is also screenless. 
The user operates the radio with the use of wooden cubes 
with built-in Near Field Communication (NFC) chips. The 
NFC chips are preconfigured with a given radio channel, 
and by placing these physical cubes on top of the radio, one 
interacts with the interface. By placing a piece with a given 
channel on top of the radio starts playing. Removing the 
cube ends the playback. The focus has been on designing a 
radio that does not require fine motor skills in fingers. 
During the design process, material, weight, size and shape 
were explored in consultation with users to find the best 
objects for physical operation of the radio. 
 
C. Radio #3 
The third radio is the rightmost radio in Figure 3, and 
was developed in 2015. The purpose of this radio was to 
allow users with tremors, involuntary twitching, and 
reduced fine motor skills to operate it. The radio is made of 
oak and has an aluminum cylinder with a wooden knob that 
automatically snaps to predefined positions using magnets. 
One operates the radio by positioning the wooden knob at a 
predefined position. A secondary exploratory feature is that 
the wooden knob swivels around the cylinder. The design of 
the radio offers deliberate constraints that prevent users 
from making mistakes during the interaction. The wooden 
knob is locked to the pole and the magnet in the cylinder 
both guides and limits the positioning. This allows 
involuntary actions to have less impact on the accuracy. 
 
D. Empirical context and participants 
This study was conducted at three local care facilities in 
Oslo. Each care facility consists of a set of apartments, with 
the largest holding 90 apartments. The care facilities consist 
of senior residents residing in independent apartments, but 
with shared access to a range of facilities, e.g., cafeteria, 
lounge, fitness center, and 24-hour staffed reception. The 
limited access to participants with motor challenges in 
hands and fingers led to three years of data gathering in 
order to yield an appropriate set of data. The requirement for 
participation was that the participant suffered from reduced 
ability or no ability to operate a store-bought radio and thus 
needed a more customized interface. The three store-bought 
radios used for participant selection were Pinell Supersound 
DAB, Pop DAB Radio and Argon DAB Radio, three highly 
popular brands in Norway. The data for this study was 
collected in the period 2013-2015. The three radios used in 
the tests were also built during the same period. 39 
participants (M = 82.1 years, SD = 6.31) participated in six 
tests. For each test, we recruited an independent control 
group consisting of 13 elderly people with no apparent 
motor disabilities (M = 80.4 years, SD = 5.29) who were 
asked to perform the same tasks as the experimental group. 
The testing involved 52 participants in total. Most 
people had medical documentation to assess their motor 
disabilities. The documentation was provided to us by 
themselves or by the local care home administration with 
their consent. A few participants unable to operate store-
bought radios and in the lack of proper medical 
documentation of disability were also invited to participate 
in the experimental group as they showed symptoms similar 
to those with proper diagnoses. Table 2 gives an overview 
of the participants and the documented or self-assessed 
disability or illness. 
 
TABLE II. OVERVIEW OF PARTICIPANT GROUPS 
 
Disability or illness 
N 
Cramps 
8 
Muscle stiffness 
3 
Osteoarthritis 
8 
Parkinson’s disease 
4 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
3 
Tremor 
13 
Control group 
13 
Total 
52 
 
E. Test procedure  
The participants in both groups were asked to interact 
with the three radios through a series of repeated tasks to 
measure their psychomotor performance. Three different 
tables and eight chairs were used to provide all participants 
with a setup that supported their preferred bodily 
configuration. Some participants were also sitting in their 
wheelchairs during the test, specifically three participants 
from the experimental group and one participant from the 
control group. For each of the radios, the participants were 
given a set of tasks that mimicked the context applicable 
parts of assignments given in standardized tests of 
psychomotor abilities, e.g., rotary pursuit test, steadiness 
tester, Minnesota manual dexterity test, Purdue pegboard, 
tapping board (as seen in [12], as well as O’Connor finger 
dexterity test, box and block test, Jebsen hand function test, 
and Moberg pick-up test. As we used our own set of tasks, 
the results are not meant to demonstrate the external validity 
and be directly comparable to other test results, but instead 
provide a set of tasks applicable to the three radios, thereby 
providing us with a measurement comparable within the 
study. To eliminate learning effects and bias due to 
unfamiliarity with novel interaction mechanisms, each 
participant was given a demonstration of the intended 
interaction of each radio, and each participant conducted ten 
trials for each radio (similar to [5]). The task order was 
randomized for each participant. We relied on randomized 
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

repeated measures to minimize bias due to interpersonal 
variations between tests. The task set consisted of 12 tasks: 
gripping, turning, positioning, re-positioning, and resetting 
the main and secondary interaction element, as well as 
lifting and moving the radio. Time (seconds), error (count) 
and precision (position and distance) were observed and 
measured for each task, and the performance was graded on 
a normalized scale from 1-10 to make the performance 
metrics 
comparable. 
The 
computationally-generated 
normalized score used the four metrics above (seconds, 
count, position, and distance) to calculate the final score. 
Thus, the performance scores are not intended to be 
comparable beyond the scope of our research. In Figure 4, 
we see two participants from the experimental group testing 
the positioning and re-positioning of the main interaction 
element for Radio #2. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Two residents participating in psychomotor measurements 
 
VI. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
The means and standard deviations for the psychomotor 
performance on a normalized scale from 1-10 across both 
groups are shown in Table 3. As expected, the control group 
had a better performance relatively compared to the 
experimental group for all three radios. The variation was 
larger for the control group, and we can read from the table 
that both groups demonstrated a similar within-group 
performance for each of the three radios. The average 
performance score was 7.43 (SD = 0.32) for the control 
group while it was 4.60 (SD = 0.22) for the experimental 
group. In Figure 5, we present the estimated marginal means 
for the control group vs. the regular group for all three 
radios. 
 
TABLE III. PSYCHOMOTOR PERFORMANCE SCORE 
 
Mean 
Std.  
Deviation 
 
N 
Radio # 
Group 
Lower  
Bound 
Upper  
Bound 
1 
Control 
7.385 
.7372 
6.730 
8.039 
13 
Experimental 
4.517 
1.2824 
6.471 
7.658 
39 
2 
Control 
7.064 
.5755 
7.156 
8.536 
13 
Experimental 
4.389 
1.1787 
4.139 
4.895 
39 
3 
Control 
7.846 
.4328 
4.046 
4.732 
13 
Experimental 
4.897 
1.4000 
4.499 
5.296 
39 
A 2 (group: selection or control) x 3 (radio: #1, #2 or #3) 
between-subjects analysis of variance (ANOVA) was 
conducted to study the psychomotor performance between 
the three radios as a function of the performance. We 
registered significant main effects of group, F(1,150) = 
173.6, p < .005, n = .536, and radio, F(2,150) = 3.1, p = 
.048, n = .040. The main effects were not qualified by an 
interaction between group and radio, F(2,150) = 0.142, p = 
0.867, ηp2 = .002. The participants in the selection group (M 
= 4.601, SD = .107) had significantly lower performance 
than the participants in the control group (M = 7.432, SD = 
.186). The analysis also revealed a slightly lower 
performance difference between the three radios: (M = 
5.951, SD = .186), (M = 5.726, SD = .186), and (M = 6.372, 
SD = .186). Levene’s test for equality of variances was 
found to be violated for the present analysis (p = .001), and 
Bonferroni post-hoc analysis for the radios showed that 
Radio #2 had significantly lower performance than Radio #3 
at the .05 level, while differences between Radios #1 and #2 
and Radios #1 and #3 were not significant. 
 
 
Figure 5. Estimated marginal means of performance for both groups 
 
The results from Figure 5 only demonstrated how the 
estimated marginal means of the overall performance for all 
participants in the treatment group compared to the control 
group. For a post hoc evaluation of the performance within 
the experimental group, we performed a separate repeated 
measure analyzes for each level within the grouping factor 
to study the relationship between performance and 
psychomotor disability.  
We analyzed the data with mixed-design ANOVA using 
a within-subjects factor of disability (cramp, muscle, 
osteoarthritis, Parkinson's disease, Rheumatoid Arthritis, 
Tremor) and a between-subject factor of radio (Radio #1, 
Radio #2, and Radio #3). Mauchly’s test indicated that the 
assumption of sphericity had been violated (χ2(2) = 2.681, p 
= .026). Degrees of freedom were corrected using Huynh-
Feldt estimates of sphericity (ε = 1.000) as Greenhouse-
Geisser estimates reported an epsilon value above 0.75 (ε = 
.926) [21]. There were non-significant main effects of 
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

disability, F(2, 66)  =  5.566, p = .006 and radio, F = (1, 33) 
= 8.129, p = .007. However, the main effects were qualified 
by a significant interaction between disability and radio, 
F(10, 66) = 17.011, p < .001. In Figure 6, we demonstrate 
how the interaction between disability and radio yielded a 
significant variation in the estimated marginal means of 
performance. 
 
Figure 6. Performance for each disability group across all three radios  
 
Again, the statistical results of this study do not attempt 
to provide a medical explanation for the performance but 
instead demonstrates a significant correlation in order to 
exemplify the need for various interfaces when addressing 
elderly people with psychomotor disabilities. The study only 
claims the presence of a significant difference in 
performance but does not provide any solutions. 
 
VII. DISCUSSION 
A. Psychomotor disabilities as a shift rather than a loss 
The analysis presented in the previous section 
demonstrates some important findings. First and foremost, 
we see that grouping all elderly people in one common 
category cannot be considered scientifically justifiable when 
their needs, capacities, and performances are so different. 
To group the elderly in one common category is both 
stigmatizing and improper design practice as it neglects 
individual needs. Also, we have presented empirical data 
suggesting that even the specific group of older people 
suffering from motor deficit in the hands and fingers would 
highly benefit from designs that paid individual attention to 
their needs. 
At first glance, it might look like Figure 5 illustrates a 
steady and consistent difference between the control group 
and the experimental group. However, this was not the case. 
Irregularities in performance resulted in statistically 
counteracting mean values, and glancing at Figure 5 one 
may wrongfully conclude that the older participants yielded 
a seemingly equal performance score for each radio 
regardless of their motor capacities. However, as presented 
in the secondary analysis of the relationship between disease 
and performance (illustrated in Figure 6), we see 
performance scores with high fluctuation within each group. 
We can confirm this by looking at the statistical analysis 
which indicated a significant interaction between disability 
and radio (p <.001). 
One way of understanding this phenomenon is to look at 
average performance score for each group. The participants 
who suffered from trembling serve as a good illustration. 
This group, which accounted for a third of the participants 
in the experimental group, had the lowest performance score 
on Radio #2 (M = 4.19, SD = 0.40), an intermediate 
performance score on Radio #1 (M = 05.07, SD = 1.57), and 
the highest on Radio #3 (M = 6.08, SD = 0.98).These results 
can be explained by the different types and various 
symptoms of tremor. Participants reported issues with 
intention tremor that could affect their aim, specific tremor 
which influenced goal-oriented action), as well as general 
stressing tremor. As Radio #2 required participants to raise a 
cube in midair and place it within a designated area, it was 
difficult for several participants to operate this radio. With 
more degrees of freedom compared with the other two 
radios, there was more room for both intentional and 
deliberate errors. This group performed best on Radio # 3 as 
involuntary movements would not give adverse effect or 
hinder progress in solving the task.  
A similar pattern can be seen in the group of participants 
who suffered from Rheumatoid Arthritis. They reported 
challenges with swelling, decreased sensitivity and reduced 
mobility, which resulted in problems with the interface of 
Radio# 1 (M = 2.83, SD = 0.99). The reduction in 
sensitivity in particular would mean that they struggled 
more with sensing moving, clicking, and snapping feedback 
from the radio. However, they delivered a good average 
performance score for Radio # 2 (M = 6.28, SD = 1.74), 
suggesting that they still had the capacity for interaction. 
Thus, loss or reduction in motor capacities does not an 
automatically 
reduce 
or 
deprive 
our 
interaction 
opportunities; it mainly shifts them. All three of our radios 
were developed to allow people with motor impairments in 
their hands and fingers to still use these limbs for 
interaction. And our results suggest that they are highly 
capable of doing so if presented the right interface. In their 
studies of differences in pointing movements between older 
and younger users, [16] argues that older people maintain 
the use of residual sensory information (vision and 
proprioception) and can achieve similar precision levels as 
younger users. However, the radios in our study do not need 
to be operated by hands and fingers. There are also 
opportunities explore new bodily uses and configurations. In 
certain context, radios are naturally operated through 
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

different interaction mechanisms, for instance in cars. Prior 
studies have also demonstrated interaction opportunities for 
people with motor disabilities by the use of other bodily 
capacities. For instance, [22] use head gesture recognition 
for wheelchair control for elderly people suffering from 
Parkinson's disease and other restrictions in limb movement. 
The authors of [23] study wrist rotation as input 
mechanisms for mobile devices, and suggest that both 
hands-free and eyes-free interaction techniques would be 
feasible with further research. The research of [24] uses a 
voice-driven drawing application to include users with 
motor impairments. 
We should never exclude any people as potential users 
just because their capacities prevent them from using a 
given interface. Incompetence or inability in use should not 
be tied with technologies, but instead, be a use dimension 
related to the specific interaction mechanisms that the 
technology provide. Radio might be considered one piece of 
technology, but there are limitless opportunities when it 
comes to the way it is presented to the user. The results in 
this paper have demonstrated that people can re-establish 
meaningful relationships with technology by shifting the 
way of presentation. 
 
B. Extending and re-establishing purposeful interactions 
It is important to note that none of the three radios was 
perceived as uniformly better than the rest. Each radio 
would yield good scores with one or more groups, but there 
was always another group that would struggle with the same 
interface. This supports our claim that radios designed for a 
specific group of people, and with features that may even 
fully compensate for the motor deficit, will still not 
necessarily work for everyone. Hence, the results of this 
study demonstrate not only the need but also the possibility, 
to make individual adjustments in the design of interfaces. 
Even though we developed three radios, they all utilized 
nearly identical hardware, and the basic electronic 
components are the same in all three radios. The back of the 
three radios and how their hardware is enclosed in similar 
casement taking up roughly the same size is demonstrated in 
Figure 7. They were developed in three independent 
processes focusing on various psychomotor challenges, yet 
we see that only the packaging, i.e., the "outer shell" 
enclosing technology, is changed. By designing three 
different interfaces, we have shown that it is possible to re-
enable an entire group of elderly people who would 
otherwise have to abandon interaction with radios. And we 
achieved this while letting them continue to use their hands 
and fingers, something which is not a requirement for 
successful interaction. If we expand the design area to 
include all other bodily capacities, the potential to re-
establish purposeful interaction would be even greater, and 
the chance is simultaneously greater for technology to 
remain meaningful longer, even when living through a 
decline in psychomotor capacities. To offer users a variety 
of interfaces on top of the technology also provides users 
the ability to customize the interaction to their capacity 
levels, even if they were to discover at some point that some 
of their motor skills develop in a positive sense. Adapting to 
skill levels is encouraged by [19]. It would also open up 
more room to address changes in movements, actions and 
bodily configurations as psychomotor skills among user 
group changed. The authors of [6] suggest that there is a 
natural discontinuation in slow movements among older 
people. This is also supported by [5] who suggest that older 
participants depend on interfaces that allow for more sub-
movements in interaction. In general, it is considered 
reasonable to spend more time on interface adaptations 
since the majority of prior research only studied two-factor 
analysis of the interaction and psychomotor capacity in a 
context where other conditions such as frequency of use and 
expertise could have had an impact on the interaction [9]. 
 
 
Figure 7. The back of the three radios 
 
In our empirical context, this idea of introducing 
multiple interfaces is particularly important as Norway is 
facing an infrastructural change where all radios are 
switching 
from 
FM 
broadcasting 
to 
digital 
audio 
broadcasting (DAB). This will render all current FM radios 
unusable as of 2017. People with older radios are forced to 
buy new devices where the interaction may depend on users 
properly learning and understanding new interfaces, new 
terminologies, new frequencies and new mechanisms. 
However, prior research simultaneously suggests that 
elderly people are less willing to modify current strategies 
or adapt new strategies [5, 25]. This forced transition gives 
us a golden opportunity to introduce a variety of interaction 
mechanisms that can be incorporated into routines and 
habits while people are relatively able-bodied and only 
shows early symptoms. By doing so, the technology could 
potentially remain with them even if they were to enter a 
downward phase with reduction of capacities. If someone 
should not develop symptoms consistent with the 
expectations, having incorporated these new interaction 
mechanisms may still have a positive effect as it is often the 
underlying factors that are to be blamed for reduction of 
psychomotor skills, e.g., in the performance of tasks aiming 
[12]. 
Another important factor is the degree of stigmatization 
associated with use. Technology tailor-made for a certain 
group of people often succumbs to design choices so 
distinctive that other people can interpret the intended users 
their weaknesses just from the design itself. Our participants 
claimed that all three radios, but, in particular, Radio #3, 
had looks that did not suggest being specifically designed 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

for the target audience. The design did not emit the 
stigmatizing radiance often found in technology tailored for 
the elderly [4]. To early expose users interfaces that can 
have a secondary function ago, will also allow older staple 
acquaintances interaction mechanisms not yet been vital for 
their use. Thus, there is less chance that they will experience 
the design and interface as stigmatizing about it sometime in 
the future should be such that it was the specific interaction 
mechanism 
that 
allowed 
interaction; 
interaction 
is 
associated with routines and habits rather than to impose 
solutions. Early exposure to interfaces that can have a 
secondary function later will also allow older users to make 
acquaintances with interaction mechanisms that have not yet 
become vital for their use. This would mean fewer chances 
of experiencing the design and interface as stigmatizing, 
even though it sometime in the future may become the very 
interaction mechanism allowing interaction; the interaction 
is associated with routines and habits rather than to imposed 
solutions.  
This discussion of avoiding stigmatizing design further 
aligns with the idea of universal design. Design tailored for 
specific disabilities or illnesses does not exclude people 
without disabilities from using them. On the contrary, we 
found that the design of our three radios, and, in particular, 
Radio #3, appealed to participants and stakeholders that 
were not in the user group such as family members, 
employees at the care home, and even our self as designers. 
In future research, it would be interesting to investigate this 
aspect of the design further. While our results does not 
provide any significant evidence of one radio fully re-
establishing interaction for all types of psychomotor 
disabilities, we did see examples of radios elevating the 
interaction performance to the level of the control group for 
multiple types of disabilities and illness (as demonstrated 
with Radio #1 and Radio #2 in Figure 6). It is therefore not 
unreasonable for further research on this topic to generate 
designs that can reach even more people and help users 
achieve even better performance scores. Nevertheless, the 
aesthetics of the three radios demonstrate the important 
underlying idea that design tailored for a specific user group 
can very well be fully usable and appealing to everyone. 
There is no reason that design for elderly people cannot be 
design for all. 
 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have discussed the opportunities to re-
establish interaction through the use of alternative 
interfaces. We have studied the case of elderly people 
suffering from a reduction in psychomotor capacities in 
hands and fingers to demonstrate how three different radio 
interfaces allowed them to return to the use of radios. Six 
rounds of tests were conducted with 52 participants in 2013-
2015. We demonstrate how none of the three radios were 
universally acclaimed, and how extending and re-
establishing purposeful actions require a more nuanced and 
adapted interface, even for a specific demographic as the 
one included in this study. Our main findings suggest that 
providing interfaces that acknowledge and compensate for 
psychomotor 
disabilities 
can 
re-enable 
interaction 
comparable to the level of fully-functional users. 
To investigate our findings further, we aim to conduct a 
long-term testing with these proposed models that will yield 
qualitative data better suited for an interpretive analysis; the 
addition of subjective opinions and experiences from elderly 
users living alongside our proposed designs will help 
support the claims presented in this paper. The work 
presented in this paper encourages further research into 
opportunities for re-establishing interaction. Our particular 
case should also only be considered a starting point for 
similar research with a different or expanded scope. We 
have studied a limited set of challenges, i.e., psychomotor 
disabilities in hands and finger, but we would like to 
advocate further research on similar topics such as 
discussion of other types of psychomotor abilities or the role 
of cognitive capacities in re-establishing interaction. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
S. G. Joshi, “Designing for Experienced Simplicity. Why 
Analytic and Imagined Simplicity Fail in Design of Assistive 
Technology.” The International Journal on Advances in 
Intelligent Systems, vol. 8, no. 3&4, 2015, pp. 324-338. 
[2] 
E. A. Fleishman and M. E. Reilly, “Handbook of human 
abilities: 
Definitions, 
measurements, 
and 
job 
task 
requirements.” Consulting Psychologists Press, 1992. 
[3] 
S. Norway, "Norwegian Media Barometer, 2014," SSB. 
[4] 
S. G. Joshi, "Emerging ethical considerations from the 
perspectives of the elderly," in Ninth International 
Conference on Cultural Attitudes in computer-Human 
Interactions, M. Strano, H. Hrachovec, and S. Fragos, 2014, 
pp. 1-15. 
[5] 
M. W. Smith, J. Sharit, and S. J. Czaja, “Aging, motor 
control, and the performance of computer mouse tasks.” 
Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society, vol. 41, no. 3, 1999, pp. 389-396. 
[6] 
M. Morgan, J. G. Phillips, J. L. Bradshaw, J. B. Mattingley, 
R. Iansek, and J. A. Bradshaw, “Age-related motor slowness: 
simply strategic?.” Journal of gerontology, vol 49, no. 3, 
1994, pp. M133-M139. 
[7] 
C. N. Riviere and N. V. Thakor, “Effects of age and 
disability on tracking tasks with a computer mouse: 
Accuracy and linearity.” Journal of Rehabilitation Research 
and Development, vol. 33, 1996, pp. 6-15. 
[8] 
C. Poletti, R. Sleimen-Malkoun, J.-J. Temprado, and P. 
Lemaire, 
“Older and 
younger 
adults’ 
strategies in 
sensorimotor tasks: Insights from Fitts’ pointing task.” 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and 
Performance, vol. 41, no. 2, 1994, p. 542. 
[9] 
C. Sutter and M. Ziefle. “Psychomotor user characteristics as 
predictors for a successful usage of small input devices.” in 
Proceedings of the HCI International 2005,  pp. 1-11. 
[10] R. W. Soukoreff and I. S. Mackenzie, “Towards a standard 
for pointing device evaluation, perspectives on 27 years of 
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

Fitts’ law research in HCI.” International journal of human-
computer studies, vol. 61, no. 6, 2004, pp. 751-789. 
[11] C. Sutter and M. Ziefle. “Psychomotor performance of input 
device users and optimized cursor control.” in Proceedings of 
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual 
Meeting. SAGE Publications. 2006, pp. 742-746. 
[12] Y. Cheong, R. L. Shehab, and C. Ling, “Effects of age and 
psychomotor ability on kinematics of mouse-mediated 
aiming movement.” Ergonomics, vol. 56, no. 6, 2013, pp. 
1006-1020. 
[13] Y.-K. Cheong, "Performance and movement kinematics of 
mouse pointing task: Perspectives from age, psychomotor 
ability, and visual ability," University of Oklahoma, 2007. 
[14] N. Đorđević, D. Rančić, and A. Dimitrijević. “Evaluation of 
User Cognitive Abilities for HCI.” in Proceedings of the 11th 
WSEAS International Conference on COMPUTERS, Agios 
Nikolaos, Crete Island, Greece. Citeseer. 2007, pp. 468-473. 
[15] J. Knight and G. Salvendy, “Psychomotor work capabilities.” 
Handbook of industrial engineering, 2nd edn. Wiley-
Interscience, New York, 1992, pp. 978-989. 
[16] L. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Inai, Q. Huang, and J. Wu, “Effects of 
aging on pointing movements under restricted visual 
feedback conditions.” Human movement science, vol. 40, 
2015, pp. 1-13. 
[17] B. Makofske, “Manual Dexterity,” in Encyclopedia of 
Clinical Neuropsychology. Springer, 2011, pp. 1522-1523. 
[18] A. Furnham, S. Von Stumm, A. Makendrayogam, and T. 
Chamorro-Premuzic, “A Taxonomy of Self-Estimated 
Human Performance: The General Factor.” Journal of 
Individual Differences, vol. 30, no. 4, 2009,  pp. 188-193. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[19] M. H. Fogtmann. “Kinesthetic empathy interaction–
exploring the possibilities of psychomotor abilities in 
interaction design.” in Second International Workshop on 
Physicality, 2007, p. 37. 
[20] J. A. Jacko and H. S. Vitense, “A review and reappraisal of 
information technologies within a conceptual framework for 
individuals with disabilities.” Universal Access in the 
Information Society, vol. 1, no. 1, 2001, pp. 56-76. 
[21] A. Field and G. Hole, “How to design and report 
experiments.” Sage, 2002. 
[22] J. Gray, P. Jia, H. H. Hu, T. Lu, and K. Yuan, “Head gesture 
recognition for hands-free control of an intelligent 
wheelchair.” Industrial Robot: An International Journal, vol. 
34, no. 1, 2007, pp. 60-68. 
[23] A. Crossan, J. Williamson, S. Brewster, and R. Murray-
Smith. “Wrist rotation for interaction in mobile contexts.” in 
Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Human 
computer interaction with mobile devices and services. 
ACM. 2008, pp. 435-438. 
[24] S. Harada, J. O. Wobbrock, and J. A. Landay. “Voicedraw: a 
hands-free voice-driven drawing application for people with 
motor impairments.” in Proceedings of the 9th international 
ACM 
SIGACCESS 
conference 
on 
Computers 
and 
accessibility. ACM. 2007, pp. 27-34. 
[25] N. Walker, D. A. Philbin, and A. D. Fisk, “Age-related 
differences in movement control: Adjusting submovement 
structure to optimize performance.” The Journals of 
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social 
Sciences, vol. 52, no. 1, 1997,  pp. 40-53. 
 
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

