Improved Treatment of Cerebral Stroke Patients in Small Hospitals? 
Reporting from a Telestroke Service in North Norway 
 
Kari Dyb 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and 
Telemedicine, University hospital of North Norway, 
Tromsø, Norway 
kari.dyb@telemed.no 
Terje Solvoll 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and 
Telemedicine, University hospital of North Norway, 
Tromsø, Norway 
terje.solvoll@telemed.no 
 
Ellen Rygh 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and 
Telemedicine, University hospital of North Norway, 
Tromsø, Norway 
ellen.rygh@telemed.no 
Tove Sørensen 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and 
Telemedicine, University hospital of North Norway, 
Tromsø, Norway 
tove.sorensen@telemed.no 
 
 
 
Abstract - In 2010, Norwegian Centre of Integrated Care and 
Telemedicine (NST), in collaboration with Northern Norway 
Regional Health Authority (Helse Nord RHF), initiated a 
project to establish and explore a telestroke service for 
diagnosing and treatment of cerebral stroke patients. The first 
step was to set up a video-conference system between the three 
hospitals that constitute The Nordland Hospital (in Norwegian: 
Nordlandssykehuset, NLSH). This service connects the 
neurological department at NLSH Bodø with the two small 
rural hospitals; NLSH Lofoten and NLSH Vesterålen. The 
telestroke service was made available between NLSH Lofoten 
and NLSH Bodø from September 2010. At NLSH Vesterålen, 
the telestroke equipment was made available, but the usage 
was postponed due to reorganization of the local cerebral 
stroke care. The second step of our study was to explore the 
significance of the context when establishing a telestroke 
service in North Norway. This article is based on telestroke log 
data, semi-structured interviews, and focus group discussions 
with involved health personnel. We report from the 
implementation of the service, and the preliminary experience 
from the first year of use.   
Keywords-cerebrale stroke, rural hospitals, video conference 
consultation,  telestroke 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The volcano ash incident in Iceland in April 2010, gave a 
reminder of how vulnerable the health services in Norway 
are without air transport. In May 2010, Northern Norway 
Regional Health Authority (Helse Nord RHF), decided to 
establish a telemedicine service for diagnosis and treatment 
of cerebral stroke patients in The Nordland Hospital (from 
now 
on 
we 
will 
use 
the 
Norwegian 
name, 
Nordlandssykehuset, NLSH), connecting the two rural 
hospitals; NLSH Lofoten and NLSH Vesterålen, to the 
Neurology and Radiology departments at NLSH Bodø.  The 
two rural hospitals receive approximately two patients with 
stroke symptoms every week; NLSH Lofoten (1.6) and 
NLSH Vesterålen (1.25). NLSH Bodø receives an average of 
one stroke patient every two days. As the numbers are small, 
a fully specialized stroke unit is difficult to maintain with 
stroke specialists physically present (day and night, seven 
days of the week) at the small hospitals in Lofoten and 
Vesterålen.   
A “VAKe” -compatible video-conference system [1] was 
installed in June 2010. After completion of common 
procedures and on-site training, the telestroke service was 
operational 
from 
September 
2010. 
It 
was 
utilized 
immediately between Lofoten and Bodø, but the use was 
postponed in NLSH Vesterålen waiting for the employment 
of a specialized stroke nurse and the refurbishment of the 
intensive care unit.     
Telestroke implies that the stroke specialist examines the 
patient in cooperation with the physicians and nurses at the 
local site, through video- and sound communication systems. 
Radiology images are transmitted using the RIS/PACS 
system [2]. When a patient with stroke symptoms is expected 
to one of the two local hospitals, the procedures are as 
follows: In Bodø, the stroke specialist is notified by phone, 
and moves quickly to a dedicated room for telestroke 
conferences. At the relevant local hospital the involved staff 
is gathered at the intensive care unit, waiting for the patient 
to arrive. The “VAKe” video-conference system is also 
prepared.  
This article addresses treatment of cerebral stroke 
patients. We report from the implementation of a telestroke 
service in North Norway, and the preliminary experience 
from the first year of use.   
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
 BACKGROUND 
Cerebral stroke is the third most frequent cause of death 
in Norway, and the most common cause of severe disability 
in adults. The annual incidence is about three per thousand 
inhabitants, where 85-90% is due to ischemic stroke. The 
average cost of one stroke incident is approx. NOK 600,000, 
adding up to a total annual cost of NOK 7.8 billion. Timely 
treatment and rehabilitation can reduce disability after stroke, 
improve quality of life and reduce costs [3, 4]. 
Hospitalization in a specialized stroke unit leads to a 10 % 
absolute reduction in mortality in the acute phase [3]. The 
prognosis for patients with ischemic stroke is further 
improved by thrombolytic treatment in the acute phase. The 
challenge is the narrow time window: Thrombolytic 
treatment should be given as soon as possible, and not later 
than 4.5 hours after the first symptoms. The national 
numbers on thrombolytic treatment indicates that only 5.9 % 
of all stroke patients in Norway receive such  treatment (the 
numbers for NLSH is 2.7% ), whereas 20 % is expected to 
benefit from thrombolytic treatment [4] The low rate could 
be due to geographical conditions with long travel distances, 
lack of awareness in the population, but also limited 
experience with the treatment in local hospitals may play a 
role [5]. 
It is crucial to decide the diagnosis and indication for 
thrombolytic therapy as soon as possible after the patient 
with suspected stroke reaches the emergency unit. If the local 
hospital is without specialists with adequate experience and 
competence in the field, telemedicine can guide and support 
the clinician remotely [6-10]. 
 
Organization in telestroke networks includes [6, 7]: 
 
1. Specialized stroke units in all hospital. 
2. Comprehensive and continuous education and 
training of the entire staff in the units,  
3. Stroke specialists available 24/7 on videoconference 
combined with teleradiology,  
4. Centralized organization of patient transfers. This is 
in consistence with The Norwegian Directorate of 
Health’s national guidelines for treatment and 
rehabilitation of stroke [4]. 
 
Telestroke consultations may be useful to assess whether 
patients need more advanced specialist neurological or 
neurosurgical emergency treatment, by supporting quick 
triaging and transfer to the appropriate unit. Although the 
decision to give thrombolytic treatment is seen as the end-
point of the telestroke consultation, this is just the beginning 
of care for the patient [5]. Post-thrombolytic care requires 
intensive cardiovascular and neurological monitoring, 
neurosurgical backup, and decision whether to keep the 
patient or to “drip-and-ship”. Tele-consultation may also be 
useful for follow-up after the acute phase [5]. 
There is limited experience with telestroke in Norway.  
Many hospitals use teleradiology image transfer combined 
with phone advice to support local hospitals for stroke 
patients. A telestroke service established between Haukeland 
University Hospital and local hospitals in Voss and in Førde 
reports an increase in thrombolytic treatment [11].   
There is substantial scientific evidence of the medical 
impacts of telestroke [12]. A meta-analysis shows that a 
telestroke network, where the experienced stroke specialists 
perform an evaluation and examination of the patient 
through a video-conferencing system, and considers the 
indication for initiation of thrombolytic treatment, is 
comparable with face-to-face consultations [10]. There is 
also evidence that video-conferencing counseling is more 
effective than telephone counseling in the acute treatment of 
stroke. Several studies of telestroke solutions including 
video, versus solutions without video, show that video 
conferencing may [13, 14]:  
 
1. Reduce the number of wrong diagnoses.  
7.1 % vs 17.6 %, p< 0.05 
2. Reduces death rate.  
1.3 % vs 6.8 %, p <0.05 
3. Reduces needs for nursing homes.  
2.6 % vs 5.4 %, p = 0.58 
 
In this project we aim to implement and organize a 
telestroke service, and explore whether the same benefits that 
are reported internationally, are possible to obtain in a North 
Norwegian context.  
 
III. 
MATERIALS AND MEHTODS 
In this section, we present the research settings, the 
materials and the methods used.   
A. Research settings 
The research was conducted at three hospitals within 
Northern Norway Regional Health Authority, more 
precisely Nordlandssykehuset, NLSH, in Nordland County. 
NLSH serves a geographical area of 131,000 inhabitants, 
and consists of three local hospitals, Bodø, Lofoten and 
Vesterålen. NLSH Bodø is the largest hospital in the county 
and act as the central hospital of NLSH [15]. NLSH Lofoten 
and NLSH Vesterålen are two rural hospitals, situated in a 
geographical area known for its wild and beautiful nature, 
long distances, dispersed settlement and extreme rough 
weather conditions. The weather conditions often make it 
difficult or even impossible to use air transport for severe ill 
patients. Other types of transport take between five to ten 
hours to reach Bodø. NLSH Vesterålen, covers a 
geographical area of approximately 30,000 inhabitants, and 
employs about 400 people. The hospital has a full surgical 
and medical emergency unit and a maternity ward. A new 
hospital is under construction in Vesterålen. NLSH Lofoten 
is placed on the island Vestvågøy, in the middle of Lofoten, 
and serves approximately 24,000 inhabitants.  
The telestroke service was implemented and has been 
operative since September 2010. When a potential stroke 
patient arrives at one of the two rural hospitals, the standard 
procedure is to conduct a Computed tomography (CT) scan 
and collect the necessary blood samples. At NLSH 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Vesterålen, the patient is then transferred to the intensive 
care unit, where a telestroke conferencing is prepared for a 
potential collaboration with stroke specialists in Bodø. At 
NLSH Lofoten, the patient is transferred to the emergency 
room for telestroke conferences and given thrombolytic 
treatment if relevant. 
To ensure that the technology is operational and works 
flawlessly, as well as maintain the users’ expertise, NST has 
recommended that each hospital test the telestroke solution 
regularly, and preferably once a week. The staff agreed on 
being abundant in using the system in the initial phase in 
accordance with this.  
B. Materials 
To implement a telestroke service it is necessary to 
obtain video-conferencing equipment, at least one for each 
site. In this project, we decided to supply each of the 
hospitals with the same type of equipment, which reduces 
possible sources of error. Only minor local adjustments were 
made due to room configuration. The video conferencing 
equipment consists of a Tandberg Quick set C60 and a Sony 
full HD (1080p) television, mounted on a mobile rack (see 
Fig. 1). The Tandberg Quick set C60 has the possibility to 
connect medical equipment like: Electrocardiography (ECG) 
together with two full HD (1080p) cameras. The system is 
also 
made 
ready 
for 
multipart 
conferences 
for 
communication between more than two locations. The total 
cost of each unit ready for use is approximately NOK 
200,000.    
 
 
 
Figure 1. Telestroke equipment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. NLSH Telestroke service 
 
 
At NLSH Bodø, the telestroke system is installed in a 
dedicated room connected to the neurology department. This 
room has also a computer equipped with two 24 inch 
displays; one display devoted to the electronic patient record, 
and one to the CT images. 
At NLSH Lofoten and Vesterålen, the telestroke 
equipment (Fig. 1.) is mobile. When not in operation, it is 
stored in the intensive care clinic. However, when the local 
hospital is notified about a possible cerebral stroke patient, 
the equipment is brought from storage and moved into 
position. The video conference unit is then prepared for a 
telestroke session. The 3 telestroke units are connected 
through the Norwegian Health Net [16], which is a dedicated 
secured network for health information between hospitals 
and different health care institutions, see Fig. 2. All 
institutions require authorization before connection to ensure 
data protection and security [17].  This solution is approved 
by the Norwegian Data inspectorate and Privacy Protection 
Committee [16].  
C. Methods 
We have used a qualitative, multi-method research 
approach to gather relevant data on the telestroke service in 
North Norway, in this case Nordlandssykehuset. Quantitative 
methods with control-groups have been considered, but 
found not ethical since the telestroke equipment is already 
installed in the hospitals. We have also considered including 
more hospitals as control-groups, but found difficult within 
the framework of the project. The methods used are:  
 
 
Analyzing telestroke log data 
 
Video conference and phone interviews with 
involved health personnel 
 
Focus group discussions 
 
This approach does not only capture research data, it also 
ensures that the telestroke system is working according to the 
plan, and reveals potential need for follow-up actions like 
training and revision of procedures. 
 
 
  Norwegian        
   Health Net 
NLSH Bodø 
(Tandberg C60) 
NLSH Lofoten 
(Tandberg C60) 
NLSH Vesterålen 
(Tandberg C60) 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

1) Analyzing telestroke log data 
Exploring telestroke log data is an adequate approach to 
gather an understanding of the usage of the telestroke 
service. Telestroke log data indicates the frequency and 
length of the telestroke sessions between the hospitals. Log 
data is sufficient to observe which hospital that has been 
connected, and which hospital that are more reluctant with 
telestroke collaboration. This data includes the year, season, 
time and length of the video and sound communication 
between the collaborating hospitals. Analyzing log data is an 
adequate approach to map out the actual telestroke 
collaboration. It is also a useful approach to visualize the 
numbers and the length of the training sessions, and how 
often the different hospitals are testing the equipment. 
Analyzing log data also captures potential changes in the 
organization of stroke treatment over time. 
2) Semi-structured  interviews 
Semi-structured 
interviews 
with 
involved 
health 
personnel are a constructive approach for gathering the 
users’ satisfaction and experiences with the telestroke 
system. Health personnel can share their knowledge from 
specific cases where the telestroke service has been used. For 
instance, information about medical results like; time from 
onset of symptoms to thrombolytic treatment or proportion 
of thrombolytic treatment.  The method is also sufficient to 
gather information about health personnel experiences with 
the technology and the online collaboration between the 
hospitals. Semi-structured interviews can reveal potential 
differences between users, for instance between the remote 
neurological experts and the onsite local hospital staff. The 
approach is also useful to detect technological obstacles or 
organization challenges with the telestroke service. We have 
conducted the interviews by phone and video-conferencing 
systems.  
3) Focus group discussions 
Focus group discussions with participants from all three 
hospitals are an adequate approach to get in contact with the 
everyday practice of cerebral stroke treatment. Similarities, 
differences and the dynamic character of the local practices 
are often revealed in group discussions [18]. Focus group 
discussions between health personnel from different 
institutions are also suitable to expose contextual and 
organizational aspect of the telestroke service.  
D. Ethical considerations 
The study has been approved by the North Norwegian 
Regional Medical Ethics committee (REK).  
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The telestroke service has so far been used for treatment 
of a few cerebral stroke patients at NLSH Lofoten, but until 
now, none from NLSH Vesterålen. After approximately one 
year of service, the frequency of telestroke conferences has 
been considerable lower than expected. However, the few 
conferences that have been carried out were reported as 
constructive and valuable. The conference quality has been 
characterized as excellent: The video quality was good 
enough to detect pupil contraction and eye movements like 
nystagmus (a rapid, involuntary, oscillatory motion of the 
eyeball). Despite the high video and sound quality, health 
personnel at both the rural hospitals have expressed concerns 
about the low frequency of use, which might be a threat to 
the long term success of the telestroke service. Low 
frequency of use can result in ambiguity and hesitation on 
how to operate the telestroke equipment, and thereby result 
in even fewer telestroke consultations. Even though NST 
recommended that the hospitals tested the telestroke system 
regularly, preferably once a week to maintain the users’ 
expertise, the log data shows that the recommendations has 
not been followed. This has not been done regularly, and far 
from once a week.  
It also needs to be emphasized that the involved staff at 
NLSH Vesterålen, in general, were perceived as more 
reluctant to adopt the new service than the involved staff at 
NLSH Lofoten.  
Health personnel also reported that the telestroke system 
could be useful for other clinical consultations. This could be 
other acute neurological sufferings, but also in none acute 
situations with uncertain diagnoses or treatment. At NLSH 
Lofoten some of the local staff also suggested to use the 
telestroke system for collaborations with other departments, 
for instance, dermatologists at NLSH Bodø.  
The two rural hospitals have developed different 
telestroke procedures. At NLSH Vesterålen the second-call 
physician is always consulted first, if there are any doubts 
about whether thrombolytic treatment is adequate or not. If 
the local team still is uncertain about the best treatment, the 
telestroke service should be used. This differs from NLSH 
Lofoten where the procedure is to always seek guidance 
from neurologist at NLSH Bodø, if thrombolytic treatment is 
considered. The telestroke service replaces the phone as a 
collaboration tool at this hospital. None of the three involved 
hospitals indicated any delays in thrombolytic treatment 
when using the telestroke service compared to ordinary 
phone conferences.  
As already mentioned the telestroke service has only 
been used for treatment of a few cerebral stroke patients at 
NLSH Lofoten. Here we report from three cases where the 
telestroke service has been used for patients hospitalized 
with cerebral stroke symptoms. As we will show, all three 
cases had different outcomes.  
1) The first patients arrived at the rural hospital with a 
diagnosis of possible cerebral stroke. After using the 
telestroke service, this diagnose was dismissed and changed. 
No thrombolytic treatment was given, and the patient was 
discharged from the rural hospital two days later.  
2) The second patient who arrived with cerebral stroke 
symptoms was a person with a heart transplant. After using 
the telestroke service, this patient was diagnosed with a 
possible severe rejection of the transplant. The patient was 
transferred by air ambulance directly to national expertise in 
Norway, located in Oslo. No thrombolytic treatment was 
given.  
3) The third patient who arrived with a possible cerebral 
stroke diagnosis had a former diagnose of cerebral stroke. 
The patient had successfully received thrombolytic treatment 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

one and a half year earlier. After using the telestroke service, 
the patient received thrombolytic treatment successfully. 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The results presented here indicate anecdotally how a 
telestroke service might be useful in rural hospitals for 
diagnosing and treating patients with suspected cerebral 
stroke. The collaboration was described as constructive and 
valuable by the involved health personnel. Despite 
successfully implementation and positive feedback from the 
few telestroke conferences that has been conducted, the 
frequency of telestroke conferences has been considerable 
lower than expected. This interesting paradox needs further 
investigation.  
The preliminary results from NLSH Lofoten question the 
estimated number of potential stroke patient in the Lofoten 
region. This number might be too high. The next step in our 
study will include data from patient records to reveal both 
actual numbers of stroke patients last year, and the patients 
that arrived with a suspected stroke diagnosis. This data will 
then be compared with the numbers from the telestroke log 
data.  
The results also question the frequency of thrombolytic 
treatment in Lofoten. In general only 2% of all Norwegian 
stroke patients receive thrombolytic treatment, whereas 20 % 
is expected to benefit from such treatment (Helsedirektoratet, 
2010). The low rate could be due to geographical, 
environment or organizational conditions. Hazard weather 
conditions, long travel distances and lack of stroke 
awareness in the population, might be of importance for how 
quickly patients arrive at the hospital. The established 
practice of shipping patients to the central expertise, rather 
than giving local treatment, might also affected on the 
frequency of use.    
The preliminary results from NLSH Vesterålen point in 
direction of organizational or technological challenges. A 
new hospital is under construction, and the staff is naturally 
eager to move into a new building. New procedures and 
training might be put on hold until the new facilities can be 
used.  
It also needs to be highlighted that the involved staff at 
NLSH Vesterålen, in general, seems more reluctant to adopt 
the new service than the involved staff at NLSH Lofoten. 
NLSH Vesterålen is a bigger hospital than NLSH Lofoten, 
which means that they have more staff and local expertise 
present than NLSH Lofoten. The physicians at Vesterålen 
expressed, for instance, concern about the level of expertise 
at NLSH Bodø after office hours. The stroke unit at NLSH 
Bodø is organized with a stroke specialist present at the 
hospital during office hours. After hours, a stroke specialist 
might not be present at the hospital, but be the second 
physician on-call, possible located outside the hospital. This 
is off course a legitimate concern, and something that needs 
further exploration in the next step of our research.   
The next step of our study will therefore focus on the 
local context for the telestroke service. Few or none studies 
are found on the significance of the context when 
implementing a telestroke service. This is unfortunate since 
the geographical, contextual and organizational environment 
is known to be significant to other telemedicine services in 
the region [19, 20]. A telestroke service in North Norway is 
expected to face other challenges than those reported 
internationally: In NLSH as in North Norway in general, the 
number of cases is low, clinicians have high turnover, 
technical support is not available 24/7 and severe weather 
conditions and long distances might add to the transport 
time.  
There is long experience with telemedicine in Northern 
Norway [21-23]. Unfortunately, in Norway as well as 
internationally, there is also a long track record of 
telemedicine services terminating after the pilot project is 
over [24-26]. Therefore it is important to follow the 
telestroke service by studying the local context and the 
organizational requirements as well as the clinical outcome 
of the service. The organization of the health service (work-
flow, technical support, maintenance of staff, etc) are 
important factors to ensure a functional and sustainable 
telemedicine service. 
Another interesting aspect is the expressed concern about 
the low frequency of use. Low frequency of use may be a 
threat to the long term success of the telestroke service. This 
concern came from both the rural hospitals’ staff.  Compared 
to the telestroke log data, this concern is particularly 
interesting, since the log data shows that the recommended 
testing of the telestroke solution has not been followed. 
Running tests to maintain users’ expertise, in an already 
stressful work day, may not be prioritized and is easily 
skipped. On the other hand, not following NST’s 
recommendation may be one of the reasons for the low 
frequency of use.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The preliminary results indicate that it is possible to 
implement and organize a telestroke service in rural hospitals 
in North Norway. So far the usage has been limited to a few 
cases, but in all these cases, the involved personnel reported 
beneficial results for the patient, successful online 
cooperation, and excellent video and sound quality. 
However, the sparse frequency of use in a North Norwegian 
context raises important questions. To our knowledge there 
are few or none studies focusing on the significance of the 
context when establishing a telestroke service. This will be 
the next step for our research.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the Northern Norway Regional 
Health Authority (Helse Nord RHF) for funding this 
research project. Special thanks to Professor Rolf Salvesen 
and the staff at Nordlandssykehuset, NLSH. We also want 
to thank Professor Lars Thomassen at the Haukeland 
University Hospital, for inspiration and guidance. 
 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

REFERENCES 
[1] 
Bolle S., Larsen F., Hagen O., and Gilbert M. Video 
conferencing versus telephone calls for team work across 
hospitals: a qualitative study on simulated emergencies. 
BMC Emergency Medicine. 2009; 9 (1): p. 22. 
[2] 
RIS/PACS system. Retrieved: November, 2011;  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Picture_archiving_and_commun
ication_system. 
[3] 
Skaset M. Lokalsykehusenes akuttfunksjoner i en samlet 
behandlingskjede. Oslo 2007. Retrieved: November, 2011; 
http://www.regjeringen.no/upload/HOD/Vedlegg/Lokalsyke
husenes%20akuttfunksjoner%20rapp%20200307.pdf 
[4] 
Helsedirektoratet. Nasjonale retningslinjer for behandling og 
rehabilitering ved hjerneslag.  Oslo2010. Retrieved: 
November, 2011; 
http://www.helsedirektoratet.no/publikasjoner/nasjonale_fagl
ige_retningslinjer/nasjonal_retningslinje_for_behandling_og
_rehabilitering_ved_hjerneslag___kortversjon_702254  
[5] 
Meschia J. F., Camera in the Emergency Department: The 
Evolution of Stroke Telemedicine. Mayo Clinic Proceedings. 
2009 January 1, 2009; 84(1) pp. 3-4. 
[6] 
Audebert H., Telestroke: effective networking. Lancet 
Neurol. 2006 Mar;5(3): pp. 279-282. 
[7] 
Audebert H. J. and Schwamm L., Telestroke: scientific 
results. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2009; 27 Suppl 4: pp. 15-20. 
[8] 
Johansson T. and Wild C., Telemedicine in acute stroke 
management: systematic review. Int J Technol Assess Health 
Care. 2010 Apr;26(2): pp. 149-155. 
[9] 
LaMonte M. P., Bahouth M. N., Hu P., Pathan M. Y., 
Yarbrough K. L., Gunawardane R., et al., Telemedicine for 
acute stroke: triumphs and pitfalls. Stroke. 2003 Mar;34(3): 
pp. 725-728. 
[10] Schwamm, L. H., Holloway, R. G., Amarenco, P., Audebert, 
H. J., Bakas, T., Chumbler, N. R., et al. (2009). A Review of 
the Evidence for the Use of Telemedicine Within Stroke 
Systems of Care. Stroke, 40(7), pp. 2616-2634. 
[11] Thommasen L. Behandling av akutt hjerneinfarkt. Tidsskr 
Nor Lægeforen 2007(127): pp. 1060-1063. 
[12] Hess D. C., Wang S., Gross H., Nichols F. T., Hall C. E., 
Adams R. J., Telestroke: extending stroke expertise into 
underserved areas. Lancet Neurol. 2006 Mar;5(3): pp. 275-
278. 
[13] Handschu R., Scibor M., Willaczek B., Nuckel M., 
Heckmann J. G., Asshoff D., et al., Telemedicine in acute 
stroke: remote video-examination compared to simple 
telephone consultation. J Neurol. 2008 Nov;255(11): pp. 
1792-1797. 
[14] Meyer B. C., Raman R., Hemmen T., Obler R., Zivin J. A., 
Rao R., et al., Efficacy of site-independent telemedicine in 
the STRokE DOC trial: a randomised, blinded, prospective 
study. Lancet Neurol. 2008 Sep;7(9): pp. 787-795. 
[15] Nordlanssykehuset. Retrieved: November, 2011; 
http://www.nlsh.no/om-oss/category2791.html. 
[16] Norsk Helsenett. Retrieved: November, 2011; 
http://www.nhn.no/om-oss. 
[17] Pettersen S., Uldal S. B., Baardsgard A., Amundsen M., 
Myrvang R., Nordvag D., Stenmarkl H., The North 
Norwegian Health Net. J Telemed Telecare. 1999;5 Suppl 1: 
pp. 34-36. 
[18] Fontana A. and Frey J., The interview: from structured 
questions to negotiated text. In: Denzin NK, Lincoln YA, 
editors. Collecting and Interpreting Qualitative Materials: 
Sage; 2003. pp. 61-106. 
[19] Andreassen H. K. and Dyb K., Differences and Inequlities in 
Health. Information, Communication & Society. 2010 
2010/10/01;13(7): pp. 956-975. 
[20] Dyb K. and Halford S., Placing Globalizing Technologies: 
Telemedicine and the Making of Difference. Sociology. 2009 
April 1, 2009;43(2): pp. 232-249. 
[21] Elford D. R. Telemedicine in northern Norway. J Telemed 
Telecare. 1997;3(1): pp. 1-22. 
[22] Gammon D., Bergvik S., Bergmo T., and Pedersen S., 
Videoconferencing in psychiatry: a survey of use in northern 
Norway. J Telemed Telecare. 1996;2(4): pp. 192-198. 
[23] Johnsen E., Breivik E., Myrvang R., and Olsen F., Gevinster 
av norsk telemedisin. Tromsø: NST2006. 
[24] Andre B., Ringdal G. I., Loge J. H., Rannestad T., and  
Kaasa S., The importance of key personnel and active 
management for successful implementation of computer-
based technology in palliative care: results from a qualitative 
study. Comput Inform Nurs. 2008 Jul-Aug;26(4): pp. 183-
189. 
[25] European-Commission. telemedicine for the benefit of 
patients, health care system and society 2008. Retrieved: 
November, 2011; 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/health/docs
/policy/telemedicine/telemedecine-swp_sec-2009-943.pdf 
[26] Obstfelder A., Engeseth K. H., and Wynn R., Characteristics 
of successfully implemented telemedical applications. 
Implement Sci. 2007; pp. 2:25. 
 
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

