Review of Mobile Health (mHealth) Solutions for Food-related Conditions and
Nutritional Risk Factors
Andreas Arens-Volland, L¨ubomira Spassova, Norbert R¨osch
Resource Center for Health Care Technologies — SANTEC
Public Research Center Henri Tudor
L-1855 Luxembourg, Luxembourg
andreas.arens@tudor.lu, lubomira.spassova@tudor.lu, norbert.roesch@tudor.lu
Abstract—Representing
a
subarea
of
eHealth
and
Telemedicine,
mHealth
solutions
are
becoming
more
and more widespread. Food-related conditions, like food
hypersensitivities, diabetes, obesity and associated risk factors,
pose a major threat to the public worldwide. This paper
investigates the variety of mHealth solutions in the area of
food-related health conditions and assesses their potentials
for the affected end-users, related health professionals and
possible health economic impacts. A wealth of mHealth
approaches targeted at the area of food and health exist;
however, several areas for improvement are revealed.
Keywords-Personalized eHealth; mHealth; food-related dis-
eases; diet; nutritional risk factors
I. INTRODUCTION
With the increased availability of smartphones, tablet PCs
and other mobile computing devices, the Mobile Health
(mHealth) approach is gaining increasing relevance in the
ﬁeld of Telemedicine. Especially food-related chronic con-
ditions – such as food hypersensitivities, obesity, diabetes,
etc. – are of special interest as the number of affected
people has been rising in the last decades, and diseases with
major nutritional determinants make up 41% of disability-
adjusted life years among all diagnosed diseases in Europe
[1]. Here, mHealth approaches seem to be promising in the
context of primary and secondary prevention through dietary
recommendations and food intake monitoring.
This paper provides a state of the art overview of ex-
isting mHealth solutions targeted to food-related chronic
conditions and assesses their beneﬁts to the end users and
health care professionals, if feasible. After a ﬁrst overview
of food-related diseases and their impact, we present so-
lutions available for speciﬁc conditions and more general
mHealth concepts available for food intake monitoring, food
information and diet management. Their current potential
and shortcomings are discussed and ﬁnally, conclusions are
drawn.
II. FOOD-RELATED CONDITIONS AND RISK FACTORS
This section gives an overview of food-related diseases
and associated major risk factors. In order to give an indica-
tor for the relevance of each condition, we present prevalence
ﬁgures where feasible. Most of the presented illnesses show
a potential for using mHealth for primary or secondary
prevention. In some cases, it also seems appropriate to
support the diagnostic process with adequate mHealth tools.
A. Food Hypersensitivity
Adverse reactions to food intake can be roughly separated
into two main branches: food allergy and and non-allergic
food hypersensitivity. Non-allergic food hypersensitivity,
also often named as food intolerance, refers to an abnormal
physical response to a food or food additive, whereas (true)
food allergy involves the immune system. Food allergy can
be linked with a measurable increase of IgE antibodies or
can be an immune response that is non-IgE-mediated [1][2].
Some non-allergic food hypersensitivities can be classiﬁed
through missing enzymes for digestion (e.g., lactose in-
tolerance), whereas others are related to the ingestion of
colorants, preservatives or ﬂavor enhancers. Through the
involvement of the immune system, the reactions for food
allergy can range from mild symptoms to life threatening
events, like an anaphylactic shock. Although up to 35% of
the German people believe they have adverse reactions to
food, food allergy could only be conﬁrmed for 4%, as an
example of the western population [3]. The prevalence of
lactose intolerance in Europe, for example, ranges from 4%
in Denmark and Ireland up to 56% of the adult population
in Italy [4].
The management of food allergies and food intolerances
consists in educating the patient to avoid ingesting the re-
spective allergen or food component. Some food intolerances
allow a mitigation of the symptoms through medication (e.g.,
lactase), but the root cause can not be eliminated in most
cases. As non-allergic food hypersensitivities can not be
diagnosed easily using tests for the immune system, food
intake diaries are of great value here. Also, for food allergy
patients with complicated cases, food diaries help to identify
individual allergens in the daily food.
B. Diabetes
According to the WHO Diabetes Fact sheet N312, ”346
million people worldwide have diabetes”. A 2002 study esti-
284
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

mated the average annual costs per patient to EUR 2,834 in
eight western European countries [5]. The goals of medical
nutrition therapy for diabetes are to a) attain and maintain an
optimal metabolic outcome (blood glucose levels in normal
range, lipid and lipoprotein proﬁles as well as blood pressure
levels that reduce the risk for complications of diabetes); b)
prevent and treat chronic complications of diabetes through
lifestyle changes; c) improve the health status through
healthy food (and physical activity); d) address individual
nutritional needs [6]. For overweight and obese individuals,
a weight-loss diet, e.g., through low-carbohydrate or low-fat
calorie-restricted diets, may be effective in short term. The
scope of application for mHealth in diabetes II management
is clearly the primary and secondary prevention as well as
the disease management through food intake monitoring and
dietary management.
C. Obesity
Obesity and overweight are major risk factors that are
associated with several chronic diseases such as diabetes,
cardiovascular diseases (CVD), hypertension, arthritis, some
forms of cancer, or chronic kidney disease, to name a few.
Based on the WHO classiﬁcation, adults with a BMI from 25
to 30 are deﬁned as overweight, and those with a BMI above
30 are obese. According to an OECD report, more than half
of the adult population (50.3%) are overweight or obese,
and across the entire OECD region, 17% of the adult pop-
ulation are obese [7]. These ﬁgures are even more dramatic
when taking into account the predicted further rise, mainly
among children, due to physical inactivity and cheaper and
thus more easily accessible food in industrialized countries.
Newest WHO ﬁgures presented in the Obesity Fact sheet
N311 indicate that more than 1.4 billion adults in 2008 and
more than 40 million children under the age of ﬁve were
overweight in 2010.
D. Elderly Nutrition
Proper nutrition is essential for health and well-being, but
it is often lacking among the elderly. For example, as the
elderly reduce their food intake in response to decreasing
physical activity, their iron intake also drops [1]. Apart
from general nutritional needs of aged people, like increased
calcium and vitamin D intake, often (co-)morbidities evolve
that can be inﬂuenced through dietary behavior.
1) Neurodegenerative Diseases: Neurodegenerative dis-
eases describe a group of conditions affecting the nervous
system. Typical is the progressive loss of nerve cells leading
to dementia and motion disorders. Popular examples include
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) and Parkinson’s Disease (PD).
Alzheimer’s Disease is becoming an increasing burden to
the elderly population and very often displays symptoms
like forgetfulness, lack of orientation, cognitive decline etc.
A recent study found out that concentration of vitamin C and
beta-carotene in the serum of AD patients was signiﬁcantly
lower than in control group [8]. In contrast to these ﬁndings,
a correlation between quality of diet and the occurrence of
Parkinson’s Disease could not be detected so far [9]. Among
subjects aged over 65, crude prevalence rates for dementia
varied between 5.9% and 9.4% [10].
2) Malnutrition: Malnutrition is a quite common problem
for elderly people. The consequences are a weak immune
system, weaker muscle power, poor wound healing, tiredness
and mental impairment, as well as less enjoyment of life. A
body-mass-index (BMI) of 20 and below indicates malnutri-
tion; if the BMI is below 18.5, the affected person is clearly
malnourished. However, not only the BMI is a critical factor
but also the supply with vitamin D, vitamin B12 and folic
acid is essential, meaning that a person with a BMI above
20 still can be malnourished. In order to correctly assess a
dietary condition, it is suggested to consider the weight loss
in the past months, the mobility, autonomy of eating, number
of main meals, drinking, and ﬁnally, the subjective state
of health. Among other factors, appetite tends to decrease,
leading to reduced food and nutrient intake. Other key risk
groups are those with chronic diseases, people who are
living in poverty or are socially isolated and those who have
recently been discharged from hospital.
Recent research shows that only 17.7% of 80-year-old pa-
tients are well nourished, 58.7% are under risk of malnutri-
tion and 23.6% of the patients suffer from malnutrition [11].
A study published in 2012 estimates the annual public health
and social care costs associated with adult malnourished
patients in Ireland at over EUR 1.4 billion, representing 10%
of Ireland’s health-care budget [12]. In Europe, an estimated
33 million people are at risk of malnutrition [13].
E. Raised Cholesterol
Raised cholesterol levels (LDL) are a major cause of
coronary heart diseases (CHD) and are also strongly linked
to diabetes. An LDL-lowering therapy reduces the risk of
CHD. It should include therapeutic lifestyle changes ac-
companied by a drug therapy. The lifestyle changes include
reduced intakes of saturated fats (<7% of total calories)
and cholesterol (<200 mg per day), therapeutic options for
enhancing LDL lowering, such as plant stanols/sterols (2
g/day) and increased viscous (soluble) ﬁber (10-25 g/day),
weight reduction, and increased physical activity [14]. In
Europe, the WHO assumes that about 54% of the population
have raised cholesterol levels (above 190mg/dl, ages 25+).
III. MOBILE HEALTH (MHEALTH) SOLUTIONS
The Mobile Health (mHealth) approach experienced a
tremendous growth during the last years mainly propelled
through the rising availability of mobile hardware, like
smartphones and tablet PCs. Initiatives like ”Quantiﬁed Self”
pool self-tracking ideas for general life-style monitoring and
tracking health-related data for general purpose. The range
of available self-tracking tools encompasses solutions for
285
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

tracking mood, physical activity, sleep, daily habits, food
intake and many more. However, the ambitions of those
tools are rather to be set in the voluntary self-management.
The WHO Global Observatory report deﬁnes mHealth as ”a
component of eHealth” that is ”medical and public health
practice supported my mobile devices” [15]. The focus of
the present paper lies mainly on mHealth tools that are
oriented towards the management or prevention of concrete
health conditions. Furthermore, the presented technologies
rather center around the end users and attending health care
professionals, in contrast to the use of mobile technologies
within health care service provider organizations, e.g., in
hospitals.
The rest of this section is divided into two parts, in
which we ﬁrstly review condition-speciﬁc mHealth tools
— concerning food sensitivity and diabetes — and sec-
ondly, evaluate more generic food information and diet
management solutions currently available. Due to the space
limitation, the authors renounce to mention references for
the mHealth tools except for scientiﬁc papers. The presented
approaches are examined with regard to their capabilities of
a) providing food information, b) food intake monitoring,
and c) diet management. Further, we distinguish between
standalone tools and tools integrated in the health care chain
with health care professionals.
A. Condition-speciﬁc solutions
1) Solutions for food hypersensitivity: As indicated in
the previous section, the sole ”treatment” of food hyper-
sensitivities lies in the avoidance of the respective food
allergen or food item. This is also the reason why most
mHealth solutions in this speciﬁc area are limited to provid-
ing information about food items, whenever possible with
relation to a patient-speciﬁc proﬁle. However, the possibly
life-threatening consequences of an unintended ingestion of
an allergen due to a false negative rating by a mobile tool
are always a huge risk for the user as well as to the solution-
provider due to liability issues. Having this in mind, it is no
surprise that most solutions are targeted towards non-allergic
food hypersensitivity issues where no fatal consequences due
to unintended ingestion are known.
Representative for non-allergic food hypersensitivity so-
lutions, we present approaches covering lactose intolerance
and gluten intolerance. Apps like Laktosefrei provide in-
formation about the contents of lactose in food products
that have to be selected in a product hierarchy or through
simple text search. The 900 products in Laktosefrei are a mix
of generic food classes and branded food products. Other
apps provide recipes for cooking lactose-free dishes and
guidance for ﬁnding appropriate retailers and restaurants,
e.g., in Lactofree (see Figure 1 left). In contrast to that,
Is that Gluten Free? provides over 23,000 veriﬁed gluten-
free products that can be easily searched (Figure 1 right),
and Gluten-free Scanner uses the phone camera to scan the
Figure 1.
Lactofree and Is that Gluten Free?
barcodes printed on food packages. A few solutions try to
cover multiple areas of food sensitivity. Food Intolerances
covers histamine intolerance, fructose malabsorption, aspirin
intolerance as well as lactose or gluten intolerance, but has
only 700 commented foods, which is by far not a sufﬁcient
mass of data.
Most of the available food allergy-related solutions cover
the requirement of providing information about speciﬁc
products. There are more general apps that guide to allergy-
friendly restaurants (AllergyEats) or provide information
concerning food dishes available in speciﬁc restaurant chains
(Food Allergy Reference - Safe2EatTB4). MyFoodFacts
and ScanAvert, for example, use the built-in camera to
scan the barcode of a food product and present information
about the ingredients and possibly opposing allergens. The
FoodAllergy Detective is an exceptional case as it does
not focus on providing food allergy-relevant information
to the end user, but it performs food intake and symptom
monitoring in order to discover hidden food sensitivities.
It should be noted that depending on the stated intended
use of this app, it could be seen as providing a diagnostic
method. If, however, it can be seen as such, it should have
the approval as medical device, which is mandatory by law
for such kind of functionality.
The major shortcoming of the presented solutions for food
hypersensitivity is that they all are disconnected standalone
tools. Thus, the authors want to share their experiences
made during the progress of the MENSSANA project
(Mobile Expert & Networking System for Systematical
Analysis of Nutrition-based Allergies): The smartphone-
based Personal Allergy Assistant (PAA) allows patients
to keep an electronic diary by scanning the barcodes of
the consumed food products. For diagnostic purposes, the
diary is regularly transmitted to the allergist’s electronic
patient record. A computer-supported evaluation method for
patient diaries has been developed and tested. To further
support the individual diet management, the PAA gives a
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

warning before consumption of allergenic food. Computer-
readable food ingredient lists are required for the PAA diet
management. To collect this kind of information, a dedicated
web-based ”virtual community” of food consumers and
producers (www.wikifood.eu) has been established. Clinical
studies have been conducted to evaluate the usefulness of
the MENSSANA-PAA approach. A total number of 26,916
diary entries for 28 patients have been transmitted via the
telemedicine system. An average of 15.65 [4.49
41.27]
entries have been reported per patient and day. It turned out
that food diaries can be very helpful for diagnostic purposes
if symptoms are in general linked with food intake. A time
frame of eight weeks of self-monitoring is acceptable for
most of the patients.
2) Diabetes: Mobile health applications and devices can
support diabetic persons to better observe their diets through
improved self-monitoring with reminders and alerts, and
through generating diary information. This collected infor-
mation can then be shared with the patient’s attending health
care professional [16]. Typically, diabetes solutions encom-
pass diary functionalities to record blood glucose levels,
physical activity, and food intake. At the beginning of 2011,
more than 260 diabetes-related apps have been counted
in the iPhone app store, an increase of 400% compared
to 2009 [17]. It can be assumed that online markets for
other mobile platforms such as Android show a similar
availability of diabetes-related apps. Prominent examples
include the BGStar blood glucose meter and iBGStar blood
glucose meter and iPhone app by Sanoﬁ Aventis (Figure 2).
Both are approved medical devices. The focus of (i)BGStar
is the measurement and documentation of blood glucose
levels, self-calculated carbohydrate intake, and administered
insulin. Physical activities or food intake are only covered
via conﬁgurable additional notes, such as ”high-fat meal”.
Besides the calculated carbohydrate values and additional
notes, the BGStar tools don’t allow for any more detailed
food intake monitoring.
Another mentionable diabetes support tool is the WellDoc
Diabetes Manager, which is an integrated mobile and
online solution. It includes a message center, goal setting
capabilities, information library, collecting glucose level
with real time feedback on medicals, recording of where
(part of the body) the injections are made, re-test reminder
and a rather rudimentary food intake diary. Although Well-
Doc is a quite comprehensive system and shows a better
decline of 1.2% of glycated hemoglobin compared to a
conventional care group [18], the usability is lacking as
the high drop-out rate of 50% in a study suggests [19]. A
similar solution that is integrated with an online platform is
Glucose Buddy. It also allows doctor printouts to be handed
to the treating physician. Users can track glucose levels,
carbohydrate consumption, insulin dosages, and activities.
Standalone applications include Actelin and iCholesterol,
for example, which mainly allow for diary keeping of
Figure 2.
BGStar and iBGStar
glucose levels.
B. Generic food information and diet management solutions
A major part of the available food-related mHealth apps
are dedicated to diet management, especially aiming at
weight loss and calorie counting. Many of these apps are
associated with corresponding web communities dedicated
to diet management and healthy nutrition. In addition to
tracking the user’s food consumption, these apps often also
offer the possibility to track further parameters, like physical
activity, blood pressure, sleep, mood etc. A part of the apps
use camera-based barcode scanning for identifying packed
food products through their UPC identiﬁers. Clearly, these
solutions require product information on individually packed
food as printed on the corresponding product labels, in con-
trast to other apps, which use generalized food information
related to food archetypes. Similar to the food sensitivity
apps, the crucial point concerning the usefulness of diet
management apps is the availability of appropriate food
information databases.
Mobile apps like LoseIt! or DailyBurn Tracker allow
users to specify their speciﬁc diet goals, log their daily food
consumption using barcode scanning or through selecting
food entries out of a food product hierarchy, and thus to
keep an overview of their calorie consumption but also on
the consumption of certain nutrients if needed. Similarly,
FitDay allows the creation and management of personal
food journals by choosing food items out of a predeﬁned
food hierarchy (without barcode scanning). This app aims
at a long term analysis of the food journals and thus at
supporting the users in gaining control over their eating
habits. With the iFood Diary app, users can share their food
diaries with their nutritionists via Facebook or e-mail. Apart
from the possibility to chose food items from a conventional
food hierarchy, the GoMeals mobile app additionally sets a
focus on restaurant meals. Users can browse the menus of
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

nearby restaurants and check the calorie and nutrient values
of the offered dishes.
In addition to tracking their own food consumption, with
the alli Food Planner, users can also plan their upcoming
meals in accordance with their self-estimated individual
calorie needs. This process is supported by corresponding
meal suggestions by the app and a simple trafﬁc light system
indicating the appropriateness of certain foods. Calori-
eTrack is similar to the alli Food Planner but with automated
calculation of calorie needs based on the user’s current
weight and height and the target weight.
The recently released Food Navi app calculates the
optimal food intake in different food categories based on
the user’s personal proﬁle and a special rating system -
UGB’s Healthy-Eating-Index (HEI-UGB). In contrast to
other scoring systems, this index calculates the optimal in-
take amounts in different food groups, which are represented
in the so-called nutrition circle, instead of being based on
individual nutrients. The app is also available in specialized
versions optimized for diabetics, coeliacs and cardiovascular
prevention.
Beside these mobile apps which focus mainly on weight
loss, there are also some apps that merely provide informa-
tion on the nutrient values of food products without tracking
the user’s weight or calorie consumption. The app Nutri-
tion Facts allows users to browse nutrition information for
popular foods, including fast food. A similar functionality
is offered by the app MyFood - Nutrition Facts, which
however concentrates on unprocessed foods, like fruits and
vegetables. The app provides complete nutrition data for a
number of unprocessed foods, which includes a complete
breakdown of vitamins and minerals. The food information
app Fooducate automatically rates foods and beverages on
a scale with 10 distinct grades based on their nutrition
facts and ingredient lists. The information is presented in a
clear and informative way, using different colors and simple
labels. The user is also presented suggestions for alternative
food products.
IV. DISCUSSION
The previous section reviewed existing mHealth solutions
from the viewpoint of food-related conditions and risk fac-
tors. It can be stated that a wealth of solutions for different
aspects are available, e.g., apps for different smartphone
architectures. However, their utility largely depends on fur-
ther resources and requirements: a) availability of error-free
information about food items and food products in order to
be able to predict the tolerance or the usefulness of food for
speciﬁc persons; b) the integration into a personalized case
management process involving health care professionals.
Especially the data correctness is inevitable for conditions
that can involve fatal consequences. However, for areas like
obesity or other nutrient-based risks, rare data errors could
be negligible in favor of an increased volume of available
data. Two types of food information data are used: food-
related information concerning archetypal food and infor-
mation concerning speciﬁc food products. The archetypal
information is most often drawn from food composition
databases (FCDB) and includes averaged nutrition informa-
tion for foods and food product classes. Digital food product-
speciﬁc data, possibly extracted from food product labels,
are not as widely available. For the US market, dedicated
commercial databases of consumer packaged goods exist,
but for the European dispersed multilingual markets, such
databases are not available, apart from solutions available in
the UK. Further, this type of data can be found at collabo-
rative food information platforms, in which a community
of users, manufacturers and platform operators maintains
the data. Both sources of product speciﬁc data (commercial
and community-based) implicate the question if the collected
data is suitable for use in mHealth. This is due to the facts
that commercial product information databases are mainly
intended for business activities such as monitoring shopping
behavior, and the quality assessment in community-based
approaches is very often not addressed.
As shown in the previous sections, the presented diabetes
solutions are better integrated into case management pro-
cesses, and their main functionality covers diary keeping
of blood glucose levels and food intake for documentation.
The food intake is recorded by entering (self-calculated)
carbohydrate values, but it is not based on archetypal food
information or product-speciﬁc data. This is clearly an
area where improvements are suggested. Apart from the
diabetes apps and some further exceptions, most of the other
presented solutions are standalone approaches providing the
possibility to send data via email to a clinician at most.
Although not examined in detail in this article, we would
like to ﬁnish the discussion by stating that a huge factor
of uncertainty concerning mHealth solutions in general is
the lack of evidence that undermines the quality and safety
aspects of medical apps [20]. There is an ongoing discussion
in the community of what a medical or health-related app is
and how quality and safety characteristics can be guaranteed.
In 2011, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) ini-
tiated a regulation process for mobile medical applications,
which has not been ﬁnalized yet [21].
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Food-related conditions and associated risk factors pose
a dramatic burden to the society, which is expected to
increase in the near future. Persons suffering from men-
tioned conditions can already choose from a wide range of
mHealth solutions. However, certain weak spots have been
identiﬁed: the functionality of the apps is limited to speciﬁc
features, mainly displaying dietary information or collecting
blood glucose levels for documentation. Menu planning or
diagnostic support is most often not available. Moreover,
the provided dietary information is frequently based on
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

data coming from food composition databases and lacks
information on speciﬁc food items sold in supermarkets.
This is mainly true for the European sector. Further, dietary
applications are often designed for general weight loss and
not adjusted to speciﬁc risk factors, like raised choles-
terol. Finally, a better integration of the solutions into case
management processes is highly desirable. The latter and
applied regulation processes for mobile medical applications
will enable mHealth suppliers to provide solutions with a
higher level of quality and safety, and will eventually allow
additional functionalities, like diagnostic support.
Future work will include a more extensive review of actual
user experiences of the target groups concerning app usage
as well an assessment of number of users, age groups etc.
and comments from health care specialists.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Robertson, C. Tirado, T. Lobstein, M. Jermini, C. Knai,
J. r. H. Jensen, A. Ferro-Luzzi, and W. P. James, “Food and
health in Europe: a new basis for action.” WHO regional
publications European series, no. 96, pp. i–xvi, 1–385, back
cover.
[2] S. G. O. Johansson, T. Bieber, R. Dahl, P. S. Friedmann, B. Q.
Lanier, R. F. Lockey, C. Motala, J. a. Ortega Martell, T. a. E.
Platts-Mills, J. Ring, F. Thien, P. Van Cauwenberge, and H. C.
Williams, “Revised nomenclature for allergy for global use:
Report of the Nomenclature Review Committee of the World
Allergy Organization, October 2003.” The Journal of allergy
and clinical immunology, vol. 113, no. 5, pp. 832–6, May
2004.
[3] T. Zuberbier, G. Edenharter, M. Worm, I. Ehlers, S. Reimann,
T. Hantke, C. C. Roehr, K. E. Bergmann, and B. Niggemann,
“Prevalence of adverse reactions to food in Germany - a
population study.” Allergy, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 338–345, 2004.
[4] EFSA Panel on Dietetic Products Nutrition and Allergies
(NDA), “Scientiﬁc Opinion on lactose thresholds in lactose
intolerance and galactosaemia,” EFSA Journal, vol. 8, no. 9,
pp. 1–29, 2010.
[5] B. J¨onsson, “Revealing the cost of Type II diabetes in
Europe.” Diabetologia, vol. 45, no. 7, pp. S5–12, Jul. 2002.
[6] J. P. Bantle, J. Wylie-Rosett, A. L. Albright, C. M. Apovian,
N. G. Clark, M. J. Franz, B. J. Hoogwerf, A. H. Lichtenstein,
E. Mayer-Davis, A. D. Mooradian, and M. L. Wheeler,
“Nutrition recommendations and interventions for diabetes:
a position statement of the American Diabetes Association.”
Diabetes care, vol. 31 Suppl 1, pp. S61–78, Jan. 2008.
[7] O. Indicators, Health at a Glance 2011: OECD Indicators.
OECD Publishing, 2011.
[8] C. A. F. Von Arnim, F. Herbolsheimer, T. Nikolaus, R. Peter,
H. K. Biesalski, A. C. Ludolph, M. Riepe, and G. Nagel,
“Dietary Antioxidants and Dementia in a Population-Based
Case-Control Study among Older People in South Germany.”
Journal of Alzheimers disease JAD, 2012.
[9] K.
S¨a¨aksj¨arvi,
P.
Knekt,
A.
Lundqvist,
S.
M¨annist¨o,
M. Heli¨ovaara, H. Rissanen, and R. J¨arvinen, “A cohort study
on diet and the risk of Parkinson’s disease: the role of food
groups and diet quality.” The British journal of nutrition, pp.
1–9, Apr. 2012.
[10] C. Berr, J. Wancata, and K. Ritchie, “Prevalence of dementia
in the elderly in Europe.” European neuropsychopharma-
cology : the journal of the European College of Neuropsy-
chopharmacology, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 463–71, Aug. 2005.
[11] M. Noreik, “Evaluation der Ern¨ahrungstherapie in einer geri-
atrischen Klinik - Analyse von Effekt, Kosten und Nutzen der
Ern¨ahrungstherapie in einer Jahresbilanz,” Ph.D. dissertation,
Universit¨at zu K¨oln, 2012.
[12] N. Rice and C. Normand, “The cost associated with disease-
related malnutrition in Ireland.” Public Health Nutrition,
no. 17, pp. 1–7, 2012.
[13] O. Ljungqvist and F. de Man, “Under nutrition: a major health
problem in Europe.” Nutrici´on hospitalaria : organo oﬁcial
de la Sociedad Espa˜nola de Nutrici´on Parenteral y Enteral,
vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 369–70, 2009.
[14] A. T. Panel, “Executive Summary of The Third Report of
The National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert
Panel on Detection, Evaluation, And Treatment of High Blood
Cholesterol In Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III).” JAMA :
the journal of the American Medical Association, vol. 285,
no. 19, pp. 2486–97, May 2001.
[15] WHO Global Observatory, “mHealth: New horizons for
health through mobile technologies,” World Health Organi-
zation, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[16] eHealth Initiative, “An Issue Brief on eHealth Tools and Dia-
betes Care for Socially Disadvantaged Populations,” eHealth
Initiative, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[17] T.
Chomutare,
L.
Fernandez-Luque,
E.
Arsand,
and
G. Hartvigsen, “Features of mobile diabetes applications:
review of the literature and analysis of current applications
compared against evidence-based guidelines.” Journal of
medical Internet research, no. 3, p. e65, Jan.
[18] C. Quinn, M. Shardell, and M. Terrin, “Cluster-Randomized
Trial of a Mobile Phone Personalized Behavioral Intervention
for Blood Glucose Control,” Diabetes . . . , vol. 34, p. 2337,
2011.
[19] R.
Katz,
T.
Mesﬁn,
and
K.
Barr,
“Lessons
From
a
Community-Based mHealth Diabetes Self-Management Pro-
gram: It’s Not Just About the Cell Phone,” Journal of Health
Communication, vol. 16, pp. 67–72, 2012.
[20] A. W. G. Buijink, B. J. Visser, and L. Marshall, “Medical
apps for smartphones: lack of evidence undermines quality
and safety.” Evidence-based medicine, Aug. 2012.
[21] U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2011) Draft guidance
for industry and food and drug administration staff - mobile
medical applications.
289
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

