Status of IT in Dutch Hospitals in 2011 
 
Irene Krediet, William Goossen 
Christelijke Hogeschool Windesheim 
 ICT Innovations in Healthcare 
 Zwolle, the Netherlands 
e-mail: I.Krediet@windesheim.nl 
 
 
Abstract—The IT-monitor gives an overview on the use and 
implementation of information technology (IT) in general and 
university 
hospitals 
in 
the 
Netherlands. 
Using 
the 
questionnaire, earlier applied in Germany and Austria, all 
Dutch hospitals were requested to participate, of which 20% 
responded.  The results show that the introduction of IT is 
realised in various activities in several departments of the 
hospitals. Examples are the Electronic Health Record (EHR), 
electronic medical correspondence and diagnostic tests such as 
radiology. Desktops are most commonly used, but laptop and 
notebook are also used. On the other hand, IT use for medical 
guidelines, clinical pathways and clinical reminders are not 
generally introduced. Five reasons are named as barriers for 
the introduction: lack of financial support, shortage of staff, 
inadequate suppliers, lack of support by doctors and 
difficulties in showing the return of investment. With a larger 
budget available, hospitals will increase the development of IT 
on various areas in the hospital departments in the near future 
towards a more eHealth orientated Dutch healthcare. 
Keywords: Dutch hospitals; IT implementation; barriers 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In January 2006, the Dutch government implemented 
major reforms to their health care system. With an increase 
in care, changing care demands, and shortage of personnel, a 
system of regulated competition was introduced. In an 
attempt to reduce rapidly rising costs, an eHealth oriented 
attitude was suggested as well. The use of IT in health 
organizations can help to make healthcare safer, more 
effective, and more efficient for the patient, at lower costs 
[4]. 
 
IT studies in health organizations focus on a range of 
topics, all with the aim to bring satisfied, safer, more 
effective and more efficient care to the patient at lower cost 
[8][14][16].  However, the use of IT can also degrade the 
safety and quality of patients’ care [5] and can lead to higher 
costs [1][2][11][12]. Furthermore, a recent study reports that 
an increase in IT in Dutch healthcare organizations does not 
necessarily lead to an increase of adequacy of information 
management [10].  
 
 
Research indicates that a number of barriers, which are 
also interrelated with each other, limits the implementation 
of IT in hospitals. These barriers can have legal, 
organizational, financial or technical support features [1] [4] 
[5][15][16],  but also depend on psychological or social 
factors such as acceptance, usefulness, content [2][14][17].   
Various methods have been suggested on how to deal with 
these barriers, in order to improve care and manage costs for 
specific health organizations, such as more and better 
research before IT introduction, more financial and IT 
support and more standardization [1] [10][11].   
 
Research on IT in healthcare has been categorized into 
three levels: macro, meso and micro [9]. On micro-level, IT 
is investigated within one hospital. For instance, the effects 
of adaptation using IT innovations are investigated. Research 
on meso-level focus on one country or one region in this 
country. For example, in the Netherlands, in 2001 and 2009, 
research on IT use was focused on the electronic transfer 
process for nurses [6][7][18]. A clear picture of the IT use in 
hospitals on macro-level, that is multi-national and bi-
national, was recently investigated by the EC [3]. Here, for 
27 European countries and three other countries (Croatia, 
Iceland, and Norway) it was found that university, and large 
hospitals, have better IT implemented in healthcare than 
smaller, non-university hospitals.  
 
In our research, we focus on the results on meso level, 
and try to discover today’s use of information technology in 
Dutch hospitals.  Besides research on the IT usage by nurses 
(not discussed here), we also investigate various IT aspects  
in the hospitals such as the amount of IT implementation in 
the various departments, for a number of activities, the 
possible barriers for implementation, the available hardware 
etcetera.  
 
In this paper, after we explain the method used for our 
questionnaire, we describe the IT department,  where IT is 
used and how far it is implemented in the departments and in 
various activities. This is followed by the results on the 
amount of IT implementation of the EHR and the electronic 
signature. We describe the hardware used, and mention some 
barriers named by the respondents. We finish with some 
ideas for improvements and future research. 
II. 
METHOD 
We translated and adjusted the German survey 
‘Informationtechnologie im Krankenhaus 2011’ [13], which 
focus on the chief information officer (CIO) in the health 
organization.  The survey covered a number of categories 
related to IT in hospitals such as IT usage, IT department, IT 
priorities, finance, electronic signature and documents 
management, finance, and of the usage of Clinical Pathways, 
cooperation, and EHR's. 
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
The translated questionnaire was implemented in an 
electronic questionnaire tool and distributed by a web link to 
129 members of three Dutch health organizations related to 
ICT (the Dutch association of hospitals NVZ, the association 
of informatics and healthcare VIenG, and the association of 
university hospitals AcZie) working both in university and 
public acute hospitals. Because of the number of 
respondents, frequency analyses were executed to report on 
the situation of IT in hospitals in the Netherlands. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
A. General information  
We received 20 useful questionnaires back (response rate 
20.9%) from 16 general and 4 university hospitals. We 
compared the hospitals who responded to the non-responsive 
hospitals on three characteristics i.e. academic versus general 
hospitals, number of beds, and location. 15 % of the general 
hospitals responded and 50% of the university hospitals. 10 
% of the non-respondent hospitals have less than 150 beds, 
82% 150 until 999 beds, and 8% more than 1000 beds. The 
hospitals in this study scored 0%, 90% and 10%. Most 
hospitals in the Netherlands are located in the western part of 
the country. Indeed, most hospitals who returned the 
questionnaires are located there. Based on these results, we 
concluded that we deal with a representative random sample 
of the Dutch hospitals. 
B. IT Department 
All hospitals have an IT department. Most hospitals 
(57.9%) have more than 20 staff; 20% has between 21 and 
25 employees and 15% has 41 until 65 employees. 
University hospitals have between 135 until 230 workers 
(20%).  
Almost all hospitals (94.4%) have an IT-budget for 
recent and future IT expenses. Management decides, together 
with the IT department (38.9%) or with the requesting 
department (38.9%) on the investments. In most hospitals 
(55.6%) the IT budget has increased from 2009-2010. For a 
smaller group (38.9%) the budget remained the same and in 
one hospital (5.6%) the IT budget decreased. 
C. IT usage 
The usage of IT in the hospitals is illustrated by the amount 
of implementation or a plan to implement specific parts of 
IT usage. In Figure 1 we see that IT is well implemented in 
clinical 
documentations, 
especially 
in 
medical 
correspondence (83.3%) and in the operating room (OR) 
documentation (77.8%). Also nursing files and medicine 
usage is available electronically (in almost 70% in more 
than one department or in the whole hospital).  In 5.9% of 
the hospitals there is no plan to implement electronic 
nursing 
records 
or 
electronic 
intensive 
care 
(IC) 
documentation (10.5%) or in medical documentation 
(5.9%).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. IT Usage in Dutch hospitals 
 
When we look at the IT usage in administration (Fig. 2) we 
see that the IT usage is highly implemented in the hospitals 
administration. Only the electronic administration about the 
costs of medicine is behind other administrative duties, but 
there is progress (5.6%). 
 
 
 
Figure 2. IT in administration 
 
Similar positive results are found in the IT implementation 
in diagnostic disciplines such as radiology (in 94.4% 
implemented), laboratory results (in 77.8%   implemented), 
in the management department for example for making duty 
rosters (in 100% implemented), in patient registration 
systems for example for patient administration (in 94.4 %  
implemented),min 
patient 
identification 
(in 
64.7% 
implemented) or in quality management (in 70.6% 
implemented). 
 
Figure 3 illustrates the introduction of the electronic health 
record (EHR). In 36.8 % of the hospitals the EHR is 
completely operational, 35% has started to install EHR. A 
small amount has already contracts with suppliers (5.3%), or 
has a plan to implement an EHR system (5.3%). Also, there 
are still hospitals that have not started to make plans to 
introduce EHR (5.3%). 
 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Figure 3. Electronic Health Record 
 
The electronic signature is hardly used in Dutch hospitals. 
As shown in Fig 4,  hospitals do have plans to introduce the 
electronic signature (33.3%), whereas 22.2% have no plans 
at all. 
 
 
Figure 4. Electronic signature 
 
Also the results on IT usage and guidelines are less positive. 
Figure 5 shows that the hospitals have only started to 
implement IT in medical guidelines and clinical pathways, 
(47.1%), clinical reminders (29.4%) and alerts (35.3%). A 
small percentage of the hospitals indicate that no plans are 
made. 
 
 
Figure 5. IT and guidelines 
 
 
Figure 6 shows that hospitals have the opportunity to use 
modern electronic devices such as laptop (70%), notebook 
(60%), tablet (25%) or I-Pad (20%), beside pc’s (95%) and 
bedside terminals (4%). 
 
  
 
Figure 6. Use of modern electronic devices  
 
Barriers to implement IT successfully in the hospitals are 
mentioned by 83.3% of the hospitals. Three hospitals 
(16.7%), i.e. two university hospitals, mention no barriers at 
all. 
Only five of the possible fourteen barriers suggested by the 
literature are mentioned by the hospitals. The lack of 
financial support is reported as the most important barrier 
(38.9%), followed by a shortage of staff in the IT 
department (16.7%), and inadequate suppliers (16.7%).  
Also, a lack of support by doctors (5.6%) and difficulties to 
show the return of investment of IT (5.6%) are named as 
possible barriers. 
 
IV. 
 DISCUSSION 
The study has some limitations. In particular the total number 
of 20 respondents (roughly 20% of the hospitals in the 
Netherlands) is rather small. On the other hand, this is quite 
common for questionnaires, and looking at other parameters 
like size, location and academic versus general hospital, the 
study reveals that it is a representative sample.  
Another issue could be the questionnaire. If that is 
implemented the first time, it usually leads to some questions 
not easy answered. However, the use of the German 
questionnaire and cross translation and validation ensured that 
the base quality could be considered adequate. We did not get 
feedback about the quality of questions or questionnaire. On 
the other side, this might be a reason for non-response.  
Also, this study did not concern any technical aspects of 
health IT. 
 
 
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

V. 
 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The results show that the information given by the hospitals is 
a representative sample of the country. The results further 
show that the introduction of IT is realized in Dutch hospitals, 
but there are some areas where progress is needed. 
 
Whether hospitals will make progress, will depend on the 
financial situation and the priority that IT gets. Besides 
money and means, IT systems must be worthwhile in order to 
get the support it needs. Government, hospitals and various 
branches show positive signs to support further introduction. 
 
In order the see whether or not the suggested plans have been 
executed, and progress has been made, another questionnaire 
will have to be executed in the near future. Furthermore, in 
order to get a broader view of the IT use in European 
countries, i.e. research on macro level, more results on 
separate countries, i.e. on meso level are needed. At the 
moment, our results are being compared with the results of 
Germany and these results will be published in the coming 
months. 
VI. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Boonstra, and M. Broekhuis, ”Barriers to the acceptance of 
electronic medical records by physicians from systematic 
review to taxonomy and interventions.” BMC Health Services 
Research, 2010, vol. 10/231. 
[2] A.J.E. De Veer, and A.L.Francke, ”Attitudes of nursing staff 
towards electronic patient records: a questionnaire survey.” 
International Journal of Nursing Studies, vol. 47, 2010, pp. 
846-854. 
[3] Deloitte, & Ipsos Belgium, “eHealth Benchmarking III,” 
SMART 2009/0022, 2011, Final Report. 
[4] eHealth, 
“Raamwerk 
eHealth 
agenda,” 
Nederlandse  
Vereniging voor eHealth,  23 juni 2011, pp. 1-7.  
[5] D.A. Handel, R.L Wears,  L.A. Nathanson, and J.M. Pines, ” 
Using information technology to improve the quality and 
safety of emergency care,” Academic emergency medicine, 
vol.  6, 2011, pp.  45-51. 
[6] H.G. Hilderink, W.T.F.Goossen, and P.Epping, “ICT in 
nursing in Dutch hospitals.” Stud Health technology 
Informatics,  93, 2002a,   83-88. 
[7] H.G. 
Hilderink, 
W.T.F.Goossen, 
and 
P.Epping, 
“OVERZORG. A new principle for ICT in nursing. Results of 
a research to the situation and changes for ICT in nursing.” 
[“OVERZORG. Een nieuw fundament voor ICT in de 
Verpleging. Resultaten van een onderzoek naar de stand van 
zaken en kansen rondom ICT in de verpleging”], 2002b, 
NICTIZ. 
[8] T. Hoff, “Deskilling and adaptation among primary care 
physicians using two innovations,” Health Care Management 
Review, vol. 36(4), 2011, pp.338. 
[9] U. Hübner, E. Ammenwerth, D. Flemming, C. Schaubmayr, 
and B. Selleman, “IT adoption of clinical information systems 
in Austrian and German hospitals: results of a comparative 
survey with a focus on nursing.” BMC Medical Informatics 
and Decision making, 2011, vol. 10(8). 
[10] IGZ, “Rapport status healthcare,” Utrecht, Inspection of 
Healthcare, 2011 [“Rapport staat van de gezondheidszorg,”  
Utrecht, Inspectie voor de gezondheidszorg],  2011. 
[11] Infotechnology in Healthcare, 2004 Conference proceedings.  
[12] L. Kok, C. Tempelman, S. van der Werff, and C. Koopmans, 
“ ICT in care and education,” [“ICT in zorg en onderwijs”], 
SEO economisch onderzoek., 2011. 
[13] J.D. Liebe, N. Egbert, A. Frey, and U. Hübner, 
“Characteristics of German Hospitals adopting Health IT 
systems. Results from an Empirical Stud,” In: A. Moen, J. 
Aarts, P. Hurlen (eds.). User Centred Networked Health Care, 
2011,  pp. 335-338. 
[14] N. Menachemi, T. Powers, and R.G. Brooks, “The role of 
information technology usage in physician satisfaction,” 
Health care manage Rev., vol. 34(4), 2009,  pp. 364-371. 
[15] C. Ploem and S. Gevers,  “News and Views. Introduction of a 
national electronic patient record in the Netherlands: some 
legal issues,” European Journal of Health Law, vol.18, 2009, 
pp. 191-204. 
[16] P.G. Shekelle,  S.C. Morton, and E.B. Keeler, “Costs and 
benefits of health information technology,” Evid Rep Technol 
Assess, vol. 132, 2006, pp. 1-71. 
[17] Van Bemmel, J.H. “People and ideas in medical informatics- 
a half century view.” Yearbook Medical Informatics 6(1), 
2011, 175-182. 
[18] R. Verwey, R., I. van Duijvendijk, I., E. Vreeke, E., and R. 
Zondervan, “Summary report ‘e-tranfer in the care, an 
inventory 
of 
ICT 
in 
healthcare 
and 
eduction,”  
[“Samenvatting rapport:' e-Overdracht in de Care, een 
inventarisatie ICT in zorg en onderwijs”], 2010, V&VN, 
Nictiz, Actiz.  
 
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

