Detection of Health-Related Problems of People with Dementia from Lifestyle 
Wearables: A Rule-Based Approach 
Antonios Pliatsios, Thanos G. Stavropoulos, Dimitris Strantsalis,Vasileios Kassiano, Spiros Nikolopoulos, and 
Ioannis Kompatsiaris 
Information Technologies Institute (ITI) 
Centre for Research & Technology Hellas (CERTH) 
Thessaloniki, Greece 
email: {apliatsios, athstavr, dstrants, vaskass, nikolopo, ikom}iti.gr
Abstract— In this paper, we describe a rule-based framework 
for the detection of health-related problems of people with 
dementia. The framework combines a novel ontology for 
lifestyle 
data 
(steps, 
sleep 
duration 
and 
heart 
rate 
measurements) and health-related problem representation and 
a novel set of SPARQL Inferencing Notation (SPIN) Rules to 
infer problems from lifestyle data. Both the ontology and the 
rule set are designed based on clinical expert knowledge in the 
field of dementia. More specifically, lifestyle data is acquired 
from lifestyle wearable devices in the market, making the 
system affordable and convenient. A model based on Semantic 
Web technology, Web Ontology Language (OWL), is used to 
formally represent and integrate sensor measurements, which 
promotes interoperability with other models and data 
exchange. SPIN rules offer the benefit of simplicity and 
flexibility as opposed to other rule representations in the 
domain. A proof-of-concept scenario is realized, showing data 
gathered from a real subject and the generation of expected 
problems by the framework. 
Keywords-Ontology; Event Detection; Semantic Web; SPIN; 
Reasoning; Rule-Based Systems; Dementia. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As the world population is rapidly aging, people living 
with dementia globally amounted to 50 million in 2019 and 
are expected to triple to 150 million by 2050 [1]. Yet there is 
no silver bullet for dementia, such as a pharmacological 
solution. Only holistic and objective information about a 
patient’s health status can drive tailored interventions to 
alleviate the ailments and slow down the progression of the 
disease. However, this imposes a huge burden on informal 
caregivers and healthcare professionals to manually monitor 
lifestyle, and health-related problems such as movement, 
sleep and stress. 
Lifestyle sensors are a promising and affordable solution 
to objectively, continuously and affordably monitor patients, 
but a framework to map and extract clinical health-related 
problems is needed. The acquisition of knowledge from 
continuous and heterogeneous data flows is a prerequisite for 
IoT applications [2]-[4]. Semantic technologies provide 
integrated tools and methods for representing data and 
producing new Knowledge from them. Smart environments 
are increasingly encountered in healthcare technologies at 
home in actions that create better living conditions for older 
people by using Internet of Things (IoT) technologies, such 
as Active and healthy Ageing (AHA) and Ambient Assisted 
Living (AAL). In this context, human activity recognition 
plays a main role [5], because it could be considered as a 
starting point to facilitate assistance and care for the people 
with dementia. Due to the nature of human behavior, it is 
necessary to manage the time and adhere to the spatial 
restrictions. In doing so, semantic technologies enable 
expressive reasoning over health data, allowing clinical 
decision support to be realized. Ontologies are used to 
describe the context elements of interest (e.g., persons, 
events, activities, location, time), their pertinent logical 
associations [6], as well as the background knowledge 
required to infer additional context information. 
In this paper, we propose a Semantic framework for 
Health-related Problem detection that combines ontologies 
and SPARQL Inferencing Notation (SPIN) Rules [7]. 
Ontologies are used to provide the common vocabulary for 
representing activity related contextual information, whereas 
SPIN rules derive high-level activity interpretations. SPIN is 
used as standardized declarative language able to address the 
limitations of the standard OWL Semantic Web technologies 
mentioned previously. More specifically, the temporal 
relations among activities are handled by SPARQL 
functions, whereas the derivation of new composite activities 
exploits the native capabilities of SPARQL to update the 
underlying activity model. 
The SPIN language was chosen to implement this system 
because 
it 
combines 
concepts 
from 
object-oriented 
languages, query languages, and rule-based systems to 
describe the behavior of objects on the web of data and the 
Internet of Things [8]. In addition, it makes the rules 
accessible and easy to maintain, extend and share. A suitable 
Reasoner tool, such as the SPIN API, can extract the extra 
information generated by the rules and reuse it, for example, 
in executing a SPARQL query, thus generating new 
knowledge. 
These 
rules 
apply 
using 
SPARQL 
CONSTRUCT or SPARQL UPDATE requests (INSERT 
and DELETE). SPIN standards also make it possible to 
define such rules in higher level domain specific languages, 
so that rule designers do not have to work directly with 
SPARQL. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents related work in the domain of ontology-based 
reasoning architectures in Healthcare field. Section III 
describes the proposed System architecture that combines 
OWL ontologies and SPARQL rules in order to derive high-
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

level activity interpretations. Section IV presents the use case 
scenario that evaluates the proposed architecture. Finally, 
Section V concludes our work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In previous related studies, Semantic Web technologies 
have been used to represent knowledge from home 
healthcare systems. Some examples of projects are 
Knowsense 
[9], 
COSAR 
[10], 
ACTIVAGE 
[11], 
Dem@Care [12], Faber [5], and FallRisk [13]. Table I 
summarizes their aim and semantic web methods used. 
 
TABLE I. RELATED WORK. 
Project 
Year 
Aim 
Methodology 
KnowSense 
 
2015 
Activity Recognition in 
Healthcare system 
Description Logic 
Reasoning, (DL) for 
activity detection and 
SPARQL queries to 
extract clinical 
problems 
COSAR 
2011 
Activity Recognition in 
in context-aware 
environments 
Ontological reasoning 
is also combined with 
statistics 
ACTIVAGE 
 
2017 
Development of Smart 
Living solutions for 
active and healthy 
aging 
Interoperable 
Ontologies, rule-based 
reasoning 
Dem@Care 
 
2015 
Supporting independent 
life for elderly people 
with dementia 
Interoperable 
Ontologies, Rules, 
Reasoning 
FABER 
 
2015 
Detect abnormal 
behaviors for medical 
applications 
Simple reasoning on 
an ontology 
FallRisk 
 
2015 
Detect falls of elderly 
in smart homes.  
Semantic Reasoning 
techniques 
 
KnowSense is designed to support monitoring of the 
activities of elderly people with dementia in controlled and 
ubiquitous environments. Semantic Web technologies, such 
as OWL 2, are extensively used in KnowSense to display 
observations from sensors and specific applications, and to 
implement solutions to identify activities and problems in 
everyday life activities (IADLs) with the aim of clinical 
evaluation in different stages of dementia. The Description 
(Logic Reasoning, DL) reasoning for activity detection and 
SPARQL questions are used to extract clinical problems. 
However, the semantic techniques used by KnowSense 
cannot be easily extended and reused. 
COSAR offers a solution based on the use of ontologies 
and ontological reasoning combined with statistical 
inference. Simple patient activities are identified by 
statistical methods, such as selecting the most likely method 
compared to others. The ontological reasoning is also 
combined with statistics to identify complicated activities 
that are not only detectable by statistical methods.  
ACTIVAGE is a large-scale pilot project, aimed at 
developing Smart Living solutions that have a positive 
impact on active and healthy ageing. The ACTIVAGE IoT 
Ecosystem Suite (AIOTES) project, provides a set of 
techniques, tools and methodologies (rule-based reasoning, 
interoperable ontologies, etc.) that enhance semantic 
interoperability at different levels between heterogeneous 
IoT platforms. The approach uses different reasoning 
mechanisms that can improve the understanding of 
heterogeneous patient’s data and help to generate new 
knowledge by providing services to end users. 
Dem@care offers a complete system, consisting of 
heterogeneous sensors, to support the independent life of 
elderly people with dementia or similar health problems. 
This approach includes a heterogeneous set of detection 
methods and technologies, including video, audio, in 
addition to normal, environmental and other measurements. 
Semantic technologies (e.g., rule-based reasoning) are used 
to process and analyze sensor data according to user 
requirements. This results in feedback and decision support, 
that is delivered to end users through appropriately designed 
user interfaces. A variety of clinical scenarios and 
environments are supported, from short-term experiments in 
a hospital environment to long-term monitoring and support 
of daily life at home, for independent living. 
FABER is is an ubiquitous system developed to detect 
abnormal behavior for medical applications. It first 
calculates events and actions from the available context data 
by using simple reasoning on ontology. Computed 
boundaries, actions and events are sent to the knowledge-
based inference engine.  
The main goal of FallRisk is to detect falls of elderly 
people in smart homes. It is based on a platform that uses 
several learning-based fall detection systems. The results of 
these systems are filtered and entered into an ontology that 
contains the contextual knowledge. The knowledge, 
including contextual information about the user, is then used 
to refine fall detection. The strength of this approach, in 
addition to the combination of both techniques, is the 
compatibility with any fall detection technique. However, it 
deals exclusively with fall detection. 
Τhe above systems use semantic rule-based mechanisms 
and provide solutions for activity and event recognition 
based on the use of ontologies and ontological reasoning. 
However, most methods are quite sophisticated and 
complex to express and to maintain due to rich logic 
support. For this reason, the SPIN language was chosen by 
us to create semantic rules. SPIN offers a lot of advantages 
[6][7]. SPIN rules offer the benefit of simplicity and 
flexibility as opposed to other rule representations It is 
based on SPARQL, a well-established query language and 
protocol, which is well supported by numerous engines and 
databases. This means that SPIN rules can be directly 
executed on the databases and no intermediate engines with 
communication overhead need to be introduced. Moreover, 
it has an object-oriented model that leads to better 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

maintainable models. Specifically, the SPIN rule engine 
does not have to check all rules at all times, but instead rules 
are checked incrementally when new instances of a certain 
class are inserted (or modified) in the ontology. This leads 
to better rule execution performance. Furthermore, SPIN is 
a more promising de-facto industrial standard for the future 
of combining ontologies and rules, because it builds upon 
the widespread use of SPARQL.  
III. 
SEMANTIC REASONING APPROACH FOR 
HEALTH-RELATED PROBLEMS DETECTION 
This section presents the proposed Semantic System for 
Health-related problem detection 
with the aim of 
recognizing the activities of the people with dementia 
through different sensors and producing new knowledge by 
offering new services to end users of the system such as 
doctors, health professionals and patients. As shown in the 
Figure 2, the raw data are collected by users (i.e., the patient 
with dementia) using various wearable sensors and smart 
home sensors. Afterwards, raw data are modeled on RDF 
ontologies and stored in the Knowledge Database 
(GraphDB) for the purpose of creating the System 
Knowledge Base of the system. Then, the semantic analysis, 
which will be presented in the next section (Spin Rule 
Engine, Ontology and Rule reasoner, etc.), processes and 
interprets the data, enriching the Knowledge Base of the 
system. 
A. Ontology and Knowledge Base 
The proposed approach is built on top of emerging 
Semantic Web technologies. We started with the definition 
of system ontology for representing different elements of a 
healthcare system.  The goal of ontology is to semantically 
visualize all concepts related to activity recognition in 
healthcare system and acts as a semantic information 
integration model derived from the system's sensors. A 
common practice in the development of ontologies is the 
reuse of existing models, so we're relying on already 
developed and valid ontologies for developing a part of the 
supporting ontology. The following are an overview of the 
existing entities used: 
Dem@Care 
[12]: 
An 
ontology 
to 
represent 
experimental protocols of diagnostic support and dementia 
diagnosis in a controlled environment. 
Semantic Sensor Network (SSN) [14]: Contains the 
ontology SOSA (Sensor. Observation, Sampler and 
Actuator). These ontologies describe semantic sensors, 
actuators, sampling and their actions. It is a W3C 
recommendation and OGC application. 
SmartHome [15]: This ontology is an extension of SSN 
ontology and focuses on the representation of spatial and 
time aspects of entities included in spaces with devices 
belonging to the smart home category. 
The system's ontology is expressed in OWL 2 (W3C, 
2012), which is a representation language commonly used in 
the semantic issue community for entity development.  
Figure 1 shows the hierarchy of entity classes and the 
hierarchy of its properties. Object attributes are relationships 
that link classes together, and data attributes link classes to 
simple values (such as integers, alphanumeric, dates, etc.). 
The main classes of ontology are Device, Event, 
HealthProblem, Person, and Profile. The Device represents 
the devices of the system. Event is a parent class for 
different Event-related classes. It has two subclasses 
Activity 
and 
Measurement. 
Activity 
contains 
the 
 information of activities. Measurement includes instances, 
which represent information of measurements (Calories, 
Distance, Floor, HeartRate, Movement, Sleep, Steps). The 
HealthProblem is a parent class for different Health 
Proplem-related 
classes. 
It 
consists 
of 
subclasses 
HeartProblem, 
MovementProblem, 
MultiProblem 
and 
SleepProblem. The class Person includes instances, which 
represents the type of Person of the system (Doctor, 
Patient). Finally, the class Profile includes information from 
users’ profile (Age, Gender, etc.). 
 
 
Figure 1. Classes of the proposed ontology. 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Figure 2. Architecture of the proposed system. 
 
After adding Semantic Web technologies to the raw data 
and modeling them based on the system ontology, 
“Semantic Data” are stored in a semantic Graph Database, 
which constitutes the Knowledge Base of our system. For 
this purpose, we have chosen GraphDB, an enterprise ready 
Semantic Graph Database, compliant with W3C Standards. 
Semantic Graph Databases (also called RDF triplestores) 
provide the core infrastructure for solutions where 
modelling agility, data integration, relationship exploration 
and cross-enterprise data publishing and consumption are 
important. Querying and reasoning are performed over 
stored RDF graphs with SPARQL language.  
B. Rule Base  
Table II presents a sample of the semantic rules created 
after the collaboration of scientists, doctors, psychologists 
and patients. The rules contained in this section are a subset 
of the rule base of the proposed system. In every rule, there 
are upper and lower limits that control whether a condition 
is satisfied or not. The numerical values of the limits were 
decided after consultation of the clinicians and the patient 
users. Thus, for example, in the first rule, the limit for 
drawing a conclusion of a user's insomnia problem was set 
at 1800 minutes. In addition, to conclude that the patient 
needs to exercise more, his steps are limited to less than 80 
in one day. 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II. A PRIORI RULE BASE OF THE DIFFERENT SEMANTIC 
RULES THAT DESCRIBE THE MODELED ACTIVITIES. 
 
Variables (number) 
Rule 
Problem 
Duration in minutes 
Time to fall asleep in a 
day > 1800 
Insomnia 
 
Count of sleep 
interruptions 
Number of 
interruptions in a day 
> 10 
Restlessness 
 
Duration in minutes 
Sleep total duration in 
a day> 480 
Too much sleep 
 
Duration in minutes 
Sleep total duration in 
a day < 300 
Lack of sleep 
 
Duration of “Nap” 
state in minutes 
Asleep in Naps > 100 
in a day 
Increased Napping 
 
Occurrence of 
“Nap” State, 
Occurance of “Night 
Sleep” state 
Asleep in Naps end 
time < 2 hours from 
Sleep start time 
Nap close to 
bedtime 
 
Time Alseep / Time 
in bed 
Sleep Efficiency < 85 
Bad Quality Sleep 
Step count, 
Heart Rate measure, 
Duration in minutes 
Steps < 50 & Heart 
Rate > 90 (Fat Burn 
Zone) for duration > 
300 
Stress or Pain 
Heart Rate measure 
HR < 60 
Low Heart Rate 
Step count,  
Heart Rate measure, 
Duration in minutes 
Steps <1000 & Heart 
Rate < 80 for duration 
> 300 
Inactivity 
Step count, 
Heart Rate measure, 
Duration in minutes 
Steps < 500 & Heart 
Rate < 100 for 
duration > 800 
Lack of Movement 
Step count 
 
Steps < 80 
Lack of Exercise 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C.  Implementation of the rules with SPIN 
We used the TopBraid composer [16], a tool for 
modeling and developing semantic data applications, to 
present the SPIN rules. Topbraid allows us to easily develop 
spin rules in the form of SPARQL queries, which is more 
readable than regular spin syntax. In practice, the following 
three code blocks present in SPIN three simple semantic 
rules that were applied to the system ontology.  
The following code block shows the implementation of 
SPIN rule for Sleep problem “Lack of Sleep”. Applying this 
rule produces the addition of a new property that represents 
the type of sleep problem “Lack of Sleep” in the objects of 
the ontology (users of a support system). If the patient's 
sleep duration is less than 300 minutes, then it is considered 
that there is a sleep problem (lack of sleep). 
 
 
The following rule in SPARQL and SPIN adds new 
knowledge to the system Ontology. If the sleep duration of 
the patient with dementia is greater than 480 then we 
conclude that there is a sleep problem (too much sleep). 
 
SPIN rule for sleep problem “Too much Sleep”. 
CONSTRUCT { 
?p owl:hasSleepProblem "Too much sleep "} 
WHERE { 
    ?p a :Person . 
 
?p :duration ?d. 
 
FILTER (?d >480 )} 
 
The following code block shows the implementation of 
the simple semantic rule “lack of exercise”. If the steps of 
the patient with dementia are less than 80 and we conclude 
that there is a lack of exercise. 
 
SPIN rule for problem “Lack of Exercise”. 
CONSTRUCT { 
?p owl:hasProblem "lackOfExersice" } 
WHERE {  
?p a :Person . 
 
?p :steps ?st1. 
 
FILTER (?st11<80)} 
IV. 
USE CASE 
For the evaluation of the proposed architecture we 
consider the following use case scenario. A wearable sensor 
was given to a patient with dementia in order to monitor his 
activities. The duration of the measurement is 11 days (20-
30 November 2019). The initial sensor data was modeled by 
using the system ontology and stored in the Knowledge 
Base. Then, the proposed semantic techniques were applied 
and in particular the semantic rules of the system were 
checked. Figure 3 shows the measurement of sleep minutes 
of the patient. Figure 4 presents the measurements of steps 
per day of the user.  This data is processed, and the results, 
showing the problems that the patient experiences during 
this time, are produced. 
 
 
Figure 3. Sleep Minutes of a single patient with dementia whose activity 
was monitored. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Sleep Minutes of a single patient with dementia whose activity 
was monitored. 
 
Specifically, as shown in Figure 3, the patient with 
dementia slept below the limit of 300 minutes (rule 1) on 
November 23 and 24. The results of these measurements are 
shown in Figure 5 with the creation and visualization of the 
"Lack of sleep" problem. In addition, the patient slept above 
the limit set by rule 2 (480 minutes) on November 25, and 
this resulted in the creation of the problem “too much 
sleep”. Finally, in Figure 4 it is observed that on November 
20, 21, 28, and 29 the patient took a few steps. The result of 
this measurement is shown in Figure 5, by creating the 
problem (rule 3) “Lack of exercise”. This also shows how 
the user can easily observe the days with a lot and different 
problems e.g., the 25th, and the days with a few problems 
e.g. 20th, 21th, 28th, and 29th, at a glance, without going 
through the raw data each time. 
SPIN rule for sleep problem “Lack of Sleep”. 
CONSTRUCT { 
?p owl:hasSleepProblem "Lack of Sleep "} 
WHERE { 
    ?p a :Person . 
 
?p :duration ?d. 
 
FILTER (?d <300 )} 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 5. Health-related Problem Detection of a single patient with dementia whose activity was monitored. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
In this paper, we presented our approach towards the 
definition of a semantic system for Health-related 
Problem detection that combines ontologies and SPIN 
Rules. Architectures related to the proposed framework 
are listed, and the advantages of using the SPIN language 
to create semantic rules are presented. The main purpose 
of the proposed architecture is to generate new knowledge 
from the original raw data, especially recognition of 
healthcare problems in the users with dementia. The 
system is validated through a proof-of-concept use case 
scenario where a wearable sensor gathers data from a real 
subject and the framework extracts the expected health-
related problems. 
As future work, we plan to evaluate the framework in 
a formal clinical trial with real subjects. Subjects will be 
recruited in the spectrum of dementia, as well as healthy 
controls and use the wearables for several months. The 
framework will be used to extract problems and clinical 
experts will evaluate its accuracy, usability and usefulness 
for the disease. In the long run, it will support decision 
making 
of 
the 
clinicians 
adjusting 
their 
non-
pharmaceutical interventions, e.g., a clinician can 
“prescribe” exercise for lack of activity or relaxation 
exercises for stress, insomnia and lack of sleep problems. 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was co-financed by the European Union 
and Greek national funds through the Operational 
Program 
Competitiveness, 
Entrepreneurship 
and 
Innovation, under the call RESEARCH-CREATE-
INNOVATE, 
project 
code: 
T1EDK-02668 
(https://www.ypostirizo-project.gr/). 
 REFERENCES 
[1] Alzheimer’s Disease International, “World Alzheimer Report  
Attitudes to Dementia,” Alzheimer’s Dis. Int. London, 2019. 
[2] A. Pliatsios, C. Goumopoulos, and K. Kotis, “Interoperability 
in IoT: A Vital Key Factor to Create the ‘Social Network’ of 
Things,” in UBICOMM, pp. 63–69, 2019. 
[3] A. I. Maarala, X. Su, and J. Riekki, “Semantic Reasoning for 
Context-Aware Internet of Things Applications,” IEEE 
Internet Things J., vol. 4, no.2, pp. 461-473, 2017. 
[4] A. Pliatsios, C. Goumopoulos, and K. Kotis, “A Review on IoT 
Frameworks Supporting Multi-Level Interoperability The 
Semantic Social Network of Things Framework,” Int. J. Adv. 
Internet Technol., vol. 13, pp. 46–64, 2020. 
[5] M. Ziaeefard and R. Bergevin, “Semantic human activity 
recognition: A literature review,” Pattern Recognit., pp. 2329-
2345, 2015.  
[6] K. L. Skillen et al., “Ontological user modelling and semantic 
rule-based reasoning for personalisation of Help-On-Demand 
services in pervasive environments,” Futur. Gener. Comput. 
Syst., pp. 97-109, vol. 34, 2014. 
[7] H. Knublauch, J. A. Hendler, and K. Idehen, “SPIN: SPARQL 
Inferencing Notation,” W3C Member Submission, 2011. 
[8] C. Fürber and M. Hepp, “Using SPARQL and SPIN for data 
quality management on the Semantic Web,” In International 
Conference on Business Information Systems Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, pp. 35-46, 2010. 
[9] G. Meditskos, T. G. Stavropoulos, S. Andreadis, and I. 
Kompatsiaris, “KnowSense: A semantically-enabled pervasive 
framework to assist clinical autonomy assessment,” In 
SWAT4LS, pp. 122-131, 2015. 
[10] D. Riboni and C. Bettini, “COSAR: Hybrid Reasoning for 
Context-aware 
Activity 
Recognition,” 
Pers. 
Ubiquitous 
Comput., vol. 15, pp. 271–289, 2011.  
[11] G. Fico et al., “Co-creating with consumers and stakeholders to 
understand the benefit of internet of things in smart living 
environments for ageing well: The approach adopted in the 
madrid deployment site of the activage large scale pilot,” pp. 
1089-1092, 2017. 
[12] T. Stavropoulos, G. Meditskos, S. Andreadis, and I. 
Kompatsiaris, “Dem@Care: Ambient sensing and intelligent 
decision support for the care of dementia,” In SWAT4LS, pp. 
229-230, 2015. 
[13] F. De Backere et al., “Towards a social and context-aware 
multi-sensor fall detection and risk assessment platform,” 
Comput. Biol. Med., vol. 64, pp. 307-320, 2015. 
[14] M. Compton et al., “The SSN ontology of the W3C semantic 
sensor network incubator group,” J. Web Semant., 17, pp. 25-
32, 2012.  
[15] M. Alirezaie et al., “An ontology-based context-aware system 
for smart homes: E-care@home,” Sensors (Switzerland), vol 
17, no. 7, pp. 1586, 2017.  
[16] “Enterprise Data Governance — TopQuadrant, Inc,” 2019. 
https://www.topquadrant.com/ accessed Aug. 13, 2020. 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

