Design and Evaluation of a New Nurse-Led Intervention for the Management of 
Bariatric Surgery Patients
Cláudia Amaro dos Santos,1,2 João Gregório1 
1 - CBIOS – Universidade Lusófona’s Research Center for Biosciences & Health Technologies 
Lisbon, Portugal 
2 - Center for Integrated Responsibility Bariatric Surgery and Metabolic Diseases 
Évora, Portugal  
email: cmendes@hevora.min-saude.pt 
 
Abstract — Obesity has an increasing incidence and bariatric 
surgery emerges as a treatment for severe and morbid obesity, 
as well as for its associated diseases, with proven success rates. 
In this context, patient follow-up by a case manager, who guides 
the provision of specialized care focused on adapting the patient 
to the new reality, can prove to be essential to achieve positive 
results. This study, guided by the Design Science Research 
Methodology (DSRM), will have as main objective to design an 
intervention [Case-managing program] aimed at patients 
undergoing bariatric surgery. In the evaluation phase of the 
intervention, an experimental, controlled, and randomized 
study will be developed, with intervention group and control 
group. This project aims to be the first study to investigate the 
effect of specialized interventions on patients who are 
candidates for bariatric surgery, with evidence based on mixed, 
face-to-face, and e-health programs, on the management and 
results of bariatric surgery.  
Keywords- e-health; case manager; perioperative care; 
bariatric surgery; nurse case management. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Obesity is considered a 21st century epidemic, with more 
than 4 million deaths worldwide [1]. It manifests itself as a 
chronic disease, but also as a risk factor for numerous other 
pathologies and consequently worse health outcomes. Its 
prevalence justifies the priority in its treatment. Bariatric 
surgery is one of the most effective long-term treatments for 
obesity [2]. The success of bariatric surgery is usually 
measured by the percentage of weight lost. However, this 
success is dependent on several factors, such as the 
preparation for surgery. This path involves multidisciplinary 
guidance, namely related to health promotion, well-being and 
self-care, functional readaptation, and pre-habilitation, 
consistent with patient satisfaction [3]. 
It is essential to begin health education to prepare patients 
for surgery, but also to guide for adaptations, risks, and 
benefits. The use of educational strategies, with organized and 
systematized information before bariatric surgery, allows 
stimulating an attitude of self-care and lifestyle changes [4]. 
Empowering patients with this knowledge, allows them to 
realize that weight loss and lifestyle changes need to be 
maintained in the long term [5]. Working on these changes’ 
pre-surgery increases the likelihood of a successful 
intervention [6]. 
In the follow-up of patients with chronic diseases and 
other comorbidities, the "case manager" nurses or nurse-led 
case-management interventions, improved the health of these 
patients, with improvement of health indicators. The figure of 
these specialized nurses induces quality of care and reduces 
health costs [7][8].  
Good results of bariatric surgery depend on how patients 
experience, understand and accept the changes that develop in 
the postoperative period. It is in this context that nurse-led 
case-management may allow better management of the 
surgical process, through health education and promotion of 
healthy lifestyles, supported by a multidisciplinary team. 
These interventions have the potential to bring very positive 
results in self-reported quality of life, mental health, and 
reduction of cardiometabolic risk [9]. Thus, we intend to 
verify how a new eHealth nurse-led intervention can 
contribute to the quality of life, adaptation process and 
maintenance of weight loss of post bariatric surgery patients. 
This paper’s aim is to present the methodology of a 
research project that will design and evaluate this nurse-led 
intervention. After the Introduction in section I the 
methodology is described in section II, with an emphasis on 
the study design and the flow of the evaluation stage. 
 
II. METHODS 
This research project will follow a mixed method 
approach, supported by a cycle of Design Science Research 
Methodology (DSRM) [10], that will allow us to design and 
evaluate a new intervention of specialized "nurse-led case-
management" (Table 1). 
 
TABLE I.  
DESIGN SCIENCE RESEARCH METHODOLOGY CYCLE 
 
A. Study design 
Activity 1- A systematic review of the literature with 
meta-analysis will be carried out with the objective of 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

identifying interventions directed at bariatric surgery patients 
and the respective outcomes. There will also be interviews 
with patients who underwent surgery, as well as with 
professionals who are part of the current follow-up protocol, 
to understand the context where the intervention is developed 
and uncover possible points for improvement. 
Activity 2 - Conduct two to three focus groups with 
representatives of the various stakeholders (patients and 
health professionals) in order to identify what the objectives 
for a new intervention should be. These objectives are 
expected to be related to the set of endpoints interest that will 
be used to measure the results of the intervention in the 
evaluation stage.  
Activity 3 - In this activity, a nurse-led case-management 
intervention program is expected to be developed 
(NURLIFE). The aim of this intervention is to improve the 
management of the bariatric surgery process by patients in 
collaboration with the health care team, with a view to 
improving health and adoption of healthy lifestyles that 
enhance better outcomes. During this stage, the initial 
protocol of interprofessional collaboration, the skill mix of 
the multidisciplinary team, and the requirements of the web-
platform where most of the communication with patients will 
occur, will be set. 
Activity 4 - Conducting a short-term case-control study. 
The objective of this study will be to test the intervention 
designed in the previous step with a reduced number of 
participants, to optimize the intervention. 
Activity 5 - Evaluating the results of the NURLIFE 
program. To proceed with this activity, a randomized clinical 
trial (RCT) will be conducted, with division of the 
participants into two groups (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1.  Prediction of the evolution and recruitment plan of the RCT 
study to evaluate the intervention 
 
The predicted process and timeline for the RCT will be 
developed in all perioperative period. 
 
B. Sample 
The sample size is based on the number of patients who 
had bariatric surgery in previous years, with the reference 
value of 100 patients per year, the usual in the context of the 
hospital. As inclusion criteria in the sample, participants will 
have to be enrolled for bariatric surgery at the Hospital of 
Évora, Portugal and agree to participate in the study. The 
main non-inclusion criteria will be patients with secondary 
bariatric surgery, with severe psychiatric or neurologic 
disease, and patients who do not agree to participate. 
C. Randomization 
Each participant will be randomly assigned to each group 
after signing the informed consent and conducting the initial 
assessments. All data collected will be de-identified with 
identification ID, safeguarding confidentiality of the 
collected data. 
D.  Outcomes 
The primary endpoint of the RCT will be the proportion 
of patients who maintain their primary weight loss at the end 
of the first year.  
For the measurement of clinical data, anthropometric 
parameters, surgical data, and a health data questionnaire will 
be used. The remaining variables will be defined based on 
activity 2 of the DSRM cycle, and may include life quality, 
physical activity, sedentary behavior, comorbidities. 
 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
This project aims to be the first study to investigate the 
effect of specialized interventions on patients who are 
candidates for bariatric surgery. It is expected that this project 
will provide evidence of the impact ofevidencebased mixed, 
face-to-face and e-health programs, on the long term 
maintenance of bariatric surgery results. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. J. Foreman, N. Marquez, A. Dolgert, K. Fukutaki, N. 
Fullman, M. McGaughey, et al., “Forecasting life expectancy, 
years of life lost, and all-cause and cause-specific mortality for 
250 causes of death: reference and alternative scenarios for 
2016–40 for 195 countries and territories” The Lancet, pp. 
2052–90, 2018. 
[2] J. L. Colquitt, K. Pickett, E. Loveman and G. K. Frampton,  
“Surgery for weight loss in adults” Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev. 2014, 2014 
[3] J. I. Mechanick, A. Youdim, D. B. Jones, W. T. Garvey, D. L. 
Hurley, M. McMahon, et al., “Clinical Practice Guidelines for 
the Perioperative Nutritional, Metabolic, and Nonsurgical 
Support of the Bariatric Surgery Patient. The Obesity Society, 
and American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery” 
Obes Silver Spring Md, 2013 
[4] L. M. Barros, F. N. Carneiro, N. M. Galindo-Neto, M. F. 
Araújo, R. A. Moreira, L. P. Barbosa, et al., “Educational 
intervention and obesity indicators in gastroplasty candidates: 
quasi-experimental study” Acta Paul Enferm, 2020. 
[5] A. Petcu, “Comprehensive Care for Bariatric Surgery Patients” 
AACN Adv Crit Care, 28(3):263–74, 2017 
[6] E. Yildiz and S. Karagözoğlu, “The Effects of Nursing 
Education Constructed According to Roy Adaptation Model on 
Adaptation Process of Patients Undergoing Bariatric Surgery. 
Bariatr Surg Pract Patient Care” 98–108, 2021 
[7] V. Doménech-Briz, M. R. Gómez Romero, I. Miguel-
Montoya, R. Juárez-Vela, J. R. Martínez-Riera, M. Mármol 
López, et al, “Results of Nurse Case Management in Primary 
Heath Care: Bibliographic Review” Int J Environ Res Public 
Health, 2020. 
Recruitment
Randomization
Control Group
Baseline
Evaluation A1
Evaluations
Evaluation A2
Preoperative
Evaluation A3
3 months after surgery
Evaluation A4
6 months after surgery
Evaluation A5
12 months after surgery
Experimental Group
Perioperative
Evaluation A1
Baseline
Intervention T1 
Before surgery
Evaluation A2
Preoperative
Intervention T2
Intraoperative
Intervention T3
Postoperative
Intervention T4
15 days after surgery
Intervention T5
1 month after surgery
Evaluation A3
3 months after surgery
Evaluation A4
6 months after surgery
Evaluation A5
12 months after surgery
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[8] S. K. Chow and F. K. Wong, “A randomized controlled trial of 
a nurse-led case management programme for hospital-
discharged older adults with co-morbidities” J Adv Nurs.2257–
71, 2014 
[9] G. Cangelosi, I. Grappasonni, P. Pantanetti, S. Scuri, G. Garda, 
N. Cuc Thi Thu, et al., “Nurse Case Manager Lifestyle 
Medicine [NCMLM] in the Type Two Diabetes patient 
concerning 
post 
COVID-19 
Pandemic 
management: 
Integrated-Scoping literature review” Ann Ig 2022 Feb 8. doi: 
10.7416/ai.2022.2500.  
[10] L. V. Lapão, M. M. Da Silva, and J. Gregório, “Implementing 
an online pharmaceutical service using design science 
research” BMC Med. Inform. Decis. Mak., vol. 17, no. 1, 2017, 
doi: 10.1186/s12911-017-0428-2 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

