Economic impact of remote specialist consultations using videoconferencing: an 
economic model based on data from randomised controlled trials  
Trine S Bergmo 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine, University Hospital of North Norway  
Tromsø, Norway 
Email: trine.bergmo@telemed.no     
 
 
 
Abstract – The University Hospital of North Norway plans to 
replace some of the outpatient consultations with real-time 
telemedicine. It has been estimated that 7000 consultations 
annually can be handled remotely by videoconferencing. As 
part of this initiative, a project assessing the economic 
impact of using videoconferencing at scale has been initiated. 
Cost-effectiveness will be assessed using models based on 
data from existing randomised controlled trials. A literature 
search in relevant databases has been conducted to collect 
data on patient flow and clinical effectiveness (QALYs). 
Data on the cost parameters will be collected locally. The 
data on costs and effectiveness parameters will then be 
synthesised to estimate average group values. Probabilistic 
methods will be used for estimation of expected outcomes 
and for sensitivity analysis. This paper describes the planned 
modelling evaluation, reports the results from the literature 
review and outlines potential model structures.  
Keywords – cost-effectiveness analysis, decision analytical 
modelling, telemedicine, videoconferencing, randomised trials, 
literature review, and economic model.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
    Telemedicine has been around for almost two decades, 
but is still viewed as outside the mainstream of most 
health care services (except possibly for radiology) [1]. 
Implementing telemedicine technologies as part of routine 
health care delivery requires evidence of the following: its 
technical feasibility; its practicality in a clinical setting; 
and finally its being worthwhile, that is, that the 
additional costs are met with savings or improvements in 
health outcomes [2, 3]. Main arguments for introducing 
telemedicine services has been to decrease costs, improve 
efficiency and increase access in health care delivery. 
These cost savings and efficiency potentials make 
economic 
evaluation 
of 
central 
importance 
to 
telemedicine evaluations. To be able to make well-
informed resource decisions, information on costs and 
consequences associated with these decisions must be 
available. Information on costs and consequences can 
broadly be collected in two ways: alongside trials and 
observational studies (primary data); and, from the 
existing literature (secondary data) [4, 5].          
A.     Economic data 
   New primary economic data can be collected alongside 
randomised clinical trials, non-randomised interventions 
and observational studies (general issues in economic 
evaluations are common to all these) [5]. 
    Randomised trials are designed to investigate the 
relative effectiveness of different medical interventions 
[6]. The most important advantage of randomisation is 
that it minimises allocation bias and balances other factors 
that might affect the result, both known and unknown. 
Strictly controlled trials are not very common in 
telemedicine research for practical reasons, nor are they 
well suited for economic evaluations. The more controlled 
a trial is the less can be concluded about how much the 
intervention costs and how well it works for normal 
caseloads in everyday practice. The trial context is often 
very different from real-world decisions and conditions 
that will improve internal validity in randomised 
controlled trials will undermine the economic evaluation 
[7]. Real-setting clinical trials are in many telemedicine 
situations both time consuming, difficult to conduct (too 
few participants) and expensive to run. This often leaves 
decision-makers without information about clinical and 
economic 
consequences 
of 
different 
telemedicine 
interventions.  
     Another way to inform decision-makers is to use the 
best available evidence from existing sources and 
decision models. Secondary data can come from clinical 
trials, observational studies meta-analysis and case reports 
found in the literature. Data can also be found in 
databases and administrative records. Decision models 
provide a means to bringing this evidence together in a 
systematic way. 
B. When to Model 
    A well-designed model is essentially a tool that can 
simulate or mimic a clinical trial [8]. Models can simulate 
different scenarios by making explicit assumptions about 
the incidence, prognosis, duration, benefits, health-related 
quality of life and costs. It allows one to investigate how 
cost and benefits might change if the values of key 
parameters in the model change. The purpose of 
modelling is not to make unconditional claims about the 
285
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

consequences of an intervention, but rather to reveal the 
relation between assumptions and outcomes [9]. 
    Whether to use new trial-based data or existing data 
and decision models in economic evaluation of 
telemedicine should be seen in relation to the objective 
and role of the study and the viewpoint of those who are 
expected to use the results [7]. A randomised trial focuses 
on particular measurements for specific patients in one 
specific setting. These are essential in establishing safety 
and clinical effectiveness as a first stage in developing 
telemedicine applications. The evidence base for 
decision-making should be based on the best available 
measurements on clinical and economic outcomes and 
these come from trials. Decision models are useful in 
situations where more evidence is required than can be 
obtained in one single trial. Furthermore, in a situation 
where a decision has to be made in the absence of 
evidence from trials, modelling can help structure the 
problem, assess potential pathways and identify the level 
of uncertainty.  
    In this paper, we describe an economic evaluation 
based on existing data and modelling techniques. The 
paper is structured as follows: Section II provides the 
background and includes an overview of the local context, 
the use of clinical videoconferencing, and the rationale and 
aim of this project. Section III outlines the research 
approach and provides an overview of the modelling study 
and the data collection. Section IV reports the results of 
the literature search and propose two preliminary model 
structures. 
Section 
V 
discusses 
implications 
and 
limitations. Finally, conclusions and future work are 
discussed in Section VI.   
II. 
BACKGROUND   
    The University Hospital of North Norway (UNN) plans 
to replace some of the outpatient consultations with real-
time telemedicine consultations. In May 2011, the 
management at UNN made a decision to invest in 
videoconferencing equipment 
at scale to provide 
specialist services to patients at local health centres and 
GP-clinics in the region. A committee report from 2011 
estimated that 7000 patient consultations annually could 
be handled by video-consultations saving both hospital 
visits and travel costs (unpublished but available from the 
author on request). The implementation has been 
postponed awaiting further investigation into conditions 
for and potential consequences of a large scale 
videoconferencing network.  
    The reason for the videoconferencing initiative seems 
to be twofold: First, it has been recognised that high 
quality services for patients cannot be provided by one 
health care discipline alone or by one single sector. The 
new health care reform; the Coordination Reform is one 
initiative to ensure high quality services across sectors 
and 
between 
health 
care 
levels 
[10]. 
Using 
videoconferencing can contribute to more personalised 
and integrated care pathways: it will give the patients the 
opportunity to get treatment locally; they might avoid 
burdensome travels; and this might improve the quality of 
care through a better coordinated health service delivery. 
Second, the management at UNN wants to reduce the 
costs by reducing hospitalisation and outpatient visits and 
save travel costs (the health authorities cover travel costs 
in Norway).  
A. Clinical videoconferencing 
    The use of videoconferencing to examine and treat 
patients over a distance can be used in most medical 
specialities and settings [2, 11]. In a remote specialist 
consultation, the patient, usually accompanied by a health 
care worker, meets the specialist in real time via 
videoconferencing. These latter types of telemedicine 
consultations have for example been used in psychiatry 
[12-14], dermatology [15, 16], oncology [17], to support 
renal dialysis [18], cardiology [19], in diabetes, asthma, 
epilepsy [20, 21] and lifestyle group counselling [22]. 
There now exists a range of evidence supporting that 
videoconferencing for a variety of conditions produce 
similar health outcomes to treatment delivered in-person 
[11, 23, 24]. However, there exists no robust evidence 
that remote video consultations is cost-effective compared 
to conventional health care delivery. Wade (2010) 
reviewed the literature of real-time video-communication 
and found it to be cost-effective for home care and access 
to on-call hospital specialists, it showed mixed results for 
rural service delivery, and it was not cost-effective for 
local delivery of services between hospitals and primary 
care [25]. It is, however, not realistic to make one general 
recommendation for cost-effectiveness across services 
and settings. The local context will decide important cost 
parameters, such as travel costs, the need for investment 
in infrastructure and technologies, and the opportunity 
costs of health professionals making it difficult to 
compare results across evaluations. Most reviewers, 
however, report that the evidence of cost effectiveness is 
scarce and more research on resource allocation and costs 
is still needed [26, 27].  
B. Aim 
    In this project, we will use a combination of existing 
evidence found in the peer-reviewed literature and local 
data to build a decision model to analyse the economic 
impact of remote specialist consultations. The model will 
be used to structure and simulate patient pathways with, 
and without videoconferencing; to identify expected 
outcomes of different strategies; and, to explore the costs 
and benefits of different scenarios under different 
assumptions. The main aim is to assess the cost-
effectiveness of remote specialist consultations using 
videoconferencing compared with usual care. This work 
is conducted in three related phases: 
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

1. Develop the structure of the cost-effectiveness 
model and identify key parameters relevant to 
the decision problem;  
2. Identify local setting parameters such as medical 
field, investment and technical support costs, 
personnel- and travel costs.   
3. Populate the cost-effectiveness model and 
analyse the economic impact of remote specialist 
consultations 
using 
videoconferencing 
in 
Northern Norway.  
 
    This paper describes the economic modelling study and 
reports on its first phase.  
III. 
METHODS  
    Decision models provides a framework to draw costs 
and benefit data from a range of different sources together 
in a systematic way [5].  
A. The Modelling Study  
    In this project, a decision model will be constructed to 
assess the 
cost-effectiveness 
of 
remote specialist 
consultations compared to usual care. In the model remote 
specialist consultation refers to situations in which the 
patients, usually accompanied by a health care worker at 
one location, consults with the specialist at the hospital 
using videoconferencing. Usual care refers to situations in 
which the patients see the specialist in a face-to-face 
consultation at the hospital. The model is populated with 
parameters collected from the peer-reviewed literature 
and with general cost parameters collected locally.  
    The primary outcome in the economic model is costs 
and quality adjusted life years (QALYs) in a cost per 
QALY ratio. If QALYs are not found in the literature, 
other effectiveness measures will be considered. If no 
effectiveness measure is found, episode of care (number 
of patients managed) will be used as an effectiveness 
measure and a net cost (or net benefit) per episode of care 
will be used as pathway outcome. Data on costs and 
effectiveness parameters are synthesised in a cost per unit 
of effect or a net costs to estimate average group values 
(cohort 
models). 
The 
model 
assesses 
short-term 
alternative branches or events defined as consultations. 
Another key model parameter of interest is the proportion 
of patients within each strategy or pathway. Probabilistic 
methods will be used both for estimation of expected 
outcomes and for sensitivity analysis. The evaluation will 
have a health provider perspective, that is, only include 
costs falling on the health care budget.   
    The data are collected in two steps. The first step is to 
conduct a systematic literature search to identify existing 
studies analysing effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of 
videoconferencing alongside randomised trials. The 
literature 
can 
provide 
information 
on 
structural 
assumption, parameter inputs, and areas of uncertainty. 
The second step is to collect local cost parameters. These 
include equipment costs, technical support costs, 
personnel costs, travel costs, and other health care costs 
from the health clinics involved. These will be collected 
from hospital departments, local health centres already 
using videoconferencing and regional health authorities.   
    This paper reports results from the first step: the 
literature search and structural model assumptions. 
B. The systematic review 
    The systematic literature search has two main 
objectives; to collect information on a) previous cost-
effectiveness analyses and decision modelling studies in 
real-time telemedicine studies; and, b) to collect data on 
structural 
assumptions, 
probabilities 
and 
clinical 
effectiveness in randomised controlled trials of using 
videoconferencing.   
    The search strategy included two main search terms:  
1. Real-time telemedicine OR videoconferencing 
OR video-link OR video-communication OR 
videophones OR video-consultation OR hub and 
spoke OR remote teleconsultation OR real-time 
consultation AND 
2. a) Economic modelling OR economic model OR 
decision model OR decision analytic model OR 
decision modelling OR cost-effectiveness OR 
cost-utility OR 
b) Randomised OR randomized  
     
   The following databases have been searched: PubMed, 
PsycINFO and ISI Web of Knowledge, CINAHL, Cost-
Effectiveness Analysis Registry and the NHS Economic 
Evaluation Database (NHS-EED). Furthermore, reference 
lists in the retrieved articles and existing reviews have 
also been screened.  Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Registry 
and the NHS Economic Evaluation Database (NHS-EED) 
were 
searched 
using 
videoconferencing, 
video-
consultation or video-link as search words. 
     Only articles published in peer-reviewed journals were 
included. The search was limited to English language text 
and publication date from 1990 to 2013. 
    The articles relevant for this study cover remote 
specialist consultations using real-time audio and visual 
telemedicine technologies (videoconferencing) and only 
include aspects in which the patient is directly involved 
and present at the or GP office, local health centre or rural 
hospitals. Studies analysing video contact from home, 
store-and-forward 
transmissions 
of 
data, 
e-mail 
consultations or structured telephone support were 
excluded. We only included randomised trials to collect 
data on clinical process or patient flow through the health 
system, 
and 
clinical 
effectiveness 
of 
using 
videoconferencing. 
    Selection of relevant publications was based on 
information found in the abstracts. Full-text articles were 
retrieved when the abstract indicated a cost-effectiveness 
analysis and an assessment of effectiveness and patient 
flow through the health system. Full-text was also 
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

retrieved for closer inspection if the abstract did not 
provide clear indication of the content. Figure 1 shows a 
flow diagram mapping the number of studies identified, 
the number of studies included and excluded, and reasons 
for exclusions.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
    The literature search identified 1265 records. These 
were found searching PubMed (n = 618), ISI Web of 
Knowledge (n = 532), CHINAL (n = 81) PsycINFO (n = 
21) and NHS Economic Evaluation Database (NHS-EED) 
(n = 13). No articles were found searching the Cost-
Effectiveness Analysis Registry. From these records, 46 
full text articles were retrieved for further inspection. Two 
more articles were identified screening reference lists. 
Sixteen articles were selected for inclusion (see Figure 1).  
    The 
full 
text 
articles 
assessed 
were 
reviews, 
methodology papers, effectiveness and cost-effectiveness 
studies alongside randomised trials, case control studies 
and decision models. The decision modelling studies were 
analysing the use of videoconferencing in pulmonary care, 
stoke treatment and home visits for tuberculosis treatment 
[28-31].  
A. Inluded studies 
    Sixteen articles were included in this review. Ten of 
these met all the inclusion criteria, that is, they reported 
results from randomised trails and included information on 
clinical 
process 
and 
patient 
flow 
of 
using 
videoconferencing in remote specialist consultations [32-
41]. These articles form the basis for the model estimation 
in this study. Six other studies were also included. These 
were effectiveness or cost-effectiveness studies containing 
information on clinical process and effectiveness. These 
studies used case-crossover design [42-44], retrospective 
pre-post design [45] and two were models based on data 
from the literature [28, 46]. Reliable parameter data from 
these studies will also be used where parameter values are 
still lacking.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Flow diagram. 
  
 
    The included studies found data on the following 
parameters:  
 
The 
proportion 
of 
patients 
in 
which 
videoconferencing is a suitable and reliable 
option compared to face-to-face consultations. 
 
The proportion of patients in need of  second 
consultation  
 
Outcome or clinical effectiveness  
 
Time use  
B. Model structure 
    Data on patient management and patient flow found in 
the literature suggest that videoconferencing is acceptable 
for approximately 70 % of the patients [41, 42, 44]. This is 
supported by a review where it was reported that 70 % of 
the patients avoided travels [46].    
    Furthermore, the studies included reported an increased 
follow-up rate for patients seen by telemedicine [32, 34, 
35]. For example one large scale telemedicine trial found 
that the follow-up visits for video consultations compared 
to usual care in general practice had an odds ratio of 1.52, 
95% CI 1.27 to 1.82. [32]. 
    The data suggest two possible models that describe the 
structural process of using video-consultations. The first 
model assumes a broad approach and includes all patients 
in the videoconferencing arm without any pre-selection. 
Figure 2, show this model populated with follow-up data 
from a large scale telemedicine trial by Wallace et al 
(2002) [32] as an example. Usual care refers to outpatient 
consultations. The second potential model assumes a 
screening process selecting the patients most suited for 
remote consultations beforehand. This might reduce the 
relative increase in follow-up visits for the remote arm. 
Figure 3 shows the model with pre-selection of patients.   
    Other parameters found in the included papers were:  
 
Effectiveness as number of patients managed 
times utility (preferences for videoconferencing 
compared to outpatient consultations). Utility was 
estimated by expert opinion (10 physicians) [28]  
 
Time use for the different alternatives [33] 
 
 
 
Figure 2. A decision model without pre-selection of patients populated 
with follow-up data from a large scale telemedicine trial as by Wallace et 
al (2002) [32] as an example. 
 
Reference lists (n=2) 
Records identified through 
database searching (n =1265) 
 
 
 
 
Full-text articles 
assessed (n = 46)  
 
Records excluded by 
title and abstract 
(n = 1219) 
 
Full-text articles excluded  
No videoconferencing (n = 2)  
No process or outcome 
measures (n =28) 
Methodology/teaching (n = 2)  
Studies included 
RCT (n = 10) 
Other studies (n = 6) 
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

   
Figure 3. A model where the patients suited for videoconferencing has 
been pre-selected 
 
None of the studies measured the clinical effectiveness of 
videoconferencing in QALYs.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
    The literature on telemedicine is extensive. A search in 
PubMed in November 2013 found over 16 000 papers on 
the topic. There is, however, a relatively small number of 
randomised trials in telemedicine research and even fewer 
analysing the effect of using videoconferencing in 
providing remote specialist consultations. A review from 
2012 identified 141 randomised controlled trials in 
telemedicine [47]. These studies analysed interventions in 
chronic disease management and the majority analysed 
home monitoring and telephone support. Few studies 
looked into the use of videoconferencing. Recent 
telemedicine research seems to focus more on home based 
services using monitoring and telephone contact with less 
focus 
on 
remote 
specialist 
consultations 
using 
videoconferencing. 
    Only ten randomised trials met all the inclusion criteria 
and analysed the effect of remote specialist consultations.    
The clinical disciplines in the included articles were 
mental health, dermatology, orthopaedics, neurology and 
single studies with a mix of medical and surgical 
specialities. The studies varied in terms of sample size, 
outcome measures and contexts. All these studies 
included some evidence on patient management and the 
clinical process of using videoconferencing to examine 
and treat patients over a distance. Furthermore, we found 
that the increased offer of follow-up differed between 
specialities. It was highest in surgical specialities and 
neurology and lowest in mental health [32, 35, 38, 40]. 
This implies that the base model will have to include a 
specific patient group within one clinical discipline and 
not a general patient population.     
    We were not able to find any studies measuring clinical 
effectiveness in QALYs. One reason for this may be that 
using videoconferencing as a substitute for a face-to-face 
consultation have little or no effect on patient’s health. 
The benefits for the patients are most likely the avoidance 
of burdensome travels. Since no QALYs were found, we 
will consider other preference measures identified from 
literature search. If the effectiveness measures is of low 
quality and cannot be used, a net cost per episode of care 
will represent the pathway outcome (assuming similar 
health outcomes).    
    The main purpose of this literature search was to 
identify randomised trials analysing the effect of remote 
specialist consultations. Consequently, the scope is 
therefore quite narrow. Furthermore, the fact that only 
articles written in English and published in peer-reviewed 
journals (to provide some basic quality control) were 
included is recognised as a limitation. The search strategy 
used might also have missed some evaluations. Remote 
specialist consultation is not easily defined. Some analysts 
might have used other terms and definitions to describe the 
provision of specialist treatment over a distance than the 
search terms used in this review. 
    The proposed model structures can be seen as 
hypothetical trial with two arms. In some context, the 
model might include a third arm in which the specialist 
travels to the remote health centres or clinics. None of the 
reviewed studies included this option. It will, however, be 
considered if a third arm is relevant in the areas selected 
for this study.  
     There is a number of valid concerns about using models 
to assess the economic consequences of an intervention 
[48]. The most important is the quality of the data used. 
The quality and validity of the results from modelling 
studies are not any better than the data used in the models. 
Telemedicine research has in general been criticised for 
being full of demonstration projects, anecdotal evidence 
and poor study design [49]. One way to ensure high 
quality data has been to limit the included studies to 
randomised trials. This strategy, however, produced few 
articles. To supplement the data six other studies were 
included.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
    This paper has presented an economic modelling study, 
reported results from its first phase of collecting existing 
data from the literature and outlined potential model 
structures.  
    The next step is to develop the model, that is, to decide 
clinical field and primary care catchment area, to decide 
the final model structure and to organise and systematise 
the data on key input parameters and probabilities. 
Furthermore, we have to decide pathway outcome (cost 
per unit of effect or net costs). The model structure will 
also be adapted to local practices. Then local cost will be 
collect. The final step is to populate the model and 
analyse the cost-effectiveness of using videoconferencing 
for remote specialist consultations.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the regional health authorities Helse Nord 
for funding this project.  
 
289
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

REFERENCES 
[1] 
N. A. Brown, "Information on telemedicine," J 
Telemed Telecare, vol. 11, pp. 117-26, 2005. 
[2] 
P. Taylor, "Evaluating telemedicine systems and 
services," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 11, pp. 167-77, 
2005. 
[3] 
S. Ruckdaschel, M. Reiher, R. Rohrbacher, and E. 
Nagel, "The Role of Health Economics in 
Telemedicine," Disease Mgt Health Outcomes, vol. 
14, pp. 3-7, 2006. 
[4] 
J. A. Fox-Rushby and J. Cairns, Eds., Economic 
evaluation. Maidenhead, UK: Open Univiversity 
Press, 2005, p.^pp. Pages. 
[5] 
M. F. Drummond, M. J. Sculpher, G. W. Torrance, B. 
J. O'Brien, and G. L. Stoddart, Methods for the 
Economic Evaluation of Health Care Programmes, 3rd 
ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
[6] 
P. Laake, H. B. Benestad, and B. R. Olsen, Research 
methodology in the medical and biological sciences: 
Academic Press, 2007. 
[7] 
T. S. Bergmo, "Approaches to economic evaluation in 
telemedicine," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 18, pp. 181-4, 
Jun 2012. 
[8] 
K. Kuntz and M. Weinstein, "Modelling in economic 
evaluation," in Economic evaluation in health care: 
merging theory with practice, M. Drummond and A. 
McGuire, Eds., ed Oxford Oxford University Press, 
2001, pp. 141–171. 
[9] 
M. C. Weinstein, B. O'Brien, J. Hornberger, J. 
Jackson, M. Johannesson, C. McCabe, et al., 
"Principles of Good Practice for Decision Analytic 
Modeling in Health Care Evaluation: Report of the 
ISPOR Task Force on Good Research Practices—
Modeling Studies," Value in Health, vol. 6, pp. 9-17, 
2003. 
[10] 
"Ministery of Health and Care Services. Report no. 47 
to the Storting. The Coordination Reform, Proper 
treatment - at the right place at the right time," 
Ministery of Health and Care Services, Oslo, 2009. 
[11] 
T. Reardon, "Research findings and strategies for 
assessing telemedicine costs," Telemed J E Health, 
vol. 11, pp. 348-69, Jun 2005. 
[12] 
D. Hailey, R. Roine, and A. Ohinmaa, "The 
effectiveness of telemental health applications: a 
review," Can J Psychiatry, vol. 53, pp. 769-78, Nov 
2008. 
[13] 
D. Savin, D. A. Glueck, J. Chardavoyne, J. Yager, and 
D. K. Novins, "Bridging cultures: child psychiatry via 
videoconferencing," Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N 
Am, vol. 20, pp. 125-34, Jan 2011. 
[14] 
I. R. Sharp, K. A. Kobak, and D. A. Osman, "The use 
of videoconferencing with patients with psychosis: a 
review of the literature," Ann Gen Psychiatry, vol. 10, 
p. 14, 2011. 
[15] 
G. R. Kanthraj, "Classification and design of 
teledermatology practice: what dermatoses? Which 
technology to apply?," J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol, 
vol. 23, pp. 865-75, Aug 2009. 
[16] 
M. N. Johnson and A. W. Armstrong, "Technologies 
in dermatology: teledermatology review," G Ital 
Dermatol Venereol, vol. 146, pp. 143-53, Apr 2011. 
[17] 
S. Sabesan, K. Simcox, and I. Marr, "Medical 
oncology clinics via videoconferencing: An acceptable 
tele health model for rural patients and health 
workers," Intern Med J, Jun 1 2011. 
[18] 
M. Rumpsfeld, E. Arild, J. Norum, and E. Breivik, 
"Telemedicine in haemodialysis: a university 
department and two remote satellites linked together 
as one common workplace," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 
11, pp. 251-5, 2005. 
[19] 
G. J. Morgan, B. Craig, B. Grant, A. Sands, N. 
Doherty, and F. Casey, "Home videoconferencing for 
patients with severe congential heart disease following 
discharge," Congenit Heart Dis, vol. 3, pp. 317-24, 
Sep-Oct 2008. 
[20] 
S. N. Ahmed, S. Wiebe, C. Mann, and A. Ohinmaa, 
"Telemedicine and epilepsy care - a Canada wide 
survey," Can J Neurol Sci, vol. 37, pp. 814-8, Nov 
2010. 
[21] 
S. McLean, D. Protti, and A. Sheikh, "Telehealthcare 
for long term conditions," BMJ, vol. 342, p. d120, 
2011. 
[22] 
J. Laitinen, E. Korkiakangas, M. Alahuhta, S. 
Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi, U. Rajala, O. Timonen, et 
al., "Feasibility of videoconferencing in lifestyle 
group counselling," Int J Circumpolar Health, vol. 69, 
pp. 500-11, Dec 2010. 
[23] 
K. Steel, D. Cox, and H. Garry, "Therapeutic 
videoconferencing interventions for the treatment of 
long-term conditions," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 17, 
pp. 109-17, 2011. 
[24] 
G. Pare, M. Jaana, and C. Sicotte, "Systematic review 
of home telemonitoring for chronic diseases: the 
evidence base," J Am Med Inform Assoc, vol. 14, pp. 
269-77, May-Jun 2007. 
[25] 
V. A. Wade, J. Karnon, A. G. Elshaug, and J. E. 
Hiller, "A systematic review of economic analyses of 
telehealth services using real time video 
communication," BMC Health Serv Res, vol. 10, p. 
233, 2010. 
[26] 
D. Kairy, P. Lehoux, C. Vincent, and M. Visintin, "A 
systematic review of clinical outcomes, clinical 
process, healthcare utilization and costs associated 
with telerehabilitation," Disabil Rehabil, vol. 31, pp. 
427-47, 2009. 
[27] 
D. Hailey, "The need for cost-effectiveness studies in 
telemedicine," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 11, pp. 379-
83, 2005. 
[28] 
Z. Agha, R. M. Schapira, and A. H. Maker, "Cost 
effectiveness of telemedicine for the delivery of 
outpatient pulmonary care to a rural population," 
Telemed J E Health, vol. 8, pp. 281-91, Fall 2002. 
[29] 
J. A. Switzer, B. M. Demaerschalk, J. Xie, L. Fan, K. 
F. Villa, and E. Q. Wu, "Cost-effectiveness of hub-
and-spoke telestroke networks for the management of 
acute ischemic stroke from the hospitals' 
perspectives," Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes, vol. 
6, pp. 18-26, Jan 1 2013. 
[30] 
R. E. Nelson, G. M. Saltzman, E. J. Skalabrin, B. M. 
Demaerschalk, and J. J. Majersik, "The cost-
effectiveness of telestroke in the treatment of acute 
ischemic stroke," Neurology, vol. 77, pp. 1590-8, Oct 
25 2011. 
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[31] 
V. A. Wade, J. Karnon, J. A. Eliott, and J. E. Hiller, 
"Home videophones improve direct observation in 
tuberculosis treatment: a mixed methods evaluation," 
PLoS One, vol. 7, p. e50155, 2012. 
[32] 
P. Wallace, A. Haines, R. Harrison, J. Barber, S. 
Thompson, P. Jacklin, et al., "Joint teleconsultations 
(virtual outreach) versus standard outpatient 
appointments for patients referred by their general 
practitioner for a specialist opinion: a randomised 
trial," Lancet, vol. 359, pp. 1961-8, Jun 8 2002. 
[33] 
P. Jacklin, J. Roberts, P. Wallace, A. Haines, R. 
Harrison, J. Barber, et al., "Virtual outreach: economic 
evaluation of joint teleconsultations for patients 
referred by their general practitioner for a specialist 
opinion," BMJ, vol. 327, p. 84, 2003. 
[34] 
J. R. Benger, S. M. Noble, J. Coast, and J. M. Kendall, 
"The safety and effectiveness of minor injuries 
telemedicine," Emerg Med J, vol. 21, pp. 438-45, Jul 
2004. 
[35] 
R. Chua, J. Craig, R. Wootton, and V. Patterson, 
"Randomised controlled trial of telemedicine for new 
neurological outpatient referrals," J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry, vol. 71, pp. 63-6, Jul 2001. 
[36] 
R. Wootton, S. E. Bloomer, R. Corbett, D. J. Eedy, N. 
Hicks, H. E. Lotery, et al., "Multicentre randomised 
control trial comparing real time teledermatology with 
conventional outpatient dermatological care: societal 
cost-benefit analysis," Bmj, vol. 320, pp. 1252-6, May 
6 2000. 
[37] 
J. C. Fortney, J. M. Pyne, S. B. Mouden, D. Mittal, T. 
J. Hudson, G. W. Schroeder, et al., "Practice-based 
versus telemedicine-based collaborative care for 
depression in rural federally qualified health centers: a 
pragmatic randomized comparative effectiveness 
trial," American Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 170, pp. 
414-425, 2013. 
[38] 
P. E. Ruskin, M. Silver-Aylaian, M. A. Kling, S. A. 
Reed, D. D. Bradham, J. R. Hebel, et al., "Treatment 
outcomes in depression: comparison of remote 
treatment through telepsychiatry to in-person 
treatment," Am J Psychiatry, vol. 161, pp. 1471-6, 
Aug 2004. 
[39] 
A. M. Oakley, P. Kerr, M. Duffill, M. Rademaker, P. 
Fleischl, N. Bradford, et al., "Patient cost-benefits of 
realtime teledermatology--a comparison of data from 
Northern Ireland and New Zealand," J Telemed 
Telecare, vol. 6, pp. 97-101, 2000. 
[40] 
R. O'Reilly, J. Bishop, K. Maddox, L. Hutchinson, M. 
Fisman, and J. Takhar, "Is telepsychiatry equivalent to 
face-to-face psychiatry? Results from a randomized 
controlled equivalence trial," Psychiatric Services, 
vol. 58, pp. 836-843, 2007. 
[41] 
O. Timonen, "The teleconsultation in general practice. 
A randomized, controlled study of a remote 
consultation experiment using a videoconferencing 
system," International journal of circumpolar health, 
vol. 63, 2004. 
[42] 
E. Gilmour, S. M. Campbell, M. A. Loane, A. Esmail, 
C. E. Griffiths, M. O. Roland, et al., "Comparison of 
teleconsultations and face-to-face consultations: 
preliminary results of a United Kingdom multicentre 
teledermatology study," Br J Dermatol, vol. 139, pp. 
81-7, Jul 1998. 
[43] 
K. Harno, E. Arajarvi, T. Paavola, C. Carlson, and P. 
Viikinkoski, "Clinical effectiveness and cost analysis 
of patient referral by videoconferencing in 
orthopaedics," J Telemed Telecare, vol. 7, pp. 219-25, 
2001. 
[44] 
M. A. Loane, R. Corbett, S. E. Bloomer, D. J. Eedy, 
H. E. Gore, C. Mathews, et al., "Diagnostic accuracy 
and clinical management by realtime teledermatology. 
Results from the Northern Ireland arms of the UK 
Multicentre Teledermatology Trial," J Telemed 
Telecare, vol. 4, pp. 95-100, 1998. 
[45] 
D. Buckley and S. Weisser, "Videoconferencing could 
reduce the number of mental health patients 
transferred from outlying facilities to a regional 
mental health unit," Aust N Z J Public Health, vol. 36, 
pp. 478-82, Oct 2012. 
[46] 
R. Wootton, K. Bahaadinbeigy, and D. Hailey, 
"Estimating travel reduction associated with the use of 
telemedicine by patients and healthcare professionals: 
proposal for quantitative synthesis in a systematic 
review," BMC Health Serv Res, vol. 11, p. 185, Aug 8 
2011. 
[47] 
R. Wootton, "Twenty years of telemedicine in chronic 
disease management--an evidence synthesis," J 
Telemed Telecare, vol. 18, pp. 211-20, Jun 2012. 
[48] 
M. J. Buxton, M. F. Drummond, B. A. Van Hout, R. 
L. Prince, T. A. Sheldon, T. Szucs, et al., "Modelling 
in economic evaluation: an unavoidable fact of life," 
Health Econ, vol. 6, pp. 217-27, May-Jun 1997. 
[49] 
J. D. Whited, "The quality of telemedicine research," J 
Telemed Telecare, vol. 12, pp. 271-3, 2006. 
 
291
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

