Clinical Wall applied for Polypathological Patient Care  
 
Alicia Martínez García 
Technological Innovation Group 
“Virgen del Rocío” University Hospital 
Seville, Spain 
alicia.martinez.exts@juntadeandalucia.es 
Carlos Parra Calderón 
Technological Innovation Department 
“Virgen del Rocío” University Hospital 
Seville, Spain 
carlos.parra.sspa@juntadeandalucia.es 
Manuel Ollero Baturone 
UCAMI Department 
“Virgen del Rocío” University Hospital 
Seville, Spain 
manuel.ollero.sspa@juntadeandalucia.es 
Alberto Moreno Conde 
Technological Innovation Group 
“Virgen del Rocío” University Hospital 
Seville, Spain 
alberto.moreno.exts@juntadeandalucia.es 
 
 
Francisco Javier Galindo Ocaña 
UCAMI Department 
“Virgen del Rocío” University Hospital 
Seville, Spain 
franciscoj.galindo.sspa@juntadeandalucia.es 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Polypathological patients have a complex health 
scenario that is not generally well addressed by traditional 
Electronic Health Record systems. In order to treat chronic 
diseases that these patients have, there is a need for 
coordination and communication among health personnel of 
different levels of care (primary care, specialty care, home 
care) and distinct profiles. Also these healthcare professionals 
will require to do complex interactions such make shared 
decisions within their collaborative work. To enhance this 
coordination among healthcare professionals, we propose the 
idea of "Clinical Wall" as a 2.0 tool that allows professionals to 
debate, share knowledge and make decisions based on the 
clinical patient information. 
Keywords-Polypathological Patient; Continuity of Care;  
Web 2.0;  Shared clinical decision; eHealth; Clinical Wall. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One of the implications of aging, from the clinical 
viewpoint, is the fact that is increasing the number people 
with two or more chronic diseases. Likewise there are studies 
that affirm that number of diseases per patient has 
incremented in the last two decades [1]. The World Health 
Organisation calculates that 60% percent of global deaths are 
caused by chronic diseases [2]. As a result, there is a 
growing concern within the Public Health Services in 
developed countries about polypathological patients. For 
instance in Australia people with multiple chronic diseases 
represent 50% or more of the population with chronic 
diseases [3]. These patients are characterized by their high 
complexity and vulnerability with a large number of 
symptoms and high prevalence of functional impairment. As 
a result, these patients are likely to be dependent on 
caregivers who support them in their daily routine [4]. 
Within the Andalusian region the fragility of the 
polypathological patients has been shown in fulfilled studies, 
verifying that in primary care up to 40% of polypathological 
patients have three or more chronic diseases, 94% are 
polymedicated [5], 34% have a Barthel under 60, 37% have 
cognitive impairment [6], over 60% need caregiver, and 40% 
of these have overload signs [7]. Most of these variables are 
related to the insufficient sociofamiliar [8], so it still tends to 
be a comprehensive assessment that includes clinical areas, 
functional, and sociofamiliar. 
A. Integrated healthcare process 
Integrated Healthcare Processes (IHP) Management is a 
central strategy for improving the quality of the Andalusian 
Health Service. These Healthcare Processes are based on the 
development of flexible organizational models and an 
appropriate management of the processes according to the 
integration of scientific knowledge and evaluation of their 
performance in healthcare environment. The IHPs are based 
on increasing the involvement of professionals in a patient 
centered assistance, ensuring clinical practice according to 
the available scientific knowledge, facilitating continuity of 
care, and evaluating the clinical results.  
The IHP for polypathological patient care specifies the 
professionals who will take part in healthcare, as well as, 
their role in this process [9]. The polypathological patient, 
more than any other patient, requires sustained assistance in 
shared care between primary and hospital for presenting 
special complexity that often requires quick access to 
interconsultation, 
complex 
diagnostics 
and 
hospital 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

admissions . The answer to these needs has been the 
incorporation of a model of continuity of care based on 
collaboration programs between internists and general 
practitioners with the defence of the figure of the internist of 
reference for each healthcare centre.  During the last years 
different practical experiences have shown that is possible to 
consolidate this model both at large and small hospitals. The 
following professionals are described in the IHP: 
 
General Practitioner participates on the identification 
of the polypathological patient in order to be 
included 
in 
this 
IHP, 
the 
Comprehensive 
Assessment, in the Continuing Assistance Plan 
(CAP), home care, and attention to the caregiver. 
 
Internist of reference on the identification of the 
polypathological patient in order to be included in 
this IHP, in the CAP, home care, and attention to the 
caregiver.  
 
Family Nurse. Participates in the Comprehensive 
Assessment, in the CAP, in home care, and in 
attention to the caregiver.  
 
Hospital Nurse. Participates in the CAP, in home 
care, and in attention to the caregiver.  
 
Community Liaison Nurse. Participates in home 
care, and in attention to the caregiver.  
The following figure shows a summary of process 
architecture that takes place in the care of polypathological 
patients, extracted from the IHP: 
 
 
Figure 1.  Process architecture: The care of polypathological patients 
Just as is shown in the IHP, polypathological patient care 
involves many professionals with different roles and 
responsibilities. They must complement each other to obtain 
continuity of patient care across the different health centers 
of the region. 
II. 
METHODS 
“Virgen del Rocío” University Hospital (VRUH) is 
currently developing the eHealth Platform, a system able to 
deploy new services and pilots projects within the hospital 
environment. Within the project called PITeS: Methods and 
Tools for Design and Implementation of Telemedicine and 
eHealth for the care of Chronic Patient, a system called 
Polypathological Patient Module (PPM) is being developed 
to allow communication and coordination between the 
healthcare professionals involved in the polypathological 
patients care. 
The platform is a complement to the Electronic Health 
Record (EHR) systems in use at patient care. The 
infrastructure currently deployed is composed by one EHR 
system in Primary Care and another different in Specialized 
Care. 
Although there are some interoperability capabilities 
between these EHR systems, it is not possible to share all 
the patient information between the healthcare centers 
involved. For this reason, the PPM aims to facilitate the 
continuity of care accessing through Web Services the 
relevant patient information contained within the different 
EHR systems. 
A. Clinical Wall 
From the VRUH, we are working in order to enhance the 
EHR with tools that assist clinicians in their work in day by 
day.  
The PPM includes the possibility to generate records that 
contain what we have called Clinical Wall. When two or 
more professionals have the need to exchange opinions about 
the patient care, they can start a conversation in the Clinical 
Wall. The Clinical Wall allows to exchange messages 
between healthcare professionals who participate on the 
patient care, until agree on conclusions or final decisions. If 
any of these healthcare professionals who participates in the 
Clinical Wall decides that is required the opinion of another 
colleague, they can invite these experts to the conversation to 
incorporate their clinical expertise.  
The clinical dialogue hosted in the Clinical Wall is not 
for urgent communications. The platform will not be used in 
emergencies because there are other established protocols 
within the hospital to meet these events. In order to minimize 
the impact on the daily routine of healthcare professionals 
this system doesn’t require real-time communication.  The 
Clinical Wall dialogue allows sharing information between 
healthcare professionals to help them in the definition of 
coordinated therapies and prescriptions.   
If the clinician who starts the conversation wishes to 
receive a response within the next 24 hours, he/she can 
activate an alert to notify via SMS to the healthcare 
professional who must answer this consulting. 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Below, the figure shows a business process diagram 
designed to record information in the Clinical Wall report: 
 
 
Figure 2.  Business process diagram 
The principal users of the platform will be the 
professionals described in the IHP as responsible for 
polypathological patient care. These professionals will use 
the platform within their daily routine so they should not 
receive SMS notifications. 
Additionally, the platform will also give users access to 
specialists from various ailments common to these types of 
patients. For example, to questions related to cardiology and 
respiratory medicine will exist user within the respective 
departments of the hospital to evaluate and establish their 
clinical assessment. Because it is expected that these 
specialists don't have a volume of consultations as high as 
those included in the IHP , will receive an SMS alert 
showing them that have a new message in your inbox if 
someone have made them a consultation for them. 
Furthermore, we defined interesting alerts that appear in 
a pending tasks box when the professional access to the 
platform. If you have urgent alerts will be sent an SMS to the 
mobile professional or professionals who are involved in the 
care of the patient. 
B. ISO 13606 Standard 
The platform has a relational database designed based on 
the specifications of the ISO 13606 reference model [10]. In 
this database are modelled all properties of the components 
of this model, establishing the corresponding relationships 
of the components from the archetypes repository. The ISO 
13606 Standard defines a reference model defined for the 
message exchange containing clinical information. In this 
model the clinical information to be transmitted is structured 
into extracts, which contain folders, which brings together 
documents, which are composed of headers and entries, and 
these entries may contain elements or groups of elements. 
C. Arquetypes 
The definition of the Clinical Wall record is based on 
logical structures called archetypes. Archetypes are formal 
definition of semantic relationships between concepts 
defined as a set of constraints within an underlying reference 
model.  [11]. Archetypes are able to define the relationships 
between the clinical concepts as a new layer that allows the 
management of clinical knowledge evolution. 
A very important feature of the archetypes is their 
reusability. Archetypes define specific concepts such as 
blood pressure, body weight or body temperature. These 
concepts are useful in different health areas. Likewise, the 
archetypes of blood pressure or other concepts can also be 
reused in a multitude of health services and greatly reduce 
the costs associated with the implementation of this 
architecture [12]. Its application allows the development of 
easily-scalable systems and with semantic interoperability, 
designed to adapt to changing clinical needs of health 
professionals. 
A set of archetypes have been defined in order to create a 
composition with 3 sections to record the dialogue between 
the clinicians.  
Patient Assessment Section. This section is going to be 
filled by the healthcare professional that starts the dialogue 
with a clinical question. In order to provide patient clinical 
context for the colleagues this section includes patient 
evolution, examination, complementary tests, treatment plan 
and current clinical assessment. 
Clinical Wall Section the name of this section is to 
illustrate the similarities with conversations in the wall of a 
social network websites where people exchange messages on 
a topic. The dialogue starts when the first healthcare 
professional wants to share or ask for additional information 
to other professionals who provide care to one specific 
patient. Other professionals can provide additional inputs and 
they will be stored as a conversation. 
Conclusions section, participants can agree and sign their 
conclusions and future actions for patient care. Some 
possible outcomes from the conversation are changes in 
treatment plan, new appointment for hospital or GP 
encounter, schedule for additional tests. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
In order to separate information and knowledge the 
system architecture design has been based on the ISO-13606 
standard. The system DataBase includes all the classes 
detailed in the ISO 13606 Reference Model and store 
archetypes that model the relationship between the 
information stored with the clinical knowledge. In this 
process we have applied LinkEHR for  archetype edition 
Our system also incorporates the ICEfaces framework 
based on JavaServer Faces (JSF) standard to create a 
separation between presentation and behavior. JSF provides 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

rich architecture for component state management, data 
processing event management and user login validation. 
In addition, the system includes a productive persistence 
layer based on Hibernate tools. These opensource tools 
optimize the maintenance, performance and flexibility of 
databases. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Platform architecture 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The platform expects to help in the complexity of 
polypathological 
patient 
care 
workflows 
allowing 
communication 
between 
the 
healthcare 
professionals 
involved and supporting interactions between the group 
actors that treat the set of diseases that affect every patient 
This tool aims to support professional interactions that 
are not well handled by the traditional EHR systems because 
based on web 2.0 tools enables decision sharing among a 
group of professionals. The following complex interactions 
required in collaborative work [13] are able to be performed 
within the Clinical Wall: 
 
Confer: Healthcare professionals are able to discuss 
the patient situation with others colleagues before 
they make a decision 
 
Inform: Healthcare Professionals are able to notify 
others actors involved why they made a specific 
decision. 
 
Validate: Healthcare Professionals often require 
reviewing additional information to validate and 
support the decision they make. 
 
Assimilate or Share: Healthcare Professionals are 
able to share the decisions they are making or the 
information 
they 
have 
obtained, 
with 
the 
professionals involved in one specific patient care 
and the large community of professionals distributed 
to IHP professionals of the Primary Care and 
Specialized Care Centers. 
On the other hand, given that polypathological patients 
suffer two or more chronic diseases, frequently is needed the 
participation of experts from different healthcare specialties.  
It requires a fluent communication between all the 
professionals that are in charge of the patient care in order to 
provide coordinated care. 
By being patients with chronic diseases, must take into 
account that polypathological patients will need a monitoring 
of disease throughout his life. Then, it's possible that the 
patient be seen by various professionals in the same 
specialty. An important aspect is to leave reflected the 
decisions taken on assistance in any record of the health 
record. 
The platform and specially the Clinical Wall are going to 
increment the communication and coordination of the 
clinical staff. As a consequence it could be inferred that the 
security and quality of patient care will be improved.  
Currently we are finalizing the development of the 
Clinical Wall. Next stage will be pilot the system in the 
VRUH environment. From the results of this pilot, the 
impact of the Clinical Wall on the patient care will be 
evaluated. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Traditional EHR systems don’t provide enough support 
for clinical workflow needs. In the case of Polypathological 
Patients these needs increase because their treatment requires 
strong collaboration among different healthcare levels and 
specialties. 
Our proposed Clinical Wall enables asynchronous 
communication among healthcare professionals within a 
collaborative work environment. This will improve the 
current clinical protocol based on phone communication for 
both urgent and non urgent information. The system will 
support the communication among healthcare professionals 
as a team and allow them a better workload administration 
because many interruptions by non-urgent calls will be 
avoided. Furthermore, the Clinical Wall will improve patient 
safety because it avoids interpretation errors caused by 
misunderstanding in phone communications. 
We expect that evaluation of the pilot in our clinical 
environment could demonstrate the system benefits and 
extend the service to all the clinical specialties included in 
our hospital and a network of 36 primary care centres in our 
region.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project has been funded by the Instituto de Salud Carlos 
III within the call Strategic Help in Health (code 
PI09/90518) and RETICS 
Innovation in Healthcare 
Tecnology call (code RD09/0077/00025) 
REFERENCES 
[1] A.A. Uijen and E.H. van de Lisdonk, “Multimorbidity in 
primary care: Prevalence and trend over the last 20 years,” 
European Journal of General Practice, 2008, Vol. 14, No. s1 , 
Pages 28-32, doi:10.1080/13814780802436093. 
[2] World Health Organisation, Preventing chronic disease: a 
vital investment, World Health Organisation: Geneva, WHO 
global report, 2005. 
[3] G.E. Caughey, A.I. Vitry,  A.L. Gilbert, and E.E. Roughead, 
“Prevalence of comorbidity of chronic diseases in Australia,“ 
BMC Public Health 2008, Vol. 8, doi:10.1186/1471-2458-8-
221. 
[4] M. Bernabeu-Wittel, B. Barón-Franco, J. Murcia-Zaragoza, 
A. Fuertes-Martín, C. Ramos-Cantos, et al., “A multi-
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

institutional, hospital-based assessment of clinical, functional, 
sociofamilial 
and 
health-care 
characteristics 
of 
polypathological patients (PP),”  Archives of Gerontology and 
Geriatrics, Volume 53, Issue 3, November-December 2011, 
Pages 284-291. 
[5] J. Galindo-Ocaña, M. Bernabeu-Wittel, F. Formiga, A. 
Fuertes-Martín, B. Barón-Franco, JM. Murcia-Zaragoza, et al. 
“Effects of renin–angiotensin blockers/inhibitors and statins 
on mortality and functional impairment in polypathological 
patients” European Journal of Internal Medicine, in press. 
doi:10.1016/j.ejim.2011.06.004 . 
[6] M. Bernabeu-Wittel, M. Ollero-Baturone, L. Moreno-Gaviño 
,B Barón-Franco,A. Fuertes, J. Murcia-Zaragoza, et al. 
“Development of a new predictive model for polypathological 
patients. The PROFUND index” European Journal of Internal 
Medicine, Volume 22, Issue 3, June 2011, Pages 311-317  
[7] L. Moreno-Gaviño, M. Bernabéu Wittel, M. Álvarez Tello, 
M. Rincón Gómez, S. García-Morillo, et al., “Overload felt by 
the figure of the main caregiver in a cohort of patients with 
multiple pathologies,” “Sobrecarga sentida por la figura del 
cuidador 
principal 
en 
una 
cohorte 
de 
pacientes 
pluripatológicos,” Abril 2008, Aten Primaria, Vol. 40, Núm. 
04. 
[8] M. Rincón-Gómez, M. Bernabeu Wittel, P. Bohórquez-
Colombo, L. Moreno-Gaviño, M. Cassani-Garza, MA. 
Ortiz.Camúñez et al.” Perceived quality of healthcare in a 
multicenter, community-based population of polypathological 
patients” Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Volume 52, 
Issue 2, March-April 2011, Pages 142-146.  
[9] M. Ollero-Baturone, M. Alvarez, B. Barón-Franco, M. 
Bernabéu-Wittel, A. Codina, et al., Integrated care process for 
polypathological patient care,  Atención al paciente 
pluripatológico. Proceso Asistencial Integrado, 2007, Public 
Health Direction of Andalusian Autonomus Government: 
Sevilla, 
second 
edition, 
available 
from: 
http://www.juntadeandalucia.es/salud/servicios/contenidos/pr
ocesos/docs/pluri.pdf. 
[10] ISO13606, “Health Informatics - Electronic Health Record 
Communication,” 2008-2010, Technical Committee 215. 
[11] T. Beale, “Archetypes constraint-based domain models for 
futureproof information systems,” In: In Workshop on 
Behavioural 
Semantics, 
25 
November 
2009, 
2000 
OOPSLA'02, OpenEHR.  
[12] D. Kalra, G. Mennerat, F. Devlies, J. Tapuria, and A. 
Thienpont G, “Management and maintenance policies for 
EHR interoperability resources, EuroRec Institute,” 2008, Q-
Rec. 
[13]  R. Khan, ”BPM and Web 2.0,” A BPTrands Column. 
BPTrends. 2008. 
 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

