Field Testing of Remote Teledentistry Technology 
Rodrigo Mariño 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
rmarino@unimelb.edu.au 
 Parul Marwaha 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
pmarwaha@unimelb.edu.au 
Richard Collmann 
Victorian eResearch Strategic Initiative 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
rcollmann@unimelb.edu.au 
Matthew Hopcraft 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
m.hopcraft@unimelb.edu.au 
David Manton 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
djmanton@unimelb.edu.au 
Michael McCullough 
Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
m.mccullough@unimelb.edu.au 
Andrew Stranieri 
Centre for Informatics and Applied Optimisation, 
University of Ballarat 
Ballarat, Australia 
a.stranieri@ballarat.edu.au 
Ken Clarke 
Institute for a Broadband-Enabled Society 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
clak@unimelb.edu.au 
Elizabeth Ozanne  
Department of Social Work 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
eao@unimelb.edu.au 
Irene Blackberry 
National Ageing Research Institute 
Melbourne, Australia 
 i.blackberry@unimelb.edu.au
 
Abstract—In the Australian state of Victoria, only 11% 
of nursing home residents have seen a dentist in the past 
12 months. This study tested whether the use of intraoral 
cameras by oral health professionals located at remote 
facilities improved access to appropriate oral health care 
services for nursing home residents. The support 
program and instructional kit for camera operators, 
including the structure, content and delivery of the 
program, was developed and evaluated. Residents’ views 
about the structure, content and delivery of the program 
were also evaluated. The intraoral camera was operated 
by trained teledentistry assistants with the aim of 
screening residents for oral diseases and pathological 
conditions. Treatment plans were then developed by 
remote 
oral 
health 
professionals 
based 
on 
the 
information collected.  The remote assessments were 
compared with those done via traditional face-to-face 
oral examinations. Results indicate that the proposed 
teledentistry approach for oral health screening is 
feasible and reliable as an alternative to traditional oral 
health examination. Residents expressed high levels of 
satisfaction with the teledentistry service. This study 
provides an innovative solution towards closing the gap 
in the provision of sustainable oral health care services 
to underserviced populations (e.g., nursing homes, rural 
areas). 
Keywords; oral health, teledentistry, intraoral camera, 
nursing homes 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Improvements in oral health in Australia over the past 50 
years have translated into a greater proportion of elderly 
individuals retaining more of their natural teeth, increasing 
the prevalence of caries and periodontal disease. Older 
people living in residential aged care facilities (RACFs) 
have been identified as a significant risk group for oral 
diseases in Australia, and the changing demography and oral 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

health needs of older Australians will present many 
challenges for the dental profession over coming decades.  
In 2005 more than 41,000 Victorians lived in high or low-
care residential facilities on a permanent basis; with just 
over half being dentate and having high dental treatment 
needs [1,2]. Significant barriers accessing dental services 
exist. Residents are often physically and cognitively 
impaired, medically compromised and dependent on others 
to maintain their oral hygiene.  
Face-to-face patient examinations are regarded as the 
most accurate method for correct oral health diagnosis. 
However in Victoria only 11% of aged care facility 
residents have seen a dentist in the past 12 months, as there 
are few dentists available to provide dental care for residents 
[3,4]. In fact, only half of Victorian dentists reported 
providing care to residents of RACFs, and those dentists 
spent on average only one hour per month providing care in 
this setting [4]. 
As the capability of information and communication 
technology (ICT) has risen, the use of ICT for data 
collection has increased.  Expanded use of ICT provided 
clinicians with alternatives to the traditional face-to-face 
oral examinations. This shift in focus has resulted in a vast 
increase in the number of published articles that include 
some form of either synchronous or asynchronous, 
teleconsultation/ telediagnosis [5]. 
A three-stage study was designed to address priorities 
established by Australia's National Oral Health Plan 2004-
2013 for ‘Older People’ targeting older people living in 
RACFs, (an underserviced, high-risk population and one 
with major oral health needs) [6]. This project was 
conceived in an effort to promote affordable, timely oral 
health care and to test an oral health care model in which 
ICT is used with the aim of extending clinical care to 
residents who are physically separated from the examining 
oral health professional. This study is also a response to 
serious dental workforce shortages in caring for this group 
and provides opportunities to supplement traditional 
methods of oral diagnosis, care delivery and health 
promotion. 
Potentially, this project could benefit an expanding 
segment of the population in relative and absolute terms; 
namely, older people living in RACFs and older people 
living in rural areas. According to the 2006 Australian 
Census [7], 55-64 year-olds made up 11.8% and those 65 
years and over 13.7% of the total Victorian population.  
However, older people are proportionately over-
represented in rural and regional Australian communities 
and these communities are ageing more rapidly than their 
metropolitan 
counterparts. 
Therefore, 
the 
present 
intervention potentially targets a rapidly expanding segment 
of the population with special oral health needs. Other parts 
of the world have similar demographic and geographical 
problems making this study equally relevant to them. 
This project builds on a University of Melbourne 
Institute for a Broadband Enhanced Society (IBES), Project 
Seed Grant, which tested the technology under laboratory 
conditions 
(proof 
of 
concept) 
and 
developed 
the 
instructional material for non-oral health professional 
operators [8]. The results demonstrated that the proposed 
teledentistry approach for oral health screening using an 
intraoral camera was feasible and reliable as an alternative 
to traditional oral health examination. Stage 2 of this three-
stage study involved the field testing of this teledentistry 
technology and is the subject of this article.   
II. 
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
The long-term goal of the project is to test whether 
improvements in accessibility and appropriateness of oral 
health services can be achieved by utilizing advanced ICT 
techniques to screen for oral disease in older people living 
in RACFs. This paper outlines the results of the second 
stage of this project, which aimed to assess, on a small 
scale, but under real conditions, the safety of the procedures, 
their feasibility, as well as patients’ and health practitioners’ 
experiences with the technology. A comparison was 
conducted between face-to-face-examinations and remote 
examinations using an intraoral camera. 
Three RACFs within the state of Victoria, Australia, 
were successfully approached to participate in this stage; 
two in metropolitan Melbourne and one in rural Victoria. 
Five non-oral health professional teledental assistants (e.g., 
registered nurses) in these facilities were trained to 
manipulate an intraoral camera and use existing and 
introduced ICT infrastructure to transmit video images for 
remote examination and diagnosis. An oral health 
professional at the Melbourne Dental School performed a 
‘virtual dental examination’, recorded findings and 
developed a treatment plan for a group of selected residents.   
This Stage had four main objectives: 
1) assess the feasibility of using teledentistry to screen for 
oral diseases and conditions and to develop treatment 
plans  for older people living  in RACFs; 
2) identify barriers to the adoption of a teledental 
approach. These included: a) general staff workload; b) 
professional culture and acceptance (e.g., morale, 
motivation, resistance to change, etc.); and c) 
availability of appropriate equipment, 
3) test the utility of an instructional training kit  
4) assess the residents’ views of their experiences during 
delivery of the program, as well as feedback and 
information 
provided 
during 
the 
teledentistry 
consultation. 
III. 
METHODS 
Although sample size calculations are not strictly 
necessary for a pilot study [9], a sample size of 50 residents 
was considered to be adequate to meet the general aims of 
this study. A 20% attrition rate was expected over the six 
months duration of the field component of this study - 62 
residents were recruited initially.  
To participate in this teledentistry study, the resident was 
required to have the ability to understand and to provide 
independent informed consent, the ability to communicate 
with the health professional and to undergo a 15-20 minute 
oral examination. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A SOPROLIFE® intra-oral camera was used to capture 
video via a custom video streaming software platform 
designed for the project [10]. Simulations were conducted in 
the Institute for Broadband Enabled Society (IBES 
http://broadband.unimelb.edu.au/) test-bed facility. The 
intra-oral camera was connected via a USB cable to a laptop 
or mobile tablet used for bed side evaluations, containing 
the software that compressed and encoded the 25 frame-per-
second video into an mpeg4 video stream of at least 
3Mbit/sec bandwidth, and preferably a 5Mbit/s stream if 
network conditions allowed. This bandwidth was found to 
give the clinician sufficient quality to interpret the images 
received and removed blurring due to the motion of the 
camera [8]. The clinician viewed the incoming video via a 
PC connected to a large monitor. A large screen facilitated 
simultaneous viewing of both the intra-oral camera video as 
well as that from a second web-cam, a high definition 
Logitech model C920 model, capturing the overall 
interaction between patient and the intra-oral camera 
operator. This was also streamed as an mpeg4 video of 
minimum 3Mbit/sec bandwidth. Mpeg4 audio was also 
transmitted at 128kbit/s along with the images via the use of 
Clear One Chat 50 model microphone/speaker units also 
connected via USB cables. This allowed excellent quality 
audio communications between patient and clinician 
ends.  For test sites that could not accommodate a 3Mbits/s 
stream reliably a Store and Forward version was developed 
that enabled the mpeg4 file to be stored on a central server 
for asynchronous download by the dentists. Each 
examination lasted approximately 15 minutes and each 
minute of video created a file of approximately 1GB.  Thus, 
the video files were large (i.e., 15 minutes produces a 15 GB 
file).  
Using a teledentistry installation each participant 
received a ‘virtual’ oral examination, including dental and 
oral mucosal assessments conducted with the assistance of a 
trained registered nurse (RN) at the RACF’s facility using 
an intraoral camera operated in communication with a 
remotely located oral health professional.  Training of the 
intraoral camera operator involved three hours of direct 
contact, a sixty-six page training manual including diagrams 
with content organized in five modules, and up to ten hours 
of practice examinations. 
The oral health professional was able to communicate in 
real-time with both the resident and the intraoral camera 
operator (i.e., the RN) via a video link to assist in taking a 
history, and to direct the RN where necessary in the use of 
the intraoral camera. To have communication in real time 
we used Skype® and Vidyo®.  However, there were several 
problems with Vidyo due to firewall settings.  
The information obtained from this examination was 
recorded and transmitted to a server for review of the 
‘virtual dental examination’ to be performed remotely at a 
later time. Information was registered on a conventional 
Dental Health Services Victoria’s chart for the generation of 
treatment plans by qualified clinicians at the Melbourne 
Dental School, University of Melbourne.   
On completing the virtual oral examination the resident 
was asked to complete a seven-item teledentistry assessment 
questionnaire to assess his/her views on the approach. As 
further verification of the approach, the interaction, the 
clarity and facility to understand communication between 
the oral health professional and the resident was examined 
for 
the 
conventional 
face-to-face 
and 
remote 
communications. 
Ten residents received a second oral examination by a 
different oral health clinician. This was a traditional real-
time examination (the clinician present in front of the 
patient) with findings recorded on a conventional chart.  
RNs who collected the information for this project 
completed a questionnaire to assess their initial attitude to, 
and acceptance of the practice, and their overall experience 
with the teledentistry approach. The utility of the 
instructional training kit and any other issues associated 
with the project were also assessed. 
Data was collected extended between October 2012 and 
June 2013. 
Descriptive analysis was used to illustrate the 
participants’ views about the format, content and delivery of 
the teledentistry program. The level of inter-examination 
reliability for the degree of consistency of the two sets of 
examinations has been assessed using the kappa statistic. 
Ethical approvals to conduct this study were sought and 
obtained from the University of Melbourne 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Fifty residents from three RACFs participated in the trial 
from the 62 initially recruited; with 58% being female. A 
teledentistry installation enabled five trained intra-oral 
camera operators (registered nurses) to record, use and 
transmit video images for the generation of treatment plans 
by qualified clinicians at the Melbourne Dental School, 
University of Melbourne. Information from the remote 
examination was compared with a real-life dental 
examination. The intra-examiner agreements for dental 
examination 
parameters 
were 
reported 
as 
excellent 
(Kappa=0.83). 
When residents were asked about their level of 
satisfaction with the examination, the majority of the 
residents were either very satisfied: (46%) or slightly 
satisfied (38%) with the format of the remote dental 
examination. The majority would also recommend (strongly: 
46%; or slightly: 46%) a remote dental examination to other 
people of their age and background. When asked about the 
reason for not recommending this assessment, the comments 
were related to the lack of provision of oral health services, 
in particular preventive care (See Table I). 
The majority of the residents considered the format of the 
remote dental examination to be either highly appropriate 
(46%) or slightly appropriate (46%). On the other hand, three 
residents (6%) were neutral about its format and one resident 
(2%) considered remote dental examination to be slightly 
inappropriate. No reason was provided for that view. 
When asked about how satisfied they were with the 
review of oral health needs, although the majority was either 
satisfied (46%) or slightly satisfied (32%), three residents  
(6%) were neutral and, more importantly, 16% were slightly 
dissatisfied. Asked about the reason for this dissatisfaction, 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

most residents’ comments were related to the lack of 
immediate feedback on the examination.  
On comparing residents’ opinions on the clarity of the 
communications received with the face-to-face examiner 
(i.e., the RN), 86% of the respondents found it “Very easy”, 
and another 12% “Easy” to understand. On the other hand, 
residents found it generally easy to understand remote 
communications (46% “Very easy” and 46% “Easy”), and 
another 4% were neutral about it. Nonetheless, the remainder 
4% found it “Difficult” or “Very difficult” to understand 
remote communications. Residents who found it difficult to 
understand indicated that the comments were related to the 
foreign accent of the oral health professional that provided 
feedback on the examination, rather than the technology 
used. 
TABLE I.  
RESIDENTS’ RESPONSES TO TELEDENTISTRY ASSESSMENT 
QUESTIONNAIRE (%) 
1. How satisfied were you with the remote dental examination? 
Strongly 
satisfied 
Slightly 
satisfied 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Dissatisfied 
Strongly 
dissatisfied 
46.0 
38.0 
14.0 
2.0 
- 
2. If remote examinations were available for patients, would you 
recommend them to other people? 
Strongly 
recommend 
Slightly 
recommend 
Neutral 
Slightly not 
Recommen
d 
Strongly not 
recommend 
46.0 
46.0 
4.0 
2.0 
2.0 
3. How appropriate was the format of the remote dental examinations? 
Very 
appropriate 
Slightly 
appropriate 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Inappropriate 
Strongly 
inappropriate 
46.0 
46.0 
6.0 
2.0 
- 
4. How satisfied were you with the review of your dental needs by the 
remote dentist? 
Strongly 
satisfied 
Slightly 
satisfied 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Dissatisfied 
Strongly 
dissatisfied 
46.0 
32.0 
6.0 
16.0 
- 
5. Were instructions from the examiner in the face-to-face exam clear 
and easy to understand? 
Very easy 
Slightly 
easy 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Difficult 
Very 
difficult 
86.0 
12.0 
2.0 
- 
- 
6. Were instructions from the examiner in the remote examination 
clear and easy to understand? 
Very easy 
Slightly 
easy 
Neutral 
Slightly 
Difficult 
Very 
difficult 
46.0 
46.0 
4.0 
2.0 
2.0 
Over one quarter of the residents (28%) commented that 
the most valuable element of the remote dental examination 
was its convenience. For example, by taking video images in 
the RACF, residents could avoid the disruption, difficulty 
and cost of arranging travel to visit a dentist.   
Three of the five RNs that had been recruited and trained 
conducted intraoral examinations with the RACF’s residents.  
Nonetheless, most of the exams (n=28) were conducted by 
an oral health professional. In another eight examinations, 
RNs were assisted, either remotely or at the RACF, by an 
oral health professional on how to properly manipulate the 
intraoral camera and transmit video images. The RN 
performed the examination and could transmit the videos by 
themselves without supervision in 14 examinations (See 
Table II). 
These three nurses provided feedback on the training 
material presented (i.e., a hard-copy, on-line manual and 
demonstrations). There was general agreement that the 
material presented was clear and relevant to the purposes of 
this project. RNs also agreed that the length of the material 
was right. The information about oral health in older adults 
was considered too long and less relevant to their work.   
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF TELEDENTAL EXAMINATIONS COMPLETED BY 
INTRAORAL CAMMERA OPERATOR 
 
RACFa 
Location 
Examinations 
Nurse no 
supervision 
Nurse under 
supervision 
Oral health 
professional 
 
Total 
Urban 1 
6 
4 
11 
21 
Urban 2 
4 
0 
3 
7 
Rural 
4 
4 
14 
22 
a. 
Residential aged care facility 
However, when asked about the relevance of the 
teledentistry model in their workplace, they were neutral 
with some indicating that teledentistry might only be relevant 
to low-care residents, as the model may not be practical in 
high-care due to dementia and decreased physical capability.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The present study tested the technical feasibilty and 
acceptance, by both users and residents, of an alternative 
model to the traditional face-to-face oral health examination 
using a teledentistry installation. The results provided 
evidence that the proposed approach for oral health screening 
proved to be feasible and reliable as an alternative to 
traditional oral health examinations. On one side, the 
observed concordance of remote and face-to-face exams was 
high. On the other hand, residents expressed acceptable 
levels of satisfaction with the teledentistry model.  
The ‘virtual dental examination’ can provide general and 
specialist oral health care support to local aged care facilities. 
It can assist in providing regular and timely oral health 
checks using trained non-oral health professional assistants 
in the first instance.  
Additionally, there is anecdotal evidence from RACF 
staff that the stress imposed by travel to a dental surgery can 
lead to complete non-compliance with the dental examiner, 
to the point where attempts at oral examination are 
abandoned. This leads to further travel and dentist re-
booking costs and often reluctance on the part of resident and 
practitioner to repeat the process. By using the teledentistry 
approach, RACF avoids the disruption and difficulty of 
arranging travel for the patients for dental treatment. A 
successful translation of this technology into clinical practice 
would extend the provision of health care/oral health care to 
remote and difficult-to-serve locations, and improve access 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

for care to additional patient populations at a reasonable cost, 
as well as easing the shortage of oral health professionals. 
The ability to view examination results at their desktop 
will enable oral health professionals to see and screen more 
residents per time unit in their catchment area. Further 
development of the procedures is warranted to allow for 
high-care resident assessment.  Specialist dental services can 
subsequently be provided when the required treatment is 
identified. 
Oral health professionals will also be able to triage and 
prioritize appointments, rather than travelling to each home 
without knowing beforehand what treatment each resident 
will require. Visiting domiciliary oral health professionals 
will be aware of the exact nature of the oral problem before 
they arrive. The oral health professional will also be able to 
plan a visit to treat other residents in the area, improving 
efficiency and meaning that more residents are able to be 
treated over the course of the year. The oral health 
professional will also be provided with better means of 
identifying 
older 
adults 
who 
require 
a 
diagnostic 
examination by a dental specialist.  
Furthermore, by performing an in-RACF examination, 
the confidence that both the residents and the residents’ 
families have in the RACF will increase.  From the health 
care system and societal perspective, a key impact will be in 
the satisfaction of knowing that residents have been well 
looked after, and that scarce resources are being well 
utilized. Additionally, the case for extension of funding 
would be bolstered. It will improve oral health for 
underserviced communities through education, diagnosis, 
treatment, health promotion and disease prevention.  
Data collected from this project could also be useful as a 
starting point for a large oral health record repository, which 
would combine a digital record with 2D and 3D stills and 
video images, as well as radiographs.  
Additional research should explore and address some 
technical and training aspects of this study, as means of 
further verification of this approach. Firstly, when the 
interaction during the conventional face-to-face exam and 
remote 
communications 
was 
examined, 
there 
were 
significant differences between remote and face-to-face 
consultation. The face-to-face, provided a more effective 
mean 
to 
achieve 
clarity 
and 
easy 
to 
understand 
communication between the oral health professional and the 
resident.  In the present study it appears that this was due to 
language and not technical aspects, but this was not 
explored. However, King and his collaborators [11] reported 
diminished 
quality 
of 
communication 
with 
videoconferencing. Secondly, although adequate training and 
material compensation to the RACFs for the RNs time was 
provided, some still failed to fully engage with the study 
despite the successful use of RNs in other areas of dentistry 
[12,13].  The perception that this technology is of limited use 
in RACFs could explain, at least in part, the willingness to 
take up this new technology [14].  In any case, it seems that 
barriers to implementation are mostly human factors.  
Further training and analyses of how different types of 
constraints operate to support or undermine the adoption of a 
teledentistry model need to be explored and addressed.   
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Findings for this field trial indicate that using a 
teledentistry installation is an appropriate alternative to 
traditional oral health consultation, and could provide 
benefits to an expanding segment of the population in 
relative and absolute terms. This population comprises older 
people living in RACFs and older people living in regional, 
rural, and even outer-metropolitan areas. 
An increasing proportion of older people are living in 
rural and regional Australia and these communities are 
demographically ageing more rapidly than their metropolitan 
counterparts. Intervention projects such as the present one 
have the potential to target the rapidly expanding aged 
segment of the population with special oral health needs. 
There is also potential for wider scale application for the 
provision of sustainable oral health care in rural areas.  
Nonetheless, involvement of a wider range of stakeholders 
might be necessary, as they all influence adoption.  Recently, 
a review of factors influencing the implementation of 
teledentistry, highlighted some challenges at different levels 
[14]. These challenges need to be specifically targeted. 
This study will lead to a multi-State, community-based 
trial of the technology. This will require further research into 
the acceptability of teledentistry by participants, including 
the format, content and delivery of the program, as well as 
the relevance and appropriateness of the information 
provided. 
Further research will also be required to undertake 
economic analysis and modeling to determine the 
interventions productivity compared to the traditional model 
of oral health examination. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This project was funded by a grant from Dental Health 
Services Victoria’s Research and Innovation Scheme and 
the Victorian Department of Business and Innovation BEIP 
program. We would also like to acknowledge the RACFs, 
residents and nurses involved in this study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. National Survey of 
Adult Oral Health 2004-2006. AIHW cat.no.DEN 165. 
[2] M. Hopcraft, M. Morgan, J. Satur, and FAC. Wright, 
Edentulism and dental caries in Victorian residential aged 
care facilities. Gerodont 2012;29:E512-519 
[3] M. Hopcraft, M. Morgan, J. Satur, FAC. Wright, and I. 
Darby, “Oral hygiene and periodontal disease in Victorian 
residential aged care facilities”. Gerodont 2012;29:220-228.  
[4] M. Hopcraft, M. Morgan, J. Satur, and FAC. Wright, “Dental 
service provision in Victorian residential aged care facilities,” 
Aust Dent J 2008;53:239-245. 
[5] R. Mariño, and A. Ghanim A, “Teledentistry: a systematic 
review of the literature. J Telemed Telecare. 2013;19:189-
194. 
[6] Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council, Healthy 
mouths healthy lives. Australia’s National Oral Health Plan 
2004-2013. South Australian Department of Health, 2004.  
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[7] Australian Bureau of Statistics.  2006 Census QuickStats: 
Victoria. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.multiculturalaustralia.edu.au/doc/2006cens
us-quickstats-victoria.pdf (Accessed 26-8-2013). 
[8] R. Mariño, M. Hopcraft, R. Collmann, D. Manton, M. 
McCullough, K. Clarke, E. Ozanne, and I. Blackberry. A 
teledentistry approach for oral health screening in nursing 
homes. Available at: http://www.slideshare.net/ifa2012/3-
mariooral-health-if-apresentation29may2012 . (Accessed 2-9-
2013). 
[9] L. Thabane, J. Ma, R. Chu, J. Cheng, A. Ismaila, LP. Rios, R. 
Robson, M. Thabane, L. Giangregorio, and CH. Goldsmith, 
“A tutorial on pilot studies: the what, why and how” BMC 
Med Res Methodol. 2010 Jan 6;10:1. doi: 10.1186/1471-
2288-10-1. 
[10] SOPROLIFE: 
Light 
Induced 
Fluorescence 
Evaluator. 
http://www.soprolife.com/ (Accessed 23-1-2014). 
[11] G. King, H. Richards, and D. Godden, “Adoption of 
telemedicine in Scottish remote and rural general practices: a 
qualitative study’ J Telemed Telecare. 2007;13:382-386. 
[12] J.M. Chalmers, and A. Pearson A, “A systematic review of 
oral health assessment by nurses and carers for residents with 
dementia in residential care facilities” Special Care in 
Dentistry, 2005;25: 227-233. 
[13] L.J. Walsh, G. Hill, G. Seymour, and A. Roberts, “A scoring 
system for the quantitative evaluation of oral mucositis during 
bone 
marrow 
transplantation” 
Spec 
Care 
Dentist. 
1990;10:190-195. 
[14] RN. Patel, and R.N. Antonarakis, “Factors influencing the 
adoption and implementation of teledentistry in the UK, with 
a focus on orthodontics.’ Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 
2013;41:424-431. doi: 10.1111/cdoe.12029. 
 
 
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

