The Potential of Telemedicine for Patients with Chronic Disorders Experiencing 
Problems with Their Functioning 
 
 
Miriam Vollenbroek-Hutten, Hermie Hermens, 
Richard Evering, Marit Dekker-van Weering, 
Stephanie Jansen-Kosterink, Rianne Huis in ‘t 
Veld 
Roessingh Research and Development BV 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
e-mail: m.vollenbroek@rrd.nl, h.hermens@rrd.nl, 
r.evering@rrd.nl, m.vanweering@rrd.nl, 
s.kosterink@rrd.nl, r.huisintveld@rrd.nl 
Miriam Vollenbroek-Hutten, Hermie Hermens, 
University of Twente 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering Mathematics & 
Informatics 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
e-mail: m.vollenbroek@utwente.nl, 
h.hermens@utwente.nl 
 
 
 
Abstract—It 
is 
hypothesized 
that 
telemedicine 
applications can make rehabilitation care more effective 
and efficient.  Besides the demonstrated potential of 
image/audio-based technology, it is expected that 
telemedicine applications, which use biomedical and ICT 
technology, to support physical and cognitive behavioral 
rehabilitation at home or daily life style management, 
both under remote supervision of professionals, are 
considered very promising. Compared to traditional 
rehabilitation methods, these telemedicine applications 
enable the patient to receive more intensive treatment at 
moments they prefer, or when care/coaching is needed, 
instead of when scheduled. In addition they also have the 
advantage that no translation of the learned skills to 
everyday life is needed. However, these telemedicine 
applications are often too much technology driven and 
insufficiently guided by the need of end users and the 
added value of these applications is still insufficiently 
known as a proper evaluation methodology is scarcely 
applied and large studies are lacking. This paper 
addresses these two aspects by describing a concept for 
development 
of 
end 
user 
driven 
telemedicine 
applications followed by an evaluation methodology that 
enables us to show the added value when applied in 
every day care. This is illustrated for telemedicine 
applications that focus on physical rehabilitation of 
patients with a chronic disease who are experiencing 
problems with physical functioning. Based on the results 
available so far, it can be concluded that these 
telemedicine applications are well accepted by patients 
and are at least as effective as traditional care. 
 
Keywords-telemedicine; 
chronic 
disease; 
physical 
reconditioning; 
ambulant 
monitoring; 
home 
treatment; 
feedback.  
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Both the European and American population is aging. 
With regard to The Netherlands, it is expected that the 
number of people aged over 65 years will increase to about 
24% of the total population by 2050. Besides the increase in 
the proportion of elderly in the population there is also an 
increase in the number of people suffering from one or more 
chronic illnesses. Currently in The Netherlands, 1 of 4 
people suffers from a chronic disease and it is expected that 
this number will rise sharply in the coming years. Since 
both the elderly and those with chronic diseases have higher 
care consumption this increase means a surge in pressure on 
our healthcare system.  
Treatment of chronic diseases focuses on the relief of 
symptoms and related complaints as well as on increasing 
self-management by patients; this with the overall aim of 
increasing quality of life and level of participation in 
society. There are various treatments for patients with 
chronic disorders: such as drug treatments but also non-
pharmaceutical 
treatments, 
like 
physiotherapy 
and 
multidisciplinary treatments are becoming increasingly 
important. It is however not realistic to continue these 
treatments in the way they are currently provided. This is 
due not only to the growing number of people in need of 
such care, but also due to the decline in labor capacity and 
the rise in costs that the care system is facing. In addition, 
our current way of care provision is strongly geared towards 
professional guidance with the patient not sufficiently in the 
driver’s seat.  
Prompted by these trends, but also facilitated by the new 
possibilities of technology, it is expected that telemedicine 
can contribute to more cost-effective patient centred care. 
This style of care provision is considered of utmost 
importance for our current and future care.  
According to the Dutch Technical Appointment (NTA) 
telemedicine is defined as a process in healthcare, 
characterized at least by the following two features (NTA 
8028; [1]) 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Distance is bridged by using Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) 
 
There are at least two actors involved, at least one of 
them is an approved care professional or acts on behalf of an 
approved care professional  
The use of ICT in healthcare is a relatively recent 
development. In 1906, the Dutch physiologist Willem 
Einthoven transmitted Electrocardiograph (ECG) signals 
over telephone lines. He investigated ECG signals from 
patients in the Hospital from his laboratory located 1.5 km 
away. However, this was for research purposes only [2]. 
Medical care on a distance started in the 1920s when 
physicians were linked by radio to ships at sea to assist in 
medical emergencies [3]. Nowadays a Google search using 
the term ‘ICT and healthcare’ results in about 16.820.000 
hits. 
One of the areas in healthcare where telemedicine 
applications are considered to be of potential is the 
rehabilitation that merely aims at supporting patients in 
acquiring and maintaining an active lifestyle. Recently, the 
first systematic reviews related to telemedicine in this field 
have been conducted. Kairy et al. [4] performed a 
systematic review on clinical outcomes, clinical processes, 
such as attendance and compliance, healthcare utilization 
and costs associated with tele-rehabilitation for individuals 
with physical disabilities. They included 28 papers, 
published between 1993 and 2006, that used an 
experimental or observational study design. They concluded 
that tele-rehabilitation can lead to similar clinical outcomes 
compared to traditional rehabilitation programs, with 
possible positive impacts on some areas of healthcare 
utilization. However, the majority of the reviewed papers 
concerned technology that focused on image/audio-based 
technology. Other more advanced technologies such as 
sensor based technology and virtual environments, are 
hardly considered. LaPlante and Peng [5] published a 
systematic review in 2011 that included 31 articles which 
they analyzed in terms of study design quality, intervention 
characteristics and support for e-health in physical activity 
interventions. This review demonstrated that 
it is 
increasingly common to use various e-health technologies to 
address physical activity, but they also concluded that it is 
impossible at this moment to give definitive evidence for the 
effectiveness of e-health technologies as insufficient 
systematic and proper evaluation studies have been 
performed. In addition, a recent review [6] concluded that 
there is even less evidence regarding the costs or cost-
effectiveness of telemedicine applications, as well as the 
fact that there is insufficient evidence of the added value. 
The fact that telemedicine applications are still too 
technology driven and insufficiently guided by the needs of 
end users is also considered to hamper implementation and 
successful uptake of telemedicine applications by its 
stakeholders, 
including 
healthcare 
institutes, 
health 
professionals and health insurance companies [7].  
This paper focuses on these two aspects, a concept for 
development of end user driven telemedicine applications 
and an evaluation methodology which enables us to show 
the added value of telemedicine when applied in every day 
care. This is illustrated by reference to telemedicine 
applications which focus on physical rehabilitation of 
patients with chronic disease who are experiencing 
problems 
with 
physical 
functioning. 
Firstly, 
the 
telemedicine applications will be addressed by describing 
the overall concept as well as some examples for physical 
rehabilitation. Subsequently an evaluation methodology is 
described as well as results of evaluation studies using this 
methodology on telemedicine applications that are used in 
the care of patients with chronic low back pain, chronic 
fatigue or a pulmonary disease. 
 
II. 
POSSIBLE TELEMEDICINE APPLICATIONS FOR 
PHYSICAL REHABILTIATION 
 
A. The concept of telemedicine 
Looking at rehabilitation in a broad sense, the aim is to 
enable a patient to participate in our society at the highest 
possible level of activity. There are different rehabilitation 
methods available to achieve this and they have certain key 
aspects in common, namely (re)learning adequate motor 
skills, regaining important functions such as force and, 
mobility and improving a patient’s activity level. In 
traditional care, these treatments are performed during 
patient visits to the professional’s premises where the patient 
receives feedback from the professional on how the patient 
performs and tips on how to further improve. Opportunities 
for introducing telemedicine in this rehabilitation process lie 
in applications that enable patients to train at home and work 
on their recovery more independently while being remotely 
supervised 
by 
their 
healthcare 
professional. 
Such 
telemedicine applications can be realized by means of 
biomedical technology used in combination with ICT. 
Hermens and Vollenbroek-Hutten [8] described an overall 
concept for these telemedicine applications, which is 
graphically presented in Fig 1.  
 
Figure 1.  The concept of a telemedicine service 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

This figure shows that different building blocks are 
needed for a telemedicine service. 
Sensing:  
In traditional treatment, a professional assesses the 
performance of the patient during training and, based on this, 
feedback is provided. In the case of telemedicine 
applications, where face to face treatment is at least partly 
replaced by technology, it is required that performance can 
be quantitatively assessed within the patient’s daily 
environment and therefore some kind of sensing is usually 
needed. Which parameters to use for sensing the patients’ 
performance depends on the diagnosis and the aim of the 
telemedicine application. Examples are: range of motion if 
mobility is being trained; muscle activation patterns where 
treatment aims at reduction of tension or at coordination, or 
activity levels when the goal is improvement of physical 
activity. The techniques useful for assessing performance can 
also differ. Some possible techniques are: subjective 
information (e.g. diaries), sensors temporarily attached to the 
body (e.g. ECG, EMG) and environmental sensors (e.g. 
wireless sensor networks [8]. 
Feedback 
Once insight into a patient’s performance is gained, the 
next step is to give the patient insight into his own 
performance by providing adequate extrinsic feedback. 
Extrinsic feedback is feedback provided on top of intrinsic 
feedback and mostly provided by an external source [9]. 
Feedback in treatment of patients with chronic disorders can 
serve different goals such as motor skills learning, creating 
awareness, motivating the patient to change, changing into 
and maintaining new performance levels [10]. In the case of 
telemedicine applications, feedback can be provided via 
different loops as also shown in Fig. 1. The shortest loop is 
local feedback provided directly on the monitored 
information. The second loop is feedback provided via a 
portal. This loop enables integration of data from different 
sources as well as over longer period of time. The third loop 
is professional feedback in addition to feedback received via 
the first two loops. Research shows that both patients and 
professionals prefer a combination of feedback via the first 
two loops, namely feedback by technology with feedback by 
professionals (third loop) [11]. 
Backend and portals 
Backend and portals concern transport and storage of the 
measured signals, the processing of these signals as well as 
support of secured access to the data via internet. In most of 
the cases a ‘decision-support system’ is needed in order to 
extract relevant characteristics from the data and to 
adequately inform or warn patients and professionals as well 
as to trace technical failures [12]. The portals that provide 
access to the data are most often built around databases and 
this kind of ‘decision-support system’ and enable the user to 
get access to the data in a user friendly and secure manner. In 
case multiple professionals are involved in the care of a 
patient it is important that the system, supported by a good 
policy management, can decide who needs to be warned and, 
which information needs to be presented to which healthcare 
professionals. 
Care and coaching 
Formal and informal care givers may be involved in the 
care process to coach/support the patient. In order to 
adequately support them it is important to ensure that 
telemedicine applications are implemented in this daily care 
process in a proper manner. Telemedicine applications can 
be implemented as aftercare, as partial replacement of 
traditional care or as an addition alongside regular care. 
Considering the challenge to decrease the pressure on our 
healthcare in terms of costs and required labor capacity it is 
important that implementation as partial replacement is 
pursued.  
 
B. Examples  of telemedicine applications 
Starting from this overall architecture different kinds of 
telemedicine applications can be realized for physical 
reconditioning of patients with chronic diseases. Below some 
examples are given. 
Rehabilitation exercises at home 
Patients with chronic disorders need to exercise and keep 
exercising a lot to improve and/or maintain their condition 
and motor skills. Rehabilitation at home refers to 
telemedicine applications that enable patients to perform 
these exercises at times and places they prefer while still 
being adequately supervised by professionals. Patients get 
access to individually tailored exercise programs through 
technology. Examples of these are presented in Fig. 2.   
The picture on the left shows web-based exercise 
programs as developed in the FP7 project Clear (ICT: PSP 
CLEAR 224985) [13] and the Dutch project CoCo 
(CALLOP9089) [14]. A healthcare professional, often a 
physiotherapist, creates an individually tailored exercise 
program for each patient by making a schedule with the 
patient showing what exercises to execute and when. 
Exercises are chosen out of a data base of exercises. At home 
the patient logs into the system with a username and 
password and gets access to his personalized exercise 
program. Exercises are presented to the patient by means of 
video, spoken word and text. The patient has the opportunity 
to send text messages to the professionals or a teleconference 
can be scheduled. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Examples of telemedicine applications for active rehabilitation 
at home  
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The picture on the right shows a Home Care Activity 
Desk (HCAD) equipped with sensors for arm-hand function 
training. This application was developed by the European 
project HELLODOC (FP6 ETEN, 517508) [14]. This system 
consists of a portable unit with seven sensorized tools, which 
is installed in the patient’s home. The seven sensorized tools 
are: a key, light bulb, book, jar, writing, checkers and 
keyboard. With this portable unit a set of exercises can be 
performed such as reaching, grasping, lateral pinch, pinch 
grip, holding, manipulation and finger dexterity. The unit is 
also 
equipped 
with 
two 
webcams, 
which 
allow 
videoconferencing and recording. The videos and the results 
of the exercises were uploaded to the hospital server where 
all the data and videos were collected. The therapist used this 
information for the weekly videoconference with the patient 
[15]. 
 
Life style management 
Patients with a chronic disease often need to change their 
lifestyle to prevent deterioration or recurrence of complaints. 
An example of this is deploying and maintaining an active 
lifestyle. Telemedicine applications for life style coaching 
support patients in the development and maintenance of 
healthy behaviour by monitoring the patient’s daily lifestyle 
and giving direct feedback on this to the patient. The 
monitored data can also be stored in databases and made 
accessible to his formal and informal care professionals via 
web-portals to adequately support the patient in this process. 
An example of such a telemedicine application is shown in 
Fig. 3. 
The picture on the left shows the sensor for activity 
monitoring. In the middle of the illustration, an example can 
be seen of the direct feedback that is provided to the patient 
on his mobile phone. On the right is a screenshot of the 
portal that gives both the patient and professionals insight 
into the data and changes over a longer period of time.  
 
Remote monitoring and alarming 
For many patients it is difficult to recognize important 
disease-related symptoms and complaints and to act 
adequately on them. For example a worsening of complaints 
for patients with a pulmonary disease can be a reason to start 
an antibiotic or Prednisolon treatment.  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Examples of a telemedicine application for lifestyle 
management 
 
 
 
Remote monitoring and alarm applications focus on 
guarding the (changes in) health status of a patient by 
monitoring and interpretation of his vital body signs or 
primary complaints. This should be achieved as far as 
possible without affecting the patient’s daily life but ensuring 
that help is provided if necessary. Fig. 4 gives an example of 
a remote monitoring and alarm service. 
This application for patients with pulmonary diseases 
monitors the patient’s changes in complaints on a daily basis 
by asking the patient whether the most relevant aspects of 
their complaints are different than usual. Based on the 
patient’s scores over consecutive days an advice is given to 
the patient whether or not to start a medication treatment. 
Data of the patient are made accessible for his healthcare 
professional who is alerted in case a medication treatment 
has to start. This enables him to adequately advise the 
patient.  
III. 
EVALUATON  
A. Methodology  
Once a telemedicine application has been developed, the 
next step is to demonstrate the results when the system is 
used in everyday practice. Outcome measures usually focus 
on the technical feasibility of the system and on user 
satisfaction. In general, the results of such studies show that 
telemedicine applications are technically stable and that 
patients and professionals have a positive attitude towards 
using them. This type of evaluation is however not 
sufficient to justify subsequent large scale implementation. 
For this, a broader evaluation is necessary [9]. DeChant et 
al. [16] proposed a staged approach for the evaluation of 
telemedicine applications, starting early in the development 
phase and dependent on the maturity of an application. The 
first phase evaluation is aimed at investigating whether the 
requirements of the patients are met and whether the 
application is technically stable. At this stage the user group 
is small, because the results are mainly used to develop a 
more mature application. After the first phase evaluation, 
evaluation of a mature application (stage 2) focuses on the 
clinical outcome. If these results are positive, evaluation 
becomes even more extensive, using multiple endpoints 
such as effectiveness, efficiency or accessibility of care 
(stage 3). The last evaluation phase (stage 4) focuses on 
external validity and investigates whether the application is 
as effective when implemented in places other than where it 
was developed. 
 
Figure 4.  Examples of a telemedicine application for remote monitoring 
and alarming 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Clinical studies 
Taking the DeChant [16] framework as starting point 
evaluation 
studies 
have 
been 
performed 
for 
the 
rehabilitation-at-home applications and the life style 
management applications. Results of these studies are 
presented below. 
Rehabilitation exercises at home 
After a small positive prognostic cohort study, a further 
developed version of the web-based exercise program was 
implemented at The Roessingh Center for Rehabilitation 
(RCR) (The Netherlands) in outpatient pain and pulmonary 
rehabilitation programs in two different modalities: as 
addition to and as partial replacement of the traditional 
rehabilitation. For evaluation a study was performed in 
which eligible patients were divided into a control and an 
intervention group. The control group followed the 
traditional rehabilitation program. The intervention group 
followed the same program but with the web-based exercise 
program implemented, dependent upon patient’s ability to 
train as addition or as replacement of one visit to the 
rehabilitation center per week. The large scale evaluation 
focused 
on 
multiple 
outcome 
parameters 
namely 
experiences (satisfaction, compliance and usability) and 
clinical benefit. Clinical benefit was assessed by using a 
Visual Analogue Scales; pain intensity for chronic pain 
patients and level of dyspnoea for COPD patient. The trial is 
ongoing; currently 212 patients are informed about the 
service and 187 patients have given written informed 
consent to participate. Eighty-four patients were allocated to 
the control group and 103 patients were allocated to the 
intervention group. Preliminary results for the first 125 
patients who have finished the treatment show that the 
overall grading of the web-based telemedicine exercise 
service was sufficient and that the ease of use was rated 
good. On average, these patients scored 7.2 on a scale of 0-
10 indicating that usability is good. The first results on 
clinical benefit show that both implementation modalities 
(as addition / as partial replacement) are at least as effective 
as traditional care. In the telemedicine (n= 66) and the 
traditional care group (n= 69) about 55% and 49% of the 
patients show a clinically relevant improvement on the 
primary outcome parameter, respectively. However, these 
percentages are not significantly different from each other. 
 
The Home Care Activity Desk (HCAD), which was also 
redesigned after an initial demonstration study, was 
evaluated in a randomized multicenter trial within the 
European project Hellodoc [17]. In this study usual care was 
compared to the HCAD intervention for arm/hand training. 
The intervention with the HCAD system at home lasts one 
month, whereby the patients had to train at least once a day, 
5 days a week for an average of 30 minutes. Usual care 
(control group) consisted of regular physical and ergonomic 
therapy with an average of three times a week for 45 
minutes. Follow up measurements were performed after one 
month of treatment. Eighty-one patients with chronic Stroke, 
TBI and MS patients were recruited in Italy, Spain and 
Belgium. Outcome measures used were the Action Research 
Arm Test and the Nine Hole Peg Test. Results showed that 
the overall satisfaction of patients and therapists concerning 
the HCAD system was high. The outcome measures do not 
differ significantly between the two groups; and patients 
maintain or even improve on their arm/hand function. 
 
Life style management 
Evaluation of the activity-based feedback application for 
supporting the patient in deploying a better activity pattern 
during the day started with a prognostic cohort study of 17 
patients with chronic low back pain who carried a tri-axial 
accelerometer and a PDA for 15 days (baseline and 2 weeks 
of feedback [18]. Patients received continuous and time-
related personalized feedback and were instructed to follow 
the activity pattern as displayed on the PDA (norm value). 
Results showed that the technical performance was rated 
good in nine patients (56%), moderate in four patients 
(25%) and bad in three patients (19%). The overall 
compliance was rated good in seven patients (44%), 
moderate in five patients (31%) and bad in four patients 
(25%). A positive trend was seen in the activity pattern of 
the patient that moved towards the norm value during the 
feedback weeks, however the difference failed to reach the 
level of significance (F=1.932; p=.149). In contrast, the pain 
intensity levels decreased significantly in the second week 
of feedback compared to baseline and the first week of 
feedback  (F=5.401; p=.005).    
In addition to this study, a second study was performed 
on 30 patients with chronic fatigue syndrome with the aim 
determining the compliance with the system and the amount 
of change in physical activity patterns of those who comply 
[19]. For this a longitudinal study was performed as part of 
a randomized controlled trial in which a feedback program 
was introduced in an existing rehabilitation program. The 
existing rehabilitation program comprised 9 weeks of 
inpatient cognitive behavioural therapy in weeks 1, 3, 5, 7 
and 9. The feedback application was implemented during 
the four periods when patients were at home in between the 
weeks of inpatient treatment. Compliance with the feedback 
system was around 90% during each of the four feedback 
periods, however only fifteen patients (50%) complied with 
all four feedback periods (compliers). The Wilcoxon signed 
ranks test showed that for the group of compliers the 
physical activity level, expressed as percentage of the goal 
value, during feedback period 1 (103%), feedback period 2 
(98%), feedback period 3 (94%) and feedback period 4 
(98%) were significantly higher (p<0.01) and closer towards 
the goal compared to the baseline period (84%) and these 
changes were most obvious in the morning and afternoon.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
The results of the present paper show that patients and 
professionals are positive about telemedicine services for 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

rehabilitation purposes. In addition, the clinical benefits 
achieved with telemedicine applications are promising as 
the clinical benefits appear to be at least as good as the 
results achieved with traditional rehabilitation care. 
However, the level of evidence to date is, also according to 
the DeChant [13] framework, not sufficient and needs 
attention in future. Next to this, another aspect that is 
considered important for future work is the technology used. 
The technology should be relegated even more to the 
background as is currently the case. For this, the technology 
should be more adaptive, intelligent and become a real 
buddy of the patient. Concerning the telemedicine 
applications itself the integration of social media, group 
dynamics but also serious games are considered important, 
especially for long term adherence to exercising.  
To finalize, although there are still many challenges, the 
potential of telemedicine in rehabilitation care becomes 
conspicuous on a daily basis and the positive effect of our 
methodology is evident. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work presented in this paper is made feasible 
with different grants. HELLODOC (FP6 ETEN, 517508) 
[13]   CLEAR (FP7, ICT: PSP 224985) [12], The Dutch ZIP 
project CoCo (CALLOP9089) [13], ZonMw project 
Chronisch Vermoeidheidssyndroom (56100001), BSIK 
Awareness project [13] 
  
REFERENCES 
[1] http://www.nen.nl/web/Leven/Telemedicine.htm, <retrieved, 
dec, 2011> 
[2] W. Einthoven, “Le telecardiogramma,” Arch Int de Physical, 
vol. 4, 1906, pp. 132-134 (translated into English, Am Heart J 
1957; 53: pp. 602-615). 
[3] S. Tachakra, Z.H. Wang, R.S.H. Isepanian, and Y.H. Song, 
“Mobile e-Health: The unwired evolution of telemedicine,” 
Telemedicine journal and e-health, vol. 9(3), 2003, pp. 247-
257. 
[4] D. Kairy, P. Lehoux, C. Vincent, and M. Visintin, “A 
systematic review of clinical outcomes, clinical process, 
healthcare 
utilization 
and 
costs 
associated 
with 
telerehabilitation,” Disabil Rehabil, vol. 31(6), 2009, pp. 427-
447.  
[5] C. Laplante and W. Peng, “A systematic review of e-health 
interventions for physical activity: an analysis of study 
design, intervention characteristics, and outcomes,” Telemed 
journal and e-Health, vol. 17(7),  2011, pp. 509-523. 
[6] A.G. Ekeland, A. Bowes, and S. Flottrop, “Effectiveness of 
telemedicine: a systematic review of reviews,” International 
journal of medical informatics, vol 79, 2010, pp. 736-771. 
[7] T.F. Broens, M.H.A. Huis in ‘t Veld, M.M.R. Vollenbroek, 
H.J. Hermens, A.T. van Halteren, and L.J.M. Nieuwenhuis, 
“Determinants for successful telemedicine implementation; a 
literature study,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 
13(6), 2007, pp. 303-309. 
[8] H.J. Hermens HJ and M.M.R. Vollenbroek-Hutten, “ Towards 
remote monitoring and remotely supervised training,” Journal 
of Electromyography and Kinesiology, vol. 18(6), 2008, pp. 
908-919.  
[9] C.J. Winstein, “Knowledge of results and motor learning – 
implications for physical therapy,” Phys Ther, vol 71, 1991, 
pp. 140–149. 
[10] M.M.R. Vollenbroek-Hutten and  H.J. Hermens, “Remote 
care nearby,” J Telemed Telecare, vol 16(6), 2010, pp. 294-
301. 
[11] K. Cranen, C.H. Drossaert, E.S. Brinkman, A.L. Braakman-
Jansen, M.J. Ijzerman, and M.M.R. Vollenbroek-Hutten,  “An 
exploration of chronic pain patients' perceptions of home 
telerehabilitation services,”  Health Expect, vol 17(7), 2011, 
pp. 530-535.  
[12] V. Jones, R. Batista, R. Bults, H. Op Den Akker, Y. Widya,  
H. Hermens, M. Huis In' t Veld, T. Tonis, and M.M.R. 
Vollenbroek-Hutten, “Interpreting streaming biosignals: in 
search of best approaches to augmenting mobile health 
monitoring with machine learning for adaptive clinical 
decision support,” In Learning from Medical Data Streams 
Workshop, 13th Conference on Artificial Intelligence in 
Medicine (AIME'11), July 2-6, 2011, Bled, Slovenia. eds. 
P.P. Rodrigues, M. Pechenizkiy, M.M. Gaber, and J. Gama. 
[13] http://www.habiliseurope.eu/ <retrieved:dec,2011> 
[14] http://www.rrd.nl,< retrieved: dec, 2011> 
[15] B.C. Huijgen, M.M.R. Vollenbroek-Hutten, M. Zampolini, E. 
Opisso, M. Bernabeu, J. Van Nieuwenhoven, S. Ilsbroukx, R. 
Magni, C. Giacomozzi, V. Marcellari, S.S. Marchese, and 
H.J. Hermens,  “Feasibility of a home-based telerehabilitation 
system compared to usual care: arm/hand function in patients 
with stroke, traumatic brain injury and multiple sclerosis,” J 
Telemed Telecare, vol. 14, 2008, pp. 249–256. 
[16] H.K. DeChant, W.G. Tohme, S.K. Mun, W.S. Hayes, and 
K.A. Schulman, “Health systems evaluation of telemedicine: 
a staged approach,” Telemed J, vol 2, 1996, pp. 303–312. 
[17] H.J. Hermens, B.C.H. Huijgen,C. Giacomozzi, S. Ilsbroukx, 
V. Macellari, E. Prats, M. Rogante, M.F. Schifini, M.C. 
Spitali, S. Tasies, M. Zampolini, and M.M.R. Vollenbroek-
Hutten, “Clinical Assessment of the HELLODOC tele-
rehabilitation service,” Ann Ist Super Sanita, vol 44(2), 2008,  
pp. 154-163. 
[18] M.G.H. Dekker-van Weering, M.M.R. Vollenbroek-Hutten, 
and H.J. Hermens, “Potential value of an activity based 
feedback system for treatment of patients with chronic low 
back pain,” Unpubslished. 
[19] R.M.H. 
Evering 
and 
M.M.R. 
Vollenbroek-Hutten, 
“Ambulatory activity-based feedback for improving daily 
physical activity patterns in patients with the chronic fatigue 
syndrome: a longitudinal study,” Unpublished. 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

