 
The Bravehealth Software Architecture  
for the Monitoring of Patients Affected by CVD 
Silvia Canale, Francesco Delli 
Priscoli, Silvano Mignanti, Guido 
Oddi, Antonio Sassano 
Dip. di Ingegneria Informatica, 
Automatica e Gestionale 
Università degli Studi di Roma 
“Sapienza”, Rome, Italy 
{canale; dellipriscoli; mignanti; oddi; 
sassano}@dis.uniroma1.it 
Donato Macone, Lorenzo Piazzo  
 
 
Dip. di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, 
Elettronica e Telecomunicazioni 
Università degli Studi di Roma 
“Sapienza”, Rome, Italy 
{macone; lorenz} 
@infocom.uniroma1.it 
 
Francesco Costa, Paolo De 
Stefanis 
 
Labor S.P.A 
Rome, Italy 
f.costa@labor-roma.it, 
p.destefanis@labor-roma.it 
 
Abstract — The Bravehealth project is a large scale Integrated 
Project (IP) launched in the 7th Framework Programme. 
Bravehealth proposes a patient-centric vision to Cardio 
Vascular 
Disease 
(CVD) 
management 
and 
treatment, 
providing people already diagnosed as subjects at risk with a 
sound solution for continuous and remote monitoring and real 
time prevention of malignant events. Mainly, this paper 
describes the BVH Software Architecture. The role and the 
rationale behind the various system components is widely 
explained. The set of adopted technological solutions is 
presented and, finally, it is shown how the architecture 
succeeds in achieving a flexible, scalable and efficient system 
able to cope with many different medical scenarios. 
Keywords-Cardio Vascular Disease; Architecture; DSS; Data 
Mining. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
E-Health is largely recognized (see for instance [4], [5], 
[7] and [9]) as one of the most promising and powerful 
solutions to address Cardio Vascular Disease (CVD), being 
able to ensure an increase of the quality of care delivered and 
of the quality of life of patients, while decreasing overall 
healthcare costs. Nevertheless, in spite of these widely 
agreed and demonstrated benefits, the technical maturity of 
the majority of the solutions implemented is poor, the 
concrete use of e-Health services for supporting remote 
management of CVD is still very limited, there is a lack of a 
standardized 
approach, 
the 
market 
remains 
highly 
fragmented and focused on specific scenarios. Moreover, 
even though Decision Support Systems (DSS) can be a key 
added-value of the e-health (see for instance [1] and [2]). no 
convincing and standardized approaches for such an issue 
have been developed yet, especially regarding the use of 
Data Mining [3] techniques, applied to data related to 
patients affected by CVDs.  
The Bravehealth (BVH) project [6] aims at coping with 
these problems introducing an efficient, flexible and scalable 
patient-centric system including a Software Architecture 
suitable for being applied to a plenty of different scenarios. 
The BVH focus is on CVD, but the designed Software 
Architecture (based on standard protocols and languages) 
and the Decision Support System, which is a key element of 
such an architecture, are so flexible that they can be reused 
for different diseases and for different typologies of patients.  
The main objective of the proposed architecture is to 
enable the cooperation among the Patients and the Medical 
Supervisors (e.g., physicians, nurses, etc.) following the 
Patients, finalized at an early diagnosis and prevention of the 
occurrence of malignant events or complications. Another 
ancillary aspect is the capability of providing the Medical 
Supervisors 
with 
suggestions 
concerning 
the 
most 
appropriate provisions to be taken in case the system detects 
anomalies in the Patient health status. This will be obtained 
thanks to a synergistic approach of a compact wearable 
device with the capability of monitoring several clinic 
parameters in order to perform a timely diagnosis of patient’s 
conditions, 
with 
advanced 
data 
fusion 
techniques 
implemented on it and with innovative algorithms and 
solutions for the Decision Support System. The correct way 
of working must be continuously monitored by appropriate 
technicians, referred to as Technical Supervisors. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces 
the main components of the proposed architecture, along 
with a brief description of each of them. Section III details 
the main macro-tasks considered in the Bravehealth project 
and their relation with the architecture, with particular focus 
with the Decision Support System. Finally, conclusions are 
drawn in Section IV.  
II. 
BVH MAIN COMPONENTS 
The main actors and components of the BVH system are 
shown in Figure 1, using UML [8] formalism. The BVH 
main components are: (i) the Wearable Unit (WU), (ii) the 
Patient Gateway (PG), (iii) the Remote Server (RS), (iv) the 
IPTV, (v) the Patient Client (PaC), (vi) the Medical 
Supervisor Client and (vii) the Technical Supervisor Client. 
The Wearable Unit (WU) is the component the Patient 
“wears” and includes the sensors responsible for sensing 
Patient’s physiological data, as well as the functionalities for 
collecting the relevant measures and for transmitting them 
towards the Patient Gateway (PG). Such functionalities can 
be properly configured by the Remote Server (RS) (in 
cooperation with the PG). Then, the WU also includes the 
functionalities for actuating the received configuration 
information. Physiological data transmission towards the PG 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
takes place either periodically, following the instructions 
deduced from the configuration information, or after 
properly selected triggering events again deduced from the 
configuration information, or on-demand following specific 
requests. Finally, the WU interfaces the Patient through an 
ad hoc interface which is intended to provide the patient with 
very simple status messages such as the WU battery charging 
status 
or 
possible 
malfunctioning/misplacing 
(more 
elaborated information is sent to the Patient by the HMI 
Component embedded in the PG, as detailed later). 
The 
Patient 
Gateway 
(PG) 
proposed 
Software 
Architecture is shown in Figure 2, using UML formalism. 
The PG is the Component which represents the mean by 
which the information data flow from the WUs to the RS and 
vice versa. Moreover, the PG is devoted to perform a 
preliminary analysis on raw data (physiological and context) 
collected from the WU, to store data into a local memory 
cache and to forward them (both raw and elaborated) to the 
RS. The above-mentioned preliminary analysis makes use of 
Data Processing and Decision Support capabilities running at 
the PG finalized at deducing elaborated information from 
raw data collected by the WU to be exploited by the RS 
Decision Support System and at detecting, in a fast way, 
anomalies with respect to the regular Patient behavior. The 
PG is configured (in terms of scheduled activities) by the RS. 
The PG also receives from the RS the configuration for the 
WU: this configuration could be modified by the PG on the 
basis of some internal elaboration and then forwarded to the 
WU. The PG can request specific data from the WU. Finally, 
the PG is able to provide the Patient with information about 
the status of his health, as well as specific instructions 
determined by the Medical and/or the Technical Supervisors. 
The Remote Server (RS) proposed Software Architecture 
is shown in Figure 3, using UML formalism. The RS is the 
core architectural component of the BVH system and 
contains most of its intelligence. The RS performs the 
complex algorithms of the Decision Support System (DSS) 
component, stores data (physiological and context data, both 
raw and elaborated) collected from all the PGs (related to all 
patients) with which it is connected and provides the front 
end logic of the interfaces with the BVH actors (Patients, 
Medical supervisors and Technical supervisors). The RS is in 
charge of computing (automatically or by means of the 
intervention of Physicians/Technicians) the most appropriate 
configurations 
for 
the 
PGs 
and 
the 
WUs. 
Such 
configurations, among other information, include the 
scheduling of the activities to be performed by the WUs and 
by the PGs. The RS can request data stored into the PGs 
and/or the WUs (raw or elaborated context and physiological 
data). The RS provides the front end logic to the users' client 
components (Medical Supervisor Client (MSC), Technical 
Supervisor Client (TSC), Patient Client (PaC) and IPTV) 
through the set of exposed interfaces, illustrated in Figure 1. 
The IPTV is a Component which is used by the Patient in 
order to interface with the BVH system: thanks to it, the 
Patient could visualize the status of his health, as well as a 
list of specific instructions and/or high resolution videos. 
The Patient Client (PaC) is a Component which is used 
by the Patient in order to interface with the BVH system. 
Through this interface, the Patient is able to visualize the 
status of his health, as well as a list of specific instructions 
and/or low resolution videos.  
The Medical Supervisor Client is the Component which 
is used by the Medical Supervisors in order to interface with 
the BVH system. The Medical Supervisors could use this 
component (i) to access (including insert, modify or delete) 
configuration or sensor data of a particular Patient, (ii) to 
manage notifications/suggestions produced by the BVH 
DSS, (iii) to access all patient history. 
The Technical Supervisor Client is the Component which 
is used by the Technical Supervisors in order to interface the 
BVH system. A Technical Supervisor could use this 
component to monitor and to modify the status of the PGs 
Figure 1. Main components of the BVH architecture 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
and of the WUs or the patients’ data and to apply diagnostic 
operations in order to correct possible malfunctions. 
III. 
BVH MACRO-TASKS DESCRIPTION 
In order to facilitate the understanding of the rationale 
behind the proposed Software Architecture, the description 
of the BVH Components appearing in Figures 1-3 will be 
performed with reference to five specific BVH Macro-tasks. 
A BVH Macro-task includes all the procedures which aim at 
the same high level objective. 
A. PG and RS orchestration 
This macro-task deals with the orchestration of the PG 
and RS Components. The main components involved in this 
macro-task are, at the PG side, the PG Controller, whilst, at 
the RS side, in consideration of the complexity of the 
involved tasks, in order to get a real-time processing speed, 
the orchestration task is distributed among the RS Gateway 
Controller and the RS Patient Configuration Manager, 
involved in the management of the Sensor Data and of the 
Configuration Data, respectively. The above-mentioned 
components 
operate 
according 
to 
a 
flexible 
logic 
guaranteeing a high degree of reconfiguration and, in 
particular, assuring the possibility to replace, in a natural 
way, the current WUs/PGs with more advanced ones, as well 
as to add/remove/replace storage, pre-processing, decision 
support system, configuration and interfacing capabilities. 
The PG Controller is devoted to orchestrate all the PG 
components in order to execute the whole logic of the PG. 
The PG Controller is triggered by events coming from the 
PG Scheduler: the latter is updated by the former and 
includes the scheduling of the events involving the PG. 
The RS Gateway Controller is in charge of the whole 
logic related to the communication with the PG and the 
management of the Sensor Data, which include both the raw 
data produced by the WU sensors and transmitted by the WU 
to the RSs through the PGs, and the elaborated data which 
are the output of the pre-processing of the above-mentioned 
raw data performed at the PGs and/or at the RS. 
The RS Patient Configuration Manager is in charge of the 
management of the Configuration Data, i.e. the data relevant 
to PG and WU configurations. In particular, the RS Patient 
Configuration Manager is in charge of managing the 
configurations of the PGs and of the WUs on the basis of 
Patient information (e.g., status, case history, medical 
protocols, the output of the DSS, etc.) and of physicians’ or 
technicians’ 
decisions. 
Moreover, 
the 
RS 
Patient 
Configuration Manager is the Component of the RS in 
charge of performing the whole application logic related to 
the management of the Patient Data, which include the 
patient personal information, as well as the data relevant to 
the patient status validated by medical diagnoses. 
B.  Flow and Management of Sensor Data and of 
Configuration Data 
This macro-task deals with (i) the flow of the Sensor Data 
collected by the sensors (the ones embedded in the WUs, as 
well as other kind of sensors such as environment sensors) to 
the PGs (where they can be subject to formatting and 
preprocessing) and eventually to the RS, (ii) the flow of 
Configuration Data (for PG/WU configuration) from the RS 
to the PGs and, eventually to the WUs. Each WU is 
configured by the RS (with the possible cooperation of the 
PG) to send, either periodically, or whenever events occur, 
patient specific information (e.g., physiological data) to the 
PG. In addition, a PG could also request to a WU on-demand 
data or other types of information. 
The PG Sensor Communication Manager is in charge of 
interacting with the WU and/or with other kinds of sensors in 
order (i) to receive Sensor Data and (ii) to send either 
Configuration Data or data requests to the WU. In particular, 
such component has to interwork with the communication 
channel (e.g., Bluetooth) which is used for the data exchange 
between WUs and PGs. 
The PG Format Translator is a Component able to 
translate the Sensor Data collected by the sensors, which are 
raw data, into a standard format suitable for the PG 
Preprocessing Environment (see next section). 
The PG Data Cache stores all Patient related data 
(measurements, 
scheduling 
information, 
status, 
configuration, etc.), i.e., the raw ones, the ones formatted by 
Figure 2. Patient Gateway (PG) Software Architecture 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
the Format Translator component and the ones elaborated by 
the PG Preprocessing Environment.  
The PG RS Communication Manager (PG side) and the 
RS Gateway Controller (RS side) interwork with the 
communication channel (e.g., UMTS) which is used for the 
data exchange between PGs and RS. In particular, these 
components manage the sending of Sensor Data (which 
could include both raw data coming from the WU and/or 
data formatted by the PG Format Translator and/or data 
elaborated by the PG Preprocessing Environment) from the 
PG to the RS, as well as of Configuration Data in the 
opposite direction. 
Aiming at enhancing RS performances, two main 
database components with associated database management 
(updating, adding, removal) logic have been foreseen at the 
RS, namely the RS Sensor Data Management System and the 
RS User Management System storing the Sensor Data and 
the Configuration/Patient data, respectively; these two 
databases are managed by the RS Gateway Controller and by 
the RS Patient Configuration Manager, respectively. 
The RS Sensor Data Management System stores all Sensor 
Data, both the ones directly arriving at the RS from the PGs 
and the ones resulting from elaborations of these data 
performed by the RS DSS and/or the RS Preprocessing 
Environment. RS components such as DSS, Preprocessing 
Environment, Patient Service, Medical Supervisor FE and 
Gateway Controller could use these data through the DATA 
CRUDS interface. 
The RS User Management System stores all Configuration 
Data and Patient Data (these two kinds of data, being strictly 
related since PG and WU configurations are tailored to the 
associated patient, are stored in the same database 
component). The RS Medical/Technical Supervisor FE, the 
RS Supervisor Management System and the RS Patient 
Configuration Manager could use/update these data through 
the Patient Record CRUDS interface. Moreover, the RS User 
Management System has the key role of interworking with 
the Hospital Information System (HIS), in order to extract 
information relevant to enrich the Patient Data. 
C. Data Processing and Decision Support at the PG 
A key feature of the BVH architecture is the fact that 
some light processing of Sensor Data already takes place at 
the PG, whilst an heavy processing of Sensor Data is 
demanded to the RS. This issue adds many degrees of 
flexibility to the whole system allowing to perform the most 
urgent elaborations close to the patient, with evident 
advantages in terms of privacy/security, decoupling from 
both possible PG-RS communication link and RS server 
problems, saving PG-RS communication channel capacity, 
etc. The PG processing in question is performed within the 
PG Preprocessing Environment component, in turn, 
including its subcomponents: (i) the PG Signal Processing, 
(ii) the PG Physical Context and (iii) the PG Lightweight 
Decision Support System. 
The PG Signal Processing includes algorithms for 
filtering and processing the signals coming from the WU, 
e.g., in order to remove noise and compute a set of ECG 
descriptors (or features), e.g., QRS-T-Angle [10], QT-
Figure 3. Remote Server (RS) Software Architecture 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
dispersion and so on. These descriptors are used for 
measuring the distances among different electrocardiograms 
with the aim of detecting anomalies, detecting and 
segmenting heart beat and supporting physician’s diagnosis. 
The PG Physical Context includes algorithms that, on the 
basis of the signals coming from the WU and/or from other 
possible 
sensors, 
extract 
context 
information 
(e.g., 
information about the activity, the location, the environment 
related to a certain patient): such information will be made 
available by computing a family of physical context factors 
(e.g., location of the patient, etc.). These factors will be made 
available to other data processing modules (e.g., the 
Lightweight Decision Support System described below) for 
further information extraction procedures. 
The PG Lightweight Decision Support System analyses 
the Sensor Data available at the Patient Gateway (raw data 
coming from the WU, ECG descriptors and other 
physiological parameters/context factors coming from the 
PG Preprocessing Environment) with the aim of identifying 
specific patient profiles and abnormal behaviors. This 
analysis is performed by using unsupervised machine 
learning algorithms (e.g., data clustering) with the aim of 
identifying patterns that are typical of a given patient. In 
turn, these patterns are used to detect anomalies with respect 
to the regular behavior of the specific patient. 
D. Data Processing and Decision Support at the RS 
The RS Preprocessing Environment includes Signal 
Processing and Physical Context functionalities, whose 
rationale is similar as the corresponding ones at the PG. 
The RS Decision Support System (DSS) (see Figure 4), 
following the on-line application of appropriate rules to the 
Sensor, Configuration and Patient Data, provides the 
Medical Supervisors with Notifications and Suggestions. The 
rules which are used for deriving notifications and 
suggestions are stored in the database component referred to 
as Medical Knowledgebase Management System (MKMS), 
also providing the associated database management 
(updating, adding, removal) logic. Such rules are managed 
by the Medical Supervisors authorized to manage the DSS, 
through the Rule Supervisor FE. In particular, as shown in 
Figure 4, the DSS component consists of the following 
subcomponents: (i) the Notification Rules Engine, (ii) the 
Data Mining, and (iii) the Suggestion Rules Engine. 
The Notification Rules Engine is the engine that 
interprets the logic rules defined on the basis of medical 
protocols and standard procedures adopted by physicians. 
These rules are directly uploaded by the Medical Supervisors 
in the MKMS, where they are labeled as “Active Standard 
Rules”. The Notification Rules Engine on-line applies the 
Active Standard Rules to both the Sensor Data coming from 
the RS Sensor Data Management System and to the 
Configuration/Patient Data coming from the RS User 
Management System. Following the application of each rule, 
the Notification Rules Engine takes a decision in the form of 
a “notification” which is sent to the Medical Supervisors, via 
the DSS Communication Management System. 
The Data Mining is the core Component of the DSS. It 
analyses (through an off-line processing, but continuously in 
progress during the BVH system operation) the available 
historical data (i.e. the Sensors Data stored in the RS Sensor 
Data Management System and the Configuration/Patient 
Data stored in the User Management System) with the aim of 
identifying correlations, regularities and patterns that 
represent the information extracted from data. The analysis is 
performed through both unsupervised (e.g., data clustering) 
and supervised (e.g., data classification and regression, 
pattern recognition) machine learning algorithms in order to 
identify correlations, regularities and patterns in the data. 
This information is used to infer new rules which are stored 
in the MKMS being initially labeled as “Suggested Inferred 
Rules”. Then, following the approval from a Medical 
Supervisor authorized to manage the DSS (performed by 
means of the Rule Supervisor Front End (FE)), each rule can 
be labeled as “Active Inferred Rule” and can be interpreted 
and used by the Suggestion Rules Engine. 
Figure 4. RS Decision Support System (DSS) 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
The Suggestion Rules Engine is the rule engine that 
interprets the Active Inferred Rules derived by the machine 
learning algorithms running in the Data Mining module. The 
Suggestion Rules Engine on-line applies the Active Inferred 
Rules to both the Sensor Data coming from the RS Sensor 
Data Management System and to the Patient/Configuration 
Data coming from the RS User Management System. 
Following the application of each rule, the Suggestion Rules 
Engine takes a decision in the form of a “suggestion” which 
is sent to the DSS Communication Management System and, 
eventually, to the Medical Supervisors. 
E. User Interface 
In the BVH system there are three kinds of users, namely 
the Patients, the Medical Supervisors and the Technical 
Supervisors. For each kind of user a specific interface is 
foreseen. The Medical Supervisors access the BVH system 
through the Medical Supervisor Client. They could use this 
Component to manage (insert, modify or delete), through the 
Medical Supervisor FE, specific Configuration, Patient or 
Sensor Data, as well as to manage, through the Rule 
Supervisor FE, the notifications/suggestions produced by the 
DSS. The Patients can access the BVH system both at the 
PG, via the PG HMI (Human Machine Interface) and at RS, 
via the Patient Client (PaC) and/or the IPTV. The PG HMI is 
a simple, usable and friendly interface which can display 
physicians-filtered instructions and/or proper information 
stored in the PG Data Cache Instead, the RS Patient Service 
is delegated to provide a “device-independent” RS HMI 
functionality to the Patients which can access the Sensor 
Data and the Configuration/Patient Data stored in the RS 
databases, via both their television set (via the IPTV and 
IPTV 
FE 
Components) 
and/or 
via 
their 
personal 
computers/smartphones (via the Patient Client (PaC) and 
Patient FE Components). The Technical Supervisors access 
the BVH system through the Technical Supervisor Client 
and the Technical Supervisor FE. They could use this 
Component to monitor and modify the status of the RS, the 
PGs and the WUs and to apply remote diagnostic operations. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The proposed BVH architecture includes a set of 
consistent 
technological 
solutions 
which, 
considered 
altogether, contribute for achieving a flexible, scalable and 
efficient system able to cope with a plenty of different 
scenarios. The most meaningful of such solutions are: (i) the 
PG and RS orchestration, thanks to the adoption of general 
purpose, event-driven controllers, is not customized for a 
specific scenario, but is conceived for allowing, in a natural 
way, the adding/removing/upgrading of the various system 
components; (ii) the decoupling of the Sensor Data handling 
from the Patient and Configuration Data handling allows a 
faster and more flexible data management; (iii) the use of a 
two-scale Decision Support including a light processing of 
Sensor Data taking place at the PG, and a more heavy 
processing of Sensor Data demanded to the RS, allows to 
perform the most urgent elaborations close to the patient, 
with evident already depicted advantages in terms of 
privacy/security, decoupling from PG-RS communication 
link problems, decoupling from RS server problems, etc; (iv) 
the use within the RS Decision Support Systems (DSS) of 
two set of rules deriving from medical protocols and 
standard procedures and from machine learning algorithms 
running in a Data Mining module allows the DSS to produce 
notifications/suggestions 
for 
the 
Medical 
Supervisor 
integrating the medical experience with advanced data 
extraction techniques. In addition, in the proposed DSS all 
heavy computations are demanded to an off-line (non real-
time) Data Mining component, whilst the on-line (real-time) 
Rules Engines have to perform light/standard computations, 
with the evident advantages in terms of reaction speed; (v) 
the use of several user interfaces tailored to the requirements 
of the three BVH system users. 
As far as future work is concerned, the next research 
step will be the tailoring of appropriate algorithms for the PG 
and RS Decision Support components (algorithms already 
partially identified by the authors), to perform effective data 
extraction from a huge amount of CVD related data. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work described in this paper is partially based on the 
results of the ICT FP7 Integrated Project Bravehealth, under 
Grant Agreement no. 248694. The European Commission 
has no responsibility for the content of this paper. The 
information in this document is provided as is and no 
guarantee or warranty is given that the information is fit for 
any particular purpose. The user thereof uses the information 
at its sole risk and liability. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. A. Miller, “Medical Diagnostic Decision Support Systems 
– Past, Present, and Future”, J Am Med Informatics Assoc. 
1994; 1:8-27. 
[2] A. Khan, R. Cohen, J. Doucette, and D. Lizotte “A Hybrid 
Design for Medical Decision Support using Data Mining to 
Impute Missing Data”, HI-KDD 12, August, 2012, Beijing, 
China. 
[3] I. Witten, E. Frank, and M. Hall, “Data Mining: Practical 
machine learning tools and techniques”, MK Publishers, 
2011. 
[4] M. Masucci, C. Homko et al., “Cardiovascular Disease 
Prevention for Underserved Patients Using the Internet: 
Bridging the Digital Divide”, Telemedicine and e-Health, 
February 2006, 12(1): 58-65. 
[5] W. Santamore, C. Homko, A. Kashem, T. McConnell, and A. 
Bove, 
"Using 
a 
Telemedicine 
System 
to 
Decrease 
Cardiovascular Disease Risk in an Underserved Population: 
Design, Use, and Interim Results", EMBS 2007, Aug. 2007. 
[6] Bravehealth FP7 IP Project, Grant Agreement no. 248694. 
[7] J. Habetha, “The MyHeart Project – Fighting Cardiovascular 
Diseases by Prevention and Early Diagnosis”, Conference 
Proceedings of IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2006; Suppl:6746-9. 
[8] Unified Modeling Language, OMG, website: www.uml.org, 
accessed on July 2012. 
[9] V. Traver, E. Monton et al., "Multiagent home telecare 
platform for patients with cardiac diseases," Computers in 
Cardiology, 2003 , vol., no., pp. 117- 120, 21-24 Sept. 2003. 
[10] T. Yamazaki, V. Froelicher, J. Myers, S. Chun, and P. Wang, 
“Spatial QRS-T angle predicts cardiac death in a clinical 
population”, Heart Rhythm, Vol 2, No 1, January 2005. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

