Addressing Barriers to Wider Adoption of Telehealth in the Homes of Older People: 
An Exploratory Study in the Irish Context  
Brenda Reginatto 
Institute of Gerontology 
King‘s College London 
London, UK 
Brenda.Reginatto@kcl.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—Understanding 
barriers 
to 
wider 
Telehealth 
adoption is vital to enable its embracement by those who could 
greatly benefit from the technology. The aim of this 
exploratory study was to identify barriers to wider Telehealth 
adoption in the homes of older people, particularly in the Irish 
context. Objectives included identifying barriers from the 
perspective of five groups of stakeholders, determining the 
most pressing barriers and suggesting possible approaches to 
addressing such issues. Fifteen semi-structured interviews were 
conducted. Findings were analysed against existing literature, 
current technology adoption trends and successful initiatives 
implemented in different countries. This study suggests that 
technology usability issues, implementation costs, lack of 
organisational willingness to change and the lack of incentive 
to healthcare professionals to embrace Telehealth are the most 
pressing barriers to wider adoption. Suggestions to address 
these issues are discussed.  
Keywords-Telehealth; barriers to adoption; older people; 
chronic condition management. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In line with European demographic trends, the proportion 
of older people in the Republic of Ireland is expected to 
double in the coming decades [1, 2]. As a consequence of 
population ageing, Ireland is expected to experience a 
significant increase in the prevalence of chronic conditions. 
By 2020 the number of people experiencing cardiovascular 
disease (CVD) events is expected to rise by 50%, while the 
number of those diagnosed with diabetes and hypertension is 
likely to increase by 62% and 40%, respectively [3]. At 
present, chronic conditions account for three quarters of the 
total healthcare expenditure in Ireland [4]. Projections 
indicate that the demand for such healthcare services will 
continue to grow as a consequence of population ageing, 
representing a significant burden to the Irish public finances 
[5]. 
The importance of shifting the focus of healthcare 
services from curative to preventative strategies, where 
patients are empowered to take active control over their 
health, is being recognised as the key to control costs and 
increase efficiency in healthcare [4]. It is amid this context 
that Telehealth technologies emerge as a relevant alternative 
to address these issues. Telehealth is here defined as the use 
of information and communication technology (ICT) based 
systems to assist the diagnosis, monitoring, management and 
empowerment of patients with chronic conditions [6]. 
Remote vital signs monitoring systems are a common 
example described in the literature [6]. Emerging evidence 
has demonstrated the potential for Telehealth systems to 
reduce unnecessary hospital admission [7, 8], decrease 
mortality rates [6, 9], lower costs of care per patient and 
increase satisfaction among users [10]. 
Despite all such positive factors, Telehealth has not yet 
been widely adopted in any country [8, 11]. A complex 
interplay of barriers has been identified in the literature and 
some of those have so far proven difficult to overcome [8, 
11]. Poor ICT skills [8, 11], confidentiality concerns [7, 8, 
12] and lack of awareness of the available technology and its 
potential benefits [6, 8, 11, 13, 14] were associated with 
lower Telehealth acceptability among both older people and 
healthcare professionals. Technology issues involving 
usability problems [6, 14], poor system stability and 
reliability [8, 11] have been associated with low Telehealth 
up-take post pilot programmes. Moreover, limited access to 
broadband connections [7, 8] and lack of interoperability 
between various Telehealth solutions have been highlighted 
as significant barriers to effective information sharing 
amongst patients and healthcare professionals [6, 8, 12, 14, 
15].  
The fragmentation within the healthcare sector [6, 8, 16], 
absence of service ‗champions‘ capable of  promoting the 
recognition of Telehealth as part of core healthcare services 
[7, 11] and overall lack of willingness to innovate [6-8, 11] 
have been pointed as organisational obstacles to the 
embracement of Telehealth in the healthcare sector. The 
absence of clear guidelines defining roles and responsibilities 
of the different stakeholders involved [7, 8, 11, 17], lack of 
technical quality standards [7, 11] and unclear data 
protection legislation are also believed to hamper Telehealth 
adoption amid healthcare professionals. Additionally, the 
lack of robust evidence supporting the role of Telehealth in 
chronic condition management and unclear evidence for 
return on investment are perceived as significant barriers to 
its wider adoption among the medical community [7, 8, 14]. 
The absence 
of 
reimbursement arrangements 
to 
incentivise healthcare providers to embrace Telehealth is 
perceived as a fundamental barrier to its mainstream 
adoption [6, 11, 13, 14, 16]. Additionally, it has been pointed 
that existent payment systems in fact discourage healthcare 
providers to embrace Telehealth [8, 13, 14, 18-20]. This is 
because most systems remunerate professionals per in-
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

person contact with patients and remote contact supported by 
Telehealth (e.g., remote vital signs monitoring, e-mails, 
video-consultation) is not currently covered under most 
reimbursement systems.  
Although much has been debated about the barriers to 
Telehealth adoption, little research has been done to 
investigate the extent to which such obstacles apply to the 
Irish context [8]. Moreover, few studies have attempted to 
explore barriers to Telehealth adoption from the perspectives 
of different stakeholders [17]. Therefore, the aim of the 
present exploratory study was to answer the following 
question: ―what are the main barriers to the wider adoption 
of Telehealth in the homes of older people, in the Irish 
context?‖ Research objectives included: 1) to identify 
barriers to wider Telehealth adoption from the perspective of 
five groups of stakeholders: Potential Consumers, Healthcare 
Professionals, Service Providers, Technology Providers and 
Irish Context Experts; 2) to determine the most pressing 
barriers; and 3) to suggest possible approaches to address 
such issues.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section II explores the study methods, while Section III 
presents a summary of the main barriers to Telehealth 
adoption indentified by interviewees. Potential solutions 
suggested by participants are also described in this section. 
In Section IV findings are critically analysed against the 
literature, the most pressing barriers are identified and 
potential solutions are discussed. Conclusions are presented 
in Section V along with a reflection upon study limitations 
and opportunities for further research. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
After obtaining final approval from the King‘s College 
London Ethics Committee (ref KCL/10-11_379), fifteen 
semi-structured 
interviews 
were 
conducted 
between 
February and May 2011. Potential participants were 
approached through convenience sampling strategy and 
interviewees were selected based on the assumption that they 
had the necessary experience to help investigating the 
research question. 
A. Sampling and Recruitment 
To verify barriers to Telehealth adoption from the 
Potential Consumer (PC) point of view, relatives (sons, 
daughters, nephews or nieces) of older people currently 
receiving long-term care were approached. The rationale for 
selecting this group was that 1) their generations are more 
likely to benefit from the use of Telehealth by the time they 
reach old age, in comparison with their older relatives and 2) 
they were expected to have reasonable understanding of 
older peoples‘ needs due to their experience with relatives 
who require long-term care. It was assumed that this group 
could shed light on the research topic both from a potential 
user point of view and a family member / caregiver 
perspective. Two nursing homes in Dublin, Ireland were 
approached and invitation letters were made available at the 
reception desk. To maximise response rate, invitation was 
extended to visitors and staff members who met the main 
inclusion criteria (sons, daughters, nephews or nieces of 
older people who require long-term care or suffer from 
chronic conditions). In total, five (n=5) PCs were recruited. 
Face-to-face interviews were conducted in a suitable area 
(e.g., visitors‘ room) in the nursing homes. 
To explore the views of Healthcare Professionals 
(HCPs), GPs who regularly visit residents in the same 
nursing homes above mentioned were approached. An 
invitation letter was made available to potential participants 
in one of their visits to the nursing homes. In total four (n=4) 
HCPs 
were recruited. 
Face-to-face 
interviews 
were 
conducted in a suitable area in the nursing home or, 
alternatively, in the participant‘s private practice facility. 
Service Providers (SPs) were defined in this study, as 
organisations concerned with the supply of Telecare / 
Telehealth products and services. Two SPs have been 
identified in Ireland. An invitation email introducing the 
study was sent to both companies. One of them (n=1) agreed 
to take part and a telephone interview was arranged. 
Technology Providers (TPs) were defined as companies 
that develop Telehealth systems and have headquarters in 
Ireland. Five organisations have been identified and 
contacted through the same approach used with SPs. Three 
subjects (n=3) agreed to participate. Although in the case of 
two companies the appointed interviewee was not based in 
Ireland, this was considered acceptable since both 
individuals had the desired experience to contribute to the 
study. Depending on interviewees‘ location a face-to-face or 
telephone interview was arranged. Face-to-face interviews 
took place in a suitable area of the respondents‘ workplace. 
Finally, Irish Context Experts (ICEs) were defined in this 
study as individuals who have significant knowledge of the 
Irish health and social care systems and are familiar with 
Telehealth systems. Two potential interviewees with this 
profile were identified through snowballing strategy (i.e., 
through the indication of other interviewees) and were 
approached via email, as described above. Both agreed to 
take part (n=2) and face-to-face interviews took place in a 
suitable area of their workplaces. 
B. Data Collection and Analysis 
All participants received a study information sheet and 
gave informed consent prior to interview. Topic guides have 
been used to support the semi-structured interviews and 
different questions have been included to suit the different 
stakeholders‘ background. A diagram illustrating possible 
Telehealth configurations has been used to frame discussions 
about barriers to Telehealth adoption (Fig. 1). The diagram 
displayed technologies commonly described in the literature 
including remote vital signs monitors, video-consultation and 
electronic health record (EHR) systems. Considering the 
likelihood that most PCs and HCPs would not be familiar 
with Telehealth technologies, two videos were shown to 
further support the interviews. Video 1 [21] described the use 
of a Telehealth remote monitoring system to support patients 
with chronic pulmonary disease. Video 2 [22] explained the 
functions of a personal EHR that allows patients to organize, 
store, and share health information online. Both videos are 
freely accessible on the Internet and have been used for 
illustration purposes only. Moreover, an Apple iPad device 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

was used to display the videos. This was considered 
beneficial should interviewees not be familiar with touch 
screen interfaces, a common feature in Telehealth devices.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interviews 
were 
audio 
recorded 
and 
manually 
transcribed. Based on interview transcripts, a thematic 
content analysis was carried out. The use of the qualitative 
analysis software NVivo 9 (www.qsrinternational.com/ 
products_nvivo.aspx) greatly facilitated this process. In order 
to determine the most pressing barriers to Telehealth 
adoption in the Irish context, findings were critically 
analysed and compared to the literature. Current technology 
adoption trends and successful initiatives implemented in 
different countries have been also considered in this analysis.  
III. 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
The most significant barriers identified by interviewees 
are explored below. Participants also suggested possible 
strategies to promote Telehealth adoption, and these can be 
found at the end of this section.  
A. Acceptance Barriers 
1) Poor ICT skills: PCs, SP1, TPs and ICEs suggested 
that at present the lack of technology skills is a barrier to 
Telehealth adoption among older people. Nevertheless, 
these participants acknowledged that this should not be a 
barrier to Telehealth adoption in the near future. PCs 
believed that their generations will be more familiar with 
electronic devices by the time they reach old age and will 
have greater understanding of the advantages the technology 
can offer. 
“My aunt had a panic button but she never wore it. I think 
she was afraid of the technology. I don‟t think older 
people adapt well to change. (…) I would think now we 
are more open, I‟m only 70, I would be more open than 
she was. She was probably 90 when she got it. I think as 
the time goes on people will be more receptive to these 
things.” (PC5) 
HCPs were less optimistic about this matter. The group 
pointed that older patients often demonstrate decreased 
ability to learn new skills, posing an important barrier to 
wider Telehealth adoption. Two HCPs also believed that this 
will continue to be an issue for future generations of older 
people. 
2) Lack of face-to-face contact: HCPs suggested that the 
lack of face-to-face contact with patients may represent an 
important barrier to Telehealth adoption among medical 
professionals. It was pointed that remote contact could 
negatively impact doctors‘ decision making capacity, since 
relying on hard data, without clinical observation, could 
potentially increase the risk of medical errors.  
“I think baseline details like blood pressure, fine, but 
when you go into more details like breathlessness, wheeze, 
chest tightness, you can‟t actually see “are they 
cyanosed?”, “what is their chest actually like?”. You 
know, would you be able to rely on the data that 
much?”(HCP2) 
TPs agreed that the lack of face-to-face contact may 
increase liability concerns among medical professionals. SP1 
added that remote contact with patients may also raise fears 
of decreased business among physicians. 
“[Doctors‟] biggest drive for business is the repeated 
visits they receive from this demographic. So I find they 
are absolutely reluctant to engage with anything that may 
possibly reduce the amount of visits, which will happen, in 
their practice. That is a huge obstacle to overcome.” 
(SP1)  
Lack of face-to-face contact has not been seen as an issue 
to any PCs interviewed in this study. 
3) Confidentiality concerns: Two PCs demonstrated 
apprehension about their health information travelling 
online. This was not a concern for the remainder PCs who 
acknowledged that, at some extent, most people already 
share sensitive information electronically (e.g., bank 
transactions).  
“I know there would be people that wouldn‟t like to put 
their information in like that. (…) I wouldn‟t see a 
problem with that. I presume that would all be securely 
done, like bank accounts would be the same.” (PC5) 
Confidentiality concerns were perceived as a barrier to 
Telehealth implementation among HCPs. Interviewees were 
suspicious about how to ensure that only authorized 
professionals have access to EHRs and who would be 
ultimately liable for maintaining patient data protection. 
“There are huge safety issues with having all that 
information accessible, and who will have access to it. 
Because it could just get into the wrong hands, and 
suddenly you are in major trouble for not protecting your 
patient‟s information. (…) At present GPs own the 
information to a certain extent, so if you share that with 
the community nurse, who owns that? And who is 
ultimately 
responsible 
for 
that 
if 
it 
is 
used 
inappropriately?” (HCP3)  
SP1, TPs and ICEs did not believe confidentiality 
concerns are a significant barrier to Telehealth adoption. 
These groups shared the perception that this issue may be 
 
Figure 1. Diagram representing possible Telehealth configurations (source: self) 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

easily solved through adequate regulation and awareness 
raising. 
4) Lack of familiarity with Telehealth and its benefits: 
SP1, TP1, TP2 and ICE1 agreed that the overall lack of 
awareness among healthcare professionals and patients 
about Telehealth existence and benefits is an important 
barrier to its wider adoption in Ireland. 
“The big difficulty here in Ireland (…) in terms of the 
healthcare professionals is (…) the ignorance of what is 
the actual equipment that is out there. (…) Predominantly, 
they will go with what they know works, and it can be a 
real challenge to break that down sometimes.” (SP1) 
B. Technology Barriers 
1) Technology usability: When asked if they would like 
to have a device to cater specifically for their health needs 
most PCs expressed that they would prefer if this could be 
done through the devices they already have at home, such as 
laptops and mobile phones. The reasons supporting these 
views included privacy concerns and practical issues such 
appliance size, mobility, ease to use and level of disruption 
to users‘ lifestyle.  
 “I wouldn‟t like to have a specific health device at home. 
(…) I think it is the whole thing about privacy, you know, 
you can have as many people on the computer and they‟ve 
got their own password so it remains private.” (PC2) 
“I would rather have something small like that (pointing 
to an iPhone). Something like that would be easier to use, 
that you could have beside the bed, rather than sitting up 
(…) People don‟t have space for all these stuff, do they?” 
(PC5) 
“I would like to have something in my pocket which could 
do it more or less automatically. Personally I don‟t think 
people are prepared to sit down, well, I wouldn‟t do that. 
People get tired; you don‟t have the same drive all the 
time. I think if it was automatic, that would be better.” 
(PC3) 
SP1, TPs and ICEs acknowledged that existent 
Telehealth systems are still in early stages of development 
and many issues around technology usability must be further 
explored. ICEs added that the frequent lack of gerontological 
expertise among Telehealth designers is an issue that must be 
addressed. 
“Design challenges are huge because you are dealing 
with unwell people and older people. So it is much easier 
to get a bunch of young engineers to go crazy over the 
iPhone and do all kinds of this jazzy stuff (…). Somebody 
who is sick with COPD just needs to press the button and 
make it work. That is all they want to know. (…) But yet, 
there are innovative ways of doing that. (…) And fit with 
life style is a big factor. So if the system is not in tune with 
the person‟s daily rhythm, they will not use it.” (ICE1)  
Usability issues have also been identified as a barrier to 
Telehealth embracement by healthcare professionals. TPs 
suggested that the views of healthcare providers may not be 
sufficiently considered by technology designers, resulting in 
systems that are not in tune with providers‘ workflow. HCPs 
also demonstrated concerns about how realistic it would be 
to incorporate Telehealth into their usual practice, as they 
may not have time to interpret the additional information 
generated. 
“I had a patient today who brought me a reading of his 
diabetes in a graph, so it makes it much easier to review. 
(…) But it can be quite time consuming, that consultation 
took over 30mins (…) sometimes it is just too much 
information, you know?”(HCP4) 
PCs also expressed disbelief that doctors would have the 
time to analyse large amounts of data generated by 
Telehealth and suggested that many doctors may choose not 
to consider it when making patient-related decisions. 
2) Other technology barriers: SP1, TPs and ICEs 
agreed that lack of access to broadband is an important 
obstacle to reach older people in Ireland. Incompatibility 
among Telehealth devices and lack of interoperability 
amongst EHR systems were also identified as important 
barriers to wider implementation. Nevertheless, the role of 
organisations such as the Continua Health Alliance 
(http://www.continuaalliance.org/) has been acknowledged 
as a significant movement pushing towards system 
compatibility. 
C. Organisational Barriers 
1) Low levels of trust among stakeholders: PC4, SP1 
and TPs suggested that low levels of trust from medical 
professionals in their patient‘s ability to measure their 
readings appropriately, as well as in the accuracy of devices 
and security of connections used may pose obstacles to 
wider Telehealth implementation. TP3 challenged this 
argument since data collected by patients should be 
considered as trustworthy as the subjective information 
reported by them during medical appointments. 
“What you see a lot is that the professionals can‟t really 
trust the data that is coming from the patient. I don‟t think 
that sort of barrier holds much weight. Because 
ultimately, when the patient walks into a doctor‟s office 
and tells them about their condition, that is no more or 
less trustworthy than the patient recording it and sending. 
(…) I think [this attitude] is making it harder for this type 
of data emigration to penetrate in the industry, but I think 
it will go away at some point.” (TP3) 
2) Increased professional responsibility  and lack of 
organisational willingness to change: SP1, TPs and ICEs 
acknowledged that wider adoption of Telehealth requires 
healthcare professionals to significantly adapt their 
professional practice. Interviewees explained that, for 
example, Telehealth enables professionals to look after a 
much larger number of patients and to provide more 
continuous care than they would through traditional 
methods. It was suggested that an overall lack of willingness 
to embrace such changes may be a significant barrier to 
Telehealth implementation.  
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Among HCPs, one interviewee clearly expressed he 
would not be willing to change his usual practice in order to 
adopt Telehealth.  
“This my own perspective, I‟ve studied medicine to deal 
with people, I didn‟t study medicine to look at their 
computer printouts, or blood pressure going up and down. 
(…) that might work, but that wouldn‟t be for me. I mean, 
it would wreck my head now if I would spend half of my 
day looking at printouts, or people emailing me stuff about 
it, I just don‟t do that, you know?” (HCP1) 
3) Lack of „champions‟ in the healthcare system: SP1, 
TPs and ICEs suggest that the lack of strong ‗champions‘ in 
the healthcare system may be one of the reasons for the 
virtually inexistent movement towards Telehealth adoption 
in the Irish context. 
“We still need a champion here in Ireland. It needs a good 
reference site, a strong pilot in order to achieve what it 
can achieve.” (SP1) 
D. Policy and Legislation Barriers 
SP1 and ICEs argued that it is still largely unclear how 
data protection legislation applies to Telehealth. They 
suggested that this issue is an obstacle to different 
stakeholders to become involved with Telehealth.  
Most HCPs suggested that Telehealth would not achieve 
wider adoption in Ireland without a clear Government led 
strategy. They believed that this would be necessary to 
address data protection concerns.  
“I think [data protection legislation] would have to be 
determined by the government, there would have to be 
policies in place in terms of safety, informed consent (…) 
because if it is just done through the private companies I 
think it will be perceived as too ad-hoc or that there is 
something in it for the individual company.” (HCP3)  
E. Evidence Base Barriers 
TPs and ICE1 acknowledged that despite a significant 
number of successful pilots, Telehealth still lacks robust 
studies, such as large randomized controlled trials (RCTs), to 
support its efficacy and cost-efficiency. Nevertheless, they 
pointed that the lack of RCTs may be also used as an excuse 
for non adoption among medical professionals. It was 
suggested that Telehealth may instead require different 
scientific evaluation methods to demonstrate its value. 
“(…) you can argue that [careful patient selection] is 
exactly what you have to do with Telehealth, that there is 
no point in randomly selecting people in the same way 
that you won‟t randomly give people drugs to treat their 
conditions. (…) I think quite often, evidence is used as an 
excuse for inaction rather than being the real reason why 
they won‟t invest. There are lots of other things happening 
in medicine that doesn‟t have evidence base.” (TP2) 
F. Financial Barriers 
SP1, TPs and ICEs acknowledged that the high costs of 
establishing the necessary infrastructure, staff training, 
processes reconfiguration, etc., may be a major barrier to the 
adoption of Telehealth by healthcare systems that are already 
under economy strain (which is the case of the HSE, the 
national healthcare agency in Ireland). It was pointed, 
however, that this would largely depend on the level of 
government involvement in the implementation process. 
“High costs of establishing infrastructure [is a barrier] 
only if the Government decides to do it. There is already 
lots of infrastructure out there for other reasons, we can 
piggyback on existing mobile networks or smart meters, 
and other things that are happening around us.” (TP2) 
HCPs 
also 
pointed 
that 
the 
costs 
of 
system 
implementation could prevent small GP practices to engage 
in Telehealth. Interviewees demonstrated disbelief that wider 
adoption would be achieved without government financial 
incentive. 
ICE1, HCPs and two PCs also expressed that many older 
people may not have the resources to afford Telehealth if this 
is provided through out of pocket purchasing, therefore, 
hindering wider adoption. 
“I just don‟t see it becoming a big thing if it is done 
privately (…) it wouldn‟t be standardised enough. There 
would be only certain people that would be able to avail of 
that service then.” (HCP2) 
G. Lack of Incentive to Healthcare Professional 
According to SP1, TPs and ICEs the lack of clear 
incentives to healthcare professionals to embrace Telehealth 
may be one of the most significant barriers to its uptake. 
Interviewees suggested that, even if other obstacles are 
addressed, Telehealth will struggle to be widely adopted if 
healthcare professionals do not perceive clear advantages 
over traditional practice.  
1) Absence of reimbursement arrangements: The fact 
that Telehealth is not currently covered by reimbursement 
arrangements was seen by HCPs, SP1, TPs and ICEs as a 
significant disincentive to the involvement of healthcare 
professionals. They argued that even though Telehealth may 
represent cost-savings to the wider healthcare system, 
healthcare professionals will be reluctant to engage unless 
reimbursement systems are created. 
“You have to look at what incentives does a GP have to 
offer vital signs to his or her patients? Not much, because 
they are not under reimbursement systems, it doesn‟t exist 
in the HSE so it would be up to the GPs to do it privately. 
So they don‟t really have a huge incentive to do it.”(ICE1)  
2) Disincentives caused by existent payment system: 
TPs and ICEs pointed that, different than other technologies 
that have successfully penetrated in the healthcare industry, 
Telehealth does not fit into the existent procedure-driven 
model. Interviewees argued that technology diagnostic 
solutions, for example, clearly allowed professionals to 
increase their income streams, what is not the case of 
Telehealth. There was a common perception that unless the 
focus 
of 
reimbursement 
arrangements 
shifts 
from 
procedures to health outcomes, Telehealth will hardly 
penetrate in the healthcare system. 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

“The reasons why radiology was adopted so fast are quite 
simple. On the one hand it allowed you to generate more 
income, because you could get more patients through the 
radiology department more quickly. It also didn‟t interfere 
with the status quo and the workflow in the hospital in a 
fundamental way (…). So if the doctor gets paid to see 
you, but doesn‟t get paid to look after you when you are 
out of the room, why would they invest in it and pay 
attention to it? (…) I guess a lot of doctors will not like 
this because they prefer the system whereby you are paid 
by the appointment, because they can see an obvious way 
to increase their income, by increasing number of 
appointments.” (TP2)  
―The answer to that is really simple. Our healthcare 
system is based on a model that incentivises poor health. 
(…) Nothing will change until we change that model.” 
(TP3) 
H. Suggested Actions for Wider Adoption of Telehealth 
PCs suggested that in order to achieve wider adoption, 
Telehealth technologies must be flexible enough to match 
different user‘s lifestyles and preferences. Participants added 
that devices should be small, portable and easy to use, what 
could be more easily addressed if Telehealth systems could 
run in devices people already own, such as mobile phones.  
TPs and ICEs agreed that in the future technology 
developers should focus on the design of Telehealth software 
applications, as oppose to hardware. Overall, they 
highlighted that the input of gerontologists and healthcare 
professionals is critical to successful Telehealth technology 
design.  
PCs suggested different strategies to promote awareness 
among older people and family members. This included 
mass media advertisement (television, newspapers, Internet), 
availability of information leaflets in medical practices and 
the creation of a government approved website, with 
―neutral‖ and up-to-date information that could facilitate 
informed consumers' choice. 
Most 
interviewees 
indicated 
that 
government-led 
Telehealth implementation could address several of the 
barriers discussed. Government legislation could, for 
example, address data protection and medical liability issues. 
National policies were seen as necessary to endorse a 
standardised adoption of Telehealth across the country and to 
promote educational support through undergraduate training 
and continuous professional development. Interviewees in all 
groups indicated that State provision would be important to 
ensure that older people with lower incomes have access to 
Telehealth. TPs also pointed that government initiatives 
could 
stimulate 
the 
establishment 
of 
the 
required 
infrastructure to allow Telehealth data sharing. This could 
include the subsidy of broadband for older people and 
financial incentives for the adoption of interoperable EHR 
systems by healthcare providers and organisations.  
Considering the current Irish system configuration, ICE1 
suggested that it may be easier to start the implementation of 
Telehealth through the secondary sector. She explained that 
chronic disease support teams are currently based in 
hospitals and Telehealth could offer cost-saving advantages 
for such departments.  
The establishment of reimbursement schemes has been 
the most suggested measure to incentivise Telehealth 
adoption among healthcare professionals. Considering the 
fact that Ireland has a public health system in place, 
reimbursement policies were also expected to be determined 
by government policies. 
Finally, in order to avoid barriers associated with 
healthcare professional reluctance to embrace Telehealth, 
TPs and ICEs suggested that a possible strategy to achieve 
wider adoption of Telehealth in the homes of older people 
would be focusing on the development of Telehealth 
solutions that do not necessarily require healthcare 
professional involvement. Interviewees indicated that the 
platform created by Telehealth devices could be used to 
promote education, motivation and social support to patients 
and caregivers. As well as being a channel for accurate 
information and advice, Telehealth systems could promote 
treatment compliance among users through clear goal setting 
and feedback tools. Moreover, interviewees suggested that 
future developments should explore the capacity of 
Telehealth technologies to connect older people in equivalent 
disease stages and caregivers in similar situations. 
Participants argued that this approach could promote 
knowledge sharing and tackle social isolation, a frequent 
problem among chronic disease patients and caregivers. 
Additionally, this could address some of the business model 
and reimbursement issues previously mentioned, since 
Telehealth would be no longer seen as a medical device that 
is prescribed by a doctor, but a consumer device, which older 
people and family members could be interested in 
purchasing privately.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In line with international literature, interviewees in this 
study suggested that the lack of clear incentives for 
healthcare professionals to engage in Telehealth is one of the 
most pressing barriers to its wider adoption [8, 14, 20, 23]. It 
has been acknowledged that the absence of reimbursement 
arrangements 
significantly 
discourages 
healthcare 
professionals to offer this service [6, 11, 13, 14, 16]. 
Moreover, the fact that Telehealth does not fit into the 
existent procedure-driven healthcare model was seen as 
another barrier to its penetration in the healthcare sector [8, 
13, 14, 18-20]. Past experiences in healthcare show that the 
introduction of new technologies is not an issue when its 
adoption model is aligned with existing incentive schemes. 
The rapid adoption of computed tomography and magnetic 
resonance imaging scanners in the healthcare sector in many 
countries is an example [24]. 
Although these barriers have so far proven more difficult 
to overcome, several countries have been successfully 
employing strategies to stimulate Telehealth adoption 
amongst healthcare professionals. Many countries use 
government mandates to achieve broad ICT adoption in the 
health sector. In Denmark and Norway, for example, high 
rates of electronic prescriptions have been achieved since the 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Governments made this practice mandatory for primary care 
providers [25]. 
The establishment of reimbursement structures is also 
considered vital to incentivise Telehealth adoption among 
healthcare 
professionals. 
Studies 
show 
that 
the 
reimbursement structure adopted will vary depending on the 
country‘s healthcare financing model and governments play 
a key role in defining this [8, 25]. In Sweden and the UK the 
existing (small scale) provision of Telehealth has been 
publicly funded. In Germany, regulatory changes have 
enabled Telehealth reimbursement through health insurers. 
In the Netherlands phone and e-mail consultations are 
reimbursed via fixed prices by the health insurance 
companies [8].  
Innovative reimbursement frameworks, such as pay-for-
performance schemes, are also being introduced in different 
countries in an attempt to shift away from procedure-driven 
models. In the UK around 15% of GPs‘ salaries is based on 
their performance against a set of quality measures [26]. 
Finally, government financial incentives have been used 
in Australia, Denmark, the Netherlands and the UK as 
effective policy tools to incentivise technology adoption 
among healthcare professionals [8, 25]. In the US the 
Medicare and Medicaid EHR Incentive Program offers 
financial stimulus of up to $44,000 / $63,750 to physicians 
and hospitals that demonstrate meaningful use of EHR 
systems certified by the Government. The scheme has 
registered over 77,000 professionals and hospitals in only 
seven months since its implementation [27]. This is 
particularly significant considering that the fragmentation of 
the US American health sector is usually pointed as a barrier 
to the implementation of any measures in large scale [12].  
Technology usability issues have been highlighted by 
virtually all interviewees, in agreement with several studies 
[6, 11, 14, 16]. It has been pointed by interviewees that 
devices specifically designed to cater for healthcare needs 
may not be well accepted by users. Leveraging devices that 
people already have, such as mobile phones or laptops, was 
pointed as a better strategy for Telehealth adoption, since 
people are already familiar with such devices and these fit 
more readily into their lifestyles. Participants added that this 
could make Telehealth more affordable and readily 
accessible to the public. This perception is in large 
agreement with trends towards the use of mobile platforms 
for Telehealth provision (e.g., smartphones, computer 
tablets). Projections indicate that smartphone applications 
will enable the mobile health industry to reach 500 million 
users in 2015 [28].  
The lack of organisational willingness to conform to 
changes is considered a pressing barrier to wider Telehealth 
implementation [6-8, 11]. While the role of ‗champions‘ in 
promoting change in the healthcare system has been 
acknowledged by interviewees and the literature [7, 11] 
achieving wider adoption of Telehealth will require more 
than individual leadership. May et al. [17] argue that in order 
to overcome intra-organisational inertia, coherent policies 
promoting an organisational vision are needed. According to 
Castro [25] strong national-level leadership has been 
essential to countries like Denmark, Finland, and Sweden to 
successfully drive and coordinate wider adoption of ICT in 
the health sector. Comprehensive national strategies, as 
suggested by several interviewees, are required to address 
this and other pressing barriers to wider adoption of 
Telehealth as discussed below. 
The strategies above explored indicate that a high level of 
government involvement may be necessary to transform 
healthcare provision and allow wider adoption of Telehealth. 
Interviewees in this study point, however, that the high initial 
costs of establishing the infrastructure and incentivising 
healthcare professionals is an important barrier to 
government led Telehealth implementation in Ireland. 
Financial challenges have also been acknowledged by 
different studies [11, 12, 14, 15, 25].  
Issues involving poor ICT literacy among older people 
pointed by other studies [8, 11] were perceived by most 
interviewees as a trivial barrier. Recent evidence show that 
the interest of older people in technology has grown at a fast 
pace in the last decade [29, 30]. In Ireland, the percentage of 
people aged between 65 and 74 years accessing the Internet 
at least once a week has increased more than five times 
between 2003 and 2010 [31]. The use of the Internet for 
health purposes has also increased among the older 
population [29] indicating that this barrier may gradually 
become insignificant. 
Other acceptance barriers mentioned in the literature such 
as lack of face-to-face contact [7] and confidentiality 
concerns [7, 8, 12] have also been cited by interviewees. 
However, it is possible to suggest that these issues are not 
significant barriers to Telehealth adoption for several 
reasons. According to Darkins et al. [10] patient satisfaction 
was significantly high among older participants in the VHA 
Telehealth programme and lack of face-to-face contact with 
healthcare professionals has not been observed as a barrier to 
Telehealth adoption. This may indicate that the benefits 
offered by the technology may outweigh such concerns. 
Similarly, Castro [25] suggests that confidentiality concerns 
should not be a barrier to ICT penetration in the healthcare 
industry, considering that technical controls (e.g., encryption, 
electronic identification, audit logs) are available to ensure 
personal health data security. In Denmark, for example, 
health data is securely shared through an official e-health 
portal. In this context patients have access to this website and 
can easily control privacy functions, including monitoring 
who has accessed or modified their personal medical records. 
In Ireland the recently implemented National HealthLink 
Project (http://www.healthlink.ie/) is another example of 
how patient data (e.g., laboratory results) can be securely 
shared over the Internet.  
Interviewees in this study challenged several authors [7, 
8, 14] suggesting that lack of RCTs is not a significant 
barrier to Telehealth adoption. Participants argued that 
careful patient selection is desired to achieve Telehealth 
benefits, thus alternative study designs should be used to 
evaluate Telehealth value. This has been previously observed 
by other authors [11, 13]. The MAST is an example of a new 
model for Telehealth evaluation which has been developed 
to support decision making in European countries [32]. 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

There are indications, therefore, that evidence base barriers 
should not be of major significance. 
The interviews supported the main findings of the 
literature in relation to certain technology barriers including 
limited access to broadband connections by older people [7, 
8] and lack of integration between various Telehealth 
technological solutions [6, 8, 12, 14, 15]. It is important to 
acknowledge, however, that several initiatives are being 
undertaken and such barriers may not be significant in the 
long-term. The Irish government has recently implemented a 
national scheme which aims to achieve extensive broadband 
coverage by 2012 [33]. Moreover, with the increasingly fast 
adoption of smartphones, the native broadband Internet 
connection capabilities of those devices may in practice 
address the connectivity infrastructure requirements for 
Telehealth, as opposed to government-led, residence-based 
broadband 
connection 
programmes 
[34]. 
Similarly, 
interoperability issues are being tackled by both private and 
public sectors. Through the Continua Health Alliance, over 
240 healthcare and technology companies worldwide are 
working together to set quality and interoperability standards 
for Telehealth solutions [35]. Studies by Anderson [12] and 
Castro [25] indicate that in the UK and Denmark government 
agencies are setting such standards. 
V. 
CONCLUSION  
The research findings point to a number of direct and 
indirect obstacles, which largely correspond to those 
discussed in the international literature. Issues involving 
evidence base, technology interoperability and broadband 
access were not considered to be of major significance, given 
that important initiatives are already addressing these 
barriers. Similarly, based on interviewees‘ perceptions and 
technology adoption trends, older people‘s acceptance is not 
believed to be a pressing barrier to wider Telehealth 
implementation in the medium term.  
The findings indicate that technology usability issues 
may significantly hinder Telehealth adoption. The use of 
devices that people are familiar with such as mobile phones, 
laptops and computer tablets is supported by this study as a 
strategy to promote Telehealth use. Another important 
barrier is the lack of organisational willingness to change, 
currently perceived in the healthcare sector. While 
implementation costs were seen as a challenge to 
government 
action 
in 
Ireland, 
strong 
national-level 
leadership is considered essential. 
Finally, the lack of incentive to healthcare professionals 
to embrace Telehealth is considered a pressing barrier to its 
wider adoption. The absence of arrangements to reimburse 
healthcare providers and the incongruence with the present 
procedure-driven 
healthcare 
model 
are 
believed 
to 
significantly discourage professionals to offer this service. 
Possible approaches to address healthcare professional 
incentive barriers have been suggested and include 
government mandates, the establishment of reimbursement 
schemes and the use of government financial incentives. 
The imminent population ageing and epidemiologic 
trends indicate that new forms of healthcare provision are 
urgently needed. Shifting away from the current disease-
centric healthcare model towards a health-centric system is 
not only an economic necessity but also a moral obligation. 
The adoption of Telehealth technologies is believed to 
contribute towards these issues by allowing more efficient 
service provision in a patient-driven model. However, the 
disruption to traditional healthcare practices caused by the 
introduction of Telehealth represents a major challenge, one 
that requires the support from all stakeholders involved. 
Governments around the world are gradually implementing 
strategies to promote a new vision in the healthcare sector 
and significant changes are envisaged in the long-term. 
Even though interview findings indicate large agreement 
with the literature, the small scope of this study does not 
allow for the generalisation of these results. Also, this 
research project would have greatly benefited from the 
participation of representatives of the Irish Government, 
what was initially intended. The fact that Potential 
Consumers and Healthcare Professionals interviewed in this 
study did not have personal experience with Telehealth 
technologies indicate that one has to cautiously consider their 
contributions.  
While identifying barriers to wider Telehealth adoption is 
an important starting point to promote its implementation, it 
seems possible to suggest that future research should focus 
on clear and practical strategies to increase Telehealth 
adoption in the homes of older people. Investigating 
innovative ways of incentivising healthcare professionals and 
organisations to embrace Telehealth in their usual practices 
seems to be one of the most needed areas for research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to thank Professor Anthea Tinker 
from the Institute of Gerontology, King‘s College London, 
for her support and supervision. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M.C.K.Gaßner and M. Conrad, "ICT enabled independent 
living for elderly – A status-quo analysis on products and the 
research landscape in the field of Ambient Assisted Living 
(AAL) in EU-27," Berlin: Institute for Innovation and 
Technology as part of VDI/VDE Innovation + Technik 
GmbH, 2010. 
[2] 
P. McGill, "Illustrating Ageing in Ireland North and South: 
Key Facts and Figures," Belfast: Centre for Ageing Research 
and Development in Ireland, 2010. 
[3] 
K.P. Balanda, S. Barron, L. Fahy and A. Mclaughlin, 
"Making chronic conditions count: hypertension, stroke, 
coronary heart disease, diabetes. A systematic approach to 
estimating and forecasting population prevalence on the 
island of Ireland," Dublin: Institute of Public Health in 
Ireland, 2010. 
[4] 
DoHC, "Tackling chronic disease - a policy framework for 
the management of chronic diseases," Dublin: Department of 
Health and Children, 2008. 
[5] 
R. Layte, "Projecting the Impact of Demographic Change on 
the Demand for and Delivery of Healthcare in Ireland," 
Dublin: ESRI, 2009. 
[6] 
COCIR, "COCIR Telemedecine toolkit. For a better 
deployment and use of Telehealth," Brussels: European 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Coordination Committee of the Radiological, Electromedical 
and Healthcare IT Industry,  2010. 
[7] 
N. Goodwin, "The State of Telehealth and Telecare in the 
UK: Prospects for Integrated Care," Journal of Integrated 
Care, 2010. 18(6): pp. 3-10. 
[8] 
L. Kubitschke and K. Cullen, "ICT & ageing–European 
study on users, market and technologies. Final report," 
Brussels: Commission of the European Communities, 2010. 
[9] 
J. Barlow, D. Singh, S. Bayer and R. Curry, "A systematic 
review of the benefits of home telecare for frail elderly 
people and those with long-term conditions," Journal of 
telemedicine and telecare, 2007. 13(4): pp. 172. 
[10] A. Darkins, P. Ryan, R. Kobb, L. Foster, E. Edmonson, B. 
Wakefield and A. E. Lancaster, "Care coordination/home 
telehealth: 
the 
systematic 
implementation 
of 
health 
informatics, home telehealth, and disease management to 
support the care of Veteran patients with chronic conditions," 
Telemedicine and e-Health, 2008. 14(10): pp. 1118-1126. 
[11] T.H.F. Broens, R. M. H. A. H. I. T. Veldw, M. M. R. 
Vollenbroek-Huttenw, A. T. V. Hermenswz, H. J., Halteren 
and L. J. M. Nieuwenhuis, "Determinants of successful 
telemedicine implementations: a literature study," Journal of 
telemedicine and telecare, 2007. 13(6): pp. 303. 
[12] J.G. Anderson, "Social, ethical and legal barriers to e-
health," International journal of medical informatics, 2007. 
76(5-6): pp. 480-483. 
[13] A. Runge and F. Feliciani, "Telemedicine: from technology 
demostrations to sustainable services," in The European 
Files: The Telemedicine challenge in Europe. Brussels: 
European Commission, 2010. 
[14] M. Alwan and J. Nobel, "State of Technology in Aging 
Services According to Field Experts and Thought Leaders," 
Washington: American Association of Homes and Services 
for the Aging (AAHSA), 2008. 
[15] S. Koch, "Home telehealth--current state and future trends," 
International journal of medical informatics, 2006. 75(8): pp. 
565-576. 
[16] J.-M. Pique, "Impact on the restructuring of healthcare," in 
The European Files: The Telemedicine challenge in Europe. 
Brussels: European Commission, 2010. 
[17] C. May, T. Finch, J. Cornford, C. Exley, C. Gately, S. Kirk, 
et al., "Integrating telecare for chronic disease management 
in the community: What needs to be done?" BMC Health 
Services Research, 2011. 11(1): pp. 131. 
[18] J. Bonfini and C. Parker, "Telehealth: Making House Calls 
Count," in The European Files: The Telemedicine Challenge 
in Europe. Brussels: European Comission, 2010. 
[19] J. Cruickshank, "Healthcare without Walls: A Framework for 
Delivering Telehealth at Scale," London: 2020health.org, 
2010. 
[20] L.L. Barrett, "Healthy@ Home," Washington: AARP 
Foundation, 2008. 
[21] Intel, "NHS Lothian Pilot," [Online]. Available: http:// 
www.intel.com/corporate/healthcare/emea/eng/videos/video.
htm [Accessed 22 February 2011]. 
[22] Microsoft, "Microsoft HealthVault - Interesting New 
Platform," [Online]. Available: http://www.youtube.com/ 
watch?v=g9hLT2bMfbY [Accessed 22 February 2011]. 
[23] D.W. Bates, "Physicians and ambulatory electronic health 
records," Health Affairs, 2005. 24(5): pp. 1180. 
[24] E.H. Oh, Y. Imanaka and E. Evans, "Determinants of the 
diffusion of computed tomography and magnetic resonance 
imaging," International journal of technology assessment in 
health care, 2005. 21(1): pp. 73-80. 
[25] D. 
Castro, 
"Explaining 
International 
IT 
Application 
Leadership: Health IT," Washington: The Information 
Technology and Innovation Foundation, 2009. 
[26] NHS, "GP Payments Calculation Service Memorandum of 
Information (MOI)," 2010 [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.connectingforhealth.nhs.uk/systemsandservices/g
psupport/gppcs/gppcsmoi.pdf. [Accessed 15 August 2011]. 
[27] CMS, "Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services," 2011  
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.cms.gov/ 
EHRIncentivePrograms/50_Spotlight.asp#TopOfPage. 
[Accessed 14 August 2011]. 
[28] E. Mikalajunaite, "500m people will be using healthcare 
mobile applications in 2015," 2010 [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.research2guidance.com/500m-people-will-be-
using-healthcare-mobile-applications-in-2015/. [Accessed 16 
August 2011]. 
[29] K. Cullen, C. Dolphin, S. Delaney and M. Fitzpatrick, 
"Survey of Older People and ICTs in Ireland (2008)," 
Dublin: Work Research Centre (WRC) & Age Action 
Ireland, 2009. 
[30] H. Seybert and A. Loof "Internet usage in 2010 – 
Households 
and 
Individuals," 
Eurostat, 
European 
Commission, 2010. 
[31] Eurostat, "Individuals regularly using the Internet," 2011 
[Online]. Available from: http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/ 
nui/show.do?dataset=isoc_pibi_use&lang=en. [Accessed 01 
August 2011]. 
[32] K. Kidholm, C.D. Pedersen, J. Rasmussen, L.K. Jensen, A.G. 
Ekeland, A. Bowes, et al., "A new model for assessment of 
telemedicine—MAST," International Journal of Integrated 
Care, 2011. 11(6). 
[33] DCENR, "Rural Broadband Scheme Announced by Minister 
Rabbitte," 
2011 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http:// 
www.dcenr.gov.ie/Press+Releases/Rural+Broadband+Schem
e+Announced+by+Minister+Rabbitte.htm. 
[Accessed 
14 
August 2011]. 
[34] Miscrosoft Tag, "The Growth of Mobile Marketing and 
Tagging," 
2011. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http:// 
tag.microsoft.com/community/blog/t/The_Growth_of_Mobil
e_Marketing_and_Tagging.aspx [Accessed 07 August 2011]. 
[35] Continua Health Alliance, "About the Alliance," 2010  
[Online]. Available from: http://www.continuaalliance.org 
/about-the-alliance.html. [Accessed 18 February 2011]. 
 
 
 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

