The Future of e-Health  
  Isabel Pirillo1  Giovanna Ricci 2  Francesco Amenta1 
 
 
1School of Pharmacy, University of Camerino, Italy 
2 School of Law, University of Camerino, Italy 
 
e-mail: {isabel.pirillo, giovanna.ricci, francesco.amenta}@ unicam.it  
 
 
Abstract- The European Union has promoted several 
actions on health. The document accompanying the "e-
Health"Action Plan 2012-2020, Communication from 
the Commission to the European Parliament, the 
Council, the European Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions – “e-Health Action 
Plan 2012-2020” - An innovative approach to healthcare 
for the 21st century.COM (2012) 736,  describes the 
vision of e-Health in Europe in line with the objectives of 
the Europe 2020 Strategy and the Digital Agenda for 
Europe. The Action Plan presents and consolidates 
actions to exploit the potential of e-Health, describes the 
role of the European Union and calls on member states 
and stakeholders to collaborate with each other. In this 
paper, the difficulties that affect the spread of e-Health 
and 
some 
ethical 
aspects 
of 
the 
doctor-patient 
relationship and the protection of health data are 
considered.  It is clear that the adoption and diffusion  of 
e-Health across borders is a priority for the European 
Union.  
Keywords-cross-border healthcare, ethical and legal 
problems 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
   E-Health, in which healthcare and resources are 
transferred by electronic means, is a relatively recent term 
for the practice of healthcare supported by electronic 
processes. It is thought that  in time with the spread of new 
technologies such as the Internet, this practice will become 
more efficient. Therefore, the healthcare sector has 
considerable potential for growth yet faces numerous 
challenges in terms of efficiency, as well as financial and 
social sustainability.  
   To meet these challenges, several actions on health have 
been promoted by the European Union. Figure 1 
summarizes the main initiatives at European and Italian 
level in the field of e-Health from 2008 to 2013 [1].  
   Decision no. 1786/2002/EC of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 23 September 2002 introduced a 
program of Community action in the field of public health 
[2] and was the first integrated Community programme in 
this field.  
  The 
Digital 
Agenda 
proposed 
by 
the 
European 
Commission is an important part of the Europe 2020 
Strategy as it aims to better exploit the potential of 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) to 
foster innovation, economic growth and progress in the 
European Union. 
   For the first time, Directive 2011/24/EU on the application 
of patients' rights in cross-border healthcare established the 
rights of patients in Europe who wish to  seek healthcare in 
another member state and be reimbursed for it [3]. The right 
to healthcare in other member states existed prior to 
adoption of this Directive; various European Union 
regulations apply to unexpected medical treatment that 
might be necessary during a temporary stay abroad 
(Regulation No. 883/2004 on the coordination of social 
security systems, and the European Health Insurance Card) 
[4]. 
    In May 2011, a task force of leading personalities in the 
field of politics, health and Information and Communication 
Technologies was established to analyze the role played by 
technology in addressing the major challenges to the 
healthcare industry. 
   The European guidelines for Patient Summaries (2013), 
provided for by Directive 2011/24, define the data content 
of the patient summary: a collection of information 
photographing the clinical condition and health of every 
citizen [3]. 
   This information can be electronically exchanged between 
member states to support healthcare for european citizens in 
any country of the European Union. Each state shall 
establish a system of storing sensitive information that is in 
line with the standards of data protection. 
   Among the Italian initiatives in the field of eHealth is the 
implementation of Electronic Health Records that contain 
all the clinical information of the patient and collect digital 
documents relating to health and social health related 
280
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

clinical events. This information will allow decisions of a 
medical nature to be made much faster, which is especially 
important in emergency situations. 
The 
ePrescription 
service 
allows 
the 
electronic 
prescription of medicine by a legally authorised physician.  
The prescription is created using specific software and 
electronically transmitted to the pharmacist. Information 
relating to drugs dispensed by the pharmacist is then 
transmitted to the system that manages the electronic patient 
record in their country of origin. 
The process of dematerialization of health records will 
benefit the organization and management. 
The service of electronic transmission of medical 
certificates allows you to fully automate and digitize the 
entire process that originates with the production of medical 
certificates and certificates of illness by the doctor and ends 
with the transmission, by the worker, certificates to 
employers. 
These initiatives demonstrate how e-Health is an 
important element of the " e Europe " strategy . 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Initiatives at European and Italian level in e-Health from    
2008 to 2013; Board of Health, Italy [1]. 
 
 
 
II.    STATE OF THE ART 
   In recent years, the development of wireless and mobile 
networks has encouraged the application of mobile 
healthcare systems. An important issue is security, as many 
patients have privacy concerns when it comes to sharing 
personal information on open channels. These issues must 
be dealt with and mobile systems might be improved [5]. 
One challenge is the time that it takes to obtain treatment. 
This has been addressed by a study which analyses the 
benefits of telematic services and the use of mobile and 
wireless devices to develop models that aid the transfer of 
healthcare. Telematic system requirements which can 
improve time to treatment for emergency services [6].   
   The application of healthcare information systems has 
been shown to assist elderly residents of nursing homes. The 
use of a web application to collect patient data, creating a 
personalised electronic file for the residents, has helped 
physicians to manage the nursing home and the condition of 
their patients [7]. 
     In the development of e-Health, it is important that 
attention is focused on the interests of the patient. 
 
III. METHODOLOGY 
Among the various initiatives taken by the European 
Union in the field of eHealth, the following have been 
analysed: eHealth Action Plan 2012-2020, Directive 
2011/24/EU [3]  and Law August 6, 2013, n. 96 [8], with 
which Italy launched the final phase of the formal 
transposition of Directive 2011/24/EU [3] . The Action Plan 
aims to guide healthcare workers and patients in times of 
austerity, investing in research to create personalised 
medicine and cost efficient, high quality care for all.  
 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The European Union is interested in strengthening and 
promoting the efforts of member states in the field of e-
Health because this practice can bring several benefits to 
citizens and health professionals: offering user-friendly, 
secure systems that allow patients to take greater control 
over the management of their healthcare [9]. E-Health 
includes the practice of telemedicine, 
which uses 
information technologies and telecommunication to provide 
healthcare at a distance; finally, as e-Health is the third 
largest industry in the health sector, it is also an important 
part of economic growth. As its adoption increases, it will 
also be possible to reduce spending on healthcare. Finally, it 
must be considered that in terms of economic advantages, 
telemedicine can greatly reduce time spent off work and 
minimize waiting times for physicians and patients alike.  
The European Union‟s population is also rapidly aging: 
the percentage of the elderly (65 +) and very elderly (80 + ) 
281
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

will increase from 17.4 % in 2010 to 30.0% in 2060 and 
from 4.7 % in 2010 to 12.1% in 2060; this will also require 
a better quality of services and healthcare [10]. 
However, there are still obstacles to the full deployment 
of eHealth. 
First, we should consider legal barriers: 
1) Privacy 
Medical privacy, or the practice of keeping information 
about a patient strictly confidential, has to be ensured. This 
involves conversational discretion on the part of healthcare 
providers, and the security of medical records [11]. Privacy 
can be considered a barrier to e-Health. In e-Health, there is 
an electronic transfer of patient medical data and medical 
records to the physician. Healthcare providers must comply 
with data protection, and in doing so must take significant 
action to comply with legal restrictions [12]. Telemedicine  
is challenged by unclear legal regulation for some practices.   
2) Security 
Data protection in e-Health is very important. There are 
security issues in the storage of medical data so that it can 
be accessed by doctors and patients over the web. The 
confidentiality of medical information is valued very highly 
by consumers, but there is a real risk that sensitive 
information might be compromised through electronic 
storage and transmission [12]. 
Medical professionals and telemedicine users must 
always be aware of one of the most important principles of 
medical practice, that is to say the respect of privacy.  In 
particular, in e-Health we talk about „sensitive personal 
data‟ ( relating to “physical or mental health or condition”). 
  Then, there is the question of the type of information 
that is handled: should there be full data disclosure or just 
the minimum data needed  to form a diagnosis? The patient 
must be informed about this and must consent to any 
procedures. 
Another topic is access to this data. Information must be 
collected and recorded in such a way that no outside person 
can see, copy or download it and clearance should be 
reserved for the parties concerned (patient, attending 
physician, or telemedicine specialist). This is one of the 
occasions in which the Information and Communications 
Technology specialist must support the medical team. For 
example, electronic patient files should be accessed only by 
the treating physician and medical assistants according to 
necessity, including the possibility of emergency access. 
Any access beyond that should require a special consent of 
the patient.  
Some questions remain open but one thing is for sure: 
doctors should respect and maintain confidentiality; if not 
for legal, at least for ethical reasons. 
 3 ) Licensure 
The license for a physician is essential to ensure safety. 
The licensure of physicians is a regulatory function that is 
performed by the individual state. When physicians practice 
e-Health across state borders by treating a patient in a 
different state; there is often no way of knowing if they have 
licensure,  are under suspension, or have lost their license. 
4) Other barriers 
Due to the exclusive nature of the Information and 
Communication 
Technologies 
equipment 
used 
in 
telemedicine services, it is very expensive to buy and install 
the equipment necessary for practicing telemedicine. 
   Another limitation may be the lack of general guidelines 
for the practice of international telemedicine or rules that 
can standardize the use of telemedicine across member 
states. 
Guidelines 
should 
be 
seen 
as 
a 
set 
of 
recommendations that aim to facilitate the exchange of data 
across borders, understand what data is to be included in 
datasets and meet organizational and technical requirements.  
 
Therefore, a study of existing legal barriers between 
member states is important for the diffusion of e-Health in 
Europe, and to this end the European Commision has 
created a legal framework for e-Health. The Directive on the 
application of patients' rights in cross-border healthcare will 
contribute to achieving this objective, as it defines what 
rights relating to such assistance remain with the patient 
across borders.  
The document of the Commission services on the 
applicability of the current legal framework to telemedicine 
services (Commission Staff Working Paper on the 
applicability of existing European Union legal framework to 
telemedicine services) clarifies that European Union 
legislation is applicable to issues related to reimbursement, 
responsibilities, and authorizations of healthcare data 
protection in relation to the provision of telemedicine 
services across borders.  
Since 2013, the Commission has initiated a dialogue on 
the legal aspects related to e-Health. It should be 
remembered that rules which serve to safeguard and protect 
people can not be totally eliminated, but it is possible to 
standardize rules among the states.  
There are also some technical problems relating to the 
adoption of e-Health, such as: 
1) Unavailability of cell phone network coverage or a   
network with weak reception, especially in remote areas or 
in the desert. 
2)  Unavailability of Internet or slow connection. 
3) Unavailability or improper equipment used in e-
Healthcare such as computers, printers, scanners, a good 
quality camera, as well as specific telemedicine devices. 
282
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

4) Absence of effective information technology systems 
and supporting infrastructure, which represents a major 
barrier to initiate a telemedicine program. For example, the 
method of data transmission must have adequate bandwidth 
to transmit large amounts of data quickly, accurately, and 
safely.  
Organizational problems: 
A standard verification process for telemedicine 
providers is lacking.  
Financial issues are delaying a more rapid uptake of 
telemedicine.  
There is a lack of coordination between clinicians and 
technology developers. 
Standards and guidelines for best practices in 
telemedicine should be better defined and made more 
consistent. 
To overcome some of these obstacles to the Action Plan 
of the European Union, a greater interoperability of e-Health 
services is recommended. This aspect of interoperability 
concerns the way in which organizations, such as public 
administrations in different member states, shall cooperate 
to achieve common goals. 
To create confidence in e-Health it is necessary to ensure 
an efficient protection of health data. 
In January 2012, the Commission adopted a proposal for 
a Regulation establishing a comprehensive framework for 
European Union data protection aimed at updating the 
current rules and greater harmonization [13]. 
Cultural Barriers 
Another important limit to e-Health are cultural barriers. 
These might be due to lack of available information about 
the practice of e-health, or the unwillingness of some 
physicians to adapt clinical paradigms for telemedicine 
applications. Understandably, there is a general lack of 
confidence in the adoption of e-health, due to the fact that 
the physician need not be present to offer health solutions. 
Often, physicians are not even aware of the existence of 
telemedicine services and, in fact, can often only approach 
e-Health through postgraduate training, Master‟s Degrees or 
university courses. If the possibilities of telemedicine are 
unknown, neither doctors nor patients will be interested in 
taking advantage of the multiple opportunities it offers.  
In the changing cultural conditions in which it is 
practiced today, the relationship between doctor and patient 
is mediated by an instrument of a legal nature which is 
known as "informed consent."  
In principle, informed consent is not reducible to a 
simple information sheet; it must be signed by the patient 
(or someone for him): it is the reference point of the doctor-
patient relationship, since it contains what is to be done in 
the present moment from the clinical point of view, on 
which interpersonal respect, concern for others, the 
recognition of professionalism and attention to dialogue 
should be exercised [13].  
Therefore, one of the problems in the use of 
telemedicine is the selection and adoption of an informed 
consent form suitable for use in e-Health. 
Medicine which works on human subjects is also 
inextricably linked to values such as friendship and justice, 
and the sick person is not a mere object of the physician‟s 
art but is always subject to a therapeutic relationship.  
In Italy, Law August 6, 2013, n . 96 Delegation to the 
Government for the transposition of European directives and 
the implementation of other acts of the European Union - 
Delegation of European Law, 2013, with which the final 
phase of the formal transposition of Directive 2011/24/EU 
commenced, entered into force on 4 December, 2013 [8].  
Until 4 December 2013, people were subject to the 
rights provided for in the regulations that already governed 
the assistance of the citizen, in a country other than their 
own, but this Directive can now be applied. The Directive 
ensures that citizens have the right to freely choose the place 
where to seek treatment within the EU. 
Important 
aspects 
are: 
prior 
authorization, 
reimbursement and border agreements. Each state should 
now have a system of prior authorization and  may also 
provide a list of health benefits for which permission will 
not be required. 
Reimbursement: a member state will determine at local, 
regional and national level, the healthcare for which an 
insured person is entitled to reimbursement, as well as their 
level of coverage. 
In addition to authorizations and reimbursements, 
agreements between the States which should cooperate to 
facilitate the implementation of the Directive will be 
required. 
V.  CONCLUSION 
 
   E-Health is not just "selling" a service or a product; it is a 
relationship that, while never replacing the human 
relationship between physician and patient, may still be 
useful in the treatment of certain diseases. It could also help 
patients to emerge from the isolation an illness can bring. 
 
The patient must always be protected when accessing 
online services, for it is necessary to know which sites are 
safe. On this topic, states must intervene. In addition to the 
initiatives of the European Union and co-operation between 
individual states, it is important to promote initiatives aimed 
at a greater knowledge of telemedicine. It is important to 
increase confidence among patients but also among 
283
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

healthcare workers. 
 
   The transmission of knowledge through education 
(including through training courses, University courses and 
Master‟s degrees) can break down barriers more than the 
implementation of a document, although this is also 
important and fundamental. 
 
By using cross-border e-Health it will be possible to 
ensure continuity of care and assistance for citizens. If the 
system is well built, it can ensure quality healthcare and the 
adoption of state of the art techniques, in particular 
concerning the diagnosis and treatment of rare diseases, will 
ensure the system is more effective and might also reduce 
healthcare costs in the long run. 
 
REFERENCES  
 
[1]  http://www.salute.gov.it [retrieved: January, 2014] 
 
          [2] Decision No 1786/2002/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 23 September 2002 adopting a programme of 
Community action in the field of public health (2003-2008) - 
Commission Statements, Official Journal L 271 , 09/10/2002 
P. 0001 – 0012 
 
         [3] Directive 2011/24/EU on the application of patients‟ rights in 
cross-border healthcare was adopted on 19 January 2011 and 
published in the EU‟s Official Journal on 9 March 2011.  
 
          [4]  Regulation No. 883/2004 on the coordination of social security 
systems, and the European Health Insurance Card  http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CONSLEG:200
4R0883:20130108:EN:HTML [retrieved: February, 2014]. 
 
          [5] A. Boukerche and R. Yonglin, “A Secure Mobile Healthcare 
System using Trust-Based Multicast Scheme”,  IEEE Journal 
on Selected Areas in Communication vol. 27,  Issue: 4 , May 
2009, pp. 387-399.  
 
          [6]  I. Widya, A. Van Halteren, V. Jones, R. Bults, D. Konstantas, 
P. Vierhout and J. Peuscher, "Telematic Requirements for a 
Mobile and Wireless Healthcare System Derived from 
Enterprise Models", In the Proceedings of 7th International 
Conference on Telecommunications 2003, Croatia 2003, pp. 
527-534 . 
 
          [7] S. Nikolidakis, D.D. Vergados, I. Anagnostopoulos, 
“Healthcare Information Systems for Assisting Living of 
Elderly People at Nursing Home”, 3rd International Workshop 
on 
Semantic 
Media 
Adaptation 
and 
Personalization 
(SMAP‟08), December 15-16, 2008, Prague, Czech Republic, 
pp. 122-127, doi=10.1109/SMAP.2008.36. 
 
          [8]  Law 6 August 2013, n. 96 , Delegation to the Government for 
the 
transposition 
of 
European 
directives 
and 
the 
implementation of other acts of the European Union - 
Delegation of European Law, 2013 (13G00137); Gazzetta 
Ufficiale, 
Serie 
generale, 
n. 
194 
of 
20.8.2013 
http://www.gazzettaufficiale.it/eli/id/2013/08/20/13G00137/sg 
[retrieved: January, 2014] 
  . 
       [9] Communication from the Commission to the European 
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social 
Committee commit and the Committee of the Regions on 
Telemedicine for the benefit of patients, healthcare systems 
and society; Commission of the European Communities 
Brussels, 
http://eurlex.europa.eu/lexuriserv/lexuriserv.do?uri=celex:52
008dc0689:en:not [retrieved: February, 2014]  
 
       [10]   http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal  
                [retrieved: February, 2014]  
 
[11]   Medical privacy  
         http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medical_privacy 
         [retrieved: January, 2014] 
 
[12]  Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of 
the Council on the protection of individuals with regard to 
the processing of personal data and on the free movement of 
such data (General Data Protection Regulation), Brussels, 
25.1.2012 COM (2012) 11 final 2012/0011 (COD) http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2012:00
11:  FIN: EN: PDF[retrieved: February, 2014] 
 
[13] E.H. Kluge, “Ethical and legal challenges for health telematics 
in a global world: telehealth and the technological 
imperative”, International Journal of Medical Informatics 
vol. 80, Issue 2, February 2011, pp. e1–e5 Special Issue: 
Security 
in 
Health 
Information 
Systems, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2010.10.002.  
 
284
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

