Conceptual Model of the Application of the ABA Method in Alzheimer's Treatment 
Supported by Data Science 
Priscila Firmiano Parede 
Religare Innovation Lab 
Marília, Brasil 
e-mail: priscila.parede@conectamente.net.br 
Elvis Fusco 
Fundação Shunji Nishimura de Tecnologia 
Pompeia, Brasil 
e-mail:  elvisfusco@gmail.com 
 
Caio Saraiva Coneglian  
Universidade de Marília UNIMAR 
Marília, Brasil 
e-mail: caio.coneglian@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract - Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is characterized as a 
neurodegenerative disorder that causes gradually progressive 
cognitive and functional deficits and behavioral changes. 
Checking for symptoms of cognitive loss and memory loss, 
behavioral symptoms, functional decline, and cognitive testing 
remain the cornerstone of clinical diagnosis and treatment of 
AD patients. In view of the questions raised from the 
experience of the researchers, as well as the results achieved by 
the Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) method in patients with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), and adopting an innovative 
perspective of the ABA method aimed at the treatment of 
patients with AD, we envision the possibility of supporting the 
ABA method with the use of Data Science (DS) techniques to 
enable analysis and learning based on the information 
generated in this process, in search of better quality of life and 
cognitive, speech-language and psychomotor advances in 
patients with AD, featuring an important interdisciplinary 
approach.  
Keywords - Alzheimer's Disease; Applied Behavior Analysis; 
Data Science; Conceptual Model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Alzheimer's 
Disease 
is 
characterized 
as 
a 
neurodegenerative disorder that causes gradually progressive 
cognitive and functional deficits and behavioral changes [7]. 
The specialized literature indicates that its most common 
cognitive symptoms include deficits in short-term memory, 
executive, visual and spatial dysfunction, difficulty in 
carrying out daily activities, even total disconnection from 
reality [9]. Current studies are converging in stating that the 
verification of symptoms of cognitive loss, the identification 
of behavioral symptoms and functional decline and the 
performance of cognitive tests remain as the basis of the 
clinical diagnosis and treatment of patients with AD [11]. 
Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) or with 
AD have specific deficits in their ability to learn procedural 
skills that are explained by the loss of their motor 
coordination. Thus, we can say that an interdisciplinary team 
that works with the Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) 
method will be able to offer specific stimuli to patients with 
AD, as is already the case with individuals with ASD, 
whether they are professionals in Psychology, Speech 
Therapy, Psychomotricity, Physiotherapy, among others. The 
use of the proposed tests becomes fundamental in the 
evaluation of the patient with AD and in the validation of the 
impact of the ABA treatment, using parameters of 
comparison of the affected cognitive and motor areas. It is 
not a question of comparing the use of the ABA method with 
other methods, but of verifying its feasibility and its 
application in patients with AD, which has not yet been 
reported in the literature. 
Conjugating with the results of the studies of Castillo et 
al. [7] and Perakslis et al. [11], we believe that there is no 
universal treatment for AD, but it is possible to adopt an 
interdisciplinary and preventive intervention, consisting of 
psychosocial treatments, behavioral therapy and drug 
treatment. In this sense, we propose the application of the 
ABA method in the treatment of Alzheimer's Disease, and 
based on recent studies that indicate a constant growth in 
research investment that aligns technologies in the area of 
Data Science applied to the health area, we envision the 
possibility of aligning the ABA method to data analysis to 
support and validate the treatment of AD patients. 
The general objective of this study is to analyze the 
potential of the ABA method in the treatment of Alzheimer's 
Disease with the support of an informational platform based 
on Data Science (DS) techniques. Specifically, we intend to: 
a) study the feasibility and effectiveness of the ABA method 
in patients diagnosed with Alzheimer's Disease, with a view 
to expanding quality of life and promoting cognitive, speech-
language and psychomotor advances and b) developing a 
prototype composed of a digital platform using data analysis 
techniques and algorithms linked to the application of the 
ABA method to support the treatment of AD patients as a 
proof of concept of the proposal's feasibility.  
This article has the following structure: Section 2 
presents a review of the literature on the concepts relevant to 
the research, with emphasis on the Applied Behavior 
Analysis method and on Alzheimer's Disease. Section 3 
addresses the methodological procedures adopted in the 
study and the results achieved. Finally, the conclusion is 
presented. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
 LITERATURE REVISION 
Behavior Analysis is a science that is dedicated to the 
study of the elements that affect behaviors. The use of the 
principles of this science to solve socially relevant demands 
is called Applied Behavior Analysis – ABA [1]. The ABA 
method can be applied in different contexts such as ASD 
treatment, education, economics, psychological clinic, sports 
performance, among others. 
Despite being used in several areas, there was a 
significant growth in the use of ABA in the area of ASD, 
especially Lovaas [2], who carried out the first study of ABA 
applied to the treatment of this type of disorder. The method 
consists of individual and intensive teaching of skills 
necessary for the individual to acquire independence and 
better quality of life. Among the skills taught, those that 
focus on behaviors that interfere in the development and 
integration of the individual diagnosed with ASD stand out: 
a) social behaviors, such as eye contact and functional 
communication; b) academic behaviors, as prerequisites for 
reading, writing and mathematics; c) activities of daily 
living, such as personal hygiene; d) reduction of negative 
behaviors, such as aggression, stereotypies, self-injury, 
verbal aggression and escapes. 
The literature indicates improvement in the development 
of participants after undergoing the ABA method, especially 
when faced with other types of non-intensive therapies or not 
anchored in Behavior Analysis, especially when the 
intervention was performed early [3][4][5][ 6]. Based on 
these studies, which reinforce the success of the ABA 
method in the treatment of patients with ASD and, as in the 
studies carried out with patients with AD [7][8], we adopted 
part of the methodology presented in this study, namely, the 
of tests in the areas of Speech Therapy, Psychology, 
Psychomotricity and Physiotherapy.  
Castillo et al. [7] exposed a group of AD patients to 
psychosocial treatment, aimed at individuals with mild and 
moderate dementia. The treatment included physical 
activities, sound identifications, childhood explorations, 
names, 
foods, 
current 
discussions, 
identification 
of 
faces/scenes, 
word 
associations, 
increased 
creativity, 
categorization of objects, development of senses, among 
others. The results obtained were “improvement in 
orientation, a better understanding and adaptation of their 
environment, potentially leading to an increase in the feeling 
and perception of control, self-efficacy and self-esteem”, 
directly impacting the quality of life of patients and their 
families [7][9]. 
Giving an innovative perspective to the use of the ABA 
method in the treatment of AD, we propose to reconcile it 
with techniques from the DS area to support the treatment of 
patients through data analysis and the learning generated 
based on the information obtained in this process, in search 
of better quality of life and cognitive, speech-language and 
psychomotor advances, thus justifying other methodological 
aspects of the study. 
Recent literature points out that medical treatments bring 
together cutting-edge technology, such as systems for remote 
surgery, exoskeletons or wearables for the elderly to be 
monitored remotely, for example. IoT, Big Data, AI, 
nanotechnology and robotics, for example, are available to 
health professionals for hospital care, diagnosis, staging and 
monitoring of treatments. The reason for applying DS in 
medicine is to obtain improved services through the use of 
data and information analysis. These services are classified 
in two aspects: the first is the diagnosis and prognosis of the 
disease, and the second is its treatment and definitive cure 
[10]. 
The volume of relevant data on AD generated by the tests 
that will be applied will generate the need for DS techniques 
to deal with the informational complexity of these 
environments. Data Science can provide insight and pattern 
detection and/or insights for possible decision making. 
Constant progress in the development of predictive modeling 
and 
analysis, 
digital 
sensors, 
advanced 
monitoring 
techniques and their analytical capabilities are prepared to 
allow the real-time study of patients and caregivers in a 
continuous way in all stages of the disease [11]. A new 
perspective is needed to manage and process this 
information, while organizing these resources into new 
results. 
In another study, Krumholz [12] highlights how Data 
Science techniques and data analysis in Big Data scenarios 
can contribute to the generation of new knowledge essential 
for predictions and improve the performance of health 
treatments. Furthermore, the author points out that the use of 
Data Science techniques can significantly improve the power 
of observation for treatments in the health area, precisely 
because of the amount of data obtained and the use of these 
data to obtain new knowledge and define patterns that are not 
found by humans. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY  
Considering that this is a feasibility study, we started 
with the Systematic Literature Review (SLR) in search of 
information about the scope of the study, in order to 
synthesize the production of knowledge about Alzheimer's 
Disease, the application of the ABA method, the use of Data 
Science in the health area and, in particular, in the treatment 
of AD. By retrieving the results of the research already 
carried out on these subjects, we find: 
 
• 
Case studies and applications of the ABA method, to 
establish 
possible 
relationships 
between 
its 
application in patients with ASD and patients 
diagnosed with AD in terms of cognitive gains; 
• 
Case studies and applications of tests and scales in 
patients with AD in the areas of Psychology, Speech 
Therapy, Physiotherapy and Psychomotricity, to 
establish possible relationships between their 
application, cognitive gains and improvement in 
quality of life; 
• 
Case studies, techniques, applications and DS 
models applied in learning and improving the 
treatment of AD based on massive environments of 
data generated by the treatment and the tests 
mentioned in the previous activities; 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

• 
Case studies and identification of methodologies and 
technologies 
for 
modeling, 
merging, 
mining, 
management and data analysis, applied to the 
representation 
and 
processing 
in 
digital 
informational environments of data analysis systems, 
based on information from the capture of AD 
treatment with the application of the ABA method. 
 
The SLR followed the precepts described by Higgins and 
Green [13] and included works published in the period from 
2000 to 2021, with regard to works on ABA and DA and in 
the period from 2010 to 2021, with regard to works on SD 
and national and international journals were searched. 
We used the Multiple Case Study (MCE) research 
method, as proposed by Yin [14]. The method is 
characterized by simultaneously studying more than one 
particular case representing a set of comparable or equivalent 
cases. It is an “empirical investigation that investigates a 
contemporary phenomenon within its real-life context, 
especially 
regarding 
the 
boundaries 
between 
the 
phenomenon and the context that are not clearly defined”, 
seeking to know the how and why of a specific situation [ 
14]. 
The MCE is composed of patients from the Religare 
Clinic – Rehab Center. The Religare Clinic is located in the 
city of Santo André, metropolitan region of the State of São 
Paulo, Brazil. Diagnosed with mild or moderate AD, 
identified and chosen intentionally, for Alzheimer's Disease 
submitted to the ABA method, patients will be submitted to 
the application of tests and scales in the areas of 
Physiotherapy, Psychomotricity, Psychology and Speech 
Therapy, to assess their cognitive performance and 
improvements in quality of life and to validate the ABA 
method in the treatment of these patients. The tests will be 
applied in a future stage of the research. In MCE, data 
analysis can be performed using various techniques and 
tools, such as the use of computer programs, tabulations, 
categorization, tests and combination of evidence and data 
collected in SLR. At this stage of the research, we will make 
use of the following strategies: analysis in the light of SLR; 
analysis based on the results achieved with the tests and 
scales applied to patients; analysis based on the information 
provided by the metadata standard implemented to represent 
AD treatment data. The use of disruptive computing 
technologies using Data Science resources will expand the 
possibilities of treatment through the digitization and 
automation of processes that increase the ability to 
exponentiate the analysis of results. 
It is proposed to use massive data analysis techniques 
generated from the diagnosis history, application of the ABA 
method and tests in related areas to support treatment 
evaluation plans and improvements in the adequacy of the 
ABA method in the treatment of AD. 
 
Figure 1 presents the conceptual model of the proposal 
that results in the development of the prototype that will be 
validated through a proof of concept of the presented 
methodology. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Conceptual Model of Application of the ABA 
Method in Alzheimer's Treatment Supported by Data Science 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The main purpose of the conceptual model is to capture 
information requirements from a research point of view. As 
an important instrument used to represent the prototype to be 
developed, the construction of a Conceptual Model should 
not be limited only to the need to represent the prototype, but 
rather to develop global views of the entire research process. 
This can be seen in Table I that specifies the components that 
represents the Conceptual Model. 
 
TABLE I. CONCEPTUAL MODEL COMPONENTS 
Category 
Component 
Especification 
Data Layer 
Metadata 
Standard 
Standardized data scheme of 
informational 
elements 
describing the characteristics 
of AD and treatment methods. 
Data Layer 
Treatment 
Data 
Data 
extracted 
from 
the 
treatment of AD. 
Data Layer 
Test Result 
Data 
Results obtained through tests 
applied after treatment 
Data Layer 
Big Data 
Database formed by several 
information sources obtained 
from diagnosis, treatment and 
tests. 
Process Layer 
Definition 
of Metadata 
Standard 
Specification 
of 
the 
conceptual data schema of the 
proposed model. 
Process Layer 
Application 
Treatment of patients with AD 
using the ABA Method. 
Process Layer 
Testing 
Application of tests in patients 
treated with the ABA Method. 
 
To support the digital informational application to be 
developed to validate this proposal, a metadata standard is 
defined that simplifies and standardizes the data that will be 
generated in the application phases of the ABA method in 
the treatment of AD and in the application of the tests. From 
this metadata standard, a database with Big Data 
characteristics will be built from the generation of data in 
each subsequent phase, until the moment of analysis of the 
generated data and transformation into information for the 
application of learning and prediction that improve the AD 
treatment 
process. 
It 
is 
expected 
that 
with 
the 
implementation of this model, there will be an improvement 
in the treatment of AD through the application of the ABA 
method supported by indicators and knowledge generated by 
applications in the area of Data Science based on Big Data 
environments. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The partial results indicate that the technological 
structure applied in the AD treatment process will allow 
innovation in the treatment methodology through the ABA 
method applied in AD and innovation in the use of disruptive 
computational technologies in the process of evaluation, 
testing and learning of AD treatment. The feasibility study of 
the techniques and activities of the ABA method to be 
adopted in the treatment of patients with AD is under 
development and a protocol for the application of tests and 
scales in the areas of Psychology, Speech Therapy, 
Psychomotricity and Physiotherapy able to validate the ABA 
method in the treatment of patients with AD. 
In the end, it is expected to develop a prototype of DS 
application based on the information generated by the tests 
for learning and predicting the treatment of AD with ABA 
method resources, to subsidize the proof of concept that 
supports this proposal. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Todorov and E. Hanna. “Behavior analysis in Brazil”. 
Psicologia: Teoria e Pesquisa, Brasília, v.26, n. 25 anos, 2010, 
pp.143-154.   
[2] O. Lovaas. “Behavioral treatment and normal educational and 
intellectual functioning in young autistic children”. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, v.55, n.1, 1987, pp. 03-
09. 
[3] S. Eldevik, et al. “Meta-analysis of early intensive behavioral 
intervention for children with autism”. Journal of Clinical 
Child & Adolescent Psychology, v.38, n.3, 2009, pp. 439-450.  
[4] Z. Warren, et al. “A systematic review of early intensive 
intervention for autism spectrum disorders”. Pediatrics, v.127, 
n.5, 2011, pp. e1303-e1311. 
[5] C. Shepley and d J. Grisham-BrowN. “Applied Behavior 
Analysis in Early Childhood Education: An Overview of 
Policies, Research, Blended Practices, and the Curriculum 
Framework”. Behav. Analysis Practice. 12, 2019, pp. 235-
246.  
[6] D. S. Im “Treatment of Aggression in Adults with Autism 
Spectrum Disorder: A Review”. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2021 
Jan-Feb; 29(1): pp. 35-80. 
[7] C. Miranda-Castillo, F. M. Tapia, A. R. Herrera, F. M. 
Ghigliotto and L. S. Guerra. “Implementation of a cognitive 
stimulation program in people with Alzheimer-type dementia: 
a pilot study in elderly Chileans”. Universidad Psicología, 
Bogotá, v. 12, n. 2, 2013, pp. 445-455.   
[8] T. Kihara, et al. “Galantamine modulates nicotinic receptor 
and 
blocks 
abeta-enhanced 
glutamate 
toxicity”. 
BiochemBiophys Res Commun. 325(3), 2004, pp. 976-82. 
[9] L. 
D. 
Apostolova. 
“Alzheimer 
Disease”. 
Continuum 
(Minneap Minn), 22(2), 2016, pp. 419-434. 
[10] R. Pandya; et al. “Buildout of Methodology for Meticulous 
Diagnosis of K-Complex in EEG for Aiding the Detection of 
Alzheimer’s by Artificial Intelligence”. Augment Hum Res. 
5:3, 2020, pp. 01-09.  
[11] E. Perakslis, H. Riordan, L. Friedhoff, A. Nabulsi and E. 
Merlo Pic. “A call for a global ‘bigger’ data approach to 
Alzheimer disease”. Nat. Ver. Drug. Discov. 18, 2019, pp. 
319-320.  
[12] H. M. Krumholz. “Big data and new knowledge in medicine: 
the thinking, training, and tools needed for a learning health 
system”. Health Affairs, v. 33, n. 7, 2014, pp. 1163-1170. 
[13] J. P. T. Higgins and S. Green. “Cochrane handbook for 
systematic reviews of interventions”, version 5.1.0. Oxford: 
The Cochrane Collaboration; 2011. 
[14] R. K. Yin. “Case study: planning and methods”. 2a ed. Porto 
Alegre: Bookman, 2001. 
 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

