Collection of Patient Reported Outcome Measures Using Short Messaging Service 
Experiences from the development process and a pilot study  
Oystein Dale, Trenton Schulz 
Norwegian Computing Centre 
P.O. Box 114, Blindern, 0314 Oslo, Norway 
oystein.dale@nr.no 
trenton.schulz@nr.no 
Anne Christie, Hanne Dagfinrud 
NKRR, Diakonhjemmet Hospital 
P.O. Box 23, Vinderen, 0319 Oslo, Norway 
anne.christie@diakonsyk.no 
h.s.dagfinrud@medisin.uio.no
 
 
Abstract—Information and communication technology may 
improve clinical care and research. The advent of mobile tech-
nology offers many new possibilities. We present the develop-
ment and pilot testing of a system that collects patient reported 
outcome measures using mobile phones in the field of rheuma-
tological rehabilitation. Ensuring that the system was usable by 
the maximum number of patients resulted in choosing text 
messages for reporting from the patients over newer technolo-
gy like mobile apps. The system was run in a successful pilot 
study where participants answered both with text messages 
and pen and paper. The text message reporting was more 
complete than the pen and paper method. A focus group and a 
survey showed that participants preferred using text messages 
to pen and paper. We detail our design decisions and why we 
feel that for our purposes within the domain of rheumatology, 
text messages provide the best suited overall solution given 
their simplicity, ubiquity in Norwegian society, and the fact 
that no new hardware or software is required for the respond-
ent. The system is currently being used in a yearlong clinical 
study. 
Keywords: Patient reported outcome measures, electronic 
capture, short messaging service, rheumatology, clinical re-
search. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Traditionally, outcomes measures used in clinical medi-
cal research are based on a biomedical model of health fo-
cusing on objective and scientifically accepted tests and 
measures.  [1]. Today, it is recognized that the patients’ sub-
jective opinion is of importance, thus patient reported out-
come measures (PROMs) reflecting the patients’ perspective 
are increasingly emphasized in clinical trials [2, 3, 4]. 
PROMs address such constructs as health related quality of 
life, subjective health status and functional status [4]. Con-
crete examples of such information are pain or fatigue levels 
reported by patients. 
In certain chronic health conditions, such as arthritis and 
diabetes, it may be appropriate to collect PROMs over time 
in so called health diaries [5].  Health diaries in this context 
mean one or more scientifically validated PROM question-
naires completed repeatedly over a period of time, for in-
stance over weeks or months. 
It is important that the diary data is of high quality, 
providing an accurate picture of the patient’s subjective ex-
perience. The traditional diary collection method has been 
pen and paper (P&P). There are a number of inherent weak-
nesses with P&P collection, such as poor protocol compli-
ance, poor data quality and burdensome data management 
[6]. The problems may lead to the introduction of a variety of 
biases in the collected data. This may undermine the scien-
tific value of the diary method. 
Information and communication technology (ICT) may 
help combat the aforementioned biases when collecting diary 
data. With the advent of mobile handheld technology – nota-
bly personal digital assistants (PDAs), feature phones, 
smartphones, and tablet computers – data collection by 
means of electronic diaries (EDs) has become increasingly 
popular in clinical research [7, 8, 9]. Electronic capture of 
PROM data has a number of scientific and practical ad-
vantages over the P&P method [6, 8]. According to a sys-
tematic review, the ED diary method is superior to P&P col-
lection in terms of feasibility, protocol compliance, data 
accuracy, and subject acceptability [8]. Additionally, it has 
been shown that the electronic PROM collection is equiva-
lent to P&P PROM collection [10]. This is important to 
maintain scientific constructs such as validity and reliability 
to ensure that the psychometric properties of the question-
naires are carried over into the electronic versions. 
With the superiority of the ED method established, one is 
faced with the questions: given that there are a number ED 
methods available, e.g., by means of PDAs, feature phones, 
smartphones, and tablet computers, which one do you 
choose? Currently, smartphones and applications (apps) are 
in vogue, but does an app installed on a smartphone always 
provide the optimal method when one wishes to collect 
PROMs? In another project, the Short Message Service 
(SMS) or text messages have been utilized successfully [11]. 
We need to ask whether this somewhat older and basic tech-
nology is obsolete, or is it still an option in ED collection? 
This was the dilemma faced by the National Resource 
Centre for Rehabilitation in Rheumatology (NKRR) when 
they wanted to select an electronic collection method for a 
yearlong clinical study measuring the possible clinical ef-
fects of physical exercise in heated pools for persons with 
rheumatic disease. PROMs relating to subjective perceptions 
of pain, stiffness, fatigue, and how much the rheumatic dis-
ease affects the ability to engage in activities were to be col-
lected twice weekly for a year. 
Researchers at the Norwegian Computing Centre (NR) 
designed and implemented an electronic collection solution. 
As the paper will show, we opted for a solution using text 
messages. This paper detail the reasons for doing so, and in 
the process shed light on important issues and aspects that 
one has to reflect upon when wanting to choose an ED col-
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

lection method. We will do so by explaining and describing 
the technical set up, and the deliberation behind its construc-
tion. We will also detail our experiences from a pilot trial of 
the system that ran over a four-week period with 28 partici-
pants with rheumatic disease, as well as share and discuss the 
findings from a focus group and questionnaire survey con-
ducted as part of the same pilot. Further, a brief conclusion 
and planned further work is provided. 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF REQUIREMENTS, ENSUING SOLUTION 
AND PILOT STUDY 
This section describes the requirements as expressed by 
NKRR, as well as detailing the solution that was developed 
and the pilot testing of the system.  
A. System requirements and the solution developed 
Below we detail the requirements a potential system had 
to meet. Further, we provide a description of the ensuing 
system developed. 
1) System Requirements 
For their clinical study outlined above, NKRR required 
an electronic collection system that would allow them to 
collect selected PROMs twice weekly for a year from per-
sons with rheumatic disease across Norway. The participants 
were to take part in exercise classes in heated pools suited to 
the needs of people with joint disease. The PROMs would 
help indicate whether or not classes had any clinical effect. 
The system had to allow flexible access for the research-
ers from multiple geographical locations. The project re-
quired a service that could contact participants, i.e., persons 
with rheumatism, and have them answer back during a 24 
hour period. NKRR also wanted to check on the status of the 
responses, control the content of the messages, and specify 
when they were sent out. If a reply had not been received by 
a certain time, a reminder message was to be sent out. 
It was also important that solution was secure and that 
the privacy of the participants was preserved. This meant that 
the relevant privacy laws in Norway were followed. Partici-
pants would be recruited from several different research and 
medical institutions, and a contact person at each institution 
would be in charge of recruiting and adding the participants. 
The system would have to stay up during the entire year 
that the study would be running. The collected data was to be 
readily available both online and easily downloadable for 
analysis using statistical software. These requirements 
helped shape the final solution that was developed by NR in 
close cooperation with NKRR. 
2) The solution developed 
The final system is a web application with a front end 
that is run by a web interface written in Ruby on Rails. We 
only allow encrypted access (i.e., HTTPS) to the web appli-
cation and only authenticated users are allowed further ac-
cess. 
The interface (see Figure 1) allows logged in users, e.g., 
researchers or other relevant staff members, to add partici-
pants to a study, schedule what days messages are sent out, 
write the message text, look at responses from the partici-
pants, and export the results for use in spread sheets or  
 
Figure 1.  The user interface of the web application.  
statistical programs. Special administration users are also 
able to create additional system users. This allows users to be 
added for each institution that decides to join in a particular 
study. 
Participants are identified by an ID selected by the re-
searchers. Participants’ mobile phone numbers are entered  
into the database upon creation. For privacy reasons, users 
with no administration privileges are only able to see the 
phone numbers of the participants they have added. These 
users are able to see all incoming results, but they cannot see 
which result corresponds to which phone number. 
As for sending and receiving messages to participants, 
we decided to use text messages for this. After some investi-
gation, we found a Linux-based software solution called 
SMS Server Tools 3, and a modem that was well supported 
by it. We were then able to write some programs that would 
look at the information in the database, and send out remind-
er messages to those that had not sent a message yet. The 
program runs periodically using the cron service on the 
Linux system. The message that is sent out asks the partici-
pants to reply about the level of W, X, Y, Z (e.g. pain, stiff-
ness, fatigue or any relevant PROM) and answer on a scale 
from zero to ten. The participant should send back the an-
swer with each number separated by a period (e.g., 10.8.7.5). 
An overview of the whole system is provided in Figure 2.   
Another program is run whenever we receive a text mes-
sage. This program checks the phone number that sent the 
message and imports the message if it matches any numbers 
of the participants in the database. It will also parse out the 
numbers in the message and match them up to the values that 
are asked for in the study. As a precaution, we also store the 
raw message in the database as well. This ensures that if a 
message is incorrectly interpreted, we can look at the original 
message and see if there was a problem. Administration us-
ers also have access to the logs of every message that has 
been sent out and received, so it is possible to know if the 
system is working. 
The system is designed such that on certain days at a cer-
tain time, participants will get a message where they answer 
with some numerical values. If a response has not been re-
ceived in 24 hours, a reminder text message is sent out. If 
participants have not answered the question after that 24- 
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
Figure 2.  An overview of the system. The patients respond to text mes-
sages generated by the system. Their answers are store in a database. The 
collected data can be viewed in a web interface, or exported for analysis. 
hour period, the response for that period is dropped and will 
be counted as non-compliance in the study protocol. The 
system interprets the incoming message, and if this is ambig-
uous or cannot easily be interpreted according to built-in 
logic, it is discarded.   Since the days that the message is sent 
out is the same for each week, we used a simple interface 
where we could set up the actions for each day of the week 
(either send a message, send a reminder, or do nothing) and 
then specified how many weeks this action should repeat. 
The system is running continuously on a virtual machine, 
and is backed up regularly. There are monitoring scripts 
checking for and alerting us if there is any malfunction. 
B. Pilot study 
A pilot study was conducted to test the system in real 
world conditions, as well as to compare the compliance rate 
and to examine validity and reliability issues between P&P 
questionnaires and their text message equivalents. 28 adults 
with a rheumatic disease were recruited to take part. They 
were asked to answer the following text message every other 
day for four weeks: “Degree of pain, fatigue, stiffness and 
how the disease affects your ability to conduct daily activi-
ties? 0=none, 10=worst possible. Remember a full stop sepa-
rating the numbers. Thank you!1” The message consisted of 
abbreviated questions used in rheumatological research, e.g.: 
“Please, state how much pain you are experiencing! 0 = no 
pain, 10 = worst pain possible, 0 2 3…9 10”. The questions 
were also provided in full text to the participants on small 
laminated cards that they could carry with them. 
Every other day they were asked to report the same 
PROMs using P&P. The responses for both modalities were 
a value between 0 and 10 for each PROM. A text message  
with the correct syntax could look like this: “1.2.3.4”. All the 
P&P responses were to be mailed to the study coordinator. 
                                                             
1 
Text messages have a 160-character limit per message. This mes-
sage is 160 characters in Norwegian. 
Detailed written instructions were provided for each partici-
pant. Since the pilot study format alternated days with texts 
and P&P, we did not use the text message reminder func-
tionality if a response was missing. 
In total, the participants would respond with 14 text mes-
sages and 14 P&P forms to be compliant with the protocol. 
The data from the incoming texts was imported into SPSS 
statistical software for analysis. The P&P data was manually 
typed in to the same software. To obtain the participants’ 
perspective, we conducted a focus group after the pilot was 
completed to discuss the experiences with five of the partici-
pants. In addition we mailed out a questionnaire survey to 
the participants asking 14 questions related to their participa-
tion and ED collection. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Below follows a brief summary of the experience from 
the pilot divided into data collection issues and participants’ 
feedback provided in the focus groups and questionnaires. 
A. Data Collection Issues 
The system worked satisfactorily for the duration of the 
pilot with no downtime. Only brief comments about the in-
tegrity and quality of the incoming data will be provided 
here, as such results will be reported more comprehensively 
in a future publication. Overall, the text message data sets 
were more complete than the P&P data sets; that is, there 
was fewer missing data in the text message records when 
compared to the P&P records. 
Further, as we were able to monitor the incoming text 
message data, respondents could be contacted if there were 
repeated violations of the protocol, e.g. systematic syntax 
error in the responses, or numerous missing data. The project 
coordinator contacted two of the participants once to guide 
them on how to respond correctly after detecting incomplete 
incoming data. 
Based on the experiences gained in the pilot, we made 
adjustments to the system and added features. This included 
new logical rules of how the incoming messages were to be 
interpreted, and the possibility to access a log of all outgoing 
and incoming text messages.  
B. Focus groups and questionnaire survey 
We used a focus group and a questionnaire survey to ob-
tain feedback on how the participants experienced taking part 
in the pilot. 
1) Focus group 
The purpose of the focus group was to get input from the 
respondents on how they experienced taking part in the pilot. 
This input was used in the development process to further 
improve the solution. Five participants – two male, three 
female – took part. The focus group session lasted 90 
minutes and was audio recorded. An interview guide was 
used to structure the session. 
In the pilot, all five focus group participants had used 
smartphones that they carried with them at all times. They 
stated that they had responded to all messages, except one 
who had forgotten to answer on a couple of occasions. It was 
pointed out that it sometimes was socially inappropriate to 
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

answer, and this meant that they responded at a later time. 
One of the participants said that it could be somewhat social-
ly awkward to receive a message in the presence of others, as 
others may see the message content of the message. This was 
especially sensitive if the participant did not want others to 
know that the participant had a rheumatic disease. 
In the pilot the text message was sent out to all respond-
ents at 3 P.M. Three informants preferred this time, while 
two preferred to receive a message between 5 and 7 P.M. If 
they were to receive a reminder, all agreed that this should be 
sent out the same day as the original text message. 
Few practical problems were raised. One informant re-
ported problems sending a response on a couple of occa-
sions, but was unsure if this was because of problems with 
the mobile phone or with the network. Another person 
thought she had used a wrong syntax in a reply once, but 
assumed that the message went through. Despite this uncer-
tainty, none of the group members wanted to receive a re-
ceipt acknowledging that their answer had been received and 
was a valid response. 
One of the informants had been abroad during parts of 
the pilot, but had not experienced any practical problems 
receiving and sending texts using foreign mobile networks. 
Anecdotal evidence of occasional delays in receiving texts 
sent between international mobile networks are known. 
The whole group preferred text messages to P&P, and 
they thought it was easy to respond using the mobile phone. 
There was some interest in using a smartphone app as a re-
sponse medium. It was highlighted that this would enable 
them to answer more in-depth on suitable questions instead 
of the 160-character restriction on text messages. As they all 
had smartphones, this limit of 160 characters per text mes-
sage poses no practical and usability limitation as the phone 
will automatically combine and present two or more both 
outgoing or incoming messages into one message on their 
screen. Some older phone, however, split messages longer 
than 160 characters into multiple messages that must be 
opened separately. This could be a usability issue. 
Several of the participants stated that it was very helpful 
to have the laminated card with the questions written out in 
full. As for the text used in the text message, it was suggest-
ed to include an example of a correct response, e.g. 
“3.5.6.9”. 
There were also a number of suggestions and views con-
cerning the principal idea of collecting PROMs. Some of the 
issues raised were the problem with quantifying subjective 
experiences such as pain and fatigue. It was also suggested 
that they would also like to be able to add additional infor-
mation like stress levels, mood, and other factors that will 
possibly influence the PROMs.  
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SURVEY RESPONDENTS. 
Number of responses (N): 
12 
Gender: 
10 women; 2 men 
Age range (years): 
27 to 62 (mean 50 and sd 12.2; 
median 55) 
Type of phone: 
Touch UI 8 
Standard keyboard 3 
Touch UI & physical keyboard 1 
2) Questionnaire survey 
The purpose of the questionnaire survey was to gain in-
sight into how the respondents had experienced taking part in 
the pilot. It was mailed out to 20 of the pilot participants as 
we lacked the addresses for the remainder. The characteris-
tics of the respondents are given in TABLE I. 
All but two stated that they had a 100% data completion 
record using the mobile phone. One had simply forgotten to 
reply on one or more occasions, and another was busy and 
could not respond on one or more occasions. Two-thirds 
agreed that 3 P.M. was a suitable time to receive a text mes-
sage to respond to, while the rest suggested a different time 
window. Suggested times ranged from 5 P.M. to 8 P.M. 
Nine out of 12 would like to have a text message remind-
ing them to answer if they have not done so, whereas two did 
not, and one did not know. Of those that wanted a reminder, 
five would like this the same day as the original message 
while four suggested the next day. 
No one reported any technical problems that affected 
their performance, and one-third of those answering had 
been abroad during periods of the month long pilot. 10 pre-
ferred text message to P&P, one did not have a preference, 
and one answer was discarded as several mutually exclusive 
choices had been selected. 
Seven would consider using the mobile phone to register 
health related information such as pain, fatigue and stiffness 
on a regular basis, two did not, and three were not sure. A 
comment from one of the respondents was that such infor-
mation should not be collected more frequently than month-
ly. In terms of other types of information that they would 
consider to register on their mobiles was information relating 
to exercise (50%); dietary information (50%), and intake of 
medication (25%). 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES 
Below follows a discussion of the collection method cho-
sen, as well as an elaboration on several implementation is-
sues.  
A. Discussion 
There are a number of electronic capture methods. How 
wise was the decision to opt for text messages as a collection 
method in this project? While creating mobile apps or web 
apps at present is a favourite topic in the business world, we 
had no guarantee that potential respondents would own 
phones able to run such apps. To run apps, the participants 
would need a smartphone that would run Android, Blackber-
ry, iOS, Windows Phone, or similar. Since there are a num-
ber of different platforms, it would mean either choosing 
only one platform or creating versions of the app for all plat-
forms. This would have been very resource demanding for 
this small project. 
Since the prevalence of rheumatism increases with age 
and it is a chronic disease [12], many of the potential re-
spondents would be older. As smartphone ownership 
amongst the elderly is still low, we decided that this would 
preclude many potential participants from entering the study. 
This would have had the potential to cause bias in the results. 
One could for instance expect that a majority of participants 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

would be younger if one opted to go for a mobile app or a 
web app given this groups higher smartphone ownership. 
An option would be to lend participants smartphones for 
the duration of the project. This measure would be both cost-
ly and would require a great deal of training and support. 
Research has also shown that seniors would like to have 
basic phones, and that complex phones can be confusing 
[13]. Making them use a new smartphone seemed to be an 
option that could end up being both costly and fraught with 
support problems. 
Further, we were sure that there would be a wide variety 
in the functionality of the mobile phones amongst potential 
participants. Text messages were the only method we could 
be sure that everyone had access to. Text messages are also 
so ubiquitous in Norwegian society that we could be sure 
that participants could answer a text message without any 
training. They would be able to use their own phone that they 
are familiar with. 
Another reason for using text messages was that they are 
cheaper than data costs when participants are abroad. A mo-
bile app or web app would require some sort of data connec-
tion, either over Wi-Fi or using mobile data. Many Norwe-
gians with rheumatic disease travel to countries in Southern 
Europe for the winter as a therapeutic measure, and roaming 
data is currently much more expensive than a roaming text 
message. Text messages only require GSM coverage, and 
this available across the populated world. The use of text 
messages also allows for two-way communication: allowing 
us to do things like send out encouragement messages to 
keep up motivation. 
Although, text messages have many advantages in the 
context of this particular project, there are a number of short-
comings one needs to keep in mind. One limitation is the 
160-character limit per message. This limits the number of 
questions one can pose, as well as the amount of information 
the responses can contain. In our case, we were able to ask 
for four PROMs in each message based on abbreviated P&P 
questions. Using an app we could have been much more 
flexible in terms of mimicking the original P&P questions 
used, and thereby presenting the respondent with one ques-
tion at the time in full. The respondent could then answer a 
particular question before moving on to the next. 
We could have worked around this by sending multiple 
text messages for the participants to answer one at a time. 
This has been done in prior projects [11]. We considered this 
too inconvenient and intrusive for the respondents, so we 
opted to go for one message per communication. 
Another problem using text messages is that the partici-
pants need to structure their response in a manner that is 
easily 
interpreted 
by 
the 
system, 
e.g., 
“val-
ue1.value2.value3.value4”. This is because there is no inher-
ent structure in the text message itself. When we are parsing, 
we look for any numbers that are separated by any non-
number character, not just a period. We chose to be liberal in 
what we accept since participants may forget the exact for-
mat of the answer. Although we have flexibility in the sys-
tem, the possibility of the respondent making an error is al-
ways there. This may result in missing or corrupted data, and 
subsequent incomplete data sets. 
This problem can easily be addressed when one uses apps 
as a response medium as each question is linked to a re-
sponse, and there are measures one can make to ensure re-
spondent answers are well formatted. One can even use text 
messages as the medium for sending well-formatted respons-
es from an app and avoiding expensive data charges as well. 
Yet, this may add another level of complexity if there are 
problems with the text messages. It also does not give a great 
experience for informing the participants: first, they get a 
text message informing them they need to answer, and then 
they need to start up the app to respond. 
Another issue with text messages is that there is no guar-
antee that they will be received and no indication for suc-
cessful delivery. You can only know that a message was 
sent. Messages are also either sent with weak encryption or 
no encryption depending on the service provider that is send-
ing the message. These issues need to be considered to de-
termine the reliability, security, and privacy you wish to 
have. All of these issues can be addressed in an app. 
It seems like text messages are useful when there are few 
and brief questions requiring short responses, whereas apps 
allow for many questions as well as opens up for open-ended 
questions and different types of responses such as multiple 
choice and Likert scales. We have summarized some of the 
pros and cons for text messages and apps in TABLE II. 
In our project, we believe that the advantages with text 
messages outweigh their disadvantages. The use of an app 
would have excluded too many people from taking part. Al-
ternatively, were we to have supplied smartphones to all par-
ticipants, the added expense and resources for training, sup-
port, and follow-up would have been prohibitive. 
In addition, an app requires the selection of an implemen-
tation platform. This would further have shut out potential 
participants. A possibility in the future when all phones are 
smartphones would be to use a web app that would run in a 
 
TABLE II.  
PROS AND CONS FOR USING SMS OR APP ON SMARTPHONE. 
SMS 
App on smartphone 
Pros 
Cons 
Pros 
Cons 
• Universal 
technology. 
• Highly 
adopted in 
elderly age 
group. 
• Works on all 
phones. 
• Only requires 
mobile cov-
erage. 
• Can use 
respondents 
own phone. 
• Maximum of 
160 charac-
ters. 
• May have to 
re-
ceive/respond 
with several 
messages. 
• Need to in-
terpret in-
coming mes-
sage. 
• No guarantee 
of delivery. 
• No guarantee 
of privacy. 
• Very flexible 
in terms of 
design and 
user inter-
face. 
• Can design 
layout of 
questions 
very similar 
to P&P origi-
nals. 
• Can control 
input through 
design. 
• Easier to 
automatically 
insert data 
into database. 
• Need expen-
sive 
smartphone. 
• Many differ-
ent platforms 
to design for. 
• Few elderly 
have 
smartphones. 
• High thresh-
old for use. 
• Roaming data 
fees may in-
cur. 
• May need 
training. 
• May have to 
provide 
phone for 
respondent. 
 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

web browser. This would also be able to run on PCs and 
tablets, providing a solution for the collection of PROMs on 
multiple platforms. 
B. Implementation Issues 
We saw two possible solutions for sending and receiving 
text messages. One solution was to use a commercial text 
messaging service. These are services that have infrastruc-
ture for sending and receiving many text messages and can 
be controlled through a web service. These are typically used 
for large surveys. The second solution was to create our own 
system by getting a subscription for only text messages and 
either controlling a mobile phone or installing a GSM mo-
dem. Regardless of which solution we would choose, we 
would have to write some custom software to send the text 
messages and store the responses. Ultimately, we decided to 
go with our own custom solution instead of using a text mes-
sage service. The main reason being that adding a text mes-
sage service meant adding another data processor into the 
mix; this meant extra cost and paperwork and eventually an 
extra contract that needed to be signed. Further, we were 
concerned about the implications of doing this in terms of 
security and privacy. We also felt that developing our own 
solution would be good experience in seeing how text mes-
sages services worked. 
 We only allow encrypted access through HTTPS to the 
web application for the researchers and other admin person-
nel, and only authenticated users are allowed further access. 
This solution was chosen as it provides adequate safety, 
while at the same time allowing access in institutions such as 
hospitals and research facilities that may have strict security 
policies when it comes to Internet access that would prevent 
other types of communication. 
An advantage to using a web app is that the website can 
be accessed by researchers and admin personnel from any 
location with Internet access instead of having to be on a 
certain network, e.g. a certain hospital or research institution.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper we have detailed the development and im-
plementation of a system that collects PROMs by way of text 
messages, as well as shared our deliberations in the devel-
opment process. Further, we have detailed our findings and 
experiences from a pilot run of the system, which included a 
focus group and a questionnaire survey. 
A major issue for us was the decision to use the more 
traditional medium of text messages for communication as 
opposed to an app installed on a smartphone. We feel that for 
our purpose and within the domain of rheumatology, text 
messages provide the best overall solution. We further ex-
pect that text messages will be suitable to use in the foresee-
able future. 
The context for use is within clinical research, but we al-
so believe that text messages can be an appropriate medium 
also in clinical practice when PROMs are to be collected 
over time to be used in patient follow up and care. Its 
strengths lie in its simplicity, ubiquitousness in Norwegian 
society and the fact that no new hardware or software is re-
quired for the respondent. We are, however, convinced that 
in future, we will all carry smartphones, and that an app or 
perhaps a web app will be the preferred medium for carrying 
out PROM collection. Meanwhile, as our experiences have 
showed - text messages are more than adequate. 
The system is currently being used in the aforementioned 
heated pool clinical research project that will last for approx-
imately one year. We have a number of concrete features and 
improvements we would like to include in future implemen-
tations of the system. A more flexible and individual text 
message schedule, and a smartphone version giving patients 
the option to chose response modes are among the possible 
improvements. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank all the persons who took part in 
the pilot. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Bowling A. Measuring health outcomes from the patient's 
perspective. In: Bowling A, Ebrahim S, editors. Handbook of 
health research methods: Investigation, measurement and 
analysis. Maidenhead: Open University Press, 2005: 428-444. 
[2] Muldoon MF, Barger SD, Flory JD, Manuck SB. What are 
quality of life measurements measuring? BMJ 1998; 316 
(7130):542-545. 
[3] Crawley JA, Kleinman L, Dominitz J. User preferences for 
computer administration of quality of life instruments. Drug 
Information Journal 2000; 34:137-144. 
[4] Fitzpatrick R, Davey C, Buxton MJ, Jones DR. Evaluating 
patient-based outcome measures for use in clinical trials. 
Health Technol Assess 1998; 2 (14):i-74. 
[5] Raymond SA, Ross RN. Electronic subject diaries in clinical 
trials. Applied Clinical Trials 2000; March:48-58. 
[6] Shiffman RN, Hufford M, Paty J. The patient experience 
movement. Applied Clinical Trials 2001; February:46-56. 
[7] Bolger N, Davis A, Rafaeli E. Diary methods: capturing life 
as it is lived. Annu Rev Psychol 2003; 54:579-616. 
[8] Dale, O. & Hagen, KB. (2007). Despite technical problems 
personal digital assistants outperform pen and paper when 
collecting patient diary data. J Clin Epidemiol. 2007 
Jan;60(1):8-17. 
[9] Abernethy, A. P., Herndon, J. E., Wheeler, J. L., Patwardhan, 
M., Shaw, H., Lyerly, H. K. and Weinfurt, K., Improving 
Health Care Efficiency and Quality Using Tablet Personal 
Computers to Collect Research-Quality, Patient-Reported Da-
ta. Health Services Research, 2008, 43: 1975–1991. 
[10] Gwaltney CJ, Shields AL, Shiffman S. "Equivalence of Elec-
tronic and Paper-and-Pencil Administration of Patient-
Reported Outcome Measures: A Meta-Analytic Review". 
Value in Health, 2008, 11 (2): 322–333. 
[11] Anhøj J, Møldrup C. Feasibility of Collecting Diary Data 
From Asthma Patients Through Mobile Phones and SMS 
(Short Message Service): Response Rate Analysis and Focus 
Group Evaluation From a Pilot Study. J Med Internet Res; 
2004, 6(4). 
[12] Wong, R., Davis, A.M., Badley, E., Grewal, R. and Moham-
med, M. Prevalence of Arthritis and Rheumatic Diseases 
around the World A Growing Burden and Implications for 
Health Care Needs. MOCA2010-07/002. 2010. Arthritis 
Community Research & Evaluation Unit. 
[13] Mallenius, S, Rossi, M & Tuunainen, V. Factors affecting the 
adoption and use of mobile devices and services by elderly 
people - results from a pilot study. 6th annual Global Mobility 
Roundtable, Los Angeles. 2007. 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

