Document-Driven Care Pathways Using HL7 CDA
John J Chelsom
Centre for Health Informatics
City University
London, UK.
john.chelsom.1@city.ac.uk
Ira Pande, Ian Gaywood
The ORCHID Project
Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust
Nottingham, UK
ian.gaywood@nuh.nhs.uk
Conceição Granja, Stein Roald Bolle
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway
Tromsø, Norway.
{conceicao.granja, stein.roald.bolle}@telemed.no 
Abstract—We describe the use of HL7 CDA documents for
representing and driving the execution of care pathways in the
open source cityEHR health records system. The method is
illustrated using example pathways for electronic pre-operative
planning, at the University Hospital of North Norway, and for
an  osteoporosis  treatment,  at  the  Nottingham  University
Hospitals  in  the  UK.  Both  have  a  requirement  to  involve
patients in telehealth consultations prior to attendance at the
hospital.  Template  HL7  CDA documents  are  created  using
simple tooling (spreadsheets) to model the care pathway. The
template  document  is  then  instantiated  with  data  from  a
specific patient encounter to start the pathway. As the pathway
progresses,  the  document  is  updated  to  reflect  the  current
status of tasks and actions; once the pathway is completed the
CDA document is stored permanently in the patient record, as
the history of the pathway and its execution.
Keywords  -  HL7  CDA;  care  pathway;  ontology;  clinical
document; pre-surgical planning.
I.  INTRODUCTION
The cityEHR [1] is an open source health records system
that uses ontology models to define the structure of the
clinical record, following the high-level recommendations of
the ISO 13606-1 [2] model and the HL7 Clinical Document
Architecture (CDA) [3].
Clinical  data  are  gathered  through  messaging  from
external systems, or entered by users as forms or letters. All
data  are  stored  as  clinical  documents  in  the  Extensible
Markup Language (XML) [4], using the HL7 CDA standard.
This contrasts with EHR systems in which data are stored in
a  relational  database;  the  rationale  for  storing  as  CDA
documents  is  that  health  records  are  primarily  records
systems, incorporating longitudinal data sets and repeated
observations of the same data on multiple occasions, rather
than normalised data repositories.  
Here we describe the modelling of care pathways as
clinical documents using CDA, so that they are specified,
processed  and  stored  in  the  patient  record  in  a  similar
manner to any other clinical document.
Integrated  care  pathways  have  been  defined  as
"structured  multidisciplinary  care  plans  which  detail
essential steps in the care of patients with a specific clinical
problem" [5]. This definition matches clinical practice, and is
a useful basis for the implementation of executable pathways
in electronic health records systems.
Closely related to integrated care pathways are clinical
guidelines, which seek to recommend best practice in clinical
care based on the current evidence, and clinical protocols.
Clinical protocols are procedures that define how guidelines,
and other best practice, should be implemented at a local
level. Many approaches have been proposed and adopted for
the representation of pathways, guidelines and protocols, but
relatively few have been part of an operational health records
system, as concluded in systematic reviews by Gooch &
Roudsari [6] and by Loya et. al [18]. 
The study by Wakamiya and Yamauchi [7] identified
seventeen standard features of electronic care pathways, and
recommended three features to be considered as the most
important: adaptable checklists, measuring variance (of the
pathway as performed from the original library version), and
recording statistics.
We set out the objectives for our approach to modelling
care pathways in Section II and describe the representation
of  pathways  in  Section  III,  including  references  to  the
literature on alternative approaches. Section IV describes
how a pathway, once expressed as a CDA document, can be
progressed in an operational EHR system, from inception
through to completion. We then present, in Section V, some
examples of out approach for modelling pathways in the
context  of  telehealth  and  draw  our  conclusions  on  the
effectiveness of the approach in Section VI.
II. OBJECTIVES
Several key drivers led to the consideration of HL7 CDA
as  the  format  to  represent  care  pathways.  The  cityEHR
system uses an ontology-driven modelling approach [8] to
create a data dictionary which includes data entries, elements
(as per the ISO 13606-1 model), and a specification of how
entries are combined into sections of compositions. Each
composition corresponds to an HL7 CDA clinical document.
For the purposes of the cityEHR, these documents can be
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

messages (from external systems), forms, or letters. In the
future, they may also include orders and prescriptions. 
Our research question was to determine the feasibility of
using HL7 CDA to specify, execute and document integrated
care pathways.
The objectives of our approach were therefore to:

model care pathways as clinical documents;

use the same HL7 CDA model as all other clinical
documents in the system;

design user interaction with the pathway that was
integrated with other actions on clinical documents;

store completed pathway documents in the record as
a history of the actions completed;

use that historic record to show the variance of any
completed pathway from its original library version.
Implementation  of  the  functionality  to  meet  these
objectives  has  been  informed  by  previous  studies,
methodologies for representing pathways, and guidelines,
most notably the Guideline Interchange Format (GLIF) [9],
the guideline modelling language PROforma [10], and the
ontology-based approach described by Daniyal et al. [11].
III.
CARE PATHWAYS AS CLINICAL DOCUMENTS
A
Clinical Documents in cityEHR
The cityEHR has a basic architecture for clinical data that
includes components from the ISO 13606-1, and HL7 CDA
standards. Using this architecture, an information model is
created for each specific clinical application. This model
defines a data dictionary of entries and elements, together
with a specification of how those entries are grouped into
sections  and  compositions.  Hence,  a  form  for  entering
clinical data is represented as a composition that consists of
sections  (with  sub-sections  nested  to  any  level),  entries
within sections, and elements within entries.
The architecture, and the specific information models
built from it, are represented as ontologies using the Web
Ontology  Language  (OWL/XML)  [12].  The  information
model is used to generate a runtime configuration for the
system, including template CDA documents that are used for
forms  and  letters  created  by  user  through  a  web-based
interface. Once completed, the CDA documents are stored in
an XML data store as a persistent record for each patient;
while  in  progress,  forms  and  letters  can  also  be  stored
between  user  sessions  so  that  they  do  not  need  to  be
completed  in  a  single  session,  and  can  be  worked  on
collaboratively by more than one user.
Extensions  specific  to cityEHR  allow for  conditional
display of sections, entries or elements, calculated element
values, default values, and constraints expressed using the
standard XPath language [13]. XPath has various built-in
functions, and can reference data in entry/element pairs in
the historic record, or in the current clinical document.
B
Care Pathways as HL7 CDA Clinical Documents
Care pathways, in cityEHR, are  modelled  as clinical
documents, adopting the same approach taken for modelling
forms or letters. A pathway is a CDA document, containing
sections (nested to any level) and entries, as shown in Figure
1.  Sections  correspond  to  tasks  in  the  pathway;  entries
correspond  to  individual  actions.  Hence,  the  pathway is
represented as a hierarchical decomposition of tasks and sub-
tasks, with actions forming the leaf nodes of the hierarchy.
The XML structure of a CDA document is ideal for
representing the hierarchical decomposition of tasks in a
pathway,  and  the  processing  of  the  pathway  can  take
advantage of some general properties of XML as a hierarchy
of document nodes, in which parent nodes have child nodes
which are an ordered set of siblings.
We have used the term 'action' to denote the atomic unit
of activity in the pathway, since this meaning is most widely
adopted in the modelling of pathways, and guidelines (for
example, in GLIF [9], and PROforma [10]). In more general
representations of workflow processes, such as the Business
Process Execution Language (BPEL) [14] and the Unified
Modelling Language (UML) [15], the term 'activity' is used.
In our CDA documents, an action is modelled as an entry
which is an HL7 Act, so the terminology is quite consistent.
cda:ClinicalDocument (Pathway)
cda:section (Task)
unranked
cda:section (Task)
cda:entry (Action)
cda:act link to subject document
cda:section (Task)
cda:entry (Action)
cda:section (Task)
ranked
cda:entry (Action)
cda:entry (Action)
cda:act link to subject document
cda:act link to subject document
cda:act link to subject document
Figure 1. Care pathway as an HL7 CDA document.
Although the importance of hierarchical decomposition
of  processes  is  acknowledged  in  BPEL  (as  structured
activities), and in GLIF, no distinct terminology is used for
tasks  that  can  be  decomposed  into  a  set  of  actions.  In
PROforma, an action is modelled as being a sub-type of task,
rather than as having a containment relationship, hence our
use of the term 'task' is not consistent with PROforma.
In cityEHR, a task is a section in the document that can
contain any combination of sub-sections (tasks), or entries
(actions). Sections can be designated as being 'ranked' or
'unranked' (cityEHR extensions to HL7 CDA), which for
forms and letters define how the contents of the section
should  be  laid  out  (vertically  or  horizontally),  but  for
pathways also define the order in which tasks and actions
should be performed (sequentially or concurrently).
An action is performed by a user outside the pathway by
completing a form (for clinical data entry and/or review),
writing a letter, or completing another pathway. Each of
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

these  three  types  of  actions  has  an  associated  clinical
document (form, letter, or pathway) as its subject which is
completed by one or more users, and then stored in the
patient record; when the subject document is completed and
stored, its associated action is completed in the pathway. 
C
Decisions and Looping
Decisions  in the  pathway (conditional  progression  of
alternative branches) are modelled in cityEHR by attaching
conditions to sections, and entries, in exactly the same way
as other clinical documents. When used in forms, or letters,
these conditions determine whether the section, or entry, is
displayed  to the user;  for  pathways  they also  determine
whether the task or action is performed.
To model loops in the pathway (repeated branches of
progression), the repeated branch is created as a separate
sub-pathway which is performed as the subject of an action
in the main pathway, and includes an action which performs
the  sub-pathway  itself.  The  loop  will  continue  until  a
condition on that action in the sub-pathway evaluates to
'false'.
IV.
PROGRESSING THE CARE PATHWAY
Transient
Store
Data
Process
Persistent
Store
Records
Pathway
Template
Clinical
Document
Pathway
Document
Subject
Document
Notification
Document
Pathway
Document
Subject
Document
Notification
Document
Pathway
Document
Instantiate
Pathway
Start
Pathway
Perform
Actions
Progress
Pathway
Perform
Actions
Progress
Pathway
Complete
Pathway
Figure 2. Automatic progression of the care pathway.
A
Automatic Progression
Tasks and actions in the pathway have a status that can
assume one of four values:
Charted;
Triggered;
In progress;
Completed.
All tasks and actions start in the 'charted' state (equivalent
to the dormant state in PROforma) and progress through to
the 'completed' state. A pathway is completed when all its
top-level tasks are 'completed'; at this point every task, and
action, in the pathway also has the status of 'completed'.
A task is 'in progress' when any of its contained tasks or
actions are 'in progress', and is 'completed' when all its
contained tasks and actions are 'completed'. Each action has
an associated subject document, and is 'completed' once that
document is completed and stored in the patient record.
The 'triggered' state extends the set of action states in
PROforma, and is required because specific processing is
needed to move the status of an action from 'triggered' to 'in
progress'.  The  sequence  in  which  tasks  and  actions  are
triggered  is  determined  by  the  document  order  of  the
corresponding sections and entries in the pathway. A task or
action can only be triggered when its parent task (i.e., the
task that contains it) has progressed to 'in progress'.
For an 'unranked' task, all its immediate children in the
document hierarchy are triggered as soon as the parent task
is 'in progress'. For a 'ranked' task, each child is triggered
when it has no preceding siblings (i.e., is the first child), or
once its preceding siblings have all been completed.
The progression of the pathway begins when the user
selects a new pathway from the templates available in the
data dictionary. The template CDA document is loaded, and
the CDA header is instantiated with the demographics data
for that patient. The user interaction in cityEHR uses the
XForms standard [16] which is a useful way to implement
web-based forms. In XForms, there is a clear separation of
concerns between the model in XML (the CDA document in
this instance), the view in XHTML, and the user controls
(e.g., controls for data entry, drop-down selection, etc.).
The recursive nature of the triggering of tasks/actions,
and the completion of tasks, can be managed by binding of
the status attribute on XML elements for cda:section and
cda:act. Hence, triggering and completion 'bubble' through
the document without the need for recursive function calls.
Once loaded, the user can review the pathway and adapt
it to the current clinical context before starting it. On start,
each of the triggered actions results in two documents being
created in the transient data store for the patient. The first is
the HL7 CDA document required as the subject of the action
(i.e., a form, letter or pathway to be completed); the second
is a notification document (also HL7 CDA) which holds
details of the user role designated to perform the action, and
the  timing  of  the  notification  to  those  users  (can  be
immediate or with a specified time delay). The pathway
document  itself is also stored  in the transient  store;  the
pathway is now 'in progress' and can be accessed by other
users. The relationship between the pathway, subject and
notification documents is shown in Figure 3.
Pathway
Subject (Form, Letter, Pathway)
Notification
cda:documentationOf
cda:serviceEvent
cda:id
cda:documentationOf
cda:serviceEvent
cda:id
cda:act
cda:subject
cda:id
Figure 3. Linking pathway, subject and notification documents
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Users  perform  actions  by  completing  the  associated
subject document, which can be accessed by several means.
Firstly, it can be accessed directly from the pathway by
clicking on the action; the subject document will then be
loaded in place of the pathway document. Alternatively, the
subject document is also shown in the list of 'in progress'
documents of that type, whenever any user views the record
for that patient; it can then be loaded directly from there.
Finally, subject documents can also be accessed through
the user's “In-Tray”. This is a user-centred, cross patient
view which shows the list of all notifications that are targeted
at the role of the current user. The user can click to view the
details of any notification, and can then move directly to the
record for that patient, to access the subject document.
When any document is completed, and is stored in the
patient record, a check is made to see whether it is the
subject of a pathway action. If it is, then that pathway is
immediately loaded, causing its automatic progression. On
load, all 'in progress' actions are checked to see if their
subject document has been completed, which will in turn
complete the action. These then bubble through to complete
applicable parent tasks and trigger any subsequent actions.
B
Manual Progression
A user can adapt a pathway before it starts, or while it is
in progress, by setting the start time of actions, changing the
role of user performing an action, or forcing tasks or actions
to complete.
With the pathway document loaded, the user can make
any of these changes, and then commit them to the pathway
document, by selecting a manual progression. The status of
each task and action is held in a 'session status' attribute for
the duration of the user session. On load, the session status
attributes of each task/action is set to the status as recorded
in the pathway document. The session status can then be
changed  by  the  user,  with  any  consequent  changes  to
completed tasks, or triggered tasks/actions, bubbling through
the document. The following changes can be made:

Tasks  can  be  'completed'  from  'charted'  or  'in
progress'  states  and  can  revert  from  'completed'
back to the committed status;

Actions can be 'completed' from 'charted', 'triggered'
or 'in progress' and revert back to 'charted' or 'in
progress'.
This means that a 'completed' task, or action, may gain
that status through automatic progression when actions are
completed by users, or through manual progression as the
pathway  is  adapted  by  a  user.  Hence,  the  result  of  a
completed task or action is recorded in an attribute which
takes one of the following values:

Completed - the task or action was completed after
users  had  completed  the  subject  documents
associated with the charted action(s);

Skipped - manual progression to ‘completed’ from
the ‘charted’ state;

Aborted - manual progression to 'completed' from
the 'in progress' state.
V. EXAMPLES OF DOCUMENT-DRIVEN PATHWAYS
We  illustrate  our  approach  to  document-driven  care
pathways  using  two  examples;  one  for  electronic  pre-
operative  planning  at  the  University  Hospital  of  North
Norway (UNN), the other for an osteoporosis treatment at
Nottingham University Hospital in the UK. Although based
on clinical practice, both have been adapted here for the
purpose of illustration. Care pathways are often documented
as flowcharts and there have been some efforts to formalise
this representation using UML Activity diagrams [17]. We
have chosen to show the two examples using this familiar
visualisation.
In contrast, the cityEHR models pathways as HL7 CDA
documents through a multi-stage process that starts by using
a spreadsheet to specify the pathway with its constituent
tasks, actions, and conditions, as part of the full information
model  for the  application. This model  includes the  data
dictionary of clinical entries and elements, together with the
forms,  letters,  and  pathways  used  in  the  EHR.  The
spreadsheet is saved as XML, transformed (using XSLT, the
Extensible Stylesheet Language for Transformations) to an
OWL/XML ontology, as the base representation, and then
further transformed to a set of HL7 CDA XML documents.
A
Pre-Surgical Planning
Our  first  example  is  a  pathway  for  electronic  pre-
operative planning at UNN (Figure 4). 
Figure 4. Pre-operative assessment as a UML Activity Diagram
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Patients  provide  information  for  assessment  before
attending the hospital, and then undergo separate surgical
and anaesthetic assessments. Following these, the surgery
may be cancelled, may proceed or the patient may undergo
further assessment and/or treatment, before being reassessed
for surgery. For modelling, this pathway is interesting, since
it includes concurrent progression of two main assessments,
and a decision point, with three possible outcomes.
cda:ClinicalDocument (Pre-surgical assessment) 
cda:section (Patient communication)
cda:entry (Admit patient)
cda:act Admit patient for surgery
cda:entry (Send patient questionnaire)
cda:section (In-patient surgery)
cda:entry (Send patient letter)
cda:entry (In-patient assessment)
cda:act In-patient assessment 
cda:act Patient questionnaire
cda:act Patient letter
High risk patient = 'no'
cda:section (High risk assessment)
cda:entry (High risk assessment)
cda:act High risk assessment
High risk patient = 'yes'
Figure 5. Pre-operative assessment pathway as an HL7 CDA document
cda:ClinicalDocument (In-patient assessment) 
cda:section (Patient assessment)
unranked
cda:entry (Cancel surgery)
cda:act
Cancel surgery
cda:entry (Anaesthetic assessment)
cda:section (In-patient surgery)
cda:entry (Surgical assessment)
cda:act Anaesthetic assessment
cda:act Surgical assessment
Fit for surgery = 'no'
cda:section (Patient review)
cda:entry (Medical review)
cda:act
Investigation and treatment
Fit for surgery = 'Further information required'
cda:entry (Perform surgery)
cda:act
Perform surgery
Fit for surgery = 'yes'
cda:entry (In-patient assessment)
cda:act
In-patient assessment
Figure 6. Sub-pathway for In-patient  Assessment
When modelled as HL7 CDA, the pathway is split into
three documents; one for the overall assessment (Figure 5),
one for assessment as an in-patient (Figure 6) and one for
further assessment of high risk patients (outside our scope).
B
An Osteoporosis Treatment
Our second example is a pathway for an osteoporosis
treatment at Nottingham University Hospital in the UK. This
forms part of the ORCHID system [8] which is designed to
gather data in routine outpatient encounters, both for clinical
care and for secondary use in clinical studies, linked to
samples in the local biobank. The pathway (Figure 7) covers
a bone health assessment with various outcomes, including
denosumab treatment, which is the focus of our example.
When modelled as a CDA document (Figure 8), this
pathway is split into two, allowing for repetition of the
denosumab treatment. Three consecutive decision points, at
the start of the pathway, are combined into sets of conditions
on  the  possible  branches  of  progression,  and  the  data
required  to evaluate those conditions are reviewed  on a
single form at the start. 
Figure 7. Bone health assessment as a UML Activity Diagram
The data required for the decision (i.e., DEXA scan,
Vitamin D, and CG-GFR) are received using HL7 messages
from laboratory systems. The pathway can be progressed
using the most recently recorded values from the laboratory,
but a manual review step is necessary to ensure that the tests
were performed within an acceptable timescale; if not, then
new tests must be ordered.
cda:ClinicalDocument (Bone health assessment)
cda:section (Assessment)
cda:entry (Vitamin D treatment)
cda:act Vitamin D treatment
cda:section (Treatment)
cda:entry (Review test results)
cda:act Review test results
cda:section (denosumab treatment)
cda:entry (denosumab treatment)
cda:act denosumab treatment
T < -2.5 and Vitamin D =< 35
cda:entry (Oral biphosphenate)
cda:act Oral biphosphenate
T < -2.5 and Vitamin D > 35 
and CG-GFR >= 35
cda:entry (Book clinic)
cda:act book in specialist clinic
T < -2.5 and Vitamin D > 35 
and CG-GFR < 35
Figure 8. Bone health assessment as a an HL7 CDA Document
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

cda:ClinicalDocument (denosumab treatment)
cda:section (Treatment)
cda:entry (Repeat treatment)
cda:act denosumab treatment
cda:section (Review)
cda:entry (denosumab treatment)
cda:act Treat with denosumab
Five years of treatment = 'no'
cda:entry (Review bone health)
cda:act Review bone health
Delay = 6 months
Five years of treatment = 'yes'
Figure 9. Sub-pathway for denosumab treatment
The sub-pathway for denosumab treatment (Figure 9) is 
called recursively in an action until five years of treatment 
have been completed. Note that similar pathways exist for 
the treatments of vitamin D replacement, and oral 
bisphosphonate, but are outside the scope of this example.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
We have implemented support for executable, integrated
care pathways in the cityEHR health records system, using
HL7 CDA documents to model and record the pathway. This
approach enables pathways to be handled in much the same
way as other clinical documents in the system, and allows
them to be stored as a permanent record of the actions taken
to fulfil the pathway. Hence, any variance from the original
library  pathway  is  captured  in  the  final  version  of  the
document stored in the patient record, and statistical analysis
of variation can be made by querying the records database.
We have demonstrated that the approach is sufficient to
implement  typical  pathways  in different  clinical  settings,
including pathways with conditional branches and repetitive
loops. The actions that can be performed in a pathway are
currently  restricted  to  clinical  data  entry/review,  clinical
letters, or sub-pathways; hence not all the standard features
of  pathways  identified  by Wakamiya  and  Yamauchi  [7].
However,  the  addition  of  order  communications  (i.e.,
computerized  physician  order  entry)  to  cityEHR  would
enable support of the full set of standard features.
At present, the transition from a UML Activity diagram
as the representation for a pathway, to HL7 CDA document
models is not automated. The template pathway CDA is
created  using  the  same  tooling  as  for  other  clinical
documents in the system: a spreadsheet is used to define the
document, its sections, and entries, saved to XML format,
transformed to an ontology representation in OWL/XML,
and then transformed again to a CDA document. It would be
possible to use UML tooling which enabled the activity
diagram to be saved as XML, but whether this could then be
transformed into the OWL/XML model remains an open
question. However, the reverse transformation is relatively
straightforward, whereby a representation as a UML activity
diagram is generated from the OWL/XML model.
REFERENCES
[1] Chelsom  J,  Ahluwalia  R,  Dogar  N.  (2013)  Clinician-led
development  of  electronic  health  records  systems.  Stud
Health Technol Inform. 2013;183:3-8.
[2] ISO  13606-1:2008  Health  informatics  -  Electronic  health
record  communication  -  Part  1:  Reference  model.
International  Organization  for  Standardization.  Geneva,
Switzerland. 2008.
[3] Dolin, R. H., Alschuler, L., Boyer, S., Beebe, C., Behlen, F.
M., Biron, P. V., & Shvo, A. S. (2006). HL7 clinical document
architecture,  release  2.  Journal  of  the  American  Medical
Informatics Association, 13(1), 30-39
[4] Bray, T., Paoli, J., Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., and Maler, E.
(2000). XML 1.0 (second edition). W3C Recommendation,
W3C. http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml/. 
[5] Campbell, H., Hotchkiss, R., Bradshaw, N., & Porteous, M.
(1998). Integrated care pathways. British Medical Journal,
316, 133-137.
[6] Gooch,  P.,  &  Roudsari,  A.  (2011).  Computerization  of
workflows,  guidelines,  and  care  pathways:  a  review  of
implementation  challenges  for  process-oriented  health
information  systems.  Journal  of  the  American  Medical
Informatics Association, 18(6), 738-748.
[7] Wakamiya, S., & Yamauchi, K. (2009). What are the standard
functions  of  electronic  clinical  pathways?.  International
journal of medical informatics, 78(8), 543-550.
[8] Chelsom,  J.  J,  Pande  I,  Summers  R,  Gaywood  I.  (2011)
Ontology-driven  development  of  a  clinical  research
information  system.  24th  International  Symposium  on
Computer-Based Medical Systems, Bristol. June 27-June 30
ISBN: 978-1-4577-1189-3
[9] Ohno-Machado, L., Gennari, J. H., Murphy, S. N., Jain, N. L.,
Tu, S. W., Oliver, D. E., ... & Barnett, G. O. (1998). The
GuideLine  Interchange  Format  A Model  for  Representing
Guidelines.  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Informatics
Association, 5(4), 357-372.
[10] Sutton, D. R., & Fox, J. (2003). The syntax and semantics of
the PROforma guideline modeling language. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 10(5), 433-443.
[11] Daniyal,  A.,  Abidi,  S.  R.,  &  Abidi,  S.  S.  R.  (2009).
Computerizing clinical pathways: ontology-based modeling
and execution. In MIE (pp. 643-647).
[12] Motik, B., Parsia, B., & Patel-Schneider, P. F. (2009). OWL 2
Web  Ontology  Language  XML  serialization.  W3C
Recommendation,  W3C–World  Wide  Web  Consortium.
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-xml-serialization.
[13] Clark, J. and DeRose, S. (1999). XML Path language (XPath)
version 1.0. W3C Recommendation, W3C–World Wide Web
Consortium. http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath.
[14] Andrews, T., Curbera, F., Dholakia, H., Goland, Y., Klein, J.,
Leymann, F., ... & Weerawarana, S. (2003). Business process
execution language for web services.
[15] Dumas, M., & Ter Hofstede, A. H. (2001). UML activity
diagrams as a workflow specification language. In 
 UML
≪
≫
2001—The  Unified  Modeling  Language.  Modeling
Languages, Concepts, and Tools (pp. 76-90). Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
[16] Boyer, J. M.. (1999). XForms 1.1. W3C Recommendation,
World Wide Web Consortium. http://www.w3.org/TR/xforms.
[17] Hederman, L., Smutek, D., Wade, V., & Knape, T. (2002).
Representing  clinical  guidelines  in  UML:  a  comparative
study. Studies in health technology and informatics, 471-477.
[18] Loya, S. R., Kawamoto, K., Chatwin, C., & Huser, V. (2014).
Service Oriented Architecture for Clinical Decision Support:
A  Systematic  Review  and  Future  Directions.  Journal  of
medical systems, 38(12), 1-22.
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

