Near-Infrared Mobile Imaging Systems for e-Health
Lighting the Veins
Hüseyin Aşkın Erdem 
Computer Engineering Department
Dokuz Eylul University
İzmir, Turkey 
e-mail: huseyinaerdem@gmail.com
Işıl Erdem  
Civil Engineering Department
Izmir Institute of Technology
İzmir, Turkey 
e-mail: isilerdem@iyte.edu.tr
Semih Utku
Computer Engineering Department
Dokuz Eylul University
İzmir, Turkey 
e-mail: semih@cs.deu.edu.tr
Abstract—The evaluation of the methods used in image
processing techniques with new perspectives has enabled the
development of applications to address a wide range of usage
areas. One of these perspectives brought to image processing is
spectroscopy. Spectroscopy is a method based on obtaining
information about the molecular structure of a substance as a
result of its interaction with electromagnetic radiation (light
photons). In this study, the interaction of haemoglobin in the
blood vein structure with near-infrared light photons is
utilized.
With
this
interaction,
superficial
veins
can
be
detected. The results obtained in this study are used to create a
system which presents e-health measurements to the user
through virtual environment. The system is created in the form
of a mobile e-health application via smart devices or tablets.
The data obtained by the near-infrared camera is passed
through various image processing filters and stages as the
software part of the study. In this way, vein structures are
obtained. New images will be taken from the same veins of the
user at certain time periods. The images taken at different
periods will provide information to the user whether these
veins have any problems with blood flow. This information will
also be shared with the doctor. This procedure is aimed to
create
a
pre-diagnosis
data
with
the
calculated
mobile
measurements.
Keywords
-
image
processing;
near-infrared
light;
spectroscopy; e-health; virtual pre-diagnosis environment.
I.
INTRODUCTION
As
a
result
of
rapidly
increasing
technological
developments, it is revealed that multipurpose systems which
can work anywhere any time are extremely necessary. Now,
not only desktop computers, but also mobile phones or
tablets that we always carry with us as a part of our lives,
offer a wide range of applications. Although the most
common usage areas of these applications are telephone
communication
and
photo
functions,
there
are
also
applications covering various fields, such as calculation,
notepad, calendar planner, office applications, step counters,
and health measurements. Among these applications, health
applications are often used for mobile measurement. For
example,
there
are
applications
which
include
the
measurement of heart rate, the calculation of calorie intake or
the daily intake of water, allowing health measurements to be
taken.
In terms of wearable devices, specialized devices, such as
blood pressure meters or step wristbands, can also be used to
make such measurements. Instead of being purchased
separately, such devices can be purchased as an integrated
system in a single device which is always preferred by the
user.
Health measurements taken via electronic devices are
usually carried out by means of customized sensors located
on the device. These sensors can take measurements from
the
outside
world
by
means
of
motion,
vibration,
temperature, speed, or position detection. There are also
special devices operating with infrared light, which are
frequently used in hospitals. These devices are connected to
the fingers to monitor the heartbeat.
Vascular access, commonly used in blood tests in
hospitals, is an invasive process for the patients. It is among
the most common applications used in the field of health. In
order to perform this process with less pain for the patient,
health personnel should open the vascular system, at the first
attempt [1]. This depends both on the experience of the
health
personnel
in
this
process
and
some
of
the
characteristics
of
the
patient.
Characteristics,
such
as
ethnicity (skin color) or adipose tissue may vary from person
to person. These characteristics lead to difficulties in
detecting the vein to be opened, while increasing the number
of trials and giving more pain to the patient. Facilitating vein
detection may result in less painful vascular access. To this
point, various devices have been developed commercially
and are currently being used in hospitals. However, these
devices using Near-InfraRed (NIR) light are not suitable for
daily use, as they are only intended for a particular purpose
(heart rate measurement or vascular access detection) and are
very expensive devices.
Among the commercial devices operating with NIR
light, which are currently used in hospitals, VeinViewer,
which has two different versions: Veinviewer Vision (the
smaller one) and Veinviewer Flex (portable), is used to
detect veins in vascular access. The device reflects the
superficial vein image obtained with the use of NIR light on
the patient's skin, so that the anatomical location of the
veins remains the same. AccuVein AV300 is an easy-to-use
and a hand-held device used for locating and visualizing
superficial veins [9][10][22].
Currently used commercial devices capture the image of
the vein with the infrared Charge Coupled Device (CCD)
camera. The captured image is processed and reflected back
(as NIR vein image) to the skin surface onto which the
camera focuses [14].
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The main method for vein visualization with infrared
light used to obtain images in this study is basically similar
to the methods used by commercial devices. However, the
study differs from these devices in terms of processing the
images and determining the blood flow changes in the veins
from the processed images. After processing the images,
only the Region Of Interest (ROI) in black-and-white colour
format can be seen in the NIR image. The vein shapes
obtained from the images will be compared with the vein
images taken from the same tissue region of the same
person in different periods (weeks or months, depending on
the disease to be followed). This way, it is aimed to examine
whether the blood flow in the veins within the image has
changed or not. At this point, the comparison process will
be determined by calculating the differences between these
veins (more precisely, haemoglobin in the blood) in the next
image taken. If any decrease in the lines representing the
blood flow within the veins in the images is to be detected,
then an obstruction in the vein will be conveyed to the
doctor as a preliminary diagnostic data.
NIR
devices
which
are
successful
in
providing
visualization in vascular access, often have high costs.
Therefore, they are only used for limited applications
(vascular access, vascular visualization) for specific targets
in private treatment centers [24][25].
Plastic
surgeons
and
dermatologists
applying
neurotoxins (Botox, Dysport) and fillers can perform more
sensitive injections
with
AccuVein,
which
is a
vein
illuminator device. In addition, complications that may
occur after the surgery/application (especially bruises, for
aesthetic reasons) can be reduced with these devices [23].
Along with advancing imaging technologies, various
vein imaging systems involving the use of NIR light have
also been developed for different uses. These systems are
able to perform identification procedures, from the palm
veins
or
finger
veins
by
performing
vein
imaging.
Specialized ophthalmoscope systems which use NIR light to
detect diseases of the eye veins are also available [2].
In this study, which is prepared within the scope of an
ongoing PhD thesis, how to design a NIR vein imaging
system that can be used as a mobile e-health application is
discussed in terms of hardware and software. Also, the
features of the cameras and Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs)
that can be used to design such a system have been specified.
The software steps that should be passed during the
processing of the NIR images obtained by using these
cameras have been explained in general. In Section 2,
literature review about the use of NIR light is given. In
Section 3, the basics of NIR imaging are discussed and their
hardware characteristics are explained. In Section 4, the
software processing stages of the NIR images to be obtained
by using the hardware part of the developed system are
mentioned. In Section 5, the steps of developing an
exemplary NIR imaging system are discussed. Finally, the
overall summary of the study is given in Section 6.
In Section 2, the literature review related to the studies
involving the usage of NIR light is examined.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
In the majority of studies involving the use of NIR
imaging, vein imaging has been addressed for vascular
access or safety. Ai et al. [3] combined images from the vein
imaging system with augmented reality environment and
aimed to reduce the time of intravenous injection. In this
way, they determined that they could increase the ejection
success rate and the efficiency by the system they developed.
Chaio et al. [4] stated that they could provide better clinical
care in vein discovery by using VueTek Scientific Veinsite
in their superficial vein visualization. They examined how
patient characteristics (ethnicity, age, or adipose tissue)
affect the vein visibility by the system they developed.
Fernandez and Armada [5] emphasized that the guide system
they developed for catheter insertion can be used as a robotic
guide system in the future. With their proposed multisensory
systems, they identified the surrounding veins and paired
them on a three-dimensional reconstructed surface. As a
result, a complete representation of the vein region was
obtained. Asrar et al. [6] compared three different cameras
having different light characteristics (using visible light,
infrared light and NIR light) for vein recognition to be used
in vascular access. As a result, they stated that the most
effective results from these cameras were obtained by NIR
camera. Zhong et al. [7] examined smartphone security for
authentication and developed the veinDeep system. In this
system, vein images that uniquely identify the person were
obtained by using an infrared depth sensor. They also
underlined that, for authentication security, the disadvantages
of fingerprints leaving marks on the surface or the human
face being easily registered in the public area are not present
in vein patterns. Bazrafkan et al. [8] obtained the vein
structure map that they used in the authentication system
they developed, by using the vein structure in the middle part
of the finger. According to their results, they found that
image acquisition and fusion methods provided by the
system, which can be easily integrated into handheld devices,
are suitable for vein imaging. Şeker and Engin [1] created 
two separate phantoms, liquid and solid, that will mimic
human blood and skin. They used plastic tubes instead of the
veins through which the liquid phantom would pass. In this
way, they developed a system that can be used in vein
network analysis with NIR imaging. The advantages of the
system they developed include the utilization of non-ionizing
radiation, providing a cost-effective design and providing
algorithmic simplicity. Elnasir and Shamsuddin [9] reported
that, with the help of the palm vein recognition system,
which uses NIR light with a wavelength of 850 nm,
penetration up to 3.57 mm depth in the palm area was
observed. According to the results of the experiments, they
stated
that
the
system
they
designed
gave
99.74%
recognition rate and 100% verification rate. Shotri et al. [10]
argued that a camera hardware capable of detecting NIR
light could be developed by configuring an ordinary webcam
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to develop a more cost-effective vein imaging system. In
addition, the noise on the image due to the use of a webcam
with a low imaging capability has been improved by the
noise reduction algorithm.
In Section 3, the fundamentals of NIR imaging are
discussed and their hardware characteristics are explained.
III.
NEAR-INFRARED IMAGING
Light is an electromagnetic radiation including different
wavelengths and frequency ranges, which carries energy in
the form of photon particles. The diagram formed of these
different ranges of the light is known as the electromagnetic
spectrum. In this spectrum, "the visible region" that the
human eye can detect is the region having wavelength range
of
about
380-770
nm.
The
wavelengths
of
the
electromagnetic spectrum covering 380 nm and below are
ultraviolet and X-Ray; 770 nm and above are infrared and
radio waves [11].
The electromagnetic spectrum region in the wavelengths
range of 700-900 nm is defined as the NIR optical window
because it is located near the visible region [12][13].
When light energy strikes a matter, the matter exhibits
different interactions with respect to the molecules that make
it up. As a result of examining these interactions, the method
of obtaining information about the molecules that make up
the substance is called spectroscopy [11].
The spectroscopy method which provides information
from the substance was the basis for imaging of blood veins.
The radiation in the NIR optical window is scattered by
direct penetration into the lower layers by tissues, such as
skin and adipose layer with low absorption coefficient. On
the other hand, blood mostly absorbs these NIR photons due
to its haemoglobin molecules. NIR photons are absorbed
slightly by oxygenated haemoglobin in arteries and strongly
absorbed by deoxygenated haemoglobin [1][12][15].
NIR spectroscopy, in other words, the visualization of
blood veins with the use of NIR radiation, requires cameras
that have different characteristics than ordinary cameras used
in daily life. NIR systems use cameras with infrared-pass
filters (which allow these rays to reach the camera lens)
instead of the filter that blocks NIR rays in ordinary cameras
[14].
The improved work is designed with an external infrared
camera integrated into a mobile device (smartphone or
tablet). The built-in cameras in all smart devices currently
available on the market, designed for daily use, have a filter
that allows visible light to pass through, but prevents the
passage of NIR light. However, the method of vascular
imaging to be used in this study is based on the detection of
NIR light. From this point of view, there are two methods for
the user to get a NIR image with his/her mobile device.
Either in a professional manner, it should be carefully
interfered with the mobile device camera (NIR light blocking
filter should be removed and replaced with NIR light passing
filter), or an external camera should be integrated to a mobile
device via USB support. In the study, a USB-powered NIR
camera integrated into the mobile device was used. With this
NIR camera, the users have the ability to take their own
images and send them to the server computer with a mobile
application prepared with Android Studio [20] within the
scope of the study. The images transferred to the server
computer were processed with the MATLAB [21] program
and the vein images consisting of black and white colors
were recorded. The parts representing the veins in these
recorded images were examined. The results (investigating if
the pixel values representing the blood vein have changed or
not in the next image) obtained by processing these images,
which the user will periodically capture and transfer to the
server, will be sent to the doctor as preliminary diagnostic
data and to the user for information purposes via the server.
From the hardware perspective, in the NIR imaging
process, the tissue to be imaged is illuminated by a NIR LED
(700-900nm) or laser light. The skin layer passes most of
these light photons towards the lower layers, whereas the
haemoglobin in the veins absorb it. Therefore, in the NIR
image taken by the camera, parts of the reflected photons
appear light-colored. The other dark parts represent the
veins. [1]
Lingyu and Leedman [15] found that the optimal infrared
image was at 800 nm wavelength. They obtained hand
dorsum, palm and wrist images using NIR LEDs having this
wavelength. Bazrafkan et al. [8] used 10 NIR LEDs with 940
nm wavelength in their studies. Şeker and Engin [1] worked 
with 875-940 nm NIR LED which they placed in a ring
form. Shotri et al. [10] stated that, in order to develop a cost-
effective vein imaging system, the best illumination can be
provided with an IR sensitive webcam in the middle and
concentric LED placement around it. Seymen et al. [16], in
order to make the veins more prominent, they suggested
making the participants carry 3 kg weighted bags, squeeze
elastic ball for 1 minute and put ice on the hands before hand
photographs were taken. In this way, they aimed to facilitate
vein detection in needle and laser applications.
In Section 4, the software processing parts of the NIR
images to be obtained by using the hardware part of the
developed system are mentioned.
IV.
PROCESSING NEAR-INFRARED IMAGES
Digital image processing is based on the processing and
modification of digital images in electronic media by various
ways [17].
The processing of an image basically takes 5 steps; (1)
The image is transferred to digital media with a hardware,
such as camera or scanner that can record in desired format
(NIR image, thermal image, etc.), (2) Defects caused by
camera or ambient lighting on the raw image transferred to
digital media are eliminated
by pre-processing (noise
removal, contrast enhancement, etc.), (3) In the pre-corrected
image, the parts of the target area of interest (defined as ROI)
are separated from the rest of the image, (4) Identification of
the parts that have formed specific patterns (corner, curve,
etc.) on the ROI, (5) Making inferences on the identified
patterns by various methods (machine learning, data mining,
etc.) [18]. Bazrafkan et al. [8] determined that the vein image
was best obtained from the second region in their NIR finger
images, by developing a biometric authentication system
with a finger vein map. In order to obtain the vein details,
first the High Pass Filter in the frequency domain was used
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Hardware Part

Illumination of the image with 850 nm NIR LEDs.

Reflected rays form the image with the NIR camera.
Software Part

Convertion of a NIR image that is RGB to a grayscale
image.

Elimination of small noises with a median filter.

Two consecutive CLAHEs for intensity adjustment.

Detecting the edges of blood veins by applying Gabor
filter.

Binarization is applied according to the threshold value.

Morphological procedures that sharpen the blood veins
are performed.

Determination of ROI.
and then the median filter was applied. Finally, vein
structures were extracted with the Gabor filter. Zhong et al.
[7] obtained vein patterns from the NIR image with the
adaptive threshold filter and eliminated the background with
the depth threshold filter. They created references as key
points from the vein patterns they obtained, and compared
these reference points with test vein patterns and calculated
similarity score. Francis et al. [19] performed the software
part of the system developed for the detection of blood veins
in the forearm in 9 steps; (1) Convertion of the NIR image to
a gray-level image, (2) Noise elimination with median filter,
(3) Gaussian filter for smoothing, (4) Adjusting the intensity
of images with Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram
Equalization (CLAHE), (5) Detection of vein edges with the
Gabor filter, (6) Separation of veins and other tissues by
Otsu's thresholding method, (7) Sharpening of vein shapes
by morphological procedures, (8) Obtaining the ROI, (9)
Enhancing the vein image for real-time application.
In Section 5, the steps of developing an exemplary NIR
imaging system are discussed.
V.
APPLICATION
The ongoing doctoral dissertation which includes a NIR
vein imaging system, consists of two parts as hardware and
software, as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1.
Hardware and software parts of the study, and their contents.
In the hardware part, the tissue to be imaged is
illuminated by NIR LEDs having a wavelength of 850 nm.
When NIR photons pass through adipose and skin tissue,
haemoglobin in the blood absorbs them when they penetrate
intravenously. The back-reflected photons are detected by
the NIR camera to produce a NIR image of the illuminated
portion of the tissue.
In the software part, the steps in Francis et al. [19] work
are used. In this section, firstly the Red-Green-Blue (RGB)
image obtained in three-dimensional format is rendered two-
dimensional (including 0 and 1) as grayscale. Secondly, salt
and pepper type small noises are eliminated by applying the
median filter. In the third step, in order to adjust intensity,
CLAHE algorithm is utilized twice in a row and the contrast
of the grayscale image is enhanced. With a re-application of
the median filter, the small noise that may occur in this stage
is also eliminated. In the fourth step, by applying Gabor
filter, the edges of blood veins are detected. In the step five,
with the binarization process used, the grayscale image is
converted to include only black and white images according
to the threshold value, and the blood vein and the
surrounding tissue can be extracted from each other. In the
sixth step, morphological processes (line-shaped shapes
show vein structures better) are applied as pixel insertion or
deletion in order to make the blood veins more specific and
to show their shapes more sharply. In the last step, the ROI
part, which will be studied in more detail on the vein image,
is separated from the other sections by considering pixel
coordinates.
In this study, the raw NIR image of the forearm with
ROI extraction is given in Figure 2. Unlike the working
steps of Francis et al.[19], first the ROI was determined and
then the image processing part was applied. In Figure 3, the
NIR image passing through the filter stages is depicted. The
image that has been converted to the black-and-white colour
format through the image processing stages is given in
Figure 4. The image given in Figure 4 obtained at the stage
of vein extraction of the study will be further improved in
terms of image processing within the scope of future
studies,
and
the
vein
structures
will
be
made
less
discontinuous and more distinctive.
Figure 2.
Raw NIR image with ROI extraction.
Figure 3.
NIR image passed through filter stages.
Figure 4.
NIR image in black and white format.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In Section 6, an overall summary of the study is given.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In commercially or academically developed vein imaging
systems, NIR imaging technique is generally used. In terms
of user health, the NIR imaging technique is mostly preferred
since it does not give harmful beams to the user as in the X-
ray or tomography. Moreover, since it is very easy to obtain
or create NIR cameras (it is possible to obtain a NIR camera
by removing the IR-Cut filter that blocks NIR rays in the
ordinary webcam and replacing it with the IR-Pass filter), it
is possible to come across numerous studies in the literature
with vein imaging systems using such cameras. Most studies
on vein imaging are the basis for security systems using vein
pattern recognition infrastructure. In this study, which is
currently being developed within the scope of a PhD thesis,
the hardware and software steps used to develop a vein
imaging system to be used for mobile measurements via
smart devices are described. In the hardware part, the
wavelength range of the NIR technique and the NIR device
to be used is specified, and it is explained that the acquired
images are generated by the spectroscopy technique. In the
software part, in the guidance of a study in the literature
which software filters and image processing parts should be
applied in order to make the vein images extracted from NIR
images
more
specific
is
explained
and
the
obtained
preliminary examples of the processed images are given.
Within the scope of future studies, the developed system
will be used to monitor patients who may have suspected
vascular occlusion. Periodically, NIR images can be obtained
from patients anytime anywhere by using NIR camera which
is integrated with a mobile device (via smartphone or tablet)
and personal vein databases will be created in this way.
Following the processing of the images and the steps in the
software part, the doctor will be notified of any vascular
occlusion,
and,
this
way,
preliminary
information
is
presented to the doctor and possible delays in treatment are
avoided. The blood flow changes detected in the images
along with the blood flow rates and numerical values after
calculation will be reported both to the doctor and the user
via server by e-mail.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Seker and M. Engin, “Deep tissue near-infrared imaging for
vascular network analysis”, Journal of Innovative Optical Health
Sciences, Journal of Innovative Optical Health Sciences, 10 (3),
pp. 1650051.1-12, 2016.
[2]
K. Yılmaz, “The design of a new portable ophthalmoscope and 
utilization of the device for diagnosis and identification”,
Doctoral Dissertation, Ege University, The Graduate School of
Natural and Applied Sciences, 2014.
[3]
D. Ai et. al., “Augmented reality based real-time subcutaneous
vein imaging system”, Biomedical Optics Express, 7 (7), pp.
2565-2585, 2016.
[4]
F. B. Chiao et. al., “Vein visualization: Patient characteristic
factors and efficacy of a new infrared vein finder technology”,
British journal of anaesthesia, 110 (6), pp. 966-971, 2013.
[5]
R. Fernández and M. Armada, “Multisensory system for the
detection and localization of peripheral subcutaneous veins”,
Sensors, 17 (4), pp. 897,1-16, 2017.
[6]
M. Asrar, A. Al-Habaibeh, and M. Houda, “Innovative algorithm
to evaluate the capabilities of visual, near infrared, and infrared
technologies
for
the
detection
of
veins
for
intravenous
cannulation”, Applied Optics, 55 (34), pp. D67-D75, 2016.
[7]
H. Zhong, S. S. Kanhere, and C. T. Chou, “VeinDeep:
Smartphone unlock using vein patterns”, In Pervasive Computing
and Communications (PerCom), IEEE International Conference
on, pp. 2-10. IEEE, March 2017.
[8]
S. Bazrafkan, T. Nedelcu, C. Costache, and P. Corcoran, “Finger
vein biometric: Smartphone footprint prototype with vein map
extraction
using
computational
imaging
techniques”,
In
Consumer
Electronics
(ICCE),
2016
IEEE
International
Conference on, pp. 512-513. IEEE, January 2016.
[9]
S. Elnasir and S. M. Shamsuddin, “Palm vein recognition based
on 2D-discrete wavelet transform and linear discrimination
analysis”, Int. J. Advance Soft Compu. Appl, 6 (3), pp. 43-59,
2014.
[10] A. Shrotri, S. C. Rethrekar, M. H. Patil, and S. N. Kore, “IR-
webcam imaging and vascular pattern analysis towards hand vein
authentication”,
In
Computer
and
Automation
Engineering
(ICCAE), 2010 The 2nd International Conference on, 5, pp. 876-
880. IEEE, February 2010.
[11] Introduction
to
spectroscopy.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://edu.rsc.org/download?ac=11384 [retrieved: 03, 2020]
[12] H. Rao, P. Zhang, and C. Sun, “Contrast enhancement for the
infrared vein image of leg based on the optical angular spectrum
theory”, Signal, Image and Video Processing, 11 (3), pp. 423-
429, 2017.
[13] S. Crisan, “A novel perspective on hand vein patterns for
biometric
recognition:
Problems,
challenges,
and
implementations”, In Biometric Security and Privacy, pp. 21-49.
Springer International Publishing, 2017.
[14] S. Sawant, Turn webcam to IR sensitive camera. [Online].
Available from:
http://www.instructables.com/id/turn-webcam-
to-IR-sensitive-camera/ [retrieved: 03, 2020]
[15] W. Lingyu and G. Leedham, “Near-and far-infrared imaging for
vein pattern biometrics”, In Video and Signal Based Surveillance,
AVSS'06. IEEE International Conference on, pp. 52-52. IEEE,
November 2006.
[16] V. Seymen, Ö. F. Boyraz, Ö. Çetin, and M. Z. Yıldız, “Hand-vein 
pattern detection from infrared images”, 2nd International
Symposium on Innovative Technologies in Engineering and
Science (ISITES), Karabük, pp. 722-729, 2014.
[17] O.
Marques,
Practical
image
and
video
processing
using
MATLAB: John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[18] A. McAndrew, An introduction to digital image processing with
Matlab: Notes for SCM2511 image processing 1, School of
Computer Science and Mathematics, Victoria University of
Technology,
2004
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.math.hkbu.edu.hk/~zeng/Teaching/math3615/ls.pdf
[retrieved: 03, 2020]
[19] M. Francis, A. Jose, and K. K. Avinashe, “A novel technique for
forearm blood vein detection and enhancement”, Biomedical
Research, 28 (7), pp. 2913-2919, 2017.
[20] Android Studio Official Website. [Online]. Available from:
https://developer.android.com/studio [retrieved: 03, 2020]
[21] MATLAB
Official
Website.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.mathworks.com/ [retrieved: 03, 2020]
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

