Cluster Randomised Controlled Trial of a Mobile Monitoring and Feedback Tool 
Embedded in a Counselling Protocol to Stimulate Physical Activity in Chronically 
Ill Patients 
Study protocol of the It’s LiFe! RCT 
Sanne van der Weegen1 
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Maastricht University, The Netherlands 
s.vanderweegen@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
Huibert Tange 
 School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Maastricht University, The Netherlands 
h.tange@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
Trudy van der Weijden 
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Maastricht University, The Netherlands 
trudy.vanderweijden@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
Renée Verwey1 
 Research Centre Technology in Care, Zuyd University  
of Applied Science, Heerlen, The Netherlands 
renee.verwey@zuyd.nl 
Marieke Spreeuwenberg 
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI) 
Maastricht University, The Netherlands 
m.spreeuwenberg@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
Luc de Witte 
Research Centre Technology in Care, Zuyd University  
of Applied Science, Heerlen, The Netherlands 
luc.dewitte@zuyd.nl
 
Abstract—Physical inactivity is an increasing public health 
concern. The It’s LiFe! monitoring and feedback tool 
embedded in the Self-management Support Program (SSP) is 
an attempt to stimulate physical activity in people with 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease or type 2 diabetes 
treated in primary care. This paper describes the study 
protocol of the It’s LiFe! three armed cluster randomized 
controlled trial in which the effects of the SSP and the added 
value of the tool were evaluated. The main hypothesis was that 
the complete intervention increases participants moderate to 
vigorous physical activity with at least 10 minutes per day, 
after a 4-6 months intervention period. 
Keywords- physical activity, self-management support, 
remote sensing technology, primary care, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, type 2 diabetes. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
According to the World Health Organization (WHO) 
physical inactivity is the fourth leading risk factor for global 
mortality and the cause of 6% of all deaths [1]. Physical 
activity (PA) reduces the risk of developing several diseases, 
and in people with an existing chronic condition it improves 
quality of life and delays complications [2] [3]. Despite the 
benefits of PA, 31% of the people worldwide were 
insufficiently active in 2008 [1]. Therefore, the WHO 
Member States try to reduce physical inactivity by 10% in 
2025 by, e.g., making active transportation accessible and 
safe, developing labor and workplace policies to encourage 
physical activity, encouraging and supporting schools to  
 
 
 
 
have safe accessible spaces for free time activities of the 
students, and by improving physical education for children 
[1]. Another strategy is by incorporating the improvement of 
PA levels of patients into the healthcare process. Especially 
for practice nurses (PN’s) in primary care, coaching people 
with a chronic disease to become more active has become 
part of regular care according to guidelines [4] [5]. However, 
using the right strategies to stimulate people and keep them 
encouraged to be active, remains challenging. A clear 
coaching strategy and the implementation of rapid 
developing technical tools could reinforce and help the PN in 
this coaching role [6]. In the It’s LiFe! project a coaching 
strategy for the PN, which is called the Self-management 
Support Program (SSP), and a monitoring and feedback tool 
which should be embedded in this SSP, were developed [7] 
[8]. A three-month pilot study in two general practices with 
20 patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
(COPD) or type 2 diabetes (DM2) showed promising results 
[9]. However, in this feasibility study no control group was 
present.  
Therefore, the objective of this three armed cluster 
randomized controlled trial (RCT) was to evaluate the 
effects of the SSP and the added value of the It’s LiFe! tool 
on 40-70 years old patients with COPD and DM2 in primary 
care. The primary outcome measure was physical activity in 
daily life. Secondary outcome measures were quality of life, 
self-efficacy and health status. Section 2 of this paper 
describes the study protocol of the It’s LiFe! RCT of which 
an extended version has been published in advance[10]. 
 
1 Both authors contributed equally to this study. 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Figure 1. The It's LiFe! activity monitor and Smartphone app 
 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Study design 
A cluster randomized controlled trial was performed in 24 
general practices in the South of the Netherlands. Practices 
were randomized in three groups. Practice nurses, in 
practices in group one executed the SSP and provided the 
tool, practices in group 2 executed the SSP alone and 
practices in group 3 performed care as usual. Every practice 
was asked to include 5 patients with COPD and 5 patients 
with DM2, which made a total of 240 patients.  
B. Eligibility  
Participants were eligible when they complied with the 
following criteria: 
 
Diagnosed with COPD or DM2 
 
Between 40 and 70 years old  
 
Treated in primary care 
 
Did not comply with the Dutch Norm for 
Healthy Exercise, according to the practice 
nurse 
 
Additional inclusion criteria for the DM2 
patients were a Body Maxx Index>25 and for 
the COPD patients: a clinical diagnosis of 
COPD according to the GOLD-criteria stage 1-
3, being at least six weeks respiratory stable 
and on a stable drug regimen  
 
Access to a computer with an internet 
connection  
 
Not participating in another PA intervention 
 
Sufficient mastery of the Dutch language 
 
No coexisting medical conditions with a low 
survival rate, severe psychiatric illness or 
chronic disorders or diseases that seriously 
influence the ability to be physically active 
C. Recruitment 
1) Recruitment of practices 
General practices in the South of the Netherlands were 
invited by an invitation letter, by telephone and personal 
contact with general practitioners, practice managers, and 
PNs. 
2) Recruitment of participants 
The PN’s sent 20-32 patients, which met the inclusion 
criteria, a general invitation letter. After randomization, the 
PN called the patients to give specific information about the 
group in which the practice was allocated and to ask if they 
wanted to participate. Patients, who decided to participate, 
received an information letter and an informed consent 
form. 
D. Intervention 
Both components of the intervention, the tool and the SSP, 
were developed in a previous user-centred design process 
and tested in an usability and feasibility study [7-9] [11]. 
See Figure 1 for a picture of the It’s LiFe! tool and Figure 2 
for the course of the interventions.  
1) Self-management Support Program (group 1 and 2) 
The SSP consisted of four consultations with the PN and is 
based on the Five A’s model (Assess, Advise, Agree, Assist, 
Arrange), 
a 
counselling 
protocol 
to 
support 
self-
management in a primary care setting [12]. Before the 
consultations, the participants received an information 
booklet with information about the course of the 
intervention, local PA activities and a questionnaire to 
assess their activity level (SQUASH) [13]. In the first 
consultation the PN talked with the participants about the 
current activity level based on the completed SQUASH 
questionnaire, and the PN tried to increase the awareness of 
the health risks of a sedentary lifestyle. The participant 
received a leaflet with information about PA in relation to 
COPD/DM2 [14] [15]. During the two weeks in between the 
first and the second consultation, the PA level of the 
participant was assessed (the pre-measurement); in group 1, 
objectively by the tool and in group 2, by filling out a PA 
diary. Additionally, questions about barriers and facilitators 
for physical activity were answered during this period. In 
the second consultation, the PN and participant set a PA 
goal in minutes per day, based on the pre-measurement and 
the PN encouraged the participant to set up an activity plan 
to reach their goals. The third consultation, 8-12 weeks after 
the start, by mail, phone or in real-life, functioned as an 
evaluation, PA results, goals, barriers and facilitators were 
discussed and if necessary adapted. In the last consultation, 
16-24 weeks after the start, PA performance was discussed 
in relation to behaviour changes, habit formation and 
challenges and goals for the future. 
 
 
 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 2. The different components of the (intervention) groups 
 
2) The tool (group 1) 
The It’s LiFe! tool consists of a 3 dimensional 
accelerometer, a Smartphone app and a web application for 
the participant and the PN. The participants could wear the 
accelerometer at the hip or in their pocket and see on the 
Smartphone app their activity in minutes per day. In 
addition, dialogue sessions were sent which could be 
answered on the Smartphone app or the web application. 
After a goal was set in the second consultation, the real time 
activity results were presented in comparison to the personal 
goal and automated feedback messages were send based on 
the achieved results.  
E. 
Data collection 
For 
the 
data 
collection 
the 
participants 
received 
questionnaires and a physical activity monitor three times 
per post; at baseline, direct after the intervention (4-6 
months after the start) and 3 months after completion of the 
intervention (7-9 months after the start).  
F. Outcome measures 
The primary outcome measure, minutes of physical 
activity per day in the moderate to vigorous category was 
measured with the Pam AM300 (PAM) [16]. Participants 
were asked to wear the PAM on 8 consecutive days. A 
measurement was considered valid if the Pam was worn on 
≥ 5 days for ≥ 8 hours.  
Secondary outcome measures were measured with 
questionnaires. Quality of life was assessed with the 
RAND-36 [17] [18], exercise self-efficacy with the Exercise 
Self-efficacy Scale [19-21] and general self-efficacy with 
the General Self-efficacy Scale [22]. Health status was 
measured with the Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire [23] 
[24] in participants with COPD and with the Diabetes 
Symptom Checklist Revised [25-27] in participants with 
DM2.  
 
 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

G. Statistical analysis 
Differences at baseline between the three groups were 
identified with chi-square, ANOVA and Kruskal Wallis 
tests, p-value ≤0.10 and those variables were considered as 
potential confounder in further analysis. To account for 
dependency among participants in the same general practice 
multilevel analyses were performed.  
 
The main hypothesis was that the complete intervention, 
where the tool was embedded in the SSP increases 
participants’ moderate to vigorous physical activity by at 
least 10 minutes per day, after a 4-6 month intervention 
period, compared to care as usual and that participants 
maintained this increase over three months. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank all participants and practice 
nurses for their time and efforts. The project is funded by 
ZonMw. The companies involved in the development of the 
tool are:  
• 
IDEE Maastricht UMC+ Universiteitssingel 50, 
6229 ER Maastricht, the Netherlands, www.idee-mumc.nl  
• 
Maastricht Instruments Ltd. Oxfordlaan 70, 6229 
EV 
Maastricht, 
the 
Netherlands, 
www.maastrichtinstruments.nl 
• 
Sananet Care Ltd. Rijksweg Zuid 22A, 6131 AP 
Sittard, the Netherlands, www.sananet.nl 
REFERENCES 
[1] WHO. Physical activity fact sheet no 385. World Health Organization.  
Available from: http://www.webcitation.org/6SMZsQsXZ, [retrieved: 
December, 2014]. 
[2] J. L. Durstine, B. Gordon, Z. Wang, and X. Luo, "Chronic disease 
and the link to physical activity", Journal of Sport and Health 
Science, vol. 2: 2013, pp. 3-11. 
[3] K. Hill, P. Gardiner, V. Cavalheri, S. Jenkins, and G. Healy, 
"Physical activity and sedentary behaviour: Applying lessons to 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease", Intern Med J, vol. 2014, pp.  
[4] L. A. Nederland. Zorgstandaard copd. Amersfoort: Long Alliantie 
Nederland; 2013. 
[5] G. E. H. M. Rutten, et al., "Nhg-standaard diabetes mellitus type 2 
(derde herziening)", vol. 56: 2013, pp. 512-25. 
[6] C. Foster, J. Richards, M. Thorogood, and M. Hillsdon, "Remote and 
web 2.0 interventions for promoting physical activity", Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev, vol. 9: 2013, pp. CD010395. 
[7] S. van der Weegen, et al., "The development of a mobile monitoring 
and feedback tool to stimulate physical activity of people with a 
chronic disease in primary care: A user-centered design", JMIR 
mhealth and uhealth, vol. 1: 2013, pp. e8. 
[8] R. Verwey, et al., "Upgrading physical activity counselling in primary 
care in the netherlands: The systematic development of a self-
management support programme combined with mobile technology", 
Health Promot Int, doi: 10.1093/heapro/dau107 
[9] R. Verwey, et al., "A pilot study of a tool to stimulate physical 
activity in patients with copd or type 2 diabetes in primary care", 
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 20: 2014, pp. 29-34. 
[10] R. Verwey, et al., "A monitoring and feedback tool embedded in a 
counselling protocol to increase physical activity of patients with 
copd or type 2 diabetes in primary care: Study protocol of a three-arm 
cluster randomised controlled trial", BMC family practice, vol. 15: 
2014, pp. 93. 
[11] S. van der Weegen, R. Verwey, H. J. Tange, M. D. Spreeuwenberg, 
and L. P. de Witte, "Usability testing of a monitoring and feedback 
tool to stimulate physical activity", Patient Prefer Adherence, vol. 8: 
2014, pp. 311-22. 
[12] J. A. Peterson, "Get moving! Physical activity counseling in primary 
care", J Am Acad Nurse Pract, vol. 19: 2007, pp. 349-57. 
[13] G. C. Wendel-Vos, A. J. Schuit, W. H. Saris, and D. Kromhout, 
"Reproducibility and relative validity of the short questionnaire to 
assess health-enhancing physical activity", J Clin Epidemiol, vol. 56: 
2003, pp. 1163-9. 
[14] NISB. Sportief bewegen met een chronische longaandoening. NISB.  
Available from: http://www.webcitation.org/6PDsk5Av1, [retrieved: 
December, 2014]. 
[15] NISB. Sportief bewegen met diabetes mellitus. NISB.  Available 
from: http://www.webcitation.org/6PDsgeCvk, [retrieved: December, 
2014]. 
[16] S. M. Slootmaker, A. P. M. J. Chin, A. J. Schuit, W. van Mechelen, 
and L. L. Koppes, "Concurrent validity of the pam accelerometer 
relative to the mti actigraph using oxygen consumption as a 
reference", Scandinavian journal of medicine & science in sports, vol. 
19: 2009, pp. 36-43. 
[17] K. I. Van der Zee, R. Sanderman, J. W. Heyink, and H. de Haes, 
"Psychometric qualities of the rand 36-item health survey 1.0: A 
multidimensional measure of general health status", Int J Behav Med, 
vol. 3: 1996, pp. 104-22. 
[18] K. I. Van der Zee, R. Sanderman, and J. Heyink, "A comparison of 
two multidimensional measures of health status: The nottingham 
health profile and the rand 36-item health survey 1.0", Quality of life 
research : an international journal of quality of life aspects of 
treatment, care and rehabilitation, vol. 5: 1996, pp. 165-74. 
[19] B. Everett, Y. Salamonson, and P. M. Davidson, "Bandura's exercise 
self-efficacy scale: Validation in an australian cardiac rehabilitation 
setting", Int J Nurs Stud, vol. 46: 2009, pp. 824-9. 
[20] Y. Shin, H. Jang, and N. J. Pender, "Psychometric evaluation of the 
exercise self-efficacy scale among korean adults with chronic 
diseases", Res Nurs Health, vol. 24: 2001, pp. 68-76. 
[21] M. M. van der Heijden, F. Pouwer, and V. J. Pop, "Psychometric 
properties of the exercise self-efficacy scale in dutch primary care 
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus", Int J Behav Med, vol. 21: 
2014, pp. 394-401. 
[22] R. Schwarzer, and M. Jerusalem. Generalized self-efficacy scale. In: 
Johnston MWSCWJ, editor. Measures in health psychology : A user's 
portfolio. Windsor: NFER-NELSON; 1995. p. 35-7. 
[23] M. Rutten-van Molken, B. Roos, and J. A. Van Noord, "An empirical 
comparison of the st george's respiratory questionnaire (sgrq) and the 
chronic respiratory disease questionnaire (crq) in a clinical trial 
setting", Thorax, vol. 54: 1999, pp. 995-1003. 
[24] T. Glaab, C. Vogelmeier, and R. Buhl, "Outcome measures in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (copd): Strengths and limitations", 
Respiratory research, vol. 11: 2010, pp.  
[25] P. A. Grootenhuis, F. J. Snoek, R. J. Heine, and L. M. Bouter, 
"Development of a type 2 diabetes symptom checklist: A measure of 
symptom severity", Diabetic medicine : a journal of the British 
Diabetic Association, vol. 11: 1994, pp. 253-61. 
[26] R. A. Arbuckle, et al., "Psychometric evaluation of the diabetes 
symptom checklist-revised (dsc-r)--a measure of symptom distress", 
Value Health, vol. 12: 2009, pp. 1168-75. 
[27] K. Secnik Boye, et al., "Patient-reported outcomes in a trial of 
exenatide and insulin glargine for the treatment of type 2 diabetes", 
Health and quality of life outcomes, vol. 4: 2006, pp. 80. 
 
 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

