Designing in Rural Highland Contexts 
Exploring the role of technology in facilitating human connections 
 
Tara French, Jeroen Blom, Sneha Raman  
Institute of Design Innovation, The Glasgow School of Art 
Forres, UK 
Email t.french@gsa.ac.uk, j.blom@gsa.ac.uk, s.raman@gsa.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— There is a need when introducing new technology in 
health and social care settings to involve those who will use the 
technology, or be affected by it, at an early stage of the design 
process. Experience Labs employ a participatory approach for 
different stakeholders to share lived experiences, and 
collaboratively create ideas and solutions for health and social 
care challenges. The Labs serve the whole of Scotland, 
including the remote Highland areas, and are designed 
bespoke to the project goal and context. In this paper, we 
propose that the participatory approach of the Experience 
Labs provides a valuable space for collaboration to explore the 
potential and impact of supportive technology in rural 
communities. Initial findings suggest that participating in 
Experience Labs leads to a better understanding of 
communities of care as established by individuals and support 
structures in place, and how these can be mediated by 
technology. We conclude that the introduction of technology in 
these rural Highland communities of care needs to support 
existing networks, unique to each community, and consider the 
impact on changing existing structures.  
Keywords- rural health; participatory design; community; 
technology; experience labs; care structures; collaboration 
space;  experiential learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A. Health care in rural areas of Scotland 
The Highlands and Islands of Scotland has a population 
of approximately 466,00 [1] and is ‘one of the most sparsely 
populated parts of the European Union’ [2]. The existing 
care infrastructure is facilitated by NHS Highlands and the 
area is served by one general hospital in the Highland capital 
of Inverness. The National Health Service (NHS) in Scotland 
encompasses 14 regional health boards. Each board is 
responsible for providing services and resources to their local 
region. Health services in remote and rural contexts are 
served by GPs, community health care staff, Scottish 
Ambulance Service, and local council [3]. 
B. Challenges for rural communities 
Several challenges exist for rural communities in relation 
to health and social care including access to services [4], 
geographic challenges [4], recruitment and retainment of 
professionals [3] [5] and lack of integrated care infrastructure 
[3]. Although the benefits of telehealth and digital 
innovations are recognised in terms of supporting 
communities and reducing hospital admissions [6], there is a 
scepticism surrounding the usefulness, organisational fit, and 
quality of communication of telemedicine [7]. To date 
telehealth impact has been small [3] and therefore a new 
approach to designing is required for rural communities.  
The role of design in shaping future health and social 
care services is now increasingly recognised across the 
health service. Research in the field of rural primary 
healthcare is also beginning to embrace community 
participatory approaches and outcomes suggest that 
involving communities adds value to the process [3]. Within 
the NHS, design thinking and approaches such as user-
centred health design and evidence based co-design have 
been employed within the context of health improvement [8] 
[9]. Online design tools and toolkits have also opened up 
design to those who are not formally trained designers [10]. 
The toolkits are useful for healthcare staff to involve patients 
in ongoing service improvement, however, their capacity to 
create transformative and sustainable innovations to public 
health and care challenges is not clear. 
The scope of wellbeing and quality of life extends 
beyond enabling patients to experience a good state of 
health, to ensuring that they have dignity, positive 
relationships and feel included in the process. This cannot be 
created and maintained using digital means alone. There is a 
need to ensure that technology is designed to support both 
professionals and patients rather than replace existing 
services and resources, as this can contribute further to 
experiencing feelings of loneliness and isolation. This 
highlights the importance of ‘community’ when considering 
a rural context such as the Highlands and Islands of 
Scotland.   
Design can play a key role in crafting technology to 
facilitate connections between individuals and communities 
by enabling communication, and overcoming some of the 
existing barriers to participation and access.  We term this 
process creating ‘communities of care’ which aims to enable 
individuals to become active agents of their own health, and 
support each other in their community. 
This paper seeks to contribute to the understanding of the 
role of technology in the rural health and care context, and 
the role of design in co-creating sustainable futures with 
health professionals and patients. We begin by introducing 
our design-led Experience Lab approach in section 2, 
highlighting the collaborative and temporal nature of the 
research approach to explore the potential and impact of 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

technology in the delivery of care in rural communities. In 
section 3 we present three case studies of Experience Labs in 
the rural context to illustrate the approach and way in which 
the community of care is established for each. Finally, we 
discuss the knowledge we have gained when designing in the 
rural context and the resulting implications for technology 
innovations. 
II. 
EXPERIENCE LABS: MOBILE TEMPORAL SPACES FOR 
HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE INNOVATION 
When considering the role of technology in health and 
social care innovation, there is a need to involve those who 
will use or benefit from the innovation at a much earlier 
stage of the process [11] to design and develop technology 
that is appropriate within the context.  
Experience Labs are led and developed by the Institute of 
Design Innovation at The Glasgow School of Art. The Labs 
are currently applied within the context of health and social 
care, forming a core part of the Digital Health and Care 
Institute (DHI) [12]. The DHI is an innovation centre funded 
by the Scottish Funding council and is tasked to deliver value 
for the Scottish people and economy by innovating in the 
health and social care sector. The Experience Labs employ a 
participatory design approach to provide a space for 
collaboration 
and 
enable 
co-creation 
with 
different 
stakeholders across a range of projects. We are exploring the 
potential of our approach across the health and social care 
context in order to share our knowledge and learning with 
the wider design community and researchers in this context. 
We hypothesise that our participatory approach can respond 
to the challenges faced in this context through the space we 
create for collaboration and creativity, where we support 
participants towards creating “preferable futures” [13]; 
through designing bespoke tools and artefacts to support 
design activities to make ideas tangible; through the 
interdisciplinary skills of the Lab team; and an evaluation 
approach to communicate the value and impact, and share 
the knowledge and learning. 
It is recognised that Experience Labs are not a new 
concept, however, there are elements which make the 
Experience Lab approach unique in their context. The 
location of the Lab team is distributed: based in Forres on the 
edge of the Highlands and Islands, and Glasgow in the 
central belt of Scotland. Experience Labs are mobile and 
serve the whole of Scotland with projects taking place in 
several locations, for example Wick and Thurso on the North 
coast, the Isle of Skye in the west, Fort William in the South 
and Inverness, the capital of the Highlands in the East (see 
Figure 1). As described previously, the Highlands present 
unique challenges for health and care services and rural 
communities. The Experience Lab team needs to have a 
presence in the area and engage with the local communities 
and organizations in order to gain an understanding of the 
context and landscape, and address the local care challenges 
appropriately. The mobility of the Labs provides the 
opportunity to create temporary spaces, bespoke to the 
project and context, in which concepts can be explored 
quickly.  
The participatory nature of the Labs aims to support the 
development of collaborative relationships through creating 
new communicative spaces and experiential learning [14]. 
Participants are invited to design and evaluate solutions, 
together with the Lab team and with relevant stakeholders, 
with a focus on how proposed solutions would have an 
impact on their individual lives and context. The Lab team 
design the tools and artefacts to support participants to make 
their ideas tangible and use methods such as prototyping and 
role-play to test and iterate ideas during the Lab [15]. The 
collective skill of the team allows for a non-linear process 
that is flexible and can respond to the needs of participants.  
The participants’ lived experience is at the core of the 
insights and concepts emerging from the Labs. The asset-
based approach [16] [17] of the Labs focus on empowering 
participants to be creative, and to share their skills and 
experience towards identifying opportunities for healthcare 
innovation. This allows participants to tackle challenges and 
identify opportunities for change or improvement rather than 
focussing on problems and deficits [16] [17]. 
  
III. 
EXPERIENCE LABS IN THE RURAL CONTEXT: CASE 
STUDIES 
The following section describes three case studies of 
projects carried out in the rural context with communities in 
the Highlands. The projects focus on the needs and 
expectations of people to ensure that health and social care 
services are accessible to all in ways that are relevant and 
desirable. In each case study, we describe the context of the 
project, the design of the Experience Labs and the 
community of care established in the context. Figure 1 
provides a map of Scotland, including population density. 
The map illustrates areas in the Highlands where Experience 
Labs discussed in the case studies have taken place using red 
markers. 
A. Case study 1: Digital brokering 
1) Context: The Digital Brokering project explored the 
potential of a digital platform to connect those who need 
small services to those who can provide them, with a 
particular focus on rural communities. The need for a 
platform was identified by Albyn Housing Association and 
the University of the Highlands and Islands [18]. It was 
found that accessing and exchanging small services between 
residents would have a positive effect on rural communities. 
2) Design: The Experience Lab provided the opportunity 
for multiple stakeholders, including Highland rural residents, 
public sector and third sector representatives to come 
together and map their experiences of accessing services in 
rural communities. The mapping method employed in the 
Lab [19] provided participants with the tools to identify 
people, places and things that were important in terms of 
accessing services. A second session then focussed on the 
potential impact of a digital platform in accessing these 
services in terms of the technological requirements and the 
effect on existing relationships and structures. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

 
Figure 1.  Areas of the Highlands where Experience Labs took place (red 
markers) and population density in Scotland [20] 
3) Community of care: In order to explore the potential 
of a digital platform, the Experience Lab made the current 
experience of accessing services and the potential impact of 
technology support tangible. The community of care in this 
context described the relationships and structures within 
rural areas. The project specifically suggested how an 
envisioned technology would strengthen rather than replace 
structures through offline accessibility, accreditation of 
services and moderation of feedback. Furthermore, it was 
discussed that the platform could indicate opportunities for 
service providers to start/expand a business to benefit the 
community in supporting unmet needs. However, this would 
require careful consideration of an organization with local 
knowledge to prevent bypassing of local businesses and 
potentially damaging existing structures. 
B. Case study 2: Virtual hospice 
1) Context: A key objective of Hospice care is to 
empower individuals and carers to live with life-shortening 
illness in their own communities, by offering support and 
increasing their confidence. This project involved a 
collaboration with Highland Hospice with the aim of 
widening access for patients and professionals and enabling 
higher quality palliative care to be delivered through a 
‘Virtual Hospice.’ The project involved designing a 
sequential series of Labs in order to define the various 
elements of the Virtual Hospice.  
2) Design: The project involved a series of Experience 
Labs with Highland Hospice staff, healthcare professionals, 
patients and a carer. The aim of the Labs was to explore 
awareness, use and barriers to use of Highland Hospice 
services and identify opportunities for Hospice services that 
could be delivered at a distance, as well as ideas for potential 
future services. One of the Labs was replicated across four 
different locations in the Highlands (Inverness, Fort William, 
Isle of Skye, and Wick) using an iterative approach and 
focussed on identifying opportunities for delivery of hospice 
care tailored to the local context. 
3) Community of care: The Virtual Hospice was initially 
envisioned by Highland Hospice as a room within the main 
Hospice building where digital services could be delivered. 
Over the course of the Labs, this definition expanded from a 
purely digital platform to involve a multi-layered and 
interconnected network of people and places supported by 
technology. Across locations a number of key barriers to 
accessing Highland Hospice services were identified. Some 
participants proposed that one of the ways to overcome these 
barriers would be for Highland Hospice to build on existing 
networks of people in the community, and for this to be 
mediated by technology; not for the solution to be digital. 
This led to ideas specific to the local context – e.g. 
collaborating with Men’s Shed in Skye and a Care Home in 
Fort William. Both ideas focussed primarily on leveraging 
on existing community or care groups as points of delivery 
for Hospice services.  
The community of care therefore involves the linking of 
networks 
involving 
people, 
e.g., 
local 
healthcare 
professionals, social and care groups, patients and families; 
community spaces, e.g., the Men’s Shed and Care Home; 
and digital platforms supporting delivery of improved 
palliative care. 
C. Case study 3: Directory app 
1) Context: A third case study provides an example of a 
different type of community of care but highlights challenges 
in a rural context compared to more urban areas, and how 
these could be addressed. The Directory App project 
explored ways of developing a directory of service 
application providing information about alternative services 
and points of care for the Scottish Ambulance Service [21]. 
2) Design: The Experience Lab began by exploring the 
current services available to ambulance clinicians across a 
number of health boards through a mapping session. The 
mapping session involved marking health and care locations 
accessible to each clinician in their respective NHS regional 
boundary on a physical map. The Lab also involved a role-
play session of an ambulance call out scenario where the 
ambulance clinician required access to information about 
alternative services in the area (see Figure 2). The role-play 
session provided insights, which led to the co-design of a 
paper directory of services. The first prototype was tested by 
role-play using a mock tablet with the paper screens inserted. 
In the final design session the prototype was further iterated 
to develop the ‘ideal’ directory of services (see Figure 2).  
3) Community of care: In this case study, the directory of 
services was initially envisioned to serve as a digital 
directory of contact information for local services available 
to ambulance clinicians in their current healthcare boundary. 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Images from the Directory App Experience Lab including role 
play and design session of the ‘ideal’ directory of services. 
It became evident during the Lab that participants wished to 
have the ability to make contact with and refer patients to 
local services in the community, rather than simply have a 
directory of contact information. Therefore the community 
of care involves connecting ambulance clinicians with 
appropriate local services in their current healthcare 
boundary which best serves the needs of the patient, avoiding 
inappropriate transfer to A&E. This would provide 
ambulance clinicians with an awareness of points of care 
within their own regional boundary as well as other health 
care boundaries in Scotland and enable the patient to receive 
the most appropriate care.  
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The findings and knowledge gained from the projects 
presented within the case studies, provide important 
considerations when designing in the rural care context, and 
highlight a number of implications for rural technology 
innovations. 
A. Designing in the rural care context 
1) Identifying needs through a participatory approach:  
The Experience Lab offers a participatory approach to 
designing for rural care contexts.  The Lab provides the 
opportunity to ascertain the needs of individuals and 
communities living in rural contexts in order to ensure that 
the types of solutions proposed during the Lab meet the 
needs of the people involved. Early stages of the Experience 
Lab approach enable a deep understanding of participants’ 
lived experience. It is important when designing in the rural 
care context to understand the experience of the participants, 
their communities and the wider rural landscape to have an 
awareness of existing support and infrastructure. The case 
studies presented support the participatory approach of the 
Lab in giving voice to individuals and communities living in 
rural areas, allowing them to feel a level of ownership over 
the outcomes.  
2) Imagining future possibilities through tools and 
artefacts: The Labs allow participants to imagine and 
express their thoughts on technology through the use of 
artefacts and tools. These make ideas and solutions tangible 
and also help participants to see them in the context of use 
by weaving on their daily lives and relationships as part of 
the narrative. This helps to prioritise technology or solutions 
that are not only ‘possible’ or ‘feasible,’ but also preferable 
[13]. This is important for change, especially in health and 
social care where success of new systems rely on positive 
attitudes and behaviours. Participants in the Virtual Hospice 
case study could envisage how both the Men’s Shed and 
Care Home hubs could work through a visual tool and 
props, which helped to develop the idea and create a 
narrative. In addition, the case study of the directory of 
service application for ambulance clinicians took this a step 
further by enabling participants to experience the co-
designed application through role-play.  
3) Creating value and enabling new collaborations: 
The collaborative nature of the sessions and the use of 
bespoke design tools bring issues and challenges to life 
between different stakeholders. In the case studies, rural 
participants expressed their appreciation of being heard and 
having 
the 
opportunity 
to 
share 
their 
experiences. 
Institutional stakeholders involved in the collaboration 
valued the depth in the scenarios being created through the 
tools and artefacts used in the Lab, and the level of detail 
expressed in relation to the needs and desires of people who 
may use the proposed solution. By focussing on communities 
and context of use, the relationships and exchanges are 
enhanced through the new ideas that emerge. This will 
potentially support the adoption of a new technology because 
it will be used by the same people in the same environment 
as those involved in the Lab. 
The communicative spaces facilitated by the Experience 
Lab, enables collaborations and relationships to be 
established for new ways of creating communities of care. 
For example in the Virtual Hospice case study, a potential 
collaboration which emerged involved the Hospice engaging 
with a local care home in one Highland region. By being 
involved in designing and trialling this model in the Lab, a 
senior care home nurse could imagine part of being a system 
that does not yet exist and feel more inspired and open to try 
a new way of working.  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

B. Implications for technology innovations in the rural 
care context 
1) Technology as an enabler: The case studies presented 
in this paper highlight the emerging theme across the 
Experience Labs conducted in rural contexts to date; the role 
of technology in enabling and mediating connections with 
others i.e. enabling a ‘community of care.’ In this case, 
technology is not the single solution to the challenges which 
are experienced in rural contexts, but is a way of facilitating 
support through existing networks and connections. We 
therefore suggest that participants in Highland communities 
have deeper incentives to rely on human contact potentially 
due to the rural context within which they live. In the case 
studies, participants talked about the human support, which 
in rural areas automatically means connecting people 
locally. 
2) Low risk, iterative model for technology innovation: 
In all the three case studies, the technology proposed by 
participants were simple existing technology that people use 
in their everyday lives, or adaptations of the same. This 
provides an opportunity for trialling new health and social 
care models quickly and without very high set-up costs. At 
the same time it can significantly cut down the development 
time for completely new technology. In order to inspire 
individuals and clinicians to adopt new ways of living and 
working it is important that they use these everyday 
technologies they feel confident with and fit with their 
everyday life. As there are no high costs or lengthy 
development time associated with the iterative approach, 
this instils more confidence in rural health boards to invest 
and trial new models of health and social care delivery and 
enables them to gather evidence quickly, which can then 
inform 
further 
iterations 
and 
development 
of 
the 
technology-supported solutions. 
3) Practical issues of technology in the rural context: A 
practicality of using technology which is evident in rural 
areas is internet connectivity. A service which relies on an 
online platform would quickly be rendered useless if people 
cannot access it when required. In the Digital Brokering 
case study, this issue was resolved by adding an offline 
directory to a platform aimed at connecting people to 
exchange services. In this situation the technology was 
primarily being viewed as a mediator with the reliability on 
other people being the main goal. 
4) Long term impacts of technology on communities:  
Participants are aware of the wider impacts of technology 
on the community they live in beyond its functional use. In 
the Digital Brokering case study, it was suggested that a 
platform for brokering of small services between residents 
would need careful moderation by an organization familiar 
with the community. Participants described the potential 
impact of negative feedback on the dynamics of a 
community, and how a platform might lead to bypassing 
existing local small businesses. When considering the 
introduction of a technological solution to a rural context it is 
important for participants from different backgrounds to 
collectively explore the impact of proposed technologies on 
their specific community and existing structures. The fragile 
nature of small Highland communities requires particular 
attention to the impact over time, not necessarily for the 
functioning of the technology, but for its position within a 
community.  
There are also important implications in terms of 
ensuring people do not become isolated or lonely through the 
introduction of technology-focussed solutions. The case 
studies presented proposed solutions aiming to connect 
individuals. We anticipate that the resulting innovations may 
also provide ways to address social isolation and loneliness 
through the support provided by the community of care, 
enabled by technology. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Communities of care in the rural Highland context 
depend on providing support through existing networks of 
people and care infrastructure within that community. 
Technology is the enabler to ensure that people have access 
to care and services that meet their needs. The Experience 
Lab approach highlights the importance of the impact of new 
technologies and services on the people involved and in the 
context of use, rather than focussing on the functionality of 
technology or service alone. In this way, the Experience Lab 
approach allows people to imagine a wide variety of 
possibilities and identify those that are preferable. The 
collaborative nature of the sessions can assist in overcoming 
some of the scepticisms surrounding the introduction of new 
technologies. 
The participatory research approach of the Experience 
Labs offers an insight into the potential for technology in the 
delivery of care from a community perspective. New 
collaborations are enabled through the participatory 
approach. The use of design tools and artefacts help to 
explore future possibilities and empower participants to 
create value within the community. The Labs help to better 
understand what a local community of care entails in a rural 
context, and how it can be supported by technology.  
Based on the case studies presented, it is suggested that 
in order for technology to effectively enable delivery of care 
in rural contexts there is a need to consider existing networks 
of support within the community and adapt and tailor the 
technology based on the local context. The case studies 
suggest that adopting a low risk, fast and iterative approach 
ensures appropriateness and acceptance when designing and 
implementing new technologies in the rural context. 
However, there is also a need to consider practical issues as 
well as long-term impacts of technology on communities.  
Traditionally when designing new technologies and 
services, there is a focus on designing to address the needs of 
the general population, which results in gaps when applied to 
rural contexts with their unique challenges [22]. The focus 
on the rural context and the mobile nature of Experience 
Labs ensures that the innovations are more applicable to the 
local needs.  
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Future work will explore whether the solutions, which 
address the unique challenges in rural Highlands are 
applicable and relevant to the development of similar 
solutions for the urban context. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank all our participants who took part 
in the Experience Labs described in the case studies. We 
would also like to thank our project partners: Albyn Housing 
Association, The Glasgow School of Art, Highland Hospice, 
Scottish Ambulance Service and the University of the 
Highlands and Islands. We would like to acknowledge the 
support from our Experience Lab colleagues throughout the 
projects.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Smith, N. Sobey and C. Ross, Highlands and Islands Area 
Profile, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, May, 2014. 
[2] The Scottish Government, Highlands and Islands Scotland: 
European Regional Development Fund 2007-2013: Structural 
Funds Operational Programme, July, 2008. 
[3] J. Farmer and A. Nimegeer, “Community participation to 
design rural primary healthcare services,” BMC Health 
Services Research, vol. 14, March, 2014, doi: 10.1186/1472-
6963-14-130. 
[4] L. Philip, A. Gilbert, N. Mauthner, and E. Phimister, 
“Scoping study of older people in rural Scotland,” Research 
Findings, vol. 3, 2003, pp. 1-4,. 
[5] J. Farmer, W. Lauder, H. Richards, and S. Sharkey, “Dr John 
has gone: assessing health professionals’ contribution to 
remote rural community sustainability in the UK,” Social 
Science Medicine, vol. 57, August, 2003, pp 673-686. 
[6] A. Roberts, L. Garrett and D. J. Godden, “Can telehealth 
deliver for rural Scotland? Lessons from the Argyll and Bute 
Telehealth Programme,” Scottish Medical Journal, vol. 57, 
February, 2012, pp. 33-37. 
[7] G. King, H. Richards, and D. Godden, “Adoption of 
telemedicine in Scottish remote and rural general practices: a 
qualitative study,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 
13, 2007, pp. 382-386. 
[8] S. Bowen, K. McSeveny, E. Lockley, D. Wolstenholme, M. 
Cobb, and A. Dearden, “How was it for you? Experiences of 
participatory design in the UK health service”, CoDesign, vol. 
9, 2013, pp. 230-246. 
[9] G. Robert, J. Cornwell, L. Locock, A. Purushotham, G. 
Sturmey, and M. Gager, “Patients and staff as codesigners of 
healthcare services”, BMJ, 350, 2015, pp. 7714. 
[10] H. Bevan, G. Robert, P. Bate, L. Maher, and J. Wells, “Using 
a Design Approach to Assist Large-Scale Organizational 
Change “10 High Impact Changes” to Improve the National 
Health Service in England”, The Journal of Applied 
Behavioral Science, vol. 43, 2007, pp. 135-152. 
[11] E. B. N. Sanders and P. J. Stappers, “Co-creation and the new 
landscapes of design,” Co-Design: International Journal of 
CoCreation in Design and the Arts, vol. 4, 2008, pp. 5-18.  
[12] Digital Health and Care Institute, Available from www.dhi-
scotland.com. [retrieved: March, 2016] 
[13] I. McAra-McWilliam, Available from: http://tinyurl.com 
/odual6h 2014. [retrieved: March, 2016] 
[14] P. Reason and H. Bradbury, The Sage Handbook of Action 
Research. London: Sage Publications Inc., 2008. 
[15] T. French, G. Teal and S. Raman, “Experience Labs: co-
creating health and care innovations using design tools and 
artefacts”, Design + Research + Society DRS 2016, In press. 
[16] J. Foot and T. Hopkins, “A glass half full: how an asset 
approach can improve community health and wellbeing,” 
London: Improvement and Development Agency, 2010. 
[17] A. Morgan and E. Ziglio, “Revitalising the evidence base for 
public health: an assets model,” Promotion and Education, 
vol. 14, 2007, pp. 17-22. 
[18] G. Roger and S. Bradley, “Feasibility of delivering assisted 
living services to vulnerable Albyn Housing Society 
Customers,” Centre for Rural Health, April 2012. 
[19] M. P. Johnson, “Mapping design things: making design 
explicit in the discourse of change, ”unpublished Ph.D. 
Thesis, 2015. 
[20] Office for National Statistics, Scotland population density: by 
council area, 2010, August, 2012. 
[21] T. French and G. Teal, “Co-designing a digital directory of 
services,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 63, September, 
2015, pp. 445-450, doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.366. 
[22] R. Chapman and 
T. 
Slaymaker, 
"ICTs 
and 
Rural 
Development: Review of the Literature, Current Interventions 
and 
Opportunities 
for 
Action," Overseas 
Development 
Institute, Working Paper 192, 2002, pp. 5. 
 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

