Electronic Messaging to Improve Information Exchange in Primary Care  
Reporting from an Implementation and Evaluation Project in North Norway 
Trine S Bergmo, Gerd Ersdal, Eirin Rødseth, Gro Berntsen 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine, University Hospital of North Norway  
Tromsø, Norway 
trine.bergmo@telemed.no, gerd.ersdal@telemed.no, eirin.rødseth@telemed.no, gro.berntsen@telemed.no 
 
 
 
Abstract – FUNNKe is a large-scale ongoing project aiming 
to assist in implementing secure broadband communication 
and support the use of electronic messages between 
community nursing service, general practitioners and local 
hospitals in the northernmost region in Norway.  The main 
goal of FUNNKe is to establish electronic communication 
and information exchange in all sectors of health service 
delivery in the region. The FUNNKe-project has two distinct 
parts: The first is the actual implementation phase where the 
focus is to facilitate and support the municipalities to invest 
in and start using electronic messages for information 
exchange. The second part is an evaluation phase focusing 
on the implementation process, analysing the potential for 
time savings and perceived changes in quality of care. The 
evaluation study has a multi-method research approach 
using quantitative and qualitative methods. This paper 
describes the planned evaluation, the experiences so far, and 
reports some preliminary results.  
Keywords - telehealth; electronic messaging; large-scale 
implementation; community nursing service; evaluation; 
efficiency.   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Exchanging health information electronically has been 
a political goal in Norway since 1997 [1]. In 2010, the 
Norwegian Health Authorities introduced a strategic 
program to speed up the implementation process [2]. The 
main political goal was to improve cooperation between 
health providers and to improve continuity and integrated 
patient care. As part this initiative, several projects have 
been initiated in different parts of the country. In Helse 
Nord, the northern most health region, a project named 
FUNNKe was launched in 2010. The main goal of 
FUNNKe is to establish standardised electronic clinical 
information exchange in all sectors of the health service in 
the region. The underlying assumption is that standardised 
electronic communication will speed up and improve the 
quality of the information exchanged [3, 4]. And that this 
will lead to more efficient and high quality service 
delivery through improved cooperation and better 
continuity in patient care. Another implicit and common 
assumption is that the technology alone cannot improve 
the integration of care, but it can be an important facilitator 
[5]. FUNNKe aims to assist in implementing secure 
broadband communication and support the use of 
electronic messages in all 88 municipalities and four 
hospital units in the region. The planned e-messaging is 
between the community nursing services and general 
practitioners and the community nursing services and local 
hospitals. Electronic messages between hospitals and 
general practitioners are already in place and have been 
operative for several years. The messaging system is based 
on the ebXML Messaging Service specification (ebMS) 
and PKI (Public Key Infrastructure). The messages are 
standardised, fully integrated with electronic medical 
records (EMR) and sent in a secure national network; the 
Norwegian Health Network. The technological system has 
been through extensive risk assessments and has been 
approved by the authorities.  
The FUNNKe-project offers knowledge, technological 
support, guidance and financial support to the local health 
services in implementing the messaging platform and start 
using the messages. Two letters of invitation have been 
sent to the primary health authorities in all municipalities: 
one in June 2010; and one in September 2011. Several 
meetings with local health authorities, community nursing 
service managers, general practitioners and technical staff 
have also been arranged to advertise the project and 
encourage participation. Information leaflets on how to get 
started, training manuals, and advice on how to organise 
the implementation process have been distributed and are 
available online via FUNNKe’s web portal [6]. The 
project will run until December 2014.  
The FUNNKe-project has two distinct parts: The first 
is the actual implementation process where the focus is to 
facilitate and support the municipalities to invest in and 
start using electronic messages. The second part is an 
evaluation phase focusing on assessing the implementation 
process and analysing the potential for time savings and 
effects on perceived quality of care of using electronic 
messages in a nursing care setting. This paper describes 
the planned evaluation, the experiences so far, and reports 
some preliminary results.  
II. 
BACKGROUND  
There is a considerable interest in implementing digital 
solutions to improve safety, quality and efficiency of 
health care provision. It is widely believed that introducing 
information and communication technology (ICT) systems 
in health combined with social and organisational changes 
will improve quality of health care provision, reduce costs 
and improve efficiency [7]. Little empirical evidence, 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

however, exists to substantiate many of the claims made in 
relation to large scale eHealth technologies [8, 9]. It has 
also been reported that research in this area is of poor 
quality [10, 11].  Black et al [8], for example, found in a 
recent systematic review of reviews that there is a large 
gap between the postulated and empirically demonstrated 
benefits of eHealth systems. In addition, they found that 
there is a lack of robust research on the risks of 
implementing 
these 
technologies 
and 
their 
cost-
effectiveness has yet to be demonstrated. Despite this, the 
technology is frequently being promoted by policymakers 
and "techno-enthusiasts" as if this was given. 
A. Information exchange in primary care 
The number of patients living at home supported by 
the local nursing service is increasing. These patients are 
getting older, they often have multiple diagnoses, and are 
using a large number of different prescribed drugs [12]. 
Patients are increasingly being managed by a team of 
health professionals and this requires an effective 
communication and information transfer. Time spent on 
gathering patient level information in primary care nursing 
services can be substantial. Medication error for example, 
is one of the more serious challenges in health care in 
Norway [13, 14]. Limited access to patient information 
might be one reason for this  [4]. Jensen et al (2003) found 
in a study that there was a discrepancy between what the 
general practitioners ordered and what the nurses 
administered in 90 percent of the cases [15]. 
Inadequate cooperation is claimed to be one of the 
main challenges the Norwegian health care system is 
facing [16]. Transfer of patient information and 
communication in primary care has long been a neglected 
area [17]. Information transfer both between hospitals and 
primary care services and within the primary care sector 
still mostly uses traditional means such as telephone, fax, 
written notes and verbal communication with the patients 
themselves. Timey transfer of relevant patient data about 
diagnostic findings, treatments, and arrangement of post-
discharge follow-up may improve continuity of care and 
patient outcomes. By contrast delayed, inaccurate or lack 
of information transfer between health care providers may 
have substantial implication both for patient safety, 
provider satisfaction and resource use [18, 19]. For 
example, Kripalani et al found in a recent review that the 
availability of discharge summaries in primary clinics 
were low affecting the quality of care in 25% of follow-up 
visits [3]. About half of adults experience a medical error 
after hospital discharge, and 19% - 23% suffer an adverse 
event, most commonly an adverse drug event [20]. Bakken 
et al. [21] found in a study carried out in Norway, that 
most general practitioners did not have routines for 
informing the primary care nurses about changes in patient 
medication. They also lacked information on how many of 
their patients the home care nurses had in their care.  
It is widely believed that standardised digital solutions 
will improve both efficiency and quality of care [22]. 
Several authors have pointed out that lack of common 
infrastructure is one of the main causes of deficit in 
information transfer both within and between health care 
levels [23, 24]. A standardised platform for e-messages   is 
now underway in the Helse Nord region assisted by the 
FUNNKe-project.   
As far as we know, there exists no research on how 
large-scale ICT implementation processes in primary 
health care settings should be managed and organised to 
become successful. Furthermore, research on how 
electronic messaging between primary care nurses and 
general practitioners affects quality of care and the 
efficiency potential in the nursing service is also lacking. 
Obtaining a scientific-informed perspective on these issues 
can reduce unrealistic expectations. This might also 
promote long-term progress and help identifying areas 
with greatest potential for benefits, suggest priorities for 
further implementations, and help guide implementation 
processes in other parts of Norway.  
The objectives of the evaluation are to understand the 
implementation process and to establish if electronic 
communication between nursing services and general 
practitioners increase efficiency and improve quality in 
terms of more continuity and better integrated care 
pathways. The objectives are: to analyse if frequency and 
pattern of use is influenced by size, location, living 
conditions and financial situations in the municipalities 
affect use; to establish if electronic messaging between 
nursing services and general practitioners has potential to 
increase efficiency and improve quality of care; and 
finally, to provide knowledge of the implementation 
process that can be used for further development and use.  
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS  
The evaluation study has a multi-method research 
approach using both quantitative and qualitative methods. 
The first part is using quantitative methods to analyse the 
pattern of use and efficiency potential, and the second part 
uses qualitative research methods to evaluate the 
implementation process. The data will be collected using 
the following strategies: prospective logging of messages; 
prospective case control study design; a survey using 
questionnaires and in-depth interviews.  
A. Logging of e-messages  
This part of the project will look into how the health 
care providers use electronic messaging in the nursing 
service. Is frequency and pattern of use influenced by size, 
location, living conditions and financial situations in the 
municipalities? Will the smaller communities use 
electronic messaging differently from the bigger ones? 
And what characterise communities with a high usage 
rate? These questions will be answered by analysing 
message logs and municipality characteristics.  
Prospective logging of messages including data on 
sender, recipients and purpose will form the basis for 
analysing frequency and the pattern of use. All messages 
in the region will be logged. Frequency of use, sender, 
where the messages are sent (recipients) and type of 
messages will be collected over a period of one year. This 
will also give us insight into how usage develops over time 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and with experience. Seventeen municipalities using e-
messaging will be included in this analysis starting after 
three months of regular use.  
B. The time saving potential 
In this part of the project, we analyse the effect of 
electronic messaging on efficiency. The efficiency 
potential at the local nursing service will be analysed by 
measuring time savings. The time the nurses spend on the 
phone collecting patient information from other health care 
providers and the time spent on reading and writing 
messages will be will be obtained and registered.  
The study design chosen for this part of the evaluation 
project is a prospective case control study design at the 
municipality level. This design is suited to estimate the 
effectiveness of an intervention as it is reflected in routine 
health care practice. We are interested in analysing the 
effect of e-messaging in everyday nursing practice.  
Specified phone bills from the telephone operators 
(Telenor and Netcom) will be obtained and used to 
investigate difference in time costs. The bills will be 
obtained by the owners of the phone numbers and 
forwarded de-identified to the researchers. Specified phone 
bills will provide information about the number of calls, 
duration and price. We will be able to register who the 
recipients are (by recognizing general practitioners’ and 
other health care providers’ phone numbers) and the 
duration of the call (waiting and conversation). This will 
give an estimate on time spent on collecting and 
confirming patient information. The time spent on reading 
and writing messages by the nurses will be registered 
manually using a pre-designed registration form.  
A pragmatic approach to sample size calculation is 
adopted as we want to include as many of the local nursing 
services as possible. We have invited 20 community 
nursing services to participate (only one municipality has 
more than one nursing service unit). We did expect a high 
no-response rate, hoping to include at least 10 community 
nursing services. So far 6 nursing services have agreed to 
participate. The nursing services are divided into smaller 
units ranging from four to seven units (areas) in each 
service. The data will be analysed using units (areas) 
adjusted for number of patients. The outcome measures 
therefore are number of calls per unit and time spent on the 
phone per unit. So far we have 31 units to include for 
analysis. Data have been collected before start-up (at 
baseline) and will be collected after one year of use. Three 
of the nursing services have more than one year of 
experience and will be used for comparison at baseline.  
1) Data analysis  
The objective above will formally have the form of 
null hypotheses stating that electronic messaging has no 
effect on efficiency. Parametric and non-parametric 
analyses will be used to analyse potential differences. We 
will use multilevel analysis to adjust for variation within 
municipalities and nursing services. Regression models 
will be used to analyse pattern and frequency of use. 
Additional analyses will be performed for each dimension 
of the models in order to verify the sensitivity of the 
results. The effects will be tested at P < 0.05 level and the 
analysis will be performed in SPSS.  
C.  The quality of nursing services  
      We also developed a questionnaire addressing the 
quality aspect of the nursing services after the 
implementation. We wanted to explore how e-messaging 
was affecting the quality of the service the nurses provided 
perceived by the nurses themselves. We had a special 
focus on the quality of the medication lists (if they felt that 
medication was more updated and correct), but also asked 
for general satisfaction and challenges. The questionnaire 
was piloted on 10 nurses. After one reminder the response 
rate was only 20% which is inadequate for our purposes. 
We are now working on an alternative plan on how to 
assess the quality changes of e-messaging.  
D. The implementation process  
This part of the project evaluates whether the 
implementation process has been organised and managed 
successfully. This part of the study is based on data 
collected trough questionnaires and semi-structured in-
depth interviews.  
A convenience sample of project managers at the local 
health and care services in the municipalities will be 
approached. We will include municipalities with a varying 
degree of experiences in using the e-messaging system.  
These project managers organise, assist and encourage the 
implementation processes. They are also responsible for 
supporting and guiding the surrounding municipalities in 
their designated area.  
We have chosen to include a questionnaire as basis for 
the interviews. This will help form and structure the areas 
to be covered in the interviews. The questionnaire will be 
distributed to 17 project managers during October 2012. 
The main themes explored are: types of collaboration; how 
they perceive the usefulness of the assistance from the 
main project; the advice and the competence given; the 
need for ICT support; problems encountered; and 
challenges for continuous use of the e-messaging system. 
The questionnaire also includes spaces for open ended text 
where the respondents can elaborate on issues they feel are 
important.   
Based on the findings of the questionnaire, semi-
structured 
interviews 
will 
be 
conducted 
using 
videoconferencing. The interviews will take place as soon 
as data from the questionnaires have been analysed. The 
purpose of the interviews is to gather an in-depth 
understanding of the findings. The project managers will 
be asked to explain and deepen their response. The 
structure of the interview will also open for discussing 
topics not addressed in the questionnaire.  
1) Data analysis 
    The questionnaire has been developed in the survey and 
data collection software Questback. Data will be displayed 
in tables using descriptive statistics. Open ended text will 
be categorised and analysed according to standard 
methods. The interviews will be taped and transcribed. 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Notes will also be made after each interview. Two 
evaluators will read the interviews and identify overall 
themes. After agreeing on the overall themes, the data will 
be organised according to main categories and then 
discussed. This will form the foundation for the data 
analysis.   
IV. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
Halfway into the project seventeen of 88 municipalities 
in the region (20 %) have implemented the technological 
platform and are using electronic messages for information 
exchange. Five of these (Alta, Tromsø Lenvik Dyrøy and 
Rana) have used electronic messaging for more than a 
year. The remaining 11 started using the system during the 
first half of 2012.  
A total of 25000 messages have been sent to and from 
the nursing services in the region during the first 6 months 
of 2012. Most of the messages have been sent between the 
nursing services and the general practitioners. These 
messages are mainly general health related questions about 
patients and their medication lists in addition to patient 
updates from the nurses to the general practitioners and 
information about changes from the general practitioners 
to the nurses. The nursing services in four of the 
municipalities (Tromsø and Dyrøy, Harstad and Lenvik) 
also communicate electronically with the hospital (a total 
of 1600 messages). Most of these messages contain patient 
information 
before 
hospitalisation 
and 
discharge 
summaries from the hospital to the local nurses. The 
number of messages sent in the different areas range from 
380 in a small local area (Dyrøy with 1270 inhabitants) to 
12000 messages in the largest city (Tromsø with 70000 
inhabitants), both with more than one year of experience. 
As can be seen in Fig 1, the total volume of e-
messaging is steadily increasing. The blue curve shows the 
number of messages sent to and the red curve indicates the 
messages sent from the community nursing services in 
North Norway. This figure is borrowed from FUNNKe’s 
web portal with permission [6]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Number of e-messages to and from the local nursing services 
from the first quarter of 2011 (Q1-11) to the second quarter of 2012 (Q2-
12).  
 
The main barriers to actual use reported so far in the 
project have mainly been around four aspects: lack of 
political will; shortage of personnel and other resources; 
lack of ICT skills; and technological difficulties due to old 
equipment.   
Primary care nurses already using e-messaging is 
reporting that the system seems to be time saving. 
Previously they spent a considerable amount of time on the 
phone trying to get in touch with the general practitioners. 
They are also claiming that having access to ready and 
updated information is improving the quality of the care 
they are providing (personal communication). 
Preliminary results seem to support the nurses’ 
perceived benefits of e-messaging. We have data from six 
nursing services. Crude preliminary analyses, unadjusted 
for patient volume, show that the nursing services who 
have taken the service into use have 37% less phone 
volume compared to the control nursing services. Adjusted 
analyses are planned, but critical data elements are still 
missing. The time spent on the phone also tends to be less 
for the e-messaging users. We can, however, not confirm 
these results yet. The post intervention data collection will 
start in the first half of 2013. We are also consecutively 
working to recruit more nursing services to provide data 
for the quantitative analysis.    
V. 
DISCUSSION 
     Despite political will and several strategic action plans 
the health sector has been slow to adopt digital solutions. 
Over 70 % of the community health services still lack 
proper ICT equipment and infrastructure to communicate 
electronically with other health service providers [25]. 
Information transfer still mostly uses traditional means 
such as telephone, fax and written notes. The latest health 
care reform “The Coordination Reform” [26] is 
encouraging more health services to be provided in local 
communities where the patients live. More patients are 
being discharged from the hospital sooner causing a need 
secure and effective electronic communication between 
the levels of care [27]. Despite this need for a more timely 
information exchange the municipalities are slower to 
implement and use electronic messaging. After two years 
of active encouragement, technical and financial support 
and organisational advice still only one in five 
municipalities have started to use electronic messaging in 
the region. There might be several reasons for this slow 
uptake and low use. The main challenge so far has been 
the integration of the messages into day-to-day work. The 
administrative routines have had to change to adapt to the 
new mode of communication. There have been problems 
with identifying recipients and which addresses to use for 
which message. Continuous monitoring of the activity and 
large amount of technological support has overcome these 
challenges. This highlights the need for a support and 
troubleshooting plan early in implementation processes.   
Another factor that might have contributed to the slow 
uptake is that most of the municipalities are relatively 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

small. Forty-three percent have less than 2000 inhabitants 
and 77% have less than 5000 inhabitants. This might 
imply a general shortage of both qualified personnel and 
financial resources. A general lack of ICT skills tends to 
limit adoption of the technology [28, 29]. Furthermore, the 
existing computer equipment is relatively old and of low 
quality [30] and this can be a  major challenge to wider 
adoption [31]. The cost of upgrading the computer 
equipment might also be too high. The municipalities are 
facing a higher cost than expected as part of the latest 
health care reform.  
There might also be a general reluctance towards 
changing existing routines and implement new working 
patterns. Organisational barriers such as the absence of 
clear guidelines defining roles and responsibilities can 
hamper adoption [29, 31, 32]. There seems to be an overall 
lack of willingness to innovate in the health sector [29, 
31]. The community nurses might also have too busy time 
schedules caring for patients to innovate. 
The main limitation of this evaluation is the low 
number of community nursing services included for the 
quantitative analysis. The main problem has been to get 
the local nurses to respond to our request for data. This 
might be due to a combination of shortage of time and lack 
of interest. To get the nurses to register the time they 
spend on reading, writing and systematise the information 
is by far the greatest challenge. We will, however, 
continue our data collection effort.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has described and reported preliminary 
results from an ongoing large-scale implementation project 
in North Norway. The project aims to establish 
standardised electronic clinical information exchange in all 
sectors of the health service delivery in 88 municipalities 
the region. Halfway through the project 17 of the 88 
municipalities (the community health service providers) 
have implemented the technological platform and are 
using e-messaging. The e-messages have mostly been sent 
between the nursing services and the general practitioners 
with a much lower volume between the nursing services 
and the hospitals. Electronic communication between 
general practitioners and hospitals are already in place. 
Preliminary results also indicate a potential reduction in 
number of phone calls to the general practitioners and 
reduced time spent on the phone for the nursing services 
using e-messages. 
The next step in our study is to begin analysing the 
implementation process. Questionnaires are now being 
sent to seventeen of the e-messaging users. Data from the 
questionnaires will be processed and analysed. This will be 
followed 
by 
in-depth 
interviews 
for 
a 
deeper 
understanding of the implementation process.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank The Department of Health and Care Services 
and the Norwegian Directorate of Health for funding the 
project FUNNKe.  We also thank the health care personnel 
participating in this study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Ministery of Health and Social Affairs. More Health for 
every bIT - Information Technology for Better Health 
Services. Action Plan 1997-2000. Ministery of Health and 
Social Affairs, 1996. 
[2] Helsedirektoratet. Handlingsplan 2011 - Meldingsløftet i 
kommunene 2010-2011. 2010. 
[3] Kripalani S, LeFevre F, Phillips CO, Williams MV, 
Basaviah P, and Baker DW. Deficits in communication and 
information transfer between hospital-based and primary 
care physicians: implications for patient safety and 
continuity of care. JAMA. 2007 Feb 28;297[8]:831-41. 
[4] Pirnejad H, Niazkhani Z, Berg M, and Bal R. Intra-
organisational communication in healthcare--considerations 
for standardization and ICT application. Methods Inf Med. 
2008;47[4]:336-45. 
[5] Melby L, Helleso R. Electronic exchange of discharge 
summaries between hospital and municipal care from 
health personnel's perspectives. Int J Integr Care. 
2010;10:e039. 
[6] http://telemed.custompublish.com/index.php?cat=164942 
Accessed 3 Oktober 2012. 
[7] Commision of the european communities [2004]. E-Health 
- making healthcare better for European citizens: An action 
plan for a European e-Health Area. Available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/doc/qualif/health/C
OM_2004_0356_F_EN_ACTE.pdf Accessed 15 March 
2011. 
[8] Black AD, Car J, Pagliari C, Anandan C, Cresswell K, 
Bokun T, et al. The impact of eHealth on the quality and 
safety of health care: a systematic overview. PLoS Med. 
2011;8[1]:e1000387. 
[9] Catwell L, Sheikh A. Evaluating eHealth interventions: the 
need for continuous systemic evaluation. PLoS Med. 2009 
Aug;6[8]:e1000126. 
[10] de Keizer NF, Ammenwerth E. The quality of evidence in 
health informatics: how did the quality of healthcare IT 
evaluation publications develop from 1982 to 2005? Int J 
Med Inform. 2008 Jan;77[1]:41-9. 
[11] Chuang JH, Hripcsak G, and Jenders RA. Considering 
clustering: a methodological review of clinical decision 
support system studies. Proc AMIA Symp. 2000:146-50. 
[12] Yang JC, Tomlinson G, and Naglie G. Medication lists for 
elderly patients: clinic-derived versus in-home inspection 
and interview. J Gen Intern Med. 2001 Feb;16[2]:112-5. 
[13] Grimsmo A. [Electronic prescriptions--without side-
effects?]. 
Tidsskr 
Nor 
Laegeforen. 
2006 
Jun 
22;126[13]:1740-3. 
[14] Buajordet I, Ebbesen J, Erikssen J, Brors O, and Hilberg T. 
Fatal adverse drug events: the paradox of drug treatment. J 
Intern Med. 2001 Oct;250[4]:327-41. 
[15] Jensen SA, Oien T, Jacobsen G, and Johnsen R. [Erroneous 
drug charts--a health hazard?]. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 
2003 Dec 23;123[24]:3598-9. 
[16] Department of Health and Care Services. Teamwork 2.0: 
National strategy for electronic cooperation in health and 
social services 2008 - 2013. Oslo, Norway 2008. 
[17] Melby L, Hellesø R. Annual Conference Supplement 2008: 
E-messages as a tool for improved information exchange 
across levels in the health care sector: intentions and 
realities. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Integrated 
Care. 
2008;8[Suppl]. 
[18] Poon EG, Gandhi TK, Sequist TD, Murff HJ, Karson AS, 
and Bates DW. "I wish I had seen this test result earlier!": 
Dissatisfaction with test result management systems in 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

primary care. Arch Intern Med. 2004 Nov 8;164[20]:2223-
8. 
[19] Coleman EA, Berenson RA. Lost in transition: challenges 
and opportunities for improving the quality of transitional 
care. Ann Intern Med. 2004 Oct 5;141[7]:533-6. 
[20] Kripalani S, Jackson AT, Schnipper JL, and Coleman EA. 
Promoting effective transitions of care at hospital 
discharge: a review of key issues for hospitalists. J Hosp 
Med. 2007 Sep;2[5]:314-23. 
[21] Bakken K, Larsen E, Lindberg PC, Rygh E, and Hjortdahl 
P. [Insufficient communication and information regarding 
patient medication in the primary healthcare]. Tidsskr Nor 
Laegeforen. 2007 Jun 28;127[13]:1766-9. 
[22] Winthereik BR, Bansler JP. Connecting practices: ICT 
infrastructures to support integrated care. Int J Integr Care. 
2007;7:e16. 
[23] Dinesen B, Gustafsson J, Nohr C, Andersen SK, Sejersen 
H, and Toft E. Implementation of the concept of home 
hospitalisation for heart patients by means of telehomecare 
technology: integration of clinical tasks. Int J Integr Care. 
2007;7:e17. 
[24] Granlien MF, Simonsen J. Challenges for IT-supported 
shared care: a qualitative analyses of two shared care 
initiatives for diabetes treatment in Denmark "I'll never use 
it" [GENERAL PRACTITIONER5]. Int J Integr Care. 
2007;7:e19. 
[25] Birgit Abelsen, Toril Ringholm, Per-Arne Emaus, and 
Margrete Aanesen. Hva har Samhandlingsreformen kostet 
kommunene så langt? Norut Alta Rapport 2012;9 
[26] Ministery of Health and Care Services. Report no. 47 to the 
Storting. The Coordination Reform, Proper treatment - at 
the right place at the right time. Ministery of Health and 
Care Services, Oslo, 2009. 
[27] The 
Norwegian 
Broadcasing 
Company 
[NRK] 
[http://www.nrk.no/nyheter/norge/1.8320873]. Accessed 3 
October 2012. 
[28] Broens TH, Huis in't Veld RM, Vollenbroek-Hutten MM, 
Hermens HJ, van Halteren AT, and Nieuwenhuis LJ. 
Determinants of successful telemedicine implementations: 
a literature study. J Telemed Telecare. 2007;13[6]:303-9. 
[29] Kubitschke L, Cullen K, and Műller S. ICT and Ageing: 
European Study on Users, Markets and Technologies, Final 
Report. 
Brussels: 
Commission 
of 
the 
European 
Communities. 2010. 
[30] Abelsen B, Gaski M, Pedersen E, and Skipperud M. Er 
desentralisering 
av 
spesialisthelsetjenester 
lønnsomt? 
1256–9. 
[31] Goodwin N. The state of telehealth and telecare in the UK: 
prospects for integrated care. Journal of Integrated Care. 
2010;18[6]:3-10. 
[32] May C, Finch T, Cornford J, Exley C, Gately C, Kirk S, et 
al. Integrating telecare for chronic disease management in 
the community: What needs to be done? BMC Health 
Services Research. 2011;11[1]:131. 
[33] 
 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

