Kid’s Friendly Wearable Device for Children’s Daily Safety 
 
SeungHee Lee 
Faculty of Art and Design 
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences 
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan 
e-mail: seungheekansei@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— This study introduces the development of a 
practical product based on Kansei simulation of children’s 
behavior and physiological reaction against anxiety. It started 
in 2006 with children under 6-years-old who had few 
experiences of accidents or events, and less linguistic 
communication skills with their parents. The reliability of 
heart rates to detect fear and anxiety was tested to know if it 
could be one of the functions on this device. The heart rates 
and behaviors of children while watching simulated movies 
showing dangerous situations was analyzed. With the support 
of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, a 
device named “Onigiri Machine” was developed to keep 
children safe while their parents work during daytime. It was 
highly evaluated by scientists worldwide through conferences 
papers, newspapers, and magazines. Now, keeping track of 
children and elderly in shopping malls or in hospitals became 
an issue in Tsukuba, Japan. For this reason, the device was 
refined to update the functions and qualities for practical uses 
in public services. Finally, this study shows how the device can 
be used to keep children and elders safe in public spaces, and 
how it delivers personal based data in an easy interface for 
their companions. 
Keywords- 
wearable 
device: 
kid’s 
friendly 
design; 
information sharing; children’s safety. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The idea of this study was based on personal interests in 
security for children between 0 to 6 years old in nurseries or 
kindergartens while parents work during daytime. For the  
development of  the device, a basic research on physiological 
data from children between 1 to 6 years was needed to detect 
unconscious states in children through their heart rate.  
Generally, regular working mothers should stay with 
their children at least for 8 hours a day, and should 
communicate with them, face to face, for 4 - 5 hours a day in 
average. It is hard to say that this is enough to know what is 
happening to their children’s growth, both physically and 
mentally. Furthermore, the linguistic communication ability 
of 0 to 6 years old children, before elementary school, is not 
enough to be correctly understood by adults. In this regard, 
the author had some frustration to communicate and get 
information on her child, meaning that the only way to 
understand was to keep watching her behavior and reactions 
during limited moments. On the other hand, children under 6 
years old get most of their influences from people around 
them while imitating their behaviors naturally. As such, there 
must be a clever way for working parents to know and feel 
their children. 
This study introduces the development process from 
researching on children’s behavior and emotional reactions 
to the final stage of making a practical system for real users 
in public places. In order to develop a device that can detect 
children’s conditions in anxious or emergency situations, the 
following components were selected: heart rate measurement 
device, GPS, camera, 3D accelerometer, XBee network, and 
a microcontroller for connecting and controlling the sensors. 
The most outstanding progress of this study was done 
between 2009 and 2011, with the aid of the Strategic 
Information and Communications R&D Promotion Program 
(SCOPE) funded by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Communications. Based on the children’s heart rates 
experiments started in 2006, a device named “Onigiri 
Machine” was developed and updated to support information 
sharing of children and elderly who cannot communicate 
satisfactorily with people.  
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section II, the 
basic research used as a base for this study is introduced. In 
Section III, a design approach based on behavioral aspects of 
children concerning safe construction of form, namely 
“Kid’s Friendly Design”, is presented alongside advanced 
technologies to detect a variety of situations. Section IV 
details the experiment conducted for this study. Finally, 
Section V concludes this research. 
II. 
BASIC RESEARCH 
This study uses as base a foundation research done in 
2006 concerning heart rate measurements on children during 
stressful situations combined with the Kansei approach of 
design. 
A. Kansei 
Kansei is a Japanese term that implies subjective 
perception and reaction based on experiences. It involves 
emotion, preferences, and learning of daily habits. People 
react to an event depending on their personal experience, 
including knowledge and intuitive response from image 
matching of the past. Kansei reaction is more important for 
surveying behavioral habits, in addition to being more 
creative in finding new solutions for design development. 
B. Heart rate Experiments 
Heart rate is one of the elements in measuring 
unconscious 
feelings 
of 
anxiety 
while 
facing 
new 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

experiences or any uncomfortable situation. The purpose of 
the experiment was to know how heart rate relates to 
emotional prediction in children while the device detects 
their conditions during any situation. Figure 1 shows the 
setup for the experiment. Children in a nursery from 1 to 6 
years old participated. Simulation films which entail 
dangerous and anxious situations from an adult standpoint 
were prepared. These movies were originally edited with 
royalty free copies. All the participants’ parents agreed with 
the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of University of 
Tsukuba while the safety of the experiments for testing the 
heart rates was thoroughly checked. The result of the 
experiment was that children’s Kansei is generally expressed 
around 2 - 3 years old with practical experiences and 
learning from their parents or people around. Therefore, their 
emotional reaction gets closer to an adult’s. 
III. 
DESIGN DEVELOPMENT 
For the development of the “Onigiri Machine”, a unique 
approach was proposed. To make children attracted to, and 
willing to, wear the device, a fascinating shape was designed 
before deciding on the technological components. As shown 
on Figure 2, this approach was denominated “Kid’s Friendly 
Design”. 
A. Maintaining the Integrity of the Specifications 
For “Kid’s Friendly Design”, the first step was to decide 
on the weight and size of the device, followed by how and 
where to wear on a child’s body. Graphical design and 
decoration was the last step. The main goal is to create a 
fascinating appearance for kids to keep wearing it while the 
necessary information is read from their chest. Emotional 
and cognitive behavior could be detected by 3D acceleration 
and heart rate measurement, in order to share their status 
with their parents online, complemented with an image from 
the child’s point of view. 
B. Weight and Size of the Device 
In accordance to the Research Institute of Human 
Engineering for Quality Life of Japan, which has a database 
of the average body size for Japanese children between 0 and 
12 years old since 2005, the size of the device was decided. 
The width of a 3-year-old child’s chest is 164mm and for a 
5-year-old is 176mm. Based on this information, the device 
should not exceeded 100mm in diameter. Moreover, most of 
the objects that can be attached on child’s neck weight 
between 30 to 50 grams, while on their waist are less than 
100 grams. Additionally, a survey among mothers in the 
kindergarten reveled that 75 percent of them would allow 
devices under 100 grams to be attached to their children. For 
reference, an alarm buzzer weights between 45 to 60 grams, 
likewise mobile phones for children range between 130 and 
150 grams. 
C. How and Where to Wear the Device 
To attach the device on an appropriate position on 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.   Physiological test of anxiety for Children under 6 years old 
 
 
 
Figure 2.   Kid's Friendly Design Approach 
 
 
  
 
Figure 3.   Kid's Friendly Design Approach 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

children’s body, a survey of the sizes of desks and tables in 
the kindergarten was conducted. The machine should not 
disturb the activities of the kids in the classroom or in the 
playground. At the same time, the camera on the device 
should be set at a stable position on the chest, so as to allow 
them to actively run around. 
D. Building the Prototype 
Based on shoulder sac types of design, the built of the 
sensors followed the concept “B-3”, presented in Figure 3. 
The total weight of the built-in sensors had to be at most 90 
grams. Notwithstanding, a necklace type of design was 
rejected from the candidates, due to the burden generated on 
the children’s neck. From a pool of four ideas for shoulder 
types, “B-3” offers a relatively high position for the camera, 
while being easy to wear. An updated sketch of “B-3” was 
prototyped using a 3D printer to verify the size of the device. 
Furthermore, the layout of the sensors was tested. What is 
more, small connection parts were created on the corners for 
the straps attached to the body. Finally, an on-off switch was 
placed on the rear side in a tiny hole, as to be securely turned 
with an originally designed stick, thus preventing unwanted 
manipulation.  
Figure 4 shows the final device ‘Omusubi’ (=Onigiri), 
which means ‘rice ball’ or ‘connection’ in Japanese. A ‘rice 
ball’ is a traditional snack between lunch and dinner popular 
among all ages in Japan. ‘Connection’ is also a meaningful 
concept within this study, as information is not only shared 
between children and parents, but also with local caretakers.  
IV. 
EXPERIMENT 
For the experiment, 12 hand-made devices were built 
with a setup of over 30 relay sensors to monitor the position 
of the devices every 10 meters inside the kindergarten. For 
the final user test, 50 children were selected through an 
ethical research pre-survey with their parents. The subjects 
were in average ten children per age. To observe the 
behavior, and check both physical movements and digital 
data of the children with the devices, 5 selected personnel 
attended the test. 
Complementary to the device, a website for parents, 
shown in Figure 5, was made available at the beginning of 
the experiment. With this tool, they could monitor the 
movement of their children inside the kindergarten, besides 
watching their point of view constantly. Nevertheless, for 
everyday use, these shots are meant to be taken when a child 
registers a sudden change in heart rate or shifts his/her 
position up and down rapidly. 
A. Extension of the Experiment 
One of the biggest shopping malls in southern east Japan 
adapted this system to prevent children getting lost while 
shopping in the facility. In addition, with the function of 
measuring heart rates, shops can get information on when the 
children got excited in relation to certain products, making 
this feedback useful for the store to promote their products or 
events practically. On the other side, for detecting the 
position of lost children, a GPS was implemented in the 
device. However, as indoor measurements were not accurate, 
and XBee mobile network was deployed at the shopping 
mall for every 30 meters for monitoring and controlling the 
devices. Figure 6 shows the setup and positioning of the 
XBee mobile network inside the mall. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
To develop a new device concerning children’s safety, 
emotional and physical growth with new experiences are the 
most important points. Those aspects were treated using an 
approach with Kansei, physiological data, and behavioral 
movements sensed by highly technical solutions. For 
practical uses of the device, fascinating and reasonable 
design, fitting children’s preferences, was highly evaluated. 
Currently, real production of the “Onigiri Machine” is being 
prepared based on the behaviors and preferences of children 
and elderly. In this regard, it will increase its potential: not 
only as a tool to prevent lost people, but also as a mean to 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 4.   Implementation of Onigiri Machine 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.   Online Website Interface for Onigiri Machine 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

know the user’s Kansei in various situations, regardless of 
age. With the mechanical engineering and information 
technology developed, this concept, that started from a 
personal need to prevent loss or kidnaping of children, 
brought more possibilities for the improvement of 
Information and Communication Technology for the future. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S.H.Lee, J.H.Sohn, A.Usami, M.Hamanaka, Development of 
Wearable Device by Kid's friendly Design for Kid's Safety, 
Human Computer Interaction 2010, Brisbane, Australia, 2010. 
[2] S.H.Lee, M. Hamanaka, Y.Iwamoto, D. Kim, Heart-rate 
Response to Simulated Anxious Events- Development of 
Kid's Friendly wearable device for children's safety, Design 
and Emotion Conference 2010, Chicago, USA. 
[3] M. Hamanaka, Y. Murakami, A. Usami, Y. Miura, S.H.Lee, 
System for Detecting Kindergartners’Potential Emergency 
Situations, 
World 
Multi- 
Conference 
on 
Systemics, 
Cybernetics and Informatics 2010(WMSCI2010), July Florida, 
USA, Vol. I, pp. 296-301. 
[4] J. 
Farringdon, 
A.J.Moore, 
N.Tilbury, 
J.Church, 
P.D. 
Biemond, ,Wearable Sensor Badge and Sensor Jacket for 
Context Awareness. ISWC, p.107. 2009. 
[5] N. Kern, B.Shiele, H. Junker, P. Lukowicz, G.Troster, 
Wearable sensing to annotate meeting recordings Euro-Par 
2006. LNCS, vol.7, No.5, pp. 263-274. Springer, Heidelberg 
London. 2003. 
[6] M. Wiklund, Usability in practice: how companies develop 
user-friendly products. Academic Press Professional, Inc., 
1994. 
[7] “Japan's already-safe streets could become even safer for 
children”, 2010, URL: http://www.csmonitor.com/World 
/Global-News/2010/1201/Japan-s-already-safe-streets-could-
become-even-safer-for-children/ 
[accessed: 
2017-02-26].
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.   Signal receptors position in the mall 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

