Psycho-physiological Stress Monitoring using Mobile and Continous Pulse Transit 
Time Measurement 
 
Stefan Hey 
House of Competence, hiper.campus 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
Stefan.hey@kit.edu 
Hatem Sghir 
House of Competence, hiper.campus 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
Hatem.sghir@kit.edu
 
 
Abstract—In the last years stress has become one of the 
most serious health problems in industrialized western 
countries. It is one of the most common reasons for a number 
of serious diseases and an important factor for increasing cost 
in health systems. Beside this, over the last years there has 
been an increasing interest in finding new methods for 
capturing psychological, behavioral and physiological data in 
real-time using infield data acquisition systems. Within our 
research group a system for ambulatory assessment of psycho-
physiological signals for real-time data capture was developed. 
Because of the multivarious influences of stress on the 
physiological response of the body, a stress measurement 
system has to take into account as many parameters as 
possible. Pulse transit time (PTT) gives comprehensive 
information about the cardiovascular system. It is determined 
by measuring the ECG and the pulse wave; the latter is 
noninvasively measured either on a finger or on an earlobe. In 
a further study we discovered a strong correlation between 
stress and PTT and that PTT is an appropriate parameter for 
stress measurement. The paper describes the use of a mobile 
PTT-measurement system for monitoring stress in everyday 
life. 
 
Keywords-component; stress; mobile; PTT;ECG 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Excessive stress releases reactions on different levels in 
the human body. One can observe reactions on the cognitive 
level [1], the emotional state of a person, the vegetative-
hormonal system, as well as on the muscular level.  
Predominantly the reactions on the vegetative-hormonal 
level of the body can be measured by different methods. For 
the measurement of stress, one can distinguish between 
invasive and non-invasive methods, or between stationary 
(laboratory) equipment and mobile measurement systems. 
The physiological reactions are caused by an activation 
of the sympathetic nervous system and by the release of 
hormones (adrenalin, noradrenalin, testosterone and cortisol).  
These hormones are released as a consequence of the 
activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA 
or HTPA axis), the neuroendocrine system that controls 
reactions to stress and regulates many body processes, i.e., 
mood and emotions, the immune system, as well as many 
others. 
Consequences arising out of this are: an increase of the 
respiration and heart rate, a constriction of the blood vessels, 
an increase of the blood pressure, a reaction of the 
electrodermal activity and energetic metabolism [4].  
The goal of a reliable measurement of stress is to obtain a 
comprehensive overview of the entire reaction chain within 
the body by a simple monitoring system. The monitoring 
system has to be non-invasive, mobile and unobtrusive in 
order to be accepted by a user as part of their everyday life. 
Under these circumstances the use of the pulse transit 
time seems to be an ideal parameter for stress measurement. 
Almost all of the cardiovascular parameters (heart rate, blood 
pressure, artery resistance) can be linked with one another. 
The PTT could be measured non-invasively by a system that 
simultaneously records ECG and photoplethysmogramm. 
Several workgroups are trying to make the psycho-
physiological load on people measurable, in order to help 
people adapt to their stressful everyday life in a simpler 
fashion. In other words, to investigate the different 
possibilities of balancing one’s physical and mental 
resources 
thereby 
achieving 
one’s 
best 
cognitive 
performance. 
In fact, they are attempting to find indicators which could 
show and quantify one’s stress and activity level and thusly 
give an idea about one’s physical and mental state. 
This paper is organized as follows: in Section II, a 
description of the methods used to extract stress indicators 
and to validate PTT as an appropriate indicator for the acute 
stress level is given. Following this, the research results on 
the topic will be presented in Section III. Lastly, a discussion 
on future research plans and concluding remarks are 
presented. 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Pulse Transit Time 
The pulse transit time or PTT represents the time needed 
by a blood pulse wave to exit the heart and reach the PPG 
(PhotoPlethysmoGramm) measurement site. To increase the 
accuracy of the measurement, the distance between that site 
and the heart should be as long as possible. In this case, the 
impact of measurement errors in time domain is smaller 
compared to the measurement result. Beside this, the 
measurement site must to be accessible for the sensor device 
and robust enough against artifacts, e.g. caused by 
126
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

movements. For this reason the pulse wave is detected at the 
finger tip [2]. 
 
Figure 1.  Measurement of pulse transit time from ECG and PPG. 
 
As shown in Figure 1, the PTT can be determined by 
calculating the time difference between the r-wave of the 
ECG signal and the virtual base point of the PPG signal. This 
latter corresponds to the intersection point between the 
tangent to the pulse wave at the point with the maximal slope 
during the systolic rise phase and the horizontal line going 
through the point having the absolute minimum. The main 
advantage of using the base point to calculate the PTT is that 
the p-base point, which is determined out of two 
characteristic points in the pulse wave, guarantees a better 
noise and artifact robustness compared to other possible 
points of the photoplethysmogramm like the maximum of 
the p-wave. 
B. Mobile Measurement System 
This section describes the mobile measurement system 
used in this study. For the assessment of the biosignal, the 
SOMNOscreen plus system from somnomedics (Rander-
sacker, Germany) was used. With this system we measured 
ECG-signal, photoplethysmograph signal, the electrodermal 
activity and the respiration signal. 
These signals could be relevant for the determination of 
the stress level of the test person. Furthermore, a 3D 
acceleration sensor-node [3], [9] is used to simultaneously 
collect information about the activity of the user. The 
measurement of physical activity is important to interpret the 
cardio-respiratory physiological signals in field studies. 
1) ECG-Sensor: We are using the two-lead method to 
detect ECG-Signal with a sample rate of 1024 Hz. By means 
of gel electrodes we measure the skin potential on the chest 
of one person. To eliminate motion artifacts, the cables of the 
electrodes are fixed to the surface of the body. 
2) Photoplethysmograph: A finger clip transmission 
photoplethysmograph is used to register the PPG. The signal 
of the photodiode correlates with the amount of blood in the 
finger and thus reflects the pulse wave in the blood vessels. 
The PPG signal is also acquired with a sample rate of 
1024 Hz. 
C. Simulation of stress in laboratory environment 
The „Trier Social Stress Test” (TSST) [5] is used in 
laboratory environment for induction of moderate psycho-
biological stress responses. A meta-analysis conducted by 
Dickerson and Kemeny [6], reviewing 208 laboratory studies 
of acute psychological stressors, demonstrated that the TSST 
is a reliable instrument eliciting robust physiological stress 
reactions. 
The TSST consists of an anticipation period (10 min) and 
a test period (10 min).  
In the anticipation period three persons are introduced as 
a selection committee. The subjects are told that after a 
preparation time a job interview will take place, in which 
they have to deliver a free speech introducing themselves 
and answer questions asked by the committee (5 min).  
Following these instructions the subjects were instructed 
to prepare their talks, in which they had 10 minutes. After 
this they made their short presentation to the committee and 
responded to the panel’s questions. Following this interview, 
one member of the committee presented a second task the 
participant must partake in. The test person has to subtract 
the number 13 from 1687, backwards in sequence. Each 
mistake restarts the subtraction from the beginning at 1687. 
During the whole test period subjects are filmed by a video 
camera [5], and they are informed, that these film are used 
for further analysis of the test. 
D. Measurement of baseline during night 
Normally, baseline values of physiological data in „Trier 
Social Stress Test” (TSST) experiments are measured at the 
beginning of the test. After connecting the sensors to the test 
persons, baseline values are captured just before the 
anticipation phase starts. But a number of people show 
increased vital parameters when coming to the laboratory for 
a test, even if they don’t know exactly what happens during 
the experiment. 
To obtain a reliable baseline value of physiological data, 
monitoring during the night after the laboratory test is 
necessary. To measure the physiological signal during the 
night an unobtrusive measurement system is needed, so that 
it does not disturb the sleeping pattern of the user to maintain 
the influences of the measurement signals as small as 
possible. 
E. Subjects 
28 students (14 female, 14 male) from the Karlsruhe 
Institute of Technology were selected to participate in the 
study. They were misleadingly informed beforehand that the 
goal of the study was to test a new medical device; they were 
not told that the actual intentions of the study were to 
measure stress. This procedure was necessary in case of a 
stress study to avoid influences on the measurement result. 
F. Study procedure 
We designed a detailed and complex procedure for this 
study (see figure 2).  
After the reception of the participant, an informed and 
written agreement is given by each individual. Some 
common information about the person is collected from 
questionnaire. After this, the system for measurement of 
pulse transit time was applied to the subject and the 
recording was started. Immediately they were instructed to a 
take a 5 minute pause. After this phase, a first saliva cortisol 
127
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

measurement and a subjective assessment of the mental state 
(MDBF) were collected. This was followed by a second 
phase, where the subjects had to lie down (baseline phase). 
In the next 20 minutes the anticipation period and the test 
period of the TSST took place. At the beginning and the end 
of each phase, saliva cortisol levels, as well as MDBF, were 
assessed. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Study procedure in laboratory environment. 
 
Following the TSST procedure consisting of the job 
interview and the arithmetic problem, subjects stayed in rest 
again for recovery from the stress reaction (10 min), a 
cortisol and MDBF measurement followed. Then a special 
relaxation technique, the so called progressive muscle 
relaxation (PMR), was performed during a period of time of 
20 minutes. With this procedure we can get valid data for 
relaxed state as a reference that could be compared to the 
phases during the stress test. This phase also ended with 
saliva cortisol an MDBF measurement. The last phase of the 
laboratory period was a normal passive phase with no action 
for again 20 minutes. After the laboratory phase, the study 
procedure included a monitoring phase of the daily activities 
of the individual, including the night after the experiment. 
The measurement devices were removed from the 
individuals that following morning. 
G. Biosignal processing 
The digital signal processing has been done in MATLAB 
with an integrated analysis environment for psycho-
physiological signals. ECG and PPG biosignals have been 
filtered in respect to the nature of the signal in order to 
suppress noise (e.g. power line interference). The feature 
detection of the r-wave in the ECG signal has been done with 
the OSEA algorithm [7]. Heart rate has then been calculated 
using the adjusted data. Furthermore, an automatic artifact 
inspection process did not take in account the r-waves, 
whose corresponding heart rate differs more than 30% from 
a moving average [8].  
The p-base point in the PPG signal has been detected as 
described in section II.A. As a result, the pulse transit time 
could be obtained as the time difference between both of the 
identified features namely the r-wave and the p-base point. 
Subsequently a validation operation assured that the PTT is 
within a reasonable interval. Finally, the arithmetic mean 
value has been calculated over the defined phases. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Pulse transit time plotted over time for a test person. 
 
Figure 3 shows the typical signal sequence of the 
registered pulse transit time curves during one stress test in 
the laboratory environment using mobile PTT-sensor. In this 
figure, at the beginning of the measurement one can see the 
baseline phase with a relatively high value of PTT, followed 
by a sudden decrease at the beginning of the anticipation 
phase. At the beginning of the TSST, one could see another 
decrease in PTT. During the Relaxation a PMR, the PTT 
rises up to the level at the beginning of the test. 
 
In comparison to this, the signal sequence of the heart-
rate for the same individual is shown in Figure 4. One can 
see an inverted course of the graph. There is also a difference 
in the reaction time of the parameter at the beginning of a 
stressful phase.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Heart rate plotted over time for a test person. 
 
To control the evidence of the physiolocal signals during 
the different phases of the study, we calculated a Poincare-
plot of the R-R-intervals in the baseline phase, the 
anticipation phase and in PMR-phase. As we can see in 
figure 5, there is a significant difference in HRV in phases 
with stress (anticipation) and phases of relaxation (PMR). 
 
128
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

 
Figure 5.  Poincarre plot for a test person. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The study shows that a mobile acquisition of pulse transit 
time (PTT) is possible.  
The expected behavior of the PTT according to the 
defined phases could be registered. In fact, one could 
identify the stressful moments during the TSST test by the 
corresponding changes in PTT curve. Further analyses needs 
to show the benefit of a measurement of PTT during night. 
The analysis of this data is still in progress and will be 
presented in a later paper. 
In Addition to other methods of psycho-physiological 
monitoring, the mobile measurement of pulse transit time for 
stress detection appears to be a very significant method as 
described in this paper. 
Due to the fact that pulse transit time comprises much 
more information than heart rate and heart rate variability, 
this parameter provides more precise estimation of a person’s 
stress level. This was shown in a previous work [8].  
 
IV. 
FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSION 
A more detailed analysis of the whole data acquired in 
this study is necessary in order to consolidate the preliminary 
results shown in this paper and to be able to draw a more 
reliable conclusion. 
A further psycho-physiological analysis that compares 
the cortisol level to a subjective behavior state needs to be 
done in order to endorse the proposed method. In the next 
studies, an integrated sensor platform combined with a PDA-
based e-diary method using myExperience software [10] will 
be used. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The Research Group hiper.campus received financial 
support by the “Concept for the future” of Karlsruhe Institute 
of Technology within the framework of the German 
Excellence Initiative.   
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
J.J.Kim and D.M. Diamond, “The stressed hippocampus, synaptic 
plasticity and lost memory,” Nature Reviews, vol. 3, 2002, pp. 453-
462. 
[2] 
P. Vollmer, P. Boll, W. Stork, N. Lutter, A. Wagner, U. Großmann 
and J. Ottenbacher, “Entwicklung eines mobilen, kontinuierlichen und 
nicht-invasiven 
Blutdruckmessgerätes 
mit 
Bluetooth 
Daten-
übertragung,”  Illmenau: BMT,  2004. 
[3] 
L. Jatobá, U. Großmann, J. Ottenbacher, S. Härtel, B. von Haaren, W. 
Stork, K.D. Müller-Glaser and K. Bös, “Obtaining Energy 
Expenditure and Physical Activity from Acceleration Signals for 
Context-aware Evaluation of Cardiovascular Parameter,” Venezuela, 
CLAIB, 2007. 
[4] 
R. L-C. Pan, B. Chen and J. K-J. Li, “noninvasive monitoring of 
autonomic cardiovascular control during stress,” Bioengineering 
Conference, Proceedings of the 1993 IEEE Nineteenth Annual 
Northeast, March 1993,  pp. 187 – 188. 
[5] 
C. Kirschbaum, K.-M. Pirke and D. H. Hellhammer, “The „Trier 
Social Stress Test“ - a tool for investigating psychobiological stress 
responses in a laboratory setting,” Neuropsychobiology, vol. 28, 
1993, pp. 28, 76-81. 
[6] 
S. S. Dickerson and M. E. Kemeny, “Acute stressors and cortisol 
responses: a theoretical integration and synthesis of laboratory 
research,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 130 (3), 2004, pp. 355-391. 
[7] 
P. S. Hamilton, “Open Source ECG Analysis Software (OSEA),” 
www.eplimited.com. 
[8] 
S. Hey, A. Gharbi, B. von Haaren, K. Walter, N. König and S. 
Löffler, “Continuous non-invasive Pulse Transit Time Measurement 
for Psycho-physiological Stress Monitoring,” Proceeding of the 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine eTELEMED 2009, Cancun, Feb. 2009, IEEE Computer 
Society Conference Proceedings, pp. 113 – 116. 
[9] 
S. Härtel, J.-P. Gnam, S. Löffler, K. Bös, “Estimation of Energy 
Expenditure using Accelerometers and activity-based Energy-models 
– Validation of a new device”. European Review of Aging and 
Physical Activity, Springer 2010 
[10] J. Stumpp, P. Anastasopoulou, S. Hey, “Platform for ambulatory 
assessment of psycho-physiological signals and online data capture”. 
7th International Conference on Methods and Techniques in 
Behavioral Research “Measuring Behavior 2010”, Eindhoven 2010 
 
129
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

