Kansei Design Applied on Hospital Beds: Medical Design for Patient and Caregiver
Eiji Onchi
Kansei, Behavioral and Brain Sciences
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences
University of Tsukuba
Ibaraki, Japan
Email: onchi.eiji@gmail.com
SeungHee Lee
Faculty of Art and Design
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences
Univeristy of Tsukuba
Ibaraki, Japan
Email: seungheekansei@gmail.com
Abstract—The paper proposes new design directions, using a
Kansei Design approach, of the mechatronic hospital bed made
by the Pontiﬁcal University Catholic of Peru, and analyzes the
Kansei aspects of the overall user experience. Implementing a
semi-autonomous, easy to use adjustable bed, not only facilitates
the work of medical personnel, but may improve the recovery rate
of patients by boosting their emotional state by enabling mobility.
It is suggested to correlate the personality of the users with the
impressions of this medical bed to ﬁnd if using a mechatronic
system is suitable for all patients.
Keywords–hospital bed; kansei design; rehabilitation; user ex-
perience; emotions.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The technology developed in the past years has eased the
advancement of automation in different areas, meaning that
the quality of life of humans could arguably improve. In spite
of that, there are concerns that automation will dehumanize
certain procedures or could be misused and abused if not used
correctly [1]. In response to this, researches and developers
are starting to apply Kansei Design approaches to consider
human factor, with a focus on human emotions, as the core
when designing a product. The use of ’kansei’ (a Japanese term
that conveys the meaning of affection, emotion, aesthetics, and
related terms) as the base for developing a product, aims to
improve the synergy between humans and objects [2].
In health-care, automation aims to be beneﬁcial for both
patient and caregiver. In this regard, the evolution of adjustable
beds, commonly known as hospital beds, plays a key role in
any medical institution. From the traditional mechanical and
electromechanical beds (controlled by handles or buttons that
are cumbersome to operate), to the most advanced automated
medical beds (embedded with sensors, actuators and a central
processing unit), the goal has been to provide movement and
comfort to bedridden patients.
Nevertheless, it is of the uttermost importance to take into
account injuries caused by prolonged lack of movement, such
as skin pressure ulcers, and reduce the risk of death by sleep
disorders, like sleep apnea, while relieving caregivers of work-
related stress. In this sense, the University of New Hampshire
developed a medical bed [3] that monitors the patients’ blood
pressure and breath rates in real time to react to possible
complications. Moreover, beds that monitor temperature and
spatial location of the patient [4] can prevent skin injuries,
while systems with pressure sensors [5] help for apnea sleep
disorder. Following this trend, hospital beds as those produced
by EPOSbed project [6] or Stryker [7] implement mechatronic
systems to ease the workload on the caregiver and yield more
freedom to the patient.
In addition, to complete and complement the aforemen-
tioned researches and projects, the Pontiﬁcal Catholic Univer-
sity of Peru developed a mechatronic SmartBed [8] with these
considerations in mind. However, most of these developments
mainly focus on the technical features and usability of ad-
justable beds rather than the user experience and ’kansei’ of
the patient, the caregiver, and those members related to the
bedridden person.
Therefore, based on this [8] previous research, this paper
discusses the developed mechatronic hospital bed from a
Kansei Design perspective and proposes improvements on
its design. The structure of the document is as follows. In
Section I, the State of the Art development of hospital beds
are introduced. In Section II, the general characteristics of the
SmartBed [8] are presented. Section III details the experimen-
tal procedure and obtained results, next to the analysis and
discussion in Section IV. Finally, in Section V, the conclusions
of this research are laid out.
II.
MECHATRONIC SMARTBED
The following section brieﬂy describes the characteristics
of the mechatronic SmartBed show in Figure 1.
1) Mechanical Speciﬁcations: This hospital bed can be
adjusted to seven standard medical positions, namely: trende-
lenburg, anti-trendelenburg, fowler, gatch, self-contour, lateral,
Figure 1. Mechatronic SmartBed.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. Smartbed User Interface
and ﬂat. To achieve these shapes, four linear actuators act
as pillars, while two linear actuators control the angle of the
header and footer.
2) Electronic Speciﬁcations: Several sensors measure the
weight, position and shape of the patient, while synchronizing
these data to a web-based database. The bed itself commu-
nicates wireless to a tablet, where doctors and caregivers are
able to manipulate the medical bed at ease.
3) Interface Design: All collected data is synchronized and
stored on a web server in order to be accessible anywhere
with an Internet connection. In this manner, family members,
as well as medical personnel, can keep track of the patient’s
condition in real time. The interface is presented on a tablet
and uses icons to control all motor functions of the hospital
bed, as shown in Figure 2, while providing processed data
from sensors. The tablet can only control paired beds, so as
to avoid misuse or hacking.
III.
EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS
A. Experiment
As stated in [8], the carried out user study had two
objectives: 1) conﬁrm the functionality of the system, and
2) evaluate the users’ perception of the interface. In this
regard, the focus of this paper will be to discuss the later.
To accomplish the objectives, 20 participants from 17 to 28
years old tested the adjustable bed, as shown in Figure 3, and
ﬁlled a survey that encouraged the participants to think of the
system as a robot.
The procedure for the experiment went as follows:
Figure 3. SmartBed during the experiment
Figure 4. User Experience Survey
1)
Training (1 min) - participants laid down on the bed
and were given instruction on how to navigate the
user interface.
2)
Predeﬁned sequence (2 min) - participants experi-
enced automatic movement of the SmartBed.
3)
Free control (3 min) - participants freely interacted
with the interface.
4)
Questionnaire (4 min) - participants ﬁlled out a
questionnaire
For the survey, the following items were asked and an-
swered with a scale from 1 (Not at all) to 5 (Of course), using
a Godspeed style questionnaire [9]:
•
Friendliness: how friendly the system feels.
•
Smartness: how smart the system feels.
•
Wisdom: how knowledgeable the system seems.
•
Relaxation: how relaxed the system seems.
•
Calmness: how calmed the system feels.
•
Ease of use: ease of use of the interface.
•
Capability: how capable the system feels for the task.
•
Personal Preference: whether the subject would like
to be catered by a robotic interface.
B. Results
The results of the survey presented in Figure 4 are as
follows. Having an adjustable bed controlled by just a tablet
seemed to be easy to use for the participants. Moreover, most
subjects felt the bed to be calmed and relaxed. On the contrary,
while some people thought the SmartBed was somewhat smart,
the majority agreed that it did not infer wisdom.
C. Follow Up
A follow up of this experiment took place on an actual
hospital environment, where a designated nurse and patient
tested the bed for a week. From the care-giver’s perspective,
the developed system proved to be functional and convenient,
as they could control the hospital bed remotely, without any
major effort. On the other hand, the patient reported that the
movement of the bed was comfortable and felt secure while
using the system.
Notwithstanding,
this
convenience
of
controlling
the
SmartBed remotely might distance the interaction between
caregiver and patient, while the emotional state of the bedrid-
den may not be conveyed promptly and correctly.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV.
KANSEI ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
In Kansei Design, user experience plays an important role
in deﬁning the direction of development for a product. The
reaction of the ﬁnal user is as important as solving the problem
with the most optimal procedure, which is the reason why
a constant feedback from the users is necessary to create
a closed-loop like system that allows for a better design.
Additionally, the environment where the product will be used
must be taken into consideration, as that determines limitations
and restrictions of the design.
Taking the aforementioned factors into account, the results
presented on the previous section show that the overall feed-
back of the participants tends toward perceiving the bed as
having seemingly human-like characteristics. Nonetheless, it is
worth noting that the survey encouraged the subjects to think
of the SmartBed as a robot, instead of an entirely controllable
machine. Moreover, the subjects were around their twenties,
which means that it is highly probable that they are used to
interacting with technology.
In this sense, the general perception that this hospital bed is
capable of doing what it is expected to do, but without having
any knowledge or good judgment for its actions, namely
wisdom, could mean that potential users (both patients and
medical personnel), might think of the system as a slave
machine rather than a companion throughout rehabilitation.
Yet, this perception may give the patient the notion of freedom
and independence, as the user will be able to control the system
by itself, thus potentially increasing his/her motivation and
mood, and improve the rehabilitation process.
Furthermore, as the SmartBed is projected to be used by
people not familiar with technology, it is proposed to redesign
the user interface. With the bed’s ability to do biometric
measurements of the patient, it is possible to process these data
to present some of the emotional states of the user, as well as
programming countermeasures to react to negative emotions.
Also, Figure 5 shows a draft of the redesigned user interface:
a cover and tablet which displays the face of the patient
and caregiver, alongside simple inputs, to lessen the negative
effect produced by remote controlling, and to make the bed
both easier to use for general people, and a communication’s
channel.
On the other hand, a redesign of this medical device,
considering the approach suggested by Lee, et al. [2] of
creating a 3D model in clay before sketching, can be applied to
obtain unconventional results to actual hospital beds in order to
Figure 5. Proposed Interface Draft
circumvent the feeling of entrapment for bedridden patients.
After that, the model must be adjusted with hospital safety
standards to ensure its usability.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Although designing a hospital bed with only technical
aspects in consideration may improve user experience, the
’kansei’ of the user must be appraised to develop a medical
device that feels and is safe.
Likewise, adding convenience to a system might improve
usability, but could diminish patient-caregiver relationship.
Thence, it is suggested to consider these factors on future
designs.
Finally, further evaluations must be made on an actual
hospital environment to assess the emotional and psychological
response of target users. It is suggested to correlate the per-
sonality of the patient with the impressions of this SmartBed
to ﬁnd if using a mechatronic medical bed is suitable for all
patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Potiﬁcal Catholic
University of Peru and its researchers for providing the back-
ground work of this project.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Parasuraman, “Humans and Automation: Use, Misuse, Disuse,
Abuse,” Human Factors, vol. 39, no. 2, 1997, pp. 230–253.
[2]
S. H. Lee, A. Harada, and P. J. Stappers, Design Based on Kansei. Taylor
Francis, London, 2002, chapter 16, pp. 219–229, in Green, W. S. and
Jordan, P. W., Pleasure With Products: Beyond Usability, ISBN: 0-415-
23704-1.
[3]
“UNH Research Enhancing Patient Care With ”Smart” Hospital Beds,”
2012,
URL:
http://www.unh.edu/news/cj nr/2010/dec/dw07smart.cfm
[accessed: 2017-02-26].
[4]
A. Bandala and et al., “Development and Design of Automated Hospital
Bed with Incremental Panels for Bedsore Prevention,” in IEEE Region
10 Conference TENCON 2014, Bangkok, Thailand, Oct. 2014, pp. 762–
767.
[5]
D. Townsend, M. Holtzman, R. Goubran, M. Frize, and F. Knoefel,
“Relative Thresholding With Under-Mattress Pressure Sensors to Detect
Central Apnea,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measure-
ment, vol. 60, no. 10, 2011, pp. 3281–3289.
[6]
“Welcome
to
the
EPOSbed
Project
Website,”
2011,
URL:
http://www.eposbed.com/ [accessed: 2017-02-26].
[7]
“In-Touch Critical Bed Care,” 2016, URL: http://www.stryker.com/en-
us/products/PatientHandlingEMSandEvacuationEquipment/Beds/Critical
CareBeds/InTouch/index.htm [accessed: 2017-02-26].
[8]
E. Onchi, C. Pealoza, and F. Cullar, “Design and implementation of a
mechatronic SmartBed for improved rehabilitation,” in Proceedings 2016
IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT), Taipei,
Taiwan, Mar. 2016, pp. 1482–1487.
[9]
C. Bartneck, E. Croft, and D. Kulic, “Measurement Instruments for the
Anthropomorphism, Animacy, Likeability, Perceived Intelligence, and
Perceived Safety of Robots,” International Journal of Social Robotics,
vol. 1, no. 1, 2009, pp. 71–81.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

