 
Benefit of Telemedicine for Patients With Diabetes Mellitus
 
Irene Tagliente, Matteo Ritrovato, Nicola Ullmann; 
Riccardo Schiaffini 
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy, 
irene.tagliente@opbg.net; riccardo.schiaffini@opbg.net 
 
 
Francisco. J. Leon Trujillo  
Faculty of Engineering, University of Rome "La Sapienza,  
Rome, Italy 
francisco.leon@uniroma1.it
Abstract-The mean HbA1c difference between Sensor 
Augmented Pump (SAP) therapy and Multiple Daily 
Injections (MDI) is 0.3 to 0.6% in favour of SAP, but 
adolescents, although treated with SAP therapy, show a 
progressive temporary deterioration of glucose control. 
Telemedicine in Type 1 Diabetes is thought to facilitate 
diabetes management and to improve compliance to 
CSII/SAP treatment especially during adolescence. The aim 
of the present study was to observe the long term impact on 
glycometabolic 
controlled 
by 
Telemedicine 
systems 
(Telemedicine Group) compared with traditional follow-up 
(Control Group) in Type 1 diabetes SAP treated adolescents. 
The observed HbA1c decrease in the group followed with 
telemedicine was associated with a better compliance to 
therapy in terms of frequency of sensor use, number of 
SMBG tests and number of insulin boluses.  
  
Keywords-Type 
1 
diabetes; 
adolescence; 
telemedicine; 
telemonitoring; CSII; SAP 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Diabetes is a hormonal disorder that affects an 
estimated three hundred million people worldwide [1]. 
Several treatments have been proposed to guarantee 
patients a good control of symptoms but, when diabetes 
is underestimated, it can lead to a poor quality of life. 
Diabetes is a disease characterized by a group of 
metabolic disorders, caused by defects of insulin’s 
secretion and/or activity. The first condition is 
represented by a pancreas inability to produce insulin 
and the latter is characterized by incorrect use of normal 
secreted insulin (insulin resistance). Insulin, produced by 
the Beta cells from the Langerhans islets, has a dual 
function: transport glucose from the bloodstream to the 
body's cells, where it is converted into energy and is 
involved in the anabolic metabolism of glycogen. The 
previously strong association of low HbA1c with severe 
hypoglycemia and coma in young individuals with type 
1 diabetes has substantially decreased in the last decade, 
allowing achievement of near-normal glycemic control 
in these patients [3]. At the same time, high HbA1c 
value can induce, in the long term, the incurrence of co-
morbidity diseases, which is well known from literature. 
Several meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials 
have demonstrated that mean glycated hemoglobin 
(HbA1c) levels and hypoglycaemic episodes are 
significantly lower with Continuous Subcutaneous 
Insulin Infusion (CSII) as compared with multiple daily 
insulin injections (MDI) in type 1 diabetic patients, 
children, adolescent and young adults [4]. The mean 
HbA1c difference between treatments is 0.3 to 0.6%, 
with a greater reduction (> 0.6%) in patients treated with 
Sensor Augmented Pump (SAP) therapy [5], especially 
for very young children [6]. 
During this age period people with diabetes shows a 
progressive and temporary deterioration of glucose 
control and one explanation for deteriorated glycaemic 
control among adolescents treated with CSII and SAP is 
omitted bolus doses before meals [7].  
Telemedicine in diabetes, defined as the use of 
telecommunications to deliver healthcare services by 
interaction 
between 
the 
medical 
staff 
and 
the 
patients/their families, includes the telemonitoring of the 
transmission of health data (self monitoring blood 
glucose data, insulin therapy, pump setting, etc.) from the 
patient's home to the Diabetic Unit, with a consequent 
real-time health feedback. An online website on web-
based intervention for adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes 
demonstrated that the tele medical approach seems to be 
a promising tool for a better disease management [8], but, 
up to now, poor literature related to Telemedicine in 
adolescents with Type 1 Diabetes is available. The main 
aim of this study was to observe the long term (five year) 
effect of glycometabolic control in patient followed with 
ambulatory 
visits 
and 
Telemedicine 
assistance 
(Telemedicine Group),  compared with a similar group 
(Control Group) followed with traditional trials (only 
with periodic ambulatory visit) in Type 1 diabetes 
adolescents treated with SAP therapy. The paper is 
structured as follows: Section II discusses the methods 
used for our approach; Section III presents the results; in 
Section IV we presents conclusion and ideas for future 
work. 
 
II. 
METHODS 
This 
is 
a 
case 
feasibility 
study 
on 
using 
telemonitoring for diabetes follow-up. This was an 
analytical observational study, carried out at Bambino 
Gesù Children's Hospital, in the Unit of Endocrinology 
and Diabetes in association with Research Unit of Health 
Technology Assessment, over a period of 60 months. A 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

total of 29 consecutive Type 1 diabetes, SAP treated, 
adolescents (mean age 13), regularly followed at 
Bambino 
Gesù 
Children’s 
Hospital, 
Unit 
of 
Endocrinology 
and 
Diabetes, 
were 
randomly 
(randomization 
1:1) 
assigned 
to 
a 
Telemedicine 
assistance (Telemedicine Group), with a frequent 
(monthly) tele-assistance and tele-interaction between the 
medical team and patients/families,  or to a traditional 
follow up (Control Group): only with ambulatory visit 
(in-hospital periodic visits at 3 months intervals). Patients 
with diabetes duration < 1 year were excluded from this 
study.  
For both groups HbA1c values, was compared the 
mean, at 6 months intervals, of: frequency of sensor use, 
insulin boluses per day, SMBG tests per day and severe 
hypoglycemic episodes, by engineers of Research Unit of 
Health Technology Assessment 
The study design conformed to the ethical guidelines 
of the Declaration of Helsinki (1975), and the Ethics 
Committee of Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital and 
Research Institute approved it.  
At the beginning and during the study all the enrolled 
patients received a regular and standardized protocol of 
education about proper control of diabetes, in which a 
multidisciplinary team (diabetologist, nurse, dietitian and 
psychologist) was involved.  
To the Telemedicine Group, plus the standardization 
protocol, was asked to store the parameters before 
mentioned, on each personal profile of online website, 
day by day, to have telemonitoring of the transmission of 
health data (Telemedicine protocol) by the team of Unit 
of Endocrinology and Diabetes, with a consequent real-
time health feedback. 
 To the Control Group, plus the standardization 
protocol, was asked to store, the parameters before 
mentioned, in a diary (Traditional protocol). For the 
Telemedicine Group the data was stored by the patients 
on each personal profile of online website, day by day. 
For each patient, was valued the number of doses of 
insulin/day (bolus/day) and number of self-monitoring of 
blood glucose/day ( SMBG / day ).  
So for each patient was reported: the value of 
glycosylated hemoglobin test (HbA1c) at month: 
0,6,12,18,24,30,36,42,48,60 in the years since 2009 to 
2014; number of boli/die and SMBG/die. 
A. 
Statistical Analysis: 
At the end of the study, the recorded outcomes were 
analyzed using GrafPad software. Difference between the 
mean values of HbA1c, bolus/day and SMBG/day in two 
groups was statistically compared and analyzed by 
student-t test, standard deviation and   When p-value was 
< 0.05, it was considered as statistically significant. 
When p-value was<0.01, it was considered as very 
statistically significant. 
 
III. RESULTS 
Results showed that both groups were homogeneous 
on the socio- demographic characteristics. Mean follow-
up duration was more than 60 months.  
As reported in Table 1, the observed HbA1c decrease 
in the Telemedicine Group was associated with a better 
compliance to therapy in terms of frequency of sensor 
use, number of SMBG tests and number of insulin 
boluses. Our data showed that there is, for the two 
groups, in the last year of observation, statistically 
significant difference (p< 0.004) of mean values of 
HbA1c associated to: significant differences of number 
boli/die (p=0.036) and very significant difference 
(p=0.001) between number of SMBG/die in the five 
years of observation. 
 Patients in Control Group tendency have values of  
8 < HbA1c <12, individual patients tend to have higher 
average of HbA1c equal to 8 even surpassing this 
threshold.  
Patients of Telemedicine Group tendency have values of 
6 <HbA1c <10, individual patients tend to have lower 
average levels of HbA1c to 8. In Figure 1 is reported the 
HnA1c trand of two group. 
The analysis of the graphs shows a increase of 
boli/day for patients in Telemedicine Group higher than 
patient in Control Group. Patient in Telemedicine Group, 
noncompliance 
with 
recommended 
Telemedicine 
protocol had value of HbA1c comparable of patient in 
Control Group. Again, patient of Control Group, more 
compliance at Traditional protocol had vale of HbA1c 
similar of patient in Telemedicine Group. 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Telemedicine can increase the self-management of 
disease in pediatric patient with diabetes by increase the 
number of boli/die and SMBG/die with consequent 
reduction of HbA1c test value. In our study we compared 
two groups of SAP treated Type 1 Diabetes adolescents 
followed for a long period (five years). 
The 
Telemedicine 
Group 
was 
followed 
by 
standardization protocol of education and storage data on 
each personal profile means online website, day by day, 
to have telemonitoring of the transmission of health data 
(Telemedicine protocol) by the team of Unit of 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, with a consequent real-time 
health feedback (plus periodic ambulatory visit). 
While the 
Control Group was followed 
by 
Traditional 
protocol 
manner 
with 
standardization 
protocol of education and only periodic in-hospital visits 
consultations and storage data in a diary. 
We demonstrated a favorable impact of frequent 
(monthly) Tele-assistance on compliance to therapy: in 
fact, patients receiving a frequent feedback by the 
medical/multidisciplinary 
team, 
due 
to 
the 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

telemonitoring, 
resulted 
more 
compliant 
to 
self-
management of diabetes then patient in Control Group 
followed with traditional trials, without telemonitoring by 
the multidisciplinary team. In Telemedicine Group 
frequency of sensor use, as well of SMBG tests, and 
consequently frequency of insulin boluses, were 
significantly higher as compared to the Control Group. 
This improved compliance to the therapy and to the 
global management of the disease, seems to have a direct 
effect on the glycometabolic control. The results of our 
study, in fact, demonstrated a better level of HbA1c even 
after a long period of follow-up in Telemedicine.  
In conclusion, our study demonstrated that when 
remote assistance (Telemedicine) is added to technology 
(SAP Therapy) we may assist people living with type 1 
diabetes to become more compliant to self-management 
of the disease. More and wider studies are needed in 
order to confirm this data and better define populations 
appropriate for the Telemedicine approach.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Danaei G, Finucane MM, Lu Y, Singh GM, Cowan 
MJ, Paciorek CJ et al. National, regional, and global 
trends in fasting plasma glucose and diabetes 
prevalence since 1980: systematic analysis of health 
examination surveys and epidemiological studies with 
370 country-years and 2.7 million participants. 
Lancet, 2011, 378(9785):31–40.  
[2] Mary M. Austin, MA, RD, CDE, FAADE, Guest 
Editor Self-Monitoring of Blood Glucose in Type 2 
Diabetes: Preface Diabetes Spectrum May 1, 2013 
26:2 80-81.  
[3] Karges B, Rosenbauer J, Kapellen T, Wagner VM, 
Schober E, et al. (2014) Hemoglobin A1c Levels and 
Risk of Severe Hypoglycemia in Children and Young 
        Adults with Type 1 Diabetes from Germany and 
Austria: A Trend Analysis in a Cohort of 37,539 
Patients between 1995 and 2012. PLoS Med 11(10): 
e1001742. 
[4] JC Pickup, D Phil. Insulin-Pump Therapy for Type 1 
Diabetes Mellitus. N Engl J Med 2012;366:1616-24 
[5] H-C Yeh, TT Brown, N Maruthur et al. Comparative 
Effectiveness and Safety of Methods of Insulin 
Delivery and Glucose Monitoring for Diabetes 
Mellitus. A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. 
Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:336-347. 
[6] G Frontino, R Bonfanti, A Scaramuzza et al. Sensor-
augmented pump therapy in very young children with 
type 
1 
diabetes: 
an 
efficacy 
and 
feasibility 
observational 
study. 
Diabetes 
Technol 
Ther. 
2012;14(9). 
[7] V Cherubini, R Gesuita, R. Bonfanti et al. Health-
related quality of life and treatment preferences in 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes. The VIPKIDS 
study. Acta Diabetol. 2014; 51:43–51. 
[8] K Nørgaard, A Scaramuzza, N Bratina et al.  Routine 
sensor-augmented pump therapy in type 1 diabetes: 
the INTERPRET study. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2013 
15(4):273-80. 
[9] JC Pickup, D Phil. Insulin-Pump Therapy for Type 1 
Diabetes Mellitus. N Engl J Med 2012;366:1616-24 
[10] H-C Yeh, TT Brown, N Maruthur et al. Comparative 
Effectiveness and Safety of Methods of Insulin 
Delivery and Glucose Monitoring for Diabetes 
Mellitus. A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. 
Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:336-347. 
[11] G Frontino, R Bonfanti, A Scaramuzza et al. Sensor-
augmented pump therapy in very young children with 
type 
1 
diabetes: 
an 
efficacy 
and 
feasibility 
observational 
study. 
Diabetes 
Technol 
Ther. 
2012;14(9):762-4. 
[12] AL Brorsson, J Leksell, G Viklund et al. A 
multicentre randomized controlled trial of an 
empowerment-inspired intervention for adolescents 
starting continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion - a 
study protocol. BMC Pediatrics 2013;13:212. 
[13] L Siminerio, K Ruppert, K Huber et al. Telemedicine 
for Reach, Education, Access, and Treatment 
(TREAT): Linking Telemedicine With Diabetes Self-
management Education to Improve Care in Rural 
Communities. The Diabetes Educator. Published 
online 
24 
September 
2014; 
http://tde.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/09/24/0145
721714551993. 
[14] R Guljas, A Ahmed, K Chang et al. Impact of 
Telemedicine in Managing Type 1 Diabetes Among 
School-age Children and Adolescents: An Integrative 
Review. Journal of Pediatric Nursing 2014;29,198–
204. 
[15] KT Newton, A Ashley.  Pilot study of a web-based 
intervention for adolescents with type 1 diabetes. J 
Telemed Telecare. 2013;19(8):443-9.  
[16] RH Slover, JB Welsh, A Criego et al.  Effectiveness 
of sensor-augmented pump therapy in children and 
adolescents with type 1 diabetes in the STAR 3 study. 
Pediatr Diabetes. 2012;13(1):6-11. 
[17]S Sheehy, G Cohen, K Owen.  Self-Management of 
Diabetes in Children and Young Adults Using 
Technology and Smartphone Applications. Curr 
Diabetes Rev. 2014. ISSN: 1573-3998. 
 
 
 
 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
Fig. 1 Trand of HbA1c levels during the follow-up period 
in 
Telemedicine 
Group 
and 
Control 
Group.
 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

