Patient Experience with Non-Clinical Aspects of
Virtual Clinics:
Beyond User Experience Design
Malak Baslyman
Information and Computer Science
Interdisciplinary Research Center of Finance and Digital Economy
King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals
Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
email: malak.baslyman@kfupm.edu.sa
Abstract—eHealth practices bring many opportunities to the
healthcare sector, such as increasing accessibility to healthcare
services while controlling cost and resource allocation. Virtual
clinics are one of the essential components of the eHealth system.
Virtual clinics have been widely implemented, especially during
the Covid-19 pandemic and after it. Hence, it is important to
evaluate patient satisfaction with the quality of the care services
provided by those clinics. Many studies attempted to evaluate
the patient experience with virtual clinics from the angle of
user interface design and user experience when interacting with
virtual clinics applications. However, there is a lack of studies
investigating patient experience and satisfaction regarding non-
clinical aspects that are related to clinical tasks in the context
of virtual clinic applications. Hence, the main objectives of this
study are to evaluate patient experience with non-clinical aspects
of virtual clinics using a standardized tool and analyze opinions
of multi-perspectives of users (patients, physicians, and software
engineers) to enhance patient experience design regarding the
non-clinical aspects. This study utilized the Hospital Consumer
Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS)
survey to evaluate patient satisfaction with non-clinical aspects of
virtual clinics. In addition, a focus group session was conducted to
collect data on the issues related to non-clinical aspects and how
to resolve those issues and enhance the patient experience when
designing virtual clinics. The results showed that participants are
generally satisﬁed with the quality of communication with doctors
in virtual consultations and with using the virtual clinics overall.
However, participants have a negative experience regarding
information availability of patient health record and medicines
and their side effects. Moreover, the participants of the focus
group session emphasized the importance of enhancing human
communication and integration of human value when designing
virtual clinic applications, and providing better support after the
online session is over.
Index Terms—Software Engineering; Healthcare; eHealth; Pa-
tient Experience.
I. INTRODUCTION
Patient satisfaction has been one of the essential dimensions
to evaluate the quality of provided healthcare services [1].
Patient satisfaction evaluates the perception of patients about
the quality of the provided services. If the quality of provided
services do not match patient expectations, patient satisfaction
is expected to the low. Patient experience (PX) is another
concept that evaluates patient experience before, after, and
during receiving healthcare services [1]. The Beryl Institute
deﬁnes the patient experience as “the sum of all interactions,
shaped by an organization’s culture, that inﬂuence patient
perceptions across the continuum of care” [2]. However, a
uniﬁed, clear, and standardized deﬁnition of PX does not exit
yet, which makes measuring and evaluating PX a challenging
task [3].
The rapid implementation of digital health transformation
and the wide adoption of virtual clinics applications lead
to a new concept called Digital Patient Experience (DPX).
In current literature, PX or User Experience (UX) are used
interchangeably with DPX as a speciﬁc deﬁnition of DPX is
still missing [4]. Studies conducted about DPX focused on
understanding factors and components that inﬂuence DPX.
Those factors are clinical and non-clinical aspects of virtual
clinics applications. Examples of the non-clinical aspects are
the usability of virtual clinic applications (user interface,
personalization, proﬁling, readability, etc.) [4]. An example
of non-clinical aspects that are associated with clinical tasks
is communication with doctors [5]. Most studies conducted
to evaluate PX with virtual clinics focused on evaluating the
technical part of virtual clinics (usability and user interaction).
Despite the fact that DPX has its own nature compared to
the PX in physical visits, there is a paucity of literature that
evaluate the other non-clinical aspects of virtual clinics, such
as communication with doctors, information availability, and
medicines explanations.
In this study, we attempted to evaluate PX regarding the
non-clinical aspects of virtual clinics using a customized
version of the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare
Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) survey. In addition, we con-
ducted a focus group session that brought multiple perspectives
of users (patients, physicians, and software engineers) to have
a deep analysis of their reactions regarding the non-clinical
aspects, and to collect their input on how to improve the non-
clinical aspects and the overall PX when using virtual clinics.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

We believe that this study contributes to the body of knowledge
by 1) using a standardized tool to evaluate PX regarding non-
clinical aspects on virtual clinics, and 2) establishing a multi-
perspective analysis of PX regarding non-clinical aspects of
virtual clinics that is reported to be missing in literature [5].
The results showed that patients are satisﬁed with virtual
clinics in general and when the medical case is not urgent.
However, to improve patient experience, participants men-
tioned that human communication, incorporation of human
values, and adequate support services after the consultation
need to be enhanced.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides background about the evaluation of patient satisfac-
tion and experience factors and tools. Section III illustrates
the research methodology followed in this work. Section IV
presents the survey and focus group results. Lastly, Section V
discusses the ﬁndings of the study, and Section VI draws
conclusions and discusses some future research opportunities.
II. RELATED WORK
There are many studies that attempted to evaluate and
investigate what inﬂuences patient satisfaction. One of the
most widely used and approved tools is the HCAHPS survey
(https://www.hcahpsonline.org/). It assesses nine aspects of pa-
tient perception of the hospital environment and the quality of
the provided care that are communication between doctors and
nurses, the responsiveness of hospital staff, pain management,
communication about medicines, discharge information, hos-
pital environment (cleanliness and quietness), and transition
of care. Kuper and Bonds argued that is true that patient
satisfaction is strongly correlated with their expectations about
healthcare services (the quality of services); however, there
are multiple factors that impact patient satisfaction, such as
the environment, culture, pain, healthcare providers, etc. [6].
In addition, Weston and Robers [7] indicated that access
to healthcare providers’ teams increases patient satisfaction.
Another study conﬁrmed the same that patient interaction
with the healthcare teams is strongly associated with patient
satisfaction [8] [9]. Gualandi et al. [10] investigated patient
experience while exploring the hospital patient journey. They
found that the signiﬁcant issues that impact patient experience
are lack of information, patient/professional relationships, fam-
ily closeness, and efﬁcient integration of clinical-related tasks.
In terms of e-health, Wang et al. [4] found that the digital
patient experience is inﬂuenced by many factors, such as
personalization of patient proﬁle, availability of information
(health information and educational material, communication
and accessibility to professionals, functionalities such as re-
minders, rewards, etc.), and visualization and navigation. The
study emphasized the lack of knowledge about the digital
patient experience. In addition, it highlighted the absence
of multiple perspectives (such as healthcare professionals,
patients, designers, etc.) when designing digital patient expe-
rience. Clinician perspectives of e-health are absent, and real
interaction between designers and patients when designing e-
health applications is not available [11] [12]. Vitanen et al. [5]
conducted an SLR to investigate the factors that inﬂuence PX
and their components. Some of the factors are the support of e-
health care processes ( communication, remote interaction, and
risks and concerns with e-health applications), and the quality
of eHealth solutions that include usability, accessibility, and
readability issues.
For conducting the evaluation of DPX, most of the existing
studies focused on evaluating the technology part of virtual
clinics by conducting usability studies. Broekhuis et al. [13]
proposed an ontology of usability issues of eHealth applica-
tions from the perspective of users. Alkhomsan et al. [14]
emphasized the importance of incorporating patient emotions
into virtual clinics desing as emotions play a pivotal role
in patient acceptance of eHealth technologies. Other studies
focused on evaluating patient experience [15] [16] and the
usability of virtual clinics [17] [18] during the Covid-19
pandemic.
The related work showed that existing studies either discuss
what constitutes PX or evaluate the virtual clinic applications
from the usability and technology aspects only. Hence, in this
study, we attempted to ﬁll the gap by evaluating the quality of
non-clinical aspects of virtual clinics, other than the technical
aspects, from the perspective of patients. Also, we performed a
focus group session to bring multiple perspectives of patients,
doctors, and software developers to evaluate and suggest how
to enhance PX with virtual clinics.
III. STUDY METHODOLOGY
In order to achieve the research objectives, two research
methods were applied that are survey and a focus group. The
following sections explain each research method in detail.
A. Survey
The survey method was selected to collect data on patient
experience with non-clinical aspects of virtual clinics. Yet,
there are no clear measures to measure PX; however, it
is claimed that patient satisfaction and patient perception
contribute to patient experience [6] [19]. Hence, this study
customized and utilized HCAHPS survey, which is known
to be the stander tool to collect data on patient experience
regarding the non-clinical aspects. HCAHPS survey covers all
non-clinical aspects that have been discussed in the relevant
literature. However, in this study, HCAHPS was customized to
suit the nature of virtual clinics as the HCAHPS is intended to
be used with physical visits to hospitals. The original survey is
found online(https://www.hcahpsonline.org/). For our study, I
attempted to map the factors, see section II, that HCAHPS
evaluates, after an actual stay of the visit to hospitals, to
the virtual clinics’ context. All factors of the HCAHPS suit
the virtual clinics except for two: the hospital environment
aspect that corresponds to the virtual clinic application design
and communication with nurses that does not exist in most
virtual clinics. Hence, both factors were eliminated. For com-
munication with nurses, in most virtual clinics that replaces
regular visits to the hospital nurse role does not exist. The
reason for the elimination of non-clinical aspects related to
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

technical design aspects is that many studies have already
covered and focused on this part. In addition, the design of
virtual clinics may vary from one application to another which
will lead to an inaccurate evaluation in general. In this study,
we focus on the non-clinical aspects that are related to clinical
activities. The customized version of the survey is available
online(https://forms.gle/4QFYjGgufev83LrB6). Those aspects
are going to be the main focus in the focus group session as
well.
The survey was distributed by email invitations using a
randomized snowballing technique. We received 20 complete
responses. All participants used virtual clinic applications at
least once. In addition, in terms of participants’ educational
background, most of the participants have more than 4-year
college degree, while four are four years college graduates
and one has an 8th grade or less. All participants are in an
excellent or a good state of health and mental health.
B. focus group
The focus group enables a thorough understanding and
deep analysis of a group of users’ reactions to a common
experience. Hence, we conducted a focus group session that
brought rich and diverse perspectives of patients, physicians,
and software development experts about the following topics:
• Motivations of using virtual clinics: what are the mo-
tivations for using virtual clinics instead of actual visits?
• Communication - Doctors’ Respect and courtesy: how
patients evaluate it and it could be enhanced.
• Data and information availability: what are the data
and information that are important to have available all
time and what is the best way to present it?
• Medicines and symptoms: what is the best way to get
information on medicines and patient symptoms? health
conditions explanations
• Follow ups: what is the best way to get follow-ups?
• Absence of nurse role: does it impact the experience
negatively or positively?
• Overall improvements: How to improve overall patient
experience of non-clinical aspects when using virtual
clinics?
The session lasted for an hour. The participants in the
session are four patients, a software development expert, and
a physician. All participants have either bachelor degree or
higher. The age of participants ranged from 28 to 40.
IV. RESULTS
This section reports on the study ﬁndings.
A. Patient satisfaction regarding non-clinical aspects
Table I illustrates the participants’ responses to the non-
clinical aspects of virtual clinics that are communication with
doctors, experience during the virtual clinics in terms of
medication explanation, experience after leaving the virtual
clinics in terms of information availability (patient medical
case and responsibilities to manage their health), and overall
experience.
1) Communication with doctors: Regarding communica-
tion with doctors, more than half of the participants indicated
that they were always treated with respect and courtesy during
the virtual consultations. The majority of participants felt that
doctors always or usually listened to them carefully during the
virtual visits. However, ﬁve responses indicated that doctors
sometimes listened to them carefully. Around 12 participants
indicated that doctors always or usually explain things in a
way they can understand. But the other responses are negative
about the way doctors explain things clearly.
2) Experience during the virtual clinics: Medication Ex-
planation: The participants’ reactions to the explanations
they received about their medicines were divided equally into
positive (always and usually) and negative (sometimes and
never). In addition, most of the participants (6) indicated
that they were not informed about the side effect of their
medications, or they were informed sometimes (8).
3) Experience after leaving the virtual clinics: Informa-
tion availability and understanding the patient care: In terms
of information availability, 13 participants indicated that they
did not receive information about what symptoms or health
problems to look out for after they left the virtual consulta-
tions. In addition, almost all participants (15) mentioned that
they were not contacted by the healthcare team after the virtual
clinics to ask if they found the support/help they needed.
Moving to understanding patient care, most participants agreed
that when they left the virtual consultation, they had a good
understanding of how to manage their health. In addition, half
of the participants mentioned their preferences and those of
their families or caregiver into account in deciding on the
treatment plan.
4) Overall experience with virtual clinics: The participants
were asked to rate their overall experience with virtual clinics
on a scale from 1 to 10, where one is the worst and ten
is the best. Five participants rated four, ﬁve rated six, ﬁve
rated 7, one rated 9, two rated 10, and two rated 2. The
participants’ opinions about not recommending the virtual
clinics over the actual visits to their family and friend vary.
Also, they sometimes prefer virtual consultations over actual
visits. Six participants left comments on the major issues of
virtual clinics that affect patient experience and satisfaction
negatively. The major issues are poor examinations, lack
of physical examination, poor communication, and lack of
information and follow-ups.
B. Focus groups
The focus group covered four main topics: motivations for
using virtual clinics, communication with doctors, availability
of information (patient health records, and medicines), follow-
ups and the role of nurse, and general improvements sugges-
tions.
1) Motivation for using virtual clinics: The participants
mentioned that they use virtual clinics mainly in four cases
that are when they do not have time for actual visits, when
they need medicines to reﬁll only, when they want to get an
initial consultation on non-urgent or non-critical symptoms,
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and when they have minor health issues, such as cold or ﬂu.
However, the physician mentioned that most of the cases are
about acquiring sick leave report.
2) Communication with doctors: This part started by
asking the patients the following question: how do you know
that a doctor listened to you carefully and treated you with
courtesy in a virtual consultation? Two participants mentioned
that when doctors have follow-up questions, they feel that he
or she was listening and caring about their case. Also, other
participants mentioned that when a doctor read their health
record before the start of the consultation, it is a sign that the
doctor respects them. Other signs said are using video calls and
making eye contact, voice tone, and understanding patients’
questions. Then, all participants were invited to suggest how
to enhance patient experience regarding communication with
doctors. Two participants mentioned that video calls should
be mandatory. The physician also suggested using video calls
may partially eliminate the negative impact of the absence
of face-to-face communication. However, the technical expert
indicated that mandating video calls for both doctors and
patients is not feasible as some patients do not prefer to open
the camera. The solution might be for doctors to open the
camera.
3) Information availability: All participants agreed that the
availability of information regarding patient health symptoms
or medicines and their side effects is important. The partici-
pants (patients) mentioned that they need the health record to
be used in future actual or virtual visits on different platforms.
They request that the report of patient health symptoms,
diagnosis, and medicines should be shared with the patient
right after the virtual consultation. In addition, information
about the medicines, how to use them, and what are the
expected side-effect is also essential to be available. However,
one participant (patient) mentioned that she does not want to
know the side effect as this may inﬂuence her perception of
the medicines negatively and may lead to unreal feelings of
side effect symptoms. It was suggested by the technical expert
to have all medicines, their explanations, and side effects to
be available online after the consultation session. In addition,
it was suggested to use a chatbot to introduce patients to
medicines and answer their questions. All participants agreed
on this solution as long as they could customize the level of
details of the provided information by the chatbot. However,
the physician did not agree with this solution, as medicines and
their related explanations should be monitored and provided
by certiﬁed practitioners.
4) The role of nurse and follow-ups: All participants agree
that the absence of the nurse role does not affect the virtual
clinic experience. However, an assistant is needed to provide
the required support before and after the consultation. One
participant (patient) suggested using chatbots to interact with
patients before and after the virtual consultations. Chatbots
also can do follow-up communications. Alternatively, follow-
ups could be done by phone calls.
5) General improvements suggestions: Participants men-
tioned that chatbots are acceptable solutions to solve most
communication and needed support issues. However, two
participants (patients) mentioned that technology should not
override the role of human communication. Effective human
communication with empathy and understanding should be
incorporated into the design of virtual clinics. In addition, One
participant (patient) mentioned that trust and human values
should be a part of the virtual clinics’ design. The physician
mentioned that those technologies should be designed to suit
all ages of patients with different educational backgrounds.
Also, it was suggested that for elderly or under 18 patients,
a family member could be allowed to attend the virtual
consultations. Three participants suggested having evaluation
records for each healthcare provider, and the evaluation should
be visible to patients to increase trust in the provided care
through virtual consultations. Moreover, a brief introduction
of the healthcare providers should be available before the
session. For this, a short video of the bio and experience of
the healthcare providers could be provided to patients. The
physician suggested that there should be new performance
evaluation metrics when it comes to virtual clinics. The metrics
shall provide means to evaluate the quality, not the quantity
only, of the provided care services from a clinical perspective.
TableII summarized the recommendations to improve DPX
using virtual clinics from the perspective of the focus group
participants.
V. DISCUSSION
The study attempted to provide an understanding of patient
satisfaction and experience regarding the non-clinical aspects
of virtual clinics. First, the HCAHPS was customized and used
to collect the required data. With the absence of standardized
evaluation tools for patient satisfaction with non-clinical as-
pects of virtual clinics, we found an opportunity to explore
the use of HCAHPS tool in evaluating patient satisfaction
with virtual clinics. The ﬁndings of the survey were consistent
with the result of the focus group session. As participants
in the focus group session tend to provide observations and
discussion points that are covered by the survey. However,
there is a need to examine the effectiveness of this tool in
evaluating patient satisfaction with virtual clinics empirically
and customize it accordingly.
In the survey results, it was noticed that most participants
who are always satisﬁed with virtual clinics used virtual clinics
that are provided by a private healthcare provider, while the
ones who are less satisﬁed used virtual clinics provided by
the public healthcare sector. Another observation is that most
of the participants who mentioned that they were not given
a new medication, used virtual clinics for follow-ups and
medication reﬁlls. Moreover, participants who have a positive
experience with the medication explanations during the virtual
clinics share the same opinion as other participants that the
side effects of the medications were not explained to them.
The result of the survey and the focus group conﬁrmed that
information availability is a big issue as it received the most
negative reactions among all non-clinical aspects. In addition,
assuring that the patient received all help before and after
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I
PATIENT SATISFACTION WITH NON-CLINICAL ASPECTS OF VIRTUAL CLINICS
Communication with doctors
Always
Usually
Sometimes Never
During the virtual consultations, how often did doctors treat you with courtesy and
respect?
12
4
4
0
During the virtual consultations, how often did doctors always listen carefully to you?
9
6
5
0
During the virtual consultations, how often did doctors explain to you things in a way
you could understand?
6
6
2
2
Experience during the virtual clinics: Medication Explanation
Yes
No
During the virtual consultations, were you given any medicine that you had not taken
before?
11
9
Always
Often
Sometimes Never
Before giving you any new medicine, how often did doctors in virtual clinics tell you
what the medicine was for?
4
6
6
4
Before giving you any new medicine, how often did doctors in virtual clinics describe
possible side effects in a way you could understand?
3
3
8
6
Experience after leaving the virtual clinics: Information availability and under-
standing the patient care
Strongly
agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly
disagree
When I left the virtual consultation, I had a good understanding of the things I was
responsible for in managing my health.
3
13
2
2
When I left the virtual consultations, I clearly understood the purpose for taking each
of my medications.
3
10
2
2
Yes
No
After the virtual consultations, did doctors, or other virtual clinics staff talk with
you about whether you would have the help you needed when you left the virtual
consultations?
5
15
During or after the virtual consultations, did you get information in writing about what
symptoms or health problems to look out for after you left the virtual clinics?
7
13
Overall experience with virtual clinics
deﬁnitely
yes
probably
yes
probably
no
deﬁnitely
no
Would you recommend this virtual clinics over actual hospital to your friends and
family?
6
7
5
2
Strongly
agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly
disagree
During the virtual consultation, doctors took my preferences and those of my family
or caregiver into account in deciding what my health care needs would be when I left.
2
7
6
3
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE FOCUS GROUP SESSION
Participant
Recommendation
Patient
• Read patient health record before the consultation
• physicians should use video calls, make eye contact, and use appropriate voice tone
• provide a report of patient health symptoms, diagnosis, and medicines
• use chatbots to interact with patients before and after the virtual consultations
• effective human communication with empathy should be incorporated into the design of virtual clinics
• trust and human values should be a part of the virtual clinics’ design
• a family member should be allowed to attend the virtual consultations
• have evaluation records for each healthcare provider to be viewed by patients
• a short video of the bio and experience of the healthcare providers could be provided to patients
Technical
expert
• have all medicines, their explanations, and side effects available online after the consultation session
• Use chatbots to answer the patients’ questions about medications
Physician
• technologies should be designed to suit all ages of patients with different educational backgrounds
• provide new performance evaluation metrics for virtual clinics that captures the quality of services not quantity only.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the virtual clinics was missing. This could be solved by the
solutions suggested in the focus group, such as chatbots or
phone calls. In the focus group session, participants gave
many solutions to enhancing patient experience with non-
clinical aspects of virtual clinics. Technical-wise, all solutions
are visible. However, the participants’ acceptance, including
the physician, varies about those solutions. Most of the par-
ticipants suggested that patient experience will be enhanced
when effective human interaction and communication are
incorporated into the design. In addition, there was a demand
to incorporate human values, families, and preferences into the
clinical processes of virtual clinics.
Despite the potential beneﬁts of this study, there are limita-
tions that are worth mentioning. This study is only preliminary
that intended to explore using HCAHPS survey and multi-
perspective focus group sessions to enhance patient experience
with non-clinical aspects of virtual clinics. However, the
validity of using the HCAHPS survey in the context of virtual
clinics is not validated yet. In addition, the size of participants
in the survey and the focus group session is small, and the
participants have good mental health in general. Hence, the
results of this study could not be generalized. Moreover, in this
study, the focus was on non-clinical aspects of virtual clinics
with the exclusion of the technical part evaluation, such as
user interface design, which may impact the analysis of the
results and the participants’ reactions.
VI. CONCLUSION
This study attempts to evaluate patient satisfaction and
experience with non-clinical aspects of virtual clinics. The
HCAHPS survey was customized and used to evaluate patient
satisfaction, while a multi-perspective focus group session
was conducted to explore how to enhance patient experience
about non-clinical aspects. The survey ﬁndings showed that
patients have a positive reaction toward non-clinical aspects
of virtual clinics. However, the major issue was related to the
information availability of patient health records, medication
explanations, and receiving support after the end of the virtual
consultations. In the focus group session, the participants
illustrated acceptance of solving some existing issues by
chatbots or other technology-related solutions. However, they
also highlighted the need to improve human interaction and
communication and to integrate human values into the design
of virtual clinic applications.
For future studies, we plan to evaluate the validity and
reliability of the customized version of HCAHPS survey in
evaluating patient satisfaction with virtual clinics. In addition,
a larger sample of participants, including patients who have
mental health issues, will be recruited to ensure that the
ﬁnding is generalizable and valid. Also, we plan to employ the
design thinking approach with multi-perspectives participants
to generate and evaluate new solutions in terms of enhancing
patient experience with virtual clinics.
REFERENCES
[1] S. L. LaVela and A. Gallan, “Evaluation and measurement of patient
experience,” Patient Experience Journal, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 28–36, 2014.
[2] The Beryl Institute Website., “Elevating the human experience in
healthcare.” 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.theberylinstitute.org,
Retrieved: Feb., 2023
[3] J. A. Wolf, V. Niederhauser, D. Marshburn, and S. L. LaVela, “Deﬁning
patient experience,” Patient experience journal, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 7–19,
2014.
[4] T. Wang, G. Giunti, M. Melles, and R. Goossens, “Digital patient
experience: umbrella systematic review,” Journal of medical Internet
research, vol. 24, no. 8, p. e37952, 2022.
[5] J. Viitanen et al., “Patient experience from an ehealth perspective: A
scoping review of approaches and recent trends,” Yearbook of medical
informatics, vol. 31, no. 01, pp. 136–145, 2022.
[6] J. M. Kupfer and E. U. Bond, “Patient satisfaction and patient-centered
care: necessary but not equal,” Jama, vol. 308, no. 2, pp. 139–140, 2012.
[7] M. Weston and D. W. Roberts, “The inﬂuence of quality improvement
efforts on patient outcomes and nursing work: A perspective from chief
nursing ofﬁcers at three large health systems.” Online journal of issues
in nursing, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1–12.
[8] S. A. Kahn, J. C. Iannuzzi, N. A. Stassen, P. E. Bankey, and M. Gestring,
“Measuring satisfaction: factors that drive hospital consumer assessment
of healthcare providers and systems survey responses in a trauma and
acute care surgery population,” The American Surgeon, vol. 81, no. 5,
pp. 537–543, 2015.
[9] J. Iannuzzi et al., “Getting satisfaction: drivers of surgical hospital
consumer assessment of health care providers and systems survey
scores,” Journal of Surgical Research, vol. 197, no. 1, pp. 155–161,
2015.
[10] R. Gualandi, C. Masella, D. Viglione, and D. Tartaglini, “Exploring the
hospital patient journey: What does the patient experience?” PloS one,
vol. 14, no. 12, p. e0224899, 2019.
[11] D. W. Swanepoel and J. W. Hall III, “A systematic review of telehealth
applications in audiology,” Telemedicine and e-Health, vol. 16, no. 2,
pp. 181–200, 2010.
[12] R. S. Palacholla, N. Fischer, A. Coleman, S. Agboola, K. Kirley,
J. Felsted, C. Katz, S. Lloyd, and K. Jethwani, “Provider-and patient-
related barriers to and facilitators of digital health technology adoption
for hypertension management: scoping review,” JMIR cardio, vol. 3,
no. 1, p. e11951, 2019.
[13] M. Broekhuis, L. van Velsen, L. Peute, M. Halim, and H. Hermens,
“Conceptualizing usability for the ehealth context: Content analysis of
usability problems of ehealth applications,” JMIR Form Res, vol. 5,
no. 7, p. e18198, Jul 2021. [Online]. Available: [Retrieved: March 20,
2023] https://formative.jmir.org/2021/7/e18198/
[14] M. N. Alkhomsan, M. Baslyman, and M. Alshayeb, “Toward emotion-
oriented requirements engineering: A case study of a virtual clinics
application,” in 2022 IEEE 30th International Requirements Engineering
Conference Workshops (REW).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 48–56.
[15] P. Vandekerckhove, Y. Vandekerckhove, R. Tavernier, K. De Jaegher,
and M. de Mul, “Leveraging user experience to improve video
consultations in a cardiology practice during the covid-19 pandemic:
Initial insights,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 22, no. 6, p. e19771,
Jun
2020.
[Online].
Available:
[
Retrieved:
March
20,
2023]
http://www.jmir.org/2020/6/e19771/
[16] A. Brett, H. Foster, M. Joseph, and J. S. Warrington, “Patient-centered
telehealth solution for observed urine collections in substance use
disorder care delivery during covid-19 and beyond,” Journal of patient
experience, vol. 8, p. 23743735211033128, 2021.
[17] C. Silva, A. Fung, M. A. Irvine, S. Ziabakhsh, and B. E. Hursh, “Us-
ability of virtual visits for the routine clinical care of trans youth during
the covid-19 pandemic: Youth and caregiver perspectives,” International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, vol. 18, no. 21,
p. 11321, 2021.
[18] J. Choi, E. Baker, S. Nalawade, and H. Lee, “Steps to develop a mobile
app for pain assessment of cancer patients: a usability study,” CIN:
Computers, Informatics, Nursing, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 80–87, 2020.
[19] B. Berkowitz, “The patient experience and patient satisfaction: mea-
surement of a complex dynamic.” Online Journal of Issues in Nursing,
vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 12–12, 2016.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

