 
Recommender Systems: an Experience With GenNet Health-Care Social Network 
 
Cleyton Vanut Cordeiro de Magalhães 
Universidade Federal Rural de Pernambuco 
Unidade Acadêmica de Serra Talhada 
Serra Talhada, Brazil 
cleyton.vanut@gmail.com 
Jorge da Silva Correia Neto 
Universidade Federal Rural de Pernambuco 
Recife, Brazil 
jorgecorreianeto@gmail.com 
 
Ellen Souza 
Universidade Federal Rural de Pernambuco 
Unidade Acadêmica de Serra Talhada 
Serra Talhada, Brazil  
eprs@uast.ufrpe.br 
Guilherme Vilar 
Universidade Federal Rural de Pernambuco 
Recife, Brazil 
guilherme_vilar@yahoo.com.br 
 
 
 
Abstract— With the information overload of the Internet in the 
recent years, recommender systems arise as a solution to 
indicate content to users and to facilitate their decision 
processes. In the social network sites context, recommender 
systems have been used mainly to recommend people profiles 
to other users. This study analyzes GenNet social network, a 
collaborative virtual environment that aims health promotion 
to patients with physical disorders caused by genetic diseases. 
A recommender system that suggests people profiles to users is 
implemented and tested, in order to improve the level of 
collaboration and communication. 
Keywords-Recommender systems; friend-of-friend; social 
network; SNS, GenNet, healt-care 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the last years, the popularity of internet has grown 
considerably, causing, among other things, an increase of 
information available on the web, and, consequently, 
facilitating knowledge dissemination. However, this event 
brought as a consequence an information overload, which 
hampers user navigation when they face a large amount of 
information.  
In this context, recommender systems arise as a solution 
to reduce the information overload by indicating content to 
users and making easier the decision process. Another key-
objective of this type of system in social network sites 
(SNS) context is recommending to the receiver items which 
are of its interest [1], [2]. 
In SNS, recommender systems have been used mainly to 
recommend people profiles to other users, in order to create 
new connections, in which the user of recommendations is 
interested in. Therefore, it is an incentive to make new 
friends, because from these relationships the virtual social 
network grows, enabling the knowledge exchange among 
network members [3].  
This study analyzes the GenNet SNS, a project that 
involves teachers and students of a federal university in the 
northeast of Brazil. It is a collaborative virtual environment 
that aims health promotion to patients with physical 
disorders caused by genetic diseases. To reach this 
objective, this SNS develops processes that address the 
promotion of comprehension, adhesion and training of 
several actors in aspects that can promote health to these 
patients [4].  
This paper aims to present a recommender system that 
suggests people profiles to users, in order to improve the 
level of collaboration and communication among GenNet 
users.  
After this introduction, this paper is organized as 
follows: Section 2 presents some related works and GenNet 
SNS; Section 3 gives an overview about the methodology 
applied; Section 4 describes the proposed recommender 
systems; Section 5 briefly presents the method used to test 
the proposed recommender system; Section 6 contains the 
observed results; and finally, Section 7 draws some 
conclusions and points the way to further studies. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Pimentel and Fuks [5] define Social Network Sites as an 
instrument to facilitate interaction between people. Using 
this type of system, users can find and establish 
relationships, share textual and multimedia information, 
exchange knowledge, keep professional contacts and reduce 
enterprise communication costs and other activities. Thus, 
SNS are used to support day-to-day problems such as 
experience exchange between people who live similar 
situations; knowledge management, through a learning 
environment that is in constant innovation; record of events 
that happened in a certain period of time in an organization; 
reproduction and creation of new connections, even between 
unknown people and organizations in order to obtain 
collaboration. 
A health social network is an online information service 
which facilitates information sharing between closely related 
276
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
members of a community.  Thus, a health social network 
provides emotional support by allowing patients to find 
others in similar health situations. This type of social 
network has shown great potential to empower patient self-
care. PatientsLikeMe is an example of patient-driven health 
care SNS that encourages information exchange and 
collaboration between patients and between patients and 
doctors [4]. 
This domain-specific GenNet SNS is a collaborative 
social network designed to promote the health and social 
inclusion of people with physical disorders caused by genetic 
diseases. The processes performed in the social network 
involve several actors, such as patients, their families, 
healthcare professionals and organizations. Each one of those 
individuals has different types of profile, with some 
particular features in GenNet [5].   
Thus, GenNet is intended to identify people with physical 
disorders 
caused 
by 
genetic 
diseases, 
to 
supply 
comprehension about these diseases and the rights ensured 
by legislation to the patients and their families as well as to 
promote engagement to treatments. It is also intended to 
identify associations of patients with similar diseases [5]. 
Beyond common features found in other social 
networks, such as receiving and sending messages, creation 
of groups of friends, among others, the following features 
may be highlighted in GenNet: 
1. Open session for general public (virtual encyclopedia) 
with several information about diseases and treatments;  
2. Topics for orientation about actions and activities;  
3. Tools for training (those learning objects are not 
available yet in the current version);   
4. Social profile of users on the network, in which they 
indicate their role: doctor, association or other kind of 
user (patient, family, lawyers, etc.);  
5. Space for publishing ideas and experiences as a web 
journal (blog) which may be followed by other users. 
Finally, according to Adomavicius and Tuzhilin [7], 
recommender systems maybe classified in three approaches. 
The content-based approach assumes that the user must be 
interested in items, in which they have shown preference in 
the past. The collaborative approach uses items chosen or 
rated by people with a profile similar to the receiver of 
recommendation. The hybrid approach combines the 
features of content-based and collaborative approaches, 
merging the positive points of both approaches. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
 
The action strategy used to develop the recommendation 
algorithm to GenNet was subdivided into four steps: 
Step 1: involved a literature review to contextualize the 
research in question, in order to identify the features of 
recommendation systems as well as the approaches and 
algorithms used to develop this type of system.  
To reach the conception of the recommender system 
proposed in this paper, four recommender algorithms 
focused on people recommendation were analyzed, based on 
Chen´s et al. [8] work: 
Content matching: using information posted by users on 
the network, the algorithm tries to find users associated with 
similar content.  
Content-plus-Link (CplusL): enhances the content 
matching algorithm adding social link information derived 
from social network structure to improve recommendations. 
It creates a network path to an unknown person, and the 
receiver of the recommendation will be more likely to 
accept the recommendation 
Friend-of-Friend (FoF): this algorithm leverages only 
social network information of friendship based on the 
intuition that “if many of my friends consider Mary a friend, 
perhaps Mary could be my friend too”. The algorithm 
operation can be seen in Fig. 1, in which each node in the 
graph represents a user, and each edge represents the 
connections between two users. 
The 
node 
“Peter” 
represents 
the 
user 
of 
the 
recommendations 
and 
the 
node 
“Mary” 
will 
be 
recommended to “Peter” because they have four nodes in 
common (x, y, k, e b).  
SONAR: this algorithm is based on the SONAR system, 
which aggregates social relationship information from 
different public data sources within IBM. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of connections among users in a social network using 
friend-of-friend algorithm. 
Step 2: a methodological procedure was defined to build 
the conception of a recommender algorithm for the GenNet. 
Therefore, the concepts gained in the previous step were 
used to define which algorithm was the most appropriate to 
be used as a model to the algorithm to be developed in this 
work. 
The recommender mechanism was implemented taking 
as base the friend-of-friend algorithm, which use the friends 
of friends of a user to recommend profiles, being necessary 
only the user information of the SNS. To implement the 
algorithm the following technologies were used: Windows as 
operational system; MySQL as database server and PHP as 
programming language. 
These technologies were chosen to be aligned to the 
technologies used to implement GenNet, making the 
integration easier and keeping uniformity between the 
system modules.  
277
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Step 3: implementation of the algorithm on the social 
network, linking the developed algorithm to GenNet.  
Step 4: functional tests of the algorithm (presented in 
detail at section V) were performed in order to validate it. 
Users were registered in order to observe the behavior of the 
algorithm.  The results of recommendations by the algorithm 
were compared to manual results of the same test to verify 
the algorithm accuracy. 
 
IV. 
RECOMMENDER SYSTEM PROPOSED 
Content-based algorithms are more complex than those 
that are based on the structure of social network [8]. 
Additionally, the initial behavior of social network users is 
to find contacts already known [7].  Based on this rationale, 
algorithms such as friend-of-friend, which are based on 
social network information to perform recommendations, 
are indicated to recommend known people and justify the 
algorithm selection to the purpose of this work. 
As shown in Fig. 2, after performing the login in 
GenNet, a user is identified as the receiver of 
recommendations (user A). Then, friends of this person are 
identified in GenNet´s database, because these profiles will 
be 
those 
in 
common 
between 
the 
receiver 
of 
recommendations and the recommended users (step 1).  
For each friend of A (step 2), its friends are identified 
(step 3). The results of this search, i.e., the friends of user A 
friends, are the inputs to make the recommendation (step 4). 
Among the results may be some users already connected to 
user A, therefore, it is not necessary to keep these users, so 
they are deleted from results (step 5). 
The next step is to save these data in a specific database, 
with recommendation data (step 6), in a table which 
contains the user of recommendation, its friends and the 
possible recommendation. It is important to highlight that 
duplicated lines of data are not saved in this database. 
The next step is the selections on the database of users 
saved as possible recommendations, verifying how many 
times the same user appears as a possible recommendation 
to the user, and giving to each one a weight. With these 
weights a ranking is created with the most frequent users 
(step 7). Finally, the recommendation of 5 users is shown to 
user (step 8).  
In the example of Table 1, user C was presented twice in 
the table as a recommendation to user A, while user Y just 
once. Consequently, user C has weight 2, and Y has 1. The 
user in the top of the recommendation ranking will be C, 
followed by Y. 
If a user appears in a recommendation and he/she is 
added as a friend, it is necessary to remove him/her from the 
recommendation table. So, before the selection of A's 
friends (step 1) a test is performed that verifies if any of A's 
friends are already in the recommendation table. If so, this 
user is removed from this table, in order to not be 
recommended again. 
TABLE I.  
 EXAMPLE OF DATA STORAGE USED TO RECOMMENDATION 
Receptor of 
recommendation 
Receptor's 
friends 
Possible 
recommendation 
User A 
User B 
User C 
User A 
User X 
User C 
User A 
User K 
User Y 
V. 
FUNCTIONAL TESTS 
The test performed to verify the algorithm was divided in 
two steps: the first step was to register members on GenNet 
and verify the behavior of the algorithm on the SNS, 
observing the users recommended to each registered user. 
The second step was to perform the execution of the 
algorithm, for the same users registered calculating the 
ranking manually.  
The results obtained after the tests were observed under 
the following scenarios: 
• 
Scenario 1: user is connected to some friends, 
which have friends not connected to the user; 
• 
Scenario 2: user is not connected to any user; 
• 
Scenario 3: user is already connected to all 
registered contacts; 
• 
Scenario 4: user has friends, but their friends do not 
have friends. 
Fifteen users were registered, divided in two groups. 
Group 1 (related to scenarios 1 to 3) with ten members, 
added among themselves and with no relation with the 
second group. The Group 2 (related to scenario 4) with five 
members added among themselves and with no relation with 
Group 1. 
Table 1 illustrates the relationship among users of Group 
2, where U11 (located in the first line) is connected to U12, 
U13, U14 and U15 for example and represented by the 
number one. 
TABLE II.  
RELATION AMONG USERS IN GROUP 2 
SR 
U11 
U12 
U13 
U14 
U15 
U 11 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
U 12 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
U 13 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
U 14 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
U 15 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
The goal of this test was to observe the results of 
recommendations generated by the algorithm to each user, 
as well as the results calculated manually, and compare 
these results. 
278
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
VI. 
RESULTS 
The recommendations showed by the algorithm and the 
results obtained manually, to the same groups of friends, 
presented the same profiles. 
Scenario 1 showed recommendations from the first to 
the fifth position of the ranking satisfactorily. This is the 
scenario with better results, because the algorithm finds 
inputs to create the ranking and make the recommendations. 
In some cases, in this scenario, four or less users were 
presented in the recommendation. This can be justified by 
the small amount of users registered in Group 1. 
In Scenario 2, in which a user has no friends added, the 
result obtained was expected, because this scenario 
represents a deficiency of the friend-of-friend algorithm. 
The algorithm showed no recommendations because it does 
not find inputs (friends). The friend-of-friend algorithm is 
based on the friends of a certain user. So, if this user is not 
connected to any friend, the algorithm cannot recommend 
any user.  
The same result was obtained in Scenario 3, where no 
people 
were 
recommended 
because 
the 
user 
of 
recommendations was already connected to all users of the 
group. Scenario 4 has the same result of Scenarios 2 and 3, 
showing no recommendations. This happened because this 
algorithm needs the friends of a certain user, but in this case 
they have no friends. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Social network sites are very popular nowadays, and 
these systems allow performing several activities that 
provide propagation of knowledge and collaboration among 
its users. Thus, it is necessary to make connections 
increasingly effectives, in order to obtain more collaboration 
among users, as well as to avoid huge efforts when 
performing 
searches 
of people in the SNS. The 
recommender system is responsible to enhance this effect. 
Therefore, this paper aimed to reflect over the proposal of 
a recommender system to recommend people in GenNet 
social network, which aims to warrant rights to people 
affected by rare diseases generated by genetic disorders.  
The objective of the proposed recommender system is to 
improve the communication among users, increasing the 
medical knowledge exchange in the SNS. The higher the 
number of friends, the better will be the information 
exchange. Thus, the communication among doctors, patients 
and other users of GenNet in order to discuss medical 
information will be improved. 
The algorithm developed in this work is based only on 
social network information. Thus, as a future work there is 
the intention to improve the proposed algorithm by adding 
content-based approach to it, making it a hybrid algorithm. 
 
VIII. REFERENCES 
[1] F. M. Figueira Filho, J. P. Albuquerque, and P. L. GEUS, “Sistemas 
de recomendação e interação na web social,” In: I Workshop de 
Aspectos da Interação Humano-Computador na Web Social, 2008, 
Porto Alegre. VIII Simpósio Brasileiro sobre Fatores Humanos em 
Sistemas Computacionais, 2008. p. 24-27.  
[2] J. J. P. Arias, A. F. Vilas, and R. P. D. Redondo, Recommender 
Systems for the Social Web, Springer, 2012. 
[3] T. F. Lima, “Recomendação de usuários baseada na topologia.” 
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco. Recife, 2011. Available in: 
<http://www.cin.ufpe.br/~tg/2011-2/tfl2.pdf>. Accessed in: March 
07. 2012. 
[4] I. Song, D. Dillon, T.J. Goh, and M. Sung, “A Health Social Network 
Recommender System,” In Proc. PRIMA, 2011, pp.361-372 
[5] GENNET. 
GenNet 
Social 
Network 
Site. 
Available 
in: 
<www.gennet.com.br>. Accessed in: March 07. 2012. 
[6] M. Pimentel and  H. Fuks, Sistemas Colaborativos, Rio de Janeiro 
,RJ: Elsevier-Campus-SBC 
[7] G. ADOMAVICIUS and A. TUZHILIN, “Toward the Next 
Generation of Recommender Systems: A Survey of the State-of-the-
Art and Possible Extensions,”  IEEE Transactions On Knowledge 
And 
Data 
Engineering, 
p. 
734–749, 
2005. 
Available 
in: 
<http://ids.csom.umn.edu/faculty/gedas/papers/recommender-
systems-survey-2005.pdf>. Accessed in: February 14. 2012. 
[8] J. Chen, W. Geyer, C. Dugan, M. Muller and I. Guy,  “Make new 
friends, but keep the old: recommending people on social networking 
sites,” Proc. of the 27th international conference on Human factors in 
computing 
systems, 
2009. 
New 
York, 
NY, 
USA: 
ACM.
 
 
Figure 2.  Functional diagram of the algorithm. 
279
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

