A Health Virtual Community Model 
A Bottom Up Approach 
 
Christo El Morr 
School of Health 
Policy and 
Management 
York University 
Toronto, Canada 
elmorr@yorku.ca 
 
Shadi Saleh 
Department of Health 
Management and 
Policy 
American University 
of Beirut 
Beirut, Lebanon  
ss117@aub.edu.lb 
 
Walid Ammar 
Ministry of Public 
Health 
Beirut, Lebanon 
mphealth@cyberia.ne
t.lb 
 
 
 
Nabil Natafgi 
Department of Health 
Management and 
Policy 
American University 
of Beirut 
Beirut, Lebanon 
nmn13@aub.edu.lb 
 
Karen Kazandjian 
Department of Health 
Management and 
Policy 
American University 
of Beirut 
Beirut, Lebanon 
kk03@aub.edu.lb 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a model for Health Virtual 
Communities (Health VCs) based on a case study of a Health 
VC for chronic disease management designed for rural and 
disadvantaged communities in a developing country. It provides 
an analysis of the components needed in the Health VC and the 
necessity of a flexible design. The model provides a list of 
characteristics that a Health VC design should have in order for 
it to provide a viable, value-added experience to users who have 
heterogeneous capacities in terms of access to Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT). It establishes a first 
attempt towards a framework for a Global Health VC analysis 
and design.  
Keywords- Health; Global Health; Online Communities; 
Modeling; developing countries; rural eHealth; LMIC. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since its inception, the Internet provided a great 
opportunity for people to meet online and form the first 
Virtual Communities (VCs). VCs drove a lot of research to 
understand the way people cooperate in them and the 
challenges and opportunities they provide. Researchers 
explored the possibility of use of VCs in identity building [1], 
and looked into the design issues involved in connecting 
people together [2] to drive trust [3-5], and enable reciprocal 
awareness [6].  Besides, the ability of a community to generate 
and use knowledge was investigated [7, 8] and diverse VCs 
were implemented, such as, human rights monitoring [9]. 
Health Virtual Communities (Health VCs) were not late to 
emerge and to carry their own problems and prospects [10, 
11]. 
Global Health Virtual Communities and Challenges have 
recently been investigated and a first attempt towards a model 
for Global Health VCs was proposed by El Morr [12]. In this 
paper, we will start with a background about health virtual 
communities (Section II). We will then introduce a previously 
suggested model (Section III). We will then explain the 
project (Section IV) and describe how we did apply it in global 
health project where the team had to build a health virtual 
community to enhance equity in the supply and demand of 
primary health care services in Lebanon and suggest its 
modification to the model based on experience (Section V). 
We will then conclude the paper (Section VI). 
II. 
HEALTH VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES 
Health Virtual Communities can be defined as a group of 
people using information and communication technologies to 
deliver health care services; they cover a wide range of clinical 
specialties, technologies and stakeholders [13]. The 
stakeholders and participants of Health VCs are health care 
providers, educators, patients, and health professionals (e.g. 
nurses). Health VCs can be divided into three types depending 
on the objectives they aim to achieve; a VC can be (1) 
Professional Centered, (2) Patient Centered, or (3) General 
Public Centered. 
Examples of professional centered VCs include 
knowledge exchange and research teams [14-17]. Members in 
these communities are health professionals that interact and 
work in virtual teams in order to exchange knowledge and 
create new knowledge if possible [7]. Professional-Centered 
VCs provide support for healthcare professionals in their 
activities. 
Patient centered VCs involve usually patients, their family 
members, and a health professional from the community [18-
20]. Patient centered VCs permit professionals-to-patient and 
patient-to-patient communication and support [5, 21-26]. 
Indeed, health care professionals can form virtual teams to 
provide care and support in disease management; besides, 
individuals diagnosed with the same chronic [27] or life 
threatening disease, or undergoing the same treatment, can 
exchange and share health information and personal stories. 
Thus, a patient centered VC ensures continuity of care through 
the exchange of messages and resources. Patient-centered 
VCs facilitate care delivery mechanisms to provide support 
for patients while they are away from the point of care. Patient 
support is paramount; its lack has a serious impact on health 
[28-31]. 
General public centered VCs are open and include 
educational services, discussion forums, and access to health 
information. The aim would be for the patients to be in charge 
of their health care by personal action (i.e., manage their 
disease) [32]. Many research projects demonstrated the 
importance of education in empowering patients [32-39]. 
Some general public VCs are disease specific while others 
target a specific social group (e.g. women) [40-42]. General 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

public VCs aim to disseminate knowledge to the wider 
population, promoting self-management of healthcare and 
empowering patients [32-39, 43] . 
III. 
A VIRTUAL COMMUNITY MODEL 
El Morr has suggested a model for collaborative virtual 
communities [10, 44] and developed it later to encompass 
global health virtual communities [12], and suggested a model 
shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. A Global Health Virtual Community Model 
 
The model stipulates that a global health virtual 
community should have the following fourteen features: 
The degree of mobility specifies if the VC members are 
‘still or ‘mobile’. 
The degree of virtuality specifies if an encounter between 
members is ‘physical’ (members are physically in the same 
place) or ‘virtual’ (members meet online). 
 The degree of cooperation specifies if the members’ 
awareness of each other passes through a simple notification 
mechanism, or if the members ‘collaborate’ dynamically and 
actively on a common aim. 
The degree of uniformity specifies if the members are 
extremely ‘homogeneous’ (the VC is a community of 
practice) or ‘heterogeneous’ (having different occupations). 
It should have an inclusive design that supports diverse 
users, and conduct a participatory approach to encourage 
their participation. The global health VC should be supportive 
to users, workflow adaptive, and should adapt its behavior 
(interface) to the different kinds of users by being profile 
sensitive and therefore personalizable. 
The policy sensitive aspects reflect the need for the VC to 
be able to adopt different security, privacy and trust 
mechanisms.  
A successful global health VC should be culturally 
adaptive and environmentally adaptive reflecting different 
environments’ priorities and contexts. 
One of the challenges is for it to provide infrastructure 
adaptive features by being able to accommodate less 
expensive and advanced technologies. Finally, it should 
provide means to share resources between stakeholders acting 
as a value catalyst tool. 
IV. 
THE PROJECT 
The collaborative research team includes researchers from 
the American University of Beirut, Ministry of Public Health 
(MoPH) in Lebanon, the United Nations Relief and Works 
Agency (UNRWA), York University, and University of 
Toronto.  
In Lebanon, a Low-Middle Income Country (LMIC), 
chronic diseases constitute an important public health problem 
accounting for around 84% of all deaths based on the 2008 
estimates of the World Health Organization (WHO) [45]. 
Specifically, age-standardized death rates from cardiovascular 
diseases (CVDs) and diabetes reached 404.4 and 262.7 per 
100,000 individuals [46]. This burden of chronic diseases is 
further aggravated in the context of disadvantaged populations 
in many of the rural areas and Palestinian refugee camps in 
Lebanon. For instance, residents of underserved rural areas in 
many regions in Lebanon, as well as the Palestinian residents 
in the refugee camps, lack equitable and sustainable access to 
modern care services for chronic illnesses. Non-governmental 
organization (NGO)-run primary health care centers and 
dispensaries are considered the only facilities available in the 
aforementioned underprivileged rural areas and often suffer 
from limited availability of resources [47]. 
This project constitutes an eHealth [48] proactive 
integrated approach that couples community-based and health 
care initiatives to managing chronic diseases. 
Ten Primary Health Care (PHC) centers located in rural 
areas and enrolled in the Lebanese Ministry of Public Health 
(MoPH) PHC National Network (Network) and six United 
Nations for Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) centers will 
comprise the study population. The ten MoPH and six 
UNRWA centers are randomly assigned into the intervention 
and control groups (five MoPH and three UNRWA centers in 
each for eight intervention sites). Each PHC center belonging 
to the Network has a defined catchment area with an average 
of 30,000 inhabitants [49]. The ten participating MoPH 
centers will be chosen from five rural areas in Lebanon (2 
centers from each area – one as control and one as 
intervention). 
A. The Intervention 
The eHealth intervention will have two components:  
1) PHC center-based in which eHealth will target the 
physicians (supply) and patients suffering from 
diabetes and hypertension (demand) treated in these 
centers, and 
2) Community-based.  
 
1) PHC center-based 
Global 
Health 
Virtual 
Community
Degree of 
Mobility
Degree of 
Virtuality
Degree of 
Cooperation
Degree of 
Uniformity
Inclusive 
Design
Participatory 
Approach
Supportivness
Workflow 
Adaptability
Policy 
Sensitivity
Profile 
Sensitivity
Cultural 
Adaptivity
Environmental 
Adaptability
Infrastructure 
Adaptability
Value Catalyst
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

a) Health Provider Side 
The Provider side eHealth intervention will comprise two 
main initiatives:  
(1) Online modules for treating diabetes and hypertension 
focusing on (a) clinical guidelines and (b) physician-patient 
communication strategies (smoking cessation, increasing 
compliance, etc.).  
(2) Online forums and Frequently Asked Questions 
(FAQs) mainly dedicated to peer-to-peer knowledge sharing 
of treatment and communication techniques, as well as a 
database of Questions and Answers (Q&A) on such 
techniques. 
 
b) Patient Side 
 On the other hand, the Patient side eHealth interventions 
will comprise one main level: the current patients will receive 
cell phone text messages or short message services (SMSs) 
that include simple weekly medical information about their 
respective disease and the importance of compliance and 
generic reminders of appointments and regular physician 
follow-up. 
 
2) Community-based 
A community-based intervention will be conducted that 
includes screening for diabetes, hypertension and obesity in 
the catchment area of each of the eight (5 MoPH and 3 
UNRWA) intervention centers. Allied health professionals 
(nurses or medical technologists) will perform household 
screening of individuals using a purposefully designed 
chronic illnesses screening kit that measures the following 
components: (a) blood glucose level, (b) blood pressure, (c) 
waist circumference, and (d) Body Mass Index (BMI). The 
results of the four screening tests will be remotely entered on 
a software application alongside other demographic data 
pertaining to the individual including name, gender, age, and 
others. In the event that the individual is identified to have 
symptoms of one or more of the three screened diseases, the 
individual will be offered an appointment with a primary care 
physician in the PHC intervention center of the corresponding 
catchment area. The appointment will be scheduled remotely 
and during the visit through a specifically designed 
application linked with the PHC intervention center pre-
loaded appointment sheet. In addition, patients will be offered 
an on-the-spot brief Disease Self-Management Education 
(DSME) provided by the allied health professionals. The 
DSME interventions will aim to strengthen the patients’ 
capacity, to enhance their quality of life and to prevent acute 
and chronic complications, while keeping costs acceptable.  
B. The eHealth Solution: Virtual Community 
To ensure an eHealth solution that works for all the centers 
on both the providers’ and the patients’ sides, a health virtual 
community was set in place. The virtual community aimed to 
provide the necessary tools on an already existent physical 
connection between the healthcare community centers and the 
MoPH. The VC design included: 
1- A website that allows the healthcare providers to 
access the FAQs and send their questions to the 
moderator who will reply to the requests by creating 
a new FAQ, if necessary. Moreover, the website 
publishes online modules for treating diabetes and 
hypertension focusing on clinical guidelines and 
physician-patient communication strategies. 
2- A software module that allows the data entry for 
health clinical indicators; the module was integrated 
with the primary health care information system in 
place at the centers. 
3- An SMS messaging system was designed to integrate 
with the module in order to send the patients’ 
appointment reminders and weekly educational 
information (e.g., medications, compliance). 
4- The appointment scheduling system was designed as 
a software application. The software will also run 
educational presentations about the diseases. 
5- The educational system to be delivered to the 
potential patient during screening was designed to be 
delivered on in an electronic format (notepad). 
The overall VC system design is presented in Figure 2:  
 
Figure 2. A Health Virtual Community Model for Chronic Disease 
Management in rural and disadvantaged communities. 
 
V. 
A HEALTH VIRTUAL COMMUNITY FOR EQUITABLE 
CHRONIC DISEASE MANAGMENT 
We launched the health virtual community project in 
September 2013 and we applied the VC characteristics, as 
shown in Figure 1, as a structured tool to explore the high-
level system’s requirements, from a VC standpoint. We 
provide here a summary of the system analysis process as a 
case study to discuss the model and we propose an updated 
version of it. 
Degree of Mobility: Most of the parts of the system need 
not to be mobile. The only mobile part required will be to 
provide the community field workers with a mobile patient 
screening and scheduling system. Thus, we adopted a hybrid 
approach containing a fixed as well as mobile component. 
Therefore, we suggest to update the degree of mobility we 
Chronic 
Disease 
Management 
Health Virtual 
Community
Provider 
Oriented 
Component
• FAQs
• Online Clinical 
Guidelines
• Communication 
Strategies
Patient Oriented 
Component
• Educational 
Material
• SMS Appointment 
reminders
• SMS educational 
information
Health Indicators 
collection
Appointment 
Scheduling
Patient e-
Education
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

have discussed above, to include not only still and mobile 
options but a hybrid option as well. 
Degree of Virtuality: The community is virtual since 
members will have to work remotely. 
Degree of Cooperation: In our project, a tight 
cooperation is required between community members in order 
to ensure the right scheduling and patient care delivery at the 
right time by the right person. Nevertheless, the scheduling 
software present in the health community centers was not able 
to support remote access from the field workers’ laptops; 
consequently, we opted for an off-line solution where field 
workers have to schedule screened patients off-line and then 
to synchronize their appointments once they reach the health 
care center they are affiliated to. In case of conflict, the field 
worker would call the screened patient to reach an alternative 
appointment. 
Degree of Uniformity: The community is heterogeneous 
since it involves doctors, nurses, field workers, researchers, 
data analyst, etc. Each would require special tools to work. 
The model in Figure 2 shows the main aspects of our VC. One 
component is patient oriented and used by patients (SMS 
messages), another one is health provider oriented and used 
by providers (online forum and FAQs). Field workers to 
schedule appointments will use a component; another one will 
be used at the healthcare centers to collect patient indicators. 
Regarding the patient e-education material, even though 
Lebanon has a high penetration of internet (52%) and cell 
phone use (3,350,000 mobile-cellular telephone subscriptions, 
equivalent to 78.65 subscriptions per 100 inhabitants)[50], 
smart phones were not judged to be a good tool in the rural 
communities and therefore we decided that the field worker 
leaves a printed material with the screened patients. That last 
solution makes the material accessible in an easy way known 
to all. 
Inclusive Design: The design was inclusive since its 
inception. The doctors and community field workers will be 
consulted from the beginning of the project to ensure that the 
clinical guidelines conform to their expectations in terms of 
language and presentation. That ensures an inclusive design 
providing better chances for adoption by end-users. 
Participatory Approach: The community of healthcare 
providers will be using the system in their work environment. 
We expect that they will find interest in participating in the 
forum and accessing the FAQs. We will measure the 
participation via embedded software tools that will provide 
some participation indicators (number of hits, number of 
logins, number of questions, etc.). 
Supportive: A coordinator will be supporting the 
members of the VC.  
Workflow Adaptive: The workflow was local, decided 
by the MoPH, and therefore was not an issue in our project. 
Policy Sensitive: The privacy and confidentiality laws and 
regulations were implemented based on the standards set by 
the MoPH. The appointment data are stored locally in each 
community center. The MoPH owns and manages the clinical 
software run in each center and provides remote update on it. 
Culture Adaptive, i.e., culturally sensitive: The 
researchers used English and Arabic and were fluent in both. 
Field workers will use mostly Arabic to communicate with the 
local population in the rural areas. The culture at work was 
framed by the information system in place set by the MoPH. 
No special adaptation will be made to local cultures. 
Environment Adaptive: There is no “environmental” 
issue. The research tackles many diseases that have the same 
prevalence across the country. 
Infrastructure Adaptive: The eHealth research team 
decided on many delivery strategies for the educational 
modules. During the screening, a notepad (e.g., electronic 
pad) will be the delivery means for all patients scheduled for 
appointment. However, since 4G networks have been 
penetrating the market in a rapid pace, a software that delivers 
the same message is also scheduled for development, ensuring 
many delivery channels for potential patents. The SMS 
messaging system will be delivered by a local company; it has 
Application Programming Interface (API) that allows the 
designers to embed the SMS messaging strategy in the VC. 
Value Catalyst: A training session will be designed in 
order to train doctors and field workers on the clinical 
guidelines and their benefit, the value of the screening process 
and the input of the clinical indicators (during the 
intervention). 
Based on our analysis, we find that the model proposed in 
Figure 1 is very useful in capturing the VC requirements; it 
gives an accurate high-level description of our project. 
However, we propose to include a “hybrid” component in the 
description of the degree of mobility; in our case, some 
aspects of the VC are fixed while others are mobile. We 
suggest that we add a “synchronous/asynchronous” aspect in 
the degree of cooperation; in our case, the cooperation is 
neither fully dynamic nor fully based on a messaging 
mechanism; for instance, the scheduling will occur in an 
asynchronous way (synching will occur once the fieldworker 
reaches the community center) without neither involving a 
messaging mechanism nor a dynamic collaboration. 
Profile Sensitivity: Taking into consideration the limited 
use of the VC, there were no disparities in users profiles. 
Different users will access different parts of the VC; 
consequently, the user interface adaptability to user profile 
was not an issue. 
Finally, we found it more useful to classify the different 
features presented in Figure 1 into categories. The result is 
shown in Figure 3. 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 3. A Health Virtual Community Model 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presented a previously established health 
virtual community model and analyzes its components based 
on a research project in a developing country. Through the 
analysis and design phases of our health VC project, the model 
proved to provide a useful way that helped to identify a 
suitable course of action and to describe its different 
components. It finally suggests two important modifications 
to the mode and provides a different, more system design 
friendly, classification of its components.  
In the context of the Lebanese public health, the project is 
expected to enhance the equity in access to the chronic disease 
management in poor and underprivileged areas in the country, 
through the patient-oriented component (e.g. SMS reminders 
and 
educational 
information). 
The 
provider-oriented 
component would enable the caregivers to establish better 
communication strategies with their patients, reduce 
professional isolation and enhance access to updated 
knowledge.   
In the context of research in virtual communities, our 
model establishes a framework for global health teams to ask 
the right questions when they are in the analysis and design 
phases of a Health VC information system. To the best of our 
knowledge this is the first time we have a model for that 
purpose. The model needs to be verified and tuned during the 
next few months. Future research will fine tune the model, 
develop the Health VC and implement it. The Health VC will 
be used in day-to-day activities in the chosen centers and 
indicators will be collected in order to measure its impact on 
chronic disease management in comparison. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was carried out with the aid of a grant from the 
International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, Canada. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Kivimäki, K. Kauppinen, and M. Robinson, "Identity in virtual 
communities," SIGGROUP Bull., vol. 19, no. 3, 1998, pp. 29-33. 
[2] A. Malhotra, S. Gosain, and A. Hars, "Evolution of a virtual 
community: understanding design issues through a longitudinal study," 
presented at the Proceedings of the eighteenth international conference 
on Information systems, Atlanta, Georgia, United States, December 
15-17, 1997, pp. 59-74. 
[3] A. Abdul-Rahman and S. Hailes, "Supporting Trust in Virtual 
Communities," presented at the 33rd Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences, Maui, Hawaii, 2000. 
[4] A. Ali Shaikh and R. Omer, "Formalising trust for online 
communities," in Fourth international joint conference on Autonomous 
agents and multiagent systems, The Netherlands, July 25 - 29, 2005, 
pp. 1245-1246. 
[5] W. Ebner, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, "Trust in Virtual 
Healthcare Communities: Design and Implementation of Trust-
Enabling Functionalities," presented at the Proceedings of the 
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS'04) - Track 7 - Volume 7, January, 2004, pp. 
1-10. 
[6] D. G. Boyer, M. J. Handel, and J. Herbsleb, "Virtual community 
prescence awareness," SIGGROUP Bull., vol. 19, Dec. 1998, pp. 11-
14. 
[7] Y. Merali and J. Davies, "Knowledge capture and utilization in virtual 
communities," presented at the Proceedings of the 1st international 
conference on Knowledge capture, Victoria, British Columbia, 
Canada, October 21 - 23, 2001, pp. 92-99. 
[8] J. Yu, Z. Jiang, and H. C. Chan, "Knowledge contribution in problem 
solving virtual communities: the mediating role of individual 
motivations," presented at the Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGMIS 
CPR conference on Computer personnel research: The global 
information technology workforce, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, April 19 
- 21, 2007, pp. 144-152. 
[9] C. El Morr, J. Subercaze, P. Maret, and M. Rioux, "A Virtual 
Knowledge Community for Human Rights Monitoring for People with 
Disabilities," presented at the IADIS International Conference on Web 
Based Communities, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 24-26 July, 2008, 
pp. 78-84. 
[10] C. El Morr, "Mobile Virtual Communities in Healthcare The Chronic 
Disease Management Case," in Ubiquitous Health and Medical 
Informatics: The Ubiquity 2.0 Trend and Beyond, ed: IGI Global, 
2010, pp. 258-274. 
[11] C. El Morr, "Health Care Virtual Communities: Challenges and 
Opportunities," in Handbook of Research on Developments in E-
Health and Telemedicine: Technological and Social Perspectives, ed: 
IGI Global, 2010, pp. 278-298. 
[12] C. El Morr, "A Model for Global Health Virtual Communities," in The 
Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges, 
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013, Lisbon, Portugal, November 17 - 22, 2013, 
pp. 33-37. 
[13] G. Demiris, "Virtual Communities in Health Care," in Intelligent 
Paradigms for Healthcare Enterprises. B. Silverman, A. Jain, I. A., and 
L. Jain, Eds., ed: Springer, vol. 184, 2005, pp. 121-137. 
[14] H. Clark, "Formal Knowledge Networks: A Study of Canadian 
Experiences Helping Knowledge Networks Work," International 
Institute for Sustainable Development, Winnipeg, 1998. 
[15] T. Willard, "Helping Knowledge Networks Work," International 
Institute for Sustainable Development, Winnipeg, 2001. 
[16] J. Davies, A. Duke, and Y. Sure, "OntoShare: a knowledge 
management environment for virtual communities of practice," 
presented at the Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on 
Knowledge capture, Sanibel Island, FL, USA, October 23-25, 2003, 
pp. 20-27. 
[17] P. Maret, M. Hammoud, and J. Calmet, "Muti Agent Based Virtual 
Knowledge Communities for Distributed Knowledge Management," in 
International Workshop on Engineering Societies in the Agents World 
(ESAW), Toulouse, France, October 20-24 , 2004, pp. 33-44. 
[18] D. H. Gustafson et al., "CHESS: 10 years of research and development 
in consumer health informatics for broad populations, including the 
Tech. Sensitive
• Degree of Mobility
• Degree of Virtuality
• Degree of Cooperation
Human Sensitive
• Degree of Uniformity
• Inclusive Design
• Participatory 
Approach
• Supportivness
• Workflow 
Adaptability
• Policy Sensitivity
• Profile Sensitivity
• Culturally Sensitive
Context 
Sensitive
• Environmental 
Adaptability
• Infrastructure 
Adaptability
Value Driven
• Value 
Catalyst
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

underserved," in The 10th World Congress on Medical Informatics 
(Medinfo 2001), London,UK, September 2-5, 2001, pp. 1459-1463. 
[19] D. H. Gustafson et al., "CHESS: 10 years of research and development 
in consumer health informatics for broad populations, including the 
underserved," International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 65, 
November 12, 2002, pp. 169-177. 
[20] Z. Temesgen, J. E. Knappe-Langworthy, M. M. S. Marie, B. A. Smith, 
and R. A. Dierkhising, "Comprehensive Health Enhancement Support 
System (CHESS) for People with HIV Infection," AIDS and Behavior, 
vol. 10, January 2006, pp. 35-40. 
[21] Y. Arnold, M. Daum, and H. Krcmar, "Virtual Communities in Health 
Care : Roles, Requirements and Restrictions," presented at the 
Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik (MKWI), Universität Duisburg-
Essen, March 9-11, 2004, pp. 1-8 . 
[22] Y. Arnold, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, "CoPEP: A Development 
Process Model for Community Platforms for Cancer Patients," 
presented at the The XIth European Conference on Information 
Systems (ECIS), 2003. 
[23] H. Krcmar, Y. Arnold, M. Daum, and J. M. Leimeister, "Virtual 
communities in health care: the case of "krebsgemeinschaft.de"," 
SIGGROUP Bull., vol. 23, 2002, pp. 18-23. 
[24] J. M. Leimeister, M. Daum, and H. Krcmar, "Towards m-communities: 
the case of COSMOS healthcare," in The 36th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences(2003), 2003. 
[25] J. M. Leimeister, M. Daum, and H. Krcmar, "Towards mobile 
Communities for cancer patients: the case of Krebsgemeinschaft.de," 
International Journal for Web Based Communities, vol. 1, January 6-9 
, 2004, pp. 58-70,. 
[26] J. M. Leimeister, P. Sidiras, and H. Krcmar, "Success factors of virtual 
communities from the perspective of members and operators: an 
empirical study," in 37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, January 5-8, 2004, pp. 1-10. 
[27] W. J. Winkelman and C. W. Choo, "Provider-sponsored virtual 
communities for chronic patients: improving health outcomes through 
organizational patient-centred knowledge management," Health 
Expectations, vol. 6, 2003, pp. 352-358. 
[28] R. M. Heeler, "Social ties and susceptibility to the common cold," 
JAMA, vol. 278 , January 22, 1997, pp. 1231-1232. 
[29] R. B. Case, A. J. Moss, N. Case, M. McDermott, and S. Eberly, "Living 
alone after myocardial infarction. Impact on prognosis," JAMA, vol. 
267, January 22, 1992, pp. 515-519. 
[30] R. B. Williams, et al., "Prognostic importance of social and economic 
resources among medically treated patients with angiographically 
documented coronary artery disease," JAMA, vol. 267, January 22, 
1992, pp. 520-524. 
[31] R. B. Adler, R. F. Proctor, N. Towne, and J. A. Rolls, Looking Out 
Looking In, 3rd ed.: Thomson - Nelson, 2008. 
[32] C. Feste and R. M. Anderson, "Empowerment: from philosophy to 
practice," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 26, 1995, pp. 139-
144. 
[33] E. T. Adolfsson, B. Smide, E. Gregeby, L. Fernström, and K. Wikblad, 
"Implementing empowerment group education in diabetes," Patient 
Education and Counseling, vol. 53, June, 2004, pp. 319-324. 
[34] R. M. Anderson and M. M. Funnell, "Patient empowerment: reflections 
on the challenge of fostering the adoption of a new paradigm," Patient 
Education and Counseling, vol. 57, May, 2005, pp. 153-157. 
[35] I. Aujoulat, W. d'Hoore, and A. Deccache, "Patient empowerment in 
theory and practice: Polysemy or cacophony?," Patient Education and 
Counseling, vol. 66, April, 2007, pp. 13-20. 
[36] N. C. Elder, S. L. Regan, H. Pallerla, L. Levin, D. Post, and D. J. 
Cegela, "Development of an instrument to measure seniors' patient 
safety health beliefs: The Seniors Empowerment and Advocacy in 
Patient Safety (SEAPS) survey," Patient Education and Counseling, 
vol. 69, December, 2007, pp. 100-107. 
[37] P. K. Hansford, "Empowerment through choice - enabling speech to 
flow," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 34, May 1, 1998, pp. 
S76-S76 
[38] K. Johansson, S. Salanterä, J. Katajisto, and H. Leino-Kilpi, "Written 
orthopedic patient education materials from the point of view of 
empowerment by education," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 
52, February, 2004, pp. 175-181. 
[39] B. Luban-Plozza, "Empowerment techniques: from doctor-centered 
(Balint approach) to patient-centred discussion groups," Patient 
Education and Counseling, vol. 26, September, 1995, pp. 257-263. 
[40] The Center for Health Enhancement Systems Studies. Comprehensive 
Health Enhancement Support System. [retrieved: January 2014]. 
Available: https://chess.wisc.edu/ 
[41] Women's Health Matters Network. [retrieved: January, 2014]. 
Available: http://www.womenshealthmatters.ca/ 
[42] @neWorld. A Virtual Community for Kids with Cancer. Available: 
http://1worldonline.org/ [retrieved: January, 2014] 
[43] J. Meuser, T. Bean, J. Goldman, and S. Reeves, "Family health teams: 
A 
new 
Canadian 
interprofessional 
initiative," 
Journal 
of 
Interprofessional Care, vol. 20, 2006, pp. 436-428. 
[44] C. El Morr and J. Kawash, "Mobile Virtual Communities Research: A 
Synthesis of Current Trends and a Look at Future Perspectives," 
International Journal for Web Based Communities, vol. 3, 2007, pp. 
386-403. 
[45] W. H. Organization, "Facing the Facts: The Impact of Chronic 
Diseases in Lebanon," WHO 2012. 
[46] W. H. Organization, "NCD Country Profiles," WHO2011. 
[47] B. Chen and M. Cammett, "Informal politics and inequity of access to 
health care in Lebanon," International Journal for Equity in Health, vol. 
11, No 23, 2012, pp. 1-8. 
[48] A. D. Black et al., "The Impact of eHealth on the Quality and Safety of 
Health Care: A Systematic Overview," PLoS Medicine, vol. 8, 2011, 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000387 
[49] A. W., "Health beyond politics," WHO, Beirut, Lebanon, 2009. 
[50] I. T. Union. ICT Data and Statistics.  [retrieved: January, 2014] 
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx 
 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

