eCare Tool for Person-Centred Care of People with Dementia in Nursing Homes
Kelber Pieter1, De Smet Herwig2, Van Rompaey
Michèle1, Kerstens Birgit1
Dept. of Nursing1 & Dept. of Applied Informatics2
Karel de Grote University College
Brusselstraat 45, 2018 Antwerp, Belgium
emails: pieter.kelber@kdg.be, herwig.desmet@kdg.be,
michele.vanrompaey@kdg.be, birgit.kerstens@kdg.be
Van Bogaert Peter3, Franck Erik1,3
Dept. of Nursing and Midwifery Sciences
Centre for Research in Innovation and Care3
University of Antwerp
Prinsstraat 13, 2000 Antwerp, Belgium
emails: peter.vanbogaert@uantwerpen.be,
erik.franck@uantwerpen.be
Abstract—Electronic
tools
have
the
potential
to
support
healthcare staff in providing more person-centred care to
persons living with dementia in residential nursing homes. The
paper describes work in progress to develop an eCare tool that
provides relevant information to caregivers about the needs of
persons living with dementia and appropriate actions related
to behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia. The
eCare tool, an eHealth technology to be integrated in electronic
care records kept in nursing homes, is particularly relevant in
the context of ‘nurse team applications’. Increased person-
centred care is linked to increase in job satisfaction and
personal competence among nursing staff, resulting in lower
turnover figures in nursing homes.
Keywords-eCare tool; person-centred care; dementia; life
stories; behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that
50 million people were living with dementia worldwide in
2015. The total number of Persons Living With Dementia
(PLWD) is projected to increase to 80 million in 2030 and
to triple to 152 million in 2050 [1]. Dementia affects
cognitive functions, often followed by Behavioural and
Psychological Symptoms of Dementia (BPSD), such as
physical and verbal aggression, wandering, calling out;
agitation and anxiety, hallucinations; depression and apathy
[2]. Currently, there is no curative treatment available.
Dementia progressively inhibits the affected person’s
ability to communicate and satisfy basic human needs.
PLWD often express or manifest their unmet needs through
socially inappropriate or unusual behaviour including the
above symptoms [3], which may lead to negative feelings in
professional caregivers and other nursing home residents
[4]. When caregivers focus on the physical needs, this can
come at the expense of the psychosocial needs of this
person. This incorporates an actual risk that nursing care
tends to be more task oriented, objectifying and even
depersonalizing. Some caregivers believe that progression to
severe dementia leads to the gradual loss of personhood
until there is nothing left of the person. It poses a real threat
that the life of this PLWD is perceived to be meaningless,
thus the role of the caregiver loses meaning too [5].
Already 20 years ago Kitwood introduced the conceptual
model of Person-Centred Care (PCC) based on the idea that
the personhood of PLWD is not lost, but is concealed [6].
Whether the psychological needs of PLWD are met and if
personhood
is
maintained
or
strengthened,
is
largely
determined by caregiver behaviour and environment [7][8].
Recent systematic reviews demonstrate the effectiveness
of non-pharmacological interventions of PCC to reduce
BPSD [9]-[12]. Reminiscence therapy (reliving experiences
from the past by talking about recognizable photos, objects,
etc.) [13]-[16], music therapy [17]-[19] and the use of
biographic information of the PLWD during communication
or care activities [20][21] are successful interventions that
reduce BPSD.
PCC also positively effects the professional caregivers’
personal accomplishment and job satisfaction [22]: e.g.,
reminiscence improves caregivers’ communication with
residents and increases their knowledge of the resident’s
background significantly [15][16], music therapy enhances
caregiving techniques [18], while life story work enables
healthcare staff “to see the person behind the patient” and
empowers
them
to
engage
in
“genuine
participatory
practices” [23][24]. There is also strong evidence that
professional caregivers benefit from learning and skill
development in PCC interventions and communication in
order to sustain the effects of those interventions to apply
person-centred care into practice [9][25].
Lastly, the above positive effects influence the perception
of quality of care provided by the nursing home: the person-
centred care staff feels more satisfied and competent to
perform their job while the PLWD and their relatives feel
more satisfied with the care received [25].
We are currently exploring the feasibility of an electronic
tool that guides healthcare staff to integrate person-centred
care in the daily care of persons living with dementia in
residential nursing homes. The results of the feasibility study
are expected to feed into a two-year implementation study.
Section II describes the objectives, study design and the
work performed so far. Section III presents the preliminary
findings, while Section IV elaborates on the work in progress
for the development of the (e) learning and training modules
and the eCare tool into the existing care records. Section V
holds the conclusion and future work.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II.
STUDY CHARACTERISTICS
A. Objective
Our study aims to develop and validate a practical
electronic tool that enables healthcare providers to integrate
person-centred care in the daily practice. The current study
funding supports the preparatory work to test the feasibility
of the tool, to identify the interventions preferred by
healthcare staff to provide PCC to persons living with
dementia and to outline the functional specifications of the
eCare tool that facilitates PCC in nursing homes.
B. Study design
We conducted a literature review on the effectiveness of
non-pharmacological interventions and person-centred care
for PLWD. We held two focus group discussions with
professional caregivers working in residential nursing homes
to identify which PCC interventions they prioritize to be
integrated in the eCare tool. They were also asked to express
the desired functional requirements of the eCare tool in terms
of content and technology, and how it can be integrated in
existing healthcare records. We conducted interviews to
explore the market of software applications for PLWD and
their caregivers. We assessed the economic and societal
relevance of electronic tools for PCC interventions.
III.
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
A. Preliminary lessons learnt
Ongoing research about integration of PCC in the daily
care of PLWD and our study results so far have given us
insights into:

the PCC interventions considered by caregivers as
being the most relevant to address the (unmet)
needs
of
PLWD,
in
particular
life
stories,
reminiscence and music;

the need for staff training in person-centred care
and supportive actions to address and prevent
BPSD;

the preference/need to integrate the eCare tool in
the existing electronic care records used in nursing
homes.
B. Development of an eCare tool supporting PCC of PLWD
The
focus
groups
with
potential
end
users
(i.e.,
professional
caregivers
of
PLWD
in
nursing
homes)
discussed primarily the most effective interventions to
guarantee
PCC
of
PLWD,
and
the
preferred
PCC
interventions to be integrated in the electronic care records.
Coding and analysis of the focus group discussions in
NVivo revealed that nursing staff prefers to incorporate two
main instruments into the eCare tool: (1) ‘know the person
living with dementia’ and (2) incidents related to BPSD. As
mentioned
above
professional
caregivers
identify
reminiscence therapy or use of life stories as effective
interventions to get to know the caretaker better, but often
they
don’t
hold
all
relevant
personal
or
biographic
information at hand: the focus group participants clearly
expressed
interest
in
having
this
information
readily
available, for use in daily care or when observing BPSD.
Figure 1 reflects how these two elements would be
included in the eCare tool whereby the tool on the one hand
provides information to get to know the PLWD better and
on the other hand hints to address and prevent agitation and
other BPSD.
Figure 1.
Elements to be integrated in the eCare tool.
1)
Know the PLWD:
Nursing staff gives considerable importance to knowing
the ‘needs’ of the person taking care of. → The eCare tool 
should allow to ‘know the PLWD’ through life story
material and additional information received from the
PLWD, their relatives and the nursing staff.
2)
Incidents:
Nursing staff acknowledges the challenges to address
BPSD in the most effective way. → The eCare tool should 
allow to register incidents related to BPSD, to analyse the
incident and to suggest supportive and preventive actions.
IV.
WORK IN PROGRESS
With the lessons learnt so far, we have prepared a study
design to develop, test and evaluate the eCare tool. We will
do this together with the end users, i.e., professional
caregivers of PLWD in nursing home settings in Flanders.
We are currently awaiting approval of study funding by the
Flemish Agency for Innovation & Entrepreneurship and
hope to start the study in September 2018.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Design of the eCare tool
In developing the eCare tool, we will follow the standard
agile development cycle as depicted in Figure 2.
Figure 2.
Agile development.
Before development can start, the requirements have to
be analysed and described. Each requirement is split up in a
number of user stories. A user story is an informal, natural
language description of one or more features of a software
system. User stories are often written from the perspective
of an end user or user of a system. Each user story contains
one well defined feature as in: As a user I want to add an
incident concerning this person.
After
this
analysis
and
description
phase,
agile
development is used to implement the software [26]. Agile
is an iterative process. In each iteration, a prototype of the
eCare tool is developed and tested. When a prototype is
demo-ready, the end user can try it and give feedback, both
at the level of the specifications and the user interface.
Agile uses test-driven development, meaning that testing
is an essential part of the process [27]. Testing is performed
at three levels. Each user story is tested in isolation (Unit
Testing). After a set of units belonging to a specific subpart
of the application has been finished, the subpart as a whole
is tested (Integration Testing). When the total application is
ready for testing, tests can be performed at that level
(System Testing). We will also perform usability testing
with the end users. This type of testing results in useful
information about how easy it is to work with the software,
and how good it looks. The eCare tool can be used a stand-
alone mobile application but is supposed to be further
integrated in the electronic care records used in nursing
homes.
Figure 3.
Application structure woth three modules.
We will focus on 3 software modules (Figure 3):

Know the PLWD Module. For each PLWD, facts of
life (incl. personal interests, needs and preferences)
will be collected through intake interviews in the
nursing homes and elements provided by the PLWD,
their family and formal and informal caregivers.
Both word processing software and database systems
can be used for this purpose. Using Information
Retrieval
technology,
relevant
information
is
extracted from these texts. A feedback loop ensures
the dynamically-evolving nature of the personal
information and records the response of the person
with dementia to certain interventions. This module
is the central data repository for the other modules.

Incident Button Module. A caregiver can use this
module to register incidents related to BPSD. The
eCare tool asks targeted questions to report BPSD,
which can be answered quickly via a drop-down list
of pre-selected options. A requirements analysis of
BPSD follows by: 1) objectively describing the
BPSD (based on pre-defined categories); excluding
possible medical causes such as pain, urinary tract
infection, constipation...; examining the context of
behavioural change; 2) discussing and analysing the
case at the next team meeting; 3) drawing up an
action plan in team with focus on person-centred
care
and
approach
(first
choice
is
a
non-
pharmacological intervention, followed by medical
treatment if needed).

Business Intelligence (BI) Module. Historical data
regarding the incidents can be consulted by the head
nurse or by other management staff, both about a
specific individual and at the level of a unit.
Appropriate
visualizations
help
to
analyse
and
understand the trends. Notifications are stored in the
database in a structured way. This makes it possible
to map out the historical course of a resident's BPSD
over time. 'Drill down' techniques allow the user to
request more details about the incidents themselves.
B. Design of the learning and training modules
The implementation of the eCare tool requires training in
the correct use of PCC interventions and the eCare tool
itself by the end users (i.e., professional caregivers of
PLWD in nursing homes). Currently, we are testing a
training programme with practical workshops on (1) how to
address and prevent BPSD (e.g., physical aggression,
screaming, etc.) and (2) how to integrate PCC in the daily
practice through PCC interventions, i.e., reminiscence
therapy, the use of music and the use of biographic
information of the PLWD during communication or care
activities. We are investigating the possibilities to provide
the training programme in e-learning modules.
Once the eCare tool is ready to be integrated in the
current (electronic) care records an additional training
Know the
PLWD
Incident
button
Business
Intelligence
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

programme will be developed to train the end users on how
to use the new applications/software modules.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The eCare tool is eHealth technology to be integrated in
electronic care records kept in nursing homes and provides
support to their healthcare staff for a person-centred
approach of persons living with dementia. Increased quality
of care and person-centred care are linked to increase in job
satisfaction and personal competence among nursing staff,
resulting in lower turnover figures in nursing homes.
The
project
team
is
currently
conducting
further
discussions with IT experts and focus group discussions
with healthcare providers and health managers about the
functional requirements of the eCare tool. Future work
depends on approval of study funding for two more years.
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Ethical
approval
will
be
requested
from
the
Ethics
Committee
of
the
Antwerp
University
Hospital
if
application
for
further
funding
for
development
is
successful.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study is funded by the Flemish Agency for Innovation
& Entrepreneurship for technology transfer (TETRA) and
co-financed by two Flemish networks of residential nursing
homes (i.e., Curando and GZA Zorg en Wonen), Centre of
Expertise Dementia Flanders and BlueHealth Innovation
Center - supported by Microsoft.
REFERENCES
[1]
WHO, Dementia - A public health priority (Infographic), 2017.
[2]
S. Macfarlane and
D. O'Connor, "Managing behavioural and
psychological symptoms in dementia," Aust Prescr, vol. 39, no. 4, pp.
123-125, 2016.
[3]
J. Cohen-Mansfield, "Nonpharmacologic treatment of behavioral
disorders in dementia," Curr Treat Options Neurol, vol. 15, no. 6, pp.
765-85, 2013.
[4]
A. Holst and L. Skar, "Formal caregivers' experiences of aggressive
behaviour in older people living with dementia in nursing homes: A
systematic review," Int J Older People Nurs, vol 12, no 4, pp. 1-12,
2017.
[5]
D. Edvardsson, B. Winblad, and P. O. Sandman, "Person-centred care
of people with severe Alzheimer's disease: current status and ways
forward," Lancet Neurol, 2008. vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 362-7, 2008.
[6]
T. Kitwood, "The experience of dementia," Aging & Mental Health,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 13-22, 1997.
[7]
G. Mitchell and J. Agnelli, "Person-centred care for people with
dementia: Kitwood reconsidered," Nurs Stand, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 46-
50, 2015.
[8]
D. Brooker, "What is person-centred care in dementia?"Reviews in
Clinical Gerontology, vol. 13, pp. 215-222, 2004.
[9]
S. Kim and M. Park, "Effectiveness of person-centered care on people
with dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis," Clin Interv
Aging, vol. 12, pp. 381-397, 2017.
[10] L.E. Legere et al., "Non-pharmacological approaches for behavioural
and psychological symptoms of dementia in older adults: A
systematic review of reviews," J Clin Nurs, Aug 9 [Epub ahead of
print], 2017.
[11] G. Livingston et al., "Non-pharmacological interventions for agitation
in dementia: systematic review of randomised controlled trials," Br J
Psychiatry, vol. 205, no. 6, pp. 436-42, 2014.
[12] I. Abraha et al., "Systematic review of systematic reviews of non-
pharmacological interventions to treat behavioural disturbances in
older patients with dementia. The SENATOR-OnTop series," BMJ
Open, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1-31, 2017.
[13] P. Van Bogaert et al., "SolCos model-based individual reminiscence
for older adults with mild to moderate dementia in nursing homes: a
randomized controlled intervention study," Journal of Psychiatric and
Mental Health Nursing, 2016. 23(9-10): pp. 568-575.
[14] R. Woods et al., "REMCARE: reminiscence groups for people with
dementia and their family caregivers - effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness
pragmatic
multicentre
randomised
trial,"
Health
Technol Assess, vol. 16, no. 48, pp. v-xv, 1-116, 2012.
[15] C. Gudex et al., "Consequences from use of reminiscence--a
randomised intervention study in ten Danish nursing homes," BMC
Geriatr, vol.. 10: pp. 33, 2010.
[16] B. Woods et al., "Reminiscence therapy for dementia," Cochrane
Database Syst Rev, vol. 2, 2005.
[17] Y. Zhang et al., "Does music therapy enhance behavioral and
cognitive function in elderly dementia patients? A systematic review
and meta-analysis," Ageing Res Rev, vol. 35, pp. 1-11, 2017.
[18] M.
Hsu
et
al.,
"Individual
music
therapy
for
managing
neuropsychiatric symptoms for people with dementia and their carers:
a cluster randomised controlled feasibility study," BMC Geriatr, vol.
15, pp. 1-19,, 2015.
[19] Y. Lin et al., "Effectiveness of group music intervention against
agitated behavior in elderly persons with dementia," Int J Geriatr
Psychiatry, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 670-8, 2011.
[20] V. Grondahl et al., "The use of life stories and its influence on
persons with dementia, their relatives and staff - a systematic mixed
studies review," BMC Nurs, vol. 16: pp. 1-11, 2017.
[21] P. Subramaniam, B. Woods, and C. Whitaker, "Life review and life
story books for people with mild to moderate dementia: a randomised
controlled trial," Aging Ment Health, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 363-75, 2014.
[22] A. van den Pol-Grevelink, J. S. Jukema, and C. H. Smits, "Person-
centred care and job satisfaction of caregivers in nursing homes: a
systematic review of the impact of different forms of person-centred
care on various dimensions of job satisfaction," Int J Geriatr
Psychiatry, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 219-29, 2012.
[23] J. McKeown et al., "The use of life story work with people with
dementia to enhance person-centred care," Int J Older People Nurs,
vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 148-58, 2010.
[24] U. Kellett et al., "Life stories and biography: a means of connecting
family and staff to people with dementia," J Clin Nurs, vol. 19, no.
11-12, pp. 1707-15, 2010.
[25] L. Chenoweth et al., "PerCEN trial participant perspectives on the
implementation and outcomes of person-centered dementia care and
environments," Int Psychogeriatr, vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 2045-57, 2015.
[26] J. Shore and S. Warden, The Art of Agile Development, Sebastopol,
2008.
[27] L.
Madeyski
and
M.
Kawalerowicz,
Continuous
Test-Driven
Development — A Novel Agile Software Development Practice and
Supporting Tool, in 8th International Conference on Evaluation of
Novel Approaches to Software Engineering (ENASE), Angers. pp.
260-267, 2013.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

