Design of a Telestroke System to Optimize Healthcare Delivery for 
Cerebrovascular Diseases in Colombia 
 
 
Brenda Ropero, Nicolás Useche 
Department of Diagnostic Imaging 
University Hospital Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá 
Bogotá, Colombia 
e-mail: bv.ropero47@uniandes.edu.co; 
jnuseche@gmail.com  
Antonio Salazar, Juan Pérez 
Laboratory of Telemedicine 
University of Los Andes 
Bogotá, Colombia 
e-mail: ant-sala@uniandes.edu.co; 
jc.perez13@uniandes.edu.co 
Manuel F. Granja 
Lyerly Neurosurgery 
Baptist Neurological Institute 
Jacksonville, Florida, USA 
e-mail: mfgranja@gmail.com 
 
Hernán Bayona, Carlos Martínez 
Primary Stroke Center, Neurology Department 
University Hospital Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá 
Bogotá, Colombia 
e-mail: hernanbayonao@gmail.com;  
caferma13@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—The purpose of this manuscript is to present the 
design of a software tool that supports clinical decision-making 
and the early transfer of patients with suspicion of 
cerebrovascular diseases in Colombia, We designed several 
clinical algorithms that comply with the latest American Heart 
Association and American Stroke Association (AHA/ASA) 
guidelines for the clinical care of a group of cerebrovascular 
diseases by defining multiple clinical outcomes in three different 
healthcare settings. Algorithms were reviewed and approved by 
a group of stroke experts, including a vascular neurologist, a 
general neurologist, and an interventional neuroradiologist. 
Patient data, time of symptom onset, and neurological and 
radiological 
severity 
scores 
were 
integrated 
into 
a 
comprehensive clinical workflow to increase the diagnostic 
sensitivity and specificity to select candidates for acute 
reperfusion therapies. Absolute and relative contraindications 
for intravenous thrombolysis and mechanical thrombectomy 
were incorporated to predict the need for an immediate transfer 
to a specialized stroke unit. These multiple variables contained 
in the algorithms were entered into a collaborative platform 
connecting three different healthcare settings with varying 
degrees of expertise and technological resources for stroke care. 
A web-based decision aid was obtained for real-time clinical 
decision-making. This software builds the pillars of a telestroke 
public-private network for the Emergency Stroke System in 
Colombia, guiding the clinical identification of a stroke, scoring 
the magnitude of the neurological deficit, and mainly suggesting 
whether a determined case may benefit from acute reperfusion 
therapies. 
Keywords-stroke; 
telestroke; 
algorithms; 
software; 
collaborative platform. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Colombia is located in the northern part of South America, 
with an estimated population of 45.5 million by 2018 [1]. 
According to the Colombian National Health Observatory, by 
2014, strokes were the third leading cause of death after 
coronary heart disease and interpersonal violence [2]. In the 
first half of 2018, there were 7,429 deaths attributed to stroke, 
and approximately 250,000 people in Colombia live with 
disabilities associated with cerebrovascular diseases [1]. The 
healthcare system delivery in Colombia is concentrated in 
urban areas, and access to specialized treatments for acute 
stroke is distributed inequitably [3]. Hence, patients located in 
remote areas sometimes lose the opportunity to receive proper 
treatment in an adequate timeframe, and some patients in 
urban areas are sent to healthcare facilities with no stroke 
handling capabilities, thus increasing the probability of 
permanent sequelae. 
In our experience, several efforts have been made to 
improve the transfer of patients presenting with acute 
ischemic strokes from rural areas to a certified Primary Stroke 
Center (PSC) in Bogotá, the capital of Colombia. These 
experiences have demonstrated that, without a collaborative 
platform that assists healthcare providers in the decision-
making and transfer processes, emergency services became 
overloaded with patients who were not real candidates, and 
patients with a potential benefit for acute interventions arrived 
late, resulting in poorer outcomes. 
A system that supports real-time clinical decision-making 
while evaluating a patient with suspected cerebrovascular 
disease is not well established in Colombia, particularly for 
patients with the suspicion of an acute stroke with large vessel 
occlusion, who may be potential candidates for endovascular 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

therapy in which the recanalization of the occluded cerebral 
artery results in penumbral salvage if accomplished early [4]. 
A collaborative platform integrating multiple clinical 
variables, clinical scales and scores and outcome predictors 
seems to be a feasible solution to increase health coverage in 
a country with healthcare budget constraints [5]. Considering 
the constantly emerging improvements in cerebrovascular 
disease protocols and evidence-based practices, we have 
developed a web-based software named Telestroke-RU 
(Emergency Network, which is the English translation of the 
Spanish “Red de Urgencias”), based on the latest diagnostic 
and therapeutic recommendations by the American Heart 
Association and American Stroke Association (AHA/ASA) 
[6]. The purpose of this software is to guide the clinical 
decision-making processes step-by-step when non-expert 
clinicians have doubts in patient management, thus serving as 
a communication tool with stroke experts in the context of 
patients presenting with a broad spectrum of cerebrovascular 
diseases such as ischemic stroke, hemorrhagic stroke, and 
transient ischemic attack (TIA). The software is available on 
the website https://telestroke.uniandes.academy. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II defines the 
three healthcare settings and describes the algorithm design 
process. Section III describes related work in the healthcare 
sector and introduces the software development. Section IV 
describes the results of the web-based collaborative platform. 
Finally, Section V presents our conclusions, future work and 
acknowledgements. 
II. 
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS AND ALGORITHM DESIGNS 
The software algorithms were designed according to the 
human and technological resources available at healthcare 
facilities in which a patient with a cerebrovascular disease 
may arrive. 
A. Healthcare settings 
We define three clinical settings as follows: 
Primary Healthcare Setting (PHS): a basic level of 
healthcare delivery, where diagnostic tools are limited to the 
anamnesis and physical exam performed by a primary care 
physician and where basic blood tests are available. The 
purpose of this setting is to make an accurate diagnosis and to 
facilitate timely transfers, as shown in Figure 1. The clinical 
workflow designed for this setting has 10 different pathways 
resulting in different final possible outcomes, including 
priority or urgent transfer to an Intermediate or an Advanced 
Healthcare Setting, as shown in Figure 2. 
Intermediate Healthcare Setting (IHS): intermediate level 
of healthcare delivery capable of performing computed 
tomography scans (CT scans), computed tomography 
angiography (CTA), and intravenous thrombolysis. Although 
IHS provides neurologists and radiologists, they are not 
available 24 hours/7 days a week to make critical decisions. 
The purpose of this setting is to make an accurate diagnosis of 
a stroke with a large vessel occlusion and optimize the early 
transfer of patients who are candidates for endovascular 
therapy. The clinical workflow designed for this setting has 39 
different pathways resulting in different possible outcomes, 
including urgent transfer to an Advanced Healthcare Setting 
(AHS), referral to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) after the 
administration of intravenous thrombolysis, neurosurgery 
referral, hospitalization or ambulatory care. Although the 
complete IHS algorithm is not shown due to its extensiveness, 
Figure 3 shows an example of one module of ischemic stroke 
requiring intravenous thrombolysis. 
Advanced healthcare setting (AHS): an advanced level of 
healthcare delivery. AHS includes specialized human and 
technological resources available 24 hours/7 days a week for 
the healthcare delivery of a patient presenting with a 
cerebrovascular disease. These specialized human and 
technological resources include vascular neurologists, 
neuroradiologists, the ability to perform CT scans, CTAs, 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), magnetic resonance 
angiography (MRA), and the capacity for intravenous 
thrombolysis and endovascular therapy, as well as stroke 
ICUs. This setting can receive transfers from PHS and IHS. 
The clinical workflow for this setting has 1,162 different 
pathways, and because interfacility transfers are not 
necessary, it results in the following final possible outcomes: 
ICU referral after administration of intravenous thrombolysis 
or 
endovascular 
therapy, 
neurosurgery 
referral, 
hospitalization, or ambulatory care. Although the complete 
IHS algorithm is not shown due to its extensiveness, Figure 4 
shows an example of one module for ischemic stroke with 
large vessel occlusion requiring endovascular therapy. 
B. Algorithm designs 
Six people were involved in the design of the telestroke 
system as described below. The algorithms were reviewed in 
weekly sessions by a group of experts working in a Joint 
Commission International (JCI)-certified PSC and included a 
vascular 
neurologist, 
a 
general 
neurologist 
and 
a 
neuroradiologist. Preliminary drafts of the algorithms were 
made with further discussions and edits for approximately two 
months focusing on the best and most proper way to manage 
patients in each setting. The group of experts finally approved 
the three algorithms in consensus following the latest 
evidence-based 2018 AHA/ASA guideline recommendations 
[6] and adapting them to the latest version of the national 
stroke guidelines of Colombia [7]. The performance of the 
final version of the algorithms was tested using simulated 
cases and dissecting the workflows into modules by a group 
that consisted of a physician and two engineers who were 
involved in developing the software. For the ease of the 
collection of data of clinical variables, neurological state and 
radiological findings, and considering the degree of expertise 
and technological resources for stroke holistic care of the three 
healthcare settings, the clinical algorithms were organized into 
common basic modules, as shown in Table I.  The scales and 
predictors used in these modules, which allow assessing the 
severity of the event, the neurological state of the patient, and 
other factors which allow determining the treatment, either in 
situ, or the referral to a higher level service are shown in Table 
II. Each clinical workflow guides the diagnosis of a spectrum 
of cerebrovascular diseases, including ischemic stroke, 
hemorrhagic stroke, and TIA, allowing us to rule out 
conditions presenting similarly to a stroke, denoted as stroke 
mimics. 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Figure 1.  Interaction between the three healthcare settings and final possible diagnosis and referrals. rtPA= Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator. 
III. 
RELATED WORK AND SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
This section describes previous work in the topic and the 
development details of our software. 
A. Related Work 
In our country, there are no systems in the health sector 
that support decisions for stroke care. Worldwide, the few 
existing systems are designed in different practical front-ends 
in the form of applications available for smartphones, tablets 
and web-based tools [8]-[11], or software integrated into 
medical records [12]. These systems rely on measurements of 
clinical scales or radiological scores but rarely rely on a 
combination of both. These are also designed mostly for acute 
ischemic stroke care, excluding other conditions within the 
spectrum of cerebrovascular diseases. Some are used for acute 
care, while others are used for follow-up during 
hospitalization or for outpatient care. 
Furthermore, most existing systems use the same 
algorithm independent of the different levels of expertise and 
the technological resources of health facilities within a 
country. Since in real clinical scenarios the eligibility criteria 
for reperfusion therapies are based on a combination of 
clinical and radiological variables, a combination of these 
criteria is suggested to improve the efficiency in management 
and quality of care. Nevertheless, many studies implementing 
this type of system show a reduction of morbidity, mortality, 
inpatient length of stay as well as better functional outcomes 
[13]. 
B. Software development 
The final version of the algorithms was arranged into a 
software presented in a simple and friendly interface for both 
administrative and healthcare provider users in the form of a 
collaborative platform. Access to the software was possible 
with the previous activation of an account by creating a 
username and a password. Privileges for interaction with a 
determined module of the software were assigned depending 
on the user expertise and capacity to make special 
contributions for the different scales and scores. Considering 
that in Colombia, a patient can interact with administrative 
staff, paramedics, triage staff, nurses, general physicians, 
emergency physicians, neurologists and neuroradiologists, 
user privileges were given depending on the role of the 
professional. A relational model was implemented with the 
following final diagnosis outcomes: ischemic stroke within 
the therapeutic window (acute or subacute compromising 
middle cerebral artery (MCA), anterior cerebral artery (ACA) 
and/or posterior cerebral artery (PCA) territories), chronic 
ischemic stroke, hemorrhagic stroke, TIA and stroke mimics. 
Software code was made using PHP (Hypertext 
Preprocessor) and JavaScript languages. Data were stored 
using the MySQL 5.1.40 database (Oracle Corporation, 
Redwood City, CA, USA), which was created and 
administered by MySQL Administrator 1.1.9. The software is 
executed in different web browsers, such as Mozilla Firefox, 
Google Chrome, Safari and Microsoft Edge, so that it can be 
used on a computer, a tablet or a smartphone. The application 
is available at https://telestroke.uniandes.academy. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Figure 2.  Detailed clinical workflow for the Primary Healthcare Setting. Algorithm results in 10 different pathways and final possible outcomes. 
 
Figure 3.  Ischemic stroke module showing one arm of the Intermediate Healthcare Setting algorithm. Due to its extensiveness resulting in 39 different 
pathways, the complete workflow is not shown. This is a case of a patient with ischemic stroke requiring intravenous thrombolysis. rtPA= Recombinant 
tissue plasminogen activator. --- = Intermediate pathways. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 4.  Ischemic stroke Module showing one arm of the Advanced Healthcare Setting. Due to its extensiveness resulting in 1,162 pathways, the complete 
workflow is not shown. This is a case of a patient with ischemic stroke requiring endovascular therapy. rtPA= Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator.
Tests on all the units of the workflows were run to ensure 
that the implementation of each unit correctly modeled the 
intended behavior of the diagram shown in Figure 1. 
For each healthcare setting, a clinical workflow was 
established. Figure 2 shows an example of the algorithm 
implemented for the PHS, which is the most straightforward 
setting. The performance of the workflows for each setting 
was tested using simulated cases to guarantee that each unit 
worked. 
Over 1,211 tests were run to reproduce all possible 
pathways among the three settings. Additional tests were run 
considering the frequent error of users: trying to select 
multiple options in single-option menus, changing a selection 
at the beginning of the workflow when at the end of the 
workflow, mistakenly selecting an option that is not possible 
in the current state, etc. 
These tests, while not capable of modeling all possible 
errors, were diverse enough to detect flaws in the system so 
that the appropriate corrections could be made. 
TABLE I.  
BASIC SOFTWARE MODULES 
Module # 
Content of modules 
Description 
Data 
Module 1 
Identification data 
Name, age, sex, identification 
number 
Module 2 
Time of onset of 
symptoms 
Day, month, year and hour 
Module 3 
Neurological deficit, 
past relevant illnesses 
e.g., Left hemiparesis, global 
aphasia.  
Past Diabetes Mellitus 
Module 4 
Use of anticoagulant 
medications 
e.g., Use of oral warfarin for 
atrial fibrillation. 
Module 5 
Physical exam 
Heart Rate, Blood Pressure, 
Respiratory Rate, Weight, 
Laterality, rest of physical 
exam. 
Module 6 
Imaging 
Compromised Cerebral 
territory, infarct volume, etc. 
Module 7 
Laboratory 
Complete Blood Count, 
creatinine, clotting times, etc. 
Module 8 
Interventional 
procedures 
Door to needle time, door to 
inguinal puncture, etc. 
 
After corrections, the implementation accurately models 
the algorithms of the three settings. To facilitate the user 
experience, the interface was designed to be explicit in each 
question to avoid ambiguities. Furthermore, a simple manual 
was designed to show, step-by-step, the actions that must be 
followed to carry out common procedures so that the user can 
learn the overall mechanism of the system. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A web-based decision aid was obtained for real-time 
clinical decision making using a computer, a tablet or a 
smartphone in Colombia. The software organizes the 
information contained in the algorithms into eight different 
basic modules as shown in Table I. A total of 11 clinical scales 
and radiological scores were integrated into its corresponding 
module to increase the sensitivity and specificity of each 
possible diagnosis. The privileges for the different 
professionals participating in stroke code responses to fill the 
data are shown in Table II. To ensure the safe selection of 
candidates for reperfusion therapies, relative and absolute 
contraindications for both intravenous thrombolysis and 
mechanical thrombectomy were also integrated into the 
software in different modules [14]. 
Three phases were planned for the validation of the 
performance of the Telestroke system. The first phase was 
initiated by one physician and two engineers who simulated a 
number of different cases based on a 5-year stroke database 
from 2014 to 2018. They collected approximately 610 past 
real cerebrovascular disease cases from our institution 
containing most of the variables shown in Tables I and II. The 
second phase is in progress at this moment and is intended for 
the training and validation of the software with neurology 
residents involved in daily stroke code responses. Once 
modifications in the software from the second phase are made, 
the third phase will be performed in real clinical scenarios in 
a network between pilot hospitals. 
Depending on the patient point of entry at the Emergency 
System, the software guides clinical decision-making and 
supports early interfacility transfer for patients with a high 
suspicion of cerebrovascular diseases. Administrative and 
healthcare users can simultaneously feed the modules through 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

directed steps entering patient data, thus beginning to solve 
the clinical case that models a specific pathway. 
The first phase of the software validation was made by 
simulating diverse clinical cases. For example, a pathway 
simulating the diagnosis of acute stroke within the therapeutic 
window yields the following decision processes: 
If a healthcare provider working in a PHS suspects a 
patient is presenting an acute stroke, the software guides the 
diagnosis using the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) [15] and the 
NIHSS scale [16] and supports the decision of interfacility 
transfer for candidates to reperfusion therapies using the time 
of symptom onset, the Field Assessment Stroke Triage for 
Emergency Destination (FAST-ED) score [17], and the 
relative and absolute contraindications for reperfusion 
therapies. 
The combination of these results inside the system will 
determine the severity of the neurological deficit and, in this 
case, the decision to transfer the patient to an IHS or an AHS 
based on the presence of a clinically large vessel occlusion. In 
this case, the main purpose is to accurately diagnose a stroke 
and clinically evaluate the compromised cerebral territory and 
large vessel occlusion. The complete workflow for the PHS 
considering the various diagnoses and therapeutic decisions is 
shown in Figure 2. 
TABLE II.  
CLINICAL SCALES AND RADIOLOGICAL SCORES USED IN 
THE BASIC MODULES 
Module # 
Content 
Scale/Score 
Description 
Responsible 
Professionals 
Module 3 
ABCD2 
score [18] 
Predictor of stroke 
risk after TIA [19] 
General physician, 
emergency 
physician or 
neurologist 
Module 5 
Cincinnati 
scale [20] 
Evaluation of 
potential stroke 
before physician 
evaluation 
Pre-hospital staff, 
nurses, general 
physician 
Glasgow 
Coma Scale 
[15] 
Level of 
consciousness 
General physician 
or emergency 
physician 
NIHSS [16] 
Quantify 
impairment caused 
by stroke 
General physician, 
emergency 
physician, 
neurologist 
Posterior 
circulation 
predictor 
[21] 
Score predicting 
posterior circulation 
involvement 
Neurologist 
FAST-ED 
[17] 
Detection of large 
vessel occlusion 
General physician, 
emergency 
physician, 
neurologist 
WFNS 
score [22] 
Grades the severity 
of subarachnoid 
hemorrhage 
Neurologist or 
neurosurgeon 
Module 6 
ASPECTS 
[23], 
FISHER 
[24] 
and 
ICH [25] 
Radiological scores 
for ischemic and 
hemorrhagic stroke 
Radiologist, 
neurologist and/or 
neurosurgeon 
Module 7 
TICI score 
[26] 
Thrombolysis 
reperfusion 
Interventionist 
 
If a healthcare provider working in an IHS suspects a 
patient is presenting an acute stroke, the software guides the 
diagnosis using the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) [15] and the 
NIHSS scale [16] and supports the decision of interfacility 
transfer for candidates to endovascular therapy using the time 
of symptom onset, the Alberta Stroke Program Computed 
Tomography (ASPECTS) score [23] for compromised 
anterior and/or posterior cerebral circulations, and the relative 
and absolute contraindications for endovascular therapy. The 
combination of these results inside the system will determine 
the severity of the neurological deficit and, in this case, the 
decision to transfer the patient to an AHS based on the 
presence of a radiological large vessel occlusion. If the criteria 
for reperfusion therapies are met, the software recommends 
administering intravenous thrombolysis and initiating a 
prompt transfer to an AHS to perform endovascular therapy 
and the corresponding referral to a specialized stroke ICU. 
Due to its extensiveness, the complete workflows for the IHS 
and AHS are not shown because it is not possible to appreciate 
the details. 
In addition to the workflows for each healthcare setting, 
this software serves as a reference network tool. Hence, the 
information on the state of the patient and the results of blood 
tests, imaging evaluations, and procedures are available online 
for all health services involved in patient care. 
In summary, 10, 39 and 1,162 different pathways resulting 
in different final possible outcomes were obtained for the 
Primary, Intermediate and Advanced Healthcare Settings, 
respectively. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The software presented here is an early step in a long-term 
process to strengthen the stroke emergency network between 
hospitals with different healthcare levels in urban and rural 
regions in Colombia. This novel tool can guide healthcare 
provider decision-making through a collaborative platform, 
using up-to-date clinical workflows and coordinating the 
consultation of stroke experts, not only for acute stroke cases 
but also for a broad spectrum of cerebrovascular diseases. The 
main goal is to identify acute phase ischemic strokes within 
the therapeutic window that are susceptible to acute 
reperfusion interventions with the intention to decrease the 
high number of people with resulting stroke disabilities. The 
collaborative platform also contributes to minimizing errors 
and promoting safer, quicker and high-quality clinical care. 
This tool is currently being implemented in simulated clinical 
cases with neurology residents in our institution with the 
objective to calibrate the software and make further updates 
and improvements in the interface before it is implemented in 
real scenarios, so the results of this phase are not shown yet. 
Its impact will be evaluated in a third validation phase inside 
a network of pilot hospitals. Once all phases are concluded, 
the real performance of the software will be determined in 
terms of comparing its impact on the timing of task 
completion for time-consuming processes before and after the 
implementation of the software, door to needle times, quality 
of care, connectivity, clinical outcomes at discharge, 30 days 
and 90 days after the event using the modified Rankin scale 
[27] and its performance as a learning tool platform to 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

simulate clinical cases for healthcare providers in training 
participating in stroke code responses. 
Considering the underreporting of stroke cases and the 
inconsistency between studies showing different prevalence 
and incidence measures across the country [28], other possible 
uses of this software include the collection of epidemiological 
data that are not currently centralized for future analyses and 
studies 
concerning 
cerebrovascular 
diseases. 
The 
implementation of this tool in an AHS may serve as a self-
assessment instrument for measuring the fulfillment and 
adherence to the latest standards of care inside dedicated 
stroke units, thus contributing to providing the best care 
available and improving outcomes. A challenge along the way 
is to continually update the algorithms that feed the software, 
considering the ever-changing evidence-based medicine. This 
can be resolved with periodical reviews between stroke 
experts and software developers. This online collaborative 
platform is currently in the second phase of the 
aforementioned three phase-process of validation, and future 
work needs to be done to incorporate the real-time 
transmission of CT scans and the geolocation of the nearest 
advanced healthcare facilities based on the patient point of 
entry. Some possible limitations in the implementation of this 
software that can arise in the future might include a limited 
internet connection in remote areas and issues related to the 
articulation with ambulance transportation systems. 
To our knowledge, there are no similar software tools in 
Colombia incorporating specific algorithms for different 
healthcare levels that consider the varying degree of 
resources and infrastructure for approaching patients with a 
suspicion of cerebrovascular disease regardless of the site of 
case occurrence. Its usability for other countries, especially 
for Spanish-speaking countries, is one we have not explored 
and depends on the completion of the three validation phases 
inside our country. However, we suspect it can become a tool 
for accomplishing accreditation requirements for stroke 
centers desiring a certification by an international 
organization once the definition of an AHS is fulfilled. The 
extrapolation of this system to other countries requires 
extensive resource investment, especially for non-Spanish 
speaking countries, considering the differences in healthcare 
system articulation and health policies. This software begins 
to build the pillars of a public-private stroke network 
initiative that guides the clinical identification of a stroke, the 
magnitude of the neurological deficit and, particularly, 
whether a determined case can benefit from an acute 
intervention, narrowing the times of interfacility transfers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank our institutions and the National Department of 
Science, Technology and Innovation of Colombia for funding 
this study (Grant 1204-744-55680). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
DANE, "Censo Nacional 2018. Departamento Administrativo 
Nacional de Estadísticas," 2018. 
[2] 
C. Castañeda-Orjuela, P. Chaparro-Narváez, and F. De la Hoz-
Restrepo, "El Observatorio Nacional de Salud y la gestión del 
conocimiento en salud del país: Superintendencia Nacional de Salud," 
in Superintendencia Nacional de Salud, ed, 2014. 
[3] 
F. Ruiz Gomez, T. Zapata Jaramillo, and L. Garavito Beltran, 
"Colombian health care system: results on equity for five health 
dimensions, 2003-2008," Rev Panam Salud Publica, vol. 33, pp. 107-
15, 6 p preceding 107, Feb 2013. 
[4] 
J. M. Wardlaw, V. Murray, E. Berge, and G. J. del Zoppo, 
"Thrombolysis for acute ischaemic stroke," Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev, p. Cd000213, Jul 29 2014. 
[5] 
J. L. Amaya-Lara, "Catastrophic expenditure due to out-of-pocket 
health payments and its determinants in Colombian households," Int J 
Equity Health, vol. 15, p. 182, Nov 10 2016. 
[6] 
J. Powers William, A. Rabinstein Alejandro, T. Ackerson, M. Adeoye 
Opeolu, C. Bambakidis Nicholas, K. Becker, et al., "2018 Guidelines 
for the Early Management of Patients With Acute Ischemic Stroke: A 
Guideline for Healthcare Professionals From the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association," Stroke, vol. 49, pp. e46-
e99, 2018/03/01 2018. 
[7] 
MinSalud. (2015). Clinical Practice Guideline for diagnosis, treatment 
and rehabilitation of Acute Ischemic Stroke in population over the age 
of 18.  
[8] 
G. Nogueira Raul, S. Silva Gisele, O. Lima Fabricio, Y.-C. Yeh, C. 
Fleming, D. Branco, et al., "The FAST-ED App: A Smartphone 
Platform for the Field Triage of Patients With Stroke," Stroke, vol. 48, 
pp. 1278-1284, 2017/05/01 2017. 
[9] 
B. Y. Andrew, C. M. Stack, J. P. Yang, and J. A. Dodds, "mStroke: 
"Mobile Stroke"-Improving Acute Stroke Care with Smartphone 
Technology," J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis, vol. 26, pp. 1449-1456, Jul 
2017. 
[10] R. L. Dickson, D. Sumathipala, and J. Reeves, "Stop Stroke(c) Acute 
Care Coordination Medical Application: A Brief Report on 
Postimplementation Performance at a Primary Stroke Center," J Stroke 
Cerebrovasc Dis, vol. 25, pp. 1275-1279, May 2016. 
[11] C. Herweh, P. A. Ringleb, G. Rauch, S. Gerry, L. Behrens, M. 
Mohlenbruch, et al., "Performance of e-ASPECTS software in 
comparison to that of stroke physicians on assessing CT scans of acute 
ischemic stroke patients," Int J Stroke, vol. 11, pp. 438-45, Jun 2016. 
[12] L. Katzan Irene, Y. Fan, M. Speck, J. Morton, L. Fromwiller, J. 
Urchek, 
et 
al., 
"Electronic 
Stroke 
CarePath," 
Circulation: 
Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes, vol. 8, pp. S179-S189, 
2015/10/01 2015. 
[13] J. Minnerup, H. Wersching, A. Teuber, J. Wellmann, J. Eyding, R. 
Weber, et al., "Outcome After Thrombectomy and Intravenous 
Thrombolysis in Patients With Acute Ischemic Stroke: A Prospective 
Observational Study," Stroke, vol. 47, pp. 1584-92, Jun 2016. 
[14] P. A. G. Sandercock and S. Ricci, "Controversies in Thrombolysis," 
Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep, vol. 17, p. 60, Aug 2017. 
[15] G. Teasdale, A. Maas, F. Lecky, G. Manley, N. Stocchetti, and G. 
Murray, "The Glasgow Coma Scale at 40 years: standing the test of 
time," Lancet Neurol, vol. 13, pp. 844-54, Aug 2014. 
[16] L. K. Kwah and J. Diong, "National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale 
(NIHSS)," J Physiother, vol. 60, p. 61, Mar 2014. 
[17] O. Lima Fabricio, S. Silva Gisele, L. Furie Karen, R. Frankel Michael, 
H. Lev Michael, C. S. Camargo Érica, et al., "Field Assessment Stroke 
Triage for Emergency Destination," Stroke, vol. 47, pp. 1997-2002, 
2016/08/01 2016. 
[18] K. Ghandehari, F. Ahmadi, S. Ebrahimzadeh, K. Shariatinezhad, and 
K. Ghandehari, "Assessment of ABCD(2) scale in patients with 
transient ischaemic attack or stroke," Neurol Neurochir Pol, vol. 46, 
pp. 421-7, Sep-Oct 2012. 
[19] S. A. Josephson, S. Sidney, T. N. Pham, A. L. Bernstein, and S. C. 
Johnston, "Higher ABCD2 score predicts patients most likely to have 
true transient ischemic attack," Stroke, vol. 39, pp. 3096-8, Nov 2008. 
[20] R. U. Kothari, A. Pancioli, T. Liu, T. Brott, and J. Broderick, 
"Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale: reproducibility and validity," 
Ann Emerg Med, vol. 33, pp. 373-8, Apr 1999. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[21] S. Runchey and S. McGee, "Does this patient have a hemorrhagic 
stroke?: clinical findings distinguishing hemorrhagic stroke from 
ischemic stroke," Jama, vol. 303, pp. 2280-6, Jun 9 2010. 
[22] W.-S. Cho, J. E. Kim, S. Q. Park, J. K. Ko, D.-W. Kim, J. C. Park, et 
al., 
"Korean 
Clinical 
Practice 
Guidelines 
for 
Aneurysmal 
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage," Journal of Korean Neurosurgical Society, 
vol. 61, pp. 127-166, 2018. 
[23] M. Mokin, T. Primiani Christopher, H. Siddiqui Adnan, and S. Turk 
Aquilla, "ASPECTS (Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score) 
Measurement Using Hounsfield Unit Values When Selecting Patients 
for Stroke Thrombectomy," Stroke, vol. 48, pp. 1574-1579, 2017/06/01 
2017. 
[24] C. M. Fisher, J. P. Kistler, and J. M. Davis, "Relation of cerebral 
vasospasm to subarachnoid hemorrhage visualized by computerized 
tomographic scanning," Neurosurgery, vol. 6, pp. 1-9, Jan 1980. 
[25] J. C. Hemphill, 3rd, D. C. Bonovich, L. Besmertis, G. T. Manley, and 
S. C. Johnston, "The ICH score: a simple, reliable grading scale for 
intracerebral hemorrhage," Stroke, vol. 32, pp. 891-7, Apr 2001. 
[26] A. J. Yoo, C. Z. Simonsen, S. Prabhakaran, Z. A. Chaudhry, M. A. Issa, 
J. E. Fugate, et al., "Refining angiographic biomarkers of 
revascularization: improving outcome prediction after intra-arterial 
therapy," Stroke, vol. 44, pp. 2509-2512, 2013. 
[27] J. T. Wilson, A. Hareendran, M. Grant, T. Baird, U. G. Schulz, K. W. 
Muir, et al., "Improving the assessment of outcomes in stroke: use of a 
structured interview to assign grades on the modified Rankin Scale," 
Stroke, vol. 33, pp. 2243-6, Sep 2002. 
[28] F. A. Silva, J. G. Zarruk, C. Quintero, W. Arenas, C. Rueda-Clausen, 
S. Silva, et al., "Enfermedad cerebrovascular en Colombia. ," Revista 
Colombiana de Cardiología vol. 13, pp. 85-89, 2006. 
 
 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

