E-Health System Development based on End User Centered Design
Rainer Planinc
Computer Vision Lab
Vienna University of Technology
Vienna, Austria
rainer.planinc@tuwien.ac.at
Martin Kampel
Cogvis GmbH
Vienna, Austria
kampel@cogvis.at
Abstract—Legal and ethical aspects need to be taken into
consideration during the development of an e-Health system,
especially if this system monitors and assists elderly people.
Furthermore, privacy and psychological aspects as well as the
end user requirements are essential, since developing Ambient
Assisted Living technology without integrating the end user
results in products or functions which are not desired by the
end user. Not considering the end user requirements (e.g.,
privacy concerns, desired functions) leads to the issue of less
acceptance for new technology, since no beneﬁt for the end
user can be provided. In order to respect the end user’s needs
from the very beginning of a project, the integration of the
end user throughout the whole project is seen as a key factor.
This includes the analysis of the user requirements and regular
feedback loops during the project. An example of the user
centered design during the development of an e-Health system
within the AAL-JP project fearless is presented in this paper.
Keywords-end user integration; ambient assisted living; fall
detection;
I. INTRODUCTION
Fear of falling is a common problem for elderly and
lead to reduced activities, even if the elderly did not fall
[1]. Furthermore, falls are considered to be a great risk for
elderly since the mortality of fallers is higher compared to
other elderly and elderly may lie on the ﬂoor for hours [2].
This motivates the introduction of an event detection
system which is able to detect falls automatically. The aim
of the AAL project fearless1 (”Fear Elimination As Reso-
lution of Elderly’s Substantial Sorrows”) is the reduction of
elderly’s fears by providing alarms if unusual events (e.g.,
falls or ﬁre) are detected. An all-in-one e-Health system
is developed, focusing on fall detection at the beginning
but offering a high degree of adaptability and standardized
interfaces to be able to integrate other systems (e.g., alarm
systems) at a later stage.
A main problem when developing AAL technologies is
the proper integration of end user during the development
process and the evaluation of the system. Despite this fact,
developed approaches are tested under laboratory settings
only (e.g., [3]–[7]), thus yielding in promising results. But
to verify these results, ﬁeld tests with elderly have to be
1This work is supported by the European Union under grant AAL 2010-
3-020.
conducted and their feedback need to be integrated into the
development process. The contribution of this paper is to
present a user centered development of an e-Health system
and the end user integration strategy evolved in the fearless
project.
The rest of this document is structured as follows: Section
2 gives an overview of the technical system methodology,
whereas Section 3 discusses the user centered design pro-
cess. Finally, a conclusion is drawn in Section 4.
II. METHODOLOGY
The structure of the fearless system is depicted in Fig-
ure 1, showing all relevant interfaces and involved end
user. The proposed e-Health system consists of sensor units
(Xtion Pro + small PC for data processing) installed at
the elderly’s house or ﬂat. The system is adaptable, hence
standardized interfaces to third parties are provided (e.g.,
alarm system, gas detector). Unusual events (e.g., falls) are
detected automatically and alarms are sent to the telematics
platform. This platform enables elderly, relatives and care
taker to access the alarm events. Furthermore, the telematics
platform offers interfaces to different standardized electronic
health record systems (e.g., ELGA in Austria) to include
health professionals.
Autonomous sensors detecting falls automatically are
needed, since it is important to reduce the cognitive load
on the user, especially when dealing with dementia [8]. The
use of computer vision is feasible, since it can overcome the
limitations of other sensor types [9] and no devices need to
be worn. Zweng et al. [7] show that the accuracy of their fall
detection approach is higher compared to 2D cameras when
using a calibrated camera setup and a 3D reconstruction of a
person. Hence, we propose to use a Kinect / Xtion pro, since
3D information is available for distances up to ten meters
without the need for a calibrated camera setup. However,
the SDK is optimized for a range from 0.8 to 3.5 meters
and thus not all features provided by the SDK can be used
for higher distances (e.g., NITE). Moreover, the scene can
be analyzed in more detail (e.g., estimation of the ground
plane) in comparison to standard cameras.
However, the use of computer vision raise privacy issues.
Due to this facts, the Kinect respectively the Xtion Pro
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 1.
fearless e-Health system
sensor is used, since depth data can be used to detect falls
(e.g., [4], [5]). Using depth data respects the privacy of
elderly, since neither the person nor the surrounding can be
identiﬁed from depth images. A depth image only visualizes
the position and the distance to the sensor. Figure 2 (left)
shows an example of a depth image illustrating a person,
tables and a mat lying on the ﬂoor. This visualization
illustrates the distances of subjects and objects to the sensor.
The brighter the color in the depth image, the more far away
the person or object is. On the other hand, the darker the
object is, the closer to the sensor it is. Furthermore, black
indicates that there is no data available (e.g., due to sunlight
or reﬂections). In contrast, the corresponding RGB image is
shown in Figure 2 (right), representing the same scene.
The workﬂow of our approach is depicted in Figure 3:
starting with a depth image, the skeleton and ground plane
data is extracted by the use of OpenNI [10]. The skeleton
joints of the shoulder, spine and the center of the hip are
extracted and analyzed using fuzzy logic. Based on the
results of the fuzzy logic, a decision is made if the person
is in an upright position or lying on the ﬂoor. Since only
the skeleton joints are used, the privacy of the elderly is
respected due to the use of an anonymous and abstract
visualization only using lines and dots. An example of this
Figure 2.
Depth image (left) and corresponding RGB image (right)
Figure 3.
Technical Workﬂow
visualization is shown in Figure 4: the dots are representing
the upper part of the body, whereas the line represents the
major body orientation and the ground ﬂoor. In case of an
alarm, the alarm including this abstract visualization is sent
to the telematics platform, depicted in Figure 1. Moreover,
the alarm is stored and forwarded to the appropriate care
taker organization or relative by using this platform.
To be able to meet the required end user demands, the
following criteria need to be fulﬁlled:
• False Alarm Rate: false alarms (false positives, FP)
are events, where the system reports a fall, although the
person does not fall. Since each fall event is monitored
by a care giver organization or a relative, FP result in
time and cost consuming actions. On the other hand,
false negatives (FN) are events, where the person falls
down but the system does not detect the event. The
drawback of FN is that the system misses the fall and
thus no help can be provided. In summary, the number
of FP and FN need to stay below a threshold (e.g.,
the number of FP and FN when using a panic button),
otherwise the system will not be successful. To reduce
the number of FP and FN, the veriﬁcation of an alarm
by a call center agent or relative, before taking counter-
measures, is proposed by sending additional veriﬁcation
illustrations. These illustrations, depicted in Figure 4,
show abstract visualizations of a person representing
the upper body of the person by three dots (shoulder,
spine, hip) and a line as well as the position of this
person with respect to the ground ﬂoor. Due to this
representation, the illustration is even more anonymized
than when using depth images, although the relevant
information (person is in an upright position vs. person
is lying on the ﬂoor) is still obtained.
• Security and Privacy: Ensuring high security and
privacy standards are essential for a successful e-Health
system. Hence, only abstract and anonymized illustra-
tions are accessible, shown in Figure 4. Furthermore,
all connections of the fearless system are encrypted
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 4.
Veriﬁcation image of a person (a) being in an upright position
(left) and (b) lying on the ﬂoor (right). The upper body of a person is
represented by only three dotes and one line.
using the AES-256 encryption standard. To ensure
privacy by design, it is not possible to view a camera
picture, since no (RGB) camera is used. Moreover, the
system does not look like a standard camera and thus
no stigmatization takes place since the sensor can be
integrated into the ﬂat or house.
• Affordability: Technology for elderly need to be af-
fordable, hence the system is built of low-cost standard
components to ensure to meet the end user require-
ments. Similar to the panic button, elderly will be able
to rent the system and thus covering the hardware as
well as personal costs.
• Adaptability: To be able to provide an all-in-one so-
lution, interfaces to other systems (e.g., alarm systems,
smoke detectors) are provided. Hence, the system can
be personalized according to the end user’s needs and
a single safety and security system can be provided.
• Control belief: This end user requirement is fulﬁlled
by providing access to all information gathered by the
system via the use of the telematics platform. This plat-
form acts as central point of information and all alarms
are sent to this platform. Elderly, their relatives and care
taker organizations have access to this platform. This
solution fulﬁlls the requirement of empowering elderly
to have control over their data, although conﬂicts arise
since elderly perceive the use of the Internet as costly
and difﬁcult [11].
III. END USER CENTERED DESIGN
The fearless consortium brings together ten interdisci-
plinary partners from Austria, Germany, Spain and Italy. To
be able to integrate end user, two caregiver organizations are
responsible for the recruitment of the test persons. Technical
partners are responsible for developing fall and ﬁre detection
algorithms, but also for providing the telematics platform.
Since the aim of the fearless project is the reduction of the
fears for elderly living in their own homes, the impact of
this assistive technology and its relation to fears is analyzed
by psychologists. Business experts are responsible that the
research within this project results in a technology which is
affordable for elderly, whereas medical experts monitor the
health status of the elderly throughout the project.
Figure 5.
End user are integrated throughout the whole project duration
Figure 5 illustrates the integration of the end user within
the fearless project: at the beginning of the project, a user
need analysis is conducted to assess the needs and fears
of end users are by theoretical derivations from existing
psychological models and theories and semi-structured in-
terviews. According to the user requirements, an initially
deﬁned system speciﬁcation is continuously evaluated by
end users and redeﬁned through regular feedback loops.
Field pilots in combination with semi-structured interviews
are conducted to ensure that the system is developed accord-
ing to the end user needs. Since end user provide regular
feedback, the technical speciﬁcation of the fearless system
is adapted throughout the project.
During the ﬁeld pilots the fearless system is installed in
elderly’s ﬂats in Austria, Germany, Italy and Spain. The ﬁeld
pilots consist of two different phases: during phase one, the
ﬁrst prototype of the fall detection system is installed in
four ﬂats (one ﬂat in each country) to obtain ﬁrst results of
the system. Due to these results the prototype is enhanced
before phase two with 30-40 installations will be conducted.
The aim of the ﬁeld pilots is not only to test the fall
detection system itself, but also to assess technological and
psychological aspects (e.g., enhanced mobility) as well as
integrating care taker organizations and relatives throughout
the project. The mobility aspect is evaluated during the
ﬁeld pilots by the use of step counter: if elderly have less
fears, they do not avoid activities and are thus more mobile.
Furthermore, also the ethical comissions are involved during
the ﬁeld pilots to verify the feasability of the fearless system
from a legal and ethical point of view.
The project beneﬁts from the different interdisciplinary
perspectives, from which the results of the ﬁeld pilots are
analyzed. From a technical point of view, the fall detection
algorithm [5] is tested under real settings and is adapted to
the end user’s needs while overcoming the lack of realism
when performing falls in the laboratory. Furthermore, the
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

overall system including its interfaces as well as the feasibil-
ity of the system setup is evaluated. From an organizational
point of view, end user organizations are able to integrate the
system into their workﬂow and provide feedback to adapt
the system to their needs. Elderly are involved to provide
essential feedback to the technical partners. Additionally, we
assume to reduce their fears by providing safety while using
our system. Since the ﬁeld pilots are conducted with medical
and psychological support, changes and beneﬁts for elderly
can be determined and these assumptions can be veriﬁed.
In summary, the following end user are involved during
the project:
• Elderly and relatives are involved during the end user
requirement analysis and during the ﬁeld pilots. Elderly
install the system in their ﬂats during the ﬁeld pilots,
whereas their relatives can receive the alarms if unusual
events are detected.
• Care taker are involved during the end user require-
ment analysis and are fully integrated during the ﬁeld
pilots. Hence, the care taker’s call center is integrated
and alarms are forwarded to the appropriate call center.
Thus allows to verify the feasibility of the overall
workﬂow in case of an alarm.
• Health professionals provide medical guidance and
assistance throughout the project.
• Electricians are involved during dissemination activ-
ities since elderly contact their already well-known
electricians around their corner and thus electricians
need to be aware of new technologies such as e-Health
systems.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented an overview of the user centered
development of an e-Health system and the end user inte-
gration within the fearless project. Since AAL technologies
are tested under laboratory settings, tests with elderly are
missing. Hence we focus on ﬁeld pilots and regular end
user feedback loops. To enhance the acceptance of such
technologies, end user need to be integrated even during
early project phases. The integration should not only focus
on primary end user (elderly), but also on secondary end user
(e.g., caregiver organizations, relatives) since these people
are also confronted with the use of AAL technologies. In
order to achieve this, all relevant stakeholders are included
and the end user feedback is received from all stakeholders,
establishing an interdisciplinary view. Due to the feedback,
adaptions and improvements of the system are developed
(e.g., integration of a power switch to ensure the end user’s
control belief).
Future work deals with the improvement of the system
according to the end users feedback gathered during the
ﬁeld pilots. The improvement of the system includes further
technical devlopement and the development of additional
features, but also design issues might be adressed by the
end users. Furthermore, the workﬂow for the end user
integration (i.e., relatives and call center) will be analyzed
and optimized as well as the feasibility of the veriﬁcation
images to distinguish between true and false positives.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors want to thank the whole fearless project team,
since techniques and ideas of many researchers involved are
used.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Deshpande, E. J. Metter, S. Bandinelli, F. Lauretani, B. G.
Windham, and L. Ferrucci, “Psychological, Physical, and
Sensory Correlates of Fear of Falling and Consequent Activity
Restriction in the Elderly : The InCHIANTI Study,” American
journal of physical medicine & rehabilitation, vol. 87, no. 5,
pp. 354–362, 2008.
[2] D. Wild, U. S. Nayak, and B. Isaacs, “How dangerous are
falls in old people at home?” British medical journal (Clinical
research ed.), vol. 282, no. 6260, pp. 266–268, Jan. 1981.
[3] D. Anderson, J. M. Keller, M. Skubic, X. Chen, and Z. He,
“Recognizing falls from silhouettes.” in 28th Annual Interna-
tional Conference of the IEEE on Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, 2006. EMBS ’06., vol. 1, New York, Jan.
2006, pp. 6388–6391.
[4] G. Mastorakis and D. Makris, “Fall detection system using
Kinects infrared sensor,” Journal of Real-Time Image Pro-
cessing, Mar. 2012.
[5] R. Planinc and M. Kampel, “Introducing the use of depth data
for fall detection,” Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, May
2012.
[6] C. Rougier, E. Auvinet, J. Rousseau, M. Mignotte, and J. Me-
unier, “Fall Detection from Depth Map Video Sequences,” in
Toward Useful Services for Elderly and People with Disabili-
ties, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, B. Abdulrazak,
S. Giroux, B. Bouchard, H. Pigot, and M. Mokhtari, Eds.
Montreal: Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 6719, pp.
121–128.
[7] A. Zweng, S. Zambanini, and M. Kampel, “Introducing a Sta-
tistical Behavior Model into Camera-Based Fall Detection,” in
6th International Symposium on Visual Computing (ISVC’10),
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6453.
Las
Vegas: Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 163–172.
[8] R. Lubinski, Dementia and Communication.
B.C. Decker,
Inc., 1991.
[9] A. Mihailidis, B. Carmichael, and J. Boger, “The use of com-
puter vision in an intelligent environment to support aging-in-
place, safety, and independence in the home,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 8, no. 3,
pp. 238–247, 2002.
[10] “OpenNI.” [Online]. Available: www.openni.org
[11] C. E. Porter and N. Donthu, “Using the technology acceptance
model to explain how attitudes determine Internet usage: The
role of perceived access barriers and demographics,” Journal
of Business Research, vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 999–1007, 2006.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

