IT-supported Double Medication Check for Home care 
 
Elles Gyaltsen-Lohuis, SikkeVisser, Marike Hettinga, Ruud Janssen, Jan M. Nauta  
Research group ICT innovation in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{Ege.Lohuis, S.Visser, M.Hettinga, TJWM.Janssen, JM. Nauta}@windesheim.nl 
 
Abstract—This paper presents the work in progress for the 
Double Medication Check project. The aim of this project is to 
provide an IT-supported solution for the Double Medication 
Check (DMC). The need for DMC is pressing. Failures are 
being made during the dispense of medicines, which costs lives 
and increases the costs of health care.  The practice of DMC 
puts strain on home care organizations, where increased costs 
and high workload are practical constraints. With the use of 
the eHix method, we hope to develop a sustainable IT support 
for DMC so safe and effective DMC will occur in the 
home care.  
Keywords: double medication check; IT support; home care; 
effective medicine dispense. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many elderly people in long-term care programs (extra 
mural as well as intramural) use combinations of different 
medications, which increases the risk of failure during the 
dispensing of medications by healthcare professionals. 
Different studies show that faults are being made due to 
dispense errors of medicine. Each year 1735 patients die in 
Dutch hospitals because of unintended injury caused mostly 
during the dispense of medication [1]. The HARM (Hospital 
Admissions Related to Medication) study of 2006 concluded 
that 2.4% of all hospitalizations in the Netherlands are due to 
medication-related issues. This results in about 41.000 
hospitalizations each year from which 19.000 are avoidable 
[2]. Again, this report concludes that most of these 
hospitalizations are caused by faults during the dispense of 
medications.  
Medication errors cause much suffering for the patients 
as extra treatments thereby mean higher healthcare costs. 
The effects of medicine errors are even higher for elderly 
people [3]. At this moment, 16% of the Dutch population is 
older than 65 years (2,7 million). This number will increase. 
The Dutch Central Statistical Office estimates that by 2060 
about 26% of the Dutch population will be 65 years or older. 
About 30 to 45% of this population uses five or more 
different medicines on a daily basis [4]. The most common 
problems concerning this population’s medications are the 
use of unnecessary medication, the incompatibility of 
different medicines, and avoidable side effects [4]. 
A. Double Medication Check 
In 2009 and 2010, the Dutch Healthcare Inspection 
(IGZ) exercised thematic supervision of medication in 
nursing homes, homes for the elderly and disabled and 
home care. The study concluded that the medication safety 
for vulnerable groups in long-term care and home care is 
inadequate [5]. The study also suggested that the use of 
technology could improve medication safety [5].  
Based on this conclusion, a taskforce consisting of 
leading actors in the Dutch health sector developed a 
national directive called “Safe Principles in the Medication 
Chain”. In this directive, the double medication check 
(DMC) is defined as an important practice/safeguard for 
reducing medication errors during the dispensing of 
medications [6]. This directive also describes the medication 
process (see Figure 1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Medication process 
DMC is conducted in the ‘dispense’ phase of the 
medication process. The medication is dispensed by a 
licensed healthcare professional and has to checked by either 
another licensed healthcare professional, an informal carer or 
the patient him/herself. In practice, it is difficult to apply 
DMCs. It is rather expensive and time-consuming and 
therefore, in many cases, these DMCs are not always 
performed. On top of this, many care organizations have to 
deal with declining budgets, which puts pressure on labor-
intensive practices such as DMCs. 
B. IT-Supported Double Medication Check 
As suggested in many studies, the use of IT technology 
could improve medication. This might also be the case for 
the DMC. To our knowledge, the use of IT-supported DMC 
has not been validated considerably worldwide. There are 
some studies that have been done on the use of 
videoconferencing for DMC. Results have not been 
possitively overwhelming [7]. In this paper we pose the 
research question: In what way can IT support contribute to  
1. Prescribe 
2. Deliver 
3. Store 
4. Prepare 
5. Dispense 
6. Evaluate 
240
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

a safer way of dealing with medication in home carehome 
care that needs to be double checked?  
The research group IT Innovation in Health Care at 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences (Zwolle, The 
Netherlands) is involved in a research center called Tech for 
Future. Within this center, the research group is developing 
an IT-supported solution for DMC at home care. The aim of 
this research is to develop a working beta-version of an IT -
supported DMC and to understand and measure whether IT- 
supported DMC is able to lower the costs and improve the 
process and user satisfaction of DMC in home care. The 
project will be conducted with one Dutch care organization, 
which provides intramural and extramural care to the elderly 
and chronically ill. For the project, we focus on the DMC in 
the dispense of medicines in extramural care. 
II. 
APPROACH 
In order to develop a feasible IT solution in a structured 
manner, the eHealth Innovation framework will be used. In 
former projects, the research group IT Innovations in Health 
Care at Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
developed a business model approach as an instrument to 
bridge the gap between innovative eHealth ideas and 
successful IT-based care services. This approach is well 
suited to the characteristics of an IT service innovation like 
the IT-supported DMC [8].  
The starting point of the eHix-method is the STOF model 
[9]. The STOF model describes the business model based on 
four perspectives or domains. the Service perspective—a 
description of the service, the value proposition (the value of 
the service for users), and the intended audience. The 
Technology perspective—a description of the required 
technical functionality and architecture to deliver the service.  
The Organization perspective—a description of the 
resources, activities, roles, and structure in which the value 
network partners provide the service. And the Finance 
perspective—a description of how the service generates 
revenue (earnings) and the distribution of costs and benefits 
among the parties involved in the value network. 
The eHix combines the STOF model with a phasing that 
provides support for the lifecycle of the innovation process. 
See Figure 2. The five phases proposed by Hettinga [10] 
form the basis for the phasing: inventory phase, design & 
development phase, experimental phase, pilot phase and  
Figure 2. eHix matrix structure combining business model domains with 
innovation phases 
implementation phase. In the inventory phase, the ideas of a 
new service are created, and the needs and requirements of 
the users are analyzed. In the next phase, the technology is 
designed and developed, and thoughts about the business 
model of the service are initiated. In the experimental phase, 
users try out the new application in a laboratory setting, 
while in the pilot phase, more users are involved testing the 
application of the service in their daily practice and giving 
input for a successful deployment in the implementation 
phase. 
The eHix thus combines the five stages in the innovation 
process (concept phase, design phase, test phase, pilot phase, 
implementation phase) with the four aspects of the business 
model (service, technology, organization, finance), resulting 
in a matrix containing 20 (4 by 5) cells. Each cell contains 
the essential steps and choices to be made in the innovation 
process for a specific domain within the business model in a 
particular phase. The eHix matrix structure is shown in 
Figure 2 with the main keyword in the cell displayed. 
A. Inventory Phase 
To lay a good fundament for this project, we first take a 
broad view by mapping and analyzing all the stakeholders 
involved. A good stakeholder analysis is crucial to enhance 
the project’s chances of success; it makes sure all parties are 
being taken into account, all interests are being mapped, and 
the evidence needed to prove the IT solution’s value is clear 
[11]. At the same time, we familiarize ourselves with the 
care organization and its needs. We specify which clients are 
involved, which scenarios of DMC are currently used at the 
care organization, and the most pressing needs according to 
the stakeholders. To retrieve this information, we first 
interview the most important stakeholders. The initial 
interviews at the care organization are with the home 
carehome care manager, a number of professional carers, and 
the IT manager. Based on the results of these interviews we 
observe five carers while they do their rounds and perform 
the DMC at their clients’ homes. From here on, we are able 
to sketch the different scenarios of DMC currently practiced. 
We will complete these scenarios with process analysis, 
which will be the focus in a following brown paper session 
with the care manager, five carers, and the IT manager. This 
brown paper session allows us to verify the detailed 
scenarios with the stakeholders and to take stock of the most 
pressing needs according to these stakeholders. Involving the 
most important stakeholders in this way creates ownership 
and 
involvement. 
It 
makes 
the 
stakeholders 
take 
responsibility for the whole process of identifying needs and 
forming solutions. This will add to the acceptation of 
changes to come. 
Even though user-requirement analysis is usually done in 
the phase following the Inventory phase, we will also use the 
brown paper session in this phase to already draw up the user 
requirements. There is a pressing need to work as efficient as 
possible with the stakeholders’ availability, since the care 
organization’s manager and carers are strapped for time.  
To put the challenge of DMC in a broader context, 
interviews are held with carers of selected home carehome 
care organizations in the region. In addition, national and 
241
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

international eHealth entrepreneurs are consulted on the 
DMC. At the same time desk research is done on the IT 
solutions currently on the market.. Scientific studies on 
DMC and eHealth in publications in online and eHealth 
magazines are accessed to make sure the DMC issue is 
approached from all angles.  
The costs of this current project are financed by a subsidy 
provided by the Tech For Future research center. In this 
Inventory stage, however, we do initiate the revenue and cost 
model with the care organization’s manager. Developing the 
possible financial scenarios of sustainable financial resources 
at this first stage of the project increases the chances of 
embedding the project in the standing organization. 
B. Design and Development Phase 
We have already drawn up the user requirements and 
contextual conditions iteratively with our most important 
stakeholders. In this next phase, we follow up translating this 
inventory of user requirements and specific organizational 
context into technical specifications and user specifications. 
We also construct mock-ups together with the care 
organization’s home carehome care manager and IT 
manager. Keeping these stakeholders involved is crucial at 
this point in the project. Active involvement of stakeholders 
at this stage enhances the chance of structural embedment of 
the envisaged IT supported solution in the organization. 
At the same time, we draw up the specifications of the 
envisaged solution with the stakeholders. We also analyze 
the technical and user specifications of the most fitting IT 
solutions currently on the market. Once the specifications of 
the envisaged solution are clear, we make a fit-gap analysis 
between the envisaged solution and the most fitting existing 
IT solution. This analysis will give an indication of whether 
or not it is feasible to even experiment with this most fitting 
IT solution in our Telecare Skillslab (for further explanation 
see Experimental Phase).  
Being in constant dialogue with the care organization, we 
can then sketch the impact of the envisaged IT solution on 
the organization. By drafting a scenario that embeds the 
envisaged solution into the work processes and technical 
infrastructure, we are able to analyze the impact of the 
solution on the standing organization. Being clear on the 
requirements and impact the device will have on the 
organization, we then follow up with a first outline of the 
business 
case, 
including 
the 
costs/benefits 
and 
operationalization of the less tangible elements that are 
prominent in the care organization’s strategy.  
The outcome of the impact analysis and first outline of 
the business case can be decisive factors in the continuation 
of the project to the next phase, the Experimental Phase. 
Depending on the outcomes, the care organization or other 
stakeholders might decide it is not (yet) worthwhile in terms 
of effectiveness, efficiency, or other interest that they carry 
to continue with the realization of a beta version of the 
envisioned IT solution. However, since this project’s goal is 
to test the feasibility of an existing device and no costs are 
being made to realize a new beta version, this phase in the 
project is not decisive.   
C. Experimental Phase 
With an existing IT device available, experiments with 
potential users (carers) will be done in our Telecare Skillslab 
to assess the value proposition of the IT solution. The 
research group IT Innovations in Health Care established the 
Telecare Skillslab to contribute to education in eHealth and 
facilitate telecare research. The Skillslab consists of two 
locations situated at the Windesheim campus. One location 
has been furnished as a living accommodation, which makes 
it possible to experiment with domestic applications of 
sensors in a realistic manner. The other location aims at 
facilitating formal or informal carers, providing care at a 
distance. Cameras installed in the ceiling provide the 
researchers with possibilities for non-obtrusive observation.  
During the experiments with the existing IT-supported 
DMC found on the market, the focus is not only on the 
technology, but also on important issues such as privacy and 
embedding the technology in daily routines. For the 
resources needed in this phase—the Telecare Skillslab, the 
existing IT-supported DMC, and the necessary people—our 
project planning is most important. It is not until the 
experiments are completed that we can do the business case 
check and adjust our initial cost/benefit analysis, an 
important indicator of structural embedding of the IT 
solution in routine care. Not only should overall costs be 
evened out with overall benefits, but a proper balance 
between costs and benefits of individual stakeholders within 
the care chain should also be pursued. The adjustment of the 
business case after the experiments can give a good 
indication as to whether or not the IT device should be 
brought into the next phase. 
D. Pilot Phase 
In the pilot phase, we will test the IT-supported DMC on 
site, with the carers performing the various DMC scenarios 
at selected clients’ homes. The aim of the pilot is a final test 
for functionality, reliability, and usability. The pilot will be 
of small scale with the focus on technical functionality as 
well as user friendliness. During the pilot, we will also 
explore whether end-users intend to keep using the 
technology and to what price. Once the results of the pilot 
study are finalized, the business case will be adjusted again 
to the findings of the pilot. The final business check is to 
ensure whether the use of the technology leads to the 
intended effects: a more effective DMC for home care 
leading to the same or higher quality of care against lower 
costs.  
Since the project’s scope excludes implementation, we 
have made the decision for now not include the last phase, 
the Implementation Phase. 
III. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
Initial research regarding the DMC at the care 
organization started in February 2014. The project will 
conclude at the end of January 2015. Hence, at the time of 
writing, only six months of the project can be considered. 
This section highlights some preliminary results and lessons 
learnt from these months. 
242
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

While the process of DMC seemed to be quite 
straightforward initially, during the inventory phase, we 
came across the practice of various scenarios of DMC at the 
care organization. Many of these scenarios were not included 
in the care organization’s official guidelines but were 
adjustments of the DMC process by the carers on site. Even 
though these adjustments are not officially recognized 
scenarios, these practice adjustments done by the carers have 
to be taken into account while mapping out all the scenarios 
of DMC. By not taking into account the ‘hidden’ 
adjustments done in the work field by carers could we could 
miss vital information on the work field, thereby excluding 
practical user requirements. 
After extensive desk research and field research, we 
could only find one existing IT solution for DMC currently 
on the market. This made the selection of IT solutions in the 
technology scan of the Inventory Phase redundant. This 
existing IT solution is used in a few care organizations for 
DMC in home care and will be considered in this project.  
During the interviews with other care organizations, a 
small number of respondents mentioned the use of Social 
Media, such as WhatsApp and SMS, as alternatives to 
dedicated IT-supported solutions for DMC. These IT 
solutions were not endorsed by the care organizations but 
‘inventions’ used by the professionals themselves. The care 
professionals using these ‘solutions’ were not aware of the 
issues of privacy and legislation around the distribution of 
personal data like medicine use. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we described the DMCs project’s ambition 
to deliver eventually: impetus for the realization of an IT 
support for DMC in home care. It is our hope that with this 
IT support, including administration and registration of risky 
medication, will contribute to a safer dealing with 
medication.  We also presented the first months of progress 
of the DMC project. 
The main conclusion to be drawn from the current 
progress is that, in general, there is a consensus that IT 
support has the potential to improve the DMC as it is 
currently practiced in the field. The technology scan in the 
Inventory phase resulted in only one ‘official’ IT supported 
solution and several ‘informal’ IT supported solutions. This 
interests shows that our research does fill the need for more 
evidenced based IT solutions regarding DMC. 
Future work on the project concerns the plans to improve 
the existing IT solution based on the results of our 
experiments and pilot study. When the existing IT solution 
does not fulfil the expected requirements at all, we will 
develop a complete new IT solution for DMC at distance 
together with our IT students and our Health Care students. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank TechForFuture, Center of 
Expertise HTSM (http://ww.techforfuture.nl) for its financial 
support. The center is an initiative of Saxion and 
Windesheim, Universities of Applied Sciences and was 
established with the support of the Province of Overijssel. 
We wish to thank Health Care student Agnes Hendriks 
and Business, IT & Management students Darryl Entjes and 
Dennis van Leeuwen for the initial research on the user 
requirements of the DMC and first field research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Wagner and M.D. Bruijne, Onbedoelde schade in 
Nederlandse Ziekenhuizen, Utrecht: NIVEL,  2007. 
[2] P. van den Bernt and T. Egberts, Hospital Admission Related 
to Medication. Devision of Pharmacoepidemiology & 
Pharmacotherapy. 
Utrecht: 
Utrecht 
Institute 
for 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2006. 
[3] F. Eulderink, T.J. Heeren, D.L. Knook and G.J.J. Ligthart, 
Inleiding in de gerontologie en geriatrie. Den Haag: Bohn 
Stafleu van Loghum, 2013. 
[4] L.C. Lemens and M. Weda, Polyfarmacie bij kwetsbare 
ouderen. Den Haag: Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en 
Milieu, 2013. 
[5] IGZ, Medicatieveiligheid voor kwetsbare groepen in de 
langdurige zorg thuis onvoldoende, Den Haag: IGZ, 2010. 
[6] Actiz, Veilige principes in de medicatieketen. Utrecht: 
Taskforce medicatieveiligheid care, 2012. 
[7] N. Bradford, N.R Armfield, J. Young, A.C SmitFeasibility 
and accuracy of medication checks via Internet video, Journal 
of Telemedicine and Telecare, Vol. 18, Number 3,  pp. 128-
132, 2012. 
[8] M. Hettinga, “Telezorg: van Buzz naar Business?”, Lectorale 
rede, lectoraat ICT-innovaties in de Zorg. Zwolle, Christelijke 
Hogeschool Windesheim, 2009. 
[9] H. Bouwman, M. De Reuver, T. De Koning, “Mobile 
Services 
Innovation 
and 
Business 
Models”. 
Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2008. 
[10] R. A. Menko, S. Visser, R. Janssen, M. Hettinga, and T. 
Haaker, “Applying the STOF Business Model Framework in 
Ehealth 
Innovations”, 
eTELEMED 
2013, 
The 
Fifth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine 2013,Nice, France, 2013, pp. 108-113. 
[11] R. Janssen et al., “Innovation Routes and Evidence Guidelines 
for eHealth Small and Medium-sized Enterprises. Towards 
Feasible yet Convincing Evidence’. International Journal on 
Advances in Life Sciences, Vol.5, no. 3&4, 188-203, 2013. 
 
 
243
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

