Barriers to Cost and Clinical Efficiency with Telehomecare and Proposed Solutions  
 
Kathryn H. Bowles 
Melissa O’Connor  
Alexandra Hanlon  
Mary D. Naylor 
Barbara Riegel 
University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing  
Philadelphia, PA, USA 
bowles@nursing.upenn.edu 
omelissa@nursing.upenn.edu 
alhanlon@nursing.upenn.edu 
naylor@nursing.upenn.edu 
riegel@nursing.upenn.edu 
Mark Weiner 
Henry Glick 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine  
Philadelphia, PA, USA 
weiner@mail.med.upenn.edu 
glick@mail.med.upenn.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Efficiency gains are often promoted as a benefit of 
using technology. In home care, telehealth technology provides 
an opportunity for cost and clinical efficiency gains through 
the efficient use of monitoring technology in conjunction with 
in-person contact. However, most telehomecare programs use 
the technology in addition to the in-person visits. This study 
was a randomised controlled field study comparing the effects 
of a telehomecare intervention that substitutes for some 
standard home care services for patients following hospital 
discharge for heart failure with the effects of standard home 
care services alone. Contrary to study goals, findings revealed 
the patients in the technology group received more visits and a 
longer period in home care than the usual care group. As 
requested in the conference call for papers, the purpose of this 
paper is to describe the issues and barriers the team faced in 
implementing a substitution protocol and to propose solutions 
that may promote cost and clinical efficiency in future work.  
 
Keywords-telehealth; telehomecare; visit pattern; efficiency. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The emergence of telehomecare in the United States 
coincided with several important concerns: a growing 
population of people over age 65, an increasing incidence of 
chronic illness, a national nursing shortage, and dramatic 
changes in the financial structure in home care [1]. The 
enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 resulted in a 
major restructuring of how agencies are reimbursed for 
home care. Prior to this legislation the home care agency 
was reimbursed for each in-person home visit made to a 
patient’s home. Since October 2000, Medicare, the major 
insurer for older adults and disabled persons, has reimbursed 
home care agencies through a prospective payment system 
(PPS), replacing the fee-for-service method. Depending on 
the medical diagnosis and other established characteristics, 
agencies receive a set amount of reimbursement per 60 day 
home care episode. Patients must receive at least five in-
person nursing or physical therapy visits to receive the full 
amount of reimbursement, but, beyond that the agency is 
free to use other strategies to meet the care needs.   
Given these changes, agencies now face the challenge of 
managing increasingly complex older adults in a highly 
constrained fiscal environment where patterns of care and 
reimbursement are based on client need and agency 
efficiency. Although challenging, this change has promoted 
new “freedoms.” Home health providers and patients may 
collaborate to design a 60-day episode of care based on 
patients’ needs, preferences, and mutually derived goals. 
This “freedom” provides the opportunity to adopt innovative 
ways, including the use of telehealth, to improve quality of 
care, enhance patient participation in their care, and promote 
efficiencies.  If telehealth is a viable substitute to home 
visits and costs less on a per visit basis, then more care can 
be 
delivered, 
as 
needed, 
under 
the 
current 
PPS 
reimbursement mechanism. Under this system, telehealth 
becomes attractive as a substitute, as well as an addition to 
home health visits, rather than just being an added expense. 
Our study revealed several barriers to achieving efficiency. 
Published results from previous studies are reviewed, and 
then our study design; protocol; data collection and data 
analysis; and results are described, followed by a discussion 
of the barriers and proposed solutions. 
 
II. STATE OF THE SCIENCE 
 
The prospective payment system provides the impetus 
for home health agencies to explore substitution of in-
person home visits with telehomecare visits. The potential 
for cost-savings makes the use of this technology an 
attractive strategy for health care insurers and home health 
providers. Several studies suggest that telehomecare visits 
will cost less per-visit than home visits based on tasks 
completed and projected savings in travel costs. On average, 
it takes clinicians 30 - 60 minutes to travel to patients' 
homes [2] and longer times are common in rural areas. This 
amount of travel is not only inefficient but it is also 
associated with an element of risk [3]. One rural 
telehomecare program reported $14,810 savings in drive 
time over 14 months [4]. Dansky, Palmer, Shea and Bowles 
[5] used data from their clinical trial to project potential 
savings if telehomecare was substituted for some in-person 
visits. They proposed that a substitution rate of 33% would 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

save $318.00 per patient and a rate of 50% would save 
$700.00 per patient.  
Despite its potential, few studies have evaluated the cost 
or clinical efficiency of telehomecare. No reported studies 
involved patients in determining the pattern of use of the 
technology in their plan of care and non have attempted to 
force a substitution pattern. Cost analyses have varied in 
quality with most being limited to reporting of anecdotal [4] 
[6][7] or projected data [5][8]. Available data from 
systematic reviews [9][10] provide mixed conclusions about 
whether telehomecare is a clinically and cost effective 
method for delivering health care services, and, major gaps 
in knowledge exist regarding the clinical and cost 
effectiveness of telehomecare when it is employed under the 
constraints of PPS, substitutes for some in-person nurse 
visits, and involves patients in decisions regarding its use.  
 
III. STUDY DESIGN AND PURPOSE 
The study was a randomised controlled field study 
comparing the effects of a telehomecare intervention that 
substitutes for some standard home care services for patients 
following hospital discharge for heart failure with the 
effects of standard home care services alone. The purpose of 
this paper is to describe the barriers the team faced in 
implementing a substitution protocol and to propose 
solutions that may promote cost and clinical efficiency.  
 
IV. SAMPLE AND SETTING 
Eligibility criteria included hospitalization within two 
weeks for heart failure exacerbation, age 55 and older, 
receiving home care services, and able to see, hear, and 
stand on a scale. Patients were not eligible if they were on a 
heart transplant list, receiving hemodialysis, or in another 
disease management study. Eligible patients were provided 
with Institutional Review Board approved informed consent 
and enrolled by trained research assistants from an academic 
health system with three hospitals and received home care 
and the telehealth intervention at a Medicare certified not-
for-profit home care agency. The agency provides 
approximately 140,000 nursing and therapy visits annually. 
Services include physical, occupational and speech 
therapies, social services, home health aide services and 
nursing care. The agency serves a five county, urban and 
suburban area and admits on average 200 Medicare patients 
per month, 20% of them are heart failure patients.  
 
V. PROTOCOL AND TELEHEALTH EQUIPMENT 
The study protocol directed specially trained home care 
nurses to install the telehomecare machine in the homes of 
consenting patients within two days of hospital discharge 
and to teach the patients and caregivers (if present and 
interested) how to operate the equipment. The telehealth 
equipment, manufactured by Carematix, included wireless 
blood pressure monitoring, pulse oximetry readings, blood 
sugar levels as needed, and body weight. In addition, 
videophones were installed to provide visual interaction 
between the nurse and patient. The patient and telehealth 
nurse were linked over ordinary telephone lines via a 
standard modem, the data was available via a website. The 
devices allowed a patient to take his or her own 
measurements. The measurements were visible to the 
patient and transmitted directly to the home health nurse. 
Readings that appeared outside of pre-set parameters were 
highlighted in color to alert the nurse for review. The nurse 
advised the patient to transmit their data by 11am each day. 
The nurse was also able to take the readings live during a 
video visit and interact face-to-face with the patient to 
answer questions and provide information about his or her 
medical condition. With the video interaction and daily 
monitoring, we felt confident we could use the technology 
in place of some of the in-person visits and based on 
previous studies where it was proposed that 45% of in-
person visits could be achieved with technology [6], we 
proposed the following visit pattern.  
 
VISIT PATTERNS FOR TELEHEALTH PATIENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI. FIDELITY MEASURES 
To assure fidelity to the telehealth substitution pattern a 
rigorous process was followed including initial education, 
six refresher classes, monitoring by the project manager, 
and one-on-one communication with the nurses. Upon 
admission the visit protocol was provided in writing to 
every nurse caring for a telehealth patient. The project 
manager monitored the visit pattern and was in telephone or 
email contact with the nurses throughout the home health 
episode encouraging that the visit protocol be followed. If 
the suggested visit pattern was not being followed, the 
project manager contacted the nurse directly to discuss why 
and reviewed the study protocol as well as notified the 
nurse’s manager. In addition, the principal investigator and 
agency executive administration met regularly in an attempt 
to obtain the support needed for protocol adherence. The use 
of the equipment by the patients was also monitored and 
Week 1:  2 in-home visits 
Week 2:  1 in-home; 1 video visit 
Week 3:  1 in-home; 1 video visit 
Week 4:  2 video visits 
Week 5:  2 video visits 
 
Week 6: 1 video visit; decision point 
Nurses determine if it is time to discharge the patient or 
whether the patient could benefit from two more weeks 
of telehealth monitoring and teaching. If discharged the 
nurse goes to the home (visit 5) to make the discharge 
visit and packs the telehealth equipment for return. If not 
discharged at week 6, the video nurse continues one 
video visit per week for weeks 7 and 8 then goes into the 
home for the final visit to either close the case or 
recertify. 
 
 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

patients were called by the telehealth nurse to reinforce 
teaching and encourage patients to transmit their data. 
 
VII. DATA COLLECTION 
In addition to patient outcomes such as hospital 
readmission, emergency department use, self care and 
functional status [11], the cost and clinical efficiency of the 
telehealth intervention was measured by the number of 
nurse visits in each group, the mileage driven, and the 
percentage of patients re-certified for a second episode of 
home care versus being discharged to self care. The data 
was obtained from the home care agency records as 
recorded by the nurses on their billing and patient records.  
 
VIII. DATA ANALYSIS 
The total number of home visits was calculated from 
index home care admission to discharge. Patients kept on 
service for another episode of home care were counted as 
recertified and their visits and days were included in the 
total visit count and length of stay. Chi square was used to 
compare the groups on categorical characteristics and the 
independent sample Mann Whitney U test was used to 
compare numbers of visits, mean number of visits over the 
study period, and length of stay in home care.  The two-
sided Fishers Exact test was used to assess the association 
between group and recertification.   
 
IX. RESULTS 
Two hundred and seventeen patients enrolled in the 
study with 116 in usual care and 101 in the telehealth group. 
The average age was 71.3 (SD=10.2) in the telehealth group 
versus 73.5 (SD=9.6) for control patients, p=.092. Overall, 
study patients had high risk characteristics such as 69% 
rated their health as fair or poor, 32% had less than a high 
school education, 65% were African American, 39% had an 
annual income <$20,000/year, 69% were hospitalized at 
least twice in the 12 months prior to enrollment, 34% lived 
alone, and had an average of 6.4 co-morbid conditions.  
 
On average, the telehomecare patients received 5 (SD 
1.8) nursing visits during the initial home care episode 
(including recertification) and the usual care patients 
received 4.2 (SD 1.1), p = .013. Over the entire six month 
study period, telehomecare patients received on average 11 
home visits (SD 8.9) and usual care patients received on 
average 8 home nursing visits (SD 4.6). Contrary to the 
study protocol goals, this was significantly more in person 
contact for the telehomecare patients than the usual care 
patients (p = <.001). Further, the telehomecare patients were 
recertified for an additional episode of home care 
significantly more often than usual care patients (24% 
compared to 9%, p = .003) and the length of the initial home 
care episode for telehomecare patients was significantly 
longer at 54 days (SD 41) compared to usual care patients at 
35 days (SD 23), p=<.001.  
 
X. DISCUSSION 
A.   Barriers to Cost and Clinical Efficiency 
Although the study protocol called for a substitution 
pattern that should have resulted in the telehomecare 
patients receiving fewer in-person visits due to use of the 
technology that is not what happened. Several barriers 
prevented the nurses from using the technology efficiently 
including staffing levels, incentives and already low visit 
numbers; personal interest; and technology issues.  
 
1) Staffing levels and incentives: The nurses’ schedule is 
based on the expectation that they complete in-person visits 
for six patients per day. Productivity standards are measured 
against the number of in-person visits completed. The 
nursing shortage contributes to the problem because there 
are more patients than nurses to care for them. One might 
expect this would increase the impetus to turn to 
technology, but we are not yet seeing that. One possible 
reason why this technology was not adopted was the nurse’s 
potential motivation to keep revisits on their schedules 
rather than defer to video visits. Video visits were meant to 
substitute for in-person visits but were not conducted by the 
field nurses. Substituting in-home visits with video visits 
could potentially reduce a field-nurse’s caseload for the day. 
This in turn, could impact their productivity, but would 
more likely lead to the assignment of a new start of care for 
the nurse and potentially an additional patient to manage. 
Agency 
nurse-manager 
support 
of 
the 
technology 
implementation was low, which in turn, led to slow 
adoption by the field nurses for this project. Finally, timely 
delivery of telehealth equipment was problematic at times 
adding to the nurse’s lack of ownership and interest in the 
technology. In addition, the numbers of in-person visits are 
already quite low leaving little room for substitution since 
Medicare rules require only five in-person visits by either 
nursing or physical therapy to qualify for full payment.  
 
2) Personal Reasons: When this project began, the home 
health agency was using paper documentation and had not 
implemented an electronic medical record.  This in turn, 
may have contributed the nursing staff’s discomfort with 
technology 
– 
including 
telehealth 
equipment. 
This 
discomfort could have triggered the nurse’s mistrust of the 
telehealth equipment readings and further distanced them 
from accepting and adopting the technology into their 
nursing practice. In addition, agency field nurses were asked 
to install the equipment, which could prove challenging at 
times due the unavailability of electrical outlets and phone 
jacks if large heavy furniture were blocking them. These 
experiences led many nurses to view telehealth as ‘one more 
thing to do’ despite its potential benefit to home health 
patients. Finally, the model of telehealth required the field 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

nurse to share the patient with a telehealth nurse. 
Collaborating about the case took extra time and was not 
valued.  
 
3) Technology Issues: The nurses did not have Internet 
access from the patients’ home so it was not convenient to 
use the telehealth equipment while in the community. This 
required a telehealth nurse to operate back at the agency 
office for video visits and monitoring the biometric data. In 
addition alarms from the telehealth equipment were often 
false alarms yet caused time spent on phone calls or visiting 
to make sure all was well. Occasionally the equipment 
would not transmit the readings due to technical or 
connection problems and a visit was spent to fix the 
equipment. This was also a source of frustration and was 
time consuming for the nurses.  
 
B. Proposed Solutions 
 
Technology applications, like any new innovation, must 
fit into the workflow and benefit the user in order for 
adoption to be favored. Several proposed solutions may help 
overcome some of the barriers to cost and clinical 
efficiency. 
 
1) Restructuring productivity and creating financial 
incentives: When telehomecare is introduced to a homecare 
agency management should consider redefining the 
productivity standards to include the use of technology. If 
management recognized the time and effort it takes to 
install, teach, and maintain telehomecare equipment as part 
of the nurse’s workload adoption might improve. However, 
the financial incentives are not in place within home care to 
support such change. The benefit of telehomecare is reduced 
readmissions but currently the home care agency is not 
penalized financially for readmissions. They do run the risk 
of losing the patient to another agency once they come out 
of the hospital, but beyond that telehealth is currently an 
expense and return on investment has been difficult to 
achieve. Other third party payers than Medicare may reward 
the home care agency for improved outcomes, but the 
majority of home care patients are covered by Medicare. 
 
2) Training and support: To overcome the personal 
barriers to technology adoption the agency must provide 
adequate training and ongoing technical support. Nurses 
want to care for their patients and when technology issues 
pull them away from patient care they become frustrated. It 
is important to choose the right team to conduct 
telehomecare. Identify the early adopters and enlist their 
help as champions, project leaders, and resource persons.  
Share data that demonstrates the patient benefit of 
telehealth. Nurses are motivated by achieving good 
outcomes of care, helping them see how technology can 
assist them with their goal may help. Finally, provide access 
to the technology from the field. Without Internet access the 
nurses are unable to monitor the patient’s readings and feel 
disconnected from the telehealth program. In this situation a 
second nurse is needed to monitor and coordinate the 
telehealth data into the plan of care. This requires time and 
effort for communication, which could slow the response 
time, and trust between providers may take time to develop. 
If the field nurse could monitor the telehealth themselves via 
the web or smart phone alerts the responsibility and 
continuity of care would certainly increase.  
 
3) Technology issues: The equipment must be reliable, 
simple, and easy to install and use. Care must be taken to 
screen patients carefully to provide the technology with 
those who are motivated to use it, need it, and are able to 
operate it. Delivery, set-up, pick-up, cleaning, and storage of 
the equipment are not tasks nurses are interested in. 
Consider methods to support nurses in their role of patient 
care such as shipping the equipment directly to the home, 
hiring technicians for installation and removal, and choosing 
equipment that is user friendly and wireless. Improvements 
in technology will hopefully lead to smart systems that 
recognize trends in patient data, decrease the number of 
false alarms, and provide decision support to improve care.  
   
XI. CONCLUSION 
 
Telehomecare is a common and growing technology 
used in community based settings. Several studies have 
demonstrated its usefulness for 
monitoring chronic 
conditions, teaching and promoting self care, and preventing 
hospital readmissions. The program requires an investment 
in equipment and personnel and most agencies use the 
technology in addition to usual in-person visits. Our attempt 
to push for a substitution pattern using technology to replace 
up to 45% of in-person visits was not successful. In spite of 
close monitoring and encouragement, many barriers and a 
lack of incentives prevented successful implementation of 
this strategy to promote cost and clinical efficiency. Issues 
related to staffing, technology, and incentives were barriers. 
Several solutions are proposed that require changes in 
policy and agency operations.  Further research is needed to 
test these solutions for their impact on cost and clinical 
efficiency.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The study was funded by the National Institute of Nursing 
Research, National Institutes of Health. USA RO1-
NR008923 
REFERENCES 
[1]   Medicare Program. (2000, July 3). Prospective Payment 
System for Home Health Agencies. Federal Register, 65 
(128), 41128-41214. 
[2]   Burdick, A.E., Mahmud, K., and Jenkins, J.P. (1996). 
Telemedicine: Caring for patients across boundaries. Ostomy 
Wound Management, 42 (9), 26-37. 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[3]   Denton, M.A., Zeytinoglu, I.U., Webb, S., and Lion, J. (1999). 
Occupational health issues among employees in home care 
agencies. Canadian Journal of Aging, 18 (2), 154-181. 
[4]   Dimmick, S. L., Mustaleski, C., Burgiss, S., and Welsh,T. 
(2000).  A case study of benefits and potential savings in rural 
home telemedicine.  Home Healthcare Nurse,18 (2), 125-135. 
[5]   Dansky, K.H., Palmer, L., Shea, D., and  Bowles, K .H. 
(2001).  Cost analysis of telehomecare.  Telemedicine Journal 
and e-Health, 7 (3), 225-232.  
[6]   Wootton, R., Loane, M., Mair, F., Allen, A., Doolittle, G., 
Begley, M., et al. (1998).  A joint US–UK study of home 
telenursing. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 4 (Suppl. 
1), 83–85. 
[7]   Whitten, P., Mair, F., and Collins, B.  (1997).  Home 
telenursing in Kansas: Patients’ perceptions of uses and 
benefits. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 3 
(Supplement 1), 67–69. 
[8]   Pringle-Specht, J. K., Wakefield, B., and Flanegan, J. (2001, 
January).  Evaluating the cost of one telehealth application 
connecting an acute and long-term care setting.  Journal of 
Gerontological Nursing, 34-39. 
[9]   Inglis, S.C., Clark, R.A., McAlister, F.A., Ball, J., Lewinter, 
D., Cullington, S., Stewart, S., and Cleland, J.G. "Structured 
telephone support or telemonitoring programmes for patients 
with chronic heart failure," Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews, vol. (8), pp. CD007228, Aug 4. 2010.  
[10] Pare’, G., Mirou, J., and Sicotte, C. (2007). Systematic review 
of home telemonitoring for chronic diseases: The evidence 
base. Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association. 14 (3), 269-277. 
[11]  Bowles, K.H., Hanlon, A.L., Glick, H.A., Naylor, M.D., 
O’Connor, M., Riegel, B.J., Shih, N.W., and Weiner, M.G. 
Clinical effectiveness, access to and satisfaction with care 
using a telehomecare substitution intervention: A randomized 
controlled trial. International Journal of Telemedicine and 
Applications. 2011 (in press). 
 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

