What Seniors Want in a Mobile Help-on-Demand Service 
A user needs analysis in the MobileSage project 
 
Oystein Dale, Ivar Solheim, Till Halbach, T. Schulz 
Norwegian Computing Centre 
P.O. Box 114, Blindern, 0314 Oslo, Norway 
oystein.dale@nr.no 
ivar.solheim@nr.no 
till.halbach.rossvoll@nr.no 
trenton.schulz@nr.no 
Luiza Spiru, Ileana Turcu 
Ana Aslan International Foundation 
Str. Spatarului Nr.4, 020771 Bucharest 2, Romania 
lsaslan@brainaging.ro 
it@ brainaging.ro 
Abstract— Ambient assisted living can greatly assist seniors in 
pursuing an active and healthy lifestyle. MobileSage is an 
Ambient Assisted Living Joint Programme supported project 
that develops a cloud enabled smartphone based help-on-
demand service for seniors providing appropriate “just-in-
time” assistance through an individualized adaptive and 
multimodal user interface. This paper details the results from a 
user needs analysis conducted with seniors to help determine 
the design of MobileSage. Six focus groups in three countries 
were held to illicit the information. The user input is 
structured under the following themes:  Multimodality:  Input 
& Output; Navigation (wayfinding); Personalization; Help 
material – content; Help-on-demand; and Privacy, trust and 
security concerns. The MobileSage system will have its first 
iteration of user testing late Fall 2012. 
Keywords: user needs analysis; Help-on-demand; seniors; 
smartphone; multimodality; ambient assisted living. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the modern self-service and technology-saturated 
society, we find ourselves increasingly in situations in which 
we need access to information and perhaps assistance to be 
able to cope and manage successfully. It may be when 
adopting Internet banking, when using a ticket vending 
machine, when using an automated supermarket checkout 
system, or when checking in electronically at the airport. We 
may also need assistance when having acquired electronic 
domestic appliances that for various reasons have deficient 
or inappropriate operating instructions and manuals, e.g., 
being overly technical, or using a minute font size etc.  
The information and assistance needs to be presented in a 
manner that the user prefers and finds accessible and easy to 
use.  It also needs to be available when required and arrive in 
a timely fashion. Given their somewhat slower uptake of 
technology, seniors especially may benefit greatly from 
having access to user-friendly low threshold information and 
assistance services. This may assist seniors in pursuing 
active and healthy lifestyles, and is in accordance with an 
active ageing paradigm. 
The MobileSage (MS) R&D-project develops such a 
help-on-demand (HOD) service for seniors. MS is partly 
funded by the European Commission through the Ambient 
Assisted Living Joint Programme (REF. AAL-2010-3-050). 
The participating countries are Norway, Spain, Romania and 
the UK.  
MS involves the development of a cloud enabled 
smartphone based HOD service for seniors providing 
appropriate 
“just-in-time” 
assistance 
through 
an 
individualized adaptive and multimodal user interface. The 
front end consists of an application (app) installed on an 
Android phone. Advanced software on a server including a 
database populated with the HOD media in the form of text 
and multimedia files comprise the back end of the system. 
The content in the database is generated through a Content 
Management System (CMS). An overview of the MS 
architecture is provided in Figure 1. 
The system can be applied to an abundance of situations 
and contexts in which seniors require assistance to conduct 
everyday tasks.  Two brief examples will suffice. 
Mr. Tweed is faced with a ticket machine when wanting 
to catch the train to his granddaughter. He is unsure on how 
to operate the machine. He sees that the ticket machine is MS 
enabled. He starts up the MS app on his smartphone (Figure 
2), and brings the phone in close proximity to the ticket 
machine. The Near Field Communication (NFC) reader on 
the phone scans the NFC tag on the machine, and the unique 
code helps identify the ticket machine. The machines ID is 
used when the MS app contacts the MS server, and 
downloads the appropriate support material to the 
smartphone. Mr. Tweed’s MS profile indicates that he 
prefers video instructions, and a brief video on how to use 
the ticket machine is shown on the smartphone.  
 
Figure 1.  The MobileSage architecture. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Figure 2.  The MobileSage smartphone application.  
Mrs. Wool has just bought a new blood pressure monitor, 
but is unable to use it as the instructions are in very small 
print, and Mrs. Wool has poor vision. By reading a Quick 
Response (QR) code, the MS app provides Mrs. Wool with a 
simple instruction manual in large print text retrieved from 
the MS server. 
To ensure that the MS service is in accordance with the 
needs and wishes of real seniors, a thorough user needs 
analysis was conducted. In this paper the methods used and 
findings from this user needs analysis are summarized and 
discussed. A brief conclusion is provided along with a 
description of further planned work. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
The MobileSage project encompasses a plethora of 
technologies and domains including Help on Demand & 
Assistance “just-in-time”, Multimodality, Adaptive and 
adaptable user interfaces, Context & location sensitive 
services, Reasoning agents and Profiles & personalization. 
Given the breadth of topics, a comprehensive summary of 
related works is not possible. A selection of relevant works is 
mentioned primarily limited to larger European R&D 
activities. 
In the ongoing APSIS4ALL-project [1] the focus is on 
using the mobile phone in personalizing interaction with 
Public Digital Terminals (PDT) such as cash dispensing 
machines and ticket vending machines. Key elements 
covered in [1] are digital interaction with the mobile phone, 
profiles and personalization, adaptive user interfaces and 
multimodality. The end users targeted are people with 
disabilities, the elderly and novice Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) users. 
The completed ASK-IT project [2] had a similar scope as 
MS in terms of providing real-time information and being of 
assistance, but dealt primarily with travelling although work 
and leisure contexts were also addressed. The WayFiS, 
Mediate and Access2all projects [3, 4, 5] all deal with 
accessibility and transport or travelling. They share some 
attributes with MS, be it in a more domain specific manner. 
Similarly, [6] is concerned with context-based adaptation of 
ubiquitous web applications focusing on tourism and travel. 
 Soprano [7] had a similar scope to MS, but was more 
centred on independent living and a smart home 
environment. OASIS [8] also includes many elements of 
MS, but is a much larger project encompassing a wider 
number of topics. It is further preoccupied with architecture 
and platform development. INHOME [9] is also concerned 
with an architecture platform and ways of providing 
intelligent ICT based services for assisting independent 
living of elderly people in the home environment. 
The ongoing MyUI-project [10] focuses on the 
mainstreaming of accessible and highly individualized ICT 
products. As with MS the need for adaptive personalized 
interfaces is of paramount importance. This was also a key 
feature of the Diadem project [11], which focused primarily 
on web interfaces. 
Other scientific undertakings are narrower in scope and 
touch on certain elements in MS. In terms of user interface 
research SNAPI [12] and GoldUI [13] are of interest, 
whereas the HAPTIMAP project [14] is interesting in terms 
of multimodality and mobile location based services. 
Mapped [15] and HMFM [16] deal with multimodality and 
also cover similar ideas as MS. There are also a number of 
other major and more general international R&D activities 
that touches upon topics covered in MS [17, 18, 19]. 
Thorough user needs analysis were important parts of 
many of the projects mentioned above as well, but for 
reasons of brevity we cannot elaborate on these. We will 
draw the attention to one piece of academic work that did 
focus entirely on user needs in the related topic of location 
aware mobile services [20]. The author presents user needs 
separated in five main themes, which are not too dissimilar 
to the topics chosen in MS. 
A review of current ongoing and past projects and 
initiatives shows that although there are a number of 
activities that touches upon similar topics, no other project is 
identical. Thus, MS is as such unique and innovative in its 
scope. It complements a number of other relevant R&D 
activities, and adds new knowledge and technology in a 
number of areas. 
III. 
METHOD AND DESCRIPTION OF PARTICIPANTS 
A. Method 
We used a qualitative approach utilizing focus groups to 
elicit the information for the user needs analysis. Six focus 
groups were conducted, with two groups each in Spain, 
Norway, and Romania. There were some local variations in 
the inclusion criteria between the groups, but key criteria 
were actual mobile phone ownership and being a senior. The 
informants also completed a short questionnaire regarding 
demographics, mobile phone ownership and usage. The 
groups varied in size from four to eight persons. Each group 
was presented with two scenarios in which MS was used – 
one involving travel and the other use of a domestic 
appliance with some variation in scenarios used in each 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

country. The scenarios were discussed based on a theme 
guide. 
The required ethical issues were covered, especially 
through the informed consent form signed by each focus 
group participant, and the provisions related to personal data 
protection. 
Transcripts were made from the recordings, and based on 
these summary reports for each group was made on a 
national level.  A qualitative thematic meta-summary for the 
whole project based on the national reports was made. 
B. Description of the participants 
In total 39 informants took part. The vast majority was 60 
years or older. In total the material comprised a wide variety 
of users in terms of functional capacity and impairments 
potentially impeding on ICT usage. It includes both the 
“average healthy” senior and persons with specific health 
issues including sensory impairments and mild cognitive 
impairments. The participants are described in Table I. 
The groups are heterogeneous in terms of the type of 
mobile they use, and the types of functionality and services 
they utilize. It appears that the group in total comprises both 
advanced and basic mobile phone users, as well as the 
average senior mobile phone user. An overview of their 
mobile phone ownership and usage pattern is provided in 
Table II. 
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE INFORMANTS. 
Country: 
Total 
#: 
Gender 
(f/m): 
Age 
range: 
Comments: 
Norway 
12 
5/7 
48-81 
Two groups of six in each. 
One group consisted of 
persons born outside of 
Norway. 
Spain 
11 
8/3 
62-75 
Two groups. 
Romania 
16 
11/5 
67-86 
One group consisted of 
persons with mild sensory 
impairment, the other group 
of persons with mild 
cognitive impairment. 
TOTAL 
39 
24/15 
48-86 
 
TABLE II.  
MOBILE PHONE OWNERSHIP AND USAGE PATTERN. 
Country: 
Type of mobile: 
Usage 
pattern: 
Comments: 
Norway 
Almost 1/2 had 
smartphones,. 
Majority used 
basic phone 
functions. 
2/3 used 
calling, 
texting, MMS 
and photos. 
Some used e-
mail and apps. 
The group of persons 
not born in Norway 
had more basic 
phones, and used 
mainly basic 
functions, compared 
to the other group. 
Spain 
9 had basic 
phones and 2 had 
smart phones. 
Calling, 
texting, MMS, 
photos and 
calendar, apps 
Use of MMS, photos 
and calendar quite 
common. Few  
advanced functions. 
Romania 
All had standard 
basic phones. 
All for talking 
and 50% for 
texting 
Only one used phone 
for other things than 
talking and texting 
None used computers. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A thematic summary of the findings from the focus 
groups is provided below. The themes reflect the main issues 
covered in MobileSage, and formed the basis for the 
scenarios and theme guides used in the focus groups. The 
themes are Multimodality:  Input & Output; Navigation 
(wayfinding); Personalization; Help material – content; 
Help-on-demand; and Privacy, trust and security concerns. 
A. Multimodality 
In general this relates to the provision of output in 
various modalities, adapted to the user’s needs and 
preferences, e.g., text, video, audio etc., as well as different 
ways of operating the device, e.g., touch, voice, physical 
keyboard input etc. 
The interest in voice input varied from enthusiasm to 
seemingly polite interest; some did not prefer voice input at 
all compared to keyboard or -pad input. It was pointed out in 
several of the groups that voice input would be both easier 
and faster compared to keyboard usage, and it would be 
especially beneficial for persons with visual or movement 
disorders. The problems using on-screen touch keyboards 
were mentioned. 
Several of the informants had had first-hand negative 
experiences using voice input. Their experience was that 
voice input was difficult to use because of poor speech 
recognition software. The need for a high quality voice input 
feature was mentioned as a prerequisite for implementation. 
It was also pointed out by several participants that a voice 
input feature must be context sensitive, i.e. must only receive 
and process input and execute something when intended to 
by the user to avoid unintentional execution of commands 
and actions. 
There was almost universal interest in multimodal output, 
with few exceptions. Audio output such as text-to-speech is 
viewed as an important adjunct to visual text output in many 
situations, 
and 
especially 
for 
persons 
with 
visual 
impairments. There are also certain situations in which audio 
output is preferable to visual, e.g., when driving. Several 
informants mentioned that it is important to facilitate 
connectivity between the phone and hearing aids to ensure 
that the audio is available for users of hearing aids and other 
assistive hearing devices. 
It was raised, though, by a number of participants, that 
audio output is not suitable in all contexts and for all 
information due to reason of privacy and safety. Although, 
many were positive to having text messages read aloud, 
some were reserved about this due to the potential private 
nature of the content. 
The use of video for demonstrations and tutorials was 
universally applauded. It was also pointed out that audio 
equivalents must be available to ensure that those with visual 
impairments do not miss out. It was highlighted that the 
video sequences must not be too long, and needed to provide 
step-by-step instructions to avoid information overload. 
Overall there was a genuine interest in multimodal 
solutions. Some had concerns for their usage in certain 
situations, and it was argued by some that it must be very 
easy to switch between the different modalities. Few had 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

much experience with vibration/haptics as a modality. It was 
also mentioned that it was essential to have fall back 
modalities available if required due, for instance, to changes 
in environmental conditions, e.g., persistent loud noise which 
means that voice output need to have a visual alternative. 
Having a large screen was deemed important. 
B. Navigation (wayfinding) 
In general this was related to provision of support for 
both in- and outdoor navigation, but also to automatic 
detection of objects and the provision of location aware 
information. 
All groups were interested in using a mobile phone as a 
device for in- and outdoor navigation.  Voice navigation was 
especially appealing. A handful of the Norwegian 
respondents reported to have first hand experience with using 
the phone as a navigation device. In addition to getting 
assistance with findings one’s way, it would also make them 
feel safe. Possible uses for indoor navigation could be to find 
one’s way around shopping centres, as well as locating 
exhibits in museums and the like. Some concern was raised, 
however, with the cost of using map-based services in terms 
of downloading data over cellular networks. 
There were some who raised the issues that a mobile 
phone screen is small for maps, and that it only shows a 
small area of the map. This could cause problems, especially 
for getting an overview of an area. Another point was that 
mobile maps are sometimes not up to date, and that this 
could cause problems. Further, some pointed that that they 
did not want to get too dependent on the phone for 
navigation purposes, and preferred paper maps. 
It was mentioned that automatic detection of objects in 
one’s surroundings could be useful – especially to regain 
one’s bearings if lost.  Many liked the idea of automatic 
location aware information, whereas others wanted manual 
settings for this. The access to a variety of Points of Interest 
(POI) for both tourist and practical purposes was mentioned 
as desirable. The possibility of being able to locate other 
persons through the phone was also mentioned in a couple of 
the groups, especially in the context of persons who were 
vulnerable, e.g., those with mild memory impairments. 
C. Personalization 
This is to be understood as the provision of support that 
is adapted to the specific, personal needs and preferences of 
the individual user. This theme is closely related to 
multimodality. 
By and large there was universal agreement that a phone 
that can be personalized to individual needs was very 
positive and very useful. It was pointed out that not only 
must the in- and output be able to be personalized, but also 
the functionality and complexity of the device and services. 
It was for instance said that functionality not required by a 
certain person, should be hidden in the menus so it would not 
complicate or confuse the user. It should also be possible to 
change the complexity level to individual needs. This was 
especially important for persons with cognitive and memory 
issues. It is vital that the most important functions and 
controls are easily and readily accessible – including an 
emergency button to alert others in potentially dangerous or 
vulnerable situations. 
It was also pointed out that a person’s needs may change 
over time, and that this was important to take into account in 
a flexible set up. Suitable translations in terms of language 
are a must, and it was also mentioned that multiple languages 
should be available if this was preferred. 
There was also a concern about who should assist the 
user with making changes to the set up of the smartphone 
when required. This is a pertinent point that needs 
addressing. Personalization also raised concerns from a 
privacy and security perspective. This was because 
personalization could mean that information about personal 
characteristics and  potential vulnerabilities such as cognitive 
or visual challenges would be stored on the phone. 
D. Help material – content 
This pertains to the type of content provided as help 
material. Various types of content were suggested, such as: 
• 
Maps and directions for orientation and navigation – 
both in- and outdoors. 
• 
Travel information, and points of interest, including 
sights and services like ATMs. 
• 
Tourist information about services and practical 
information including emergency information. 
• 
Manuals, demos and tutorials – preferably step-by-
step guides on for instance self-service machines, 
domestic appliances, recipes etc. 
The modality and delivery should be personalized. 
Suitable modalities were video, audio and text. Adequate 
help materials – and access to training in using the 
equipment – were also emphasized. 
E. Help-on-demand 
Pertaining to provision of help “just-in-time”, when 
needed. Many in the groups were positive to automaticity in 
the timing of help or assistance when needed. It was, 
however pointed out that for some persons and in certain 
situations this would not be appropriate. It could be 
distressing and disturbing. For others, like persons with 
cognitive challenges, help “just-in-time” would be very 
advantageous in a number of situations and for a number of 
reasons. Though, it is essential that a manual override is 
available, and that one has a choice in switching the type of 
mode on and off. 
F. Privacy, trust and security concerns 
This theme deals with issues pertaining to privacy, trust 
and security that MobileSage may evoke. These issues were 
raised in all groups, and seemed to be important for all. It 
was essential to trust the services and the information that 
was provided. The trustworthiness in the content would 
partially depend on who the content contributors were, and 
who were allowed to provide content.  The ability to switch 
different services on and off depending on how much trust 
the user may place in one or another service, was framed as a 
possibility. 
Privacy was a prime concern, and the protection of 
personal sensitive information such as health-related data 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

was raised by many informants as a very serious concern. Of 
particular concern were the potential consequences of losing 
the device. The use of PIN codes and content protecting was 
suggested. The problem of having to remember (and possibly 
forgetting) the PIN was also raised as an issue. Privacy 
issues around logging of, for instance geographical and 
activity information were also forwarded as an issue that 
needed to be addressed. As well as the use of tracking of 
oneself or other people.  
The issue of becoming overly dependent on the phone for 
vital functions and assistance was also raised as a safety 
concern. What would one do if there were no mobile 
coverage, or the battery went flat etc.? The need for the user 
to be in control and be informed about the various aspects 
pertaining to security, privacy and safety was suggested as 
being of paramount importance.  
G. Miscellaneous issues raised 
Below are a number of miscellaneous issues that 
emerged in the focus groups mentioned. They are all thought 
to have significance for the development of MS app. The 
cost of device/service was mentioned by a number of 
informants as an important issue. It cannot be too costly, as 
this will place it beyond the reach on many potential users, as 
well as being discriminatory. 
It was also emphasized that smartphones should have 
physical buttons to assist operation. They should be large. 
The screen should also be sufficiently large to make it easy 
to see the content and easy to operate the device. Adequate 
training in use of the system is for many of utmost 
importance. Further, motivation to use MS was forwarded as 
a key issue for success. It was suggested that if the design 
provides an easy to use interface that makes it easy to 
navigate and operate MS, the motivation to use the device 
would hopefully be higher. 
V. 
BRIEF DISCUSSION 
We will in this section briefly discuss some of the results, 
as well as scrutinize the method used. The groups appeared 
to be positive to the MS system. Many seemed to realize that 
it could be of real help to them. This was interesting as few 
seniors own smartphones [21], with subsequent low usage of 
the types of services that smartphones can offer. Some 
research indicates that seniors are getting increasingly 
interested in smartphones and that the adoption rate is on the 
increase [22]. A survey into types of different mobile 
services showed that many seniors are interested in using 
services similar to those offered in MS [22]. 
Voice input was one of the major talking points in terms 
of input modality. Touch was also mentioned, but too a 
much smaller extent. This is interesting given that the use of 
voice as an input modality is really in its infancy in terms of 
mobile phones. The introduction of Siri on the iOS platform 
and similar attempts on Android phones may of course in 
time change all that. We would have thought that using touch 
as an input method given its ubiquitousness in the 
smartphone world would be something the informants would 
like to discuss to a larger extent. This may be because few of 
the participants had phones with a touch based user interface. 
It may well also be that the theme guide specifically 
mentioned voice input as a modality, and that the groups 
became preoccupied with this as a result. 
It was raised that a touch user interface was problematic 
for some, and the need for physical buttons was also 
highlighted. Physical buttons are increasingly omitted from 
smartphones. This trend goes against the wishes of the focus 
groups. Touch only user interfaces with few or no physical 
buttons may be difficult to use for a number of groups, 
amongst them people with motor disabilities like hand 
tremors, as well as people with visual problems. 
The wish for simple and easy to understand user 
interfaces with little complexity is one of the key messages 
from the focus groups. This echoes previous research, that 
seniors would like little complexity in their mobiles [23]. 
Attempts to accommodate this in smartphones are also seen 
elsewhere. Doro [24] has for instance recently launched a 
senior friendly user interface on an Android based device. 
It was also suggested by the informants that it should be 
possible to increase and decrease the complexity of the MS 
system depending on personal needs. This could be 
especially useful for persons with cognitive issues. 
Fraunhofer Portugal [25] offers this feature in a tracking and 
navigation app for persons with dementia. 
It is noteworthy to observe the focus that the informants 
had on security and privacy in terms of the MS system. As it 
came out from the discussions, despite their low smartphone 
ownership many of the informants are well aware of various 
privacy and security risks when using smartphones. This 
echoes findings from other user studies with actual 
smartphone users [26]. It is also interesting to note that 
multimodality, e.g., using audio to have information read 
out, was perceived as a security or privacy risk too. 
The wide variety of HOD content mentioned by the 
informants covered many types of domains and activities. 
The majority of content did however focus on travel and 
tourism. This may be explained by the emphasis made on the 
first scenario that is a travel scenario. This may have 
influenced their answers and discussions. The MS system 
can offer HOD in virtually all contexts and settings, but this 
did perhaps not become evident amongst all the participants. 
The issue of cost was raised. The costs are related to the 
cost of a smartphone as well as whatever the cost (if any) the 
MS system will be to the consumer. This is a very important 
issue, especially as we currently are having a financial crisis 
in many European countries. It is also an important factor 
that many seniors are on low incomes. It should be pointed 
out that the MS service can be used with relatively cheap 
smartphones. However, one may not be able to access all 
features such as NFC. NFC is usually only incorporated in 
the more expensive high-end phones, but is increasingly 
found in less more affordable handsets. 
There are a number of methodological issues that may 
have influenced the results. Firstly, using a qualitative 
approach one is always open to different biases and 
interpretive issues. We have tried to be as open, objective 
and transparent as possible to combat this, but the results will 
always be a matter of the subjective influence by the 
researchers.  
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The informants were very heterogeneous in terms of ICT 
and mobile phone experience, nationality, and functional 
capacity, to mention but a few characteristics.  This may be 
viewed 
as 
a 
methodological 
weakness, 
i.e. 
the 
generalizations made in the results section only apply to 
some or certain of the participants or sub-groups. We choose 
to look at it as strength, however. By getting input from a 
group with a wide variety of user requirements, we were able 
to collect a wide range of user needs. As the potential users 
of MS possess an equally wide range of user needs, this may 
prove an asset rather than a liability. One should bear in 
mind, however, that there were very few participants in 
Spain and Romania that had smartphone experience. This 
fact will more than likely to have a bearing on the results, 
and needs to be taken into account when interpreting the 
results. 
VI. 
BRIEF CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The focus groups provided a wealth of useful and 
relevant information. It shows a breadth in both user needs 
and requirements, as well as in the different users’ familiarity 
with ICT and mobile technology. Further, it confirms many 
of the assumptions underpinning the MS project, as well as 
adding important commentary and input which will be 
invaluable when implementing MS. 
Ideally all products and services should be designed in a 
manner that follows the principles of universal design, so 
that everyone can use or access them. This may be the case 
in a remote future. Meanwhile, there is a need for systems 
like MS. This need is likely to persist for a long time to 
come.  
The MS project is conducting user testing of the first 
prototypes of the HOD and CMS in late Fall 2012. Several 
additional iterations are planned. The projects concludes in 
2013 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank all the participants in the focus 
groups for taking part, and all project members who 
contributed in organizing the focus groups. Special thanks to 
Fundación OVSI who conducted the Spanish focus groups. 
Unfortunately, Fundación OVSI has now closed down, and 
has withdrawn from MS. Further, many thanks to the AAL 
Joint Programme, and the national funding authorities. 
REFERENCES 
[1] APSIS4ALL. Accessible Personalised Services In Public 
Digital Terminals for all. Project website. 2012. Online: 
http://www.apsis4all.eu. 071012. 
[2] ASK-IT. Ambient Intelligence System of Agents for 
Knowledge-based and Integrated Services for Mobility 
Impaired 
users. 
Project 
website. 
2008. 
Online: 
http://www.ask-it.org.  071012. 
[3] WayFiS. WayFiS: Way Finding for Seniors. Project website. 
2012. Online: http://www.wayfis.eu. 071012. 
[4] Mediate. Methodology for describing the accessibility of 
transport in Europe. Project website. 2011. Online: 
http://www.mediate-project.eu. 071012. 
[5] Access2all. Mobility Schemes Ensuring Accessibility of 
Public Transport for All Users. Project website. 2010. Online: 
http://www.access-to-
all.eu/index.php?option=com_content&view=frontpage&Item
id=1. 071012. 
[6] Höpken, W., Scheuringer, M., Linke, D. & Fuchs, M. 
Context-based Adaptation of Ubiquitous Web Applications in 
Tourism. In O Connor, Höpken & Gretzel, (ed.), Information 
and Communication Technologies in Tourism, ENTER 2008, 
Innsbruck, Austria, 2008. 533-544, Springer. 
[7] Soprano. 
Service-oriented 
Programmable 
Smart 
Environments for Older Europeans. Project website. 2010. 
Online: http://www.soprano-ip.org. 071012. 
[8] OASIS. Open architecture for Accessible Services Integration 
and 
Standardisation. 
Project 
website. 
2011. 
Online: 
http://www.oasis-project.eu/index.php. 071012. 
[9] Vergados. D.D. Service personalization for assistive living in 
a 
mobile 
ambient 
healthcare-networked 
environment. 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 14(6): 575-590, 2010. 
[10] MyUI. 
MyUI: 
Mainstreaming 
Accessibility 
through 
Synergistic User Modelling and Adaptability. 2012. Project 
website. Online: http://www.myui.eu. 071012. 
[11] DIADEM. Delivering Inclusive Access for Disabled or 
Elderly Members of the community. Project website. 2009. 
Online: http://www.project-diadem.eu. 071012. 
[12] SNAPI. Special Needs Application Program Interface. Project 
website. 2010. Online: http://www.snapi.org.uk. 071012. 
[13] GoldUI. GoldUI: Adaptive embedded human interfaces 
designed for older people. Project website. 2012. Online: 
http://www.goldui.eu/?lang=en. 071012. 
[14] HaptiMap. HaptiMap, Haptic, Audio and Visual Interfaces for 
Maps and Location Based Services. Project website. 2012. 
Online: http://www.haptimap.org. 071012. 
[15] Mapped. Mobilisation and Accessibility Planning for People 
with 
Disabilities. 
Project 
website. 
2007. 
Online: 
http://services.txt.it/MAPPED/. 071012. 
[16] HMFM. HearMeFeelM. Project website. 2011. Online: 
http://ttuki.vtt.fi/hmfm/index.html. 071012. 
[17] AEGIS. AEGIS Open Accessibility Framework - Open 
Accessibility Everywhere. Project website. 2012. Online: 
http://www.aegis-project.eu. 071012. 
[18] ACCESSIBLE. 
Accessible: 
Applications, 
Design 
and 
Development. 
Accessibility 
Assessment 
Simulation 
Environment for New Applications Design and Development. 
Project website. 2012. Online: http://www.accessible-eu.org. 
071012. 
[19] Raising the Floor. Raising the Floor. Project website. 2012. 
Online: http://raisingthefloor.org. 071012. 
[20] Kaasinen, E. User needs for location-aware mobile services. 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 2003, 7(1): 70-79. 
[21] Zickuhr, K. & Smith, A. Digital differences. Pew Internet. 
Report. Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life 
Project. 2012.  
[22] Dale, O. & Schulz, T. JusFone - A Smartphone for Everyone. 
NR Report No. 1027. ISBN: 978-82-539-0537-2. 2011. 
[23] Mallenius, S, Rossi, M & Tuunainen, V. Factors affecting the 
adoption and use of mobile devices and services by elderly 
people - results from a pilot study. 6th annual Global Mobility 
Roundtable, 2007. Los Angeles. 
[24] DORO. DORO Experience. Online: 
http://www.doro.co.uk/experience. 071012. 
[25] Fraunhofer Portugal. AlzNav, your way home. Online: 
http://www.fraunhofer.pt/en/fraunhofer_aicos/projects/interna
l_research/alznav.html. 2012. 071012 
[26] Chin, E., Porter Felt, A., Sekar, V. & Wagner, D. 2012. 
Measuring user confidence in smartphone security and 
privacy. In Proceedings SOUPS '12. ACM, New York, 2012. 
1-16.
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

