Planning for Sustainability:
Multiple Technologies for Different Care Models
Anthony P. Glascock
Department of Anthropology
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
email: glascock@drexel.edu
Abstract—The integration of eHealth into the routine delivery of
care is an important element in the maintenance of health care
costs. This paper reports on the findings from a series of projects
assessing the effectiveness of several eHealth technologies to both
contain costs and aid in the provision of care to individuals with
Intellectual
and
Developmental
Disabilities
or
Severe
and
Persistent Mental Illness. Data were collected from 11 different
locations in order to determine if the technologies resulted in an
improvement in living conditions and to judge the acceptance of
the technologies by both the staff and individuals. Findings
indicate
that
the
technologies
have
exceeded
expectations
resulting in plans to expand to other facilities and to build a new
residence in which all of the technologies will be installed.
Keywords—telecare; eHealth, multiple technologies; demonstration
project; intellectual and developmental disabilities; severe and
persistent mental illness
I. INTRODUCTION
The need to contain health care costs has seen the
development of new technologies, as well as the innovative
use of existing technologies, in an ever enlarging number of
care models. Thus, it is
not surprising that new and
reconfigured eHealth technologies are increasingly being used
to provide care and services to individuals with Intellectual
and Developmental Disabilities (IDD) and those with Severe
and Persistent Mental Illness (SMI) [1][2]. As in the use of
new technologies, in each and every care model there are
challenges to using innovative technologies in addressing the
needs of these two populations, but the necessity to contain,
and if possible, reduce the cost of providing care to these
populations, makes the use of technology, in some form,
inevitable. However, three different trends intersect in such a
way that result in the urgency to develop more efficient care
models for the IDD and SMI populations: the cost of care; the
aging of the two populations and a reduction in the number of
qualified staff providing care to the IDD and SMI populations.
First, deinstitutionalization, in both the United States and
Europe took place from the mid-1960’s through the 1970’s,
had a dramatic impact on the care models used for both
populations [3][4]. Prior to the deinstitutionalization, the
majority of care was provided for individuals with IDD and
SMI in large institutions which were often dehumanizing. The
impact of deinstitutionalization on the cost of care varied
significantly, but the impact on the care model was significant
Rene A. Burke, Sherri T. Portnoy, Shaleea Shields
NHS Human Services
Lafayette Hill, PA 19444, USA
email: rburke1@nhsonline.org, SPortnoy@nhsonline.org,
ssheilds@nhsonline.org
as most individuals with IDD and SMI moved into the
community, many living in some form of group home. The
number of individuals living in any particular group home
varies based upon the needs of the individuals. The most
common number of residents is four with some group homes
having as many as eight to ten residents. In the most severe
cases, an individual lives alone in a residence with 24 hour
supervision. Although costs of providing care to the residents
in group homes vary based upon the needs and location, the
average cost is between $40-50,000 per year per resident and
if an individual needs to live alone, the cost can top $150,000
per year [5][6].
Second, the rapidly increasing number of such individuals
brought about by the same demographic factors as for the
general population is adding even greater cost to the care of
IDD and SMI populations [7]. As individuals with IDD or
SMI age, they are as susceptible to chronic illnesses as the
general population, but the cost of caring for them is much
greater. For example, care for an individual with IDD who has
congestive heart failure costs approximately eight times more
than for a person without IDD [5]. The ratios for other chronic
diseases and individuals with IDD versus SMI vary somewhat,
but the reasons are consistent. Many individuals with IDD and
SMI make poor lifestyle decisions—use tobacco products and
abuse alcohol and drugs. In addition, many are unable to self-
manage disease, e.g., adhere to complicated medication
regimes and follow complex health care instructions. Thus,
greater cost of care for individuals with IDD and SMI when
combined with the cost of residential care in general, results in
a compelling reason for attempting to use technology to
contain costs.
A third reason is that there is an increasing imbalance
between the growing needs of the IDD and SMI populations
and the number of qualified staff available to provide care.
Projections from the federal government suggest that the need
for trained staff will increase by over 30% in the next decade,
while the supply of individuals who traditionally have filled
these jobs is expected to increase only by 7% [8]. In addition,
the high turnover rate for individuals caring for these
populations adds another dimension to the staffing challenges.
It is estimated that turnover for direct support professionals
(DSPs) ranges between 50-70% depending on the specific jobs
undertaken, e.g., residential care versus in-home care. This
high turnover rate adds at least $2,500 in direct expenses plus
a minimum of an additional $1,000 of indirect expenditures
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

for an organization to replace a single DSP, thus adding to the
ever increasing cost of providing care to these populations [9].
In the next section, a brief discussion of attempts at using
technology to provide care for these populations is presented,
while in the third section the overall Project is described
including a short description of the organization undertaking
the Projects, as well as the overall goals and objectives to be
achieved by the introduction of the new technologies. In
Section IV, the different Projects undertaken are described
along with the care models employed and the technologies
introduced. The next section discusses the methodologies
employed in gathering data on the individuals with disabilities
and mental illness and staff in order to assess the effectiveness
of the technologies in care delivery, while Section VI offers a
discussion of preliminary findings. What has been learned
from the analysis is summarized in the Discussion Section,
while plans for the roll out of the technologies to other
facilities and the financial model to pay for this roll out
comprise the concluding section.
II. RELATED WORK
It became apparent from the earliest discussions about the
use of technology in the provision of care to individuals with
disabilities, that there had been few other attempts to utilize
technologies in a similar matter. This was the case, even
though what little research was available that the increase in
the use of technology benefits the quality of life for people
with disabilities and that, “(m)ore often than not, people with
intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDD) end up on
the side of the divide with others who do not have access to or
use technology” [10]. The vast majority of studies that exist
focus on children within the context of school [11][12], rather
than adults living in the community Those studies that do
focus on similar populations are either, not helpful because of
advances in technology since being undertaken, or are not
residential based [13][14]. Thus, the effort to use a series of
technologies within the NHS care system became more than
just a localized demonstration; it became a test of the resolve
to make these technologies widely available within the larger
IDD community [15].
III.
PROJECT
NHS Human Services, through its subsidiaries, is one of
the United States’ leading non-profit providers of community-
based human and special education services. With nationally
recognized programs in multiple states, NHS offers a full
range of integrated services to children and adults in the areas
of mental health, addictive diseases, autism, intellectual and
developmental
disabilities,
juvenile
justice,
foster
care
treatment, education and other specialized programs. In
particular, NHS is a leader in developing treatment plans for
people with dual diagnoses and other multiple challenges and
is in the forefront of the use of innovative technologies.
A. The Strategic Plan
In 2012, in order to accomplish the objectives outlined in
the NHS Mission and
Strategic Plan, the organization
embarked on an assistive technology Project. This was partly
in response to the growing IDD and SMI populations, partly
based on the financial realities faced by the organization in
providing care to these populations and partly in response to
The
Rights
of
People
with
Cognitive
Disabilities
to
Technology and Information Access [16].
The planning process was inclusive and there was a
recognition that in order to “do it right” it would take time to
put everything in place. The first step was to form a committee
led
by
an
upper
administrator,
and
employees
were
encouraged to review the current state of technology use in the
delivery of care to the IDD and SMI populations and to
propose sites at which new technologies could be used.
Members of the committee attended several professional
meetings in the United States and met with representatives of
companies and organizations that used and produced various
technologies in order to determine what technologies were
available for use.
During the remainder of 2012, proposals were received
and evaluated based upon specific criteria: administrative and
staff buy-in; existence of suitable technology; evidence that
technology would enhance care provision; evidence that, if
successful, the technology could be used at a large number of
other care facilities within the organization; and a financial
model showing that the technology was sustainable—the
organization would be reimbursed for its use. Finally, there
was an attempt to achieve a rough balance among the different
care models employed throughout the organization. This
process took over a year which afforded a thorough evaluation
of the resources available at each of the selected sites. The
final decision was confirmed at an all-day meeting of
administrators and representatives from each of the chosen
sites in the fall of 2013.
B. The Project Goals
As planning progressed, three main goals emerged: 1) to
determine which, if any, of the technologies being tested can
allow for an improvement in living conditions and the care
being delivered in the selected facilities; 2) to judge the
acceptance
of
the
technologies
by
both
the
staff
and
individuals with disabilities and mental illness; and 3) to
assess whether the technologies should be rolled out to other
facilities with similar care models. In order for any of the
technology Projects to be deemed successful, it was necessary
to
determine
if
the
new
technologies
allowed
for
an
improvement in living conditions and the care being delivered
in that the individuals with disabilities and mental illness
express that their lives are better after the introduction of the
technologies than before. It was also necessary to determine if
care delivered is more timely, efficient and cost effective than
the care delivered without the technologies.
It also became apparent that it was essential to ascertain if
staff could properly use the new technology, that they believed
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

in its effectiveness and accepted that the technology would
require that they did their jobs differently. If staff did not
accept the changes that would be brought about by the
introduction of the technology, there was no reason to go
forward with a roll out to additional facilities. Likewise, it was
necessary to determine if the individuals with disabilities and
mental illness accepted the use of the new technologies in the
care that they received, if they were intimidated or not by the
technologies and if they would
willingly comply with
requirements for the use of the technologies. Finally, even if it
was determined that the new technologies provided improved
care, were accepted by staff and individuals with disabilities
and mental illness, it was still vital to find out if the care
provided with the new technology was reimbursable as a
billable expense. Consequently, the locations, the care models
and the technologies had to be carefully selected in order to
ensure that all three goals were achievable.
IV. THE TECHNOLOGIES AND LOCATIONS
During the planning process, the Assistive Technology
Executive Steering Committee received proposals from local
management teams which had assessed individual needs, staff
interest and available dollars. The Executive Committee
narrowed the proposals to three that were to be part of the first
phase of the Project: Communication Technologies Project
(CTB); the Smarthome Project (SHP); and the Biometrics
Project (BMP). Although the initial goal was to have all three
of the Projects begin simultaneously, issues, e.g., renovation
delays, equipment problems, made this impossible. As a
result, the CTP has advanced at a faster rate than the other two
Projects. Also, as each of the Projects has progressed, sites
have been added and subtracted, once again resulting in
different timelines for the three Projects.
A. The Communication Technologies Project (CTP)
The CTP began in the spring of 2014 with the selection of
sites and upgrading of wireless routers.
Work continued
during that summer with the focus of training staff in the use
of AbleLink software [17] that had been selected for use and
during the fall of 2014, staff and individuals with disabilities
were surveyed and the Glasgow Depression Scale (GDS)
administered to all individuals with disabilities participating in
the Project [18] [19]. The main goals of the CTP was fourfold:
to enable individuals with disabilities to stay in touch with
family and friends; to allow a greater ability for them to
communicate with members of the support services team; to
encourage them to acquire basic computer skills; and to permit
safe and secure access to the internet in order for them to
pursue their particular interests. Seven sites were selected for
inclusion in the CTP. Five of the sites are group homes and
two program centers, all in Western Pennsylvania. The group
homes are single sex residences for between three and six
individuals. In contrast, the two program centers serve
between 90 and 130 individuals on any given day.
The hardware introduced into the five group homes was
iPads and laptops while at the day programs all-in-one desktop
computers, laptops, tablets and iPads were made available.
The hardware was customized to meet the needs of the IDD
population, e.g., large keyboards, headphones. After much
research a software package designed specially for individuals
with cognitive disabilities—AbleLink—was purchased and
installed. AbleLink allowed individuals to experience a more
self-determined and fulfilled life through an empowering
technology
characterized
by
a
person-centered
design
philosophy. Several AbleLink applications were installed that
allowed individuals to use email (voice activated), Skype and
webcam broadcasts, along with providing prompts for tasks
that increased independence. The personalized laptops in the
homes allowed the individuals to utilize the skills learned at
the day program in their own homes.
B. Smarthome Project (SHP)
The SHP required a remodeling of a residential unit
which faced construction problems delaying the start of the
Project several months. However, by the summer of 2014, the
four residents were able to move into the remodeled facility
and be administered surveys and the GDS. The main
objectives of the SHP were to increase the independence of
the four IDD residents and to conserve energy through the use
of “green” appliances and more efficient heating and air
conditioning systems (HVAC). To achieve the goal of
increasing the independence of residents, a Smart TV was
installed, iPads and remote controls for lighting and window
blinds were made available to the residents. Additionally,
motorized cabinetry and cook tops and sinks were installed in
a lowered position to allow wheelchair access. Finally, to
reduce the amount of energy consumed, remote control HVAC
systems and smaller and more easily accessible dishwashers
and refrigerators were installed.
C Biometric Project (BMP)
The BMP began in the summer of 2014 with the
development of protocols, the installation of the technology,
training of staff, retrospective data collection, the creation of
event and error forms and administering surveys to residents
and staff and the GDS to the residents. The main goal of the
Project was to use technology to reduce the number of
emergency room visits and hospitalizations and thus, by doing
so curtail costs by delivering care in a more timely manner and
at a lower level of care [20]. Two group homes with four
residents each were selected for inclusion along with a Long
Term Structured Residence (LTSR), a locked facility that
served eight male individuals with SMI with serious and
persistent mental illness. The technology installed was a basic
vital signs monitoring system including a digital scale, blood
pressure cuff and pulse oximeters. The software included with
the system allowed data to be sent to an external location and
was configured to send alerts when the data collected went
outside preconfigured parameters.
Planning to expand this
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Project
to
include
the
large
Delaware
County
Adult
Behavioral Health Outpatient Clinic is currently underway.
V. METHODS
There were several challenges to the selection of the
methods to use to collect data on the three Projects. First, the
Projects were not a test of the technologies themselves, as it
was already known that they worked. Instead, the objective of
the Projects was to determine how the selected technologies
could be used to enhance the provision of care, while at the
same time curtailing the cost of that care. Thus, the methods
had to capture specific data on various components of care
delivery. This entailed collecting data on the staff at each of
the sites, both the way they used the technologies and their
level of acceptance and willingness to change how they did
their jobs. Data also had to be collected on the level of
acceptance of the technologies by individuals at each of the
sites. If individuals were uncomfortable with the use of the
new technologies it would not be possible to roll out the
technologies to other facilities. Secondly, although ideally the
same methods of data collection would be used at each of the
sites, this proved impossible because of the differences in the
nature of the sites and the care models employed.
A. Communication Technologies Project
The main challenge was to develop questions that could
be answered by individuals with disabilities and would, at the
same time, provide the data necessary on which to make future
decisions [21] [22]. Achieving these twin goals necessitated
the development of a project-specific questionnaire for the
CTP, which included simple straightforward questions and
took no more than 15 minutes to administer. The questions
asked included:
•Which of the following electronic devices do you use to
communicate with friends, family or other people?
•How much help do you need to use these devices?
•When you want to communicate with friends, family or
other people, how often is the device available?
•What devices do you use to play games or watch
movies?
•How much help do you need to use these devices to play
games or watch movies?
•When you want to play games or watch movies, how
often is the device available?
The main goal of asking these questions was to determine
the amount of change that took place in both device use and
amount of help needed by individuals with disabilities during
the length of the Project. Staff was trained to administer the
questionnaire to individuals with disabilities at each of the
sites with the goal being that the same staff member at each of
the sites would administer the questionnaire at initiation of the
Project and at three, six and 12 month intervals. However, this
proved not to be possible because of the high rate of staff
turnover. The staff questionnaire was self-administered and,
similar to the questionnaire for individuals with disabilities,
was repeated at three, six and 12 month intervals. The GDS
was administered by staff members at the inception of the
Project and six and 12 month intervals. Once again, staff
turnover prevented the same staff member from administering
the Scale at each of the intervals.
B. Smarthome Project
The methods used for the SHP were closely matched to
those used for the CTP: Project specific questionnaires were
given to the residents at the initiation of the Project and three,
six
and
12
month
intervals;
likewise
the
GDS
was
administered at the initiation of the Project and six and 12
month intervals. Questions focused on the ability of the
residents to undertake basic tasks within the home, e.g., meal
preparation, putting away groceries, controlling the lighting
and blinds in their rooms, using computers and other
electronic devices, using email to communicate with family
and friends. Thus, it was possible to determine changes in both
the residents’ ability to use the new technologies and the
impact on the technology of residents’ well-being.
C. Biometric Project
The methods employed for the BMP, to a large extent,
mirrored those for the other two Projects with a couple of
exceptions. Staff was surveyed at the beginning of the Project
and after six and 12 months. Questions for the staff focused
on:
•The comfort level of staff members in the use of the
biometric devices;
•The reliability of the devices;
•The acceptance of the devices by individuals with
disabilities; and
•The perceived change in the quality of care with the use
of the biometric devices;
Similarly
residents
at
the
three
facilities
were
administered questionnaires and the GDS at the inception of
the Project and at six and 12 month intervals. In addition to
these instruments, event and error forms were developed for
use. The event forms were used to record each event triggered
by a biomedical alert, the actions taken by staff in response to
the event and the outcome, e.g., a visit by a nurse, emergency
room visit or hospitalization. The error forms were used to
record problems with the various devices comprising the vital
signs array, steps taken to correct the problem, the potential
risk to the health/safety of the residents and how the problem
was resolved.
D. Limitations of the Methods
There were several factors which limited the effectiveness
of the data collection and the quality of the data. First, as
stated previously, the fact that individuals at all the sites had
either developmental and intellectual disabilities or were
diagnosed with severe mental illness limited, to a certain
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

extent, the type of questions that could be asked and often
required prompting by the staff member administering the
instrument Secondly, although not optimal from a research
perspective, given the scope of the three Projects, it was
necessary for staff to administer the questionnaires and GDS.
These staff members were para-professional whose main
responsibility was not research, but instead, was the delivery
of care. In addition, staff turnover was also an issue because in
many cases the same staff member was not available to re-
administer the questionnaires and scales at the designated
intervals. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the Projects
were not research per se, but a real world evaluation of the
effectiveness of technology within challenging care models. In
other words, the information collected was that which could
help NHS determine whether the technology installed in the
sites should be rolled out to other facilities, rather than what
would necessarily be collected in a controlled research project.
VI. PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
At this stage, the findings from all three Projects are
preliminary and some are more preliminary than others. The
CTP started before the other two Projects and as a result the
data collected is more complete and comprehensive. However,
there is sufficient data from the other two to allow for initial
analysis that can provide useful information to NHS on what
works and what doesn’t and to allow informed decisions about
the future use of technology within the organization. Data
collection will continue at all three Projects until, at least,
September 2016. CTP eHealth technologies were installed at
three additional sites in August 2015 and data will be collected
at these three sites, at least, through September 2016. At this
time, a comparative analysis of data from all sites will be
undertaken and a decision whether to continue data collection
will be made. There are preliminary plans to include an
outpatient clinic as part of the BMP, but delays in finding an
eHealth technology that would allow the collection and
integration of vital signs information has put the project on
hold.
A. Community Technology Project
As stated in the previous section, data were collected on
both individuals with disabilities and staff at the five group
homes and two day programs: questionnaires and the GDS for
the individuals with disabilities; and questionnaires for the
staff. In order to track changes in the activities and well-being
of the individuals with disabilities, questionnaires were
administered at the initiation of the Project and at three, six
and 12 month intervals. The findings from a comparison of the
data collected from these four sets of questionnaires are, from
an organization perspective, very encouraging.
Questions
were asked about the use of electronic devices, both the
number of devices used and the purpose for the use of the
device. Answers to these questions showed a distinct pattern
of the increase in both device use and the number and type of
applications used. Sixteen of the 35 individuals (44%) for
which data on all four sets of questionnaires are available were
using more devices after 12 months than at the initiation of the
Project, while fifteen (43%) were using more applications than
in the prior 12 months. For the majority of individuals, the
added device was a laptop that was made available in their
residences.
The
pattern
that
emerged
was
quite
clear.
Individuals learned to use new applications on the desk-top
computers at the day programs and then used the applications
on the laptop when they returned to their residences.
The findings for the amount of help that individuals
required to use the new devices and applications are a bit more
complicated to interpret. The raw findings are: 2 (6%) of the
individuals did not need help throughout the twelve months;
11 (31%) of them had no change in the level of help needed to
access the devices and applications; 12 (34%) increased the
level of help needed to access the devices and applications;
and 10 (29%) decreased the level of help needed to access the
devices and applications. These data are confusing enough,
but in addition, there is no distinct relationship between the
individuals
who
increased
their
use
of
devices
and
applications and the need for help. The amount of staff time
required to train staff in the use of the technologies and to help
individuals with new devices and application is a key factor in
the decision to expand this Project to other facilities and
therefore, having more usable findings is extremely important.
As a result, a better way of measuring the level of help needed
by individuals is being considered for use in the newer sites
that have been added to the CTP.
Similarly, the findings from the GDS are ambivalent.
Although there is a slight overall decrease in the number of
answers that reflect a depressive state for over one-third of the
individuals with disabilities, there is no apparent relationship
between an increase in the use of devices and applications and
a decrease in a depressive state. Once again, a better way of
measuring the change in wellbeing is being sought.
Although the main conclusion that can be drawn from the
three staff surveys is that the staff believes strongly that the
technologies introduced have been greatly beneficial, the
findings did expose some problems. A full quarter of staff
believed that the technology was not useful for all individuals
with disabilities. In particular, those individuals who had
problems with reading grew frustrated when attempting to use
the various applications. Secondly, almost half of staff
reported that there were problems with the applications
periodically crashing and/or having difficulty in getting the
applications to work properly. However, the data did indicate
that
over
time,
the
technological
problems
decreased
significantly. Finally, the data confirmed the high rate of staff
turnover, as only 12 of the 50 staff who completed at least one
survey completed all three. In fact, an equal number—12—of
staff completed only the last survey as those who had
completed all three. Although staff turnover is a major issue
with providing care for IDD and SMI populations (see the
Introduction), such turnover will increase the costs of rolling
out the technologies to other facilities.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

B. Smarthome Project
There were no problems with data collection for the SHP.
All four individuals with disabilities completed the three
questionnaires and GDS administered upon initiation and
three, six and 12 months into the Project. Nevertheless, the
simple fact that there were only four residents in the study
does limit the ability to generalize and reach firm conclusions
about the wisdom of expanding the Project to other facilities.
The findings are largely positive as three out of the four
residents expressed that over the twelve months of the Project
their level of independence had increased: three out of the four
residents expressed an increase in the ability to operate blinds
and lights without help; two out of the four residents
expressed an increase in the ability to undertake chores in the
kitchen without help; and one out of the four residents
recorded a greater ability to communicate with family.
Answers on the GDS indicated that two of the four residents
experienced a slight decrease in their level of depression. Staff
also filled out the GDS for the residents and once again, it
appeared that the same two residents experienced a decline in
their level of depression.
In addition to the quantitative data collected, more
informal interviews with both residents and staff revealed a
very high level of satisfaction with the modifications made in
the residence and the addition of the Smart TV, iPads and
remote controls for blinds and lights. In particular, staff
indicated that the mood of the residents had become more
positive and that residents are much more active in the kitchen
and taking pride in their increased independence.
C. Biometric Project
The findings for the BMP are the most preliminary of the
three Projects, primarily because of equipment issues that
delayed its start. Nevertheless, there are sufficient data to draw
some conclusions that can be used as the Project is expanded
to other facilities. For this analysis the two residential facilities
serving IDD residents will be lumped together, while the
findings for the LTSR are presented separately.
Staff surveys at the two IDD facilities showed that at the
beginning of the Project over one-half of the staff did not
know how to use at least one of the devices that was being
installed. However, by the six month mark, all but one staff
member, not only could use all of the devices, but were
comfortable using them. The six month survey also indicated
that, overall, staff were very positive about the use of the
biometric equipment: a clear majority believed that care had
improved with the use of the equipment; and all staff believed
that residents had accepted the use of the equipment and were
comfortable with its use. Over the first six months of the
Project, there were 10 instances when one or more vital sign
reading was beyond the safe range. In seven cases, a physician
was contacted and in three cases, a nurse was contacted.
Although in none of these cases was hospitalization necessary,
four residents were put on outpatient observation in order to
more carefully track their vital signs.
The only negative finding was the number of problems
with the equipment recorded in 32 error logs. Just over 50% of
the errors were a failure of the data to upload from the device
to the iPad, which was used to record and forward the data to
the nursing staff. In one-third of the error logs, the problem
was with the devices not actually recording any data, e.g., the
blood pressure cuff not indicating a reading. These findings
have led to a reevaluation of the vital signs system being used.
All staff at the LTSR, when surveyed, expressed a high
level of familiarity with all equipment used in the Project, both
at the inception and six months later. Eight of the nine staff
reported that the residents were comfortable with the use of
the vital signs array, but one-third reported that the equipment
was not as reliable as they would have liked. This unreliability
was reflected in the nine error reports that indicated both
problems with uploading data and the blood pressure and
oximeter cuffs not generating a reading. Finally, there were
eight events when one or more vital sign reading was beyond
the safe range. In four of the cases, the nurse was contacted
and the resident more closely monitored for the next 24 hours.
VII. DISCUSSION
As stated at the beginning of the previous section, the
three Projects have been on different timelines with the result
being that the extent of data collection and analysis varies.
However, there are sufficient findings to reach preliminary
conclusions for each of the Projects separately and when
combined. In particular, it is possible to determine what has
exceeded expectations, what has worked as hoped and what
has not worked as well as hoped. Additionally, valuable
lessons have been learned that can be used to help move the
Projects to the next stage.
A. Successful Implementation
The CTP has been a tremendous success and has far
exceeded expectations. The vast majority of individuals
embraced the new technology and the applications made
available through the Project. These individuals were able, in a
relatively short period of time, to use the technology to
communicate with family and friends, safely surf the internet
in order to pursue their individual interests and to play games
and watch movies—none of which they could do on their own
before the Project. Although not all individuals at the seven
facilities were able to utilize the technology, the vast majority
could and they were able, over time, to do so with less and less
staff help. Staff was equally pleased with the introduction of
the technology and consistently reported that individuals were
happy with their increased independence.
The SHP also exceeded expectations. Even though the
numbers of residents impacted by the introduction was small,
four, the findings clearly show that they benefitted from
having the new technologies. Their independence increased
over the duration of the Project because they were able to
undertake tasks that they could not accomplish prior to the
introduction of the new technology. The simple ability to
control the lights and blinds in their own rooms, not only
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

increased their level of independence, but staff reported that
the residents’ mood became increasingly positive over time.
B. Meeting Implementation Objectives
Although the BMP did not exceed expectations, it
certainly succeeded in meeting the objectives set out at the
beginning of the Project. The vital signs system is able to
record, upload and send data to an external location as was
hoped. In addition, the system was able to determine when
readings are outside established norms and this information
was used at all locations to take action, e.g., notify nurses,
inform physicians. It is too early to determine if the use of the
technology
has
reduced
emergency
room
visits
and
hospitalizations, but staff believe that the system is able to
allow more timely care and, as a result, the well-being of
individuals has increased.
C. Hardware and Software Problems
Even though the CTP far exceeded expectation, there
have been some issues surrounding the reliability of both the
hardware and applications used. Most of these problems have
been resolved during the course of the Project, but some
problems still linger. The biggest issue with the technology
occurred in the BMP. The number of error reports filed at the
three facilities, confirm the overall impression that a different
vital signs system needs to be used as the Project moves
forward. The encouraging conclusion is that, even with the
problems with the technology, the results were sufficiently
encouraging to plan for the Project’s expansion.
D. What Has Been Learned
In the last three and one-half years, many lessons have
been
learned
about
the
process
of
incorporating
new
technologies into NHS’s various care models. Some are more
important than others, but some are absolutely essential to
rolling out the technologies to additional facilities. Among the
most important are: detailed planning is indispensable; there
must be buy-in at all levels—board, ceo, upper administration,
management and line personnel; one technology must be
working before the next one is introduced; and everything
takes longer than originally thought.
In the early stages of the Project, many individuals at
NHS believed that things were moving too slowly; they were
anxious to “get-on-with-it”.
This urge to move quickly is
natural, especially from individuals who have been recruited
because they are enthusiastic about the introduction of new
technologies. Nevertheless, taking the time to plan every step
of the Project was vital to success. Even with careful planning,
mistakes were made and problems encountered. Likewise,
there must be buy-in at every level of the organization and this
also takes time. Without buy-in and commitment, there is the
tendency to “cut the losses” when problems arise. The buy-in
of the NHS Board, CEO and upper administrators was key to
the continuation of the Project when things went wrong.
The incremental approach to the introduction of the
technologies also proved to be a wise decision. Once again,
there was a push to introduce “everything” at once, but the
plan to make sure that one technology worked before
installing a second, allowed staff and individuals with
disabilities and severe mental illness to adjust to the first
change before a second was introduced. Finally, although
initially people involved with the Project were confident that
the timeline for their slow and cautious approach was realistic,
as the three Projects got underway there was a realization that
the amount of time necessary to get 11 different sites up and
running was going to take longer than anyone had anticipated.
Fortunately, the fact that there was total buy-in at all levels of
the organization allowed the Projects to proceed at the slower
pace required.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
When the
Assistive Technology Project was being
planned in 2012 there were doubts whether, because of its
scale and complexity, it could achieve its objectives. Even as
the first technologies were being installed and problems
emerged, there were concerns that trying to evaluate three
distinct technologies in 11 locations was just too ambitious.
However, the Project leadership persevered and by the end of
2015, it is impossible to conclude otherwise than that the
Project has been a success.
A. Improvements for Next Stage
Based on an analysis of the results from the three
Projects, several adjustments have been made to both the
technologies employed and the implementation protocols.
First, continual problems with the biometric instruments have
led to a search for more robust products from companies that
offer greater technical support. Similarly, dissatisfaction on
the part of staff and individuals with disabilities with several
products in the SHP has resulted in the selection of more
sophisticated
equipment
that
incorporates
more
sensor
technology. Third, results have indicated the greatest degree of
success at the day centers. As a result, the plans are to include
a greater number of these centers and fewer group homes in
the next phase of the project. Finally, because the use of the
GDS did not produce the level of meaningful information as
anticipated, it’s been replaced by satisfaction scales.
B. Expansion
The best measure of this success is that NHS has made
the decision to extend all three technologies to additional
locations. The CTP has already been expanded to three new
locations bringing the total number of participants to just
under 200 and there are plans to include more facilities during
2016. NHS is also working with AbleLink to develop new
applications specifically targeting the IDD population, as well
as working to refine and enhance existing applications. As
indicated previously, the Delaware County Adult Behavioral
Health Outpatient Clinic will be added to the BMP in the
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

summer of 2016. The complexity of incorporating vital signs
monitoring
into
an
outpatient
clinic
is,
from
NHS’s
perspective, outweighed by the opportunity to effectively offer
psychiatric services, primary care physicians and pharmacy
services in one location along with an integrated medical
record. If successful, there are plans to extend the BMP to
other outpatient locations.
Perhaps the most significant indication of the success of
the overall Project is that there are plans to build, ground up, a
new facility in Western Pennsylvania which will include
technologies from all three Projects. This $650,000 residence
will
house
six
individuals
and
incorporate
the
green
appliances, design features—lower sinks and cabinets—and
remote control features from the SHP, with the AbleLink
applications from the CTP and the vital signs array from the
BMP. It is hoped that this new facility will be the model for
the necessary replenishment of the aging housing stock that is
currently in use.
C. Financial Model
From the inception, one of the key components of the
Project was to construct a financial model that would allow
NHS to be reimbursed for the care delivered by the use of the
new technologies. The Project itself, costing over $200,000 in
real money and much more when the amount of staff time
expended is included, has been financed by grants. Although
grant funding is absolutely satisfactory for a project whose
goal is to evaluate the appropriateness of new technologies in
the delivery of care, it is not a satisfactory means for
developing a sustainable financial model.
A sustainable
financial model can only exist if the care delivered with the
use of the new technologies is reimburseable by Medicare (the
health insurance program for people in the United States who
are 65 or older. Medicare Part B covers certain doctors'
services, outpatient care, medical supplies, and preventive
services.) and, especially, Medicaid (the U.S. government
program, financed by federal, state, and local funds, of
hospitalization and medical insurance for low income persons
of all ages.) as billable services. The problem is that, currently,
most of the care delivered in the three Projects is not billable
and thus, not reimburseable, but this is changing. Virginia and
Pennsylvania have granted Medicaid waivers that could allow
reimbursement for care delivered with the new technologies as
soon as mid-2016. Individuals from NHS are presently
developing proposals for both states that would allow the
services to be reimburseable.
If the three Projects have done nothing else, they have
confirmed that the use of technology to aid in the delivery of
care to individuals with IDD and SMI is inevitable. The
increasing numbers, along with the aging of the IDD and SMI
populations, is increasing the cost of care exponentially at the
same time as the number of people available to deliver the
care is stagnating. The only way to maintain, let alone
enhance, the level of care to these populations is through the
innovative use of technology and the only way to make this
happen is to develop a means of reimbursing this care. This
must and will occur; the only question remaining is when?
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Demiris, B. Hensel, M. Skubic, and M. Rantz, “Senior
residents’ perceived need of and preferences ‘smart home’
sensor technologies,” Inter J of Tech Ass in Health Care, vol.
24, no. 1, pp. 120-124, 2008.
[2]
E. Stip and V. Rialle, “Environmental cognitive remediation in
schizophrenia:
Ethical
implications
of
‘smart
home’
technology,” Canadian J of Psychiatry, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 281-
291, 2005.
[3]
E. Novella, “Mental health care and the politics of inclusion: a
social systems account of psychiatric deinstitutionalization,”
Theor Med Bioeth, vol. 31, pp. 411-427, 2010.
[4]
M. Knapp, J. Beecham, D. McDaid, T. Matosevic, and M.
Smith, “The economic consequences of deinstitutionalization of
mental health services: lessons from a systematic review of
European
experience,”
Health
and
Social
Care
in
the
Community, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 113-125, 2011.
[5]
National Council on Disability. [Online]. Available from:
http://www.ncd.gov/publications/2012/DIToolkit/Costs/inDetail/
retrieved March 2016.
[6]
National Institute of Mental Health. [Online]. Available from:
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/statistics/index.shtml, retrieved March
2016.
[7]
Administration on Aging—Projected Future Growth of Older
Population. [Online]. Available from:
http://www.aoa.gov/
Aging_Statistics/future_ growth/future_growth.aspx, retrieved
March 2016.
[8]
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. [Online].
Available
from:
aspe.hhs.gov/.../supply-direct-support-
professionals-serving-individuals-
intellectual-disabilities-and-
other-developmental-disabilities-report-c, retrieved March 2016.
[9]
The
New
Jersey
Council
on
Developmental
Disabilities
Recommendations
on
the
Direct
Support
Professional
Workforce. [Online]. Available from: https://www.njcdd.org/
2012-04-23.../direct-support-professionals
retrieved
March
2016.
[10] E. Tanis, S. Palmer, M. Wehmeyer, D. Davies, S. Stock, K.
Lobb, and B. Bishop, “Self-Report computer-based survey of
technology use by people with intellectual and developmental
disabilities,” Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, vol.
50, no. 1, pp. 53-68, 2012.
[11]
D.
Hammond,
D.
Whatley,
K.
Ayres,
and
D.
Gast,
“Effectiveness of video modelling to teach iPad use to students
with moderate intellectual disabilities”, Education and Training
in Autism and Intellectual Disabilities, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 525-
538, 2010.
[12] B. Bryant, R. Byant, M. Shih, and S. Seok, “The role of
assistive technology in support of needs assessment for children
with disabilities”, Exceptionality, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 203-213,
2010.
[13] A. Carey, M. Friedman, and D. Byrant, “Use of electronic
devices
by
people
with
intellectual
disabilities”,
Mental
Retardation, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 322-333, 2005.
[14] B. Weinberg, and A. Kjellberg, “Participation when using
cognitive assistive devices from the perspective of people with
disbilities”, Occupational Therapy Instruction, vol. 17, no. 4, pp.
168-176, 2010.
[15] B. Bryant, S. Seok, M. Ok, and D. Bryant, “Individuals with
intellectual and/or developmental disabilities use of assistive
technology devices in support provision”, J Spec Educ Technol,
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 41-57, 2012.
[16] The Rights of People with Cognitive Disabilities to Technology
and Information Access. [Online]. Available from: http://www.
colemaninstitute.org/declaration, retrieved March 2016.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

[17] Ablelink Technologies Home Page. [Online]. Available at
http://www. ablelinktech.com, retrieved March 2016.
[18] J. Mindham and C. A. Espie, “Glasgow Anxiety Scale for
people with an Intellectual Disability (GAS-ID): development
and psychometric properties of a new measure for use with
people with mild intellectual disability”, J of Intellectual
Disability Research, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 22-30, 2003.
[19] H. Hermans and H. M. Evenhuis, “Characteristics of instruments
screening for depression in adults with intellectual disabilities:
Systematic review”, Research in Developmental Disabilities,
vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1109-1120, 2010.
[20] Centers for Disease Control, Adults with Disabilities and Vital
Signs.
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.cdc.gov
/vitalsigns/disabilities, retrieved March 2016.
[21] M.
Tasse, R. Schalock, J. Thompson, and M. Wehmeyer,
Guidelines for interviewing people with disabilities. American
Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities.
Washington, DC, 2005.
[22] K. Caldwell, “Dyadic interviewing: A technique valuing
interdependence in interviews with individuals with intellectual
disabilities”, Qualitative Research, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 488-507,
2013.
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

