Let us Get Real! An Integrated Approach for Virtual Coaching and Real-time Activity
Monitoring in Lifestyle Change Support Systems
Olga Kulyk∗, Rieks op den Akker†, Randy Klaassen†, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen∗
∗Center for eHealth Research and Disease Management, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
†Human Media Interaction, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
{o.a.kulyk, h.j.a.opdenakker, r.klaassen, l.vangemert-pijnen}@utwente.nl
Abstract—There is a fast growing number of eHealth systems
aiming at supporting a healthy lifestyle. Tailored lifestyle coaching
services offer individual users access to web portals where they
can communicate about a growing number of ingredients of
everyday life concern: physical activity, nutrition, medication,
mood, sleep. Mobile technology in combination with body worn
sensors support user’s awareness of their physical condition
and lifestyle. Despite the large number of available lifestyle
interventions and pilot trials, only very few are successfully
transferred into the real health care practice. This paper presents
new insights and recommendations for the design of lifestyle
support systems with personalized virtual coaching based on
two user studies. The ﬁrst study focuses on the mobile physical
activity coaching for diabetes patients and ofﬁce workers. The
second study summarizes the persuasive factors on attitudes of
high-risk adolescents towards a virtual coach in mobile eHealth
applications and social media. We present a new approach that
integrates an animated digital coach in an activity monitoring
lifestyle change support system.
Keywords-Mobile Activity Monitoring, Personalized eHealth;
Persuasive
Feedback,
Usability;
Virtual
Coaching;
Behavior
Change; Lifestyle Interventions
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recent massive media attention to the obesity epidemic
worldwide and growing number of patients with chronic
diseases raises the demand for encouraging physical activity
and raising health awareness [1]. Next to classical web-based
interventions, eHealth behavior change support systems for
healthy lifestyle promotion aim to motivate patients to healthy
behavior change [2] [3] [4]. Some systems become proactive
and provide real time information and feedback to their users
based on data gathered through various sensors and personal
devices [5] [6].
Despite the large number of existing lifestyle interventions
and pilot trials, only very few are successfully transferred into
the real healthcare practice [7] [8]. Users often have problems
to navigate through the system, they get lost or they do not
ﬁnd the information they are looking for [9]. Low usability
and lack of transparency on the reliabilty and trustworthiness
of the information are just a few examples of the major barriers
for successful implementation [4] [7] [8]. There is also a lack
of standardization for interoperability between various parts of
the systems and a lack of connection between the feedback,
the actual usage patterns and the task a user is involved in [10].
These problems are often caused by a design that does not meet
the actual needs of the target users while using the system and
a lack of connection with ofﬂine, daily, activities. A holistic
design approach for eHealth intervention development which
we use in our research has proven to contribute in overcoming
these barriers [8].
This paper presents new insights and recommendations for
the design of lifestyle support systems with personalized vir-
tual coaching based on two user studies. The studies represent
different perspectives on eHealth systems. The ﬁrst study has
a Human Computer Interaction (HCI) perspective and focuses
on the use of a virtual animated character in a multi-device
mobile physical activity coaching system for diabetes patients
and ofﬁce workers. It was performed at the Human Media
Interaction group of the Computer Science Department at
the University of Twente. It was carried out in the context
of the EU funded Artemis project Smarcos, led by Nokia,
VTT and Philips. The overall theme of this ICT project is
the inter-usability of multi-device multi-sensor systems. The
second study summarizes the persuasive factors and attitudes
of high-risk adolescents towards virtual coach in mobile health
applications and social media. This study was performed at
the Center for eHealth Research and Disease Management,
Psychology Health and Technology group of the Behavioral
Sciences Department at the same university.
In the next section, we ﬁrst highlight ﬁndings from related
work on physical activity monitoring, virtual coaching and
mobile eHealth applications for lifestyle support. After that,
we present a new approach for a multi-device coaching system
based on the outcomes of two user studies on virtual coaching
for lifestyle support. The ﬁrst study describes results of the user
evaluation of the mobile physical activity coaching system for
ofﬁce workers and diabetes patients. The second study focuses
on persuasive factors and attitudes of high-risk adolescents
towards virtual coaching, social media and mobile apps for
sexual health promotion. Summarizing the main outcomes,
we then present recommendations for the design of lifestyle
support systems with personalized virtual coaching. Finally,
we present the main conclusions and discuss future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
There have been various attempts in categorizing eHealth
technology [5] [8] [11] [12] [13]. In this paper, we focus
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

on monitoring physical activity and health related parameters
(blood pressure, weight) in lifestyle interventions for preven-
tive professional care support. A categorization is based on the
type of platform that the eHealth technology is realized on:
stand alone devices; integrated web-based interventions and
personal mobile devices; or a combination of various devices
to monitor online and ofﬂine activities of a target user. We
will highlight the multi-device approach which falls into the
category.
A. Physical Activity Monitoring and Coaching
Wearable health technology, such as activity sensors, is
often used as a surveillance tool to objectively assess physical
activity patterns [6] [14] [15]. They provide an inexpensive,
accurate, and reliable objective measure of physical activity
by counting the number of steps taken per day, enabling the
accumulative measurement of occupational, leisure time, and
household activity, along with activity required for everyday
transportation. In addition to their use as a measurement tool,
activity sensors are also a popular motivational tool. The
ability of an individual to receive immediate feedback on
their accumulated step count is an important feature of the
motivational aspect of the applications using activity sensors
data [15]. A comparative study suggests that the greatest
increase in step counts occurs when participants are requested
to wear an unsealed sensor and record their step counts real
time.
Engaging patients requires user friendly interfaces and user
friendly interaction with the systems. Patients often have to
cope with various physiological measurements instruments (ei-
ther active or passive): blood pressure, blood sugar and weight.
Willingness to measure these parameters strongly depends on
the complexity of the user interface of the measuring device
or sensor, as well as the data transfer process [16].
Based on an extensive literature study, H. op den Akker
et al. [17] identiﬁed six key areas for research to improve
digital coaching for physical activity by tailoring to the in-
dividual user. Two of them are of interest here: advanced
Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and pervasive coaching.
To increase perceived intelligence of a coaching system, a
virtual coach offers an interesting opportunity as an interface
metaphor. Bickmore et al. [2] studied the effects of inter-
ventions for multiple health behaviors using conversational
agents as a coaching system. This study showed that virtual
conversational agent as a coach can have a positive effect on
perceived relationship of a patient with an eHealth system.
Computer tailoring and personalized eHealth offer great
potential for motivating people by providing personal infor-
mation and feedback [18]. Characteristics of an intervention,
such as enabling personal goal setting and providing tailored
feedback are thought to be among the important factors related
to of use of and exposure to lifestyle support systems. Next
to tailoring, personal feedback needs to be dynamic to provide
new information and real time feedback on the daily activities.
The user study of Consolvo et al. [14] reports that negative
feedback or paternalism has a negative impact on the users.
B. Mobile eHealth and Coaching
Mobile devices providing personalized feedback to inﬂu-
ence physical activity behavior are gaining more and more
popularity [19]. There are few examples of mobile health
applications (apps) speciﬁc for behavior change and physical
activity support [5] [19] [20]. Despite a huge range of health-
related apps on the market, there is little in depth research on
user experiences and views on a wide range of features that
apps can provide.
Fanning et al. [19] present extensive review on efﬁcacy of
mobile devices in the physical activity and recommendations
for implementation. This study concludes that mobile technol-
ogy applied in behavior change interventions is an effective
tool for increasing physical activity.
User studies in mobile health research are rarely performed
with young adults, though adolescents are forerunners of
mobile technology. Dennison et al. [20] present the ﬁndings
of a focus group study with students on the use of mobile
apps to support a healthy lifestyle, the attitude of adolescents
on the usefulness of various features of such apps. The results
suggest that the most important factors inﬂuencing the use and
uptake of mobile apps are accuracy, legitimacy, security, effort
required, and immediate effects on mood. Another features
that young adults valued were ability to record and track own
behavior and goals, as well as the ability to receive advice
and real time information. Interesting ﬁnding from this study
is that context-sensing capabilities of mobile apps and social
media features were perceived as unnecessary.
Consolvo et al. [14] reports a long-term user evaluation
with the UbiFit system which aims at raising individual
awareness on physical activity level. The results show that
glanceable representations of information on personal, mobile
displays can stimulate the person to do more exercises. These
ﬁndings are consistent with another study [21].
C. Serious Gaming for Lifestyle Support
New forms of entertainment media such as serious gaming
are used for promoting healthy lifestyle [22]. Serious gaming
and interactive gaming elements embedded in eHealth technol-
ogy offer great potential in innovative opportunities for engag-
ing adolescents and other patients in interventions promoting
healthy nutrition habits and physical activity changes that can
contribute to obesity prevention and healthier lifestyle [22].
III.
USER EVALUATIONS OF A MOBILE ANIMATED
ACTIVITY COACHING SYSTEM
As humans interact with many different devices during the
day, cross media systems offer the opportunity for the activity
coach to travel with the user across those devices. Depending
on the needs and context of the user, coaching can thus be
provided on the most suitable device (e.g., smartphone, PC,
smart television) [23].
A. Digitial Coaching Architectures
A multi-device digital coaching can have a more central-
ized or a more decentralized architecture. The main difference
is in the measure of autonomy of the mobile coaching appli-
cation. The Continuous Care & Coaching Platform (C3PO),
developed at Roessingh Research and Development (RRD)
in the Netherlands, enables continuous remote monitoring of
elderly patients and patients with chronic disorders [24]. In
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the C3PO platform, there is only one device with which the
patients users interact, the smartphone. The care givers can
view patient data that is uploaded to a server. An activity
monitoring and feedback system was designed to guide pa-
tients in reaching a healthy daily activity pattern. Objective
daily activity is assessed using an inertial sensor node that
captures and communicates wireless. The sensor can store
large amount of data and send the data over Bluetooth to a
PDA (an Android based HTC Desire) where further processing
and communication to the patient is handled. The users receive
feedback on their smartphone at scheduled times or if their
activity level calls for this. In this decentralized architecture
the coaching rules reside on the client-side mobile. In contrast
to this, in the centralized architecture of the Smarcos platform
the coaching rules reside on the server (see Figure 1 for an
overview). Based on server side stored sensor data or on ﬁxed
times, the server sends a message to the client, who can receive
the message on the device of his own choice. To upload activity
data the user has to connect his sensor to the internet.
In the Smarcos system, feedback is a reminder to connect
the activity monitor to upload data, a motivating message when
activity is less than the target or an overview of daily, weekly
and monthly scores. A drawback of the Smarcos system
compared to the RRD system is that feedback is not real-time.
The RRD system allows immediate feedback based on recent
data collected from the sensor. A call for urgent medication
intake (e.g., in a diabetes I medication coach) requires real-
time feedback. In the Smarcos system, scores are presented
as percentages of a user set target score and in terms of kCal.
The user can get these activity overviews on his mobile device
app, as well as via a web portal.
B. User Evaluations: Animated Virtual Coach
User evaluations were performed throughout the devel-
opment of the Smarcos coaching system [23] for physical
activity support and diabetes II patients. We performed short
user evaluation with diabetes patients and ofﬁce workers. We
focused on the graphical user interface, on the interaction
and on personal feedback in particular. We looked at timing,
content, modality and presentation format. We are particularly
interested in the application of animated virtual humans and
multi-modal natural dialog as a means for interaction between
the user and the digital coach. At the Human Media Inter-
action group we developed mobile technology for responsive
animated Embodied Conversational Agents (ECAs) [26] for
the presentation of feedback on a mobile app. The system can
produce ECA behaviors (eye blink, eye gaze, head movements,
lip sync with natural speech and facial expressions) speciﬁed in
the Behavior Markup Language (BML) [27]. In the centralized
Smarcos system the server sends a feedback message to a
client containing a BML speciﬁcation. The BML contains the
text to be pronounced by the ECA as well as the non-verbal
embodiments.
The mobile animated virtual coach was used in several
short user experiments with the Smarcos architecture, as well
as with the decentralized coaching platform developed at
Roessing Research and Development [23].
In a ‘long-term’ user evaluation with the Smarcos system
ofﬁce workers (forty-one completed the evaluation, aged 21-
57 years) were randomly assigned to one of three groups: one
group (N=19) received feedback as text (TXT), a second group
(N=15) received feedback by an animated agent (ECA). A third
control group (N=9) did not receive feedback message on the
smart phone. They could only get feedback via the web portal.
Overview of activity is shown graphically in both conditions.
Interviews and questionnaires were used at the start, halfway
and at the end of the six week period. After a calibration week
to measure their regular daily activity level users could set
their target activity level themselves. This level is presented as
a reference for the actual daily activity.
Results of a six weeks user evaluation with the physical
activity coaching system show that Physical Activity Level
(PAL) values do not differ between the ECA and TXT con-
dition. Thus feedback by means of an ECA has no added
value over feedback by means of a text message if we
look at the target objective. The control group that did not
receive feedback and no reminders to upload their sensor data
performed worse compared to both ECA and TXT group.
In particular, in the control group the mean of the PAL
values dropped from week 4 onwards. We used a Mann-
Whitney U test to compare the results between the different
groups. At the end of week 6 the PAL level of the ECA
group wa signiﬁcantly less than the mean for the TXT group
((Mdn = 1, 61), U = 36, 00, p = 0, 014, r = −0, 460). The
number of uploads of PAL data in the control group was
signiﬁcantly less than in the TXT group during all six weeks
((Mdn = 3, 00), U = 51, 00, p = 0, 045, r = 0, 378).
Interviews and questionnaires reveal that on smartphones
users prefer glanceable presentation of feedback messages.
Reading the short text message is faster than listening to
the spoken message. Smart phones are for quick access and
glanceable presentation of feedback ﬁts the message and the
use context. In line with the conclusions of Lisetti et al. [28],
we believe that the opportunities offered by the technology
of animated conversational characters are exploited fully in
multi-modal spoken personalised emphatic dialogs with the
user. The user evaluations reported by Lisetti et al. had a
similar objective as ours but the research methods differ in
a number of ways. The most important is that Lisetti uses
a lab test; therefore, we had a real-life evaluation. A second
important difference is that our ECA platform is based on the
BML framework and runs on mobile platforms. This offers
new opportunities for coaching systems in clinical applications.
A cross media or multi-device coaching system can support
the execution of an intervention program in which a team of
human and virtual coaches work towards a negotiated goal, or
to sustain a certain lifestyle. Such a blended format combining
virtual coaching with real-world coaching is a novelty in HCI
design.
IV.
USER EVALUATIONS: PERSUASIVE DESIGN FACTORS
FOR EHEALTH AND SOCIAL MEDIA APPS
Sexual health is a speciﬁc sensitive subject in many cultures
and there is little research on the effects of prevention-focused
interventions in this domain. The exploratory user study aimed
at identifying the design features interventions have to possess
to facilitate qualitatively well-designed and tailored eHealth
interventions in the future and to evaluate currently available
ones. We investigated which design factors are important using
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 1: Overview of the multi-sensor multi-device digital coaching system developed in the Smarcos project [25].
focus group discussions with high-risk adolescents. The user
study focused on social media, serious games, mobile appli-
cations and the use of personal virtual coaching for lifestyle
support. Primary research question was which persuasive de-
sign factors inﬂuence the use and adoption of various eHealth
interventions in public sexual health services.
In total, 37 young adults with low socio-economical and
various ethnical backgrounds (51, 4% male and 48,6% female;
age 12 - 24 years, M=17,4 SD=3,1) participated in four focus
group discussions. Participants are considered as having ethnic
origin in case if at least one parent comes from abroad.
Participants explored and gave feedback on a number of
existing and new social media applications and modern media
applications in a focus group setting. All sessions were audio
recorded with participants permission.
Participants were also asked to express their opinion about
the three new concepts for new media applications integrated
in modern social media, namely, (i) a serious game embedded
in the existing social network, e.g., Facebook, (ii) a mobile
application functionality embedded in Facebook, and (iii) a
personal virtual coach embedded in either a social network,
a website or a mobile application. Each concept represented
certain persuasive factors which were discussed using clear
visual examples without naming the exact factor.
In the last part, adolescents shared their own ideas and
tips about promoting public sexual health services and healthy
lifestyle via eHealth applications and social media. The script,
the power point slides and the duration of various parts of
the focus group session were ﬁrst tested during a pilot session
and adjusted based on the outcome. An assistant took notes
and answered questions about the group assignments.
During the data analysis, audio ﬁles were fully transcribed,
analyzed, coded and categorized. The social support elements
have been coded according to the Persuasive System Design
model [29]. An analysis of the inﬂuence of persuasive fac-
tors on the response of adolescents towards various types of
presented media was done.
A. Result of the Focus Group Study
The results of the focus group study showed that adoles-
cents have positive attitude towards the use of a personal virtual
coach for health promotion, as long as they perceive there
is a real human behind the virtual character. Several impor-
tant design factors were identiﬁed during the data analysis.
Anonymity was found as the most important factor, which
has important implications for the use of social networks for
sexual well-being enhancement. Social media networks lack
privacy and therefore eHealth applications, for example on
Facebook, are not a recommended media for enhancing sexual
well-being of high-risk adolescents. Instead, social networks
can be used to increase the familiarity of the target group with
the existing interventions. The next factor, level of interactivity
was identiﬁed as indispensable. Serious games and mobile
applications are expected to have a high level of interactivity
to better engage users and thus increase uptake of lifestyle
interventions. The type of platform the eHealth technology
is realized on was another essential factor. Personal mobile
devices, and smart phones in particular, were most preferred
due the high level of privacy and familiar user experience. In
addition to the factors mentioned above, the reliability of the
information source was clearly an important issue across all
media types. Participants stated the importance of the clear
visibility of the information source, as well as the logo or the
name of the health organization behind the intervention. An-
other factor, namely, support for visual aids, was also identiﬁed
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

across all types of applications. Speciﬁc to adolescents with
low soci-economical background, lifestyle interventions have
to be more visually aided. The language use in the content has
to be simple, low threshold and preferably in several languages
to reach various ethnic groups. Applying these factors in the
design of eHealth technologies should increase their uptake
and usefulness for enhancing sexual well-being of high-risk
adolescents and contribute to healthier lifestyle.
V.
LESSONS LEARNED: PERSONAL COACHING AND
LIFESTYLE SUPPORT
What have we learned from studies about the effects of a
virtual coach in lifestyle coaching systems? In general, user
studies showed positive attitude towards the use of a virtual
coach for lifestyle change support. Users prefer to be in control
of how, when and on what device they want to receive personal
feedback from a virtual coach. In addition, we learned that
users want to monitor their history and progress: what they
have done and what they should do next. They expect a
connection between the goal-setting features for behavioral
change and the personal coach to support them.
Motivation is an important factor when it comes to the
willingness to use a particular lifestyle coaching system. It
makes a difference if an eHealth intervention is supported by
a real human healthcare professional. Effective coaching and
tailored feedback in terms of its timing, content and interaction
design are crucial elements in affecting behavioral change. The
next generation of the lifestyle coaching systems will be able to
predict the optimal timing for providing feedback by analyzing
previously given feedback messages. A personal target has to
be challenging and reachable, step by step, within a set period
of time.
Next lesson is the need to provide personalized (tailored)
feedback: show progress towards target, adjust target, motivate,
suggest actions, provide real time information. Facilitating
navigation through information that user needs is also found
important, for example by offering a user to search information
by alternative interaction modalities such as speech input.
However, the coach should not talk to the user when the
head phone is unplugged. Therefore, a context-sensitive smart
sensors technology is needed to enable this feature.
Online coaching also needs to be better integrated with
ofﬂine feedback to stimulate the participation and commitment
of the user to a lifestyle intervention [30]. Combining real-
time usage behavior data with personalized virtual coaching
and timely persuasive feedback can contribute to higher en-
gagement and better uptake of lifestyle change support system
by patients as well as healthcare professionals.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Applying user-centered design techniques can signiﬁcantly
improve the appeal of the user interface and thus the en-
gagement with personal lifestyle coaching system [31]. Next
to the ease-of-use, visual appeal and clear presentation, the
user experience has to be enjoyable and rewarding. Active
engagement of the user in interaction with lifestyle intervention
is crucial to ensure prolonged use of an intervention.
There is a need for guidelines and standardization for
eHealth technology in general [10], as well as for the lifestyle
interventions, in particular. In addition, the multi-device ar-
chitecture is necessary to enable easy exchange of monitoring
data between web-based and private mobile parts of lifestyle
support systems. This paper makes two contributions: (1) new
insights into the existing lifestyle interventions with virtual
coaching, their limitations and recommendations for improve-
ments (lack of unanimity in interface and interaction, etc.)
and (2) integrated approach, by considering a multi-device
eHealth system with motivational design features (such as
timely feedback) which increases the involvement of patients
as well as healthcare professionals.
To conclude, lifestyle behavior support systems need to be
be evaluated throughout all stages of the eHealth technology
development cycle. Furthermore, it is also essential to evaluate
the effects of eHealth interventions that have already been
disseminated, using multidisciplinary approach and by inde-
pendent evaluators.
A. Future Challenges in Evaluating eHealth Systems
One of the main future challenges in eHealth technology
[10] is developing a mixed methods approach and standards
for evaluating the effects of eHealth from a user perspective
[5] [8]. Validated instruments for user evaluations are needed
to measure the effects of personalized eHealth interventions,
such as changes in lifestyle or other behavior change [32]. The
ﬁeld of eHealth technology and telemedicine can beneﬁt from
adopting design and evaluation methods from the ﬁeld of HCI.
HCI evaluation methods are well suited for the short-term user
evaluation to measure the effects of intervention before the
long-term implementation. Naturally, HCI evaluation methods
need to be adjusted to the speciﬁc goal of the eHealth tech-
nology and multi-device lifestyle support systems in particular
[31]. In return, HCI ﬁeld can beneﬁt from the active logging
methods and eHealth techniques for analyzing usage behavior
patterns for better tailoring of personalized feedback [9] [10]
[33].
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all participants of the focus groups and other
user studies, Municipal Health Services and social workers.
Special thanks are due to Irina Lehmann and Cristel Boom
for assistance in recruitment and data analysis. Part of the
work presented is funded by the EU, within the framework
of the ARTEMIS JU SP8 SMARCOS project 100249. Focus
group study is a part of Sense eHealth project funded by the
Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport (VWS) and is carried
out in collaboration with the Dutch National Institute for Public
Health and Environment (RIVM).
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Yekeh and J. Kay, “Hypothesis evaluation based on ubicomp sens-
ing: Moving from researchers to users,” in Persuasive’13, ser. CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, S. Berkovsky and J. Freyne, Eds., vol. 973,
2013.
[2]
T. W. Bickmore, D. Schulman, and C. Sidner, “Automated interventions
for multiple health behaviors using conversational agents,” Patient
education and counseling, vol. 92(2), August 2013, pp. 142–148.
[3]
T. W. Bickmore, L. Caruso, and K. Clough-Gorr, “Acceptance and
usability of a relational agent interface by urban older adults,” in
ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI’05).
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 1212–1215.
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[4]
H. op den Akker, M. Tabak, M. Marin-Perianu, R. Huis in ’t
Veld, D. V. M. Jones, D. Hofs, T. M. T¨onis, B. W. van Schooten,
P. M. M. Vollenbroek-Hutten, and P. H. J. Hermens, “Development
and evaluation of a sensor-based system for remote monitoring and
treatment of chronic diseases - the continuous care & coaching
platform,” in 6th International Symposium on eHealth Services and
Technologies, EHST 2012.
Portugal: SciTePress - Science and
Technology Publications, July 2012, pp. 19–27. [Online]. Available:
http://doc.utwente.nl/83432/ [retrieved: Jan 29, 2014]
[5]
L. Van Velsen, N. Nijhof, and O. Kulyk, “Health 2.0 emerging tech-
nologies,” in Improving eHealth, J. van Gemert-Pijnen, O. Petersen, and
H. Ossebaard, Eds.
Boom Publishers, den Haag, The Netherlands,
2013, pp. 111–126.
[6]
S. Ananthanarayan and K. Siek, “Persuasive wearable technology
design for health and wellness,” in 6th International Conference on Per-
vasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth’12),
2012, pp. 236–240.
[7]
N. Nijland, “Grounding ehealth: towards a holistic framework for
sustainable ehealth technologies,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands, January 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://doc.utwente.nl/75576/ [retrieved: Jan 29, 2014]
[8]
E. J. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, C. H.
Ossebaard, M. S. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, and R. E. Seydel, “A holistic
framework to improve the uptake and impact of ehealth technologies,”
J Med Internet Res, vol. 13, no. 4, Dec 2011, p. e111. [Online].
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22155738 [retrieved:
Jan 29, 2014]
[9]
M. S. Kelders, E. J. Van Gemert-Pijnen, A. Werkman, N. Nijland,
and R. E. Seydel, “Effectiveness of a web-based intervention aimed at
healthy dietary and physical activity behavior: A randomized controlled
trial about users and usage,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 13, no. 2, Apr
2011, p. e32.
[10]
K. D. Ahern, M. J. Kreslake, and M. J. Phalen, “What is ehealth (6):
Perspectives on the evolution of ehealth research,” J Med Internet Res,
vol. 8, no. 1, Mar 2006, p. e4.
[11]
S. Pingree, R. Hawkins, T. Baker, L. duBenske, L. Roberts, and
D. Gustafson, “The value of theory for enhancing and understanding
e-health interventions,” American journal of preventive medicine, vol.
38(1), 2010, pp. 103–109.
[12]
H. Oh, C. Rizo, M. Enkin, and A. Jadad, “What is ehealth (3): A
systematic review of published deﬁnitions,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 7,
no. 1, Feb 2005, p. e1.
[13]
A. Black, J. Car, C. Pagliari, C. Anandan, and K. e. a. Cress-
well, “The impact of ehealth on the quality and safety of health
care: A systematic overview,” PLoS Med, vol. 8(1), 2011, e1000387.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000387 [retrieved: Jan 29, 2014].
[14]
S. Consolvo, P. Klasnja, D. W. McDonald, D. Avrahami, J. Froehlich,
L. LeGrand, R. Libby, K. Mosher, and J. A. Landay, “Flowers or a
robot army?: Encouraging awareness & activity with personal, mobile
displays,” in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing, ser. UbiComp ’08.
New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2008, pp. 54–63.
[15]
S. A. Clemes and R. A. Parker, “Increasing our understanding of
reactivity to pedometers in adults,” Medicine & Science in Sports &
Exercise, 2009.
[16]
M. Kasza, V. Szucs, A. Vegh, and T. Torok, “Passive vs. active
measurement: The role of smart sensors,” in The Fifth International
Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and
Technologies, 2011.
[17]
H. op den Akker, R. Klaassen, R. op den Akker, V. Jones, and
H. Hermens, “Opportunities for smart amp; tailored activity coaching,”
in Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS), 2013 IEEE 26th Inter-
national Symposium on, 2013, pp. 546–547.
[18]
W. Brouwer, A. Oenema, R. Crutzen, J. de Nooijer, N. de Vries, and
J. Brug, “An exploration of factors related to dissemination of and
exposure to internet-delivered behavior change interventions aimed at
adults: A delphi study approach,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 10(2):e10,
2008.
[19]
J. Fanning, P. S. Mullen, and E. McAuley, “Increasing physical activity
with mobile devices: A meta-analysis,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 14 (6),
Nov 2012, p. e161.
[20]
L. Dennison, L. Morrison, G. Conway, and L. Yardley, “Opportunities
and challenges for smartphone applications in supporting health behav-
ior change: Qualitative study,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 15, no. 4, Apr
2013, p. e86.
[21]
S. Bosch, M. Marin-Perianu, R. Marin-Perianu, P. Havinga, and H. Her-
mens, “Keep on moving! activity monitoring and stimulation using
wireless sensor networks,” in Smart Sensing and Context, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, P. Barnaghi, K. Moessner, M. Presser, and
S. Meissner, Eds.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2009, vol. 5741, pp.
11–23.
[22]
T. Baranowski and L. Frankel, “Let’s get technical! gaming and tech-
nology for weight control and health promotion in children,” Childhood
Obesity, vol. 8(1), 2012, pp. 34–37.
[23]
R. op den Akker, R. Klaassen, T. Lavrysen, G. Geleijnse, A. van
Halteren,
H.
Schwietert,
and
M.
van
der
Hout,
“A
personal
context-aware multi-device coaching service that supports a healthy
lifestyle,” in Proceedings of the 25th BCS Conference on Human-
Computer
Interaction,
ser.
BCS-HCI
’11.
Swinton,
UK,
UK:
British Computer Society, 2011, pp. 443–448. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2305316.2305397 [retrieved: Jan 29,
2014]
[24]
H. op den Akker, M. Tabak, M. Marin-Perianu, M. H. A. Huis in ’t Veld,
V. M. Jones, D. H. W. Hofs, T. M. T¨onis, B. W. van Schooten, M. M. R.
Vollenbroek-Hutten, and H. J. Hermens, “Development and evaluation
of a sensor-based system for remote monitoring and treatment of chronic
diseases - the continuous care & coaching platform,” in Proceedings of
the 6th International Symposium on eHealth Services and Technologies,
EHST 2012, Geneva, Switzerland.
Portugal: SciTePress - Science and
Technology Publications, July 2012, pp. 19–27.
[25]
R. Klaassen, R. op den Akker, and H. op den Akker, “Feedback
presentation for mobile personalised digital physical activity coaching
platforms,” in Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on
Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments, ser. PETRA
’13.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 64:1–64:8. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2504335.2504404 [retrieved: Jan
29, 2014]
[26]
R. Klaassen, J. Hendrix, D. Reidsma, R. op den Akker, B. Dijk, and
H. op den Akker, “Elckerlyc goes mobile-enabling natural interaction
in mobile user interfaces,” International journal on advances in telecom-
munications, vol. 6 (1-2), 2013, pp. 45–56.
[27]
H. Vilhjalmsson, N. Cantelmo, J. Cassell, N. E. Chafai, M. Kipp,
S. Kopp, M. Mancini, S. Marsella, A. N. Marshall, C. Pelachaud,
Z. Ruttkay, K. R. Thorisson, H. van Welbergen, and R. J. van der Werf,
“The behavior markup language: Recent developments and challenges,”
in Intelligent Virtual Agents, ser. LNCS, C. Pelachaud, J.-C. Martin,
E. Andre, G. Collet, K. Karpouzis, and D. Pele, Eds., vol. 4722. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 99–111.
[28]
C. Lisetti, R. Amini, U. Yasavur, and N. Rishe, “I can help you change!
an empathic virtual agent delivers behavior change health interventions,”
ACM Trans. Manage. Inf. Syst., vol. 4, no. 4, Dec. 2013, pp. 19:1–
19:28.
[29]
H. Oinas-Kukkonen and M. Harjumaa, “Persuasive systems design: Key
issues, process model, and system features,” Communications of the
Association for Information Systems, vol. 24(28), 2009.
[30]
J. Freyne, I. Saunders, E. Brindal, S. Berkovsky, and G. S. 0003,
“Factors associated with persistent participation in an online diet
intervention.” in Extended Abstracts of the ACM Annual Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2012, J. A. Konstan, E. H.
Chi, and K. H¨o¨ok, Eds.
ACM, 2012, pp. 2375–2380.
[31]
J. Scholtz and S. Consolvo, “Toward a framework for evaluating
ubiquitous computing applications,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 3,
2004, pp. 82–88.
[32]
P. Klasnja, S. Consolvo, and W. Pratt, “How to evaluate technologies for
health behavior change in hci research,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 3063–3072.
[33]
A. Barak, L. Hen, M. Boniel-Nissim, and N. Shapira, “A comprehen-
sive review and a meta-analysis of the effectiveness of internet-based
psychotherapeutic interventions,” Journal of Technology in Human
Services, vol. 26(2-4), 2008, pp. 109–160.
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

