Proposal of Field Oriented Event Messaging System 
 
Yoshitoshi Murata, Rintaro Takahashi, Tomoki 
Yamato 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-mail: y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp, {g031n100, 
g031n161}@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Shohei Yoshida, Masahiko Okamura 
Graduate School of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University Graduate School 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-mail: {g231n034, g231p005}@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp  
 
Abstract— Several kinds of communication systems have been 
provided to hospitals in recent years. In these network systems, 
connected terminal equipment is managed and operated on a 
central console. This means that an operator is needed to do 
the job. To address this problem, we have proposed and 
developed a novel event messaging system for hospitals in 
which a sensor device paired with a mobile terminal reads a 
Quick Response Code (QR-code) on a display of sensor devices 
at a patient’s bedside. When the device detects a patient is 
having trouble, it sends event messages to the terminal. The 
system enables hospital workers to take over the handling of 
patient monitoring operations by reading the original QR-code 
on their own mobile terminal. 
Keywords-hospital; communication system; nurse call; 
patient monitoring system; QR-code. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Several kinds of communication systems have been 
provided to hospitals in recent years. They are roughly 
classified into call systems and remote patient monitoring 
systems. The latter are divided into event monitoring and 
data measuring types, which are sometimes integrated as a 
comprehensive network system. In Japan for example, 
Carecom Inc. provides a patient-nurse hotline system [1]. In 
this system, several kinds of sensor devices are connected to 
the hotline. One such device is a mat sensor to detect patients 
leaving their bed [2]. The mat is beside the bed and if a 
patient steps on it, an alert is sent to a nurse station. 
Honeywell provides a tracking and localization system 
integrated with a patient communication system and a call 
system [3]. General Electric Company (GE) provides many 
kinds of patient monitoring equipment [4]. They are 
connected to a central computer server through an intranet in 
a hospital. This makes it possible for medical professionals 
to monitor measured data. 
In these network systems, connected terminal equipment 
such as patient monitoring equipment that allows measured 
data to be accessed is managed and operated on a central 
console. This means that an operator is needed to do the job, 
which is not always the case in emergency situations. 
To address this problem, we propose a novel event 
messaging system in which a monitoring terminal by the 
patient’s bedside is connected to a wireless relay unit such as 
a smartphone or PC. The wireless relay unit is connected to a 
remote monitoring terminal and a QR-code is read on the 
latter. This operation can be done at the bedside of a patient. 
We assume that this operation would be done by a medical 
worker such as a nurse who has a remote monitoring 
terminal. When the device detects a patient is having trouble, 
it sends a message to a remote monitoring terminal. A 
medical worker who receives the message would go to the 
monitored patient. We developed a wireless relay unit and a 
remote monitoring terminal using an Android smartphone. 
This makes it possible to hand the patient monitoring 
operation to another worker merely by having the latter read 
the QR-code on the preceding smartphone. This operation is 
the same as reading the original QR-code. 
We developed two patient monitoring systems that use 
this 
messaging 
system. 
One 
monitors cases 
when 
intravenous feeding devices are removed from a patient and 
the other monitors cases when the patient leaves the bed. 
After introducing related work, we will describe the 
concepts of this system in Section III. Practical monitoring 
systems are introduced in Section IV. Conclusions and future 
work are described in Section V.  
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Remote monitoring systems for patients have been put to 
use ever since communication systems for sending messages 
from monitoring equipment to hospital personnel first 
started to be used. 
One example is the “Risho Catch” system Paramount 
Bed Inc. has developed [5]. “Risho” means getting out of a 
bed in Japanese. This system detects when a patient sits up 
in bed, sits on the side of the bed, or leaves the bed and 
walks around the room. When this happens, it sends a 
message to a nurse station through a patient-nurse hotline 
system. The system structure is shown in Fig. 1.  
 
Figure 1. System and network structure of “Risho Catch.” 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A load sensor unit in the bed is connected to the patient-
nurse hotline system through a relay unit located at the 
patient’s bedside. The nurse station has a monitor and 
console terminal through which messages are sent to mobile 
devices. 
Balaguera et al. evaluated decreasing the number of falls 
from bed using the SensableCare System [6]. Its architecture 
is shown in Fig. 2. The sensor pad in the system sends data 
through a cable to the control box located at the patient’s 
bedside. The control box wirelessly transmits this data to 
Bluetooth routers located throughout the ward. This 
information then travels through the hospital network to the 
dashboard and docking server where the data is analyzed. 
When an alert is sent to the nurse via an application on 
his/her mobile phone, it is wirelessly transmitted through 
the hospital’s Wi-Fi network. The patient’s condition is 
monitored on the dashboard terminal.  
 
 
Figure 2. Architecture of the SensableCare System. 
 
In both systems, the console terminal in the nurse station 
must be connected to the sensor unit, which the terminal 
must operate. This makes it hard to change monitoring 
terminals to other patients. 
In the early 2000s, there were several remote patient 
monitoring systems that used the General Packet Radio 
Service/Wireless Local Area Network (GPRS/WLAN) as 
the wireless network and the Personal Digital Assistance 
(PDA) as the mobile device [7]-[10]. In these systems, 
sensor devices were connected to a monitor terminal or 
server through a wireless network. Since they were 
experimental systems, they had no fixed destination address. 
In recent years, several companies have been providing not 
only patient remote monitoring devices but also cloud 
services. GE provides a “GE Health Cloud” system along 
with many kinds of sensor devices and monitor devices [11]. 
The cloud manages the connecting of sensor devices to the 
hospital network and operates them on the console terminal. 
This scheme maintains a high security level but lacks 
flexibility. It makes it difficult for medical workers to install 
and pair sensor devices at the patient’s bedside.  
III. 
EVENT MESSAGING SYSTEM 
In this paper, we describe the novel messaging system. 
We designed the system so that: 
(1) Medical personnel could install sensor devices. 
(2) They could pair the sensor devices with their own mobile 
terminals at the patient’s bedside.  
(3) Pairing situations could be monitored from a console 
terminal. 
(4) Mobile terminals belonging to other organizations would 
be excluded.  
 
Therefore, no operations are performed with the console 
terminal and monitoring sensors can be easily installed at the 
patient’s bedside. The system configuration is shown in Fig. 
3. The system consists of two programs; one is for the 
wireless relay unit and the other is for the mobile terminal. 
They collaborate with the Google Firebase Cloud Service 
(GFB) [12]. The GFB has many functions. This time, we use 
an authentication functions to exclude non-registration 
terminals, real time database to manage and monitor a status 
of pairing, and push messaging function to send notifications.  
When a mobile terminal establishes pairing with a 
wireless relay unit, the ID of the wireless unit (WR-ID) must 
be entered.  We used the QR-code for a worker to enter a 
WR-ID easily. A WR-ID is inputted merely by reading a 
QR-code on a display of a wireless relay unit. This system 
using a QR-code is useful for handing monitoring work to 
another worker. The handing operation is done by a worker 
reading a QR-code on the preceding mobile terminal. This 
QR-code is created from the WR-ID read from the wireless 
relay unit. In the case shown in Fig. 3, the first message “Mr. 
P has woken up.” was sent to Worker A, and the second 
message “Mr. P has fallen.” was sent to Worker B. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Configuration of the event messaging system. 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The sequence to establish pairing between a wireless 
relay unit and a mobile terminal is shown in Fig. 4. After 
making a project to develop a messaging program, the GFB 
sends the Project code and Software Development Kit 
(Google-service. jason) to a developing PC (D. PC). These 
are installed to the wireless relay unit program and mobile 
terminal program. The wireless relay unit program creates a 
QR-code from the wireless relay ID (WR-ID). This is 
named by a developer or a user and is unique within an 
organization such as a hospital. When the mobile terminal 
program first accesses the GFB, a terminal ID (T-ID) is sent 
from the GFB. The mobile terminal program reads a QR-
code on a wireless relay unit and sends the MT-ID and WR-
ID to the GFB.  The GFB makes a pairing between a 
wireless relay unit and a mobile terminal based on the Key. 
When a sensor device detects a change of state, the wireless 
relay unit of the sensor device sends a message to the GFB. 
The GFB then pushes the message to a paired mobile 
terminal. 
 
 
Figure 4. Sequence flow of pairing and monitoring. 
 
IV. 
MONITORING APPLICATION 
We developed two monitoring applications that adopt 
the proposed event messaging system. One is a intravenous 
drip monitoring application; the other is a fall monitoring 
application. We will describe their details in this section. 
A. Intravenous drip monitoring 
Some cognitive impairment patients sometimes remove 
an intravenous drip set by themselves. One existing 
intravenous drip monitoring system uses a switch type 
sensor that fastens a drip tube to detect when a drip set is 
removed as shown in Fig. 5 [14]. In case of a “Tenteki call”, 
if a patient removes the switch type sensor together with the 
drip set, the sensor cannot detect the removal.  
 
              (a) Switch type sensor.    (b) Example of use. 
Figure 5. “Tenteki” call (Japanese), Technos Japan Co., Ltd. 
 
We use a magnetic patch and a wireless magnetic sensor 
to remove a drip set, as shown in Fig. 6. The magnet is 
fastened to the body with an adhesive film in a place such as 
an arm. An intravenous drip tube is also fastened to the 
wireless magnetic sensor and the sensor is fastened to a 
magnetic patch with a medical fixing film. When a patient 
removes an intravenous drip set, the sensor is also removed 
from the body part. However, since the magnetic patch is 
fastened to the body part with an adhesive film, it must 
remain on the body part. 
 
 
Figure 6. Structure  
 
We developed the prototype system shown in Fig. 7. We 
used 
the 
STEVAL-WESU1 
[15] 
developed 
by 
STMicroelectronics as the wireless magnetic sensor (see Fig. 
7 (a)), and an Android smartphone as the wireless relay unit 
and mobile terminal. The muscle stiffness obtained by 
equipment manufactured by PIP Co., Ltd. was used as the 
magnetic patch [16] (see Fig. 7 (b)). In this prototype 
system, the program for detecting removal is integrated with 
the wireless relay program.  
While a magnetic sensor is on a magnetic patch (see Fig. 
7 (c)), the measured magnetic strength is bigger than the 
decision level (see Fig. 7 (e)). When the magnetic sensor is 
removed (see Fig. 7 (d)), the measured magnetic strength is 
less than the decision level; the detecting program has 
determined that an intravenous drip set has been removed 
(see Fig. 7 (f)). The wireless relay program sends a message 
“Yoshida’s tube has been removed.” That message is 
displayed on the mobile terminal (see Fig. 7 (g)). 
B. Fall monitoring 
Elderly people, especially cognitive impairment patients, 
have an increased risk of falling and consequently injuring 
themselves. They need to be prevented from falling to 
maintain their health because injuries from falling are a 
major reason for them to prolong their staying in a hospital.  
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

       
 
     (a) Magnetic sensor and attached tube.      (b) Magnetic patch on an arm. 
 
              
                       
 
(c) Magnetic sensor on a magnetic patch.        (d) A removed drip set. 
 
 
(e) W. R. display          (f) W. R. display                 (g) M. T. display 
      :monitoring                : detecting tube removing  : receiving a message  
                   
Figure 7. Drip monitoring system prototype. 
 
Therefore, many kinds of fall prevention systems have 
been developed. Most of them are classified into three 
schemes. The first type uses a mat type sensor like the 
systems described in Section II, the second one uses load 
sensors that are mounted in the legs of a bed, and the third 
one uses a camera. We developed a fall prevention system 
in which MS-KINECT was used. This is one of the third 
types. M. J. Rantz developed a fall detection system that 
uses MS-KINECT [17]. A medical worker monitors and 
judges whether a patient falls through the depth image of a 
patient on a monitor display.  
On the other hand, our developed system detects 
whether a patient in a bed wakes up, sits up, stands up, or 
falls on the floor with a skeleton image of the patient. The 
detecting algorithms are as follows; 
 
(1) Waking up: detecting that the head’s height position is 
higher than the judging height 1. 
(2) Sitting up: detecting both shoulders and a spine base 
angle of 25 or more degrees. 
(3) Standing up: detecting the head, both shoulders and both 
hips, and a head is higher than the judging height 2. 
(4) Falling down: detecting that the head’s height position is 
lower than the judging height 3. 
 
 
Figure 8. Experimental image. 
 
 
We experimentally tested whether the developed system 
can detect the four conditions given above. The MS 
KINECT was positioned diagonally in front of the bed so 
that the front of the patient could be observed as shown in 
Fig. 8. Experimental results are shown in Fig. 9. Since MS-
KINECT works on a PC, the sensor device program that 
detects patient conditions with MS-KINECT and the 
wireless relay unit program are combined on a PC. 
Monitoring images of participants as patients and the QR-
code for pairing are shown on the PC display.  
 
 
 
(1) Waking up                                       (2) Sitting up 
 
 
(3) Standing up                                        (4) Falling down 
 
 
(5) Screenshot of a mobile terminal that detects a “standing up” message 
 
Figure 9. Experimental results for patient monitoring. 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The developed system can detect four conditions for a 
patient. With it, a mobile terminal receives a “standing up” 
message sent from a wireless relay unit. However, the 
system sometimes makes mistakes in detecting conditions. 
Accordingly, we plan to improve our algorithms so that 
detection accuracy will be increased. We should also 
mention that a patient using this experimental system is 
presented with color images. We plan to change these color 
images to depth images to maintain a patient’s privacy. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have developed a novel event messaging system in 
which a sensor device is paired with a mobile terminal by 
reading a QR-code on a display of sensor devices. Therefore, 
it is possible to pair them at the bedside of a patient. When 
the sensor devices detect a patient is having trouble, event 
messages are sent to a mobile terminal. We also developed a 
drip monitoring system and a fall monitoring system for use 
with the proposed event messaging system. The systems 
have not yet been used in hospitals. Accordingly, as a 
subject for future work, we plan to improve them and have 
them evaluated in hospitals. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Nurse Call BCAC, https://www.carecom.jp/global/solutions/nurse-
call-bcac/ [retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[2] Mat sensor, Carecom, https://www.carecom.jp/global/solutions 
/option/ [retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[3] Clino Guard, Ackermann, Honeywell, 
https://www.ackermann-clino.com/en/products/tracking-localization/  
[retrieved: January, 2018] . 
[4] Patient Monitors, GE, 
http://www3.gehealthcare.com/en/products/categories/patient_monito
ring/patient_monitors [retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[5] Risho catch, Paramount Bed, 
http://www.paramount.co.jp/learn/inversion/leaving   
[in Japanese, retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[6] H. U. Balaguera et al., “Using a Medical Intranet of Things System to 
Prevent Bed Falls in an Acute Care Hospital: A Pilot Study,” Journal 
of Medical Internet Research,  
https://www.jmir.org/2017/5/e150/, [retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[7] A. V. Halteren et al., “Mobile Patient Monitoring: The MobiHealth 
System,” The Journal on Information Technology in Healthcare 2004, 
vol. 2(5), pp.365–373, 2004. 
[8] Y. Lin et al., “A Wireless PDA-Based Physiological Monitoring 
System for Patient Transport,” IEEE Transactions on Information 
Technology in Biomedicine, Vol. 8, No. 4, pp.439-447, 2004. 
[9] T. Gao et al., “Vital Signs Monitoring and Patient Tracking Over a 
Wireless Network,” Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest, Vol. 27, 
No. 1, pp. 66-74, 2006. 
[10] P. Várady, Z. Benyó, and B. Benyó, “An Open Architecture Patient 
Monitoring 
System 
Using 
Standard 
Technologies,” 
IEEE 
Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, Vol. 6, No. 
1, pp. 95-98, 2002. 
[11] Patient monitoring, GE Healthcare, 
http://www3.gehealthcare.com/en/products/categories/patient_monito
ring,  [retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[12] Google Firebase Cloud Messaging, 
https://firebase.google.com/docs/cloud-messaging/?hl=en,  
 [retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[13] QR-code, 
http://www.qrcode.com/en/,  [retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[14] Tenteki call (Japanese), Technos Japan Co., Ltd., 
http://www.technosjapan.jp/product/infusion/2012/0121195451.html 
[in Japanese, retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[15] STEVAL-WESU1, STMicroelectronics, 
http://www.st.com/en/evaluation-tools/steval-wesu1.html 
[retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[16] Muscle Stiffness, http://www.pip-club.com/english/muscle.html, 
[retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[17] M. J. Rantz et al, “Automated Fall Detection With Quality 
Improvement “Rewind” to Reduce Falls in Hospital Rooms,” NIH 
Public Access, Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 40(1), pp. 13–17, 
2014. 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

