Modeling the Clinical Observation Space 
of Electronic Medical Record in Primary Care  
 
Elmehdi Aitnouri 
GPEMA R&D department 
GPEMA Canada 
Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada 
elmehdi.aitnouri@gpema.com 
Ali Abbassene 
Networking and Information Systems Team 
Centre de Développement des Technologies Avancées 
Baba Hassen, Algiers, Algeria 
a_abbassene@cdta.dz
 
 
Abstract—We present a new model for structuring clinical 
data in primary care, denoted by the observation space. This 
model is intended to be used within Electronic Medical 
Record (EMR), and is designed to meet the requirements of 
clinical contexts and nuances that characterize primary care 
practices. While these contexts are generally captured with 
free-text descriptions, structuring them makes the use of 
EMR very attractive, since it opens many possibilities such 
as clinical data exchange and the design of Clinical Decision 
Support Systems. In partnership with practitioners, the 
results presented in this paper are being used to build 
clinical patterns.  
Keywords-Electronic medical record; clinical data modeling; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Although the Electronic Medical Record (EMR) is 
clearly identified as one of the tool that may help manage 
the many primary care challenges such as population 
aging, its  use is far to be generalised [1]. Many authors 
noted that the use of EMR is not systematic since there is 
no clear consensus on how clinical aspects of EMR 
should be processed [2]. While practitioners see that 
coding clinical data will limit necessary nuances required 
for describing the clinical context and argue to use free-
text data for this purpose, managers see that coding 
clinical data is important for information gathering, 
searching and comparing as well as the possibility to use 
upstream Clinical Decision Support Systems (CDSS) [3].  
We have initiated a research project in order to design 
an intelligent clinical module to deal with clinical aspects 
in primary care. Such a module may be part of any EMR, 
and will have the ability to address the needs of 
practitioners in their diagnosis process. We have started 
with the needs to diagnose and monitor chronic diseases. 
The project has four phases as follow: Phase1 deals with 
the capture of clinical data in primary care. Phase 2 deals 
with the design of aggregation and fusion of that clinical 
data in order to extract patterns. Phase 3 deals with the 
build of the reasoning capability. Finally, phase 4 deals 
with medical knowledge management. This paper 
presents some results obtained in phase 1 of that project, 
and dealing with the structure of the observation space.  
In primary care, clinical information, denoted in this 
article by Primary Care Clinical Data (PCCD), may be 
classified in nine categories, namely symptoms, signs, 
review of systems, medications, labs, personal history, 
family history, style of life and demographic data [4]. In 
their study of the applicability of medical data standards 
in clinical research, Richesson and Krischer [5] 
concluded that there is still much work to be done since 
many gaps have been identified, especially in the area of 
physical exam: “There is a conspicuous lack of medical 
standards for the structuring of questions and case report 
form, particularly in the areas of physical exam, medical 
history, 
family 
history, 
and 
eligibility 
criteria”. 
Interestingly, the major gaps concern directly structuring 
and standardizing PCCDs.  
The present work investigates on how to structure 
some of the PCCD, especially those describing the 
clinical observation. In addition to the first classification 
of the PCCD in nine classes, it is possible to consider a 
further 
categorization 
following 
the 
approach 
recommended by Scheuermann [6] for treating diseases 
and diagnosis within an ontological point of view. The 
approach suggests that diseases may be considered as 
predispositions rooted in physical disorders in the 
organism and realized in pathological process. This 
conceptualization of diseases helps to divide PCCD in 
two main categories. On one hand, the observation space 
groups PCCD that describe the manifestation of the 
disease phenomenon, namely symptoms, signs and review 
of the systems. On the other hand, the predisposition 
space groups the remaining PCCD and describes pre-
clinical and pre-conditions that make the disease follows 
a given course. This article will focus on the structuring 
of the observation space and propose a global model of it.       
This paper is organized as follow. Section 2 
introduces the PCCD’s and will focus on the description 
of the observation space. Section 3 discusses how it is 
possible to structure it in order to capture clinical nuances 
and contexts. Section 4 presents results of the application 
of the observation space model to a real clinical case. 
II. 
PRIMARY CARE CLINICAL DATA (PCCD) 
PCCDs are categorized following their functional 
characteristics, independently of patient’s health and 
disease diagnosis. It is possible to further categorize 
PCCDs in order to understand the clinical data structure 
in primary care. For this purpose, it is important to return 
to the pathophysiological basis of diseases [7]. 
Contemporary classification of human disease derives 
from observational correlation between pathological 
analysis and clinical syndromes, which makes diseases 
primarily described by symptoms and signs they cause.          
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

However, diseases are dispositions rooted in physical 
disorders in the organism and realized in pathological 
processes. The disorders are active and the organism as a 
complex system will use all required metabolic fluxes to 
recover the homeostasis. If a deregulation exceeds a given 
threshold or organisms fail to recover the homeostasis, a 
pathological process triggers and a disease course, which 
may vary widely between patients who have the same 
disease, starts [6].   
A. Observation Space  
      The observation space is the clinical picture of a 
patient on a given point in time of a disease evolution. 
     The 
observation 
space 
contains 
the 
PCCDs 
symptoms, signs, and review of systems. It describes the 
condition of the patient's organism due to the effect of the 
disease. From this space, a practitioner should answer the 
question, what is the clinical condition of the patient 
given these observations? Theoretically, to construct the 
observation space, physicians are not required to know 
the diagnosis or the disease of the patient.   
B. Predisposition space  
      The predisposition space represents all preclinical 
conditions of a patient that may variably influence the 
evolution of a disease course. 
The predisposition space contains the PCCDs labs, 
demographic data, past medical history, present medical 
condition, family history, present medication, and style of 
life. It represents the preclinical conditions of a patient 
independently of any actual pathological process. The 
predispositions will condition any disease course. From 
this space, the practitioner should answer the question: 
Given the information gathered from the predisposition 
space, what should be the clinical picture of the patient 
for a given pathology? Many clinical researches 
concentrate on discovering relations between some 
predisposition space PCCD and disease severities. 
  This paper focuses on the structuring of the 
observation space. 
III. 
STRUCTURING OF THE OBSERVATION SPACE 
    Due to the presence of symptoms, the observation 
space is subjective and contextual. It is, however, this 
space who introduces the major clinical nuances which 
require free-text description. The present work will focus 
on describing how data and information that constitute 
this space may be structured and modeled in taking into 
account appropriate medical knowledge and practices.  
A. Symptom model  
    Symptoms are the kernel of the observation space. A 
symptom is a subjective evidence of a disease perceived 
by the patient. Psychological aspects have seldom 
evident effects on how patients perceive and report what 
they feel.  It has been reported that patients that 
categorize themselves with a group of people that have a 
given illness will perceive concurrent symptoms relevant 
to that illness to be more severe [8]. This is a clear 
evidence of the subjectivity character of symptoms. They 
are also the main input of CDSS due to the fact that 
knowledge on diseases is described in terms of 
symptoms. Major CDSS, such as rule-based, model 
disease 
knowledge 
as 
causal 
relevance 
between 
symptoms and diseases, and symptoms are generally 
described by only their intensities [9]. Innocent [10], 
however, proposed a way to add temporal aspects to 
model the causal relevance between symptoms and 
diseases, and proposed rules such as: Influenza always 
causes symptom fever in day one to day 3.  
    Providing only few attributes to describe symptoms is 
far to be enough for practitioners who want to capture 
different clinical nuances and contexts.  In a specialized 
literature, symptoms are described by many attributes.    
    Here are two examples of symptoms that need many 
attributes to be described: 
    “Complains of intermittent severe pain in lower 
abdomen since the last three weeks”.  
“Severe pain in the upper abdomen for five days.     
Burning in nature especially occurs at night in bed”.  
    It is possible to categorize the clinical information of 
each symptom as illustrated in the following table: 
TABLE I.  
 CLINICAL INFORMATION CATEGORIES 
 
    We propose, in this work, to define symptoms with a 
set of attributes as follows: 
    Standard Symptom Qualifiers (SSQ) is defined to be a 
set of attributes that describe a symptom SSQ = {onset, 
duration, periodicity, intensity, quality, site, factors}. 
 
    The actual symptom model does not take into account 
influences other than those of the observed disease, such 
as associated symptoms, previous episodes, etc. 
B. Sign model  
    A sign is an objective evidence of a disease perceptible 
to the physical examiner.  Signs are findings resulting 
from the physical examination of the patient. This 
definition compared to that of symptoms doesn’t allow to 
totally discriminating between these two concepts. The 
borders are fuzzy and there is an overlap. However, in 
order to understand the observation space, it is important 
to examine how signs information is present and what are 
their relations with symptoms. In the literature, signs are 
not always defined as a medical entity that may be 
analyzed independently of diseases.  In this work, signs 
are classified in two main categories, which we may call 
respectively signs and symptom-signs.  
    A symptom-sign is a sign that is associated with a 
symptom and will fuse with it once evaluated.   
Descriptors 
Description1 
Description2 
Onset 
 
- 
Duration 
3 weeks 
5 days 
Intensity 
Severe 
Severe 
Location 
Lower abdomen 
Upper abdomen 
Quality 
- 
Burning 
Periodicity 
Intermittent 
- 
Factors 
- 
Night in bed 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The fever symptom is an example. A patient may report a 
fever as symptom, and the physician will measure 
objectively the value of the fever. We say that the value 
of the temperature (fever sign) will fuse with the fever 
symptom, since the fever symptom will remain, and the 
value of its intensity will be changed by the taken 
temperature.  
 
    Definition: A sign is not related to a symptom.  
   Blood pressure is a good example of a sign. Signs by 
this definition are different than vital signs. Signs have 
generally an explicit and direct link to pathologies. They 
constitute for this purpose an objective description of the 
observation space.  
    In this work, we also propose that signs are 
characterised by the SSQ model. Thus, they are identified 
by their onset, duration, periodicity, intensity, quality, 
site and factors. In doing so, fusing signs with symptoms 
will be very obvious. The degree of objectivity that a sign 
may bring to a symptom will be discussed in another 
article. 
C. Review of Systems (ROS)  
    The review of systems is a head-to-toe survey to 
screen for additional symptoms not related to the patient's 
main complaint. The information obtained from a ROS 
has its own weight to the final diagnosis. A typical ROS 
is composed of a set of symptoms classified by body 
systems or physiological functions and are symptoms that 
have no SSQ. 
D. Observation space model  
    Figure 1 shows a general structure of the observation 
space model.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.   Observation space general structure  
 
    There are three main structures that form the 
observation space; Symptoms that do not possess signs, 
symptoms that possess signs (symptom-signs), and signs. 
Each structure has its SSQ.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
    This section presents some results on the application of 
the observation space model to a real clinical situation. It 
will be used a clinical story of a 38 years old man with 
fatigue as chief complaint. 
A. 
A clinical story example 
    This clinical sample story was extracted from [11]. 
1) Patient story 
    “Mr. X, a 38-year-old homeless presented to a primary 
care clinic with severe, progressive fatigue of one 
month’s duration; progressive weakness and shortness of 
breath while engaging in any kind of physical exertion 
and dizziness whenever he tried to get out of bed. Mr. X 
reported that he had not felt like eating for a month; 
whenever he ate something, he experienced severe 
abdominal pain. It usually occurred during the evening 
hours and was always triggered by eating.  
    The patient had lost 20 pounds during the previous 
month, which he attributed to poor intake due to 
abdominal pain, anorexia, nausea, and fever. He 
reported having a mild, intermittent fever during the last 
month, particularly during the evening, which he 
attributed to fatigue”. 
2) Physical examination 
    Looking tired; Signs of pallor and jaundice. Brown 
coated tongue with no atrophy or inflammation.  
Temperature: 100.4°F; blood pressure: 140/90 
Cardiovascular system: bounding pulse, evidence of 3rd 
heart sound, no murmur. 
     Gastrointestinal system: abdomen: lower border is 1 
inch down the costal margin; no liver tenderness. The 
spleen is 2 inches below the costal margin. 
B. 
Discussion 
    The following table captures the clinical case described 
above using the observation space model. The observed 
symptoms and signs are listed in the rows. The SSQ 
attributes are listed in the columns. The Type columns in 
the table indicates which of the three types (symptom: 
Sym; Sign: Sig; Symptom-Sign: SS) the observation 
belongs to. The last column denoted symptom-sign gives 
the correspondent symptom or sign for a given symptom-
sign observation. Indeed, in this example there are three 
symptom-signs, namely (fatigue-tired), (Pain-Abdomen) 
and (Fever, Jaundice). 
     The value of each SSQ attribute for symptoms and 
signs in the table are not dealt with in this article. For 
symptoms, the values such as described in the patient 
story are used. For signs, a +1 value in the intensity 
means that there is evidence that the sign is observed. 
Moreover, how symptom-sign SSQ values may be merged 
is not dealt with in this article.    
Sign 
Symptom 
Sign 
Symptom 
SSQ 
SSQ 
SSQ 
Symptom-sign  
Symptom  
Sign  
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
    This paper presented a pathway on how to structure 
the observation space of PCCD. Despite the existence of 
many standards for medical data, it has been shown 
previously that PCCD is poorly represented by them, and 
this contribution is primarily intended to fill some of the 
associated gaps.  
    However, the most innovative aspect in this article 
concerns signs and their characterizations. Signs are 
described only in a very specialized literature and are 
complex to structure. The use of the SSQ model will help 
represent them and formalize their relations with 
symptoms.   
    Finally, the next steps are to use the same methodology 
to structure the predisposition space, as well as to 
describe how it is possible to use aggregation and fusion 
technics to extract patterns from PCCD. Results will be 
presented in another contribution.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The major parts of this contribution have been done 
when Dr. Aitnouri was working at the Université de 
Sherbrooke. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. A. Ludwicka and J. Doucettea, “Adopting electronic medical 
records in primary care: Lessons learned from health information 
systems implementation experience in seven countries”, International 
Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 78, Jan. 2009, pp. 22-31, 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2008.06.005. 
[2] 
R. H. Miller and I. Sim, “Physicians’ use of electronic medical 
records: Barriers and solutions”, Health Affairs, vol. 23, Mar. 2004, pp. 
116-126, doi:10.1377/hlthaff.23.2.116. 
[3] 
S. Lusignan, S. Wells, N. Hague, and K. Thiru, “Managers see 
the problems associated with coding clinical data as a technical issue 
whilst clinicians also see cultural barriers”, Methods of Information in 
Medicine, vol. 42, 2003, pp. 416-422. 
[4] 
M. L. Tierney and C. M. Henderson, The patient history: 
evidence-based approach, New York: Lange Medical Books/McGraw-
Hill, ed. 2005. 
[5] 
R. Richesson and J. Krischer, “Data standards in clinical 
research: Gaps, overlaps, challenges and future directions”, Journal of 
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 14, Nov-Dec. 2007, 
pp. 687-96, doi:10.1197/jamia.M2470. 
[6] 
H. Scheuermann, W. Ceusters, and B. Smith, “Toward an 
ontological treatment of disease and diagnosis”, In Proc. of AMIA 
Summit on Translational Bioinformatics (TBI 2009), 15-17 Mar. 2009, 
pp. 116-120, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
[7] 
J. Loscalzo, I. Kohane, and A. Barabasi, “Human disease 
classification in the postgenomic era: A complex systems approach to 
human pathobiology”, Molecular systems biology, vol. 3, Jul. 2007, 
article number 124 (11 pages), doi:10.1038/msb4100163. 
[8] 
L. St. Clair, A. Clift, and L. Dumbelton, “How do I know what I 
feel? Evidence for the role of self-categorization in symptom 
perceptions”, European journal of social psychology, vol. 38, Jan. 2008, 
pp. 173-186, doi:10.1002/ejsp.417. 
[9] 
M. Daniel, P. Hájek, and H. P. Nguyen, “CADIAG-2 and 
MYCIN-like systems”, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 9, Mar. 
1997, pp. 241-259. 
[10] P. R. Innocent and R. I. John, “Computer aided fuzzy medical 
diagnosis”, Information Sciences, vol. 162, May. 2004, pp. 81-104, 
doi:10.1016/j.ins.2004.03.003. 
[11] A. M. Butt, A. Mannan, A. Talib, R. Asim, and P. Post, 
“Decompensated Chronic Liver Disease with Comorbid Treatable 
Aplastic Anemia in a Homeless Adult Male”, Homeless Health Care 
Case Report: Sharing Practice-Based Experience, vol. 4, Dec. 2008. 
TABLE II.  
CLINICAL DATA CAPTURED USING THE OBSERVATION SPACE MODEL 
SSQ 
Onset 
Duration 
Period. Intensity 
Quality 
Site 
Factors 
Type 
Symptom
-sign 
Symptom 
Fatigue 
 
1 month 
 
Severe 
progressive  
 
Symp 
Tired 
Weakness 
 
 
 
Severe 
progressive  
 
Symp 
 
Shortness of 
breath 
 
 
 
severe 
 
 
While engaging in 
physical exertion 
Symp 
X 
Dizziness 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Get out of bed 
Symp 
X 
Pain 
When 
eating 
1 month 
Evening 
hours 
severe 
 
abdomen 
 
Symp 
Abdomen 
Weight lost 
 
Previous 
months 
 
20 pounds  
 
 
Symp 
X 
Fever 
 
Last months  
mild 
intermittent  
During  evenings 
Symp 
Jaundice 
Signs 
Tired 
 
 
 
+1 
 
 
 
SS 
Fatigue 
Pallor 
 
 
 
+1 
 
 
 
Sign 
X 
Jaundice 
 
 
 
+1 
 
 
 
SS 
Fever 
coated tongue 
 
 
 
+1 
Brown 
 
no atrophy or 
inflammation 
Sign 
X 
Temperature 
 
 
 
100.4°F  
 
 
Sign 
X 
Blood press. 
 
 
 
140/90 
 
 
 
Sign 
X 
Cardiac 
auscultation 
 
 
 
 
Evidence 
3rd 
No murmur 
Sign 
X 
Hepatomegaly  
 
 
1 inch 
Down 
 
Lower 
SS 
Pain 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

