IoT Platform for Ageing Society: the SMART BEAR Project 
Smart Big Data Platform to Offer Evidence-based Personalised Support for Healthy and Independent 
Living at Home
Alessia Cristiano, Sara De Silvestri, 
Stela Musteata, Alberto Sanna, 
Diana Trojaniello 
Center for Advanced Technology in 
Health and Wellbeing 
IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele 
Milan, Italy 
e-mail: trojaniello.diana@hsr.com 
Valerio Bellandi,  
Paolo Ceravolo 
Computer Science Department 
Università degli Studi di Milano 
Milan, Italy 
e-mail: ceravolo.paolo@unimi.it 
Matteo Cesari 
Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri 
Università degli Studi di Milano 
Milan, Italy 
e-mail: macesari@gmail.com 
Abstract — People over 65 years old represent a constantly 
increasing age-group in Europe and worldwide. Hearing loss, 
cardio-vascular diseases, cognitive impairments, mental health 
issues and balance disorders are the most prevalent health 
challenges experienced by older population. These conditions 
result in a quality-of-life worsening (e.g., inactive lifestyle, 
missed self-sufficiency, loneliness) and life threats (e.g., 
physical injury, disability, and hospitalization). Moreover, 
their management is burdensome for healthcare institutions 
with high and rising costs, and gaps in quality, safety and 
access. Internet of Things (IoT) technology may offer a valid 
aid with its innovative and connected solutions. In such 
context, SMART BEAR Horizon 2020 European project aims 
to design and develop an IoT platform to: (i) integrate off-the-
shelf smart consumer and medical devices for a smart health 
environment, (ii) provide an affordable, secure, and privacy-
preserving service to older subjects promoting autonomy and 
healthy living, and (iii) increase the efficiency of healthcare 
delivery reducing resource waste. The present study is 
intended to comprehensively illustrate the project. In 
particular, it summarizes rationale and features of SMART 
BEAR project with a finer description of the platform 
components, clinical scenarios, and interventions. 
Keywords - ageing population; IoT platform; personalized 
interventions; independent living; healthy lifestyle. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Ageing population represents a major challenge in 
nowadays societies. According to [1], 151 million of the 
European population will be over 65 years old by 2060 with 
a particularly rapid increase in number of people over 80 
years old. The physiological and progressive decline due to 
the ageing in physical abilities (e.g., osteoporosis, frailty) 
and cognitive skills (e.g., memory and visual-spatial 
difficulties) leads to a reduced independency and a need of 
care. Such conditions, in turn, usually cause a deterioration 
of individual’s mood and social participation (e.g., older 
people are at higher risk of depression and poor self-rated 
health when compared with younger subjects). As a result, 
multiple comorbidities of chronic and neurodegenerative 
diseases are simultaneously faced by older population with 
heavy repercussions on health policies and programs as well. 
Actions across multiple sectors enabling older people to 
remain a resource for their families, communities and 
economies are therefore needed. The World Health 
Organization (WHO) has lately set as a priority the 
promotion of “ageing well” [2] intended as the process for 
fostering and maintaining the individual’s functional ability 
that includes managing their own basic needs, making 
decisions, being active, building and maintaining a social 
life, and contributing to the society [3].  
Smart Healthcare (SH) systems addressed to older adults 
represent valuable solutions as they monitor and track 
individual’s behavior and health status. They can also help in 
managing medical conditions effectively with a consequently 
reduced burden on caregivers, and lastly, they can motivate 
subject to stay physically and cognitively fit so to enhance 
wellbeing and increase Quality of Life (QoL).  
Thanks to the recent advancements of technology, SH 
systems are increasingly proposed. From 2016 onward [4], a 
significant increase in the development of smart platforms 
tailored on ageing population with applications devoted to 
neurology, cardiology, psychiatry, and psychology has been 
observed. Those platforms [5] include Internet of Things 
(IoT) devices that can be worn by subjects (e.g., wearable 
sensors and medical devices) and/or installed in house 
settings (e.g., smart home devices). The data collected by the 
devices are then sent to a cloud system and here analyzed 
through sophisticated Machine Learning (ML) and Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) algorithms to properly assess the status of 
older individual and provide him/her feedbacks or real-time 
alerts. Although those infrastructures may appear simple, 
they hide tough tricks because of [5]: a) wide heterogeneity 
of equipment (i.e., wearable sensors, home sensors and 
medical devices), b) big volumes of data usually acquired in 
uncontrolled environments, c) multifactorial selection of the 
most suitable algorithm for the specific topic to figure out 
and d) privacy and security issues related to the processing of 
subjects’ data. 
Within such context, SMART BEAR project, funded by 
the European Commission under the Horizon 2020 program, 
aims to design, and develop an innovative platform (i.e., SB 
platform), integrating state-of-the-art devices, addressed to 
older adults [6] to offer evidence-based support for healthy 
and independent living at home. The project involves 27 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

European partners among universities, research centers, 
hospitals, collective structures, local administrations, small 
and medium-sized enterprises and big companies and it will 
be concluded in 2024 after 60 months of synergistic work.  
The aim of the present paper is to provide an exhaustive 
bird’s-eye view on the SMART BEAR project. The 
document is organized as follows. Section II reports 
rationale and goals of SB platform. Section III addresses 
project pilot sites. Section IV illustrates the devices 
comprising the platform and the principal features of the 
cloud system. Interventions and related clinical scenarios 
are described in Section V while conclusions are reported in 
Section VI. 
II.
RATIONALE 
Within the European ageing population, Hearing Loss 
(HL), 
Cardio-Vascular 
Diseases 
(CVDs), 
Cognitive 
Impairments (CIs), Mental Health Issues (MHIs), and 
Balance Disorders (BDs) are prevalent conditions [7].  
HL [8] is the third most common condition affecting 
older adults and the fifth leading cause of disability 
worldwide. It increases the risk of cognitive decline, mental 
illness, and depression, and it leads to social isolation. 
CVDs [9] are the main causes of death globally. They 
have a physical, social, and emotional impact on older 
adults and a significant economic impact on European 
economy as reported by the European Society of Cardiology 
(ESC). 
CIs [10] are prevalent in adulthood, especially after heart 
failures. They affect several domains as memory, attention, 
executive 
functions, 
and 
psychomotor 
speed 
thus 
compromising the ability to think, learn and remember. 
MHIs [11] include social isolation, sleep disturbances, 
anxiety, and depression. They have an impact on physical 
health and vice-versa. In addition, they increase the risk of 
converting mild cognitive impairments to dementia. 
BDs [12] are consequences of age-related progressive 
loss of sensory information functioning and body movement 
control. They result in falls, disability, and death (one older 
adult deaths because of a fall every 29 minutes). 
The above-mentioned conditions have hence huge impact 
on older subjects’ QoL and healthcare institutions’ finances. 
Preventing and/or slowing the development of those 
impairments is therefore beneficial for older people, 
caregivers, clinicians, and hospitals. Therefore, the main 
objective of SB platform is to integrate heterogeneous 
sensors and assistive medical devices that will enable 
continuous and non-continuous monitoring in older adults’ 
everyday life. The monitoring will be done in both indoor 
and outdoor environments, depending on every device’s 
feature, and will help to gain evidence needed to plan 
personalized interventions promoting an independent and 
healthy lifestyle. The secondary objective, instead, is to 
identify subgroups’ patterns across different countries and 
urban areas with different extensions, local services, 
environmental, and socio-economic conditions. 
III.
PILOT SITES
Throughout the project, the SB platform will be 
employed and assessed in five large-scale pilots (i.e., 
Greece, Italy-Portugal, France, Spain, and Romania) with 
the overall involvement of 5100 older adults living at home 
and in collective structures (Table 1). The high sample size 
considered enables a large-scale validation of the platform 
while the multiple geographic areas selected offer a great 
heterogeneity of conditions allowing comparisons suitable 
for patterns detection among and within regions. 
TABLE I. 
SMART BEAR PILOTS
Pilot 
Sites 
Sample  
Population 
Sample 
Size 
Geographic  
Area 
Greece  
Independent older 
adults living at home/ 
Older adults living in 
collective structures 
1000 
Region of 
Peloponnese, 
Municipality of 
Palaio faliro 
Italy-
Portugal 
Independent older 
adults living at home/ 
Older adults living in 
collective structures
1100 
Milan metropolitan 
city, District of 
Crema, Madeira 
Island 
France  
Independent older 
adults living at home/ 
Older adults living in 
collective structures
1000 
Ile-de-France (the 
Paris Region), 
Nouvelle Aquitaine 
and Bretagne 
Spain  
Independent older 
adults living at home/ 
Older adults living in 
collective structures
1000 
Barcelona, Madrid, 
Sevilla areas, Pais 
Vasco, Galicia and 
Balearic Island 
Romania 
Independent older 
adults living at home/ 
Older adults living in 
collective structures
1000 
Bucharest, Cluj 
Napoca and 
Constanta 
metropolitan areas 
IV.
SMART BEAR DEVICES AND CLOUD SYSTEM
SB platform integrates sensors and devices able to record 
data from the daily living of its older users. The 
technological devices of platform can be divided into:  

personal devices (Figure 1);  

smart home devices (Figure 2). 
All of them communicate through Bluetooth and/or Wi-Fi 
with a dedicated mobile application (i.e., SB mApp) 
installed on a Samsung Galaxy S10 smartphone and 
available in iOS environment, too. 
Figure 1. Personal Devices  
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. Smart Home Devices  
All the personal devices shown in Figure 1 includes: 

Samsung 
Galaxy 
S10: 
smartphone 
(Samsung 
Electronics Ltd., South Corea) with a RAM of 3GB up 
to 1000 GB with a micro SD. 

Phonak Marvel-50: smart-hearing aids (Phonak, 
Switzerland) rechargeable via batteries with a battery 
life up to 5-7 days depending on usage. 

BPM Core: smart-blood pressure monitor (Withings, 
France; dimensions: 560x165x450mm; weight: 430g) 
rechargeable via micro-USB cable with a duration of 
approximatively 6 months.   

Thermo: smart-thermometer (Withings, France; length: 
116mm, diameter: 66.2mm; weight: 75g) rechargeable 
via AAA batteries with a battery life up to 2 years. 

Garmin VivoSport: smartwatch (Garmin, USA; width: 
21mm, thickness: 10.9mm; weight: 24.1g) with a 
memory of 14 days of activity tracking and rechargeable 
via micro-USB cable with a duration of 8 hours in GPS 
mode and 7 days in basic smartwatch mode.  

Body+: smart-scale (Withings, France; dimensions: 325 
x325x23mm; weight: 2100g) rechargeable via AAA 
batteries with a battery life up to 18 months. 

iHealth Air: smart-pulse oximeter (iHealth Labs Inc,
USA; dimensions: 62x33x28 mm; weight: 42g) 
rechargeable micro-USB cable with a duration on a time 
scale of weeks. 
As shown in Figure 2 the smart home devices are: 

Motion 
Sensors: 
three 
sensors 
(Philips,
The 
Netherlands; height: 5.5cm; length: 3 m; width: 5.5cm; 
net weight: 65g) for motion detection, temperature and 
level of lighting rechargeable via AAA batteries.

Smart Bulbs: sensor (Philips, The Netherlands; height: 
11.8cm; width: 6cm; weight: 65g) for lighting 
adjustments including color, brightness and color 
temperature with an average life up to 25 years.

Aqara Temperature Device: three sensors (Xiaomi, 
China; dimensions: 36x36x9 mm, weight: 110g) for 
temperature, humidity and pressure with a battery life up 
to 2 years.
A total of 7 sensors, with a Raspberry Pi computer with 
a micro-SD card and a Zigbee adapter, constitute the home 
automation component of SB platform. It results fully 
compatible with any IoT platform, and it can be successfully 
linked with major AI technologies available on the market 
including Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant and Apple 
Homekit. 
The parameters collected by personal devices of 
SMART BEAR are summarized in Table II while the 
measurements provided by home sensor devices of SB 
platform are shown in the Table III. 
TABLE II. 
PERSONAL DEVICES PARAMETERS
Device 
Parameters 
Phonak 
Marvel-50 
Duration of active use [hours or minutes] 
Average duration of active use per day [hours or minutes] 
Duration of exposure at environmental noise levels per 
day and per week [minutes] 
Percentage of active use in soft/medium/high intensity 
sounds [percentage] 
Body+ 
Body weight [kilogram or pound] 
Body muscle mass [kilogram or pound] 
Body bone mass [kilogram or pound] 
Body fat mass [kilogram or pound] 
Body fat free mass[kilogram or pound] 
Body fat ratio [percentage] 
BPM Core
Diastolic Blood Pressure [mmHg] 
Systolic Blood Pressure [mmHg] 
Heart Rate [beats per minute] 
ECG signal [µV, time series] 
Thermo
Body Temperature [Celsius or Fahrenheit] 
Skin Temperature [Celsius or Fahrenheit] 
iHealth 
Air
Blood oxygen saturation [percentage] 
Pulse rate [beats per minute] 
Garmin 
VivoSport 
Number of steps [dimensionless number] 
Distance traveled [meters] 
Calories burned through activity [kCal] 
Calories burned by Basal Metabolic Rate [kCal] 
Intensity Minutes [minutes] 
Duration of vigorous/moderate/low activity [seconds] 
Floors climbed [dimensionless number] 
Average heart rate on last 7 days [beats per minute] 
Average heart rate at rest [beats per minute] 
Sleep quality [label] 
Sleep duration [seconds] 
Time spent in deep/light/REM sleep [seconds] 
TABLE III. 
SMART HOME DEVICES MEASUREMENTS
Devices 
Measurements 
Motion 
Sensors  
+  
Smart Bulbs 
+  
Aqara 
Temperature 
Device 
Room Light Intensity [illuminance] 
UV Index [integer] 
Outdoor/Room Temperature [Celsius or Fahrenheit] 
Outdoor/Room Relative Humidity [percentage] 
Outdoor/ Room Atmospheric pressure [hectoPascal] 
Wheather conditions (i.e. wind speed, wind direction, rain 
volume, snow volume and visibility) 
The main components of SMART BEAR cloud are the 
database and its underlying information model, the clinical 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

repository interfaces, the big data engine, the synthetic data 
generation element, and the analytics. Therefore, a strong 
semantic 
underpinning 
and 
a 
standards-based 
data 
representation with comprehensive and homogeneous 
datasets are leveraged to ensure efficient use of data for 
implementing high-quality and personalized interventions 
improving QoL. In particular, the HL7 FHIR standard is 
used to provide the specification of the data model, and 
FHIR resource profiles are employed to define constraints 
and extensions to the FHIR model capturing the required 
information in a standard structure and with rich semantics. 
A federated and active learning approach is applied for the 
analytics since it allows training algorithms across multiple 
systems or devices holding local datasets without the need of 
exchanging data. That ML approach allows preserving data 
privacy while enjoying large-scale aggregation benefit. 
Moreover, it enables an optimization of local models while 
maintaining a high performance for the global model as 
asynchronous approach. Lastly, to ensure an accurate health 
monitoring 
and 
the 
consequent 
appropriateness 
of 
interventions provided by the platform, the quality of 
collected data is assessed in each training rounds and 
validation loops are introduced to detect any performance 
degradation and mitigate any performance drift. 
V.
SMART BEAR SCENARIOS & INTERVENTIONS
Based on the data gathered by personal and smart home 
devices, the cloud-level data analysis and the guidance of 
clinical staff, SB platform supports interventions that may 
help the management of every targeted medical condition. 
In particular: 
HL. Interventions/notifications are aimed to a) increase the 
usage time of hearing aids (HA), b) obtain higher 
satisfaction with HA usage, and c) reduce the number of 
visits to the audiologist for HA fine-tuning. 
CVDs. Interventions/notifications are aimed to a) increase 
the adherence to the therapy, b) improve older adult’s 
outcomes and c) help in managing medical condition. 
CIs. Interventions/notifications are aimed to a) meet the 
compliance with the clinician’s recommendations (e.g., 
training time), b) assess factors that are likely to influence 
the progression of cognitive impairment, and c) improve 
older adult’s outcomes as a result of interventions. 
MHIs. Interventions/notifications are aimed to a) enhance 
user’s motivation in physical activity, cognitive games and 
socializing, b) ensure a better compliance to daily activities, 
and c) improve older adult’s outcomes and sleep parameters 
as a result of interventions. 
BDs. Interventions/notifications are aimed to a) increase the 
adherence to the therapy and training, b) assess factors that 
are likely to influence the disease outcomes and the falling 
risk, and c) improve older adult’s outcomes and as a result 
of interventions. 
For every above medical condition, comorbidity and 
combination of them, existing medical guidelines and data 
stored in both FHIR and non-FHIR databases are 
considered, and clinician-driven interventions are generated 
by SB platform for each user individually. Such 
interventions, that may be adjusted based on the assessment 
of individual’s actions in response to the treatment, are then 
transmitted via a security component to the older subject. 
The latter can access the own list of interventions through 
SMART BEAR mApp where, each intervention is displayed 
with its related medical conditions, priority level (i.e., Low, 
Medium, High), status (i.e., Active, Inactive), and 
notification text (e.g., “Repeat the measurement”). A 
version of the mApp is also available for the clinician that 
can thus insert new useful measurements, monitor the user’s 
health status, and verify whether an intervention was 
successfully completed. 
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
In the era increasingly devoted to the promotion of 
“ageing well” and personalized medicine, SB platform 
represents a valuable tool to improve seniors’ QoL. Firstly, 
this project will explore if the SB platform is an ideal tool 
for the continuous health monitoring of older adults with 
one or more than one medical conditions (e.g., HL, CVDs, 
CIs, MHIs, and BDs). Secondly, the SB project will plan 
and propose personalized interventions promoting an 
independent and healthy lifestyle. This is a project of 
Horizon 2020 that started in 2019 and is still ongoing. 
Therefore, all the results will be presented after the project’s 
completion in 2023. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The project has received funding from the European 
Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program 
under grant agreement No 857172 – SMART BEAR 
project. No conflict of interest is declared. 
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Suzman and J. Beard, “Global health and aging”, NIH 
Publ., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 273-277. 2011. 
[2]
WHO, Active Aging: A Policy Framework, 2002. 
[3]
R.J. Scheidt, D.R. Humpherys, and J.B. Yorgason, 
“Successful aging: what’s not to like?”, J. Appl Gerontol, pp. 
277-82, 1999. 
[4]
F. Sadoughi, A. Behmanesh, and N. Sayfouri, “Internet of 
things in medicine: A systematic mapping study”, J. Biomed. 
Inform, pp. 103, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103383 
[5]
S. V. P. Darcini, D. P. Isravel, and S. Silas, “A 
Comprehensive Review on the Emerging IoT-Cloud based 
Technologies for Smart Healthcare”, pp. 606-611, 6th 
ICACCS, 2020. 
[6]
V. Bellandi, et al., “A design methodology for matching smart 
health requirements”, CCPE, pp. 1–16, 2020.  
[7]
GBD Collaborators, “Global, regional, and national incidence, 
prevalence, and years lived with disability for 310 diseases 
and injuries, 1990–2015: a systematic analysis for the Global 
Burden of Disease Study 2015”. Lancet. pp. (388): 10053, 
2016. 
[8]
B.R. Rutherford, K. Brewster, J.S. Golub, A.H. Kim, and S.P. 
Roose, “Sensation and Psychiatry: Linking Age-Related 
Hearing Loss to Late-Life Depression and Cognitive 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Decline”, American J. of Psychiatry, vol. 175, no. 3, pp. 215-
224, 2018. 
[9]
WHO, CVDs Key Facts, 2017.  
[10] M. Moryś, M. Pąchalska, J. Bellwon, and M. Gruchała, 
“Cognitive impairment, symptoms of depression, and health-
related quality of life in patients with severe stable heart 
failure”, Int J Clin Health Psychol,  vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 230-
238, 2016. 
[11] F. Jessen et al., “A conceptual framework for research on 
subjective cognitive decline in preclinical Alzheimer’s 
disease”, Alzheimers Dement, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 844-52, 2014. 
[12] D.L. Sturnieks, R. St George, and S.R. Lord, “Balance 
disorders in the elderly”,  Neurophysiol Clin, vol. 38, no. 6, 
pp.467-78,20
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

