An eHealth Innovation Map for 
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises 
Towards Feasible, yet Convincing, Evidence 
Ruud Janssen, Marike Hettinga, Sikke Visser, Robbert Menko,  
Hilco Prins, Irene Krediet, Timber Haaker, and Lianne Bodenstaff 
Research group ICT Innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{TJWM.Janssen, M.Hettinga, S.Visser, RA.Menko, H.Prins, I.Krediet}@windesheim.nl 
Timber.Haaker@novay.nl, L.Bodenstaff@bizzdesign.nl 
 
 
Abstract - eHealth applications hold many promises, for 
instance to improve the quality of health care, to increase its 
accessibility, or to reduce its cost. Yet, many eHealth 
innovations never reach the stage where they get embedded 
into routine health care. This is due in part to a lack of 
evidence that these innovations indeed deliver what they 
promise. For small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in 
particular, 
collecting 
convincing 
evidence 
for 
eHealth 
innovations proves to be a challenge as the available time, 
resources and expertise to do so are often limited. In response 
to this challenge, the research group ICT Innovations in Health 
Care at the Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
initiated a joint research project, Successful Entrepreneurship 
in eHealth, with 28 eHealth SMEs, care providers, and other 
stakeholders in the Dutch health care system. The project’s 
main result is an eHealth innovation map. This map consists of 
a diagram showing eHealth SMEs which parties in the Dutch 
health care system to involve, their roles and their mutual 
relations, their interests in eHealth innovation, and the kinds of 
evidence that may convince them of the added value of an 
eHealth innovation. A set of corresponding fact sheets was 
developed to provide eHealth SMEs with concise yet easily 
accessible 
information 
for 
choosing 
an 
appropriate 
“innovation route” and for determining what evidence to 
collect for relevant stakeholders. Preliminary findings show 
that the innovation map is indeed a useful instrument, and that 
the corresponding fact sheets manage to capture all the 
essential information needed to guide an eHealth SME along a 
chosen innovation route. 
Keywords - eHealth; innovation map; innovation route; 
evidence guidelines; health care system; stakeholder 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Getting an eHealth innovation embedded into routine 
health care often turns out to be a challenge, in particular for 
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Several causes 
can be identified, for instance a lack of a good underlying 
business model [1]. The research group ICT Innovations in 
Health Care at the Windesheim University of Applied 
Sciences (Zwolle, The Netherlands) has dedicated itself to 
study these issues and to support eHealth SMEs in 
overcoming them. Note that eHealth SMEs are defined here 
as small and medium sized enterprises offering eHealth 
products and services to patients, health care providers, and 
the general public. All SMEs participating in the project had 
less than 10 employees. 
During a series of workshops organized by the research 
group, an inventory was made of the problems encountered 
when SMEs are trying to get eHealth innovations embedded 
into routine health care. Collecting evidence for an 
innovation came out first: to get their innovation accepted by 
patients and care providers, reimbursed by health insurance 
companies, endorsed by patient organizations, or approved 
by national health care authorities, innovators often need to 
show evidence for the innovation’s effectiveness, for 
instance to improve treatment quality or reduce the cost of 
delivering health care. 
For a typical eHealth SME it is often unclear what kind 
of evidence is expected and by whom, and according to 
which standards this evidence should be collected. In other 
cases, the standard may be clear (e.g., a randomized 
controlled trial) yet practically unfeasible for an SME due to 
a lack of available time, (financial) resources, or expertise. 
Other researchers have also identified this barrier to 
eHealth implementation, although not specifically for SMEs. 
For instance, Mair et al. [2, 3] conclude in a meta-review of 
eHealth implementation studies that lack of validation and 
evaluation is frequently presented as a barrier to eHealth 
implementation: “Without strong data demonstrating that a 
system works, improves standards of care, can be used 
efficiently and easily, and is cost-effective to implement, it is 
unlikely to win the confidence of policy makers and users.” 
[2, p. 23]. 
The project Successful Entrepreneurship in eHealth was 
initiated by the research group to address these challenges. 
The project constitutes a cooperation between 28 eHealth 
SMEs, health care providers, patient organizations, health 
insurance companies, and national health care authorities in 
The Netherlands. The project’s aim is to establish guidelines 
for collecting evidence in such a way that (i) it is practically 
feasible for eHealth SMEs to do so and (ii) the resulting 
evidence is acceptable and potentially convincing for care 
providers, health insurers, or care authorities. 
The project’s main aim is to offer guidance to eHealth 
SMEs: which parties will need to be convinced of the 
292
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

effectiveness of an innovation, what evidence will be 
required, and how to collect this evidence in a feasible yet 
acceptable way. 
The structure of the remainder of this paper is as follows. 
In Section II the approach followed will be introduced, 
including the four phases in which the project was structured. 
Next, Section III will discuss the main findings and lessons 
learned. Section IV describes the eHealth innovation map 
and the accompanying sets of fact sheets. Finally, Section V 
summarizes the main conclusions. 
II. 
APPROACH 
The project Successful Entrepreneurship in eHealth 
started at the beginning of 2012 and will conclude at the end 
of 2013. At the outset the project was structured into four 
phases; these phases are briefly outlined in this section. More 
details about the approach followed are given in [4] and [5]. 
A. Phase 1: Inventory 
During this phase an inventory was made of generally 
recognized types of evidence. This was done by means of a 
literature review and a workshop with representatives of 
Dutch health care providers, insurers, patient organizations, 
and national health care authorities. Questions to be 
answered included: Which parties are involved when getting 
an eHealth innovation embedded in routine health care? 
What kind of evidence is generally needed, and how should 
it be collected? How do parties value various kinds of 
evidence? And what criteria are typically used? 
B. Phase 2: Case studies 
Whereas the analysis during the inventory phase was top-
down, the analysis during the case studies was deliberately 
bottom-up – to involve the SMEs and to enrich the analysis 
with examples of concrete situations, dilemmas and 
obstacles encountered. Cases from the participating eHealth 
SMEs were subjected to a detailed study by means of in-
depth, semi-structured interviews and an analysis of 
available documentation. Questions included: How are 
SMEs trying to get their innovations embedded into routine 
care? Which stakeholders do they identify and involve? 
What kinds of evidence do these stakeholders require? What 
evidence did the SMEs collect so far, and in what ways? 
How did stakeholders evaluate the evidence, against what 
criteria? 
C. Phase 3: Guidelines and best practices 
In this phase, the insights gained from the inventory and 
the case studies were combined. Best practices for 
embedding eHealth innovations in routine health care were 
identified, and guidelines for collecting required evidence 
were developed. Best practices and guidelines were then 
combined into a systematic approach for collecting evidence 
for eHealth innovations. To validate the newly developed 
approach it was applied and evaluated in a second series of 
case studies. 
D. Phase 4: Consolidation and tool development 
In this final project phase, the systematic approach 
described above was consolidated into an “eHealth  
innovation map”. The map consists of a diagram showing 
eHealth SMEs which parties in the Dutch health care system 
to involve, their roles and their mutual relations, their 
interests in eHealth innovation, and the kinds of evidence 
that may convince them of the added value of an eHealth 
innovation. As part of the map, a set of corresponding fact 
sheets was developed to provide eHealth SMEs with concise 
yet easily accessible information for choosing one of four 
possible “innovation routes”, and for determining what 
evidence to collect for relevant stakeholders encountered 
along each route. The map and fact sheets have been made 
available to a wide audience in The Netherlands, by means 
of a convenient booklet and a corresponding interactive web-
based tool. 
E. Ongoing dialogue 
Next to the activities in the above four phases, regular 
project meetings were organized to stimulate an ongoing 
dialogue between the participating organizations. During 
these meetings, SMEs introduced their cases, representatives 
of health care organizations discussed procedures or criteria 
used to evaluate eHealth innovations, and the research team 
presented the project’s latest results. To collect feedback 
from the project’s participants, mini-workshops were 
organized to evaluate the usefulness and correctness of the 
developed tools, typically by applying them to cases at hand. 
III. 
OVERVIEW OF FINDINGS 
This section briefly highlights the main findings and 
lessons learned. A complete overview, including a detailed 
discussion of the case study results, is provided in [5]. 
A. Existing frameworks offer little guidance for SMEs 
During the literature study more than a few reports and 
scientific papers offering proposals for eHealth evaluation 
frameworks were found, most of them containing guidelines 
for setting up a proper evaluation study, lists of outcome 
indicators and measures for various aspects of eHealth’s 
impact, and descriptions of methods and instruments to 
collect data. Examples are the National Telehealth Outcome 
Indicators Project [6], Model for the Assessment of 
Telemedicine Applications [7], and Guidelines for the 
Economic Evaluation of Health Technologies [8]. However, 
these frameworks seem to be directed mostly at academic 
experts. The Health Information Technology Evaluation 
Toolkit [9] is one of the very few examples primarily aimed 
at the non-expert. It provides step-by-step guidance for 
project teams who are developing evaluation plans for health 
IT projects. 
Although these frameworks indeed offer guidance with 
regard to setting up a proper study, none of the frameworks 
found provide the same kind of guidance with regard to 
identifying the various stakeholders involved in embedding 
an eHealth innovation into routine care, including their 
possible interests in the innovation, and subsequently the aim 
of an evaluation and the kinds of evidence that may be 
293
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

required. This is especially striking since researchers have 
argued for a contextualized approach in which all relevant 
stakeholders are actively involved in the definition of the 
outcome indicators that will be used [10, 11]. 
B. Stakeholders’ views on evidence 
During an expert session with representatives from health 
care providers, insurers, patient organizations, and national 
health care authorities, three dominant themes were 
recognized by the participants within the larger concept of 
evidence: effectiveness (“did health care get any better?”), 
cost efficiency (“did it get any cheaper?”) and labor savings 
(“did it get any less labor intensive?”), including respective 
outcome indicators and methods. During the session it 
became clear that strong forms of evidence (obtained using, 
for instance, randomized controlled trials) are certainly not 
always necessary to facilitate the uptake of eHealth 
applications. The participants agreed that randomized 
controlled trials are not always useful, necessary, or 
practically feasible. Furthermore, care providers and health 
care insurers indicated that they will still rely on their own 
patient data to support any decisions they make about 
embedding eHealth applications. 
National care authorities, on the other hand, held the 
view that eHealth applications typically only change the way 
in which health care is being delivered. As long as there are 
no indications that safety or clinical effectiveness are at 
stake, and within the limits defined by regulations governing 
the provision of health care, care providers and health care 
insurers are free to negotiate and decide about the use (and 
reimbursement) of eHealth applications. 
C. Four “innovation routes” for eHealth innovations 
One topic which arose very prominently during the same 
expert session, is that it is not straightforward which path an 
SME should follow within the Dutch care system to get an 
eHealth innovation embedded into routine care. In part this is 
due to the wide variety of applications that fall under the 
common denominator of eHealth, but it is also due to the 
complexity of the Dutch care system, which is highly 
regulated and in which various authorities and other parties 
each play a distinct role. An SME should consider very 
carefully which “innovation route” to follow, as the chosen 
route will determine which stakeholders to address and 
involve. 
Stakeholders 
will 
have 
their 
own 
roles, 
responsibilities and interests, and hence will need their own 
arguments to get convinced of an eHealth application’s 
added value. It is, therefore, the chosen innovation route that 
determines the context in which evidence will be collected, 
the purpose for which it is collected, and the requirements 
that it should satisfy. 
Based on the above findings, a review of online 
documentation pertaining to innovation in the Dutch health 
care system took place (e.g., [12-16]), and follow-up 
interviews with representatives of the participating health 
care organizations were organized. These efforts resulted in a 
comprehensive description of the Dutch health care system, 
including the roles of the parties involved, their interests in 
eHealth innovation, and criteria they use to evaluate eHealth 
innovations. Four main innovation routes were identified and 
described, including the specifics of each route and criteria 
for when to choose which route: 
 
The consumer route where an eHealth application is 
offered to and paid by patients/consumers. For 
example, a medical translation app that can be used 
when visiting a doctor abroad. 
 
The provider route where an application is offered to 
and paid by health care providers. For instance, an 
online treatment plan which allows clients to consult 
their plan and report about their progress. 
 
The insurer route where an application becomes part 
of an existing treatment that is offered by a care 
provider and reimbursed by a health insurance 
company. For example, a real-time medication 
monitoring service to improve the medication 
adherence of a diabetes patient. (In this case, the 
medication is the existing treatment and real-time 
monitoring becomes part of it.) 
 
The government route where an application leads to 
a new treatment not yet offered by care providers or 
reimbursed by health insurance companies, and 
where health care authorities need to decide whether 
it should be admitted to publicly insured care. Here, 
an 
example 
might 
be 
the 
introduction 
of 
telemonitoring of epilepsy patients in the home 
environment, to respond quickly in the event of a 
major seizure. 
D. The paths followed by eHealth SMEs 
During the case studies phase, eight cases submitted by 
seven SMEs were selected for in-depth, semi-structured 
interviews. During each interview, the path followed by the 
SME to get its eHealth innovation embedded into routine 
care was reconstructed. Particular attention was paid to the 
stakeholders that had been identified and involved, and (if 
applicable) the evidence that had been collected. Where 
available, underlying documentation was used to analyze the 
collected evidence, in particular the outcome indicators and 
methodology used, the conclusions drawn, and, if applicable, 
how these conclusions were translated into a business case 
for stakeholders. 
A detailed discussion of the case study results is outside 
the scope of this paper. We briefly summarize a few 
highlights here, more details are reported in [5]. 
 
Entrepreneurs with little or no experience in the 
health care sector often had difficulties in identifying 
a successful innovation route. The paths they 
followed were frequently based on trial and error, 
during which they steadily built up a better 
understanding of how the health care system works. 
 
The role of health insurance companies in the health 
care 
system, 
their 
interests 
in 
health 
care 
innovations, and the criteria by which they evaluate 
eHealth innovations were often unclear to SMEs. 
 
SMEs tended to involve health insurance companies 
too early, when strong support among care 
providers, endorsements from patient organizations, 
294
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

or approvals from professional associations were still 
lacking. Insurance companies, on the other hand, 
used these as principal criteria for the selection of 
promising innovations. 
 
Health 
care 
providers 
and 
health 
insurance 
companies often had partly conflicting interests, 
making it difficult to come up with a business case 
which was compelling to both parties at the same 
time. 
 
Within the “insurer route”, clinical trials were often 
essential to build up evidence for an innovation’s 
effectiveness. SMEs lacked the expertise and 
financial resources to carry out a proper trial, forcing 
them to involve experts and to find sponsoring. 
Furthermore, it was not always clear exactly what 
evidence was required. 
 
In cases where evidence had been collected in trials, 
this had been done using randomized controlled 
trials – the “golden standard” [17]. These trials were 
designed and performed by academic experts. These 
experts assumed responsibility for deciding which 
evidence was to be collected and how this should be 
done. However, it remained unclear to which extent 
external stakeholders had been consulted before 
these choices were made. 
 
The results from a trial had sometimes been 
developed into a business case for stakeholders. One 
case was especially illustrative: the effect that was 
found on an intermediary outcome measure used in 
the trial was first translated into an effect on a 
relevant end measure (a reduction in health related 
costs) using the results of a systematic review found 
in the scientific literature. This was then translated 
into a reduction in insurance claims for a health 
insurance company, based on the results of an 
internal study performed by the insurer. In this way, 
the clinical trial could focus on an intermediary 
outcome measure where effects could be measured 
on a much shorter time scale.  
 
Judging from the cases under study, it was clear that 
decision makers (for instance in health insurance companies, 
but also in other stakeholders) should be more closely 
involved when an evaluation is being planned. In this way, 
the criteria that play a role in the decision process can be 
clarified early on, when they can still be taken into account 
in the development of evaluation plans or business cases, or 
in the design of clinical trials. 
E. The criteria used by the insurance company 
In the Dutch health care system, the insurance company 
often plays a crucial role in the reimbursement of eHealth 
based care. Based on three cases that were monitored closely 
during the project, it became clear that three criteria are 
essential for the insurer: (i) is there sufficient support for the 
innovation among care providers (for instance, does it 
address any evident needs or demands), (ii) does the 
innovation fit into existing health care processes, and (iii) 
will it be able to substitute for existing forms of care. Other 
important criteria were: (iv) is the innovation fully 
developed, (v) is it fully interoperable with existing systems 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Elementary version of the eHealth innovation map, showing the main parties in the Dutch health care system. 
Each of these parties and their interests in eHealth innovations are further described in accompanying fact sheets. 
 
reimburses
care
offers a
service
provides
care
develops
standards
promotes
interests
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
pays
premium
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
supervises
health care
market
regulates
publicly
insured care
advices on 
publicly
insured care
295
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

(for instance, systems in use by general practitioners), and 
(vi) is the potential for a nationwide adoption clear.  
The criteria used by the insurer seem to be driven by a 
concern to identify early on which innovations will most 
likely be successfully implemented. However, the principal 
criterion is cost reduction by means of substitution: an 
eHealth innovation should either lead to the replacement of 
an existing form of care by a more cost efficient one; or, by 
being more effective, it should contribute to a reduced health 
care consumption in the near future. To convincingly show 
this to the health insurer, a detailed quantitative business case 
is often required. 
IV. 
FROM FINDINGS TO GUIDELINES 
During the inventory and case study phases of the project 
it had become clear that, when evaluation plans or clinical 
trials are being planned, relevant stakeholders should be 
identified and their interests taken into account. This is 
especially important because, ultimately, the evidence that is 
collected will be constituting the foundation beneath a 
business case in which all relevant stakeholders and their 
interests are accounted for. Preferably, principal stakeholders 
should be involved as early as possible, and the required 
evidence defined and collected in a cooperative effort. 
To facilitate this, eHealth SMEs required a “map”: to 
find the most promising innovation routes within the Dutch 
care system, and to identify relevant stakeholders and their 
interests. The creation of such a map, including a set of 
corresponding “fact sheets” (detailed yet concise and 
accessible information on innovation routes, relevant 
stakeholders and their interests, and types of evidence 
required) became the project’s highest priority. 
A. The eHealth innovation map 
The starting point when developing the innovation map 
was that it should provide concise yet accessible information 
for SMEs on (i) the Dutch health care system, (ii) the roles of 
the main parties within it, (iii) the interests these parties have 
in eHealth innovations, and (iv) examples of applicable 
evidence to convince them. Furthermore, the map should 
visualize the four innovation routes and so facilitate the 
identification of relevant stakeholders. The map should 
 
 
 
(a) The commercial route 
 
 
 
(b) The provider route 
 
 
 
(c) The insurer route 
 
 
(d) The government route 
Figure 2: Thematic versions of the innovation map showing the four innovation routes. Thick arrows represent subsequent steps that should be 
undertaken by the SME or other involved stakeholders. Each version is accompanied by a descriptive fact sheet. 
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
care
provider
patient
professional
association
patient
association
eHealth
SME
health
insurer
health care
insurance board
ministry of
public health
health care
authority
296
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

provide only an overview; detailed information with 
guidelines and best practices had to be provided in sets of 
accompanying fact sheets (of one page each): a set on the 
innovation routes, a set on the stakeholders involved, and a 
set on applicable evidence. The following paragraphs briefly 
discuss each of these elements. 
1) The innovation map 
Figure 1 shows the innovation map in its elementary 
version, displaying only the main parties in the Dutch health 
care system and the relations among them. Care has been 
taken to streamline the map without oversimplifying it. 
Three thematic versions of the innovation map (not shown 
here) display additional information: one shows the various 
stakeholders within each party, one the interests that 
stakeholders may have in eHealth innovations, and one the 
kinds of evidence (or other applicable forms of proof) that 
may be used to convince them. Furthermore, there are four 
thematic versions displaying the identified innovation routes; 
these versions are shown in Figure 2. Each version is 
accompanied by a brief description of what is shown. In this 
way, SMEs are provided with “at a glance” information 
which acts as an index to the accompanying sets of fact 
sheets. 
2) Fact sheets on stakeholders 
Each party is described in more detail in its own fact 
sheet. These fact sheets contain concise information on (i) 
the role of this party in the health care system, (ii) relevant 
stakeholders within this party that may play a role in decision 
making, (iii) their interest (or interests) in eHealth 
innovations, and (iv) general guidelines on how (and by what 
means) this party can be convinced. Table 1 shows a 
representative example of a stakeholder fact sheet, in this 
case about the insurer. 
3) Fact sheets on innovation routes 
The four innovation routes are also described in their 
own set of fact sheets. These fact sheets contain information 
on (i) situations where a particular route is applicable, (ii) 
matters to take into account when following a route, (iii) 
special circumstances or regulations that may apply, (iv) the 
main stakeholders that need to be involved, and (v) the main 
pitfalls. Table 2 shows a representative example of an 
innovation route fact sheet, i.e., the insurer route. 
4) Fact sheets on evidence 
The third set of fact sheets concerns the evidence that 
TABLE 1: EXAMPLE OF A STAKEHOLDER FACT SHEET. THIS ONE DISCUSSES THE INSURER. OTHERS DISCUSS THE CARE PROVIDER, 
THE PATIENT, THE PATIENT ASSOCIATION, THE PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATION, AND THE GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATIONS. 
(TRANSLATED FROM DUTCH; REFERENCES TO SOURCES IN THE ORIGINAL TEXT HAVE BEEN OMITTED FOR READABILITY.) 
Fact sheet health care insurer 
 
Role 
The health care insurer is the party reimbursing the care being provided to patients with the eHealth application. Keep in mind that there will be various 
stakeholders within the insurer, all with particular interests with regard to the eHealth application: 
 
The innovation department, where potentially interesting eHealth applications are selected and evaluated. 
 
The investment fund, which backs the development of eHealth applications financially. 
 
The purchasing department, which negotiates with care providers and purchases large quantities of health care (as efficiently as possible). 
Therefore, the role of eHealth applications it often limited. 
 
The commercial department, which sets up additional insurance packages for private parties and collective insurances for organizations and which 
sees eHealth as a distinguishing feature. 
Keep in mind that any enthusiasm in the innovation department is not necessarily shared by the other stakeholders! 
 
Interests 
As far as health care insurers are concerned, what is most important is high-quality care at low cost, which translates into the following demands being 
made regarding eHealth applications: 
 
The application needs to have sufficient support among care providers and patients (through co-creation). 
 
The application must deliver health care gains (better quality care or higher quality of life). 
 
The application has to reduce health care costs (through increased independence on the part of the patient or reduced burden on the health care 
provider). 
 
The application has to lead to substitution (no extra care but substitution of existing care). 
 
The application has to lead to reduced health-related absence (prevention or quicker recovery). 
 
The application has to be in line with national agreements and purchasing policies. 
Health care insurers do business with care providers, who they see as interlocutor, which means it is important to make sure that the application is 
suggested to the health care insurer by an enthusiastic care provider (rather than by the entrepreneur). 
 
Persuasion 
Health care insurers have medical advisers who will assess the added value of an application on the basis of their expertise. Generally speaking, they will 
demand to see a business case, based on financial estimates and supported by research results (for instance a clinical trial or pilot project). 
 
A business case can be created in stages, for instance by translating the effects that have been detected in a pilot study into financial consequences for the 
health care insurer. Always determine the design of a pilot study or clinical trial (what is being measured, and how) together with the care provider and 
health care insurer. 
 
297
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

will be required to convince the main stakeholders along 
each of the four innovation routes. The information provided 
in these fact sheets is necessarily generic; details on exactly 
which evidence to collect will depend on the specific 
situation (e.g., the type of eHealth application, where it is 
being used and to what effect, and the specific interests of 
relevant stakeholders). The fact sheets therefore contain (i) a 
concise description of the kinds of effects that need to be 
demonstrated for the main stakeholders, (ii) examples of the 
kinds of evidence that may be applicable, (iii) a few generic 
guidelines and best practices on how to collect evidence, and 
(iv) references to relevant sources of information, such as the 
frameworks discussed earlier in Section III.A. Table 3 shows 
a representative example of an evidence fact sheet, i.e., 
evidence for the insurer route. 
B. Validation of the innovation map 
Validation of the eHealth innovation map and the 
corresponding fact sheets has been performed along four 
different lines. First, experts from the participating health 
care providers, patient associations, and government 
organizations have been asked to carefully check the map 
and the fact sheets for correctness and completeness of the 
provided information. Several corrections and suggestions 
have been made by them, which have subsequently been 
incorporated into the materials. 
Second, the usability and usefulness of the map and fact 
sheets have been evaluated with representatives from 
eHealth SMEs. This has been done during a series of 
workshops both within the project (as part of the regular 
project meetings) and outside of the project (e.g., at national 
and regional eHealth-related conferences and symposia). In 
these workshops the eHealth innovation map was applied to 
a range of different cases at hand (usually provided by 
workshop participants) and evaluation happened afterwards 
by 
means 
of 
questionnaires 
and 
discussions 
with 
participants. In this way, a substantial amount of valuable 
feedback was collected and used to improve the materials. 
Third, validation of the map is currently being performed 
by means of “action research”, where the research team is 
getting actively involved in a few selected cases with the aim 
to evaluate and extend the current insights. 
Fourth, a number of successful cases are currently being 
TABLE 2: EXAMPLE OF AN INNOVATION ROUTE FACT SHEET. THIS ONE DISCUSSES THE INSURER ROUTE. 
OTHERS DISCUSS THE COMMERCIAL ROUTE, THE PROVIDER ROUTE, AND THE GOVERNMENT ROUTE. 
(TRANSLATED FROM DUTCH; REFERENCES TO SOURCES IN THE ORIGINAL TEXT HAVE BEEN OMITTED FOR READABILITY.) 
Fact sheet insurer route 
 
When does this route apply? 
An eHealth application is integrated into care that is already being provided or reimbursed. The application does not alter the care being provided, only 
the form in which it is delivered. As a result, for example, the care becomes more accessible or it can be provided more efficiently.  
 
Examples 
 
An online nutrition diary that is used as part of diet advice by a dietician and promotes the patient’s self-management. 
 
A pillbox that alerts patients when they forget to take their medication. This takes place on doctor’s order and promotes patient discipline.  
Points of interest 
Make sure there is sufficient support! It is important for care providers, patients and patient organizations to be enthusiastic about the application, which 
is why it is crucial to involve them at an early stage in the development (co-creation). The specialists’ professional association plays an important role in 
nationwide up-scaling, because they determine the guidelines for good and safe care.  
 
If an application leads to cheaper or less labor-intensive care, while the quality of the provided care remains the same at least, this is interesting for the 
care provider and it may not be necessary to involve the insurer. If, on the other hand, the application makes the care being provided more expensive, it 
has to be demonstrated that the quality of the care has improved and a larger support base is needed. Do not approach the insurer yourself, but let the 
enthusiastic care provider do the negotiations. 
 
As far as insurers are concerned, it is crucial for the application to lead to a replacement of existing care (for instance through substitution or self-
management) and, ultimately, to a reduction in reimbursements. It is important to demonstrate this in a detailed business case. 
 
Special details 
If an application does not match the existing care descriptions defined by the Dutch Healthcare Authority (for example due to restrictions in the 
description or rate), the care provider and insurer together can submit an application at the Dutch Healthcare Authority. The Dutch Healthcare Authority 
can modify an existing care description or create a temporary one, giving the application time to “prove” itself. 
 
The main stakeholders 
 
Care provider and professional association 
 
Patients and patient association 
 
Care insurer 
 
Dutch Healthcare Authority (if a care description needs to be modified or a temporary one created) 
Pitfalls 
Creating insufficient support (among patients, care providers, patient associations and professional associations). Approaching the insurer yourself 
without the backing of at least one care provider. Not paying attention to the substitution of the existing care. 
 
298
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

analyzed by means of desk research and interviews with 
parties involved, to assess the innovation routes that have 
been followed and the evidence that has been collected. 
Overall, the consulted experts and participating SMEs 
had very favorable remarks. Judging from the feedback that 
was given, the innovation map does indeed manage to 
provide a concise and accessible overview of the various 
ways in which eHealth innovations can be embedded in 
routine health care. At the time of writing there is a strong 
interest in the map. It has, for instance, been made accessible 
to a large audience via the website of the Netherlands 
Organization for Health Research and Development [14] and 
a well-known website maintained by a joint initiative of four 
government organizations (the Dutch Healthcare Insurance 
Board, the Dutch Healthcare Authority, the Ministry of 
Health, 
Welfare 
and 
Sports, 
and 
the 
Netherlands 
Organization for Health Research and Development) [15]. 
The preliminary findings from the third and fourth lines 
(action research and analysis of successful cases) also 
provide support for the conclusion that the innovation map is 
a useful instrument, and that the corresponding fact sheets 
manage to capture all the essential information needed to 
guide an SME along a chosen innovation route. 
C. Consolidation and tool development 
The last phase of the project, consolidation and tool 
development, is currently nearing completion. Based on the 
eHealth innovation map a workshop protocol has been 
developed, and currently the innovation map and the fact 
sheets are being incorporated into an interactive, web-based 
tool [18]. The workshop protocol and the web-based tool 
both provide guidance to SMEs in finding a promising 
innovation route, in identifying relevant stakeholders to 
involve, and in determining which evidence they may 
require. 
Last, the project’s results are being documented in an 
accessible and illustrated booklet for SMEs. The booklet 
covers all the information contained within the innovation 
TABLE 3: EXAMPLE OF AN EVIDENCE FACT SHEET. THIS ONE DISCUSSES EVIDENCE FOR THE INSURER ROUTE. 
OTHERS DISCUSS EVIDENCE FOR THE COMMERCIAL ROUTE, THE PROVIDER ROUTE, AND THE GOVERNMENT ROUTE. 
(TRANSLATED FROM DUTCH; REFERENCES TO SOURCES IN THE ORIGINAL TEXT HAVE BEEN OMITTED FOR READABILITY.) 
Fact sheet evidence within the insurer route 
 
What needs to be demonstrated? 
A business case needs to be developed in which the interests of the care provider (see the provider route) and the health insurer are combined. Ultimately, 
health care insurers want to see a reduction in health care costs (through substitution or self-management), but they also focus on support among 
providers, scalability and compatibility with existing care processes. See the ZonMw website for a list of relevant criteria. 
 
Which evidence is suitable? 
Demonstrating a reduction in health care costs can be done in two ways: 
1. 
By replacing expensive forms of care by less expensive ones (“substitution”). This leads to “definite”, short-term cost reductions. Make clear to the 
insurer how the current care process will change and how this will lead to labor savings, process optimization, or lower costs. Pay attention to the 
aspects that will be included in the business case, and how this will be measured in a pilot or trial. Insurers will want to know how substitution is 
actually accomplished. 
2. 
More effective care will lead to a reduction in care consumption in the long term, but the cost reduction is surrounded by uncertainty. Note that 
insurers will want to see a return on investment within three years. Reduced health care consumption will need to be demonstrated with 
methodologically sound research, for instance using this three-stage process: (1) a clinical trial aimed at measuring a process measure or 
intermediary measure, (2) translation of the effects found on the process or intermediary measure into an effect on a relevant end measure, based on 
the best available scientific evidence on the relation between these two, (3) calculation of the potential cost reduction based on insurer data. The 
Achmea Health Database is a good source of information to do this. 
Some eHealth applications may be attractive for health insurer for commercial or marketing purposes (e.g., to attract or maintain subscribers). In such 
cases, contact the commercial department, which is responsible for  additional insurances for consumers and collective insurances for organizations. In 
the latter case, it should be clear how the application can lead to fitter employees or reduced sick leave. 
 
Things to keep in mind: 
 
In the case of improved efficiency, there has to be a clear (clinically relevant) improvement, which has to be demonstrated through scientifically 
sound research. 
 
Be careful about making assumptions, for instance in translating an intermediary measure (for instance, medication adherence) to an end measure 
(reduction or delay of complications). Do not add assumptions to assumptions.  
 
“Pick your battle”: using a certain application may prove more beneficial with some syndromes compared to others. Think about this carefully.  
 
“Hard” data (which can be determined objectively) have more weight than “soft” data (opinions or experiences of patients and other people 
involved), no matter how they are collected. “Hard” data can also be obtained through routine registrations of care suppliers. 
Important: 
 
Discuss as early as possible with the insurer and the care provider what evidence will be required. 
 
Involve important stakeholders, such as decision-makers, when working out the appropriate research approach. 
 
Consult experts when methodologically strong research is needed, but keep stakeholders involved. 
 
299
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

map and the fact sheets, such as the descriptions of the main 
parties in the Dutch health care system, the identified 
innovation routes, the interests of various parties in eHealth 
innovations, and various kinds of evidence that may be 
required. It is hoped that in this way, the project’s results will 
be well consolidated and accessible for all interested eHealth 
SMEs in The Netherlands. 
V. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
The main conclusion to be drawn from the research 
presented here, is that evidence constitutes the foundation 
underneath a business case in which all relevant stakeholders 
and their interests are accounted for. Preferably, principal 
stakeholders should be involved as early as possible when 
planning an evaluation study or a (clinical) trial. In this way, 
the criteria that will play a role later on in the decision 
process can be clarified early on, when they can still be taken 
into account. 
This insight has become the corner stone of the approach 
developed in the project “Successful Entrepreneurship in 
eHealth”. Following this approach, the chosen innovation 
route, the identified stakeholders, and their interests in the 
eHealth innovation at hand eventually determine which kinds 
of evidence will be needed and how they should be collected. 
The developed eHealth innovation map, the workshop 
protocol, and the web-based tool were all developed to 
provide guidance to eHealth SMEs, allowing them to make 
better, more informed decisions. The design, implementation 
and analysis of clinical trials will nevertheless remain the 
domain of academic experts or highly trained staff members 
working at care providers; the level of expertise that is 
required makes this simply unavoidable. 
With regard to the usefulness of the results in countries 
outside The Netherlands, the question arises how unique the 
Dutch situation really is. In other words, can the eHealth 
innovation map be generalized to other countries? When an 
early concept of the innovation map was presented at an 
international eHealth conference [4] it seemed from the 
responses given by the international audience that certain 
basic principles, such as the roles and interests of the care 
provider and the insurer, are certainly generalizable. Other 
aspects, such as the government legislation pertaining to the 
health care system, will vary. Nevertheless, judging by this 
first impression it seems that the proposed approach may be 
fruitful for parties in other countries as well. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank Stichting Innovatie Alliantie 
for 
financially 
supporting 
the 
project 
Successful 
Entrepreneurship in eHealth. Furthermore, they would like 
to thank the eHealth SMEs and all other organizations who 
participated in the project: Achmea divisie Zorg en 
Gezondheid, ActiZ, Be4Care, BeagleBoxx, Bonstato, 
College voor Zorgverzekeringen, Consuming Knowledge, 
DiaDerma, Dutch IT Consultants, Eusamed, Evalan, 
EvoCare, Focus Cura, Health Valley, Installatie Techniek 
Masseling, Isala Klinieken, MS Nederland, Nederlandse 
Zorgautoriteit, Novay, Nederlandse Patiënten Consumenten 
Federatie, Nederlandse Vereniging voor eHealth, SalesSpirit, 
SymaX, Syntens, Valetudo Interpres, Vos Projectadvies 
Gezondheidszorg, VRC Telecom, and Zorgverzekeraar 
VGZ. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J.E. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, H.C. 
Ossebaard, S.M. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, and E.R. Seydel, “A 
holistic framework to improve the uptake and impact of 
eHealth technologies,” J. Med. Internet Res., 2011, 
13(4):e111. 
[2] F. Mair, C. May, E. Murray, T. Finch, G. Anderson, C. 
O’Donnell, P. Wallace, and F. Sullivan, “Understanding the 
implementation and integration of e-health services,” London: 
NHS Service and Delivery R and D Organisation (NCCSDO), 
2009. 
[3] F. Mair, C. May, C. O’Donnell, T. Finch, F. Sullivan, and E. 
Murray, “Factors that promote or inhibit the implementation 
of e-health systems: an explanatory systematic review,” Bull. 
World Health Organ., 2012, 90:357-364. 
[4] R. Janssen, M. Hettinga, H. Prins, S. Visser, R. Menko, I. 
Krediet, T. Haaker, and L. Bodenstaff, “Developing evidence 
guidelines for eHealth small and medium-sized enterprises,” 
Proc. eTELEMED 2013, Feb. 2013, pp. 92-95. 
[5] R. Janssen, M. Hettinga, S. Visser, R. Menko, H. Prins, I. 
Krediet, T. Haaker, and L. Bodenstaff, “Innovation routes and 
evidence guidelines for eHealth Small and Medium-sized 
Enterprises,” Int. J. Adv. Life Sc., 2013, 5(3&4).  
[6] R.E. Scott, F.G. McCarthy, P.A. Jennett, T. Perverseff, D. 
Lorenzetti, A. Saeed, B. Rush, and M. Yeo, “Telehealth 
outcomes: a synthesis of the literature and recommendations 
for outcome indicators,” J. Telemed. Telecare, 2007, 13 Suppl 
2:1-38. 
[7] K. Kidholm, A.G. Ekeland, L.K. Jensen, J. Rasmussen, C.D. 
Pedersen, A. Bowes, S.A. Flottorp, and M. Bech, “A model 
for assessment of telemedicine applications: MAST”, Int. J. 
Technol. Assess. Health Care, 2012, 28(1):44-51. 
[8] Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health, 
“Guidelines 
for 
the 
economic 
evaluation 
of 
health 
technologies: Canada [3rd edition],” Ottawa: Canadian 
Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health, 2006. 
[9] C.M. Cusack, C. Byrne, J.M. Hook, J. McGowan, E.G. Poon, 
and A. Zafar, “Health information technology evaluation 
toolkit: 2009 update,” Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, 2009. 
[10] M.P. Gagnon and R.E. Scott, “Striving for evidence in e-
health 
evaluation: 
lessons 
from 
health 
technology 
assessment,” J. Telemed. Telecare, 2005, 11, Suppl 2:S34-6. 
[11] H. Hyppönen, E. Ammenwerth, and N. de Keizer, “Exploring 
a methodology for eHealth indicator development,” Stud. 
Health Technol. Inform., 2012, 180:338-42. 
[12] Website Nederlandse Zorgautoriteit, www.nza.nl. [Website of 
the Dutch Healthcare Authority. In Dutch.] Last accessed: 
November 24, 2013. 
[13] Website College voor Zorgverzekeringen, www.cvz.nl. 
[Website of the Dutch Healthcare Insurance Board. In Dutch.] 
[14] Website 
ZonMw, 
www.zonmw.nl. 
[Website 
of 
the 
Netherlands 
Organization 
for 
Health 
Research 
and 
Development. In Dutch.] Last accessed: November 24, 2013. 
[15] Website Zorg voor Innoveren, www.zorgvoorinnoveren.nl. 
[Website by a joint initiative of 
four government 
organizations: the Dutch Healthcare Insurance Board, the 
Dutch Healthcare Authority, the Ministry of Health, Welfare 
and Sports, and the Netherlands Organization for Health 
Research and Development. In Dutch.] Last accessed: 
November 24, 2013. 
300
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[16] Website Nictiz, www.nictiz.nl. [Website of the National IT 
Institute for Healthcare in the Netherlands. In Dutch.] Last 
accessed: November 24, 2013. 
[17] P.M. Ho, P.N. Peterson, and F.A. Masoudi, “Evaluating the 
evidence. Is there a rigid hierarchy?” Circulation, 2008, 
118(16):1675-84. 
[18] Website 
Innovatieroutes 
in 
de 
Zorg, 
www.innovatieroutesindezorg.nl. [Innovation routes in Health 
Care, maintained by the Research group ICT Innovations in 
Health Care, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences. In 
Dutch.] Last accessed: November 24, 2013. 
301
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

