Towards Influencing Factors on Business Models of Ambient Assisted Living 
Systems 
An Analysis of the German Health Care Markets 
Daniel Brem 
Technische Universität 
München 
Munich, Germany 
daniel.brem@mytum.de 
Tobias Fritsch 
Universität Heidelberg 
Heidelberg, Germany 
t.frtisch@gmx.net 
Frederick Steinke 
Humboldt Universität Berlin 
Berlin, Germany 
steinkef@student.hu-
berlin.de 
Frederik Kerssenfischer 
Technische Universität 
München 
Munich, Germany 
ozodis@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract — The aim of this paper is to close the research gap 
by 
combining 
state-of-the-art 
theory 
of 
value 
chain 
characteristics, business model definitions and financing 
options in order to realize profitable business with Ambient 
Assisted Living (AAL) systems. Relating to value chain 
characteristics, three main categories of elements are detected 
when comparing several approaches. In terms of AAL business 
models, a suitable definition is derived which is able to describe 
the creation of value in a multi-company environment. In 
order to conduct profitable business, both German health care 
markets are compared with their specific advantages and 
disadvantages. Due to the high burdens of Governmental 
restrictions in the primary health care market, AAL business 
models should focus on the secondary health care market in 
the near future. However, further research is required how to 
integrate service companies, whose daily business is to care for 
older people, into a business model as distributors of AAL 
technology.  
Keywords-Ambient Assisted Living; AAL; Business Model; 
Financing; Value Chain 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Demographic ageing as an aspect of demographic 
change is one of the global mega trends in the 21st century 
[1]. One of the most affected countries is Germany whose 
population will be one of the oldest in the world by 2035 
[2]. By the middle of this century, more than half of 
Germany’s inhabitants will be older than 50 years and the 
proportion of people aged 60 years and over will increase 
from 26 per cent in 2011 to 38 per cent in 2050 [2] [3]. 
Analogically, the group of the over eighty-year-old will 
triple to more than 10 million people [4]. Although ageing is 
not automatically equivalent to the need for care, the 
majority of the elderly increasingly relies on assistance, 
support and medical care with advancing age. In 
consideration of demographic change, this will lead to 
massive costs associated with care giving [5].  
To counter this process, new care delivery models 
supported by information and communication technologies 
(ICT) are being developed under the name Ambient 
Assisted Living (AAL) [6]. Despite its tremendous market 
potential, the AAL branch is yet to make a mainstream 
breakthrough [5]. Although many devices and systems have 
been developed in the past years, there is a lack of 
comprehensive and commercialized AAL-solutions which 
truly meet customer demands [7].  
In connection with this finding, the main problem is seen 
in the unwillingness of customers to handle the complexity 
of coordinating different partial solutions. Thus, the 
customer process must be comprehensively supported by a 
network of enterprises, offering an all-inclusive, easy-to-
handle solution. This also means, from the view of 
organizational studies, the necessity to develop new forms of 
collaborative service delivery as well as sustainable and 
viable business models for enterprise networks [4] [7]. 
Although present business models of AAL projects are based 
on governmental or semi-governmental funding, many of 
these projects have not yet achieved permanent financing [8]. 
Due to this fact, missing business models are almost 
unanimously considered to be the greatest market obstacle to 
a broad implementation of Ambient Assisted Living systems 
[5]. Therefore, this paper gives an overview of influencing 
factors on AAL business models and analyzes how they stick 
together in order to run a profitable business. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
In recent years, Ambient Assisted Living has developed 
into a decisive factor for scientific and market-oriented 
research into ageing populations [5]. AAL refers to a 
situation whereby an electronic environment reacts 
sensitively and responsively to the presence of people and 
provides assistive propositions [1]. These solutions can take 
the form of assistance for daily activities, health and activity 
surveillance, access to social and medical emergency 
systems as well as easing social contacts [8]. Accordingly, 
the AAL market can be divided into the four segments 
“Health & Homecare”, “Safety & Privacy”, “Supply & 
Household”, and “Social Environment” referencing the 
definition of the German Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research [9]. 
Since AAL was notably promoted on the political level, 
most 
innovative 
products 
and 
services 
based 
on 
technological developments instead of customer demands 
[10]. In this context, a study by Steinke et al. [11] proved a 
strong significant correlation between attitude toward a 
product or service and purchase intention. This means that 
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the elderly are willing to pay for AAL products and services 
when customers' demands are truly met. Thus, from the 
perspective of innovation literature, AAL solutions rather 
refer to the term “technology push” than “demand pull” 
[10]. This trend mainly resulted from the early focus in 
scientific research on the development of technology 
without considering the business side [12]. In this process, 
several authors such as Osl et al. [13], Balasch [14] or 
Rosales Saurer et al. [15] examined customer requirements 
from different perspectives in order to give an integrated 
view on customer requirements for the development of 
holistic AAL solutions.  
Although suitable products and services were created 
subsequently, many were not introduced into the market 
since the projects were often discontinued at the end of the 
funding period due to missing business models [8]. This is 
why the German AAL Congresses emphasized AAL 
business models in order to set foundations to ensure 
sustainable business success without governmental funding. 
Therefore, three interrelated topics were figured out to be 
most important: Value chain characteristics, business model 
definitions for value networks and financing options. 
In this context, Balasch [14], Gersch et al. [16] as well as 
Sassen et al. [17] developed value chain models to provide a 
framework for the creation of hybrid products in AAL 
enterprise networks. All of them came up with related groups 
of actors needed for viable business models. Since there was 
no commonly agreed definition of business models for value 
networks in the context of AAL, researchers defined specific 
elements. In addition, various financing options were 
analyzed and linked to existing business model definitions. 
However, the interconnectedness of these three topics has 
not yet been clearly demonstrated. Hence, the research 
question reads as follows: How are state-of-the-art theory of 
value chain characteristics, business model definitions for 
value networks and financing options interrelated in order to 
realize profitable business with AAL systems? 
Hence, the structure of the paper reads as follows: The 
introduction and background sections outline the need for 
AAL and explain why, despite working technology, financial 
aspects are needed to make a mainstream breakthrough. 
From the perspective of the value chain, the third paragraph 
gives reasons why only networks of specialized providers are 
suited to offer customer-oriented solutions. In the fourth 
segment, a suitable business model definition for hybrid 
value creation is derived. The fifth part outlines the financing 
options of AAL technology and services in both German 
health care markets. The sixth section concludes that 
practitioners should concentrated on the second health care 
market and the last paragraph reveals how still missing 
distribution partners and sophisticated revenue models may 
help to implement AAL solutions in the market. 
III. 
VALUE CHAIN CHARACTERISTICS 
The implementation of AAL solutions via a fully 
integrated business model cannot be realized by a single 
protagonist. The social and the health care systems require 
new combinations of resources and competencies which 
cannot be found in any existing corporation [16]. Thus, 
value networks consisting of legally independent, but 
interdependent organizations are necessary which have the 
potential to resolve the conflict between a high level of 
specialization and a broad range of services [8]. Only 
several partners will be able to create solutions consisting of 
a variety of products and services, which meet the 
conditions of hybrid products. These solutions have to be 
developed with reference to hybrid value creation. As 
hybrid value creation applies in the context of a single 
company, the creation of value in terms of AAL can be 
considered as an advancement of traditional hybrid value 
creation [18]. In the course of this, the various services need 
to be bundled in accordance with the long established 
principle of “one-face-to-the-customer”, via the use of the 
customer 
process 
of 
business-to-business 
(B2B) 
relationships [19]. This means that a global solution for the 
customer with a comprehensive support of customer 
processes is essential [13]. 
Since there is the necessity of enterprise networks to 
implement AAL solutions, a new or at least modified value 
chain compared to value creation in single companies is 
required. New and innovative solutions are created partly by 
changing and combining the existing elements used for value 
creation of different protagonists and partly by adding new 
components. Hence, Balasch [14], Gersch et al. [16] as well 
as Sassen et al. [17] provide new value chain models with 
various elements customized for the added value of AAL. 
Despite some varieties, their models only differ marginally. 
With the exception of one missing element, all of them 
differentiate between three main categories as illustrated in 
table 1: Infrastructure providers, several types of organizers 
and different kinds of suppliers or providers. For a clearer 
understanding of the expressions used, the first two models 
are explained in detail below (since Balasch [14] did not 
provide a description). 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF THREE MODELS OF AAL VALUE CHAIN 
ELEMENTS 
Balasch [14]
Gersch et al. [16] 
Sassen et al. [17]
Infrastructure 
Providers
Infrastructure 
Providers
Infrastructure 
Providers
- 
Orchestrators 
Network Manager
Platform Operator
Suppliers of Sensors/ 
Devices 
Service Providers 
Components 
Suppliers 
Specialized Suppliers 
Industrial Service 
Providers 
Providers 
 
According to Gersch et al. [16], Infrastructure Providers 
make the platforms and services, needed for the interaction 
of all protagonists involved in the solution, available. When 
considering the associated investments, the provided 
platform should be used by many users for diverse activities 
and implementation scenarios. Orchestrators coordinate 
value networks as a user of the provided platform. The main 
task of an orchestrator is to identify and choose the best 
specialists within the different value chain steps, to initiate 
291
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

their cooperation in a value network, and to coordinate their 
activities with the objective of creating competitive 
advantages for the whole service offering. Components 
Suppliers provide functional components or end devices, 
which work either as a standalone device or are linked to 
other components and devices. Specialized Suppliers focus 
on service provision for one component integrated in the 
offering of the network. This service is independently 
marketable at the same time. Users of the services supplied 
by orchestrators may be end-users as well as focused 
suppliers, which also demand services from Industrial 
Services Providers to realize their own service offerings. 
In accordance with Sassen et al. [17], the Network 
Manager provides services to the client with its own name 
or brand. It acts as general contractor and is liable to the 
customer. The providers, in turn, are liable to the network 
manager. The cooperation between all the suppliers is set by 
the network manager. The Platform Operator determines 
the cooperation strategy and executes all operational 
activities. It defines the processes of the providers offered 
on the platform. Furthermore, it takes orders from customers 
who hired a service provider, issues invoices and receives 
complaints. The Infrastructure providers offer the platform 
as a system. It is crucial for them to use the infrastructure in 
many application areas. Providers offer services to 
customers. In this process, many different service providers 
take over the role of the provider. 
In addition to the definition of the elements in an AAL 
value chain, there is the need to investigate how large-scale 
networks of heterogeneous enterprises are able to do 
business which is profitable for all participants [7]. 
Therefore, the following section discusses various business 
model definitions and explains how an appropriate AAL 
business model definition has to be built-up. 
IV. 
BUSINESS MODELS 
The origin of the business model term as a concept in 
practice or science has not been conclusively resolved as of 
today [19]. Since it was mainly discussed by practitioners 
and investors, it was seldom defined explicitly [21] [22] 
[23] [24]. Wirtz [25] refers to the long conceptual 
development of the business model concept which was 
repeatedly shaped by various trends and connected with 
different schools of thoughts. This has been supported by 
other authors such as Samavi et al. [26], Osl et al. [7] and 
Osterwalder et al. [27] who explain various business model 
categories and approaches. On the basis of their research, 
Osterwalder et al. [27] defined the business model term as 
follows: “A business model is a conceptual tool that 
contains a set of elements and their relationships and allows 
expressing the business logic of a specific firm. It is a 
description of the value a company offers to one or several 
segments of customers and of the architecture of the firm 
and its network of partners for creating, marketing, and 
delivering this value and relationship capital, to generate 
profitable and sustainable revenue streams.” 
Unfortunately, most business model definitions – 
including the one portrayed above – were developed for the 
application on focal firms only. Since value creation in the 
context of AAL needs to take place within a multi-company 
environment, a business model for a network of several 
companies has to be chosen. Hence, numerous authors have 
also developed definitions for value networks, focusing on 
the aspect of cooperation and business networking by 
defining specific model components, such as “network of 
actors”, “network of partners”, or “value network”. Yet, 
these concepts have not gained widespread recognition in 
literature since other elements also depend on the 
company’s inter-connectedness with its business partners as 
well. Hence, Osl et al. [7] suggest not adding cooperation as 
a 
separate 
component, 
but 
rather 
emphasizing 
a 
collaboration perspective within the other items.  
Thus, the Business Model Canvas developed by 
Osterwalder et al. [28] seems to be appropriate to design a 
business model for AAL systems. Although it was not 
developed for a multi-firm context, it has a strong focus on 
relationships between different actors. Further advantages 
are its intuitive character as well as the possibility to 
illustrate the Building Blocks graphically. Thus, the Canvas 
is able to describe the creation of value for AAL solutions 
referring to the logic of [7]. The Business Model Canvas 
consists of nine “Building Blocks”. The names of the 
Building Blocks read as follows: The Customer Segments 
Building Block, the Value Propositions Building Block, the 
Channels Building Block, the Customer Relationships 
Building Block, the Key Partnerships Building Block, the 
Key Resources Building Block, the Key Activities Building 
Block, the Revenue Streams Building Block, and the Cost 
Structure [28]. 
V. 
FINANCING OPTIONS 
For health care and nursing related products and services 
– as developed in the context of AAL – there are two 
markets for financing: the primary and secondary health 
care market. Gersch et al. [10] call them “arenas” for AAL 
business models. The primary health care market is the core 
of the German health care system along with its institutions 
and medical providers. It is characterized by the medical 
treatment of all ICD-10 indications and corresponds to the 
mainly solidarily financed partition in the context of 
standard care [16]. It includes medical care provided by 
contributions from the legal and private health insurance, 
the nursing care insurance as well as from other social 
security systems and government grants [10].  
Besides the primary, a secondary health care market 
with mainly privately funded health-related products and 
services has been established [16]. In contrast to the 
primary, the secondary health care market focuses largely 
on privately financed, health-related services [10]. Thus, it 
is characterized by much stronger market potential. Social 
acceptance and increased value of AAL solutions can be 
realized if the independent customers, who wants to provide 
for their old age, or that of their relatives, is addressed. 
292
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Here, the willingness to pay is directly correlated with the 
significant added value for users and customers [14]. 
Although the primary health care market with its 
institutions and providers is still the core of the German 
health care system (output volume in 2008: 221 billion EUR 
or 77.5 per cent), the secondary health care market gains in 
importance (total size 2008: 64 billion EUR or 22.5 per 
cent). Due to the reduction of funds in the publicly funded 
sector as of several health care reforms, the secondary 
health care market has been registering high growth rates (in 
recent years already 5.5 per cent). At the same time, the 
growth in the solidarity-funded health care spending was 
significantly lower (only 2.1 per cent in the same period).  
Despite the apparent differences of the primary and 
secondary health market, a general trend can be observed 
that the primary and secondary health care markets are 
growing together and will complement each other in the 
future. With the aid of AAL solutions, a so called “third 
health site” will be established alongside existing outpatient 
care and in-patient service provision [10]. In combination 
with the primary and secondary health care market as well as 
the three different health sites – in-patient care, out-patient 
care and care at home – six segments for health related 
services can generally be targeted with AAL solutions as 
depicted as shown in table 2. 
TABLE II.  
SIX SEGMENTS IN COMBINATION OF TWO HEALTH CARE 
MARKETS AND THREE HEALTH SITES MODIFIED  
FROM GOLDSCHMIDT ET AL. [29] 
Health care 
markets 
Secondary 
health care 
market 
IV 
V 
VI 
Primary 
health care 
market 
I 
II 
III 
 
Second health 
site 
First health 
site 
Third health 
site
In-patient care 
Out-patient 
care 
Care at home 
Health sites 
 
Besides the basic types of potential revenue models for 
the primary and secondary health care market, products and 
services developed and offered at the interface between these 
two markets can also be observed. These hybrid models try 
to combine several basic types of potential revenue models 
and financing systems of both health care markets. The best 
known of these hybrids are co-payment and deductible 
models. In addition, there are also a number of different 
premium, saving and apportionment models. Premium 
models mostly complement state-funded primary care, as the 
utilization of additional offerings has to be paid privately. 
Within the scope of saving models, partially funded health 
care financing is discussed. Apportionment models are 
insurance models which work similarly to the current social 
security system. In accordance with the principle of risk 
sharing, a direct redistribution of the group of payers to 
benefit recipients is fulfilled [10]. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Recapitulating, innovations in the primary health care 
market need the mobilization on the political level as they 
are dependent on changes in regulation [30]. The advantage 
of a solution for the primary health market is that only a few 
institutional payers have to be convinced instead of many 
individual customers with low willingness to pay [31]. In 
contrast, innovations in the secondary health care market are 
driven more by market demand. These innovations can 
better evade governmental regulation, but clearly rely on 
visible value propositions and value-added architectures in 
order to successfully establish on the market [30]. However, 
there is also the possibility to reach large customers, such as 
housing associations. In doing so, each client generates 
considerably more revenue instead of many small and 
individual customers and it is more likely to reach the 
critical mass faster.  
Nevertheless, a business model in the primary health care 
market is not preferable at the moment. Particularly health 
as well as nursing care insurances only pays for products 
and services in case an immediate savings potential – which 
means within one year – can be proved. Since innovations 
in the context of AAL have scarcely been able to prove this 
requirement as the amortization period normally lasts 
distinct longer, the potential to implement a cost-effective 
business model in the primary health care market has been 
low. In terms of a business model in the secondary health 
care market, customers’ willingness to pay needs to be 
analyzed in detail for a specific solution to be successful in 
the market. The requirements for this are the outcomes from 
several studies. Whereas some detected a general low 
willingness to pay, especially in relation to product 
supporting services [32], others pointed out that the 
willingness to pay increases significantly if the offers 
exactly meet clients’ requirements. And others again came 
to the conclusions that the price represents a secondary 
criterion from the customer perspective. According to this, it 
only becomes important if the consumer is not able to find 
any difference in the quality between certain services [13]. 
By implication, this means that there is considerable 
demand potential for quality-reduced low-cost offers with 
respect to services. In order to reach this target, 
differentiated offerings for price-sensitive customers as well 
as quality-oriented customers with higher willingness to pay 
have to be designed [13]. On the one hand, this can be 
realized by the cross-linked implementation of AAL 
solutions into integrated care processes [16]. On the other 
hand, cross-subsidization in the context of hybrid products 
are necessary elements to offer cheaper products for the 
mass market similar to many other industries financing 
forms [16]. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
Due to demographic change, the development of new 
solutions to assist the elderly in their daily routine is of high 
293
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

economic importance. Despite the Government funding of 
18 research projects [33] and the development of suitable 
products and services, there is still a lack of comprehensive 
solutions as well as interlinked business models for value 
networks [5].  
With reference to business models and the recommended 
solution for the secondary health care market, it might be 
reasonable to consult companies such as Caritas or 
Diakonie, whose daily business is caring for the elderly, and 
convert them as distributors in a large value network. Since 
nursing and even more medical services evade in many 
parts from the objective assessment of lay people, the setup 
of medical reputation requires branding. In doing so, a 
professional appearance and distribution as well as 
sustainable quality management and quality communication 
has to be implemented [34]. Therefore, a business model or 
revenue model, respectively, including brokerage fees for 
these companies has to be designed. Since these companies 
are often operated not-for-profit, further research is needed 
to investigate how these firms can yet be integrated into the 
creation of value in the context of AAL.  
Further research is also required for an optimal pricing of 
hybrid 
products 
developed 
and 
distributed 
in 
a 
multicorporate context, such as AAL. Whereas basic 
approaches for focal firms are described by Burianek et al. 
[35], their model needs to be transferred to value networks. 
In view of hybrid products, the clients do not pay for certain 
components of products, but rather for the functionality of a 
solution. Thus, pricing should be aligned to the proportion 
of value added for the customer and pricing systems by 
applying usage based pricing, performance based pricing or 
value based pricing. However, there is still a research gap 
how to apply these pricing systems to a value network, 
especially with respect to direct cross-subsidization and 
potential to create a lock-in situation, which bases on 
products and services of different companies. 
In addition, AAL offerings are typically characterized by 
a variety of economic anomalies which influence the 
diffusion process in the market directly or indirectly. First, 
there are uncertainties between special vendors and the 
demand side. Second, high investments with regard to 
potentially imbalanced fixed costs and related business risks 
have to be compensated by the involved companies. Third, 
the need for cooperation of several actors of the supply and 
demand side exists. In this context, the development and 
coordination of complementary division of labor structures 
each contributing to individual services or business processes 
in order to implement a comprehensive solution needs to be 
established. In addition, there is the need to price AAL in 
accordance with the legal framework of the primary and 
secondary health care market. Lastly, individual AAL offers 
may need a critical mass in case the benefit for each adopter 
depends on the number of additional users connected to the 
system [10]. Concluding, these issues must be resolved in 
order to establish viable and sustainable business models in 
the context of AAL. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research was supported by grants from the German 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). It is 
part of the project SMILEY (Smart and Independent Living 
for the Elderly) supported by BMBF under contract 
01FC10004. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. de Ruyter, E. Zwartkruis-Pelgrim, and E. Aarts, “Ambient 
assisted living research in the CareLab,” Journal of 
Gerontopsychology and Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 23 (2), 
2010, pp. 115-119. 
[2] M. Hampicke, S. Meyer, D. Friedrich, D. Erler, H. Quaas, H. 
Pötter, and P. Dinkelacker, “BMBF-Projekt SELBST: Ein 
innovatives Dienstleistungskonzept zur Unterstützung älterer 
Menschen und deren Angehörige,“ Proc. 4. Deutscher AAL-
Kongress, VDE Verlag, Jan. 2011, Paper 3.1. 
[3] United Nations Population Division, World population 
prospects: The 2010 revision, New York: UN Population 
Division, 2011. 
[4] P. Georgieff, Ambient Assisted Living: Marktpotenziale IT-
unterstützter Pflege für ein selbstbestimmtes Altern, Stuttgart: 
MFG Stiftung Baden-Württemberg, 2008. 
[5] R. Wichert, “Challenges and limitations of intelligent ambient 
assisted living environments,” in Ambient Intelligence, B. de 
Ruyter et al., Eds. Berlin: Springer, 2010, pp. 304-309. 
[6] B. Eberhard, U. Fachinger, and K. D. Henke, “Better health 
and ambient assisted living (AAL) from a global, regional and 
local economic perspective,” International Journal of 
Behavioural and Healthcare Research, vol. 2 (2), 2010, pp. 
172-191. 
[7] P. Osl, E. Sassen, and H. Oesterle, “A guideline for the design 
of collaborative business models in the field of ambient 
assisted living,” Proc. 1. Deutscher AAL-Kongress, VDE 
Verlag, Feb. 2008, Paper 2.3.4. 
[8] O. Herzog, and T. Schildhauer, Intelligente Objekte. 
Technische Gestaltung – Wirtschaftliche Verwertung – 
Gesellschaftliche Wirkung. Heidelberg: Springer, 2009. 
[9] Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung, AAL. 
Altersgerechte Assistenzsysteme für ein gesundes und 
unabhängiges Leben. Ambient Assisted Living, 2008, 
http://www.aal-deutschland.de/deutschland/aal-faltblatt. 
[10] M. 
Gersch, 
and 
S. 
Schröder, 
“Erlös- 
und 
Finanzierungsmodelle vernetzter AAL-Systeme auf dem 
Ersten und Zweiten Gesundheitsmarkt – Erste empirische 
Ergebnisse sowie erkennbare ökonomische Konsequenzen,“ 
Proc. 4. Deutscher AAL-Kongress, VDE Verlag, Jan. 2011, 
Paper 8.2. 
[11] F. Steinke, T. Fritsch, D. Brem, and S. Simonsen, “Purchase 
intention of ambient assisted living technology – Results from 
a German perspective,” Proc. IADIS International Conference 
e-Health, IADIS Press, Jul. 2012. pp. 146-155. 
[12] M. O’Grady, J. C. Muldoon, M. Dragone, R. Tynan, and G. 
M. P. O’Hare, “Towards evolutionary ambient assisted living 
systems,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized 
Computing, vol. 1, 2010, pp. 15-29. 
[13] P. Osl, A. Benz, and H. Öesterle, “Dienstleistungen für 
Independent Living: Kundenanforderungen und Optionen für 
die Angebotsgestaltung,“ Proc. 3. Deutscher AAL-Kongress, 
VDE-Verlag, Jan. 2010, Paper 21.2. 
[14] M. 
Balasch, 
“Integrierte 
intelligente 
Dienste 
und 
Dienstleistungen für Senioren,“ Proc. 2. Deutscher AAL-
Kongress, VDE-Verlag, Jan. 2009, Paper 20.2. 
294
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[15] B. Rosales Saurer, C. Kunze, R. Görlitz, N. Krämer, T. 
Vetter, and M. Wieser, “easyCare Service Plattform – 
situative 
Assistenzsysteme 
und 
bedarfsgerechte 
Dienstleistungen für pflegende Angehörige,“ Proc. 4. 
Deutscher AAL-Kongress, VDE-Verlag, Jan. 2011, Paper 
20.3. 
[16] M. Gersch, R. Lindert, and M. Hewing, “AAL-business 
models: Different prospects for the successful implementation 
of innovative services in the primary and secondary 
healthcare market,” Proc. AALIANCE European Conference 
on 
AAL, 
AALIANCE 
Press, 
Mar. 
2010, 
http://www.aaliance.eu/public/aaliance-conference-1/papers-
and-posters/8_2_fu-berlin. 
[17] E. Sassen, A. Benz, and H. Öesterle, “Plattformen zur 
Dienstvermittlung für Independent Living: eine Frage der 
Betriebswirtschaft, nicht der Technologie,“ Proc. 3. Deutscher 
AAL-Kongress, VDE-Verlag, Jan. 2010, Paper 7.2. 
[18] F. Burianek, S. Bonnemeier, C. Ihl, and R. Reichwald, 
“Grundlegende Betrachtung hybrider Produkte,“ in Hybride 
Wertschöpfung. Konzepte, Methoden und Kompetenzen für 
die Preis- und Vertragsgestaltung, R. Reichwald, H. Krcmar 
and M. Nippa, Eds. Köln: Josef Eul Verlag, 2009, pp. 13-32. 
[19] R. Reichwald, H. Krcmar, and M. Nippa, “Bedeutung und 
Konzeption 
des 
Forschungsprojekts 
HyPriCo 
– 
ein 
Überblick,“ in Hybride Wertschöpfung. Konzepte, Methoden 
und Kompetenzen für die Preis- und Vertragsgestaltung, R. 
Reichwald, H. Krcmar and M. Nippa, Eds. Köln: Josef Eul 
Verlag, 2009, pp. 1-12. 
[20] T. 
Bieger, 
and 
S. 
Reinhold, 
“Das 
wertbasierte 
Geschäftsmodell – Ein aktualisierter Strukturierungsansatz,“ 
in Innovative Geschäftsmodelle. Konzeptionelle Grundlagen, 
Gestaltungsfelder und unternehmerische Praxis, T. Bieger, D. 
zu Knyphausen-Aufseß and C. Krys, Eds. Heidelberg: 
Springer, 2010, pp. 13-70. 
[21] H. W. Chesbrough, and R. S. Rosenbloom, “The Role of the 
business model in capturing value from innovation: Evidence 
from Xerox Corporation's technology spinn-off companies,” 
Industrial and Corporate Change, vol. 11 (3), 2002, pp. 529-
555. 
[22] G. George, and A. J. Bock, A. J., “The Business Model in 
Practice and its Implications for Entrepreneurship Research,” 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, vol. 35 (1), 2011, pp. 
83-111. 
[23] L. Schweizer, “Concept and evolution of business models,” 
Journal of General Management, vol. 31 (2), 2005, pp. 37-56. 
[24] D. J. Teece, “Business models, business strategy and 
innovation,” Long Range Planning, vol. 43 (2/3), 2010, pp. 
172-194. 
[25] B. Wirtz, Business Model Management. Wiesbaden: Gabler, 
2010. 
[26] R. Samavi, E. Yu, and T. Topaloglou, “Strategic reasoning 
about business models: A conceptual modeling approach,” 
Information Systems and e-Business Management, vol. 7 (2), 
2009, pp. 171-198. 
[27] A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur, and C. L. Tucci, “Clarifying 
business models: Origins, present, and future of the concept,” 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 
vol. 16 (1), 2005, pp. 1-25. 
[28] A. Osterwalder, and Y. Pigneur, Business Model Generation. 
Amsterdam: Moddermann Druckwerk, 2009. 
[29] A. J. W. Goldschmidt, and J. Hilbert, Gesundheitswirtschaft 
in Deutschland. Die Zukunftsbranche. Wegscheid: Wikom-
Verlag, 2009. 
[30] J. Liesenfeld, and K. Loss, “Restriktionen für AAL und E-
Health@Home: 
Wie 
können 
Innovationen 
dennoch 
erfolgreich umgesetzt werden,“ Proc. 4. Deutscher AAL-
Kongress, VDE-Verlag, Jan. 2011, Paper 7.2. 
[31] P. Osl, E. Sassen, H. Öesterle, and A. Fischer, “Erfolgreiche 
Telemedizinlösungen und Kundenakzeptanz zukünftiger 
Weiterentwicklungen: Das Geschäftsmodell des Schweizer 
Zentrums für Telemedizin MEDGATE,“ Proc. 2. Deutscher 
AAL-Kongress, VDE-Verlag, Jan. 2009, Paper 20.5. 
[32] K. Backhaus, J. Becker, D. Beverungen, M. Frohs, R. 
Knackstedt, O. Müller, M. Steiner, and M. Weddeling, 
Vermarktung hybrider Leistungsbündel. Das ServPay-Prinzip. 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2010. 
[33] Bundesministerium 
für 
Bildung 
und 
Forschung, 
Assistenzsysteme im Dienste des älteren Menschen – 
Steckbriefe für ausgewählte Projekte in der BMBF-
Fördermaßnahme “Altersgerechte Assistenzsysteme für ein 
gesundes und unabhängiges Leben – AAL”, 2009, http://aal-
deutschland.de/deutschland/dokumente/Steckbriefe_AAL_Br
oschure.pdf. 
[34] O. 
Rong, 
“Ambient 
Assisted 
Living 
– 
neue 
Wachstumschancen 
für 
Gesundheitsunternehmen 
und 
Industrie durch neue Geschäftsmodelle und Kooperationen,“ 
Proc. 1. Deutscher AAL-Kongress, VDE-Verlag, Feb. 2008, 
Paper 3.6.1. 
[35] F. 
Burianek, 
and 
R. 
Reichwald, 
“Vertrags- 
und 
Preisgestaltung 
bei hybriden Produkten,“ in 
Hybride 
Wertschöpfung. Konzepte, Methoden und Kompetenzen für 
die Preis- und Vertragsgestaltung, R. Reichwald, H. Krcmar, 
and M. Nippa, Eds. Köln: Josef Eul Verlag, 2009, pp. 33-66.
 
295
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

