Use of Cloud Computing with Wireless Sensor Networks in an Internet of 
Things Environment for a Smart Hospital Network 
 
Nawaf Alharbe 1 & 2 
1College of Community  
Taibah University 
Saudi Arabia 
nrharbe@taibahu.edu.sa 
Anthony S. Atkins2 
2School of Computing 
Staffordshire University 
Stafford, UK 
a.s.atkins@staffs.ac.uk
Justin Champion2 
2School of Computing 
Staffordshire University 
Stafford, UK 
j.j.champion@staffs.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—In a hospital healthcare monitoring 
system, it is necessary to constantly monitor object 
movements.  
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) 
represent 
a 
significant 
technology 
for 
collecting 
important and varied information from users and their 
environment.  In addition, the use of emerging wireless 
sensor technology has become a significant element in 
providing next-generation healthcare services in real-
time.  The emerging technologies ZigBee and Radio 
Frequency Identification (RFID) are used to collect the 
data in real-time.  Smart objects are universally 
becoming Internet Protocol (IP)-enabled, e.g., in 
personal health devices and home automation, industrial 
automation, 
smart 
metering 
and 
environmental 
monitoring systems.  The recommendation of IoT6 to 
exploit the potential of IPv6 connection standards will 
help 
overcome 
the 
current 
disadvantages 
and 
fragmentation of the Internet of Things.  In particular, 
these features provide interoperability with Cloud 
Computing, mobility, and supply of information 
between 
heterogeneous smart 
object 
components, 
services and applications. The paper indicates that using 
RFID and ZigBee sensors can provide real-time tracking 
of objects (patients, staff and equipment) and monitor 
their movement throughout the hospital.  
 
Keywords-Smart Patient tracking and monitoring; 
IoT; IoT6; IPv6 ;ZigBee; RFID; Cloud Computing. 
I.INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, information technology helped us 
changing our way of life and work through new 
methods of communication; this has contributing to 
Gross National Product (GNP) growth with reduced 
risk and improved users and customer satisfaction.  
The increase in competition between companies that 
provide and produce smart sensor technologies, which 
cover large areas to meet rapid changes and users’ 
needs, has contributed to competitive advantage in 
location based services.  The number and types of 
sensors used are contributing to numerous different 
applications, such as location based services, building 
environmental control and supply chain management, 
etc. Studies show that  wireless sensor network 
industry is expected to increase  up to 43% every year 
[1] and a predicted market share £2.3 billion by 2017 
[2]. A smart sensor-based Cloud Computing system is 
composed  of several sensors based on top of the 
physical wireless sensors and data collection layer, 
which have the ability to receive and transmit  data 
automatically and wirelessly by users based on 
application demand [2]. The integration of Internet of 
Things 
(IoT), 
sensor 
technology 
and 
Cloud 
Computing 
is 
aimed 
at 
overcoming 
resource 
constraints as it enables different networks to cover 
large geographical areas so that they can be connected 
and used by several users at the same time when 
required [2]. In addition, the recent emergence of 
Cloud 
Computing 
and 
sensor 
awareness 
of 
infrastructure-architecture methods, service-oriented 
architecture, software delivery and development 
models [3] are also contributing factors to a smart 
environment. In order to provide real-time healthcare 
informatics, hospitals need some type of monitoring 
system to track objects and medical equipment in 
which security, efficiency and safety are ensured, with 
reduced occupational risks.  The key feature of the 
smart monitoring system is to provide identification 
of users and objects, so that an adequate service 
customisation can be obtained.  Accordingly, in this 
paper, a framework of integrating Cloud Computing 
technology and wireless sensor technology within the 
healthcare environment is proposed.  The purpose of 
this framework is to apply the ever-expanding sensor 
data to our community-centric sensing applications 
that can be used as a real-time service in the Cloud.  
Several techniques can provide this framework with 
the ability to receive and transmit data automatically 
and wirelessly to multiple users.  Since the entire 
network is dynamic, it can be used for exchanging 
information, smart identification, locating objects, and 
monitoring and tracking objects. 
  The paper is structured as follows: Section II 
describes the state of the art. Section III describes 
Cloud Computing. Section IV presents the wireless 
sensor networks. Section V describes the Internet of 
Things. Section VI deals with the use of Cloud 
Computing and IoT on healthcare. Section VII 
describes the proposed framework. Finally, Section 
VIII concludes the paper. 
 
II.STATE OF THE ART 
Currently, there is no automatic healthcare tracking 
and monitoring system for patients and asset tracking 
in Saudi Arabia, and many hospitals still rely on 
manual operation to collect the ‘object’ data. The 
healthcare systems in Saudi Arabia are not operating in 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

real-time and this result in the hospital staff having 
difficulties in obtaining up to date information. For 
example, a relative cannot receive any help in real-
time from the staff regarding patients status after an 
operation. Using emerging technologies such as RFID 
and ZigBee sensors which automatically scan and use 
non-contact and non-intervention for tracking objects. 
Users will be able to receive real-time information and 
visualization of objects such patients, staff and 
equipment location throughout the hospital which will 
improve the management information systems and 
provide more effective decision support systems [4] 
[5][6].  
III.CLOUD COMPUTING 
Cloud Computing technology was designed by the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
[7] to increase the capacity of shared computing 
resources in a rapid and secure way in various 
locations around the world. Cloud Computing is useful 
because it adds new capabilities to the existing system 
without the need to invest in new infrastructure, train 
new personnel, or license new software; it needs only 
minimal management input or service provider 
interaction. Cloud Computing [7] is the technology of 
sharing resources and data collection with users 
through the Internet, and it can also offer self-service 
network access [8]. The  services which Cloud 
Computing  provides to users are based on resources 
through virtual servers which the user can access 
regardless 
of 
their 
location 
or 
any 
detailed  
specifications [9].  The radical stage of Cloud 
Computing is the shift from mainframe computers to 
client/server deployment models, and it covers 
elements from grid computing, utility computing and 
autonomic computing [3]. Research shows that the 
Cloud Computing industry is currently worth £41 
billion globally, and this is expected to grow by £10 
billion per year, demonstrating a significance to the 
global economy which cannot be underestimated [10].  
A. Cloud Computing Service 
Cloud Computing technology services are used to 
support a variety of technical functions.  The services 
provided by the Cloud are divided into three service 
models 
[7], 
Software 
as 
a 
Service 
(SaaS), 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) and Platform as a 
Service (PaaS). 
 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): This service 
uses the Cloud for management and continuous 
infrastructure usage. Users are able to access 
elements of the computing infrastructure  
through Internet technologies, and can use the 
processing power, storage mediums and 
required network components provided by the 
service provider, for instance IaaS Amazon, S3 
and EC2 [11].  
 
Platform as a service (PaaS): This service 
allows users to create their own development 
environment or platform to run applications as 
a service on the Cloud, for instance PaaS 
Microsoft’s Azure Platform, Google’s Apps 
Engine and the Force.com [11]. 
 
Software as a service (SaaS): This service is a 
model where an application is hosted on the 
Cloud, and the applications are provided by the 
service provider as a service through the 
Internet.  Rather than buying the software and 
installing their own systems, users rent the 
software through a pay-per-use arrangement.  
Examples include SaaS, Salesforce  and 
Google Docs [11]. 
In addition, there are different deployment models 
for providing Cloud services to enterprises, which 
include public, private and hybrid [7] [11]. 
B. Cloud Computing Benefits for Healthcare 
Applications  
The use of Cloud Computing  offers various  
possible benefits to users such as a reduction in waste 
of both information system resources and power, an 
increase in data centre efficiency and operation rates, 
and 
lower 
operating 
costs 
[12]. 
Healthcare 
applications based on Cloud Computing take 
advantage of the Cloud Computing environment 
which provides the following benefits to patients and 
care providers [13][14]: 
 
Patient Privacy & Security: The expertise 
afforded by the Cloud service provider offers 
enhanced security (Privet Cloud) to prevent 
leakage of sensitive healthcare data and 
processes. 
 
Dynamic Sensor Data Rates: The scalability 
of Cloud architecture allows for non-
deterministic varied data flow collection. 
 
Global Access and availability: Cloud 
deployment models provide the system with 
globalised access. 
 
Disaster 
Recovery, 
Reliability, 
and 
Redundancy: Redundant Cloud architecture 
allows reliability of data security and 
processes. 
 
Economical System Usage: The Cloud’s 
service model provides economical resource 
provisioning and usage. 
 
Outsourcing Expertise: A remotely managed 
Cloud service allows expertise of the system 
to be outsourced. 
 
Scalability: Resources for dynamic data 
flows are guaranteed, any time anywhere on 
real-time via the Cloud’s elasticity. 
The most important benefits of Cloud Computing 
are the large reduction in costs and time compared 
with conventional methods, for example, where large 
companies use server farms to keep user information 
secure become unnecessary as the Cloud offers the 
economy of scale and would also be the responsibility 
for the service provider. Cloud Computing systems 
can provide the accessibility to run a program on 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

many connected computers, enabling a user to access 
an organisation's data from anywhere, at any time, 
through various devices such as computers or mobile 
phones. Cloud Computing is responsible for ensuring 
the continuity of service which is important to the 
management 
within 
organisations. 
The 
main 
disadvantage of Cloud Computing is the possible loss 
of information due to connection failure or power 
outages during its use, making it crucial for users to 
have their own backup servers to secure their data.   
IV.WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS 
Wireless sensor networks are used as novel and 
smart solutions for information collection via the 
radio spectrum of different applications, such as 
transportation, 
business, 
healthcare, 
industrial 
automation, and environmental monitoring [15]. 
Collecting patient physiological indicators using 
multi-channel 
high-frequency 
wireless 
data 
transmission can enhance a hospital's modern 
information management system to create a real-time 
health monitoring system.  Wireless sensor networks 
have a big advantage in term of deployment as sensor 
devices are small and low-cost and can be used 
anywhere 
[16]. 
In 
order 
to 
build 
a 
Knowledge Management System (KMS) for smart 
hospitals the emerging technologies ZigBee, Radio 
Frequency Identification (RFID) must be used to 
collect the data in real-time for use later in Decision 
Support Systems (DSS) applications. RFID is an 
automatic 
identification 
technology 
offering 
a 
solution to the identification of things by assigning a 
tag with a unique number, which is used to retrieve 
object information from the application database 
[17].  RFID technology can be used in a healthcare 
environment, which can enable the automating and 
streamlining of safe and correct information such as  
patient identification, tracking, and  processing 
important medical equipment [18].  Components of a 
typical RFID system are one or more readers, 
antennas and tags, which can be active, semi-active or 
passive.  RFID tags are assigned with a unique 
identification number (UIN), and, to ensure security, 
RFID tags can be programmed and protected by 
password [18]. The frequency bands used for RFID 
systems are: low frequency (LF)  125–134 KHz, high 
frequency (HF) 13.56 MHz, ultra-high frequency  
(UHF) 868–928 MHz, and finally microwave  
frequency 2.4 GHz [19]. 
The ZigBee protocol is based on the IEEE 802.15.4 
standard and works on the 868/915MHz and 2.4GHz 
unlicensed bands [20]. ZigBee  is a communication 
standard that can be used as automatic identification 
to provide short-range, low-cost and low-power 
consumption wireless solutions in several applications 
[20]. ZigBee is designed to allow up to 65,500 nodes 
to be connected in a star, tree or mesh topology 
network [20] and examples of ZigBee applications 
include home automation, personal healthcare, sensor 
networks, monitoring systems, remote control etc 
[21].  ZigBee  technology is an ad-hoc network such 
that it provides the network with the ability to obtain 
infinite expendability [22]. Wireless Sensor Networks 
(WSN) [23]  are used to collect the information 
needed by smart hospital systems. In addition, sensing 
devices make it possible to retrieve information about 
objects and their position, taking into account the 
environment 
of 
the 
sensor, 
when 
offering 
personalized on-line services. 
V.INTERNET OF THINGS 
Internet of Things (IoT) is a relatively new concept 
in connecting smart objects together.  Smart 
technology is opening new development opportunities 
for service providers.  Internet of Things was first 
introduced by Kevin Ashton in 1999 and can be used 
to identify, locate, track and monitor objects 
automatically in real-time.  IoT is exponentially 
increasing to an ecosystem connecting billions of 
smart things [24], offering smart electric meter 
reading, 
telemedicine 
monitoring, 
greenhouse 
monitoring, and intelligent transportation using 
computer technology [25]. IoT enables physical 
devices to be connected to Smart networks.  This 
concept of IoT along with the use of ubiquitous 
computing in different environments could improve 
people’s lifestyle and have specific applications in the 
field of healthcare.  
Currently, Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) is 
reaching a very large number of global IP addresses 
[24].  Today, Internet users worldwide number 
approximately 2.4 billion, and this is projected to 
reach 3 billion by 2015.  However, the number of 
objects connected over the internet has overtaken that 
of human users considerably, and is predicted to 
surpass the human population by 20 to 50 billion 
connected smart objects [24]. The Internet Protocol 
IPv4 was not designed to connect smart objects using 
Internet of Things (IoT), partly because of the 
limitation of 4 billion addresses.  IPv6 has been 
accepted by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority 
(IANA) and the Regional Internet Registries (RIRs), 
in order to go beyond the IPv4 limitations and address 
the growing demand to provide more address space to 
enable global reachability and scalability. 
 IoT6 [26] is a 3-year EU research project that is 
based on the Internet of Things.  Its main 
recommendation for the future of the Internet of 
Things was to exploit the features of IPv6, in 
particular its interoperability with Cloud Computing, 
mobility, 
and 
intelligence 
supply 
among 
heterogeneous smart object components, services and 
applications [27]. Consequently, in this research 
project, an end-user perspective with the targeted 
realization of a green and smart IPv6 building will be 
integrated based on the Mandat International [26].  
Both the Internet of Things and  IPv6  may be needed 
to enable low-power wireless devices [28].  However, 
the use of IPv6 has the potential to improve the  IoT’s  
progress because of the possible billions of new 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

sensor devices that  will require a unique IP address 
[29] in order to monitor the largest number of medical 
devices and the like over the Internet for service users. 
Smart objects, such as personal health devices and 
home automation, industrial automation, smart 
metering and environmental monitoring systems are 
universally becoming IP enabled [30].  In the network 
layer protocols for the sensor device, IPv6 will be 
installed to handle the framework of the IPv6 address 
that  will be required to develop a Smart Hospital 
Management Information System (SHMIS) [31].  
VI.CLOUD COMPUTING AND IOT EFFECTS ON 
HEALTHCARE 
The integration of Cloud Computing with IoT is 
gaining popularity on ICT prototypes and has come to 
the attention of researchers over the past few years. 
Based on the type of resources that were delivered via 
the cloud, Cloud Computing is used to provide 
Software as a Service (SaaS) by connecting objects 
via the internet [32]. Knowing that Cloud Computing 
manages to store different data apart from its coverage 
area, the IoT in turn manages to provide systematic 
orders to be performed for any devices connectable to 
the internet. Hence, the capacity can be increased and 
rapidly enhanced by Cloud Computing and IoT 
without applying further infrastructure investments. 
Using Cloud Computing and IoT in healthcare 
impacts on both cost and time when undeveloped 
countries are provided with Cloud Computing 
facilities that can provide real-time services.  
VII.PROPOSED FRAMEWORK  
One of the most important and interesting 
applications in the smart environment is the Real-
Time Locating System (RTLS).  The increasing 
competition between healthcare providers needs to 
take into account the quality of performance, time 
management and complexity of the human. This 
system can be used as a safety mechanism, storing all 
recordable acts on a smart monitoring system, and 
thus allowing healthcare providers to track their staff 
and patients [23]. The proposed  framework can be 
used as a novel and smart solutions for information 
collection via the spectrum of different applications, 
such as transportation, business, healthcare, industrial 
automation, and environmental monitoring [15]. The 
system is used to identify each object, locate its 
position automatically and provide users with the 
required services, without the need for human 
intervention [4]. A proposed design has been 
suggested for use in the field of healthcare 
management systems to track and provide automatic 
identification and real-time monitoring [25].   
In this proposed system, the object is identified and 
cross-referenced to the RFID and ZigBee tags, thus 
the process can be recorded and tracked through a 
management information system. A healthcare service 
must be available in real-time, which is currently 
limited; therefore, the future of the Internet can 
include providing healthcare services through the 
local network or over the Internet.  The proposed 
monitoring system has the capability to electronically 
store all patient records including documents, videos, 
and images enabling users to access patient data and 
use this information to provide a patient-focused 
service; for example, patient data could be exchanged 
between devices via Cloud Computing in real-time. 
A. System Architecture 
Figure 1 shows the proposed smart hospital 
network system architecture: a system for the purpose 
of detecting, locating and monitoring the object.  This 
divided it into the following six layer system 
structure: a Data Processing layer, a Data Integration 
layer, a Cloud Computing layer, a Network structure, 
a Knowledge Reasoning layer and a Visualization 
layer. The first layer is the Data Processing using 
sensor-based technology and is responsible for 
collecting real-time data from different sources.  The 
data will be captured from physical-world devices 
which have the ability to receive and transmit data 
wirelessly and would for example include data from 
location and movement of  tagged ‘objects’ and 
digital imagery etc. The second layer is the Data 
Integration 
responsible 
for 
the 
organization, 
translation, rationalization, copying and storage of 
raw data from the Data Collection Layer into 
appropriate database for example data and/or digital 
imagery.  The third layer is Cloud Computing. This 
layer is used to increase the capacity of shared 
resources provided by data collection in a rapid and 
secure way through the Internet for example 
collection and sharing patient data with hospital staff 
both at the hospital and high level data such as 
providing bed occupancy to the Ministry of Health in 
Saudi Arabia, and it can also be used to ‘mirror’ the 
database for backup purposes. The fourth layer is the 
Network Structure: this layer is used to provide the 
functional and procedural means of transferring 
multiple length data structures from different sources 
on one or multiple networks to a destination hub. The 
Network Structure layer contains several technologies 
which provide the functionality of a structured data 
exchange 
using 
a 
computer 
network. 
These 
technologies can work independently or be integrated 
with each other, and include Cloud Computing, 
ZigBee, Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN), 
Cellular Mobile Network and PANs (Personal Area 
Networks). Cloud Computing can be used to provide 
remote access, and WLANs or mobile phone 
networks can also be used to connect data-collection 
devices to the data hub. The fifth layer is Knowledge 
Reasoning: this layer is responsible for processing the 
huge amount of data and information using 
knowledge 
to 
achieve the 
objectives 
of 
the 
organization for example, the data could be mined to 
determine how long a nurse or doctor on duty was 
within 0.6m of a patient in a ward 24/7.  The last layer 
is Visualization, and this layer provides the visual 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

representation and organization of data once it has 
been  translated to make it accessible to the user 
community [4] so relatives of patents undergoing 
surgery could ascertain if the operation was 
completed to schedule or bed occupancy levels 24/7. 
Figure 1: Six-Layers of Emerging Technologies for a Real-time Healthcare Management System 
 
B. Implementation 
The implementation  of RFID system uses Alien 
Technology Company hardware [34] that includes the 
RFID equipment consisting of tags, readers, and 
antenna.  RFID was used to provide specific location 
information through deployed ‘gates’ or ‘check 
points’.  RFID readers are similar to the application of 
optical bar codes.  RFID tags contain information that 
can be used to identify the objects that carry them but 
requires no line of sight, automatic, non-intervention, 
low cost (<1p) no maintenance (tags)  and can operate 
up to 11 meters.  The RFID reader reads the tag and 
checks the database for location and movement with 
time.  ZigBee is used to provide the real-time position 
of the object, with an average accuracy of less than 2 
meters.  The implementation  of ZigBee system will 
be using Nebusens hardware [35] that includes the 
ZigBee  equipment consisting of 4 tags, 20 readers, 
and 2 coordinators. This infrastructure   was used to 
simulate the floor area of a maternity ward and 
deployed in the research centre of the university with 
an area of 280 m2. The ZigBee measurement 
equipment   consists of the  Coordinator (n-Core 
Sirius A) which,  incorporates several communication 
ports such as GPIO, ADC, I2C and UART through 
USB to connect to different devices, the ZigBee 
Readers (n-Core Sirius D) which, are used as readers 
and the ZigBee (Core Sirius B ) devices, which are 
used as tags [35]. SkyDrive was used as Cloud storage 
for framework files and is accessible everywhere.  
The movement of the object position was recorded 
through the smart system that generates and checks 
this object when the targeted object accesses the 
coverage area of RFID, ZigBee and RFID/ZigBee.  
The paper discusses the implementation of two 
important aspects of a Smart Hospital Management 
Information System: firstly, object identification and 
location position in real-time, and secondly, the use of 
low-power output devices using a combination of 
ZigBee technologies.  
C. Evaluation/Discussion 
The proposed system outlined in Section VII 
supports real-time functionally using real-time sensors 
which automatically scan and use non-contact and 
non-intervention Ultra High Frequency (UHF) RFID 
and ZigBee technologies. Laboratory experiments 
using UHF passive tags can provide up to 11 meters 
read range at the ‘check points’ ZigBee sensors can 
operate up to than 100 meters communications range 
from the antennas and provides real-time position of 
the objects, with an average accuracy of less than 2 
meters. The operating communication range allows 
Data Processing
                                     Video Record data
The lowest layer,  which is the route for inputting the data 
and information from the  hardware such as RFID, ZigBee 
and imagery equipment to the knowledge system.
Network Structure
WAN, LAN, PAN,
 (Mobile) Phone Networks,
 Wireless Sensor Network ,
Ad-hoc Network 
and ZigBee Network
This part  illustrates the network infrastructure 
Data Integration 
Cloud Computing
RFID 
reade
r
RFID 
Tag
Data 
Integration 
hub
Data
Hub
Data Integration 
hub
Data
Hub
ZigBee 
real-time 
database
ZigBee
ZigBee Tag
ZigBee 
reader
Image/
video 
databas
e
Image/
Video
Knowledge Reasoning                          
Rule-based reasoning (RBR) is used as the main 
reasoning mechanism, the result will pass to the 
visualization.
Rule set
Rule 
set
Visualization  
Reasoning 
engine
RFID 
real-time 
databas
e
RFID
Knowledge Reasoning                          
Rule-based reasoning (RBR) is used as the main 
reasoning mechanism, the result will pass to the 
visualization.
Rule set
Rule 
set
Visualization  
Reasoning 
engine
Knowledge Reasoning                          
Rule-based reasoning (RBR) is used as the main 
reasoning mechanism, the result will pass to the 
visualization.
Rule set
Rule 
set
Visualization  
Reasoning 
engine
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the system to check every object (patients, staff and 
equipment’s) position in the system and monitor their 
movement in real time throughout the hospital.  
D. The benefits of the proposed system 
The demand for healthcare services is increasing 
in the UK, Europe and the Middle East North Africa 
(MENA) region with staff providing medical care 24 
hours a day, 7 days a week, and the growing 
difficulties to respond to management information 
demands 
and 
financial 
constraints 
placed 
on 
healthcare services. For this reason, a smart system 
can help by linking smart devices to the network and 
monitoring medical staff 24 hours a day, collating 
information, storing, combining, and aggregating 
data. The proposed system can be used for security 
purposes and as smart solutions for information 
collection via the Internet including different 
application 
such 
as 
transportation, 
business, 
healthcare, industrial automation, and environmental 
monitoring.  In healthcare cases, it can be used to 
provide better and smart patient care at a low cost, 
and can allow patients to access information about 
their personal treatment and support their ability to 
interact with medical staff [36]. In addition, the 
proposed system can be used to assist and support the 
increasing number of elderly people ( 06
<
) in many 
countries some may have dementia, and the 
possibility of them getting lost in the hospital 
environment.  The number of elderly people globally  
is around  600 million, and will reach 2 billion by 
2050 [37]. The traditional method of checking 
patients’ conditions in hospitals by doctors using 
diagnostic non-movable medical equipment has a 
number of disadvantages, particularly in that it is 
inconvenient for patients and inflexible for the elderly 
or those with special needs [38]. The proposed system  
can be used to support medical staff in different ways, 
e.g., input-output devices and sensors which, provide 
improved patient care in different environments and 
with less human error, such as body sensors, patient 
activity monitoring and tracking at hospital and also, 
for elderly care patients, in a home environment [36]. 
A RFID/ZigBee tag (embedded in a wristband) can be 
issued to every patient on their arrival at the hospital, 
to enable the hospital monitoring system to identify 
and track patients during the period of their stay in 
hospital.  The RFID/ZigBee tags can be used to  store 
important information  such as  patient name, ID, drug 
allergies and blood group, etc., and also alert staff  
before a serious  situation arises [18]. In some cases, 
this system can be helpful with patients who need 
more and/or regular health checks or who are unable 
to come to visit doctors or require medical support at 
home. Healthcare providers should consider smart 
health technologies because their use means that some 
medical monitoring, such as movement, weight and 
blood pressure, can be performed without a patient 
attending hospital. Using the IoT environment is a 
flexible way of connecting modern measuring devices 
and it can create smart networks at home at anytime 
and anywhere.  
VIII.CONCLUSION  
The aim of this paper was to evaluate the 
integration of Cloud Computing, wireless sensor 
technology and Internet of Things in a healthcare 
environment. The use of wireless sensor technology is 
emerging as a significant element of next-generation 
healthcare services in real-time.  In this paper, we 
proposed a smart monitoring system, using RFID and 
ZigBee technology which is able to continuously 
detect, locate and monitor the movement of an object 
in a hospital.  The system consists of a coordinator 
node to acquire the object information, on the data 
collection layer.                        ...                        
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Markets and Markets, “Industrial Wireless Sensor Networks 
(IWSN) Market - Global Forecast & Analysis (2012 - 2017): 
By Technology, Components, Applications, Geography,” 
2012. 
[2] 
S. Madria, V. Kumar, and R. Dalvi, “Sensor Cloud: A Cloud 
of Virtual Sensors,” IEEE Softw., vol. 31, no. 2, Jan. 2013,pp. 
70–77. 
[3] 
D. Zissis and D. Lekkas, “Addressing cloud computing 
security issues,” Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 28, no. 3, 
March. 2012, pp. 583–592. 
[4] 
N. Alharbe and A. S. Atkins, “Sensor Technologies using 
ZigBee and RFID within the Cloud of Internet of Things in 
Healthcare Applications,” in 7th International Conference on 
Advanced 
Computing 
and 
Communication 
Technologies.(ICACCTTM-2013), 2013, pp. 1–6. 
[5] 
L. Zhang, A. S. Atkins, and H. Yu, “Smart Hospital System 
for Traditional Chinese Medicine Trials using RFID in IoT 
Environment,” in International Conference of Software, 
Knowledge 
and 
Information 
on 
Management 
Applications,(SKIMA) September, Chengdu, 2012. 
[6] 
N. Alharbe, A. S. Atkins, and A. S. Akbari, “Application of 
ZigBee and RFID Technologies in Healthcare in Conjunction 
with the Internet of Things,” in Proceedings of International 
Conference on Advances in Mobile Computing & Multimedia 
- MoMM ’13, 2013, pp. 191–195. 
[7] 
P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing-Recommendations of the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology. NIST,” NIST Spec. Publ., 2011. 
[8] 
S. Rajan and A. Jairath, “Cloud Computing: The Fifth 
Generation of Computing,” in 2011 International Conference 
on Communication Systems and Network Technologies, 2011, 
pp. 665–667. 
[9] 
M. Yuriyama and T. Kushida, “Sensor-cloud infrastructure-
physical sensor management with virtualized sensors on cloud 
computing,” in 13th International Conference on Network-
Based Information Systems, 2010, pp. 1–8. 
[10] N. J. King and V. T. Raja, “Protecting the privacy and security 
of sensitive customer data in the cloud,” Comput. Law Secur. 
Rev., vol. 28, no. 3, Jun. 2012, pp. 308–319,. 
[11] K. Dahbur, B. Mohammad, and A. B. Tarakji, “A survey of 
risks, threats and vulnerabilities in cloud computing,” in 
Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference on 
Intelligent Semantic Web-Services and Applications - ISWSA 
’11, 2011, pp. 1–6. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[12] ENISA, “Security & Resilience in Governmental Clouds , 
Making an Informed Decision, European,” 2011. [Online]. 
Available:http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/riskmanagem
ent/emerging-and-future-risk/deliverables/security-and 
resilience-in-governmental-clouds. [Accessed: 12-Dec-2014]. 
[13] R. Aiswarya, R. Divya, D. Sangeetha, and V. Vaidehi, 
“Harnessing healthcare data security in cloud,” in 2013 
International Conference on Recent Trends in Information 
Technology (ICRTIT), 2013, pp. 482–488. 
[14] Rao, B.B.P.; Saluia, P.; Sharma, N.; Mittal, A.; Sharma, S.V., 
“Cloud computing for Internet of Things & sensing based 
applications,” in 2012 Sixth International Conference on 
Sensing Technology (ICST), 2012, pp. 374–380. 
[15] K. Ahmed and M. Gregory, “Integrating wireless sensor 
networks 
with 
cloud 
computing,” 
in 
2011 
Seventh 
International Conference on Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor 
Networks, 2011, pp. 364–366. 
[16] E. Troubleyn, I. Moerman, and P. Demeester, “QoS 
Challenges in Wireless Sensor Networked Robotics,” Wirel. 
Pers. Commun., vol. 70, no. 3, March. 2013,pp. 1059–1075,. 
[17] Zhang, L, A S Atkins , Alharbe N and Yu H. (2012), 
‘Patient/Infant tracking and Management Application System 
using a Combination of ZigBee and RFID Technologies’, 
SIRT 
- 
Journal 
of 
Engineering, 
Management 
and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences , Sagar Insti,2012. 
[18] R. S. Tolentino and S. Park, “Hospital RFID-Based Patient u-
Healthcare Design over Wireless Medical Sensor Network,” 
2010, pp. 299–308. 
[19] F. Nekoogar and F. Dowla, “Basics of Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID) Systems,” in Ultra-Wideband Radio 
Frequency Identification Systems, Boston, MA: Springer US, 
2012, pp. 1–23. 
[20] Z. 
Alliance, 
“ZigBee 
specification,” 
2006. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.zigbee.org/Specifications.aspx. 
[Accessed: 02-Dec-2014]. 
[21] M. Jin, C. Yu, H. Lai, and M. Feng, “Zigbee Positioning 
System for Smart Home Application,” , 2007,pp. 183–192. 
[22] D. Gislason, ZigBee wireless networking, 1st ed. Oxford: 
Newnes: Elsevier Science & Technology, 2008. 
[23] Dante I. Tapia, Óscar García, Ricardo S. Alonso and Michel 
Seyrac, “Implementing real-time geolocation for medical 
personnel and patients,” Electron. Eng. Times Eur., no. 
March, 2013,pp. 34–35 
[24] S. Ziegler, C. Crettaz, L. Ladid, and S. Krco, “Iot6–moving to 
an ipv6-based future iot,” vol. 7858, pp. 161–172, 2013. 
[25] H. Zhang and L. Zhu, “Internet of Things: Key technology, 
architecture and challenging problems,” 2011 IEEE Int. Conf. 
Comput. Sci. Autom. Eng., pp. 507–512, Jun. 2011. 
[26] IoT6 European research project, “IoT6 Project,” 2014. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.iot6.eu. [Accessed: 13-Sep-
2014]. 
[27] S. Ziegler, C. Crettaz, and M. International, “IoT6 Project in a 
Nutshell,” , 2013, pp. 353–355. 
[28] M. R. Palattella, N. Accettura, X. Vilajosana, T. Watteyne, L. 
A. Grieco, S. Member, G. Boggia, and M. Dohler, 
“Standardized Protocol Stack for the Internet of ( Important ) 
Things,” vol. 15, no. 3, , 2013, pp. 1389–1406. 
[29] D. Evans, “How Next Evolution of the Internet Is Changing 
Everything,”April,2011,[Online].Available:http://www.cisco.c
om/web/about/ac79/docs/innov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf. 
[Accessed: 07-Jan-2015]. 
[30] S. Imadali, A. Karanasiou, A. Petrescu, I. Sifniadis, V. Veque, 
and P. Angelidis, “eHealth service support in IPv6 vehicular 
networks,” in 2012 IEEE 8th International Conference on 
Wireless 
and 
Mobile 
Computing, 
Networking 
and 
Communications (WiMob), 2012, pp. 579–585. 
[31] R. S. H. Istepanian, a. Sungoor, a. Faisal, and N. Philip, 
“Internet of M-health Things ‘m-IOT,’” IET Semin. Assist. 
Living 2011, 2011,pp. 20–20. 
[32] G. Suciu, A. Vulpe, S. Halunga, O. Fratu, G. Todoran, and V. 
Suciu, “Smart Cities Built on Resilient Cloud Computing and 
Secure Internet of Things,” in 2013 19th International 
Conference on Control Systems and Computer Science, 2013, 
pp. 513–518. 
[33] Z. Jack Ji and Q. Anwen, “The application of internet of 
things(IOT) in emergency management system in China,” in 
2010 IEEE International Conference on Technologies for 
Homeland Security (HST), 2010, pp. 139–142. 
[34] Alien Technology, “Alien Trusted Performance,” 1994. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.alientechnology.com/. 
[Accessed: 24-Sep-2014]. 
[35] Nebusens, “n-Core platform,” 2010. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.nebusens.com/index.php/en/. [Accessed: 15-Sep-
2014]. 
[36] L. M. R. Tarouco, L. M. Bertholdo, L. Z. Granville, L. M. R. 
Arbiza, F. Carbone, M. Marotta, and J. J. C. de Santanna, 
“Internet of Things in healthcare: Interoperatibility and 
security issues,” in 2012 IEEE International Conference on 
Communications (ICC), 2012, pp. 6121–6125. 
[37] World Health Organization, “Ageing and Life Course,” 2012. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.who.int/ageing/en/. 
[Accessed: 13-Sep-2014]. 
[38] C. Li-wan, C. Qiang, L. Hong-bin, and I. Engineering, 
“Wireless Sensor Network System for the Real-Time Health 
Monitoring,” , 2011 pp. 9–14.  
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

