Speech and Language Relearning for Stroke Patients- Understanding  User  Needs 
for Technology Enhancement 
 
Awais Ahmad 
Computer and Systems Science, 
Mid Sweden University 
Östersund, Sweden 
awais.ahmad@miun.se 
 
 
Karin Ahlin       
Computer and Systems Science 
Mid Sweden University 
Östersund, Sweden 
Karin.ahlin@miun.se 
 
                                  
     
                
                                   
                                    Peter Mozelius 
Computer and Systems Science 
Mid Sweden University 
Östersund, Sweden 
Peter.mozelius@miun.se 
 
 
Ali Hassan Sodhro       
Computer and Systems Science 
Mid Sweden University 
Östersund, Sweden 
alihassan.sodhro@miun.se 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Speech and language relearning are challenging for 
stroke survivors, as well as medical caregivers. After a stroke, 
patient’s ability to read, write, speak, and listen is decreased to 
different degrees, which results in a compromised independent 
life and a decreased quality of life for the patients. Technology-
Enhanced Systems (TES) can play a vital role in this context. 
However, the available software are not explicitly built 
for recovering stroke patients’ needs but often for children’s 
learning needs. This paper is, therefore, aimed at gathering 
requirements to support the design of speech and language 
relearning software applications for stroke survivors. A design 
science approach was adopted, where different stakeholders 
such as medical caregivers and information technology 
consultants were involved in the process. Deductive thematic 
analysis was conducted to analyze the main findings according 
to adult learning theory. The software requirements vary from 
patient to patient where the intensity of speech and language 
impairments, general medical condition, age, prior experience, 
and knowledge about the previous health record, and social 
setup of the patient are playing an important role. The speech 
therapists should have management functionality in the 
software to adjust the relearning exercises according to the 
patient's needs.  Since, stroke is most common in adults who 
learn differently than children, andragogy principles were 
useful in recognizing patients' health conditions. Adults are 
interested to be involved in the development of their relearning 
process. Software for speech and language assessment will be 
helpful to establish relearning objectives for patients. 
Keywords- 
Requirements 
specification, 
E-Health, 
Stroke 
rehabilitation, Speech and language relearning, Adult learning 
theory, Independent living 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Stroke is one of the most common causes of death and 
different kinds of chronic disabilities in adults [1]. The 
fundamental reason for stroke is a partial or complete 
stoppage of blood flow to the brain that severely affects the 
brain function; consequently, the overall human body may 
face different types of disabilities [2]. A stroke survivor often 
suffers from several long-term mental and physical 
impairments that have a considerable impact on the patient's 
daily life activities [3]-[6]. Disabilities and their rehabilitation 
following stroke are generally divided into speech, cognitive, 
and motoric impairments [7]-[10].  
This research paper focuses on speech and language 
disabilities and the role of TES for relearning speech and 
language skills. Almost one-third of a stroke survivor's ability 
past learning experiences, to communicate is reduced due to 
impaired reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills [11]-
[15]. Most impairments occur during the first weeks after the 
stroke, but the rest of the recovery may take several years. A 
decreased ability to communicate has some severe 
consequences for the patient. One of the consequences is an 
unhealthy social life [16]-[20].  The patients' social life deeply 
affects their quality of life; they seem to lose the pure 
happiness of life and often they feel isolated from society [21]-
[25]. To reduce the potential risk for a patient’s depressed 
mental state, the process of relearning communication skills 
needs to be started as soon as possible after a stroke. Several 
studies highlighted the benefits of early interventions right 
after the stroke [26]-[30]. 
Speech and language relearning require a long-term and 
intensive rehabilitation plan that involves different types of 
treatments and exercises. These interventions need many 
human and financial resources in hospitals and rehabilitation 
centres. The goal of Speech and Language Therapy (SLT) is 
to improve the patient's speech and language abilities [31]-
[34]. There is some evidence that highly intensive, highly 
dosed, and long-term therapy have better results as compared 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to low intensity, low dosed and short-term therapy [35]-[39]. 
The content of the SLT relates to the stroke patient’s damage 
and intention, such as trying to get back to their speech before 
the stroke or withholding the current situation.  One example 
of SLT is object identification, classified as simple or complex 
order comprehension. Simple order comprehension can be to 
"Put the glass close to the plate" and complex "Put the glass 
close to the plate and the glass close to a fork." However, the 
supply of required resources seems not to be enough for the 
drastically increasing number of stroke patients [40]. 
Therefore, alternative interventions for speech relearning 
exercises must be explored. Another critical issue with 
traditional speech interventions is compromised independent 
living. Generally, stroke survivors need to stay in the 
rehabilitation centre, and they are heavily dependent on 
medical caregivers to perform different kinds of exercises. 
Various studies suggested that living in the home environment 
has potential benefits for the patients' overall treatment; in 
fact, the process of rehabilitation and relearning seems to be 
more efficient and effective in their own homes [41]. In this 
context, the use of TES can play a vital role to perform speech 
relearning exercises at home. 
Software applications to perform speech exercises may not 
only decrease the operational costs for medical caregivers, but 
it may also provide a sense of joyfulness and independence to 
the patient [42]. However, the acceptance of these applications 
depends heavily on the degree of trust in TES, eHealth 
literacy, ease of use of software applications, and patient's 
integrity. The software applications should be interactive, 
self-explanatory, and secure so that patients can quickly adopt 
and trust them [43]. 
Lack of tailor-made software applications for speech 
relearning exercises is also an essential factor to consider. 
Authors’ previous studies highlighted that currently used 
speech relearning applications in rehabilitation centres are 
actually developed for school-going children rather than 
adults [4]-[15]. Stroke patients usually face difficulties using 
these applications, because of differences in context and 
learning behaviors between adults and children [4]-[16]. The 
intensity of speech deficiency differs from person to person 
where some patients may have some minor issues with 
communication. In contrast, others may not be able to speak 
even a few words [44]. Therefore, an individualized and 
tailor-made software application is needed so that it can be 
easily adapted according to the patients' current physical and 
mental condition. Stroke is most common in adults; however, 
commonly used speech relearning applications are not 
developed from an adult's learning perspective [45]-[47]. The 
adult learning theory highlights that adults actively participate 
in the planning, development, and implementation of their 
learning process [48]. Therefore, adult learning principles 
should be considered in the requirement identification 
process. 
The study aimed to gather the requirements for designing 
an interactive speech relearning software application for 
stroke survivors. The requirements were also considered from 
the adult learning principles' perspective.  The addressed 
research questions were:  
1. What are the requirements for designing an interactive 
software application for speech relearning exercises 
following a stroke? 
   
2. How can the principles of adult learning support 
understanding the patients' needs? 
 
The remaining paper is organized as follows. Section II, 
addresses the Knowles’ adult learning theory model, 
Andragogy in practice model is presented in Section III. 
Method is presented in Section IV, while findings and 
discussion are presented in Sections V and VI respectively. 
Finally, conclusion and future work are discussed in Section 
VII. 
II. 
KNOWLES’ ADULT LEARNING THEORY 
 
Several studies have successfully used adult learning 
principles and andragogy (adult learning theory) in the 
practice model for education, training, and development of 
adult learners [13]-[19]. Andragogy highlights that adults 
tend to learn differently than the traditional children's 
education that is usually referred to as pedagogy [15].  Adults 
should be involved in the overall process of planning and 
implementation of learning objectives [20]. Knowles et al. 
described the following six characteristics of adult learning 
model that is guidance for them [15]. 
A. Need to know 
Adults need to know the usefulness of learning objectives 
before they start learning. Adults invest considerable time 
and energy in exploring the perceived benefits of learning 
compared to the drawbacks of not learning. Therefore, the 
first task of the facilitator or instructor should be to bring the 
need to know to the learner’s awareness. 
B. Self-concept 
Adults are usually self-directed, and they like to take 
responsibility for their decisions. A person tends to shift his 
or her self-concept from dependency towards self-direction. 
Adult learners' active participation and collaboration in the 
learning process is needed to enhance and stimulate their 
learning. 
C. Learning from experiences 
Adults are usually influenced by their past learning 
experiences, which vary from person to person. The 
facilitator/instructor should have a good understanding of an 
adult’s previous experiences and beliefs in the given field. 
Knowles suggests an individualized learning plan for adults 
according to their previous experiences. 
D. Readiness to learn 
Knowles emphasizes the importance of task-oriented 
learning for the social and professional development of 
adults. The perceived social benefits of a learning task 
increase its readiness to support learning. The adults feel an 
urge to learn when they realize their changed circumstances 
and the role of learning in these situations. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

E. Orientation to learning 
Adults tend to learn the skills that have a direct impact on 
their real-life circumstances. Problem-solving tasks and 
exercises should be involved in the learning process. The 
focus of learning should be problem-centred rather than 
subject-centred. 
F. Internal motivation 
External motivation factors, such as a better job, good grades 
in education, and a higher salary are essential for learning.  
However, adult learning is heavily influenced by internal 
motivation factors, such as increased quality of life, 
satisfaction and pleasure at work, and self-esteem. Usually, 
adults are motivated for self-improvement and growth; 
however, this motivation is often compromised by a lack of 
resources, time, and violation of adult learning principles. 
III. 
THE ANDRAGOGY IN PRACTICE MODEL  
Figure 1.  Andragogy in Practice Model [17]. 
 
Based on the adult learning principles as described in the 
previous 
section, 
Knowles 
suggested 
a 
conceptual 
framework that can be adopted for several adult learning 
practices [15]. Since, most of the stroke patients are adults, 
adoption of the Andragogy in Practice Model (APM) is a 
promising approach for speech and language relearning as 
shown in Figure 1. As shown in the figure, the three 
dimensions of adult learning in practice may influence the 
adult learning process. 
 The outer ring presents goals and purposes for learning that 
can be seen as developmental outcomes for the learner. The 
goals can be categorized into individual, social and 
institutional growth of the learner. The middle ring shows 
individual and situational differences that might have an 
impact on learning practices. These differences are further 
categorized as individual learner differences, subject matter 
differences, and situational differences. The core six 
principles of adult learning were used as the primary themes 
that highlight patients' need for technology-enhanced speech 
and language relearning. The middle and outer rings of 
andragogy in practice model were used as filters; the core 
principles were examined through those filters to the 
requirements for the technology-enhancement following 
stroke.  
IV. 
METHOD 
The research methodology for this study is a design 
science research (DSR) that consists of a five-step process 
described by researchers in [24]. Generally, DSR consists of a 
rigorous process where a defined problem is solved by 
designing and implementing an artefact in order to make 
research contributions [21]-[23]. Since the study is about 
designing the requirements; a Requirement-Focused Design 
Science approach was adopted where the first two steps of the 
process were followed.  
A. Data collection 
Interviews are the most common approach for data 
collection and defining the requirements. Semi-structured 
interviews were conducted with some important stakeholders. 
The selection of participants is a tedious but essential part of 
the data collection process. The selection of highly competent 
and enthusiastic participants plays an essential role in the 
requirements specification [24]. A purposive sampling 
approach was adopted for the selection of participants, where 
all of the participants should have good knowledge and 
expertise in speech rehabilitation. Interviews were conducted 
with 11 participants; their professional role and experience in 
the related field are described below in Table 1. Participants 
2-7 were interviewed several times for detailed information 
and requirements identification. 
B. Data analysis 
For data analysis, a deductive thematic analysis approach 
was adopted as suggested by [29]. Interviews, based on audio 
recordings and transcripts, were carefully explored for coding, 
and essential features of data that are directly relevant to 
speech and language relearning were established. The 
identified codes were examined according to the adult 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

learning theory described in the previous section, and the 
initial themes were gathered from data. The next step was to 
select and finalize essential themes.  The initial themes were 
thoroughly reviewed, and the relevant themes that were 
important to answer the research question were selected. The 
most relevant and essential themes, such as independent 
living, tailor-made speech, and language relearning, and 
technology acceptance was analysed and presented according 
to Knowles adult learning principles.   
 
TABLE I. STUDY PARTICIPANTS 
Participants 
Professional role 
Years of 
experience 
Participant 1 
Speech therapist #1 
25 
Participant 2 
Speech therapist #2 
4 
Participant 3 
Speech therapist #3 
5 
Participant 4 
Stroke specialist doctor and 
manger in the regional hospital 
25 
Participant 5 
Occupational Therapist 
5 
Participant 6 
Physiotherapist #1 
8 
Participant 7 
Physiotherapist #2 
3 
Participant 8 
Chairman of the local stroke 
patient organization 
3 
Participant 9 
CEO of a small company 
working with game-based 
stroke rehabilitation 
25 
Participant 10 
Hardware and software 
specialist at a big multinational 
company 
9 
Participant 11 
Head of Stroke Team  
15 
C. Ethical considerations 
Discussing physically and mentally impaired people has 
always been a sensitive issue when it comes to ethics.  Ethical 
considerations are essential as a researcher, mainly dealing 
with people in the research and the consequences of the 
research on those people [26]-[29]. The Swedish Research 
Council [30]-[35] classified research ethics as professional 
ethics and categorized them in the following three 
subcategories: performing a fruitful work, following national 
and local rules and following the professional codes of ethics 
[36]-[39]. The third subset describes considerations 
regarding ethics for collaboration and working environment 
with co-workers.  
  At the start of every interview, the interviewees were briefed 
about the consent of correspondence, including some crucial 
details about their right to withdraw some specific questions 
or entire interview at any point. Additionally, they were 
informed that the purpose of gathering information through 
interviews is only academic research. The confidentiality of 
the Participant is also an essential aspect of ethics [28]. The 
Participants were also briefed that their personal information, 
such as their names will not be mentioned in the research 
report. Moreover, the gathered data was safely stored at the 
university's database, where a strong password is needed for 
access. 
  Authors in suggested a close collaboration with the user 
groups [29]. In order to create a healthy work environment, 
the researcher should respect the user group, and the users 
should feel satisfied and secure. Therefore, semi-structured 
interviews were conducted in a warm environment. Medical 
caregivers, such as speech therapists were also interviewed 
for requirement specification. Before conducting the 
interviews, there were some open discussions between the 
speech therapists and the researchers to exchange knowledge 
in their area of expertise. These discussions will help the 
researchers to create a healthy and secure working 
environment. The article has been peer-reviewed and 
discussed at the 43rd Information systems research seminar 
in [33]. 
V. 
FINDINGS 
The findings were analyzed thematically according to the 
Knowles Andragogy in Practice Model (APM); as shown in  
Figure 1. The patients' needs for technology enhancement are 
presented using adult learning principles as core themes. The 
adult learning theory and its principles were described to the 
speech therapist in regional rehabilitation (Participants 2). 
Supersizing, they have been considering speech and language 
from the adult learning aspects without knowing those 
principles, and they endorsed the idea of involving these 
principles for technology-enhanced speech and language 
relearning. 
A. The patient’s need to know 
  Several informants describe the necessity to involve the 
patients from the beginning while discussing relearning 
(Participants 1- 4, 11). They all emphasize the importance of 
describing the actual situation and what they can achieve. 
Informant 4 describes this question as to the most common 
second question from the patients, where the first one is if they 
are going to survive or not. By setting the goals, the patients 
can understand what they possibly can achieve by training. 
The actual situation is described as what happens if the 
patients skip their training.  
  The bases for the patient's learning objectives are several. 
One is the goals and another the patient's motivation for 
relearning. Highlighted is also the patient's physical condition, 
which is assessed at a specific meeting with a speech therapist 
(Participants 1-2). The assessment is conducted as a 
standardized 
procedure, 
involving 
sets 
of 
detailed 
assignments. Before starting the standardized procedure, the 
speech therapists decide which parts to assess, based on the 
patient's described injuries. The assessment relies on an 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

analogue procedure, developed and used in Sweden by speech 
therapists, and is commonly used throughout the country. 
Both speech therapists are keen on converting the analogue 
assessment process into a digital one, where the results would 
easily be stored and used as input for the relearning 
assignments.    
B. Self-concept of patients 
Since adults are usually self-directed, they would like to 
take responsibility for getting the information about their 
disabilities and the process of recovery. Several participants 
highlighted that patients like to get information from their 
relatives and friends (Participant 2, 5-7). Therefore, the 
patient's close relatives and friends can play an essential role 
in the success of a technology-enhanced system. One speech 
therapist mentioned ongoing research involving the close 
relatives of patients in the speech relearning process 
(Participant 2). That research focuses on educating and 
training the patient's relatives so that they will be able to help 
patients to perform relearning exercises. The software should 
have a feature that enables the patient's relatives to collaborate 
with the patient as well as the speech therapist (Participant 2). 
An online session with the speech therapist, the patient, and 
the patient's close relatives such as the husband or wife of the 
patient can be helpful not only for the patient to perform a 
different kind of speech relearning exercises but for the speech 
therapist as well to guide the patient for those exercises. 
Personal integrity is also a matter of concern for the stroke 
survivors while performing therapy from a distance. People 
do not like to be monitored all the time during the 
rehabilitation exercises; they want to do the exercises 
independently as much as possible (Participant 5-7). The 
patients should be able to use the application independently 
with the least interaction or guidance from the therapist 
(Participant 2, 3).   
C. Adult patients learn from their experiences  
Adults learn from their previous experiences, such as 
knowledge from previous understandings about TES build a 
perception of the use of TES. It is, therefore, essential to 
consider patients' previous practices and knowledge about 
technology enhancement. Many of the available software for 
speech is developed for English speakers; however, the speech 
therapies should be conducted in the native (Swedish) 
language (Participant 2, 11). The Head of the local mobile 
stroke team highlighted that the number of immigrants with 
different languages is increasing in Sweden and healthcare 
givers need more and more resources for translation services. 
Therefore, the option of selecting different languages in the 
software is preferable (Participant 11).   
To use speech relearning exercises, education and training 
are also needed not only for the patients but for the speech 
therapists as well (Participant 2). Medical staff faced many 
difficulties in setting up online meetings with medical 
caregivers; therefore, it might be more challenging for them 
to guide the patients who are already facing impairments 
because of stroke (Participant 2, 3). Older people particularly 
face more problems while using speech relearning exercises 
on smartphones and tablets (Participant 1). Older adults with 
limited previous experience of using TES have more 
difficulties than the younger generation and disability after a 
stroke makes it even more challenging for them (Participant 
1, 4-7). 
D. Readiness to learn  
After designing the learning strategy and tools, the patients 
should be prepared for the implementation of the learning 
strategy. 
Proper 
education 
and 
training, 
usability 
considerations, and social aspects of TES might increase the 
readiness to learn for patients. Almost all the participants 
emphasized the importance of technology acceptance 
requirements such as usefulness, ease of use, adaptability, and 
satisfaction of the software application (Participants 1-8, 11). 
Two of the speech therapists informed us that there are some 
applications available for speech relearning exercises; 
however, they have not developed specificity according to 
stroke patient's medical conditions (Participant 1, 2). The 
tendency to use those applications heavily depends on the 
degree of impairments after stroke and the overall patient's 
health (Participant 5-7).  
Two speech therapists suggested different levels of login 
settings for patients and medical caregivers. The software 
should have a simpler version of the interface for the patients 
where they can perform their exercises; however, the speech 
therapists should have a detailed version where they can 
administer, and suggest and monitor different kinds of speech 
therapies (Participant 2, 3). The stroke specialist doctor 
highlighted that the patient should feel a sense of pleasure and 
satisfaction while using software applications; therefore, goal-
oriented training with the element of entertainment can 
improve the usability of this software (Participant 4). One 
suggestion, from the chairman of the local stroke organization, 
is the involvement of music and dance during the relearning 
exercises (Participant 8). 
E. Orientation to learning 
The relearning strategy should be individual-focused 
rather than disability-focused. Therefore, an individualized 
learning plan is needed for patients with different medical, 
social, and professional background. Participants with 
medical 
backgrounds 
highlighted 
that 
the 
technical 
requirements could differ according to the patient's medical 
condition and their perception about the use of technology 
enhancement (Participant 1-7). Patients with impaired 
cognition might have problems using complex text-based 
interfaces. Therefore, applications with features of recording 
and replaying can be beneficial for those types of patients, 
especially for pronunciation training (Participant 1). Patients 
with severely impaired language skills are recommended to 
use 
image-based 
tools, 
such 
as 
photographs, 
for 
communication (Participant 1, 2). 
Due to the brain injuries after stroke, the patient's focus for 
doing different tasks is also decreased. Therefore, exercises 
with low intensity and a shorter period are more beneficial 
than high-intensity exercises (Participant 1, 5). In some cases, 
a patient's vision is blurred after stroke, and they can have a 
limited view of things; however, the interfaces are mostly 
designed for the users with full vision (Participant 1, 2). 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Therefore, the interface should be designed according to the 
patient's view level. With severe physical condition, eye-
tracking technology might be helpful where patients can 
navigate the interface through eye movement (Participant 10).  
A stroke survivor's choice of hardware also depends upon 
his physical condition; the software should be usable on 
different types of devices such as smartphones, tablets, and 
computers (Participant 1-3). The same requirement is 
suggested by the hardware and software expert, the 
application should be platform-independent, and it should be 
compatible with different kinds of hardware (Participant 10).  
F. Internal Motivation of patients to relearn 
Participants 1 - 4 emphasized that internal motivation is 
essential while discussing what can be achieved. For a person 
involved in managing various situations, such as being a 
politician or chairman, is the speech of specific interest to 
continue activities conducted before the stroke as much as 
possible. Therefore, the patients need to know what they can 
do to live their lives as much as possible as before the stroke. 
Living independently in the home environment has some 
potential benefits for stroke survivors as it increases their 
internal motivations for relearning. The mobile stroke team 
highlighted that most of the patients want to go home as soon 
as possible and feel secure in the home setup (Participant 5-
7). The relearning process is fast in the home environment 
where patients can get help and inspiration from their loved 
ones (Participant 2). 
VI. 
DISCUSSION  
The primary aim of this paper was to gather the 
requirements for the development of an interactive speech and 
language relearning software for stroke survivors. Some 
essential requirements were gathered with the help of different 
stakeholders involved in stroke rehabilitation. Especially 
speech and language therapists (Participant 1-3) played an 
important role by describing the patients' needs according to 
their impaired medical condition. The secondary aim of this 
research was to analyze the requirements of Knowles's adult 
learning theory perspective. Some other related studies also 
highlighted the involvement of adult learning principles in the 
speech and language relearning process might increase the 
efficiency and effectiveness of relearning for stroke patients 
[31][32].  Andragogy in Practice Model [15] was used as a 
theoretical framework for speech, and language relearning 
was developed. In the following discussion, the main findings 
from empirical data are discussed from previous literature in 
the field and adult learning principles viewpoint.  
  Most of the participants highlighted that the requirements are 
different for different patients according to their physical and 
cognitive abilities. Several previous studies on speech and 
language rehabilitation also highlighted the same factor 
[6][33][34]. Researchers in [44-45] argued that the intensity 
of relearning exercises should be according to the patient's 
focus or concentration level; less intensive and short exercises 
showed better improvement for the patients with low focus 
levels6. Authors in [46-48] also highlighted that the individual 
differences of an adult play an essential role in adult learning, 
and an individualized learning plan is needed [15]. Therefore, 
the speech therapist should be able to make an individualized 
relearning plan for the patients according to their medical 
condition. The speech therapist should have extra 
functionalities in software so that they can adjust the 
relearning exercises according to the patient's needs. 
Speech therapists suggest a patient-centered approach; 
both patients and therapists should be involved in the process 
of software development. As highlighted by [17], adult 
learners should be involved in the planning and 
implementation of their learning objectives. Adults want to 
understand the learning goals before they start learning and 
their involvement in defining, planning and implementation of 
the learning process may increase the effectiveness of 
learning. The importance of user-central design is already a 
well-known factor from the literature [5][33]; however, very 
few studies are conducted where both patients and the 
therapists are involved in the software design process [4][35]. 
The requirements should, therefore, be looked at from the 
user's point of view. 
Several participants showed some significant concerns 
about the usability of software applications. Medical 
caregivers highlighted that they faced many problems using 
Technology-Enhanced Systems (TES) such as connectivity 
errors, audio and video efficiency, and screen sharing issues 
with an online meeting. Proper education and training of the 
given software is always an essential aspect of usability [36]. 
Education and training are not only crucial for patients but the 
speech therapist as well. Usually, speech therapists 
recommend and educate patients about the use of 
rehabilitation applications; therefore, therapists need to get 
familiar with that application first. From the adult learning 
viewpoint, education and assistance about learning strategies 
and tools might increase the readiness to learn; the patients 
should be prepared for the implementation and use of selected 
tools and technologies for speech and language relearning. 
Another important aspect highlighted by the participants 
is the involvement of patients' relatives and friends in the 
relearning process. Patients with impaired physical and 
mental conditions feel more comfortable, secure, and 
motivated if their loved ones can be involved in the relearning 
process [13][18][37]. Usability and usefulness can also be 
improved by adding social networking features in the 
application where patients may connect with patients, share 
their stories and experience, and play online games with each 
other [38]. The social aspects of learning are also crucial for 
adult learners, as discussed in [42-43], they argued that the 
social benefits of a learning task increase its readiness to learn. 
Software applications to perform speech exercises may 
not only decrease the operational costs for medical caregivers, 
but it may also provide a sense of joyfulness and independence 
to the patient [2][39-42]. However, the acceptance of these 
applications depends heavily on the degree of trust in TES, 
eHealth literacy, ease of use of software applications, and 
patient's integrity [43-45]. The software applications should 
be interactive, self-explanatory, and secure so that patients can 
quickly adopt and trust them [46-48]. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
With the help of some experienced and enthusiastic 
participants, some essential requirements for technology-
enhanced speech and language relearning were gathered. 
Since stroke is most common in adults and adults learn 
differently than children, adult learning theory was helpful to 
understand the patients' needs. Adult patients like to involve 
in the development of their relearning process. Therefore, a 
speech and language assessment software should be the first 
step in technology enhancement where a speech therapist can 
show the patients the level of their current and/or previous 
impairments and plan a future strategy for their relearning.  
  The relearning process should be decided according to 
patients' internal and external circumstances such as the 
general medical condition of the patient, intensity of speech 
and language impairments, and patient's social and 
professional life. Therefore, speech therapists need extra 
management functionality in the relearning software so that 
they can adjust the exercises according to the patient's needs. 
  This study found essential requirements for the future 
development of technology-enhanced applications for speech 
and language relearning tailored for stroke patients. The next 
planned steps are to design, develop, and evaluate two 
technology-enhanced applications to support the diagnosis 
and the relearning process after stroke. Both these applications 
should be designed and tested with a multi-stakeholder 
approach involving caregivers, software developers, stroke 
patients, and stroke patients' friends and family. To carry out 
the work with a multi-stakeholder approach is essential since 
a stroke patient's speech relearning journey back to an 
independent life is a long and tedious one.       
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 We are thankful to Mobile Stroke Team, the communal 
rehabilitation centre and other participants in the study for 
providing us very fruitful empirical data. In addition, all the 
authors have equally contributed from Department of 
Computer and System Science (DSV), Mid Sweden 
University, Östersund, Sweden 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T.P., Yamato, J.E., Pompeu, S.M., Pompeu, and L., Hassett,  
“Virtual reality for stroke rehabilitation”,  Physical therapy, 
vol.96, no. 10, pp.1508-1513, 2016  
[2] M. Tousignant, J. Macoir, V. Martel-Sauvageau,  “Satisfaction 
with in-home speech telerehabilitation in post-stroke aphasia: 
an exploratory analysis”,  J Int Soc Telemed EHealth, vol. 6, 
no. 1, pp. 1-11, 2018. 
[3] S. Palmcrantz., J. Borg,  D. Sommerfeld, J. Plantin, A. Wall,  
Ehn, M., “An interactive distance solution for stroke 
rehabilitation in the home setting–A feasibility study”,. 
Informatics for Health and Social Care, vol. 42, no. 3, pp.303-
320, 2017. 
[4]  K.Ahlin, A.Ahmad, P. Mozelius, “Determining Testbed 
Requirements for Technology Enhanced Speech Rehabilitation 
after Stroke-the Informed Co-workers View Point”. In: IARIA 
GLOBAL HEALTH International Conference on Global 
Health Challenges. 2019, pp.1-8. 
[5] A. Ahmad , K. Ahlin , P. Mozelius., “The Technology-
Enhanced 
Requirements 
for 
the 
Three-Fold 
Stroke 
Rehabilitation to Support Independent Living”, International 
Conference on Information and Communication Technologies 
for Ageing Well and e-Health, Springer, 2019, pp. 142–159. 
[6] P. Kesav , S.L. Vrinda, S.Sukumaran., “Effectiveness of speech 
language therapy either alone or with add-on computer-based 
language therapy software (Malayalam version) for early post 
stroke aphasia: A feasibility study”,  J Neurol Sci, vol. 380, 
no.2017, pp.137–141, 2017 
[7] A.H. Sodhro, Arun Kumar, “An Energy-Efficient Algorithm 
for Wearable Electrocardiogram Signal Processing in 
Ubiquitous  Healthcare Applications”, MDPI Sensors, vol.8, 
no.3, pp.923, 2018 
[8]  O.Hege Prag, et al., “Telerehabilitation for aphasia–protocol 
of a pragmatic, exploratory, pilot randomized controlled trial”, 
Trials,  vol. 19, no.1, pp. 208, 2018 
[9] M.C.Brady, H. Kelly, J. Godwin, “Speech and language 
therapy for aphasia following stroke”, Cochrane database of 
systematic reviews, vol.6, no.2016, pp.1-16, 2016. 
[10] D. Hu, et al.  ” Decomposing Atrial Activity Signal by 
Combining ICA and  WABS”, 35th IEEE Annual International 
Conference of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
(EMBC), 2013, pp.1-7 
[11] N. Zahid, et al., “An Adaptive Energy Optimization 
Mechanism for Decentralized Smart Healthcare Applications”, 
93rd  IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC) 2021-
Spring, 25-28 April, Helsinki, Finland, 2021, pp.1-6 
[12] A. Ahmad, P. Mozelius , K. Ahlin, “Testbed requirements for 
technology 
enhanced 
stroke 
rehabilitation 
to 
support 
independent living. Eds‘Book Testbed Requir Technol Enhanc 
Stroke Rehabil Support Indep Living”, INSTICC Press 2019 
Edn, pp.1-8. 
[13] A. Ahmad, P. Mozelius, “On the Importance of Tailor-made Speech 
Relearning Software for Stroke Rehabilitation”,  The International 
Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for 
Ageing Well and e-Health (ICT4AWE) 2020, 2020, pp.176-179. 
[14] S.Eames, et al. “Randomised controlled trial of an education 
and support package for stroke patients and their carers”,  BMJ 
Open, vol.3, no.5, pp. 1-9, 2013. 
[15] A.H.Sodhro, Arun Kumar, Gul Hassan Sodhro,  “5G-based 
Transmission Power Control Mechanism in Fog Computing for 
IoT Devices”, MDPI Sustainability, vol.10, no.4, pp.1-17,  
2018 
[16] O.A.Egaji, et al., ” Digital Speech Therapy for the Aphasia 
Patients: Challenges, Opportunities and Solutions”, In: 
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on 
Information Communication and Management. 2019, pp. 85–
88. 
[17] M.S.Knowles, E.F. Holton III, R.A.Swanson, “The adult 
learner: The definitive classic in adult education and human 
resource development”,  Routledge, 2014, pp.406. 
[18] S.B. Chesbro, and L.A.Davis, “Applying Knowles’ model of 
andragogy to individualized osteoporosis education. Journal of 
Geriatric Physical Therapy, vol. 25, no. 2, pp.1-8, 2002. 
[19] A.H. Sodhro, S.Pirbhulal, K. Muhammad, “Towards 6G 
Architecture for Energy Efficient Communication in IoT-
Enabled Smart Automation Systems”, IEEE Internet of Things  
Journal, pp.1-8, 2020 (early access) 
[20] E.K. Kaufman, et al., ”Leadership development for local 
volunteers: a case study of andragogy in practice”,  Leadership, 
vol.26, no. 3, pp.1-14, 2009. 
[21] N.N. Dehghan, et al., ”Investigating the effects of a family-
centered care program on stroke patients adherence to their 
therapeutic regimens”,  Contemp Nurse, 2014;vol. 47, no.2014, 
pp.88–96, 2014 
[22] A.H.Sodhro, et al., “Mobile Edge Computing based QoS 
Optimization 
in 
Medical 
Healthcare 
Applications”, 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

International Journal of Information Management , Elsevier, 
vol.45 , no. 2019, pp.308-318, 2019 
[23] M.S.Knowles, et al., “The adult learner: The definitive classic 
in adult education and human resource development”, 6th ed. 
Burlington, MA, Elsevier, 2005. 
[24] P. Johannesson, and E. Perjons, An introduction to design 
science. Springer, Second Edition, pp.197, 2014. 
[25] K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, M.A. Rothenberger., “A design 
science research methodology for information systems 
research”,  Journal of management information systems, vol. 
24, no. 3, pp. 45-77, 2007 
[26] A.R.Hevner., S.T.March.,  J. Park., ”Design science in 
information systems research”, MIS Q, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 75–
105, 2004. 
[27] A.H.Sodhro, et al., “Artificial Intelligence based QoS 
optimization for multimedia communication in IoV systems”, 
Future Generation Computer Systems, Elsevier, vol. 95, 
no.2019, pp. 667-680, 2019   
[28] M. Muzammal, et al., “A Multi-sensor Data Fusion Enabled 
Ensemble Approach for Medical Data from Body Sensor 
Networks”, Information Fusion, Elsevier, vol.53, no.2020, 
pp.155-164, 2020 
[29] A.H.Sodhro, Y.Li, M.A.Shah, ”Energy-efficient Adaptive 
Transmission Power Control in Wireless Body Area 
Networks”, IET Communications, vol.10, no.1, pp.81-90, 2016 
[30] S.Kvale, et al., “The qualitative research interview, pp. 412, 
Third Edition, Lund: Studentlitteratur, 2014 
[31] A. H. Sodhro, A. K. Sangaiah, S.Pirphulal, “Power 
Management Strategies for Medical Information Transmission 
in Wireless Body Sensor Networks”, IEEE Consumer 
Electronics Magzine, vol.9, no.2, pp.47-51, 2020 
[32] A.Ahmad, K. Ahlin, P. Mozelius, “Technology-enhanced 
Speech and Language relearning for stroke patients-defining 
requirements for a software application development”, 11th 
Scandinavian 
Conference 
on 
Information 
Systems 
(SCIS2020), Sundsvall, Sweden, 2020, pp.1-7. 
[33] M.L.Kimbarow, “Integrating life participation approaches to 
aphasia treatment with adult learning theory: A synergistic 
approach”, Top Lang Disord, vol. 27, no.2007, pp. 318–323, 
2007. 
[34] T. Hopper, A.L. Holland, “Aphasia and learning in adults: Key 
concepts and clinical considerations”,  Top Geriatr Rehabil, 
vol. 21, no. 2005, pp.315–322, 2005. 
[35] M.Muzammal, R.Talat, ‘A Multi-sensor Data Fusion Enabled 
Ensemble Approach for Medical Data from Body Sensor 
Networks’, Information Fusion, Elsevier, Vol. 53, No.2020, 
pp.155-164, 2020 
[36] T.Simic T, C. Leonard, L. Laird et al. A usability study of 
internet-based therapy for naming deficits in aphasia. Am J 
Speech Lang Pathol 2016; 25: 642–653. 
[37] Y.Lin, et al., “An analytic computation-driven algorithm for 
Decentralized 
Multicore 
Systems”, 
Future 
Generation 
Computer Systems, vol.96, no.2019, pp.101-110,2019. 
[38] A.D. Dabbs, et al., “User-centered design and interactive health 
technologies for patients”. Computers, informatics, nursing: 
CIN, vol. 27, no. 3, pp.175, 2009 
[39] K. Mallet, R. Shamloul, M. Pugliese., “A patient perspective 
on the delivery of mobile Tablet-based stroke rehabilitation in 
the acute care setting”. Int J Stroke, vol. 14, no. 2019, pp. 174–
179, 2019 
[40] S. Mhammadi, et al., “The Effect of Family-Oriented 
Discharge Program on the Level of Preparedness for Care-
Giving and Stress Experienced by the Family of Stroke 
Survivors”, Iran Rehabil Journal, vol. 17, no.1, pp.113–120, 
2019. 
[41] M.B.Garcia, “A Speech Therapy Game Application for 
Aphasia Patient Neurorehabilitation–A Pilot Study of an 
mHealth App”, International Journal of Simulation: Systems, 
Science & Technology, vol.20, no.2, pp. 1-9, 2019 
[42] D. Veer, et all.,  “Determinants of the intention to use e-Health 
by community dwelling older people”, BMC health services 
research, vol.15, no. 1, pp.103, 2015. 
[43] A.H. Sodhro, et al. “Decentralized Energy Efficient Model for 
Data Transmission in IoT-based Healthcare System” , 93rd  
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC) 2021-Spring, 
25-28 April, Helsinki, Finland, 2021, pp.1-5 
[44] A. Ahmad, P. Mozelius, ‘Critical factors for human computer 
interaction of ehealth for older adults’, Proceedings of the 2019 
the 5th International Conference on e-Society, e-Learning and 
e-Technologies. 2019, pp. 58–62. 
[45] L.T.Vassli, B.A Farshchian, “Acceptance of health-related ICT 
among elderly people living in the community: A systematic 
review of qualitative evidence”. Int J Human–Computer 
Interact, vol. 34, no.2018, pp. 99–116, 2018. 
[46] H.Magsi, et al., “A Novel Adaptive Battery-Aware Algorithm 
for Data Transmission in IoT-Based Healthcare Applications”, 
Electronics, vol.10, no. 4,pp.367, 2021 
[47] I. Ahmad, et al., ‘Machine Learning Meets Communication 
Networks: Current Trends and Future Challenges’, IEEE 
Access, vol.8, no. 2020, pp. 223418-223460, 2020 
[48] A. H.Sodhro, et al., “Medical-QoS Telemedicine Service 
Selection using Analytic Hierarchy Process”,  Handbook on 
Smart Healthcare, Springer , Handbook of Large-Scale 
Distributed Computing in Smart Healthcare pp 589-609, 
2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

