Pervasive Business Intelligence in Intensive Medicine 
An overview of clinical solution 
Ana Pereira, Filipe Portela*, Manuel Filipe Santos, José Machado, António Abelha and Fernando Rua 
Algoritmi Research Centre, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal 
Intensive Care Unit, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal 
{cfp,mfs}@dsi.uminho.pt; {jmac,abelha}@di.uminho.pt 
Abstract— In the Intensive Care units, the information and 
data collected have a high value. It can help the physicians to 
take the best decision in the patient best interest. In this 
field, it is imperative to have the information available 
anywhere and anytime using Business Intelligence Concepts. 
Pervasive Business Intelligence (PBI) arises as a new 
technological field. This solution is focused on a person-
centered approach, where the patients and the clinicians are 
the core. In this paper, the Pervasive Computing area is 
addressed having in consideration the Pervasive Health Care 
and the Intensive Care units. At first, the Strengths, 
Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats analysis are 
presented, and then an overview of a PBI solution is 
described. 
Keywords-Pervasive; Business Intelligence; Intensive Care 
Unit 
I.
INTRODUCTION
The technological developments related to the 
diminishing 
of 
electronic 
components 
have 
been 
enormous. At the same time, the creation and spread of 
the Internet, connecting all machines and providing the 
worldwide sharing of information capacity reinforce the 
value of computing. Also the developing new techniques 
and new technologies, on par with an ever-growing 
capacity of miniaturisation of the devices and their cost 
reduction, developed the research capacity in this area.  
Huge advances were achieved regarding the portability 
and storage capability, as well as new arrangements of 
human-computer interaction and wireless communication 
technologies, 
allowing 
to 
find 
computing 
and 
communication technologies anywhere and anytime. This 
situation has allowed and potentiated new interactions 
between people and their physical environment.  
Especially in the field of healthcare, the Business 
Intelligence (BI) systems advancements have been 
enormous and especially in the latest years, many 
solutions have been implemented, given the vast quantity 
of data to gather and process. In the intensive health care 
units, the amount of data to pick increases exponentially, 
many times collected in real time. The need to make 
available the gathered data is of vital importance for the 
health professionals in these units. To access the patient’s 
history, at any time and from any place starts to be a need 
for these intensivists.  
In this article, we aim to understand the concept 
Pervasive, its appearance and joining of the Pervasive 
Healthcare with the BI systems in this field. This work 
may, therefore, serve as a guide to those who, in the 
future, aim to insert Pervasive in the BI systems.   
This paper is divided into four sections. After a briefly 
Introduction, the related concepts are presented in 
Background Section. Then, in Section 3, the Strengths, 
Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) analysis 
is presented, and a brief solution analysis is done. Finally, 
some conclusions are written, and the future work is 
mentioned. 
II.
BACKGROUND
This section presents the related concepts of the work. 
A.
Pervasive HealthCare 
The definition of the term Pervasive is, according to the 
free dictionary, “to spread something widely and deeply; 
affecting all aspects of something.” As in the Merriam-
Webster dictionary, Pervasive means “to exist in each 
part of something; spreading to all parts of something.”
Applying the concept Pervasive to the health field 
arises the Pervasive Healthcare (PHC) concept. PHC is 
considered an important area of research [1]. These 
systems have a dynamic structure and configuration, and 
an adequate understanding of these structures and the 
communication between its components, as well as the 
warranty of a proper and timely execution, is crucial. 
Pervasive 
Healthcare 
is 
one 
of 
the 
developing 
technologies using the Pervasive computing paradigm [2]. 
Pervasive computing presence provides an innovative 
way for the data transmission from medical applications. 
Currently, it is used wireless technology in various health 
domains [2].  
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

For Rafe and Hajvali [1], Pervasive Healthcare is 
characterised by complex information, a dynamic number 
of interesting parts (stakeholders), and by ubiquitous 
computing, 
which 
connects 
perfectly 
the 
digital 
infrastructures in our daily lives. It gathers, processes and 
distributes “any kind” of personal information and 
contextual data at any time [1]. Pervasive Healthcare 
demands knowledge of the standard individual functions 
so that it provides the advanced detection of diseases, 
changes in functionality. It also provides pro-active 
prevention, as well as health services to predict individual 
well-being. This means that Pervasive Healthcare requires 
information that covers a person’s entire life, including 
data on the personal behaviour, lifestyle, emotions, 
genealogical data, social data, psychological functionality 
and environmental sensors data [1].  
Pervasive Healthcare is considered a key factor in the 
reduction of expenses and it is known for allowing 
improvements in disease management. The advances in 
communications technologies and wireless networks 
provided the acquisition, transmission, and treatment of 
critical medical information in real time [8]. 
B.
Understanding Ubiquitous Computing 
For M. Weiser [3], Pervasive computing is the most 
recent paradigm in computing, known as Ubiquitous 
Computing (Ubicom). Saha [4] foreseen that the 
Pervasive Computing (PerCom)  devices would not just 
be personal computers. PerCom is also much smaller 
devices. It can be invisible appliances incorporated into 
almost any type of object that you can imagine, including 
cars, tools, household appliances, clothing and various 
consumer goods, all communicating through continuously 
more interconnected networks.  
Currently, Ubiquitous computing represents a new 
direction in researchers about the integration and use of 
computers in people’s lives and aims to reach a new 
computing paradigm, in which exists an elevated degree 
of penetration and ample availability of computers and 
other IT devices, with communication capabilities in our 
physical environment.  
Beyond our personal computers, various computing 
devices incorporate physical places and interconnected 
objects fixed or mobile, the latter usually being wireless.  
Ubiquitous computing already represents, in fact, a 
new computing paradigm, including the assumption that 
computers 
should 
“disappear” 
in 
the 
physical 
environment, becoming an integral part of such.  
The Pervasive systems and ubiquitous technologies are 
ever more present in the domains of almost all businesses, 
improving the method of fulfilling them. In more personal 
or social areas, they are used principally to improve 
people’s quality of life.  
As examples of technology innovations, we have iPad 
Mini and the iPhone 6 (both devices are from Apple) or 
the Samsung Galaxy Tab. These devices have, for 
example, A-GPS, camera, microphone, with 7-9 hours of 
battery, 4G Internet and Wi-Fi connection, digital 
compass, accelerometer, environment light sensor, etc. 
C.
Understanding Pervasive Computing 
For D. Saha [4], Pervasive computing (PerCom) 
would be, in the future, “omnipresent” combining 
ubiquitous open-source applications with the quotidian 
activities of the human being.  
From PerCom’s point of view, the environment would 
be 
saturated 
with 
a 
series 
of 
computing 
and 
communication resources very well blended with daily 
life. It allows the user to interact with a smart 
environment from everyplace, using an apparently 
invisible 
infrastructure 
from 
various 
devices/communication/computing, fixed and wireless 
networks. PerCom would create a digital omnipresent, 
sensible and adaptable environment for the human needs, 
characterised by the following essential elements: 
Pervasiveness (omnipresence), transparency (invisibility) 
and intelligence [4]. 
Pervasive 
computing 
would 
provide 
surprising 
enhancements 
in 
our 
capacity 
to 
connect 
and 
communicate [9]. It would gradually become integrated 
into our lives and daily activities, through natural ways of 
human-computer interaction, such as it has been verified. 
Even currently, the benefits and applications of Pervasive
computing are far from being finished.  
Various business fields, such as insurance companies, 
government agencies, health organisations, etc., can still 
get multiple benefits from Pervasive computing.  
What was initially limited to the development of 
technology to make Pervasive computing more than a 
vision, as clearly gone beyond the first frontiers reaching 
the development of applications for various organisational 
domains [5]? 
D.
Pervasive Mobile Architecture 
PerCom, as mentioned in [4], was pointing to the 
world where every object, every building, and even 
everybody would become part of a network service, 
where there is an expectation that the number of 
Pervasive devices would multiply rapidly.  
Ideally, PerCom should approach all and every device 
on the globe with embedded active/ passive intelligence. 
These new smart gadgets or smart devices would be fit 
into microcomputers that would allow the users their 
connection to intelligent networks, and therefore, gain 
direct access, straightforward and secure, to information 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and services. These devices would then be mainly known 
as Pervasive devices [6].  
One of the most common, current examples are the 
GPS based sensors, which provide location data that is 
translated into an internal representation of latitude, 
longitude, and altitude. Then advancing in time, we can 
verify that for Prabhakar et. al [6], there is more and more 
advances in mobile technology devices, such as, for 
example, smartphones, these technologies will become 
more Pervasive and omnipresent. Therefore, this verified 
reality in 2015, was in 2005 just a forecast/vision almost 
impossible to believe.  
E.
INTCare 
The INTCare system was elaborated by Portela et al. 
[7] and implemented in the Intensive Cares Unit (ICU) of 
the Santo Antonio’s Hospital, Porto’s Hospital Center 
(CHP). It is an intelligent decision making support 
Pervasive system, composed of a group of integrated 
modules that execute all chores regarding knowledge 
discovery in an automated way and in real-time. In 
accordance to Portela et. al [7] INTCare can present 
anywhere and at any time information/knowledge, 
essential for the clinic decisions and whose primary 
purpose is the blending of a group of data sources to 
obtain interoperability advantages and the use of Data 
Mining models.  
The INTCare System has improved the way the data is 
gathered and how it allowed the performance of manual 
actions made by the ICU professionals. It allows an 
entirely automatic collecting data process, in real-time, 
and besides that, it avoids paper registry [7].  
In [8], it is referred that the INTCare health system 
consists of a Smart Decision Making Support System and 
Pervasive (SDMSSP), focused on the field of intensive 
medicine, developed in the unit of intensive care at Santo 
Antonio’s Hospital, with the following characteristics: 
Online training; Real-time; Adaptability; Data Mining 
models; Decision Models; Smart Agents; Precision; 
Security̧; Pervasive/Ubiquity; Privacy; Safe access from 
the exterior and  Use policy. 
III.
RESULTS
The achieved results are divided into two groups: 
SWOT and web application. 
A.
SWOT 
Figure 1 presents a SWOT analysis of the Pervasive 
concept inserted in Business Intelligence Systems, 
developed while keeping in mind the context of critical 
healthcare area.  
Figure 1. SWOT Analysis 
SWOT Pervasive Analysis 
Strengths
Weaknesses
Opportunities
Threats
·
Access to information timely and
anywhere
·
Emergency and innovation of Pervasive
·
Promoted by Doctors with background in
intensive healthcare
·
More motivated team and staff with
strong commitment to medical mission
·
Exclusive access to specific critical
healthcare information
·
Consistent delivery of high quality
decision support information
·
Innovative healthcare services improves
and optimizes units capacity
·
High level of organization / department
efficiency through BI systems
·
Excellent technological infrastructure
·
Trust network questions
·
Confidentiality of information
·
Shortage of critical healthcare staff
·
Lack of technological infrastructure in
healthcare units
·
Lack of available / appropriate input
information
·
Possible need for key technical expertise
recruitment
·
Problems on supporting decision-
making if information is inappropriate /
out-to-date
·
Ineffective practice information
management system
·
Over dependency of decision support
systems in decision-making
·
Very large market (hospitals, clinics, etc)
·
Decrease in the value of insurance / health
equity
·
Increased emphasis on quality in critical
healthcare area
·
Increased awareness of preventive
medicine in intensive care units
·
Increased managed care business
·
Arrival / adoption of new technologies
·
An unfilled critical healthcare need
·
Information up-to-date
·
Avoid common pitfalls of clinical decision-
making
·
Medical staff not available to deal with
technology
·
Privacy and security health hazards
·
Cost of implementing / extending
technology infrastructure
·
Healthcare regulation laws could impact
·
Lack of financial resources / budget
deficits / decreased health staff /
decreased technical staff
·
Network attack risk making private
patient information left unprotected
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B.
Application 
In this work, several dashboards were developed (sum, 
average, mode, max, and min). These panels address 
Admissions from emergency, urgency, other ICU, other 
hospitals, other, Admission type (urgent or programmed), 
disease, vital signs, ventilation, therapeutics (medications, 
dosages), patient information (sex, age), clinician, date 
(day, month, year, hour), type and others. In the next 
images, it is possible to observe some of the contents 
developed. Figure 2 refers to a dashboard where it is 
possible to verify the total number of patients admitted to 
the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Here, we can know the 
admissions regarding the origin of the patients by service 
(SERVICO, DESP) and the number of admissions by sex 
(SEX), which, in this case, they were mostly male, with 
1738 cases of this sex and only 1139 of the women. In 
Figure 2, it is also possible to see that 102 patients had a 
cardiac issue (insufcardiac) and 36 used a pacemaker; 40 
patients did chemotherapy and 28 a radiotherapy. Finally, 
123 patients were taking insulin. 
Figure 2. An example of Dashboards developed - total number of 
patients admitted to the Intensive Care Unit. 
In Figure 3, it is possible consulting the data collected 
from patients admitted to the ICU of CHP and some of 
their characteristics, such as the episode number of 
hospitalisation 
(EPISODIO), 
process 
number 
(PROCESSO), sex (SEX), date Birth (Year, Quarter, 
Month, Day).  
During the period of October 2010 - March 2016, ICU 
had 2877 patients (1738 Males and 1135 females) 
admission with an average of 66,91 years old. 50% of the 
admissions came from either ICU or cardio service 
(UIHC).  
Figure 3. An example of Dashboards developed - data from patients 
admitted to the ICU of CHP. 
IV.
CONCLUSION 
This paper presents the first overview of a Business 
Intelligence solution developed in an Intensive Care Unit. 
In this study, the SWOT analysis shows that the 
Information Security is the primary concern and the data 
availability (anywhere and anytime) is the main benefit of 
PHC. Complementary, this paper also showed the first 
application images.  
After a first analysis, the intensivists consider this 
application interesting; however, it needs a deeper clinical 
analysis done by them. A Business Intelligence 
Application provides only the data in an intuitive way. 
Then the professionals make the results analysis with the 
focus on the contribution of it to their decision-making 
process. 
In the future, the intensivists will perform a deep 
analysis of the dashboards. Other panels are being 
developed, and then the final solution will be deployed in 
the real environment. 
ACKNOWLEDGES
This work has been supported by Compete: POCI-01-
0145-FEDER-007043 and FCT - Fundação para a Ciência 
e 
Tecnologia 
within 
the 
Project 
Scope 
UID/CEC/00319/2013. 
REFERENCES
[1]
V. Rafe and M. Hajvali, “Designing an architectural style for 
Pervasive Healthcare systems.,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 37, no. 2, p. 
9927, Apr. 2013. 
[2]
G. Sudha and R. Ganesan, “Secure transmission medical data for 
pervasive healthcare system using android,” in 2013 International 
Conference on Communication and Signal Processing, 2013, pp. 
433–436. 
[3]
M. Weiser, “The computer for the 21 st century,” ACM 
SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 3–11, 
Jul. 1999. 
[4]
D. Saha, “Pervasive Computing: A Vision to Realize,” in Advances 
in Computers, vol. Volume 64, V. Z. Marvin, Ed. Elsevier, 2005, 
pp. 195–245. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[5]
[K. Lyytinen and Y. Yoo, “Issues and Challenges in Ubiquitous 
Computing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 63–65, 2002. 
[6]
T. V. Prabhakar, U. Mysore, U. Saini, K. J. Vinoy, and B. 
Amruthur, “NFC for Pervasive Healthcare Monitoring,” in 2015 
28th International Conference on VLSI Design, 2015, vol. 2015-
Febru, no. February, pp. 75–80. 
[7]
F. Portela et al“Pervasive and intelligent decision support in 
Intensive Medicine – the complete picture.” Springer, 01-Jan-2014. 
[8]
[F. Portela, M. F. Santos, and M. Vilas-Boas, A pervasive 
approach to a real-time intelligent decision support system in 
intensive medicine. Springer, 2012.     
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

