Designing a Mobile Serious Game to Promote Healthy Lifestyles 
Motivating teenagers to adopt healthy habits through play 
 
Stefano Carrino, Maurizio Caon and Elena 
Mugellini 
HumanTech Institute 
University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western 
Switzerland (HES-SO) 
Fribourg, Switzerland 
e-mail: {firstname.lastname}@hes-so.ch 
Ian Dunwell 
Serious Games Institute 
Coventry University 
Coventry, United Kingdom 
e-mail:idunwell@cad.coventry.ac.uk 
 
Dalia Morosini 
Imaginary SRL 
Milan, Italy 
e-mail:dalia.morosini@i-maginary.it  
 
 
Abstract—Behaviours such as diet, sedentariness and how 
much exercise we do play a major role in influencing health 
and wellbeing. As a medium, mobile serious games have the 
potential to educate and foster behaviour change whilst 
engaging and motivating users. This paper illustrates the user-
centred design approach used to develop a mobile serious game 
to promote healthy lifestyles. In particular, this research, 
developed in the frame of the PEGASO European project, 
focuses on teenagers and healthy behaviours linked to the 
prevention of obesity. In this approach, teenagers from 
different European countries (Italy, Spain, and United 
Kingdom) participate to the co-design of the serious game. This 
activity is still ongoing but first findings show encouraging 
feedback concerning the generic game mechanics and the 
designed game. 
Keywords—Serious game; behaviour change techniques; 
health and lifestyles; mobile application. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Making healthy lifestyle choices in terms of diet, 
physical activity levels and in avoiding unhealthy behaviours 
such as smoking have the potential to dramatically impact an 
individual’s mental and physical well-being. For this reason, 
a number of interventions have already been designed and 
implemented to avoid the wide range of negative outcomes 
of poor habits and encourage individuals to maintain 
healthier behaviours. However, one of the main restrictions 
to the effectiveness of these interventions is a lack of 
motivation, alongside a lack of time and difficulties in 
accessing sufficient proportions of the target group [1][2]. 
These issues, along with a rise in the accessibility of 
technology, have encouraged the implementation of game-
based interventions, which incorporate all the benefits of 
interventions delivered remotely but with the added 
advantages of greater enjoyment and in-built intrinsic 
motivation [3][4]. 
A number of serious games aimed at improving lifestyle 
choices in young people have been developed, many of 
which have reported significant improvements in behaviour 
change. While likely to be at least partially due to 
publication bias against studies reporting non-significant 
findings, it is still noteworthy that only very few studies 
report a lack of change following game-based interventions 
(e.g., [5][6]). This highlights the strong potential for positive 
outcomes in terms of health-related behaviour change. 
The PEGASO European project aims at fostering healthy 
habits concerning physical activity, sedentariness and 
healthy nutrition in teenagers through a PEGASO ecosystem, 
composed of different elements and approaches, among 
which also a serious game for mobile platforms. In 
particular, PEGASO focuses its behaviour change approach 
on specifics target healthy behaviours. Target behaviours are 
those behaviours, pertaining to nutrition, physical activity, 
sedentary behaviours and sleeping habits, which have been 
recognised to have impact on overweight/obesity prevention, 
and are amenable to be changed. It is important to highlight, 
that each user of the PEGASO platform will focus on one 
specific target behaviour at a time. 
In the next section, Section 2, we motivate the use of 
serious games as means for healthy lifestyle interventions 
presenting the state of the art in this field. In Section 3, we 
present and schematise the approach that we are following to 
design the PEGASO serious game. Section 4 discusses the 
first results that we have achieved testing the game with 
teenagers in three different countries in Europe (Italy, Spain, 
United Kingdom). Finally, Section 5 concludes this paper 
highlighting the future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
One of the main arguments for the use of serious games 
over more traditional methods or interventions is how 
ubiquitous and familiar technology is for young people, 
283
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

making game-based delivery a comfortable and potentially 
enjoyable situation [7]. Learning through play encourages 
faster, more implicit learning [8], and digital games in 
particular have been argued to be especially motivating, 
encouraging a greater level of engagement than other 
activities [9]. Digital games are also enjoyed by a large 
number of young people, and this expectation of enjoyment 
can be capitalised in educational contexts; while children 
may not be interested in participating in traditional 
interventions, digital games are still seen as a fun activity, 
and they therefore enter the intervention expecting to enjoy it 
[10]. As a consequence, in the correct contexts, serious 
games can prove an ideal medium for the delivery of 
educational material. 
Previous researches into game-based interventions in 
relation to healthy lifestyle adoption also demonstrates this 
tool to be largely successful (albeit in relation to different 
kinds of measures). While the effect sizes tended to be small, 
they are comparable to other non-game, computer-based 
interventions (e.g., [11][12]). Moreover, DeSmet et al. [13] 
argue that coupled with the increased intrinsic motivation 
inherent serious games compared to other computer based 
methods, as well as the greater levels of interactivity and 
visual interest, games may be a better medium. This is in line 
with other assertions that as long as the games present 
adequate challenge, participants are willing to spend more 
time on them than they would on traditional learning 
methods [14][15]. 
However, it also worth noting that all reviews on the 
topic of game based interventions and interventions for 
health-related behaviours agree that the existing literature 
base is incredibly diverse in terms of target demographics, 
game formats and outcome measures, making overall 
conclusions very difficult [16-28]. Furthermore, a lack of 
information in many of the articles reviewed regarding game 
characteristics make it difficult to pin-point what elements 
are especially effective or successful [29]. 
III. 
PEGASO GAME DESIGN 
The design of the PEGASO serious game has been 
structured according to eight different iterative phases of 
design/development and test. These phases are fundamental 
steps of a unique iterative process that follows the user-
centred design approach. Indeed, in user-centred design, 
“development proceeds with the user as the centre of focus” 
[30]. Every phase is performed involving the user many 
times. The analysis, design and development phases are 
performed rapidly in order to provide first prototypes to test 
with actual users in order to understand what is appreciated 
and what can be improved. Then, the whole process is 
performed again and again to converge towards the optimal 
solution. This approach allows responding better to the 
users’ needs and desires in order to increase the acceptance 
of the final product. 
In PEGASO, the test phases involving users are divided 
in three short time duration pre-pilots (from one day to two 
weeks) and one final pilot of about six months. 
PEGASO Game design – Iterations: 
 
Phase 0: User requirements 
 
Phase 1: First design iteration  
 
Phase 2: Game acceptability and preliminary 
usability tests (first pre-pilot) 
 
Phase 3: Serious game first prototype  
 
Phase 4: Game mechanics and usability II tests 
(second pre-pilot) 
 
Phase 5: Design Iteration and Integration in the 
PEGASO Companion 
 
Phase 6: Integrated game test (third pre-pilot) 
 
Phase 7: Pilot version development 
 
Phase 8: Pilot study 
The full process will take 3 and half years. At the time of 
writing this paper the “pre-pilot 2” phase is still on-going. 
A. Phase 0: User Requirements 
The first step before the actual development of the game 
was aimed at determining the game typologies that are 
attractive for the target population as long as their knowledge 
in the domains related to the PEGASO project (healthy 
habits concerning physical activity, sedentariness and 
nutrition). Therefore, we conducted a review of the current 
literature, examining existing game-based interventions to 
make a list of the evidences that can enable interventions for 
lifestyle change; a summary of this analysis can be found in 
[31]. 
B. Phase 1: First Design Iteration 
Behaviour change interventions have been designed in 
PEGASO following the COM-B model and the Behaviour 
Change Wheel (BCW) framework [32]. The COM-B model 
of behaviour is a powerful model to understand behaviour. 
This model has the great capability of taking into account the 
context in which a behaviour is taking place and is 
particularly valuable for PEGASO because it can be used as 
a starting point for intervention design. On the other hand, 
the Behaviour Change Wheel (BCW) is a complementary 
framework (synthesis of 19 frameworks to classify 
interventions), based on COM-B, facilitating the design of 
interventions for behaviour change. BCW is a generic 
framework and can be adapted to different behaviours: the 
PEGASO target behaviours. Therefore, the goal of this first 
phase of design was to conceive key game mechanics 
starting from the requirements defined by the PEGASO 
objectives and the preliminary study phase to foster 
behaviour change through the guidelines of behaviour 
change models. In addition, the serious game has specific 
objectives within the PEGASO ecosystem: 1) Convey 
educational material; 2) Keep teenagers engaged in the 
whole PEGASO ecosystem; 3) Foster healthy habits. 
These elements have brought to the design of several 
game mechanics. In this paper, we present two core game 
mechanics that are the most specific within the PEGASO 
project. The first game mechanic is called “research 
benefits”. Since a major learning outcome of PEGASO is to 
provide teenagers knowledge about food and aliments we 
designed an ad hoc mini-game. In this game, food items 
found in the game have to be combined in order to benefit 
the character. However, in order to be effective for the game, 
the combination should be achieved taking into account the 
284
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

real nutritional parameters of the food item (which are shown 
to the user). In this way, the user is implicitly learning the 
composition of the different aliments. The second mechanic 
concerns the “energy” bar. Playing the game, the player 
makes use of and consumes “energy”. Without energy some 
of the character abilities are weakened or disabled. Whilst 
the user will still be able to continue to play and complete 
tasks that allow her/him to gain nutritional knowledge. While 
the character energy is depleted within the game, it is 
replenished by the behaviours of the user in real world. In 
particular, more the user behaves close to her/his target 
behaviour more energy is available to the character in the 
game. It is important to highlight that the energy game 
mechanic overcomes the boundaries of the serious games 
since it needs the integration in the PEGASO ecosystem in 
order to assess the user activities. 
C. Phase 2: Game acceptability and preliminary usability 
tests 
This pre-pilot phase has taken place in three countries: 
Italy (Lombardy region), Spain (Catalonia region), and UK 
(England). The teenagers were provided of first mock-ups of 
the game and have to evaluate the game acceptability and 
usability. Users had to consider that the game will be 
developed for a mobile platform. 
The results of this phase are reported and explained with 
more details in [33], in this article we highlight the more 
interesting findings that had an important impact on the 
game design and development.  
 
The teenagers liked the idea that activities in real life 
will have impact in the game (to spend energy in real 
life means to gain more energy in the game). They 
suggested that activities in real life should not be 
limited to physical activities and exercises but, for 
instances, calculating their resting and sleeping 
hours may be reflected in the energy bar as well. 
 
Both male and females teenagers stated that the 
zombie theme is appealing. Demonstrating that there 
is not no clear gender differences for game themes 
that are typically associated to a male audience. 
 
Nevertheless, a cartoonish version is slightly 
preferred if compared to a realistic one (Spanish 
teenagers are a little exception on that). This allows 
the game to have a funnier and more casual look to 
balance the darker atmosphere suggested by the 
theme. 
D. Phase 3:Serious Game First Prototype  
The goal of this development and more technical phase is 
to transform the mock-ups in first functioning and playable 
applications for mobile platforms (Android OS) taking into 
account the remarks of the teenagers obtained during phase 
2. Figure 1 shows some screenshots of the serious game as 
developed during this phase: the start-up screen (top); the 
main character seeing a food item container to be used in the 
“research” mini-game (middle); during the night the 
character is attacked by zombies (bottom). 
Main outcome: a first, playable prototype of the game 
available for Android platform. At this phase, the game is a 
stand-alone application partially integrated in the PEGASO 
ecosystem. 
E. Phase 4: Game Mechanics and Usability II Test  
At the time of the writing of this paper, this phase is 
currently on-going. Four countries are involved in the 
participation to this phase: Italy, Spain, England and 
Scotland. The results presented here below are related to 10 
Italian teenagers (5 girls and 5 boys). Main results: 
 
Teenagers involved in the study suggested that the 
possibility of interacting with peers for collaborative 
or competitive purposes would enhance the 
engagement toward the game. 
 
Rather than multiple characters, it would be 
interesting to have the possibility to customise the 
main character. 
 
Having a more varied environment will facilitate the 
use of the application over a long period of time. 
F. Phase 5: Design Iteration and Integration in the 
PEGASO Companion 
The PEGASO Companion [34] is the Android app the 
will encompass all the PEGASO services (see Figure 2). The 
main outcome of this phase will be the integration of the 
serious game in the PEGASO ecosystem and the PEGASO 
Companion as well as the integration of the most relevant 
features demanded by the users in the previous phase. Via 
this integration it will be possible for the PEGASO user to 
test the "energy” game mechanic that requires the whole 
PEGASO ecosystem in order to work. 
Expected main outcome: The integration of the serious 
game within the PEGASO Companion and the related apps. 
 
 
Figure 1. Screenshots from the PEGASO serious game. 
285
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

In this way, it will be possible to present to the testers the 
whole PEGASO ecosystem as a unique and integrated 
environment and evaluate the user experience in the whole 
PEGASO. 
G. Phase 6: Integrated Game Test 
In this phase, the user will test the serious game 
integrated in the whole PEGASO system. The integration in 
the PEGASO echo-system will allow the user to test 
different mechanics that would be impossible to evaluate 
otherwise. For instance, the users will have the possibility to 
see how their activities in the real world can affect the game 
and provide a first feedback about the global motivational 
mechanisms. Additionally, the expected results will address 
integrations issues and the usability of the PEGASO 
platform as a unique entity. 
H. Phase 7: Preparation for the Pilot 
This last design and development phase will be mainly 
centred on the release of the serious game stable version. It 
means that this phase will focus on creating mechanisms, 
contents and procedural solutions that should guarantee the 
game a life span covering the 6 months duration of the final 
pilot. Such solutions have to motivate the users to come back 
playing the game and, at the same time, to stay engaged with 
the whole PEGASO system.  
I. Phase 8: Final Pilot 
The final pilot will include about 300 teenagers coming 
from the same four regions (Italy, Spain, England, and 
Scotland) for a duration of more than 6 months. Via this 
pilot, we will estimate the impact of the serious game (and 
the whole PEGASO ecosystem) on the user behaviours and 
habits in the medium-long terms. 
 
IV. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
At the time of the writing of this paper, our work is 
currently between phases 4 and 5 (Figure 3 shows some of 
the users testing the serious game during the phase 4). 
Currently, the overall design of the game situates the player’s 
character in a modern city (as depicted in Figure 1), where 
the player must scavenge for food resources during the day 
and combine them to obtain abilities which she can use to 
combat waves of creatures that appear during the night. 
The backbone of this idea has been already introduced to 
teenagers during the first pre-pilot in the Italy (n=10), Spain 
(n=18) and England (n=16) as mock-ups. The activities 
consisted in focus groups during which the main planned 
game mechanics and aesthetics of the design were discussed. 
As we detail in [33], the first results positively evaluated the 
acceptability of a mock-up prototype and aesthetical options. 
At the same time, we collected valuable feedback about 
usability and suitable improvements.  
On the other hand, during the second pre-pilot, we 
provided a functioning alpha version of the serious game as 
standalone mobile application (not integrated with the 
PEGASO Companion and the other apps in the PEGASO 
ecosystem). Currently, only the data from Italian pilot site 
are available (n=10, 5 females and 5 males, all aged 15-17 
years old). In particular, the aim of the second pre-pilot 
iteration about the PEGASO serious game is: 
 
Testing the core game play mechanics (exploring the 
virtual world and finding food, fighting, unlocking 
benefits); 
 
Evaluating the usability of the first prototype.  
Together with a couple of questionnaires (SUS [35] and a 
custom questionnaire), it was decided to conduct a focus 
group to find out participants’ views and overall impressions 
about the PEGASO serious game. 
About the game play mechanics, teenagers provided 
valuable feedback highlighting the strengths and making 
suggestions for possible improvements (e.g., add a tutorial 
the first time that the mini-game about nutrition is played, or 
make the fight against the enemies more challenging). 
Similarly, about the game usability they provided 
suggestions about improvement in the control system and the 
  
 
Figure 2. PEGASO Companion UI. From this interface 
the user can access to the serious game (via the bottom 
right icon). 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Users testing the serious game during phase 4. 
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

feedback to the player. Other suggestions were related to the 
importance of avatar customisation and the possibility to 
have a competitive or collaborative game modality with the 
possibility of playing together with friends. The game needs 
to be variated if have to keep players engaged.  
Although the limited findings from this focus group 
needs to be validated with the results coming from the other 
focus groups in the other 3 regions (i.e., Catalonia, England 
and Scotland), globally, these first results show encouraging 
feedback concerning the generic game mechanics and the 
game. In particular, the “energy” game mechanic was highly 
appreciated. At the same time weak points have been 
highlighted in order to guide future developments. 
Comparison with testers in the other countries will also allow 
highlighting possible cultural differences. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents the iterative approach we are using 
for designing a serious game in the frame of the on-going 
PEGASO European project. The goal of this serious game is 
to convey educational contents, foster healthy habits and 
keep teenagers engaged in the whole PEGASO ecosystem. 
The design process that we adopted is user-centred and 
consists in 8 phases alternating design/development with 
tests and evaluations with users. In particular, the design 
steps involving users consist in three short pre-pilots (from 1 
day to 2 weeks) and a six-month pilot study. 
Currently, we have realised a first functioning prototype 
of the serious game and tests are ongoing in Italy, Spain and 
UK (England and Scotland sites). Whilst now working as 
standalone app, the future work consists in integrate the 
serious game inside the PEGASO ecosystem and evaluate its 
impact as tool for behaviour change. In particular, our 
research will focus on the effect on motivation and 
engagement derived from linking user’s behaviours in the 
real world with rewards and features in the game world. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the European 
Commission under the collaborative project PEGASO 
("Personalised Guidance Services for Optimising Lifestyle in 
Teenagers") funded by the European Commission under the 
Seventh Framework Programme, FP7-ICT-2013-10. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Baert, E. Gorus, T. Mets, C. Geerts, and I. Bautmans, 
"Motivators and barriers for physical activity in the oldest old: 
a systematic review." Ageing research reviews 10, no. 4 
(2011): 464-474. 
[2] D. J. Toobert, L. A. Strycker, R. E. Glasgow, M. Barrera, and 
J. D. Bagdade, "Enhancing support for health behavior change 
among women at risk for heart disease: the Mediterranean 
Lifestyle Trial." Health Education Research 17, no. 5 (2002): 
574-585. 
[3] M. Grasser and F. Mayer, "Interdisciplinary education in 
vocational education and training: Supporting joint up 
thinking—Some 
insites 
in 
lecturing." 
In 
Interactive 
Collaborative Learning (ICL), 2015 International Conference 
on. IEEE, 2015 pp. 615-619. 
[4] M. Prensky, "How to teach with technology: Keeping both 
teachers and students comfortable in an era of exponential 
change." Emerging technologies for learning 2, no. 4 (2007): 
40-46. 
[5]  K. Huss et al., "Computer game for inner-city children does 
not improve asthma outcomes." Journal of Pediatric Health 
Care 17, no. 2 (2003): 72-78. 
[6] K. A. Sward, S. Richardson, J. Kendrick, and C. Maloney, 
"Use of a web-based game to teach pediatric content to 
medical students." Ambulatory Pediatrics 8, no. 6 (2008): 
354-359. Harvard 
[7] P. C. H. Wong et al., "Effects of a 12-week exercise training 
programme on aerobic fitness, body composition, blood lipids 
and C-reactive protein in adolescents with obesity." (2008). 
[8] M. Prensky, "Computer games and learning: Digital game-
based learning." Handbook of computer game studies 18 
(2005): 97-122. 
[9] J. P. Gee, "What video games have to teach us about learning 
and literacy." Computers in Entertainment (CIE) 1, no. 1 
(2003): 20-20. 
[10] G. Sim, S. MacFarlane, and J. Read, "All work and no play: 
Measuring fun, usability, and learning in software for 
children." Computers & Education 46, no. 3 (2006): 235-248. 
[11] P. Krebs, J. O. Prochaska, and J. S. Rossi, "A meta-analysis of 
computer-tailored interventions for health behavior change." 
Preventive medicine 51, no. 3 (2010): 214-221. 
[12] D. B. Portnoy, L. A. J. Scott-Sheldon, B. T. Johnson, and M. 
P. Carey, "Computer-delivered interventions for health 
promotion and behavioral risk reduction: a meta-analysis of 
75 randomized controlled trials, 1988–2007." Preventive 
medicine 47, no. 1 (2008): 3-16. 
[13] M. Maertens, P. Desmet, F. Cornillie, and M. Vandewaetere, 
"It's all in the game: Assessing the difficulty of math exercises 
in an educational game." The Biennial Conference of the 
European Association for Research in Learning and 
Instruction (EARLI) (2013). 
[14] J. Bourgonjon, M. Valcke, R. Soetaert, and T. Schellens, 
"Students’ perceptions about the use of video games in the 
classroom." Computers & Education 54, no. 4 (2010): 1145-
1156. 
[15] K. Squire, L. Giovanetto, B. Devane, and S. Durga, "From 
users to designers: Building a self-organizing game-based 
learning environment." TechTrends 49, no. 5 (2005): 34-42. 
[16] T. Baranowski, R. Buday, D. I. Thompson, and J. 
Baranowski, "Playing for real: video games and stories for 
health-related behavior change." American journal of 
preventive medicine 34, no. 1 (2008): 74-82. 
[17] T. M. Connolly, E. A. Boyle, E. MacArthur, T. Hainey, and J. 
M. Boyle, "A systematic literature review of empirical 
evidence on computer games and serious games." Computers 
& Education 59, no. 2 (2012): 661-686. 
[18] J. DeShazo, L. Harris, and W. Pratt, "Effective intervention or 
child's play? A review of video games for diabetes 
education." Diabetes technology & therapeutics 12, no. 10 
(2010): 815-822. 
[19] L. Gamberini, G. Barresi, A. Maier, and F. Scarpetta, "A 
game a day keeps the doctor away: A short review of 
computer 
games 
in 
mental 
healthcare." 
Journal 
of 
CyberTherapy and Rehabilitation 1, no. 2 (2008): 127-145. 
[20] K. Guse et al., "Interventions using new digital media to 
improve adolescent sexual health: a systematic review." 
Journal of Adolescent Health 51, no. 6 (2012): 535-543. 
[21] I. Guy, A. Perer, T. Daniel, O. Greenshpan, and I. Turbahn, 
"Guess who?: enriching the social graph through a 
crowdsourcing game." In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 
2011, pp. 1373-1382 
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

[22] P. M. Kato, "Video games in health care: Closing the gap." 
Review of General Psychology 14, no. 2 (2010): 113. 
[23] H. Kharrazi, A. S. Lu, F. Gharghabi, and W. Coleman, "A 
scoping review of health game research: past, present, and 
future." Games for health: Research, Development, and 
Clinical Applications 1, no. 2 (2012): 153-164. 
[24] A. S. Lu, T. Baranowski, D. Thompson, and R. Buday, "Story 
immersion of videogames for youth health promotion: A 
review of literature." GAMES FOR HEALTH: Research, 
Development, and Clinical Applications 1, no. 3 (2012): 199-
204. 
[25] M. Papastergiou, "Exploring the potential of computer and 
video games for health and physical education: A literature 
review." Computers & Education 53, no. 3 (2009): 603-622. 
[26] B. A. Primack et al., "Role of video games in improving 
health-related outcomes: a systematic review." American 
journal of preventive medicine 42, no. 6 (2012): 630-638. 
[27] E. Rahmani and S. A. Boren, "Videogames and health 
improvement: A literature review of randomized controlled 
trials." GAMES FOR HEALTH: Research, Development, and 
Clinical Applications 1, no. 5 (2012): 331-341. 
[28] N. Wilkinson, R. P. Ang, and D. H. Goh, "Online video game 
therapy for mental health concerns: a review." International 
journal of social psychiatry 54, no. 4 (2008): 370-382. 
[29] T. Baranowski et al., "Video game play, child diet, and 
physical activity behavior change: A randomized clinical 
trial." American journal of preventive medicine 40, no. 1 
(2011): 33-38. 
[30] J. Rubin and D. Chisnell, Handbook of usability testing: how 
to plan, design and conduct effective tests. John Wiley & 
Sons, 2008. Harvard 
[31] I. Dunwell, K. Torrens, S. Clarke, and S. Doukianou, "Game-
based lifestyle interventions for adolescents: An evidence-
based approach." In Interactive Mobile Communication 
Technologies and Learning (IMCL), 2014 International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2014, pp. 269-273.  
[32] S. Michie, L. Atkins, and R. West, “The behaviour change 
wheel: A new method for characterising and designing 
behaviour change interventions”. Implementation Science. 
2011. 
[33] I. Dunwell, R. Dixon, and D. Morosini, "A mobile serious 
game for lifestyle change: Conveying nutritional knowledge 
and motivation through play." In Interactive Mobile 
Communication Technologies and Learning (IMCL), 2015 
International Conference on. IEEE, 2015, pp. 259-263. 
[34] S. Carrino, M. Caon, O. A. Khaled, G. Andreoni, and E. 
Mugellini, "PEGASO: Towards a Life Companion", 16th 
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction 
(HCII2014 Springer International Publishing, 2014, pp. 325-
331. 
[35] J. Brooke, "SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale." Usability 
evaluation in industry 189, no. 194 (1996): 4-7. 
 
 
 
 
 
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

