Natural Language Processing, Wearables, and Their Combination in Healthcare:
Opportunities, Challenges, and Considerations
Frank Rudzicz1,2,3,4, Raymond Ng5, Robert Wu6, Mohamed Abdalla2,4,
Giuseppe Carenini5, Kendall Ho7
1 Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, Canada,
2 Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
3 Surgical Safety Technologies Inc, Toronto, Canada
4 Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, Canada
5 Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
6 Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada
7 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
Email: frank@spoclab.com, rng@cs.ubc.ca, robert.wu@uhn.ca, msa@cs.toronto.edu, carenini@cs.ubc.ca,
kendall.ho@ubc.ca
Abstract—Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a growing
field in data analytics that is increasingly applied in healthcare
for assessment of patients’ electronic records or patients’
dialogues to unearth medical issues, emotions, or cognition.
Meanwhile, active research is taking place in the use of sensors
and wearables in tracking patient phenotypes and physiologic
status in diagnosis and management of diseases. This paper’s
central purpose is to explore how natural language processing
can be combined with wearables in healthcare, and how this
approach can advance health service delivery and health
system transformation. Our recommendations are to stimulate
interest and lower barriers in order to implement this novel
combination of solutions in healthcare industries, and to do so
in consideration of various technical and ethical concerns.
Keywords - natural language processing; digital health;
wearables.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Communication
between
health
professionals
and
patients is a highly important area that affects diagnosis,
treatment, and mitigation of acute and chronic diseases. In
this era of interprofessional team based
care, health
professionals
need
to
work
together
and
often
asynchronously to ensure smooth continuity of care of
patients. Patients themselves can also benefit greatly from
optimizing self-management in partnership with health
professionals. Underpinning good communication amongst
health professionals and patients is the comprehensive
capturing and sharing of essential data of the patients in
their expressions of symptoms, their physiologic changes,
their responses to different types of therapies, and their
physical, emotional, and social wellness. The current state
of the art in capturing patient data to facilitate accurate
tracking
of
disease
progress
is
based
primarily
on
observational narratives of health professionals, documented
episodically
in
patients’
electronic
health
records,
incompletely
shared
between
health professionals and
patients,
and
without
any
significant
patient
input.
Improvement in these areas conceivably can lead to
improvement
of
disease
management
through
interprofessional collaboration and partnership with patients
through patient-centred care.
Modern information and communication technologies
can contribute greatly to data capturing and documentation
of patient-centric data and its analysis to support diagnosis
and
management,
thereby
enriching
the
therapeutic
experiences for health professionals and patients. Data
streams that can be tracked include numeric quantities, text,
and physiologic signals, which can be valuable for disease
management through big data analysis.
This
paper
will
explore
opportunities
of
Natural
Language Processing (NLP) and wearables in health as
follows. Section 2 gives an overview of NLP opportunities.
Section 3 explores NLP in data mining and disease
surveillance. Section 4 explores wearables in health. Section
5 posits how NLP and wearables can combine to contribute
to health. Section 6 highlights issues and challenges of NLP
and wearables in health. Section 7 makes recommendations
and conclusions.
II.
OPPORTUNITIES OF NLP IN HEALTH
NLP, or computational linguistics, is the study of using
computer algorithms and tools to process or analyze natural
language data. Key sub-areas of NLP include speech
recognition, natural language understanding and natural
language generation. In the past two decades, machine
learning approaches become more and more popular for
NLP, essentially relying more and more on the availability
of training data.
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

NLP is an applied subarea of artificial intelligence that
uses Machine Learning (ML) in a variety of tasks, including
translation between languages, automatic summarization,
speech recognition, information retrieval and search, and
general areas of classification. To varying extents, each of
these tasks can be expressed within the medical domain,
including service delivery, and with each application there
are particular considerations that must be taken into account.
Proper application of these tools has the potential for
significant
transformation
across
the
health
system;
improper application has the risk of significant loss of trust
and unintended consequences. This provides the context for
the potential impact of natural language processing for big
data mining in the electronic health record.
Clinical decision support can assist through enabling
better
scoring
systems,
informed
through
NLP
and
structured data, such as lab values and vital signs. This can
include scores that predict increased risk of an adverse
event, including readmission, deterioration in hospital, and
1-year mortality. This, of course, assumes that clinicians
will be able to use this information effectively, and that
information with regards to deterioration or adverse events
can be delivered in an actionable way. This will require
better fine-tuning to reduce false alerts, and better design for
human-computer interaction.
A computational model that captures patient speech
patterns
by
NLP
can
be
deconstructed
into
three
components: 1) topic modeling to highlight and prioritize
topics in patients’ communication; 2) sentiment analysis to
detect patient changes in affect, such as anxiety or
depression, that interconnect with patient state of wellness
and need for hospital visits; and 3) discourse coherence
analysis to gauge patient coherence in their thinking and
detect onset of mental dysfunction or delirium. These three
components act synergistically to analyze the totality of the
patient’s speech pattern and content for optimal. For
example, in patients with depression, they ruminate on
certain morbid thoughts and topics, use words associated
with depression and anxiety, and may have incoherent
speech that are difficult for others to understand when the
depression is profound or associated with delusions. Topic
modeling can pick up the rumination, sentiment analysis can
identify words with negative emotional connotations, and
discourse coherence can highlight disturbed flow or logic of
thinking. Liu et al. [1] demonstrated that automated NLP
screening could identify 10.3% of 27,002 comments in a
microblog were suggestive of suicidality with high precision
(0.86), recall (0.78), F-measure (0.86), and accuracy (0.88).
III.
NLP IN DATA MINING AND DISEASE
SURVEILLANCE
Word embeddings (i.e., ‘distributed representations’) are
dense numeric representations of words which serve as
input to a wide array of ML methods. Typically, by learning
to
do
automatic
word
prediction
accurately
(through
measures of statistical perplexity on training data), these
embeddings induce latent dimensions that encode aspects of
morphology, syntax, and even semantics. The results
therefore can capture
meaningful relationships among
concepts in the data not afforded by traditional methods.
Publicly-available, pre-trained word embedding models
may suffice for certain tasks, but typically training on text
within a single domain leads to improved performance [2].
Publicly-available
pre-trained
clinical
word
embedding
models have been trained on PubMed abstracts and full-text
PubMed documents; however, those corpora constitute very
different
language
than
clinical
notes,
limiting
transferability.
NLP can uncover information in unstructured data that is
not always present (or is inconsistent) in the structured data,
including predicted cancer recurrence, whether a patient
smokes,
and
drug
treatment
patterns
[3].
However,
traditional text search is typically unsuitable because of
spelling differences, synonyms, and general ambiguity.
Dubois and Romano [4] trained word embeddings using
anonymized notes, treating negative counterparts of words
as
a
single
word,
since
negations
are
important
in
evaluation.
They also
trained
embeddings
on
journal
abstracts (MCEMJ) from OHSUMED [5] and evaluated
their embeddings on several tasks (e.g., disease and
mortality prediction) at the word-, note-, and patient-levels.
Embeddings trained on medical notes resulted in greater
downstream accuracy than those trained on abstracts.
Unlike other domains, larger data sets (i.e., ‘corpora’) do
not necessarily produce better biomedical models [6]. Wang
et al. [3] found that word models trained from electronic
medical records had the best F1 score (0.90, a geometric
mean of recall and precision) on a clinical information
extraction task, compared with models trained on larger (but
more general) data sets.
Beyond learning word embeddings using contextual
information during training, it is also important to use
context during inference, which means modifying outputs in
different scenarios. For example, if one knows the author
typing a clinical note, the word embedding space may shift.
This generalizes to other covariates which may have an
effect on the language. Nguyen et al. [7], for example, used
convolutional neural networks to train an end-to-end deep
learning system that learned to extract features from medical
records and predicted future risk automatically. Some
simple extensions were not taken in that work (e.g., long-
term dependencies were simply captured through a max-
pooling operation). A more careful consideration of effects
that have a temporal component, such as the progression of
symptoms or other disease trajectories, ought to enable more
accurate predictions.
IV.
OPPORTUNITIES FOR WEARABLES IN
HEALTH
Commercial devices, such as Apple Watch and Fitbit,
have fueled the popularity of qualified self [8] – the
measuring of individuals’ own physiologic signals so as to
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

gain insights into their own health and wellness. A 2017
survey by the Dublin Quantified self-group [9] found that
some of the most common variables being tracked were:
steps, sleep, weight, heart rate, diet, and exercise. The
reasoning behind the tracking and data usage included “to
make change to my life”, “I learn something new about
myself”, “Monitor the effect of a new regime”, to motivate
myself”, and “to make myself accountable”. These are
powerful reflections of individuals committed and ready to
make changes through optimizing self-management.
As a variety of newer and innovative wearables come to
the market, the opportunity to apply these devices for
continuous tracking of patients for disease diagnosis and
management is not only imaginable, but becoming reality.
For example, tracking physiologic measures with a wearable
necklace
was
found
very
promising
for
predicting
hospitalization of patients [10]. Also, continuous monitoring
in a hospital ward setting has found a dramatic reduction of
unexpected cardiac arrest and length of stay of patients [11].
The Apple watch has recently been certified by Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) to be a medical device for
diagnosing
and
tracking
atrial
fibrillation
[12].
The
opportunity is ripe to introduce wearables into the health
system as an integral part of patient surveillance and
monitoring, and incorporate these data into the electronic
health record to document patient digital phenotypes [13]
and characteristic signatures of their diseases in their well
management or exacerbation stages so as to better support
and monitor patients’ progress. This field of physiological
informatics is rapidly rising in recognition and prominence
in disease diagnosis, management, and even early prediction
[14].
V.
COMBINING NLP AND WEARABLES IN
HEALTH
The discipline of medicine is built on the foundation of
history taking and physical examination of patients in order
to carefully deliberate on the constellation of symptoms that
the patients experience, and the patterns of these symptoms
to suggest the diagnoses and management approaches. With
the promise of NLP and wearables, we have now the
opportunity to digitize and record these interactions not only
narratively in traditional ways, but also digitally in a brand
new and innovative approach. This digitization can support
diagnosis, management, and data analytics to learn about
these individual patients and their personalized patterns of
illnesses and their unique responses to therapies. The
capturing
of this
“digital
mirror”
of the
patients
is
unprecedented, and can truly revolutionize how medicine
will be practiced in the future.
The
combination
of
NLP
and
wearables
will
tremendously increase the amount of information that we
will have about patients in our Emergency departments and
admitted to hospital. Wearables will provide continuous
real-time data on patient status, including vitals, activity,
and sleep. Applying NLP to unstructured data, including
clinical notes, and communication between providers, will
complement that information. The opportunities could be
vast and include significant improvement in the domains of
clinical
decision
support,
quality
improvement,
and
research.
VI.
CHALLENGES AND CONSIDERATIONS
To develop, implement, and deploy NLP approaches in
biomedical contexts, it is necessary to define a principled
framework for systematic identification and response to
ethical dilemmas that may arise. As biomedical NLP lies at
the intersection of NLP and biomedicine, it inherits ethical
principles and conceptual frameworks developed for both
parent-fields, such as those laid out in the International
Code of Medical Ethics (adopted by the World Medical
Organization) and ACM’s Code of Ethics. These, and
others, serve as a good starting point to investigate and
further
develop
ethical
questions
that
may
arise
in
biomedical NLP applications. However, critically, these
existing
frameworks
do
not
cover
emerging
ethical
concerns, which fall beyond the scope of many established
frameworks. We take the approach of Hirst [15] in
discussing possible areas
of concern
when it comes
biomedical NLP by exploring three areas: 1) concerns
regarding how research is carried out, 2) concerns regarding
motivations for the research, and 3) concerns about the
unintended consequences of our research.
First, regarding how research is performed, we inherit
the general ethical guidelines of research ethics. While
formulations may differ in detail, the foundations are largely
agreed upon. Here, we highlight possible issues facing
biomedical NLP researchers which affect how research
should be performed. One such issue is the problem of
demographic skew. Because of the data available for
training, ML algorithms often underperform for minority
demographics [16]-[18] and this can have life-altering
consequences for our patients. Additionally, upholding the
privacy of patients is of vital importance and greatly affects
how we do research. However, in addition to basic
precautionary steps, such as encrypting hard-drives and
password protection, we must take additional steps to
protect the data we work with. The literature presents many
ways that the privacy of patients can be compromised,
including adversarial attacks [19], re-identification from
released
models
[20],
and
re-identification
of hidden
variables from de-identified datasets [21]. We must be
aware of the vulnerabilities of the techniques used and take
the appropriate measures to protect our patients.
Second, regarding the motivation for research, we must,
as our parent fields do, proceed with the intention of
improving patients’ lives and alleviating suffering. This was
at the core of Hippocratic oath, which was modernized at
the Declaration of Geneva, and also adapted for the general
researcher by many including Joseph Rotblat who proposed
a “Hippocratic Oath for Scientists” [22]. As scientists, we
must place the well-being of patients first and take actions
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

in line with the aforementioned principles. Concretely, in a
biomedical application of NLP, this could translate to being
aware of the issue of over- or under-exposure [23].
Overexposure, the increased mainstream attention to topics
in health, helps to create biases that lead to discrimination
regarding project choices, and approaches. To those of us
applying biomedical research to clinical settings, we must
ensure not to over-complicate our work. The most novel
approaches in the literature often lack the rigorous testing
required by healthcare systems. When the results of various
systems are comparable, we should opt to use the simpler
and more studied of those systems. To those pushing the
state of the research, we must not ‘oversell’ our results and
the capabilities of our systems. Doing so not only hurts trust
in our work when they fail to match the oversold promises,
but also distract from the more useful discussions possible
around
our
work
regarding
limitations
and
possible
improvements.
Third,
we
must
be
aware
of
the
unintended
consequences of our research and work to mitigate the
negative effects of our work. Researchers should be aware
that ML methods serve to further propagate the biases
implicitly and explicitly present in our society [24] unless
methods to remove and prevent such bias are taken [25].
Accurately determining predisposition and risk for a disease
given publicly available text, such as social media, would
enable medical professionals to improve quality of life but
would also allow insurance companies the opportunity to
deny coverage thereby reducing quality of life.
Using patient speech patterns to build models that
inform
disease
management
raises
several
important
questions. AI systems for NLP currently generate imprecise
analyses of patients’ explicit meaning and implicit affect
and cognition. Who will be responsible for erroneous
therapeutic
decisions?
How
will
these
percolate
into
therapeutic
decisions?
Would
NLP
allow
health
professionals to be more empathic to these patients and
sensitive to their physical and mental management needs? If
information collected regarding management may reveal
secondary or incidental findings (e.g., emotional symptoms,
signs of domestic abuse) that may be shared with clinicians
outside of the initial or immediate treatment team, how will
patient consent, privacy and confidentiality be handled? In
our multicultural communities, how will NLP from patients
of different linguistic histories or first languages affect
efficacy, and how will sources of bias in the data be
mitigated against?
Meanwhile, the applications of wearables in healthcare
also have their challenges. For health system to adopt these
technologies, they need to be medical grade requiring
institutional
approval,
such
as
FDA.
Even
though
consumers’ grade devices can still lead to positive effects,
such as step tracking to promote exercises, the variability of
the different step trackers in the market place [26] make
these devices difficult to fully be deployed in a health
context. As more wearable devices come to the market that
are medically certified, their application will likely be more
pervasive.
Even though there are many observational studies and
case series about the use of wearables in healthcare that are
promising,
convincing
evidence,
such
as
randomized
controlled trials, have so far not demonstrated unequivocal
health benefits for patient management [27]. While many of
these studies focus on outcomes in health, some authors
argue that the patient experience and health system benefits
should also be taken into account [28].
VII.
CONCLUSION
This paper has identified a rapidly evolving domain of
research and areas of exploration to this field. Beyond
research, we also need to identify approaches towards
change management and knowledge translation at this early
stage of NLP and wearables in healthcare, so that when
evidence of their benefits are clearly demonstrated, adoption
of these practices will not be prolonged to delay reaping of
the patients and health system advantages in using these
technologies.
At
the
same
breath,
we
should
not
enthusiastically adopt these
technologies
now without
judicious research and analysis to truly tease out their
benefits,
so
as
to
ensure
evidence-informed
policy
translation in incorporating these technologies into health
system provision of care.
A governance, education, and ethics body, aimed at
researchers, should collate and disperse general information
regarding issues and concerns of AI in health, including the
application of NLP and wearables. This includes best
practices and policies regarding analysis of data. Such an
organization would serve as i) a central hub for knowledge,
hosting common issues, their solutions, and ii) an active
educational force, holding
workshops, and developing
curricula.
The potential impact of NLP in healthcare is massive
and largely untapped. However, with this potential good
comes a lot of potential harm, and researchers should devote
energy to ensuring that minimal harm befalls their patients
and society at large.
REFERENCES
[1]
X. Liu et al. “Proactive Suicide Prevention Online (PSPO):
Machine Identification and Crisis Management for Chinese
Social Media Users With Suicidal Thoughts and Behaviors,”
J Med Internet Res, 21(5):e11705, 2019. doi: 10.2196/11705
[2]
S. Pyysalo, F. Ginter, H. Moen, T. Salakoski, and S.
Ananiadou,
“Distributional
semantics
resources
for
biomedical text processing,” In LBM 2013, pp. 39–44, 2013.
[3]
Y. Wang et al., A comparison of word embeddings for the
biomedical natural language processing. pp.1–21, 2018. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.00400 [retrieved: January 2020].
[4]
S. Dubois and N. Romano, Learning effective embeddings
from
medical
notes.
Technical
report,
2017.
URL
https://web.stanford.edu/class/cs224n/reports/2744372.pdf
[retrieved: January 2020].
[5]
Xmdv
Tool.
Ohsumed
DataSet,
URL
http://davis.wpi.edu/xmdv/datasets/ohsumed.html
[retrieved:
January 2020].
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[6]
B. Chiu, G. Crichton, A. Korhonen, and S. Pyysalo, “How to
train
good
word
embeddings
for
biomedical
NLP,”
Proceedings of the 15th Workshop on Biomedical Natural
Language Processing, pp. 166–174, 2016.
[7]
P. Nguyen, T. Tran, N. Wickramasinghe, and S. Venkatesh,
“Deepr: A convolutional net for medical records,” IEEE
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 21(1), pp.22–
30, 2017.
[8]
Quantified Self. Quantified Self: Self knowledge through
numbers. URL http://quantifiedself.com/ [retrieved: January
2020].
[9]
Quantified Self. Dispatch from QS Dublin: Results from a QS
Community
Survey.
URL
http://quantifiedself.com/2017/02/quantified-self-health-
wellness-now-future-dispatch-qs-dublin/ [retrieved: January
2020].
[10] R. M. Khandwalla et al., “Predicting heart failure events with
home monitoring: use of a novel, wearable necklace to
measure
stroke
volume,
cardiac
output
and
thoracic
impedance,”
J
Am
Coll
Cardiol
2016;67:1296.
doi:10.1016/S0735-1097(16)31297-9
[11] H. Brown, J. Terrence, P. Vasquez, D. W. Bates, and E.
Zimlichma, “Continuous monitoring in an inpatient medical-
surgical
unit:
a
controlled
clinical
trial,”
Am
J
Med
2014;127:226–32. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2013.12.004
[12] Healthcare IT News. Apple unveils Watch Series 4 with
FDA-approved
ECG.
URL
https://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/apple-unveils-watch-
series-4-fda-approved-ecg [retrieved: January 2020].
[13] S. Gehrmann et al., Comparing deep learning and concept
extraction based methods for patient phenotyping from
clinical narratives. PLoS ONE, 13(2): pp.1–19, 2018.
[14] J. Bai, L. Shen, H. Sun, and B. Shen, “Physiological
Informatics: Collection and Analyses of Data from Wearable
Sensors and Smartphone for Healthcare,” Adv Exp Med Biol,
1028:17-37, 2017. doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-6041-0_2
[15] H. Hirst, “Keynote: NLP ethics in a dangerous time,” In
Proceedings of the First ACL Workshop on Ethics in Natural
Language Processing, 2017.
[16] J. Anna, D. Hovy, and A. Søgaard, "Challenges of studying
and processing dialects in social media," In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Noisy User-generated Text, pp.9-18, 2015.
[17] D.
Hovy,
“Demographic
factors
improve
classification
performance,” In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th
International
Joint
Conference
on
Natural
Language
Processing. 1, pp. 752-762, 2015.
[18] R. Tatman, “Gender and dialect bias in YouTube's automatic
captions,” In Proceedings of the First ACL Workshop on
Ethics in Natural Language Processing, pp. 53-59, 2017.
[19] J. Ebrahimi, A. Rao, D. Lowd and D. Dou, “HotFlip: white-
box
adversarial
examples
for
text
classification,”
In
Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistic. 2, pp. 31-36, 2018.
[20] M. Fredrikson, S. Jha, and T. Ristenpart, “Model inversion
attacks
that
exploit
confidence
information
and
basic
countermeasures,” In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp.
1322-1333, 2015.
[21] A. Narayanan and V. Shmatikov, “Robust de-anonymization
of large sparse datasets,” In Security and Privacy, IEEE
Symposium, pp. 111-125, 2008.
[22] J. Rotblat, “A Hippocratic Oath for scientists,” Science, 286,
pp.1475-1475, 1999.
[23] D. Hovy and S.L. Spruit, “The social impact of natural
language processing,” In Proceedings of the 54th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2,
pp.591-598, 2016.
[24] S. Kiritchenko and S. Mohammad, “Examining gender and
race bias in two hundred sentiment analysis systems,” In
Proceedings of the Seventh Joint Conference on Lexical and
Computational Semantics, pp. 43-53, 2018.
[25] T. Bolukbasi, K.W. Chang, J. Y. Zou, V. Saligrama, and A.T.
Kalai, “Man is to computer programmer as woman is to
homemaker?
debiasing
word
embeddings,”
In
30th
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
[26] P. Alinia et al., “How accurate is your activity tracker? A
Comparative Study of Step Counts in Low-Intensity Physical
Activities,”
JMIR
mHealth
uHealth
2017;5:e106.
doi:10.2196/mhealth.6321
[27] A. Vegesna, M. Tran, M. Angelaccio, and S. Arcona,
“Remote
patient
monitoring
via
non-invasive
digital
technologies: A Systematic Review,” Telemed e-Health
2017;23: pp.3–17. doi:10.1089/tmj.2016.0051.
[28] P. Zanaboni et al., “Methods to evaluate the effects of
internet-based
digital
health
interventions
for
citizens:
Systematic review of reviews,” J Med Internet Res 2018;20.
doi:10.2196/10202.
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

