How to Use Qualitative Interviews in E-health Research 
 
Hege Kristin Andreassen 
Marianne Vibeke Trondsen 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
UNN 
Tromsø, Norway 
hege.andreassen@telemed.no 
marianne.trondsen@telemed.no 
 
 
 
Abstract—Qualitative interviews are much used in e-health 
research. It is a challenge that qualitative studies in e-health 
are of varying quality, and not always based in an explicit 
methodological framework. In this paper, we present easy-to-
use guidelines for using qualitative interviews in e-health 
research that are firmly based in social science methodology. 
The paper outlines some topics and practical advice that are of 
special interest for e-health. We draw on the qualitative 
methods literature and our own experiences from e-health 
research, where we have used qualitative interviews for more 
than 10 years and in studies among several different user 
groups. Qualitative interviews stand out as a well-suited 
method to grasp the socio-technical complexity and rapid 
changes that characterise the e-health sector. 
Keywords-Method; qualitative; interview; e-health; telemedicine. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
E-health research is characterised by studies of the 
implementation of novel technology in health care. In line 
with the small scale and explorative nature of many e-health 
projects, qualitative methods are well suited and frequently 
used. The benefits of qualitative methods in e-health research 
have been underlined in the literature [1][2]. 
 In this method paper, we stick to the concept e-health 
and discuss aspects that are especially relevant for this field. 
We would like to emphasise that we think of e-health in 
broad terms. The points we make are relevant for all 
qualitative studies within the field of digital technologies in 
health care, and thus apply also to studies defined as 
telemedicine, telecare, telehealth, m-health etc.  
The in-depth interview often plays a crucial role in 
qualitative e-health research, whether as a singular method or 
along with observations. The interview method is well suited 
to grasp complexity and individual differences [3]. The 
human users of e-health technologies are not part of one 
singular group; rather, there are multiple user groups and 
differences among them. There are patients in different 
stages of illness and with different diagnoses; caregivers; 
health professionals with various institutional affiliations, 
educations and experience backgrounds; and administrative 
personnel and IT advisors with different functions and depths 
of understanding of the technology. In order to understand 
when, how and why people end up using or not using e- 
health, we need to understand their detailed experiences and 
reflections on e-health technology. In other words, user 
experiences need to be studied in-depth and on their own 
premises.  
The qualitative interview stands out in the field of e-
health studies with evident methodological advantages. It is 
well suited to document not only user experiences from 
hands-on use of the technology but also reflections on non-
use. Through interviews you can gain knowledge on 
everyday work and patient practices that are not striking or 
noticeable during observation of user situations. As an 
example, interview studies have revealed that both patient 
and professional users of e-health relate to technology as a 
“security line”, and thus incorporate it into their everyday 
lives even when it is not used [4]. Qualitative interviews can 
provide insight into how users actually reason, as far as the 
e-health technology is concerned, i.e., how they construct 
meaning around their everyday habits and work (for 
professionals) [5], or health practices (for patients and their 
families) [6][7]. Open-ended questions and flexibility in the 
communication between researcher and informant, combined 
with the researcher’s continuous efforts to be active, but 
never paternalistic, allows for the informants to present in-
depth stories [8]. Thus, in qualitative interviews with e-
health users, unexpected accounts and new angles can be 
revealed; these angles and understanding may differ from 
management, design and policy understanding of what 
technology is, or is supposed to do [9].  
However, it is a challenge, that existing studies relying 
on qualitative interview-methodology in e-health are of 
varying quality, and not always based in an explicitly 
scientific methodological framework. As e-health is a 
multidisciplinary research field, the e-health researcher is 
confronted with multiple scientific ideals and various 
approaches to the process of data production. The qualitative 
in-depth interview and the techniques used to conduct such 
interviews should not be confused with other kinds of 
interviews or scientific methods, e.g., the professional 
authority and aim to give advice that is present in the clinical 
patient interview must be avoided; the same goes for the 
positivist strategies to obtain objectiveness that permeate 
surveys and strictly structured questionnaire-like interviews 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[10]. In a qualitative in-depth interview, an exact repetition 
of wording and order of questions is not desirable, as it risks 
concealing the particular subjective experience of your 
informant, which is what you want to find and study. 
The aim of this paper is to contribute with practical 
advice and suggestions for method reflections in e-health 
interview studies. In Section 2, we present an easy-to-use 
guideline for how to use qualitative interviews, that is based 
in social science methodology. The three-phase guideline 
deals with the planning, carrying out and analysis of 
interviews. Our paper highlights aspects from our own and 
others’ empirical research that are of special interest for e-
health. We round off with some reflections on the use of 
qualitative interviews in this field. We draw on general 
insights from the social science methods literature and, more 
specifically, on the interpretative and constructivist traditions 
[3][8][10]. 
II. 
QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWS IN E-HEALTH RESEARCH: 
A THREE-PHASE GUIDELINE 
There are three main phases in an interview study: the 
planning, the actual carrying out the interview and the 
analyses of the empirical material.  
A. Planning Your E-health Interview  
As a first step, you have to reflect on your choice of 
methods and make sure that the in-depth interview is an 
appropriate method to answer your research question. As can 
be seen in the literature, the qualitative interview can be 
suited for all phases of e-health, from feasibility studies 
[11][12], through processes of participatory design [13][14], 
and to evaluation and action research [15][16]. The choice of 
research methods is always linked to the scope and objective 
of your study. If your study objective is to understand user 
experiences, local practices or human constructions of 
meaning of e-health technology, then the qualitative 
interview should be considered. When you have decided that 
you want to interview users of e-health for your study, and 
you have the methodological arguments for choosing this 
method over others sorted out, you are ready to start the 
practical planning. 
In the planning phase, there are three main issues to work 
on: who you want to talk to; where you want the interview to 
take place; and what topics you want to include in your 
interview guide. 
1)    Who to interview: When your method is based on 
subjective accounts, finding the right informants is crucial. It 
is important to plan the process carefully and reflect on 
whom you want to talk to and why. Again, you need to look 
at the scope of your study.  
A common strategy in qualitative research is theoretical 
sampling, where your aim is to recruit informants that will 
give you the most and best information on your specific 
study questions. This is different from representative 
sampling, where you want to recruit a sample reflecting the 
population that you are studying. Thus, if you are looking 
for barriers to e-health implementation and have decided to 
use qualitative interviewing as your method, non-users will 
be valuable informants. An example can be found in 
Sandaunet’s study of an online self-help group [17]. She 
explained how some users experienced a challenge of fitting 
in and that there were several barriers to use. These findings 
could be revealed only through the analysis of her sample of 
drop-outs from this particular e-health service [17]. 
Likewise, for a study on how e-health technology is 
intervening in existing work practices, the most frequent 
users will likely provide the most interesting input. This was 
the rationale behind Savolainen, Hanson, Magnusson and 
Gustavsson’s decision to only include users in their sample 
who had used a videophone service for frail elderly people 
at least six times [18]. However, as suggested in the 
interview literature, when you are assessing potential 
informants, it is also important that you try to get a range of 
views on the topic of your study. Those few informants who 
could potentially express different or contrasting statements 
or experiences than others can often be central to modifying 
your assumptions, hypotheses and theories [3].  
When you have decided on your preferred sample the 
next step is to find suitable informants. Depending on the 
specifics of your study, we advice you get in touch with the 
responsible management for the e-health service you are 
interested in. This can be, e.g., a project manager, hospital 
directors, clinicians, patient organisations or others. Such 
collaborations are crucial for gaining access to the names 
and addresses of potential informants, for distributing 
information about your study, and for discussing practical 
procedures for the recruitment of informants. There are no 
strict rules with regard to exactly who you may or may not 
include in your interview study. However, in e-health, 
research and the development of new technologies are often 
closely connected processes. This requires special attention 
to the interrelationship between researchers, developers, 
health policy and management, commercial interests and 
informants. You may want to interview representatives from 
various groups of actors. As in all research, the researcher 
has the responsibility to ensure research of high ethical 
quality.  
In qualitative interviewing, there is no standard answer 
to how many informants you need. A common strategy is 
snowball sampling [19]. This strategy means you start out 
with a few key informants and then either asks them to 
suggest who else you should talk to, or you use the 
information in the first interviews to decide on new 
informants who could elaborate on or oppose your first 
findings. You continue sampling and testing emerging 
themes with new interviewees up to the point of analytic 
saturation; this is when you realise that no new themes are 
emerging, but that all that is said in the last two or three 
interviews has already been mentioned by previous 
informants. However, if your interview study is part of an e-
health pilot and there are only a limited number of users and 
involved parties, we suggest you aim to interview all of 
them. 
 After having decided whom you want to talk to, you 
will have to approach the person and check whether he or 
she is willing to do an interview. Most countries have 
ethical standards that need to be followed when making 
contact, and some require an ethics committee’s approval of 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

your recruitment plan. In general, we recommend you make 
the first contact in writing and include a request for the 
informants to reply within a week or two. This will ensure 
that the informant has time to reflect on your request, and 
does not experience any pressure to participate, but actually 
does so voluntarily. Before you start the interview, you 
should gather the informant’s written consent. If you are 
planning to recruit patient users of e-health, it is important 
you take the necessary steps to avoid deceptive practice. 
You should be cautious that you do not approach the 
patients in such a way that they interpret the interview as 
part of their relation to their doctor or treatment plan. This 
can be a challenge, as patient lists are protected through 
privacy laws, implying that you will often need to 
collaborate with clinicians to get access to potential patient 
informants. For example, when recruiting patient informants 
for a study of a videoconference service in psychiatric 
emergency care, we had to let the treating clinician do the 
practical recruitment. In this case, we underlined, in both 
written and oral information, that participation was 
voluntary and that if they should choose to withdraw this 
would not have any consequences for their further treatment 
[20, 21].  
2)     Where to do the interview: The locations you 
choose for your interviews will influence the atmosphere 
and, thus, to what degree the informants open up to you. In 
addition, there are several practical considerations to make, 
like economy, travel distance, timing and the option to use 
videoconference equipment, telephone or e-mail. These all 
have to be weighed with care.  
In e-health research, we recommend that you conduct 
interviews in the location where the technology use takes 
place (or is supposed to take place), when possible. This 
will help you frame the interview and draw the informants’ 
attention to your topic, which is e-health. When the 
interview takes place close to the technological device, the 
informant can show you how he or she uses it while you 
talk, as well as explain experiences with the functionality. If 
you are able to have such a practical exercise during your 
interview, this can often give you an entrance to ask more 
specific questions about the user’s relationship with the e-
health application. In one of our studies, the aim was to 
examine patients’ use of home-based e-health services; 
hence, we decided it was an advantage to conduct the 
interviews in the patients’ homes [7]. This proved to be a 
good decision, as we discovered something we had not 
thought about in advance: that the patients related to the e-
health service even when they did not use it. They thought 
of it as a safety alarm; thus, it influenced how they handled 
illness, even when the service was not used. This particular 
service was similar to e-mail, and opened for the patients to 
send requests at any time. It guaranteed a reply from a 
doctor in three days. For the patients, just “knowing that the 
service was there”, was reassuring and eased their self-
management of treatment plans and medications. However, 
in studies where the informants use an e-health service for 
sensitive or emotional issues, it is crucial to conduct the 
interview in a location where you can talk undisturbed and 
without risk of putting the informant in an embarrassing 
position. For example, in a study of the experiences of 
adolescents who had a mentally ill parent and used an 
Internet-based self-help group for assistance with that 
situation, we chose to conduct the interviews at an office 
and after ordinary work time, instead of their homes or in a 
public place in respect of the informants need for privacy 
[6].  
The location of the interview has to be assessed in each 
interview situation and accommodated to fit the individual 
interviewees. If it is possible, you should offer the 
informants a choice and welcome their suggestions as to 
where the interview should take place. 
3)   What topics to include in the interview guide: 
Before meeting with your informant, you have to consider 
what topics, themes and issues you want to address in the 
interviews. This is what you outline in your interview guide. 
The interview guide is a template for how to structure the 
conversation that is to take place between you and your 
informant.  
Several strategies exist for structuring the interview. For 
e-health research and evaluations, we suggest the semi-
structured interview. In a semi-structured interview, you 
have a list of pre-defined topics or themes that you want to 
address in-depth, but the order of themes can vary, and 
some interviews may comprise more (or less) topics than 
originally planned [3]. The semi-structured interview is 
different from the structured interview (where the same list 
of pre-defined questions is asked to every informant) or the 
unstructured interview (where you talk without an interview 
guide). It is not uncommon to have two guides: one with a 
list of themes/topics, and one with a list of more detailed 
questions to fall back on in case your informant does not 
elaborate as much as you hoped. The concepts “semi-
structured interviews” and “in-depth interviews” are 
sometimes used intertwiningly.  
In e-health, the researcher is most often interested in 
studying a change that has happened: for example, the 
introduction of a new technological device or service in a 
social setting (such as the work place, an organisation or in 
a patient’s home). Further, if your study is an evaluation, 
very often you will have observed variation in user patterns 
during a test or pilot phase. In your research, you want to 
follow the technology through everyday routine settings and 
gather various users’ subjective experiences.  
Some suggested topics for an interview guide addressing 
users’ experiences of e-health technologies are: (1) what the 
informants’ expectations of the e-health service were prior 
to it being introduced; (2) actual practical experiences with 
the technology, including benefits and challenges, non-use 
of the application (and why), and when and in what 
situations e-health was used; (3) if the e-health service or 
technology 
interfered 
in 
other 
work-/health-related 
processes (and how); (4) if there were any other uses or 
relations to the technology than the user had expected; and 
(5) how the informant would assess the actual outcomes of 
e-health as compared with the expectations held in advance. 
It is important to underline that a main advantage with 
the in-depth interview method is its flexibility, in that your 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

interview guide can be changed and adjusted based on 
emergent themes throughout the process. 
When you have designed the initial interview guide, we 
recommend that you do a test interview with somebody who 
could be a potential informant, e.g., a health professional, or 
a colleague in e-health. After the test interview, you can 
adjust your topics and the wording of questions in order to 
avoid misunderstandings and ensure that your guide covers 
the purpose of your study. 
There are various guidelines for qualitative research that 
can be of value when planning your study, e.g., the Critical 
appraisal skills programme (CASP) qualitative guidelines 
[22]. Researchers need to assess guidelines according to 
national, disciplinary and other requirements. 
B. Carrying Out the Interview 
An in-depth interview is demanding and requires hard 
work from the researcher. During the entire interview, you 
constantly work on creating a good trusting atmosphere, as 
well as developing the structure and deciding how to follow 
up on your informant and his or her input as you go along. 
The following aspects are interrelated. 
1)    Atmosphere: First, you need to introduce yourself 
in an honest and trustworthy way. You should start by 
stating the aim of your study, as well as your own relation to 
the e-health service or application that is to be discussed. 
You have to emphasise to the informant that, whatever your 
background and attachment to the application, you are 
interested in their subjective experiences, and that they can 
withdraw from or abort the interview at any time. Underline 
that you will treat the information confidentially and ensure 
the informant’s anonymity when reporting the results. This 
has to be stated even if you have made these points in your 
invitation letter. Our experience is that some users of new e-
health technology can feel they have to apologise if they 
have not used the technology as expected, feel embarrassed 
if they found the technology difficult to use or withhold 
negative experiences with the e-health technology. Hence, 
you need to ensure that you tell the informants that you need 
their individual experiences, including the advantages as 
well as the challenges, and that there are no correct answers. 
If you want to record the interview, make sure you ask if 
this is OK before you turn the recorder on. 
2)  Structure: A good way to build trust and a 
comfortable atmosphere is to start with questions related to 
simple, harmless facts, such as age, job, residence, 
education and how much experience the informant has with 
e-health. Afterward, go further into the essential topics 
according to the scope of the study and your interview 
guide.  
To wrap up the interview, it is important you first let the 
informant finish his or her reflections on the core topics, and 
then ask some simple and non-emotional questions. 
Examples of such can be whether the informant imagines e-
health will be much used five years from now, if he or she 
has any feedback or advice for the developers of this 
technology and, finally, if there are any other issues the 
informant wants to bring up. A neutral and non-emotional 
completion means that the informant leaves the interview 
with a satisfied feeling. This is always important, and 
especially so if your topic involves vulnerable groups like 
psychiatric patients or their close relatives [6][21]. 
3)    Follow up with your informant: In a semi-
structured interview, you should be open to include topics 
that are not on your interview-guide. The interview guide is 
to be applied as support: as a checklist. The core 
characteristics of a good in-depth interview researcher is his 
or her ability to follow the informant’s talk, allow use of the 
interviewee’s own words and logic, follow up on the 
informant’s themes and avoid organising the interview 
strictly according to the predetermined list of questions [3]. 
Dare to let there be silence and do not interrupt the 
interviewee. Still, be aware that a passive interviewer can 
create a powerful constraint on the interviewee to talk [10]. 
The interviewer has to evaluate the need for active 
communication during each interview. If your informant 
talks of e-health in general terms, make sure you ask him or 
her to give examples for each statement. In our experience, 
this can often be a challenge, especially when the informant 
is a manager, bureaucrat, policy maker or other who is used 
to talk in broad terms and relate to e-health on a general 
level [23]. 
Some practical advice is to leave your list of questions 
out of sight until you come to the end of the interview, and 
only then bring it out and explain to your informant that you 
want to check the list to ensure that you have covered all the 
topics you wanted to address. The goal of a qualitative study 
in the e-health field is to get in-depth insights into 
individuals’ experiences, and it is interesting to find 
individual variations and nuances in the use of an e-health 
service to get the whole picture.  
Finally, we recommend you take notes, even if you make 
a recording. Notes are useful not only for the analysis, but to 
follow up details and aspects of special interest during the 
interview. 
C. Analysis and Report 
In contrast to studies based on questionnaires and 
structured interviews, you will not have the categories you 
want to compare ready prior to your data gathering, or 
rather, the production of empirical material that happens 
during the interviews.  
In e-health, a qualitative analysis is about creating 
categories that reflect the empirical material in a truthful 
way and that contribute to generating new understanding of 
the users’ stories, as well as the story of the e-health 
application and its relation to the human actors you have 
met. A common strategy to ensure an analysis that reflects 
the empirical material in a truthful way, is that a team of 
researchers start out independently, producing separate lists 
of categories. The comparison of categories and further 
conceptual development can then be a joint second step. 
The qualitative researcher often alters the research 
questions during the research process, as well as in the final 
stages of the analysis. This practice places a huge 
responsibility on the individual researcher. There is no pre-
defined scheme, no methodological or statistical program 
that can ensure the reliability and validity of your data. All 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

qualitative researchers and research teams are responsible to 
ensure an active reflexive treatment of the data in all stages 
of the research process [24].  
Be aware that a qualitative analysis often takes much 
more time than a statistical analysis, where most of the 
reflexive research work is already done before data is 
gathered. If you have more than about 20 interviews in your 
sample, you might want to consider using software for 
qualitative analysis. 
In-depth interview analysis is a constant juggling of 
interview transcripts or recordings, research literature, and 
reflections on your method and research question. The 
product of your analysis will be a list of categories and the 
comparison of these, often presented in a table. 
In qualitative research the analysis of empirical material 
and the writing of the research report, or paper, will in 
practice be parts of the same process. As you go from 
preliminary analysis to drafting your research report, it is 
important to ensure the informants’ anonymity and 
confidentiality. Pertinent biographical details must be 
concealed in the quoted material used in the published report.  
III. 
REFLECTIONS ON THE USE OF QUALITATIVE 
INTERVIEWS IN E-HEALTH 
Interviews are well suited to gather knowledge on users’ 
experiences and constructions of meaning, as well as the 
embedding of e-health in their social environments. User 
involvement is crucial in the e-health design and 
development processes. This is well acknowledged, and 
participatory design is now a preferred method in e-health 
development work, as well as in health technology 
assessment [13][14][25]. Nevertheless, a lot of e-health 
projects and pilots still fail to be implemented as routine 
services after the development period [26]. We argue that 
this challenge needs to be addressed by the e-health 
community through a stronger, more in-depth focus on users’ 
experiences and the local construction of technology. 
Methodologically, this implies more in-depth interviews. 
The technology implementation process needs to be followed 
closely over a longer period of time: that is, longer than the 
design and development phases that often constitute the 
project period in e-health research, and where observation 
fieldwork is often carried out. What happens after the e-
health development and project teams have “left the 
building”? When e-health services and technologies are 
released for everyday usage, they meet with complex 
networks of humans and technologies. In most cases, these 
existing networks surpass the limited environments of the 
design process.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
There is no doubt the qualitative interview will continue 
to hold a strong position in e-health research, as a stand-
alone method or in combination with other methods. For the 
knowledge production in the field, it is important that the 
method is thoroughly applied when used. Thus there is a 
continuous need for developing and reflecting on the 
interview method to ensure high quality e-health research. In 
this paper we have presented a three-phase guideline for how 
to use qualitative interviews in e-health research. The 
guideline is built on social science methods literature as well 
as our own experiences from using interviews in e-health 
research. Some practical advice and suggestions for e-health 
researchers interested in this method have been outlined. 
Qualitative interview stands out as a well-suited method to 
grasp the socio-technical complexity and changes that are 
taking place in an increasingly digitalised health care sector.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank all the informants who so kindly 
have shared their time and reflections with us through our 10 
years in e-health. Each and every informant has contributed 
to our empirical work and our formation as qualitative 
researchers. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. MacFarlane, A. R. Harrison, and P. Wallace, “The benefits 
of a qualitative approach to telemedicine research,” Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 8, 2002, pp. 56-57. 
[2] C. May, “Agency and Implementation: Understanding the 
Embedding of Healthcare Innovations in Practice,” Social 
Science & Medicine,  vol. 78, 2013, pp. 26-33. 
[3] T. Rapley, “Interviews,” in Qualitative Research Practice, C. 
Seale, G. Gobo, J. F. Gubrium, and D. Silverman, Eds. Sage: 
Los Angeles, 2007, pp. 15-33. 
[4] H. K. Andreassen and K. Dyb, “Differences and Inequalities 
in Health,” Information, Communication & Society, vol. 13, 
2010, pp. 956-975. 
[5] S. Halford, A. T. Lotherington, K. Dyb, and A. Obstfelder, 
“Un/doing Gender with ICT?,” Nordic Journal of Feminist 
and Gender Research, vol. 18, 2010, pp. 20-37. 
[6] M. V. Trondsen and A. Tjora, “Communal Normalization in 
an Online Self-Help Group for Adolescents With a Mentally 
Ill Parent,” Qualitative Health Research, vol. 24, 2014, pp. 
1407-1417. 
[7] H. K. Andreassen, “What does an e-mail adress add? - Doing 
health and technology at home,” Social Science & Medicine, 
vol. 72, 2011, pp. 521-528. 
[8] J. A. Holstein and J.F. Gubrium, Inside Interviewing: New 
Lenses, New Concerns, London: Sage, 2003. 
[9] H. K. Andreassen, “ICT and patient roles; contradictions in e-
health policy,” Health Policy and Technology, vol. 1, 2012, 
pp. 86-92. 
[10] D. Silverman, Interpreting Qualitative Data: A Guide to the 
Principles of Qualitative Research,  London: Sage, 2011. 
[11] A. E. Holland, C. J. Hill, P. Rochford, J. Fiore, D. J. 
Berlowitz, and C. F. McDonald, “Telerehabilitation for 
people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: feasibility 
of a simple, real time model of supervised exercise training,” 
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 19, 2013, pp. 222-
226. 
[12] V. Williams, H. Rutter, T. Christy, L. Tarassenko, and A. 
Farmer, “Exploring patients’ perspectives of an mHealth 
application: a qualitative study,” International Journal for 
Integrated Care, vol. 13, 2013; T & T Conf Suppl; 
URN:NBN:NL:UI:10-1-115700.  
[13] B. Reeder, R. A. Hills, A. M. Turner, and G. Demiris, 
“Participatory Design of an Integrated Information System 
Design to Support Public Health Nurses and Nurse 
Managers,” Public Health Nursing,  vol. 31, 2014, pp. 183-
192. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[14] G. Demiris, D. B. Oliver, G. Dickey, M. Skubic, and M. 
Rantz, “Findings from a participatory evaluation of a smart 
home application for older adults,” Technology and Health 
Care, vol. 16,  2008, pp. 111-118. 
[15] M. Trondsen and A.-G. Sandaunet, “The dual role of the 
action researcher,” Evaluation and Program Planning, vol. 32, 
2009, pp. 13-20. 
[16] H. K. Andreassen, M. Trondsen, P. E. Kummervold, D. 
Gammon, and P. Hjortdahl, “Patients who use e-mediated 
communication with their doctor: new constructions of trust 
in the patient-doctor relationship,” Qualitative Health 
Research, vol. 16, 2006, pp. 238-48. 
[17] A.-G. Sandaunet, “The challenge of fitting in: Non-
participation and withdrawal from an online self-help group 
for breast cancer patients,” Sociology of Health & Illness, vol. 
30, 2008, pp. 131-144. 
[18] L. Savolainen, E. Hanson, L. Magnusson, and T. Gustavsson, 
“An Internet-based videoconferencing system for supporting 
frail elderly people and their carers,” Journal of Telemedicine 
and Telecare, vol. 14, 2008, pp. 79-82. 
[19] M. J. Salganik and D. D. Heckathorn, “Sampling and 
Estimation in Hidden Populations Using Respondent-Driven 
Sampling,” Sociological Methodology, vol.  34,  2004, pp. 
193-240. 
[20] M. V. Trondsen, S. R. Bolle, G. Ø. Stensland, and A. Tjora, 
“VIDEOCARE: Decentralised psychiatric emergency care 
through videoconferencing,” BMC Health Services Research,  
2012, 12:470. 
[21] M. V. Trondsen, S. R. Bolle, G. Ø. Stensland, and A. Tjora, 
“Video-confidence: 
a 
qualitative 
exploration 
of 
videoconferencing for psychiatric emergencies,” BMC Health 
Services Research, 2014, 14: 544. 
[22] Critical Appraisal skills programme (CASP). [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://media.wix.com/ugd/dded87_951541699e9edc71ce66c9
bac4734c69.pdf [retrieved: 24.October, 2014]. 
[23] K. Dyb and H. K. Andreassen, “Telemedicine; power 
disruptions in health care,” Tidsskrift for Forskning i Sygdom 
og Samfund, no. 21, 2014,  pp. 37-55 . 
[24] M. Alvesson and K. Sköldberg, Reflexive Methodology. New 
Vistas for Qualitative Research, London: Sage, 2005. 
[25] Y. Bombard, J. Abelson, D. Simeonov, and F.-P. Gauvin, 
“Eliciting ethical and social values in health technology 
assessment: A participatory approach,” Social Science & 
Medicine,  vol. 73,  2011, pp. 135-144. 
[26] J. C. Wyatt and F. Sullivan, “eHealth and the future: promise 
or peril?,” vol. 331, 2005, pp. 1391-1393. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

