Demonstration of The KINECT-Based Auscultation Practice System 
 
Yoshitoshi Murata, Kazuhiro Yoshida 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-Mail: y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp, kyoshida@ipu-
office.iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Natsuko Miura 
Faculty of Nursing 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-Mail: natsuko@iwate-pu.ac.jp
 
Abstract— Students in medical and nursing schools must 
practice auscultation. Students usually learn disease sounds, 
correct points and order for locating a stethoscope on a body in 
the practice. Humanoid-type simulators have been widely 
introduced to practice auscultation. However, most humanoid-
type simulators cannot detect whether a stethoscope is located 
on a body, and on which part of body a stethoscope is placed. 
Since they are too expensive, the number of them is not enough 
for the number of students in a class. We developed a low-cost 
and high performance system for the practice of auscultation. 
In this system, students themselves play the role of a patient, 
instead of a humanoid, and stethoscope locations on the body 
are measured with KINECT. Also, appropriate disease sounds 
including normal ones can be assigned at some points on the 
upper body. Students listen for such sounds, synchronized with 
breathing movements, through an earphone or speaker when a 
stethoscope is placed on assigned points. We plan to conduct a 
demonstration in which participants will practice auscultation 
with the system after it is explained to them. 
Keywords-simulator; auscultation; physical assessment; 
demonstration. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Generally, practicing auscultation is a required subject 
for students in medical and nursing schools. Students usually 
learn disease sounds, correct points and order for locating a 
stethoscope on the body in the practice. We proposed a new 
auscultation practice system to learn auscultation techniques 
effectively [1]. Humanoid-type simulators [2][3][4] have 
been widely introduced into medical and nursing schools. 
These humanoid-type simulators are effective to learn 
disease sounds. However, it is impossible to detect whether a 
stethoscope is actually placed correctly on a mannequin. 
Moreover, correct locations vary among patients according 
to their body size. Cardionics provides a hybrid simulator in 
which a student plays the role of a patient instead of a 
mannequin to solve such problems [5]. In this hybrid 
simulator, patches are attached on a body to identify correct 
attachment points. 
In our simulator, students themselves are the practice 
subjects instead of a humanoid model, and the location of a 
stethoscope can be detected with KINECT, which is a line of 
motion sensing input devices made by Microsoft [6]. The 
correct locations are normalized with respect to the positions 
of both shoulder joints and both hip joints for each student 
playing the role of a patient. Therefore, our proposed 
simulator can both show correct locations on a body and 
detect whether a stethoscope is placed on correct points 
without patches regardless of the change in body size.  
In addition, most existing simulators cannot simulate the 
timing of breathing or the synchronized forward and 
backward movements of the upper body. However, our 
simulator can detect these forward and backward movements 
of the front body and provide expiration and inspiration 
sounds synchronized with those movements.  
We have developed a prototype system and evaluated it 
experimentally. The results showed that our system could 
detect stethoscope placement on a body. Also, our system 
could detect changes of the front body in breathing. 
Moreover, we found that all students could set up our 
system by themselves. The results of a questionnaire for 
nursing students and practicing nurses showed that our 
proposed system was useful for them to learn auscultation. 
We plan to conduct a demonstration in which participants 
will practice auscultation with the system after it is explained 
to them. 
II. 
SYSTEM CONFIGURATION 
As a matter of course, the introduction cost is adequate 
for the number of students in a nursing school. Among the 
nursing skills that students have to learn are the recognition 
of different sounds between different kinds of diseases and 
the knowledge about placing correct points and order for 
locating a stethoscope on a body. In the case of respiratory 
auscultation, students have to listen to respiratory sounds for 
more than one cycle. Therefore, an auscultation practice 
system requires the following issues: 
· 
Low cost. 
· 
Simulating real sounds produced due to certain 
diseases at different points on the body. 
· 
Display correct points for locating a stethoscope. 
· 
Determining whether a stethoscope is located at 
specified points. 
· 
Determining whether a stethoscope remains on a 
body for more than one respiratory cycle. 
 
Our practice system is only composed of a PC and a 
KINECT device, as shown in Fig. 1. Students, instead of 
mannequins, act as patients to decrease system cost. The 
stethoscope locations and forward and backward movement 
of a body during breathing are measured with KINECT. The 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

students can listen for sounds produced due to certain 
diseases that are generated by the PC through earphones. 
Therefore, a specific stethoscope and patches are not needed. 
These also decrease system cost. 
 
Figure 1. Terminal equipment in our proposed system 
III. 
APPLICATION 
We developed a simple application for a teacher to 
explain practicing auscultation for the lungs: 
- 
Sound assigning program: This program assigns a 
sound to each area, dividing the upper body into five 
areas. (See Fig. 2) 
- 
Auscultation teaching program: This program detects 
on which area a stethoscope should be placed, and it 
replays a sound assigned to that area. (See Fig. 3) 
 
 
(1) Assigning sound 
 
(2) Management of sounds 
Figure 2. Operation window to assign sounds to divided body areas 
In this application, the upper body is divided to five 
areas as shown in Fig. 3. Currently eight sounds are 
provided. A teacher can assign a sound from the above eight 
sounds to each divided area using the sound-assigning 
program shown in Fig. 2 (1). Since respiratory sounds are 
different for expiration and inspiration, an expiration-sound 
file and inspiration-sound file are assigned for expiration 
and inspiration using the sound-management program, as 
shown in Fig. 2 (2).  
When a stethoscope is placed on a body of a person 
playing the role of patient, the area on which a stethoscope 
is placed is colored to yellow, as shown in Fig. 3. Students 
can listen for such sounds, synchronized with breathing 
movements, through an earphone or speaker when a 
stethoscope is placed on assigned points. 
 
Figure 3. Operation window of the auscultation teaching program 
IV. 
DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM 
Since we would like many participants to experience 
using our simulation system, we plan to demonstrate our 
auscultation system by 
(1) introducing the system configuration, 
(2) showing how to set up the system, 
(3) explaining how to operate the system, 
(4) allowing participants to practice auscultation. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We believe that our proposed system is less expensive 
and more useful for practicing auscultation than current 
humanoid-type simulators. We plan to provide a trial 
version of this system at no charge for medical and nursing 
schools to experience our system. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Murata, N. Miura, and Y. Endo, “Proposal for A KINECT-Based 
Auscultation Practice System,” in Proc. eTELEMED, 2016, pp. 86-91. 
[2] Lung Sound Auscultation Trainer "LSAT", Kyoto Kagaku Co., Ltd., 
https://www.kyotokagaku.com/products/detail02/m81-s.html 
[retrieved: January, 2017] 
[3] Sakamoto Model Corporation, Sakamoto auscultation simulator,  
http://www.sakamoto-model.com/product/emergency/m164/  
[retrieved: January, 2017] 
[4] Laerdal, SimMan 3, http://www.laerdal.com/us/SimMan3G 
[retrieved: January, 2017]. 
[5] SimScope 
WiFi 
(The 
Hybrid 
simulator), 
Cardionics 
http://www.cardionics.com/simscope  [retrieved: January, 2017]. 
[6] Meet Kinect for Windows, https://developer.microsoft.com/en-
us/windows/kinect, [retrieved: January, 2017] 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

