Long-term Preservation Solution for Complex 
Digital Objects Preserved as Archival Information 
Packages in the Domain of Pharmaceutical Records 
 
Hrvoje Stancic 
Kresimir Pavlina  
Department of Information Sciences  
Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Zagreb, Croatia 
e-mail: hrvoje.stancic@zg.t-com.hr 
e-mail: kpavlina@ffzg.hr 
Arian Rajh 
Agency for Medical Products and Medical Devices 
Zagreb, Croatia 
e-mail: arian.rajh@halmed.hr 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The authors base their research on several 
standards: Reference Model for an Open Archival 
Information System (OAIS) ISO 14721 and Information 
and documentation – Records management processes – 
Metadata for records standard ISO 2381. They build a 
model for the long-term preservation of pharmaceutical 
records in the eCTD file format (electronic Common 
Technical 
Document 
– 
standard 
format 
for 
pharmaceutical documentation) stored in a digital 
archive. The model shows formation of archival 
information packages (AIPs) as structured, complex 
objects – based on eCTD’s XML elements, packaged 
together with the appropriate metadata in a single object 
and protected for the preservation reasons by an 
integrated checksum creating MDx algorithm. An appli-
cation based upon the developed model, upon initial 
mapping of eCTD’s structure categories and metadata 
to the AIP’s structure, is shown to be able to automate 
this process as much as possible. This procedure should 
enable users to use the application even for different 
types of complex digital objects, not only for eCTD. In 
that sense the application could become a generic 
‘preservation application’ for the AIP creation and long-
term preservation. The authors conclude that the 
developed 
model, 
exemplified 
by 
the 
eCTD 
documentation format and appurtenant application, 
could improve the AIP creation of pharmaceutical 
records intended for the long-term preservation in digi-
tal archives. 
Keywords—OAIS; eCTD; pharmaceutical records; 
long-term digital preservation; digital archive 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Electronic pharmaceutical records are complex objects. 
In the EU (European Union) they usually come in the eCTD 
(Electronic Common Technical Document) format [4][7]. 
Each eCTD document consists of a predefined folder/files 
structure [8]. Such documents are complemented with 
additional national-level documents and documents produced 
by the National Competence Authority (NCA). All this docu-
mentation together makes a record of one medicine and upon 
this record it is allowed to be put on the market. This paper 
will regard these electronic pharmaceutical records as very 
important and will try to contribute to the formation of 
actions toward their appropriate long-term preservation. 
Long-term preservation of electronic records is, even 
when simple objects are considered, rather complicated and 
quite unpredictable process. This is caused by the constant 
change and advancement of technology – hardware, 
software, storage media and encoding standards. Bollacker 
states that “because any single piece of digital media tends to 
have a relatively short lifetime, we will have to make copies 
far more often than has been historically required of 
analogue media” [14]. In turn, the need for constant forward 
migration influences preserved records. If they are moved 
from one media and technology to the more advanced ones 
the authenticity, reliability, integrity, usability [10] and 
trustworthiness of the records could be endangered. These 
aspects of preserved pharmaceutical records, consistent with 
Stamatiadis, as in [1], are very important not only for the 
business purposes but, more importantly, for the health of 
patients. Gladney [6] explores the aspect of records’ 
authenticity stating that “a performance is called authentic if 
it has integrity and also conforms to a firmly bound, 
adequately informative, and honest provenance assertion.” 
Provenance, when once established at the moment of a 
record’s creation, becomes part of the record thus leaving the 
integrity problem. This article will focus on solving the 
problem of records’ integrity within the long-term 
13
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

preservation environment in the way that the preserved 
records maintain their properties while the underlying 
technologies advance since “authenticity ... is closely related 
to demonstrating the integrity of documents, that is, ensuring 
that they are complete and unaltered from the time of 
creation” [3]. 
The structure of the research presentation in this paper is 
as follows. Firstly, the relevant standards are described at the 
level of complexity relevant to the discussion and analysis. 
Some standards, like OAIS, are considered as well known 
and therefore their deeper analysis is left out. Next, the 
concepts and entities of ISO 23081-1 (Information and 
documentation – Records management processes – Metadata 
for records) standard is described and mapped to the OAIS’s 
information packages’ structure. Further, the structure of 
eCTD is described in detail. The main part of the discussion 
is around the issue of creation of archival information 
packages (AIP), exemplified by eCTD based pharmaceutical 
records. Abstraction of that example leads to the suggestions 
of AIP creation in general if complex objects are to be 
preserved. To support this research the application ArhiMed, 
created by the authors, illustrate the functionalities of an 
application intended for the long-term preservation of 
authentic medical records in eCTD format. 
II. 
OAIS RM 
Preservation of complex digital objects in a digital ar-
chive is best if an archive formation is based upon 
internationally accepted standards. One of the important 
ones, although a highly abstract one, is the Reference Model 
for an Open Archival Information System, known as OAIS 
RM or ISO 14721 [9]. Since it is a very well known standard 
only a part of its structure will be described in this place – 
the one important to create a context for this research. 
The OAIS RM consists of three models: Information 
model, Information package model and Functional model. 
Information model describes Information Object and 
Information Package. Information Object consists of Data 
Object (physical or digital) and Representation Information 
(in the form of Structure Information, Semantic Information 
or Representation Networks). Figure 1 shows Information 
Object structure. Information Package is structured into four 
main components: Content Information (consists of Content 
Data Object and Representation Information), Preservation 
Description Information or PDI (consists of Reference, 
Context, Provenance and Fixity Information), Packaging 
Information and Descriptive Information. Figure 2 shows In-
formation Package structure. Further, Information package 
model describes three types of packages – Submission (SIP), 
Archival (AIP) and Dissemination information package 
(DIP). Figure 3 shows situations in which each of the 
package types appear. Functional model describes functions 
within a digital archive that need to be developed and their 
interconnections that need to be established in order for a 
digital archive to be OAIS compliant. Package concept and 
its structure from OAIS will be important and often referred 
to in this paper. 
 
 
 
III. 
ISO 23081 
ISO 23081-1:2006 Information and documentation – 
Records management processes – Metadata for records 
standard [12] (with part 2 ISO/TS 23081-2:2007 [13]) is 
addition to the ISO 15489:2001 standard. ISO 15489: 2001 
Information and documentation – Records management – 
Part 1 [10] and Part 2 [11] standardise design and 
implementation of records management policies, programs 
and systems. Usage of that standard implies usage of some 
other standards for specific areas of programs and systems, 
such as these for work process analysis, quality management, 
information security, risk management, metadata etc. ISO 
23081 standard supplements ISO 15489 by prescribing usage 
of unambiguous metadata and therefore, by making possible 
Figure 1.  OAIS Information 
Object structure. 
Figure 2.  OAIS Information 
Package structure. 
14
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

to use records in different environments, to support interop-
erability and to disseminate content of recordkeeping 
systems between various systems and user communities. ISO 
23081 standard deals with records’ metadata management as 
a part of records management. Metadata exist to provide 
records’ description but also to decide on records’ 
authenticity (and integrity and reliability in sum), usability 
and interoperability for users or for other archives. Metadata 
needs to be captured at the beginning of records lifecycle, 
because electronic records need to be managed proactively 
and in advance. Metadata also need to be created after 
records’ submission to a digital archive, i.e., registration, 
sometimes during their usage and always during automated 
and semi-automated execution of records management 
processes and procedures. It is recommended to store 
produced metadata in metadata database or repository, in the 
later case especially in the preservation-adequate formats 
like XML. Stored metadata should be inexorably linked with 
objects they are referring to, possibly packaged together for 
the long-term preservation reasons. 
 
The following synthesis of the ISO 23081 standard is 
intended for better understanding of the importance of 
metadata and, sometimes, their complexity to either preserve 
in the present form or migrate to some other metadata 
standard, inevitably having similar, but never the same 
structure. ISO 23081 prescribes several classes and types of 
metadata – generally there are metadata on records, metadata 
on business rules and mandates, metadata on business 
processes, knowing that records and records management 
systems are considered to be in metonymic relationship with 
creator and its business processes, metadata on agents or 
business process roles, and finally metadata on records 
management processes and procedures. Relationships of 
these classes of metadata entities are as following: agents 
conduct business, create and use records, mandates govern 
business, records management subsystem is business-based, 
and business actions and transactions are interpretable and 
procurable to agents and other users as records. ISO 23081 
provides conceptual model with classes and types of entities. 
Class of records includes aggregated types of records from 
item, sequence of transaction, file, series, archive and 
archives – nomenclature is non-enforceable and can be 
altered in practice to the extent that is necessary. Sequence of 
transaction is not a sequence of business transaction itself, as 
the smallest component of business process, but the sequence 
of physically or virtually linked items evidencing some 
enclosed business transaction. Class of agents includes 
person or instrument, work group, agency and institution. 
Persons and working group represent business process role. 
Business process roles can also be applications and IT sub-
systems. Applications and systems can be considered as in-
struments from ISO 23081, but they are specifically defined 
as roles in business process management discipline, which is 
an affiliated realm to the ISO 15489 normative area. 
Institution represent creator in strictly archival sense. Class 
of business includes transaction, activity, function and 
ambient function. Ambient function is “a societal right or 
responsibility that exists outside the boundaries of 
organization”1, i.e., creator’s functional place in the wider 
society. Class of mandates consist of business rules as 
procedural instructions for execution, policies as generic 
instructions and legislation as legal environment of creator 
and direct context of his business and archive. ISO 23081 
distinguishes six broad groups of metadata. Firstly, there are 
identity metadata with elements like entity type (e.g., file), 
aggregation, and registration identifier (ID of entity in a 
specific domain). Secondly, there are descriptive metadata 
with elements like title, classification signature, abstract, 
location information, jurisdictional domain, and external 
identifiers (if any). Third group is metadata about usage, i.e., 
elements describing technical environment, elements about 
rights, access/restrictions, intended users, language, integrity 
(e.g., checksums) and documentary form (structure). Fourth 
group of metadata, event plan metadata, includes elements 
like event plan (date/time, type of event, description of event, 
relation) and trigger. Event history is the fifth group of ISO 
23081 metadata – it consists of identifier, date/time, type, 
description and relation of event and actions on both the 
entity and metadata. Sixth group of metadata is relational 
metadata which describes relationships between two or more 
entities. That relationship becomes a new entity, and its 
elements are identifiers of related entities, relationship type 
and relationship date. Metadata should be inherited from 
classes to types, by linking classes and types, copying 
metadata from class, or encapsulating aggregates. It should 
be possible to extract and reuse metadata, add additional 
elements, and maintain entities as sequences as necessary for 
the preservation reasons. Metadata support preservation of 
records but they should be preserved as well. 
 
 
Figure 3.  OAIS Information Package model. 
                                                           
1 ISO/TS 23081-2:2007, Table 2 – Entity class: Business, p. 13. 
15
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

It is possible and even implied to flatten the conceptual 
model given in ISO 23081 and to set out metadata entities in 
different views, e.g., record-centric view with records that 
interconnect business, mandate and agents, or business-
centric view with business entity as nucleus etc. It should 
also be possible to nest ISO 23081 broad groups of metadata 
into wider preservation-oriented model, such as OAIS RM, 
especially into it’s preservation description information 
(PDI) and descriptive information – they can be enriched 
with constructive business-centric and creator-centric ISO 
23081 metadata. 
IV. 
ELECTRONIC COMMON TECHNICAL DOCUMENT 
(ECTD) 
In the process of digital preservation sometimes complex 
digital objects should be considered. One of those objects is 
the medicinal documentation on a medicine a pharmaceutical 
company puts on the market. In the process of obtaining a 
license the medicinal documentation should be submitted for 
the registration procedure either to the European medicines 
agency (EMA, formally known as EMEA – European 
medicines evaluation agency) for the centralised EU level 
procedure or to a national agency (in the case of Croatia it is 
the Croatian Agency for Medicinal Products and Medical 
Devices) for the national level registration procedure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  eCTD content read from the XML backbone. 
The documentation submission is obligatory in the 
processes of registration, re-registration or upgrading of the 
medicine’s 
documentation. 
Pharmaceutical 
companies 
should submit documentation in the eCTD format [5]. eCTD 
is basically a set of directories and files grouped in an elec-
tronic dossier connected by the XML backbone. Figure 4 
shows eCTD example of a fictitious medicine obtained from 
such 
XML 
backbone. 
Documentation 
includes 
administrative documents and summaries, documents on 
pharmaceutical-chemical quality of a medicine, documents 
on non-clinical 
and 
clinical 
testing. 
Parts 
of 
the 
documentation is usually submitted in various file formats, 
ranging from .pdf, .doc(x), .rtf to .jpeg, .svg, .png, .tif or .gif. 
The documentation submitted at one point in time, either to 
the national or international regulatory body, is called a 
sequence. The first sequence’s directory is named 0000 (with 
the strictly defined subdirectory structure), the next one (e.g., 
for the dosage change) is named 0001 (with its own 
subdirectory structure repeated), etc. Each sequence contains 
index.xml file (XML backbone) and index-md5.txt file2. Each 
sequence consists of modules (e.g., m1, m2, m3 etc.). Not all 
sequence has to have all modules. The most important is 
module 1 since its eu subdirectory contains eu-regional.xml 
file with the information on the medicine. The sequence with 
the highest number containing module 1 contains the most 
recent and therefore the most complete information. Figure 5 
shows directory structure of a fictitious medicine and figure 
6 shows a fictitious example of a medicine’s documentation. 
There are already available commercial solutions for 
working with eCTD-based documentation and its validity 
checking, like EURS is Yours – European Review System for 
example. 
V. 
PRESERVATION OF ECTD AS A COMPLEX ELECTRONIC 
OBJECT 
So far the structure of eCTD was described. Neverthe-
less, eCTD documentation represents only a part of the 
record on a medicine to be preserved. It can be viewed only 
as a submission information package (SIP1). In the case of 
the national medicine registration process the pharmaceutical 
company has to submit additional documentation specific to 
the national legislative. Those documents are also organised 
into a predefined folder/files structure. The folder structure 
lies beneath the directory named the same as the sequence it 
refers to with the addition of workingdocuments in order to 
distinguish the two. Figure 7 shows an example of the 
workingdocuments folder additionally describing the 0000 
sequence of a fictitious medicine. 
This additional documentation is not part of the eCTD 
and it should be added to it when put in a digital archive 
(SIP2). Furthermore, there are documents that are created by 
the National Competence Authority (NCA), a regulatory 
body, in the process of registration, re-registration or 
upgrading/changing of the medicine’s documentation. For 
                                                           
2 Message Digest 5 checksum information intended for the e-dossier (i.e. 
SIP) integrity check. As it will later be explained, this MD5 information 
will not be sufficient for the preservation purposes and AIP creation since 
additional documentation should be added to create a complete record. 
16
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

each sequence NCA creates documents. Therefore, the 
complete record of a medicine (see figure 8) consists of: 
1. eCTD documentation, 
2. workingdocuments, and 
3. NCA documentation. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Directory structure of a fictitious medicine. 
This is maybe a straightforward process when creating a 
record, but for the preservation process a digital archivist 
will encounter: 
1. a complex record consisting of multiple folder/files 
structure, 
2. several different file formats, each one in the need of 
a different preservation method, 
3. one part of the record (eCTD) could be validated by 
MD5 check, while the other two parts can not, 
4. some parts of the record are connected by the XML 
backbone while the others are not, and 
5. there are no record-level binder. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Fictitious example of a medicine’s documentation. 
 
Figure 7.  Example of the workingdocuments folder. 
17
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

 
Figure 8.  AIP – the complete record of a medicine. 
The described situation could be improved by the creation 
of an application, or building functionality into an already 
developed digital archive, that can be used for the archival 
information package (AIP) creation or semi-automatic 
transformation of SIP into AIP. The functional specification 
of the application for preservation of pharmaceutical records 
presented in the following lines could even be made more 
general in order to be used in a wider spectrum of similar 
record-preservation situations. The idea underlying the 
application, which will be shown later in the application 
functionality description part of this paper, is to integrate all 
medicine’s documentation parts at the metadata level thus 
creating one record. It should extract all needed metadata 
from the eCTD, enable the preservation person to add 
additional metadata, automatically add digital archive-
specific preservation metadata, take care of the different file 
formats preserved within the record by triggering certain 
preservation actions, protect record’s integrity in order to 
preserve its authenticity, and it should finally create an all-
connecting XML file. It would be a very good idea to code 
and structure metadata according to the internationally ac-
cepted standards such as OAIS, ISO 23081 and METS. 
Having this in mind, an application intended for the creation 
of a complex electronic object record of a medicine, intended 
for the long-term preservation in a digital archive, should at 
least have the following functionalities. 
1. The application should be able to extract metadata 
from the eu-regional.xml file. From there it should extract 
(see figure 6 for this example’s data): 
Applicant:   
PharmaCompany  
Agency:   
EMEA – European Medicines Agency 
(EU-EMEA) 
Invented Name: WonderPill  
INN:   
Pioglitazone Hydrochloride 
2. From all m1 modules it should extract submission 
types of all sequences, e.g.: 
Submission:   Type: Variation Type IA 
and the DTD version, e.g.: 
DTD_Version: 1.4 
The submission information represents business pro-
cedure (registration, re-registration, upgrading/changing). 
The metadata mentioned so far are extracted from the 
eCTD files. The following archival metadata should either be 
detected automatically from characteristics of the files to be 
preserved or manually entered by the preservation specialist. 
3. RecordCreationDate – date of AIP creation. 
4. Person who created AIP – Agent: Name, Role 
(Creator, Editor, Archivist, Preservation, Disseminator, 
Custodian, IPOwner, Other). 
5. Title (AIP title = name of the medicine = Invented 
Name). 
6. AIP_Version – for distinguishing possible additional 
sequences and supporting new AIP creation based on prior 
AIP and newly submitted sequences. 
7. AIP_History – according to the ISO 23081 this is 
event history metadata – it records creation dates of all prior 
AIPs. 
8. RootFolderTitle – sequences submitted at a later point 
in time are organised under the same root folder as the prior 
ones – all being part of the same medicine’s documentation. 
9. External_ID – optional, free-text field for entering, 
e.g., NCA’s classification numbers. 
10. FileVersion – extracts from the folder structure 
names of all files (FileName) and their relative locations, 
adds information on their FileTypes (e.g., pdf, doc, tif etc.) 
and version (e.g., 1.4). This is important for the later 
preservation planning process – the information on the 
precise location of files that need to be migrated could speed 
up the process. 
11. FileVersionAggregation – aggregates information 
on types and versions of all documents and adds their total 
number in the AIP (e.g., PDF 1.4, 87; doc 2003, 14). This 
18
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

information supports future preservation action time-frame 
planning. 
12. Checksum – it should be created for the whole AIP 
after its creation. 
13. AIP_Check – a trigger for AIP’s hash-check and 
hash-check of all its files (starts automatically after a 
predefined period of time or manually at any given time). 
14. AIP_ValidityDate – either the date after which it is 
possible to (semi-automatically) delete the AIP or in-
formation on permanent preservation. 
 
As it was mentioned earlier, the recorded metadata could 
be 
mapped 
to 
different 
standards 
thus 
enabling 
interoperability between different digital archives keeping 
similar records, but also making future preservation activities 
easier. For example, the metadata extracted from the eCTD 
files, described through the suggested functionalities 1 and 2, 
could be mapped across different standards – table 1 (see 
figure 6 for this example’s data). 
VI. 
ARCHIMED – APPLICATION FOR ARCHIVING AND 
LONG-TERM PRESERVATION OF ECTD RECORDS 
After the initial research in the field of digital 
preservation and applicable ISO standards, recognition of the 
potential problems with the long-term preservation, in this 
case, of medical records, analysis of the eCTD structure, and 
conception of the model of functionalities for a digital 
preservation application, we have developed an application 
called ArchiMed.  
Here we will explain and illustrate the basic operating 
performance of the application. First, ArchiMed is capable of 
reading all the needed metadata from the eCTD document 
while enabling the addition of other AIP metadata (Figure 9). 
This application form also enables manual input for the 
hash check interval. It can be set automatically at certain 
number of days, but can also be changed manually if needed. 
This example shows the interval set for 30 days. The same 
semi-automatic approach is applied with AIP validity 
interval – set for 2 years in this example. AIP validity should 
be decided upon and set wisely, because after that period 
AIP data should be examined more closely, i.e., their file 
formats should be tested for potential migration purposes. 
For this purposes ArchiMed offers package validation report 
which lists name of the medicine, AIP creation date, root 
folder title, last hash check date and validity period of the 
AIP (Figure 10).  
 
 
Figure 9.  Creation of the new AIP 
At any given moment one can manually initiate data 
integrity check and test whether any AIP has been either 
intentionally or unintentionally changed. ArchiMed report 
shows status of the data integrity check, the total number of 
packages and the number of those which failed the check 
(Figure 11). 
ArchiMed also offers the possibility of checking which 
packages will expire in certain number of days. Figure 12, 
for the purposes of this demonstration, shows those packages 
which will expire in the next 1,000 days. In practice this 
feature gives opportunity to a records holding institution to 
prepare for the potential migration. For example, it can check 
TABLE I.  
MAPPING OF METADATA ACROSS DIFFERENT STANDARDS. 
Description 
Metadata 
OAIS 
ISO 23081 
METS - sections 
Who delivers the eCTD package? 
Applicant 
PDI – Provenance 
Agency (identity metadata, entity 
class: agents, layer: 3) 
dmsSec – rightsMD 
To whom was initially delivered 
the eCTD package? 
Agency 
PDI – Provenance 
Institution (identity metadata, 
entity class: agents, layer: 4) 
dmsSec – digiprovMD 
What is submitted? 
Invented Name 
PDI – Reference 
title (description metadata; entity 
class: records, layer: 3) 
dmsSec – sourceMD 
What is submitted? 
INN 
PDI – Reference 
title (description metadata; entity 
class: records, layer: 3) 
dmsSec – sourceMD 
What kind of activity? 
Submission 
PDI – Context 
Activity / process (identity 
metadata, entity class: business, 
layer: 2) 
dmsSec – digiprovMD 
Contents standard 
DTD_Version 
PDI – Provenance 
technical environment (use 
metadata, entity class: records, 
layer: 3) 
dmsSec – techMD 
19
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

which AIPs will expire within, e.g., next 30 days and will 
need a potential digital preservation action. Along this line of 
thinking there is another feature in ArchiMed which makes 
potential migration procedures much easier – file type 
version report. This report lists all file types appearing in the 
AIPs (e.g., PDFs), their versions (e.g., 4) and gives the total 
number of such files. Figure 13 shows one such report. This 
is very important if it becomes necessary to migrate all PDFs 
v. 4.1 to the newer format. This report will show if there are 
any such files and if there are how many of them. It is not the 
same if you have to migrate 1,000 or 1 million files to the 
new format. Furthermore, the application can extract only 
those files needing a preservation action, thus preparing them 
for the external migration procedure, and later on import 
new, migrated versions, calculate new hash, and create new, 
migrated AIP. All this information about the migration 
procedure is added to the new AIP in order to document the 
changes. Only in this way, consistent with [2], the 
authenticity, reliability, integrity and usability of the 
preserved records could be confirmed and the system for 
their long-term preservation certified. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The research in this paper showed the complexity of 
preservation if complex digital objects are to be preserved as 
authentic records. By using an example from the domain of 
pharmaceutical records – eCTD documentation – it was 
shown that the documentation which is submitted to a digital 
archive in the form of SIP, although structured in a 
standardised way and complemented by the integrity 
checking possibilities, still needs to undergo a lot of 
additional procedures in order to be transformed into an 
eligible and trusted AIP. In this process the national level 
documentation is added to the eCTD SIP as well as NCA 
documents. Only complete documentation can become AIP 
and stored in a digital archive as an archival record of a 
medicine’s registration procedure. Since the significance of 
the preservation of the complete registration records in the 
electronic form for the long-term period needs not to be 
emphasised, it is of great importance to support such a 
process in a proactive way. This means to try to preserve as 
many important metadata about the records themselves, 
about their context and immediate environment responsible 
for their correct rendering, functionality and understanding 
as well as the metadata important for making future 
preservation actions easier and more efficient, at the point of 
creating a record. This was a key motivation for this research 
and analysis which resulted in suggestion of the procedures 
and functionalities for an application for creating AIPs in the 
domain of pharmaceutical records, and the creation of the 
application itself. Currently, ArchiMed is in the process of 
commercialization. It is planned to become a self-standing, 
expansion module of a pharmaceutical records management 
application but it will possible to obtain it even without the 
accompanying application. 
Future work will be focused on the modification of the 
model to fit any other type of AIP creating procedure by 
adding some specific types of metadata or by changing the 
source XML file to read them from. Coding the metadata 
according to several standards, or creating mapping schemes 
between the standards, makes things a little bit more 
complicated, but this could, later in the preservation period, 
prove to be useful. It could also make different designated 
communities understand archived records better and make 
search procedures more efficient.  
To conclude, the functional application called ArchiMed, 
built around this specification can produce AIPs securely, 
quickly and with the zero-error tolerance. By giving 
aggregated information on files being preserved it can also 
make migration procedures more easily to plan, test and 
carry out. Future research and modifications will bring more 
sophisticated versions having wider functionalities of 
offering users to customise it to best suite different complex 
objects’ record-creating procedures. By implementing such 
an approach in the process of long-term preservation, any 
records holding institution, but also any institution in the 
pharmaceutical industry, can be sure that their important 
eCTD or other types of records remain unchanged, and can 
plan and conduct future migrations without breaching 
authenticity, reliability, integrity or usability of the preserved 
records. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. Stamatiadis, “Digital Archiving in the Pharmaceutical Industry,” 
The Information Management Journal, pp. 54-59, July/August 2005 
[2] 
Digital Repository Audit Method Based on Risk Assessment 
(DRAMBORA), Digital Curation Centre (DCC) and Digital Preservation 
Europe (DPE) http://www.repositoryaudit.eu/ 13.10.2010 
[3] 
E. G. Park, “Understanding ‘Authenticity’ in Records and 
Information Management: Analyzing Practitioner Constructs,” The 
American Archivist, vol. 64, pp. 270-291, Fall/Winter 2001 
[4] 
EU Module 1 specification v.1.4, August 2009, http://esubmission. 
emea.europa.eu/eumodule1/docs/EU%20M1%201.4/EU%20M1%20Specif
ications%20v1.4%20FINAL.pdf 23.12.2010 
[5] 
Guidance for Industry on Providing Regulatory Information in 
Electronic Format: eCTD electronic Submissions, Version: 1.0, May 2009, 
http://esubmission.emea.europa.eu/doc/eCTD%20Guidance%20Document
%201.0%20FINAL%20FOR%20PUBLICATION.pdf 23.12.2010 
[6] 
H. M. Gladney, LongTerm Preservation of Digital Records, Part I: A 
Theoretical Basis, ERPAePRINTS, October 2008, http://eprints.erpanet. 
org/152/ 27.12.2010 
[7] 
ICH M2 EWG electronic common technical document specification, 
July 2008, http://estri.ich.org/ectd/eCTD_Specification_v3_2_2.pdf 23.12. 
2010 
[8] 
ICH M4 harmonised tripartite guideline, Organisation of the common 
technical document for the registration of pharmaceuticals for human use, 
January 2004, http://private.ich.org/LOB/media/MEDIA554.pdf 23.12.2010 
[9] 
ISO 14721:2003 Space data and information transfer systems – Open 
archival information system – Reference model 
[10] ISO 15489-1 Information and documentation – Records management 
– Part 1: General (ISO 15489-1:2001) 
[11] ISO 15489-1 Information and documentation – Records management 
– Part 2: Guidelines (ISO/TR 15489-2:2001) 
[12] ISO 23081-1 Information and documentation – Records management 
processes – Metadata for records – Part 1: Principles (ISO 23081-1:2006) 
[13] ISO 23081-1 Information and documentation – Records management 
processes – Metadata for records – Part 2: Conceptual and implementation 
issues (ISO/TS 23081-2:2007) 
[14] K. D. Bollacker, “Avoiding a Digital Dark Age,” American Scientist, 
vol. 98, pp. 106-110, March-April 2010 
 
20
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

 
Figure 10.  Package validation report 
 
Figure 11.  Data integrity check report 
 
 
Figure 12.  Expired packages report 
 
 
Figure 13.  File type version report 
21
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

