Development of Smart Garments and Accessories to Support Behaviour Change in 
Teen-agers: Considerations on the Use of Interactive Virtual Prototyping 
 
Maria Renata Guarneri  
Department of Design  
Politecnico di Milano  
20158 Milano – Italy 
e-mail: mariarenata.guarneri@polimi.it 
 
Abstract—This paper provides some considerations and 
preliminary results on research work for the development and 
experimentation of a behaviour change system to promote 
healthy lifestyle in teen-agers and prevent the development of 
lifestyle related disease. Lifestyle-related illnesses are among 
the top healthcare challenges in Europe. As an example, the 
rapidly increasing prevalence of overweight and obesity among 
children 
and 
adolescents 
reflects 
a 
global 
‘epidemic’ 
worldwide. Due to the associated serious medical conditions, it 
is estimated that obesity already accounts for up to 7% of 
healthcare costs in the European Union (EU), as well as costs to 
the wider economy associated with lower productivity, lost 
output and premature death. Obesity in younger age groups 
has been recognized as an alarming key predictor for obesity in 
adulthood, but also entails a number of short-term health 
complications in juvenile age along with greater risk of social 
and psychological problems. The rapid development of 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), and in 
particular mobile technologies, together with their increasing 
diffusion among the EU populations, offers an important 
opportunity for facing these issues in an innovative manner 
introducing the possibility of a new technological framework to 
re-design the healthcare system model. Starting from and 
leveraging the work being performed in the course of the EU-
funded project “PEGASO”, the research focuses on developing 
solutions for self-managing life-style with specific target on the 
younger population. More specifically, an important part of 
the solution is a wearable sensor system for lifestyle monitoring 
and awareness development, composed of smart garments and 
bracelets. Due to the core relevance of the system for the 
overall solution, it is important that their design meets a set of 
requirements linked to the performance of the system, but also 
in terms of user requirements. Tapping into the potential of 
Interactive Virtual Prototyping (IVP) offers the possibility of 
designing and testing solutions that offer higher user 
acceptance and market opportunities. This paper briefly 
examines this potential approach, looking in particular at the 
fashion sector and how IVP is used, highlighting the additional 
issues posed by smart garments and accessories. 
Keywords- wearable sensors; smart garments, smart texiles; 
Interactive Virtual Protityping; lifestyle management, prevention 
in healthcare. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The research leverages the work in progress of the EU 
Project PEGASO [1], coordinated by Politecnico di Milano. 
The project addresses the growing epidemic of obesity in the 
younger population, with focus on prevention. While there is 
a general agreement that prevention is the only viable 
strategy – also in economic terms – for the future of 
healthcare, prevention is also a vague concept, as the object 
of prevention is undefined. Strategies are therefore very 
difficult to define, and they must include the economic 
model for sustainable prevention. Attempts to put this burden 
on the public health system will remain unanswered, at least 
in the present economic situation. It is therefore important to 
develop a culture of prevention that empowers individuals to 
become co-creators of their healthcare and wellbeing.  
The paper focuses on the issue of how to design a 
solution that offers a compelling user experience and on the 
tools that can support the design phase: the case of the 
PEGASO smart garments is considered. 
In particular, Section II provides an overview of the 
current approach in PEGASO, while Section III illustrates 
how the use of Interactive Virtual Prototyping tools and 
techniques can support the design of solution that meet the 
user requirements and expectations. Section IV briefly 
highlights potential strands for future work and provides 
some initial conclusions.  
II. 
OVERVIEW OF PEGASO APPROACH TO LIFESTYLE 
MANAGEMENT AND OBESITY PREVENTION 
As mentioned in the Introduction, the project PEGASO 
Fit-for-Future aims at developing a comprehensive solution 
for lifestyle management in order to prevent the risk of 
obesity and related illnesses, targeting the teen-agers 
population. In order to address this complex issue, a 
multidisciplinary approach is required, covering:  
• 
Research on current approaches to prevention 
(including 
studies 
on 
patients’ 
empowerment 
strategies and approaches);  
• 
Research on behaviour change theories and 
approaches;  
• 
Research 
on 
how 
technologies 
(and 
more 
specifically wearable technologies) can be used to 
support behaviour change towards healthy lifestyles 
and develop a culture of prevention in young people.  
Objective of the work is the development of a 
product/service system that supports young people (teen-
agers) in becoming aware of their habits, while learning what 
healthy lifestyles are, so that healthier habits are developed 
and sustained in time. 
Adopting a practice-centred research, the way to proceed 
is seemingly straightforward: mobile apps, games and 
gamification together with wearable sensors to support self-
monitoring and development of self-awareness. However, 
274
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

the teen-agers, as target users, add some difficulty to the 
development of a successful solution. Indeed while wearable 
sensors (bracelets in particular) are meeting with market 
success with the adult population, their potential is still not 
fully expressed with the younger population. In order for 
teen-agers to understand and accept wearing sensors, they 
have to be positively engaged; they need to feel involved; the 
solution needs to make them feel part of a community and 
not set apart as technology nerds or people in need of care.  
The current methodological approach is articulated along 
the following steps: 
• 
Identification of scenarios: through story telling, 
teen-agers are involved in the development of 
different lifestyle scenarios, in order to understand 
which objects and services may exist or may be 
imagined that can help them develop self-awareness 
and improve their lifestyles (a scenario design game 
such as “The thing from the future” can be adapted 
to this aim [2]); 
• 
User studies are conducted in parallel: these are 
based on ethnographic approach, to observe what 
young people do and like, in different socio-
economic sectors (different socio-economic situation 
have significant influence in lifestyles and on the 
attention to health and well-being); 
• 
Technology studies and development: focus is on 
mobile technologies and wearable sensors and 
actuators, including smart garments, bracelets, etc.; 
• 
Development of case studies, with students from 
high schools, using also mock-ups. 
III. 
USE OF INTERACTIVE VIRTUAL PROTOTYPING 
Using Interactive Virtual Prototyping (IVP) has the 
potential to improve the overall approach to the research 
described above; in particular, with regard to the technology 
studies and development, IVP can be successfully applied to 
the design and development of smart garments and 
accessories.  
Co-creation has already been applied as a potential 
approach involving teen-agers in focus groups and making 
use of questionnaires to understand their lifestyles, their 
approach to health and wellbeing and also their familiarity 
with technology and wearable sensors. However, during the 
first year of the project a full adoption of co-design has 
proven difficult, due to the limited contact with students in 
the schools and the consequent difficulty of creating a team 
able to follow the research, participating in a continuous 
manner in the design process and therefore championing the 
project with other students. 
In particular with regard to the design on the smart T-
shirt, it was clear from the start that “fashion” in a wide 
sense played an important role in user acceptability. Focus 
groups were conducted using drawings developed by the 
designers of the research group; few samples of T-shirts 
were developed based on the results. However, the samples 
produced were very costly due to having to set-up the 
production for such a small number of items. Further the 
wearability of the T-shirts was not exactly what was 
expected. The “technical” fabric - which had been selected as 
very suitable for sports apparels - turned out to be very little 
stretchable reducing significantly the wearability and 
comfort. Figure 1 below shows the first set of T-shirts 
developed within the PEGASO project and shown to the 
students. 
 
Figure 1.  Initial set of T-shirts developed in the PEGASO project 
The further development of the model was abandoned 
and it became evident that drawing was not sufficient and 
that there was a need to be able to feel the fabric. 
IVP is therefore an interesting approach and provides 
suitable tools for delivering a comprehensive user experience 
on the basis on which a product with high user acceptance 
and market potential can be developed and understood. 
Figure 2 provides a representation of the IVP process, 
showing how all senses can be leveraged to develop a truly 
engaging user experience with products. 
 
Figure 2.  Interactive Virtual Prototyping (source: KAEMaRT Group – 
Politecnico di Milano) 
Virtual prototyping is a method in the process of product 
development. A Virtual Prototype is an anticipation of a 
product Shape & Function that does not exist in reality yet, 
but that appears and behaves as it were real. Virtual 
Interactive Prototyping simulates how a product looks like, 
how it works, how users can manipulate and use it, etc.   
Virtual Prototyping has been first developed and applied 
to the manufacturing sector due to pressure to reduce time to 
275
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

market. Products are developed in the form of virtual 
prototypes in which simulation software is used to predict 
performance prior to constructing physical prototypes. 
Different design alternatives can be evaluated leading to 
improvements in performance and design quality.  
A. Interactive Virtual Prototyping and Fashion 
The user of Interactive Virtual Prototyping in the fashion 
sector is relatively novel and still presents areas for further 
study and development. In the course of the project a small 
search has been performed to understand what is available 
and which features presents.  
Interesting work on IVP for fashion has been carried out 
at MIRALab – University of Geneva, Switzerland – where 
many projects have been carried out covering different 
aspects such as cloth modelling, with the project Virtual 
Clothing where MIRACloth, a system for building and 
animating the garments on virtual actors, was developed (see 
Figure 3), or the projects Fashion Dream (1998) and Dreams 
of a Model (2004), where real models performed on stage 
with virtual models, in real time (see Figure 4).  
The group has also conducted relevant works in 
modelling of the human body, as well as in haptic sensing of 
virtual textile (HAPTEX project, see Figure 5). 
[3] and [4] summarise the evolution from modelling 
clothing to Interactive Fashion Design explaining the 
different modelling techniques used and how these have 
been combined. 
Politecnico di Milano, with the KAEMaRT group, is also 
working on applying IVP to the fashion industry [5]. 
Cooperation with the lab is being investigated to evaluate 
whether there are tools that can easily be adopted in the 
project and experimented also with the teen-agers involved. 
In the academic environment, many relevant results are 
available that can be used to develop a user experience in 
which teen-ager can be engaged in the design of the smart T-
shirt, without having to develop costly real prototypes. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Virtual Clothing – use of MIRACloth tool 
(source MIRALab – University of Geneva) 
 
Figure 4.  Project “Dreams of a Model”  
(source MIRALab – University of Geneva) 
 
Figure 5.  Project HAPTEX (source MIRALab – University of Geneva) 
On the commercial side tools are available from 
OPTITEX [6] (Innovative & Easy-to-use 3D Virtual 
Prototyping + 2D CAD/CAM Pattern & Fashion Design 
Software), LECTRA [7], TUKATECH [8]. These products 
are being investigated to see under which conditions they can 
be used in the academic environment and within the 
PEGASO project, and its follow up activities, in particular. 
With regard to the start garments and accessories, in 
addition to the issues and characteristics already taken into 
consideration by the studies and products described above, 
also the sensing aspect - which are an integral part of the 
product - needs to be modelled in order to provide the full 
functionality required for the development of a full user 
experience. 
This means that ideally we would need to model different 
body shapes in order to position the sensors, so that the body 
parameters that need to be monitored are correctly acquired. 
Also the relative position of sensor and data logger as well 
and the transmission of the sensed signal to the data logger 
(WES – Wearable Electronic System) may need to be 
modelled, so that different positions in the clothing could be 
tested in order to measure how the quality of the signal is 
affected. This would allow to test different designs of the 
smart T-shirt, also changing the position of the data logger, 
creating different designs that are better suited to different 
276
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

the sports practised by the students at school and also in 
sports’ teams. 
Working with teen-agers the appearance is also very 
important. The smart T-shirts proposed for the tests 
performed in December (total black as other designs have 
proven difficult to get an overall agreement) are produced in 
stretchable material (which is needed to ensure good contact 
between the skin and the sensors) that is tight on the body. 
This makes them of difficult acceptance for people that are 
overweight and prefer loosely fitting apparels. Given the 
constraint that the sensors have to be in touch with the skin, 
using flexible tools to try different designs would help to 
ensure user acceptance by working with the teens to test 
different options and validate with them wearability and 
function. 
While there are many open points, and also complex 
modelling issues, Interactive Virtual Prototyping is a very 
promising approach to use, also as an engaging technology 
for the target users that can be involved in co-creation 
session. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The work in the project has involved the target users – 
students in high schools – since the beginning adopting a 
user-centred co-design approach. However, traditional 
methods have been used based in focus groups, trying to 
abstract general user requirements, which have guided the 
implementation.  
It has to be noted that PEGASO is a wide-ranging 
project, aiming at a solution of which the wearable sensor 
system is only a subset. In consideration of the wide scope, 
the focus groups – though specific to the different elements 
of the overall solution – in the area of smart clothing and 
accessories have not been able to provide clear user 
requirements, taking into consideration the restrictions posed 
by the sensor system. And indeed the first feedbacks are not 
very positive, both on the design of the T-shirt (too small, 
and not useful in a hotter period; the suggestion was for a 
more summer design) and on the WES, which has to be 
considered an integral part of the garment – needed for the 
sensing function but otherwise to be considered as a 
decorative element (the students indicated that they did not 
like others to see them using the sensors, which is very 
visible when lights are on). 
The need for a more flexible tool that allows trying 
different designs and shapes while taking into account the 
constraints of the sensing system has emerged very strongly 
from the last tests with the students. Interactive Virtual 
Prototyping is a promising approach and, although the time 
limits of the PEGASO project will not allow its full use for 
the development of the solution that will be tested by the 
students from June 2016 onward, it can be used in parallel to 
evaluate alternative designs in view of exploitation of project 
results. 
Further studies in this area will consider fancier types of 
smart clothes, which are based on, e.g., smart fabrics [9] that 
can change colour or patterns based on sensed environment 
or body parameters, including reaction of the fabric to 
people’s skin. Currently we are considering how emotions 
can be sensed and reflected in clothes appearance. Work has 
been already performed in this area [10] and can be used for 
further development that – with an approach based on the 
Internet of Things philosophy – allows different wearables to 
connect and communicate with each other. Smart accessories 
with embedded communication capabilities and smart fabrics 
are the future of fashion. Designers and virtual prototyping 
have a very significant role to play in this development. 
Together with the further evolution of computer graphics and 
technologies, the capability of modelling the different 
aspects is the key research issue to be addressed. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This paper is partly based on the work performed within 
the context of the PEGASO project. The PEGASO project is 
co-funded by the European Commission under the 7th 
Framework Programme. PEGASO is part of the cluster of 
projects in the ICT for health area; it has started in December 
2013 and will run for 42 months. The author wishes to thank 
all the project partners for their contribution to the 
discussion. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
http://pegasof4f.eu/ [retrieved: March, 2016] 
[2] 
http://situationlab.org/projects/the-thing-from-the-future/ 
[retrieved: 
March, 2016] 
[3] 
N. Magnenat-Thalmann and P. Volino, “From early draping to haute 
couture models: 20 years of research”, The Visual Computer, 2005, 
Volume 21, Number 8-10, Page 506 
[4] 
P. Volino, F. Cordier, and N. Magnenat-Thalmann, “From early 
virtual garment simulation to interactive fashion design”, Comput. 
Aided Des. 37, 6 (May 2005), 593-608.  
[5] 
U. Cugini, M. Bordegoni, and R. Mana, “The role of virtual 
prototyping and simulation in the fashion sector”, International 
Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing (IJIDeM), February 
2008, Volume 2, Issue 1, pp 33-38 
[6] 
http://www.optitex.com/en [retrieved: March, 2016] 
[7] 
http://www.lectra.com/en/fashion-apparel/product-development-
modaris [retrieved: March, 2016] 
[8] 
http://www.tukatech.com/3D-fashion-design-software/TUKA3D 
[retrieved: March, 2016] 
[9] 
R. Gaddis, What Is The Future Of Fabric? These Smart Textiles Will 
Blow 
Your 
Mind, 
Forbes 
/ 
Lifestyle, 
May 
7 
2014, 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/forbesstylefile/2014/05/07/what-is-the-
future-of-fabric-these-smart-textiles-will-blow-your-
mind/#389142964914 [retrieved: March, 2016] 
[10] L. Stead, P. Goulev, C. Evans, and E. Mamdani, “The Emotional 
Wardrobe”, Personal Ubiquitous Computing (2004) 8: 282–290 DOI 
10.1007/s00779-004-0289- 
 
 
 
 
 
277
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

