So’rah: An Arabic Mobile Health Application for Saudi Dietary Evaluation
Abeer S. Al-Humaimeedy, Rahaf Almozaini, Lama Almansour, Kholoud Alaqeely,
Ahlam Almutairi, Abeer Alolayan
Department of Software Engineering
King Saud University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Emails: Abeer@ksu.edu.sa, Rahaf.almozaini@gmail.com, lmoo-2@hotmail.com,
{Khoulod.abdullah,Ahlamalmutairi744,Abeer9471}@gmail.com
Abstract—Current studies show that obesity is reaching higher
rate in Saudi Arabia. Health problems related to obesity, like
diabetes, obstructive sleep apnea, and osteoarthritis are becoming
serious concerns in the Saudi society. In the same time, mobile
phones have been embraced by a rapidly increasing number of
people worldwide in general and in Saudi Arabia in particular.
Using smartphone mobile health applications to watch food
calories is an effective method to ﬁght obesity. However, most
of the current mobile diet applications are available in English
language and do not provide the number of calories for Saudi
foods. This paper presents So’rah, a mobile health application
for a dietary evaluation. So’rah aims to show the number of
calories in Saudi foods based on barcode reading using a mobile
camera, or typing full or part of a food’s name. Moreover,
the application allows guest (unregistered) users to explore the
reviews for different kinds of foods. If users register in the
application then they can review the taste and quality of the food
and create a diet plan to maintain their weight by logging intake
calories and follow up drinking water. In this paper, we will
describe the development process of So’rah mobile application
and the implementation challenges.
Keywords–Mobile health; mHealth; Application; Dietary evalu-
ation; Obesity.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Saudis through time are becoming more concerned about
their health and their eating lifestyle. This concern comes in
the fact of Saudi Arabia now has one of the highest obesity
and overweight prevalence rates [1]. Studies show that 7 out
of 10 Saudis are overweight [2]. This is a direct result of
Saudi Arabia becoming more developed. Populations in the
developed world are mostly affected by obesity. The fast and
busy style of modern life prevent people from the pleasure of
thinking of the quality of their food and choosing the healthy
ingredients [2].
Obesity is a major source of a number of diseases, includ-
ing hypertension, diabetes, obstructive sleep apnea, hyperlipi-
demia, and osteoarthritis [1]. Previous studies have revealed
that obesity is also among the major cause of co-morbidities,
including cardiovascular diseases, cancers, and the related
issues that may lead to morbidity and mortality [2].
In addition to the health problems, obesity represents a
relative economic burden on countries economy [3].
Obesity is considered as a signiﬁcant public health issue,
which raise a concern globally. The World Health Organization
(WHO) states that obesity rates have been nearly tripled
Figure 1. Overweight percentage changes from 2005 through 2013, for men
and women in Saudi Arabia. [5]
worldwide, since 1975 [4]. Statics conducted in 2016, by WHO
organization shows that 39% of the adults were overweight and
13% were obese [4]. The same statics show that 41 million
children under age 5, around the world, were either overweight
or obese [4].
Nowadays, Saudis become more aware that healthy eating
habits will lead to a healthy life. The conducted survey in
[5] shows that, although the overweight prevalence rates are
high in Saudi Arabia, the overweight prevalence rates are
decreasing, as shown in Figure 1.
Moreover, mobile phones have been embraced by a rapidly
increasing number of people worldwide, in general, and in
Saudi Arabia, in particular.
Therefore, using smartphone mobile health applications
can contribute to decrease the overweight prevalence rates. B.
Spring et al. [6] shows that, people who use mobile weight loss
applications as a part of a comprehensive weight loss program,
are better able to lose weight and keep it off.
There are several applications that have been developed
to help people looking after their health. One type of these
applications is calories counter applications. Users of these
applications can keep track of the intake calories in their meals
by calculating the number of calories in a speciﬁc amount of
the consumed food. Some applications provide extra features
like follow up users exercises and drinking water.
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

However, most of the applications in the mobile markets
are in English and not including Saudi foods in their ofﬁcial
lists. Consequently, Saudi users for these applications will
not be able to keep track of the number of calories in their
everyday meals because their consumed food are not there.
Therefore, in the paper, we present a mobile health appli-
cation, namely ”So’rah”, which is designed for Saudi users.
The application aims to help the community to lower the rates
of obesity and overweight in Saudi Arabia by providing the
Saudi users with the information they need about calories in
Saudi foods either by searching food lists using the name of the
consumed food or scanning foods’ barcode. To the best of our
knowledge our application is the ﬁrst Saudi mobile application
which identiﬁes foods by scanning their barcodes. In addition,
the application supports extra features like reviewing foods
in the application lists, creating diet plans for users to help
them maintain their weight, and enhancing the application food
lists by allowing users to add new foods. Food additions will
only appear in food lists if they have been approved by the
application nutrition supervisor; for details see Section III-A.
Paper overview: Section II discusses related work. Sec-
tion III introduces So’rah mobile application. Section IV
demonstrates and design the main features of So’rah mobile
application. Finally, Section V concludes and discusses the
application future directions.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we ﬁrst review some of the trending calories
counting applications according the heath websites [7] and [8]
and a number of online magazines like [9] and [10]. Secondly,
we compare them to the proposed features of our application.
Lose It [11], MyFitnessPal [12], FatSecret [13], and Weight
Watchers [14] applications are well known weight loss applica-
tions which keep track of calories consumption for users, and
help them to set their ideal weight as a goal and monitor their
progress towards it. The food databases of these applications
can be searched using a food’s name. Lose It, MyFitnessPal,
and FatSecret applications allow users to search food lists
by scanning food’s barcode. Moreover, Lose It and FatSecret
applications can recognize eaten foods by their pictures.
The main feature of Weight Watchers application is that the
recommended daily meals are under the supervision of certiﬁed
nutritionists and dietitians, which makes the application like
online diet clinic [14]. However, the application is not free
and require a monthly subscription.
Food databases (lists) of these applications are compre-
hensive, e.g., MyFitnessPal has more than 5 millions foods in
its database [12]. However, none of the previously mentioned
applications have Saudi foods in their databases, and in case
they have, like MyFitnessPal, then it is marked as a user
addition which is not validated and approved by the application
administrators.
To overcome this limitation some endeavours have emerged
in the Arabic mobile stores.
Soraate [15], Calorie counter from my diet [16], Calories
guide [17], and My diet [18] applications are examples of
these endeavours. They are Arabic applications that help users
to maintain their weight by following up the gained calories
from everyday meals and the burned calories in daily exercises.
Foods and drinks can be selected from applications lists of
Arab foods which are updated regularly. Water and follow
up drinking feature are also supported in some of these
applications.
My diet application is considered as online diet clinic
like Weight Watchers application. Users can consult certiﬁed
nutritionists and dietitians to construct a customized diet plan.
However, My diet application is also not totally free.
Food databases (lists) of these applications include Arab
foods, which are not necessary to be Saudi foods, e.g., search-
ing for Jarish, a traditional Saudi food, can only be found in
Soraate application. Additionally, foods in these applications’
databases are identiﬁed by name only. Therefore, scanning
barcodes to identify foods are not supported.
Our application So’rah includes Saudi foods in its database
and identiﬁes foods by name and by barcode. Therefore,
searching for Saudi foods using keywords or barcodes both
are supported.
Table I shows a brief comparison between our So’rah
application and the previously listed applications. The selected
features for comparison are chosen based on the main func-
tionalities of these applications.
It can be concluded from Table I that the implemented
features of So’rah application cover most of the listed fea-
tures except following up exercises, and synchronizing with
health applications and/or smart watches to automatically get
the users gained/burned calories. We consider these missing
features important, but we preferred in the current version
of So’rah to concentrate in developing a mobile application
with a comprehensive database which will facilitate its use
in the Saudi society. The missing features are implemented
in the second version of So’rah which is currently under
development.
Additionally, it can be noticed from Table I, that our
application allows users to add new foods and in the same
time it is considered to be full supervised by professionals.
This comes as a result of prohibiting a food addition from
appearing in food lists until it is approved by the application
nutrition supervisor. On contrary, food additions in the other
applications, require no approval, which could generate a miss
leading information if the new addition is incorrect.
Final point, users of So’rah application can write reviews
about foods in our lists, and like/dislike previously written
reviews. These reviews can be comments on the food itself, like
its taste, or can be a space for fellow users to exchange recipes,
eaten experiences or recommend restaurants for this particular
food. Therefore, the reviews section can be considered as
a reviews section and a chatting forum in the same time.
However, with the reviews section, users can locate and track
fellow users chats about a particular food because they know
that all reviews about a food appear in its information page.
A detailed discussions and justiﬁcations of So’rah features
will be presented in the next section.
III.
APPLICATION CONSTRUCTION
This section discusses the application main features and
brieﬂy discusses its design. It also presents a system architec-
ture for our application which foster its practical deployment.
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I. SUMMARY OF THE APPLICATIONS.
Feature
So’rah
Cal. counter
Soraate
mDiet
Cal. guide
Lose It
FatSecret
MyFitnessPal
Weight Watcher
Calories for Saudi foods
√
partially
√
partially
partially
not validated
Search by food name/barcode
√
name
name
name
name
√
√
√
√
Log exercises
√
√
√
√
√
√
Sync. with health apps
√
√
√
√
Sync. with Smart watches
√
√
Water tracking
√
√
√
√
√
√
Support Arabic language
√
√
√
√
√
Food reviews and rating
√
rating
Chatting forums
√
√
√
√
√
√
√
User can add new food
√
√
√
Application is free
√
√
√
partially
√
partially
√
partially
Supervised by professionals
√
√
partially
and consultancy
√
√
√
partially
and consultancy
A. The Application main Features
In So’rah application, we have four types of users as
following:
•
Guest user: A user who does not register in the
application but wants to use some of the application
features.
•
Registered user: A user who does register in the
application and can use the full features of it.
•
Nutrition supervisor: A user who have the privilege
to approve food additions done by registered users.
•
IT administrator: A user who have the privilege to
monitor reviews written by registered users, and look
after the system in general.
All types of users can conduct a search by name or by
barcode for a food and can retrieve its information in separate
page. Food information page contains: food’s name, food’s
picture, number of calories in a portion of this food, and
food’s composition content table; if available. Note that food
portions can be cups, plates, slices, 100 grams, etc., and food’s
composition content table is the nutrient data in this food like
protein, fat, vitamins, etc. [19].
Guest users can register in the system to access the full
features of the application. To register in the system users
should provide a username, a password and a phone number.
Users can optionally provide their height, waist, hips, weight,
date of birth, and gender, to be used later to construct diet
plan.
Registered users can write reviews for foods. They can
delete their own reviews. Users also can like/dislike others
reviews to express their agreement or disagreement with these
reviews. Moreover, registered users can add new foods to feed
the application database. In case of food addition, registered
users should provide full food information same as the one
presented in the food information page. The addition request
should be forwarded by the system to the nutrition supervisor
for approving. If approved, then, the addition request will be
forwarded by the system to the IT administrator to add it to the
system database. The supervisor and the administrator should
be notiﬁed by an SMS if new requests are arrived and need to
be processed.
Most importantly, registered uses can create, delete, and
manage a diet plan. If users choose to construct a diet plan
then they will be requested to input their height, weight, waist,
hips, date of birth, and gender; if they have not input them in
the registration. Depending on these information the system
will ﬁrstly, determine the user body mass index (BMI), i.e.,
a measurement of the user body fat based on the weight
in relation to the height. The value of the BMI is used to
categorize users as underweight, normal weight, overweight,
or obese [19]. The waist and hips measurements are used
to calculate users abdominal fats [19]. Secondly, the system
will calculate the minimum and maximum number of calories
that a user can take per day. The user will be requested to
choose a target number of calories in the range between the
minimum and maximum. After that, the system will monitor
user progress towards losing weight by calculating the number
of gained calories recoded daily by the user, and compare it to
the target number of calories chosen by the user. In addition,
the system tracks users water drinking by requesting users to
log their daily drinking amount.
The IT administrator is the person who looks after the
system from the technical point of view. In addition, the
administrator is responsible of monitoring users reviews and
delete inappropriate ones if found.
1) Strong Aspects: A research was conducted in 2015 [20]
to deﬁne the features of the ideal weight loss applications
depending on the insights of Saudi women. The research
concludes that the suggested themes for an ideal weight
loss application include: Arabic language, culturally sensitive,
motivational support and social networking, and user-friendly
interface.
So’rah supports Arabic language and is designed for Saudi
society. Moreover, the application provides a review section
which can be used by fellow users to exchange experiences.
So’rah also implements an easy to use interface which requires
no special technical skills. According to this, So’rah could
be considered as an ideal weight loss application for Saudi
women.
Another strong point is that So’rah requires no registration
to search its food lists. This could result in more potential users
for our system; users who want to register and users who want
not to register. Most of the available weight loss applications
require registration before using any of their features.
Bearing in mind that an email is not essential in Saudi
Arabia to get governmental services, some Saudis, in par-
ticular elders, do not have email accounts but they have
phone numbers. For that, So’rah conﬁrms registration via SMS
mobile messages instead of emails. This could result in more
potential users for our system. Most of the available weight
loss applications conﬁrm registration via emails.
In addition to these aspects, So’rah application presents
several strong points and novelties comparing to current Arabic
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. The System Architecture
dietary applications as been previously mentioned in different
sections of this paper.
B. The System Architectural Design and Implementation
Considering the system programmers experiences and
known that most Saudi participants [20] own Android mobile
phone, the application was designed and implemented to
target mobile devices running Android platforms. However
the system can also be reproduced to other mobile operating
systems, such as iPhone, Windows mobile, BlackBerry, etc.
The system was implemented using the Android Software
Development Kit (SDK) [21]. SDK provides the needed tools
and APIs to create applications for Android platform using
Java programming language [22].
The Java programming language is an object oriented
language, i.e., it depends on having separate entities (objects)
which encapsulate the code of their functions and variables
[22]. For that, an object oriented approach was followed in the
design process of So’rah. We developed a use case diagram
and a class diagram for our system with all the supporting
information. Presenting the detailed design process for the
application is out of the scope of this paper; interested reader
can refer to [23] for information about object oriented design.
The design is then mapped to Java programming language for
implementation.
So’rah system architecture which identiﬁes the system core
components and their relationship is presented in Figure 2.
As may be seen in the ﬁgure we choose the client server
architecture because we have subsystem provides services to
instances of other subsystems. The subsystem that provides
services called server, the subsystem that consumed services
called client.
This
separation
of
the
applications
services
into
client/server components allows these components to be
distributed in different physical machines. Additionally, this
separation allows each of these components to be updated
without affecting other components [23].
IV.
APPLICATION DEMONSTRATION AND VALIDATION
This section presents an overview of the mobile application
from the user perspective and demonstrates its use in a
practical deployment.
A. So’rah Demonstration
As mentioned in Section III-A, we adopt a simple user
interface. The interface uses buttons with considerable size to
be appropriate for ﬁngers use. The application core function is
to show the number of calories in foods either by scanning the
food barcode or by searching the application’s database using
food’s name. Therefore, the main screen of the application
shows these two options very simply, as shown in Figure 3.
Figure 4 shows the steps to search by food’s name while Figure
5 shows the steps to scan a food’s barcode.
In case of searching by food’s name, keywords are enough
for searching, the exact name of a food is not required. If a
part of the food’s name is typed, then the application will give
a list of suggested food items, as shown in step 3 of Figure 4.
If the intended food is allocated then a separate screen will
be displayed to show the food’s information. The screen has
a button to display the reviews on this food, as illustrated in
Figure 6.
Users are not require to register in the application to be
able to search, to scan barcodes, or to view reviews. However,
if users register in the application they will have extra features
to boost their plan in loosing weight and to participate in food
reviewing and addition.
To register in the application users can press the registration
button in the main screen. Users then will be asked to provide
a suggested user name, a password, and a telephone number
to complete the registration, as shown in Figure 7. In addition,
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 3. So’rah Main Screen
Figure 4. Searching by Food’s Name
users can provide their hight, weight, waist, hips, gender, and
birthday. The extra information are used to calculate the user
body fat and abdominal fat. Registered users can construct a
diet plan to follow up their weight by pressing construct a diet
plan button from the user proﬁle screen, as shown in Figure 8.
If users have not provide the extra information (hight, weight,
waist, hips, gender, and birthday) during registration then they
will be asked to provide them. According to these information,
Figure 5. Search by Food’s Barcode
Figure 6. View Reviews
Figure 7. Registration Process
the minimum and maximum daily calories to be consumed are
calculated in addition to the body fat and abdominal fat.
Users after that will enter their consumed food for each
meal in the day. The application will calculate the gained
calories and compare them to the target daily calories. The
system will follow the users progress in loosing weight. Users’
weight will be updated according to the daily calculation and
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 8. Construct a Diet Plan
users will be informed if they reach the ideal weight.
Registered users can also add reviews, delete their previ-
ously written reviews, and like/dislike others reviews.
1) The Application Validation: The application functions
and interfaces were preliminary tested and validated by a
formal committee from the Software Engineering Department
at King Saud University. In addition, an informal testing on
a small group of random users was conducted to preliminary
investigate the application usability.
Currently, So’rah team and with the collaboration of the
Department of Food Science and Nutrition at King Saud
University is carrying a formal testing to investigate the
effectiveness of So’rah application in losing weight and its
usability. However, the result is not available yet.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In the paper, we present the ﬁrst version of So’rah ap-
plication. We ﬁrst question the need for such an application.
After that, we review the related works and highlight how our
application is different. Finally, we demonstrate the application
design and implantation process.
The ﬁrst version of So’rah concerns calculating the gained
calories from consumed food. Currently, we are in the design
phase for the second version of So’rah which enhances the
functionality of the ﬁrst version by adding the calculation for
burned calories during exercises.
Additionally, in the meanwhile we investigating the effec-
tiveness of So’rah application in helping users to lose weight.
In the future, we are planing to enrich the application
features by classifying foods according to their suitability for
some medical diseases like kidney diseases, diabetes, high
blood pressure, etc.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Ghalia H. Shamlan
from the Department of Food Science and Nutrition at King
Saud University for providing So’rah team with the references
to nutrition information of Saudi foods. Moreover, we would
like to thank her for dedicating some of her valuable time to
answer our nutrition questions.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. DeNicola, O. S. Aburizaiza, A. Siddique, H. Khwaja, and D. O.
Carpenter, “Obesity and public health in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,”
Reviews on Environmental Health, vol. 30, no. 3, 2015, pp. 191–205.
[2]
S. Alqarni, “A review of prevalence of obesity in saudi arabia,” Journal
of Obesity & Eating Disorders, vol. 02, no. 2.
[3]
D. Withrow and D. A. Alter, “The economic burden of obesity
worldwide: a systematic review of the direct costs of obesity,” Obesity
Reviews, vol. 12, no. 2.
[4]
World Health Organisation, “Obesity and overweight Fact Sheet
No311,” 2018, accessed = 2018-2-10. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/
[5]
Z. A. Memish, C. El Bcheraoui, M. Tuffaha, M. Robinson, F. Daoud,
S. Jaber, S. Mikhitarian, M. Al Saeedi, M. A. AlMazroa, A. H. Mokdad,
and A. A. Al Rabeeah, “Obesity and associated factors - kingdom of
saudi arabia, 2013,” Preventing Chronic Disease, vol. 11, no. 140236.
[6]
B. Spring, J. M. Duncan, E. A. Janke, A. T. Kozak, H. G. McFadden,
A. DeMott, P. Alex, L. H. Epstein, J. Siddique, C. A. Pellegrini,
J. Buscemi, and D. Hedeker, “Integrating technology into standard
weight loss treatment: A randomized controlled trial,” JAMA Internal
Medicine, vol. 173, no. 2, 2013, pp. 105–111.
[7]
healthline,
“The
10
Best
Weight
Loss
Apps
That
Help
You
Shed Pounds,” accessed = 2018-2-10. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.healthline.com/nutrition/10-best-weight-loss-apps
[8]
Gotta Be Mobile, “14 Best Weight Loss Apps for 2018,” accessed =
2018-2-14. [Online]. Available: https://www.gottabemobile.com/best-
weight-loss-apps/
[9]
Red Book magazine, “The Best Weight Loss Apps You Need
to Download to See Real Results in 2018,” accessed = 2018-
2-10. [Online]. Available: https://www.redbookmag.com/body/health-
ﬁtness/g3162/weight-loss-apps/
[10]
Paste
magazine,
“The
10
Best
Apps
to
Help
You
Eat
Healthy
and
Lose
Weight,”
accessed
=
2018-2-14.
[On-
line]. Available: https://www.pastemagazine.com/articles/2017/06/the-
10-best-apps-to-help-you-eat-healthy-and-lose.html
[11]
Lose It, accessed = 2018-2-14. [Online]. Available: https://www.loseit.
com/
[12]
MyFitnessPal,
accessed
=
2018-2-14.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//www.myﬁtnesspal.com/
[13]
FatSecret, accessed = 2018-2-14. [Online]. Available: https://www.
fatsecret.com/
[14]
Weight Watchers, accessed = 2018-2-14. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.weightwatchers.com/us/
[15]
Soraate, accessed = 2018-2-14. [Online]. Available: http://www.soraate.
com/
[16]
Calorie counter of my diet, accessed = 2018-2-14. [Online]. Available:
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.mdiet.tracker&hl=ar
[17]
Calories guide, accessed = 2018-2-14. [Online]. Available: https://play.
google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.androyal.caloriesguide.ar&hl=en
[18]
My diet, accessed = 2018-2-14. [Online]. Available: http://www.m-
diet.com/Home/Tracker
[19]
F. S. Webb and E. N. Whitney, Nutrition concepts and controversies
, 11th ed.
Belmont, CA Thomson/ Wadsworth, 2008, includes
bibliographical
references
and
index.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//openlibrary.org/books/OL22568762M
[20]
A. A. Alnasser, S. A. Alkhalifa, A. Sathiaseelan, and D. Marais, “What
Overweight Women Want From a Weight Loss App: A Qualitative
Study on Arabic Women,” JMIR mHealth uHealth, vol. 3, no. 2, 2015,
p. e41.
[21]
N. Smyth, Android Studio Development Essentials, 1st ed.
USA:
CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2014.
[22]
K. Arnold, J. Gosling, and D. Holmes, The Java Programming Lan-
guage, 3rd ed.
Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley Longman Pub-
lishing Co., Inc., 2000.
[23]
I. Sommerville, Software Engineering, 9th ed.
USA: Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company, 2010.
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

