Expectations of Middle-aged and Elderly Persons towards using Telecare 
Technologies and eHealth Applications in Primary Care 
Martine W. J. Huygens1,2, Joan Vermeulen1,2, Luc P. de Witte1,2,3 
1CAPHRI, Maastricht University, Universiteitssingel 40, 6229 ER, Maastricht, The Netherlands 
2Centre for Care Technology Research, Duboisdomein 30, 6229 GT, Maastricht, The Netherlands 
3Reserach Center for Technology in Care, Zuyd University of Applied Sciences, Henri Dunantstraat 2, 6419 PB, Heerlen, 
The Netherlands 
m.huygens@maastrichtuniversity.nl, j.vermeulen@maastrichtuniversity.nl, luc.dewitte@zuyd.nl
 
 
 
Abstract—The aim of this study was to investigate general 
expectations of middle-aged and elderly persons towards using 
care technologies and eHealth applications in primary care. 
Participants were recruited at an event about health and 
exercise for elderly people. Persons aged fifty years or older 
and who were able to provide informed consent were eligible 
for inclusion. A cross-sectional mixed method approach was 
used; participants could choose whether they wanted to 
participate in this study by filling out a questionnaire or by 
participating in a short structured interview. Fifty-seven 
participants rated 22 items of a questionnaire on a five-point 
Likert scale. The questionnaire consisted of seven subscales: 
experiences with general technology, experiences with care 
technology, perceived barriers, perceived benefits, external 
cues to take action, attitude towards using and intention to use 
technologies in primary care. Furthermore, six interviews were 
conducted. The questionnaire revealed that participants had a 
positive attitude towards using technology in primary care and 
that their behavioral intention to use technology in primary 
care was high. In addition, the mean score of perceived benefits 
was higher than the mean score of perceived barriers. Time-
saving, comfort and a higher degree of expected safety were 
the most frequently mentioned advantages in the structured 
interviews. The lack of personal contact and usability 
difficulties were the most frequently reported disadvantages of 
care technology. Based on the results it can be concluded that 
middle-aged and elderly persons have a positive view towards 
primary care technologies. However, the mentioned barriers 
should be taken into account during the implementation and 
development of technologies in primary care.   
Keywords-eHealth; telecare, expectations, intention to use, 
primary care, middle-aged adults, elderly persons 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The number of elderly persons is increasing. The number 
of persons aged sixty years or older tripled between 1950 and 
2000, and is expected to increase threefold again by 2050, up 
to nearly two billion [1]. Mainly as a result of this, the 
number of chronically ill patients is increasing. Parallel to 
these increasing numbers, there is a relative decrease in the 
number of staff working in the healthcare sector. Due to 
these reasons, a fundamental change is necessary in the 
healthcare process [2]. Telecare technologies and eHealth 
applications could facilitate a shift from intra-institutional 
care to more home-based care. It is expected that these 
technologies, which support self-care and self-management, 
can reduce healthcare costs and can improve health 
outcomes among chronically ill patients [3, 4]. 
Despite these positive expectations, a recently published 
review by Peeters et al. [5] showed that most studies which 
explored the effects of technology in home-based care were 
pilot-studies with small samples e.g., [6-8]. In addition, the 
majority of these studies had short durations with only one 
follow-up assessment and no control group. Although 
positive effects of technology in primary care are expected, 
up until now there is not enough convincing evidence for 
these effects. Furthermore, many studies explored the effects 
of care technologies in controlled conditions. Due to this, it 
is difficult to guarantee that these technologies will also 
work in real life environments, when embedded in daily care 
procedures. Large-scale studies in care practices are needed 
to investigate the effects and consequences of using 
technology in primary care on a general level.  
Before large-scale studies in care practices can be set-up, 
it is important to investigate users’ needs and expectations 
regarding the use of telecare products and services, since 
taking these into account during the development and 
implementation process will increase the level of user 
satisfaction and user acceptance [9-12]. However, studies 
exploring patients’ needs and expectations towards large-
scale use of telecare technologies and eHealth applications in 
the Dutch primary care setting are scarce.  
Middle-aged and elderly persons are a major group of 
primary care users. Therefore, the aim of this study was to 
investigate general expectations of persons aged fifty years 
or older towards using telecare technologies and eHealth 
applications in primary care. This provides important input 
for the implementation of care technologies in primary care. 
Since the data collection is still ongoing, this paper will 
discuss the preliminary results of this study. 
The paper describes the methodology (Section II) and 
presents the preliminary results of this study (Section III). In 
Section IV the results are discussed and the conclusion and 
future work are presented in Section V.  
II. 
METHODS 
 This methods section describes the recruitment of the 
participants, setting, study procedure, measurements and 
analyses which were utilized for this study. 
241
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Design, setting, and participants 
The study has a cross-sectional, mixed methods design. 
Questionnaires and structured interviews were used for data 
collection. 
Participants were recruited at an event regarding health 
and exercise for elderly persons that took place at a large 
sports hall in Nederweert (the Netherlands). Inclusion criteria 
were: fifty years or older and Dutch-speaking, since the 
information letter and questionnaire were in Dutch. 
Exclusion criteria were: serious visual impairments for the 
study with questionnaires, and serious hearing impairments 
for the interviews. 
At the stand at the event the researchers showed movies 
and presentations about examples of telecare technologies 
and eHealth applications. In addition, the stand was 
decorated with posters which presented several examples of 
primary care technologies. Furthermore, two Ipads with a 
medication management app, a physical activity monitoring 
and feedback system for chronically ill patients [13, 14], a 
physical functioning monitoring and feedback system for 
elderly persons [15] and an online platform for care and 
wellbeing for elderly persons (including functions regarding 
social contacts, comfort, and health and safety) were 
demonstrated. The study was carried out in the first week of 
October 2013. 
B. Study procedure 
Visitors of the event were asked by the researchers 
whether they wanted to participate in this study by filling 
out a questionnaire or by participating in an interview. If 
people were willing to participate, they signed an informed 
consent form after reading the information letter. In both the 
questionnaires and the interviews everyday language was 
used. 
On the first page of the questionnaire several examples 
of telecare technologies and eHealth applications in primary 
care were described. This was done to ensure that 
participants were aware of the following possibilities that 
such technologies provide: planning an online appointment 
with a general practitioner, online video consult with a 
general practitioner, online coaching program to quit 
smoking, online revalidation program, physical activity 
monitoring and feedback system, medication management 
program, and Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) motion 
tracking systems. Next, participants filled out their 
demographical data. Then, they filled out questions 
regarding their expectations of technologies in primary care. 
Filling out the entire questionnaire took approximately 
fifteen minutes.  
People who preferred to participate in an interview sat 
down with the researcher at a separate/quiet corner of the 
stand. The interviews took approximately fifteen minutes 
and were recorded with a voice recorder. 
C. Measurements 
Information regarding demographical data (gender, age, 
highest level of education, marital status and living 
situation) and health status (general health status, physical 
fitness, (chronic) diseases, and illness in last three months) 
were collected using the first part of the questionnaire.  
The second part of the questionnaire was largely based 
on previous research regarding the possibility of using 
concepts of the Health Belief Model to predict the intention 
of the general population and chronically ill patients to use 
telecare products and services [16, 17]. The items were 
translated into Dutch and adapted to the topic of this study. 
In addition, several items about technology usage were 
added. The adapted questionnaire consisted 22 items 
divided over seven subscales: general technology usage (3 
items), experience with technology in healthcare (1 item), 
perceived benefits (4 items), perceived barriers (3 items), 
external cues to take action (4 items), attitude towards using 
(3 items) and behavioral intention (4 items) to use telecare 
technologies and eHealth applications in primary care. An 
overview of the items is provided in Table I. Participants 
rated each item on a five-point Likert scale, ranging from 1 
(strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). In addition, the 
following open-ended question was added: “What kind of 
technologies in primary care would you like to use at home, 
and why?”. Participants could write down additional 
comments at the end of the questionnaire.  
     To gather more in-depth information about expectations 
of technology in primary care, interviews were conducted. 
The structured interview consisted of the following 
questions: “Do you use a lot of technology in daily life?”, 
“When I speak of technologies in primary care, what kind of 
technologies do you think of?”, “What are the advantages 
and disadvantages of technology in primary care?” and 
“What kind of technologies in primary care would you like 
to use?”.  
D. Analyses 
The scores of the questionnaire were quantitatively 
analyzed. First, mean scores and standard deviations of the 
seven different subscales were calculated for the whole 
study sample. Furthermore, the spread of participants on the 
different subscales was explored using boxplots. Moreover, 
differences between men and women, participants aged 
below 65 years and aged 65 years or older, and participants 
with or without chronic diseases were investigated for each 
subscale independently. In addition, differences between 
participants with high general technology experiences 
(mean scores of 3.5 or higher on that subscale) and low 
general technology experiences (mean scores below 3.5 on 
that subscale) were explored on experiences with 
technology in healthcare, perceived benefits, perceived 
barriers, external cues to take action, attitude towards using 
and intention to use. These differences were investigated 
using independent sample t-tests. The statistical analyses 
were performed using the Statistical Package for Social 
Sciences (SPSS) 21.0 for Windows [18]. 
 
 
242
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

General technology experience 
1. I use many technological devices in daily life (think about 
computers, mobile phones, tablet etc.). 
2. I like to discover new technologies. 
3. I have mainly positive experiences with technological devices. 
Experiences of technology in health care 
4. I have experience with technology in health care. 
Perceived benefits 
5. I think that using technologies in primary care are helpful in 
monitoring my health. 
6. I think that using technologies in primary care increases my safety 
in daily life. 
7. I think that technologies in primary care can enhance my level of 
convenience in accessing medical care services. 
8.  I think that technologies in primary care can enhance the quality of 
my life.  
Perceived barriers of taking action 
9. I am concerned that technologies in primary care are not adequately 
secure and that it might lead to the leak or abuse of my personal 
information. 
10. I am concerned that technologies in primary care would violate 
my privacy. 
11. I am concerned that the accuracy and reliability of technologies in 
primary care are not high enough.  
External cues to action 
12. I think that relatives will encourage and support me to use 
technologies in primary care. 
13. I think that friends will encourage and support me to use 
technologies in primary care. 
14. I think that medical care personnel will encourage and support me 
to use technologies in primary care. 
15. Media endorses the use of technologies in primary care. 
Attitude towards using 
16. I think I will like using technologies in primary care.  
17. Overall, I consider technologies in primary care to be just right. 
18. In my old age, using technologies in primary care would be ideal.  
Behavioral intention to use 
19. Overall, I am highly willing to use technologies in primary care. 
20. If necessary, I would use technologies in primary care often. 
21. In my old age, I am willing to use technologies in primary care. 
22. In my old age, I would use technologies in primary care often.  
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
ITEMS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
The interviews were transcribed verbatim. Afterwards, 
the researcher (MH) checked the transcripts against the 
audio recordings. Field notes from the interviews were also 
included in the analyses if they were available. The 
researcher (MH) independently coded the transcripts of the 
interviews using open coding. The following codes 
regarding technologies in primary care were used: first 
opinions, advantages, disadvantages and preferences.  
III. 
RESULTS 
This section provides the preliminary results of this 
study. First, an overview of the characteristics of the 
participants is given, followed by the mean scores of the 
subscales of the questionnaire, the spread of participants on 
the different subscales, the differences between groups, and 
participants’ preferences for using specific primary care 
technologies. Furthermore, the main results of the structured 
interviews are described.  
A. Characteristics of study participants 
In 
total, 
sixty-three 
participants 
filled 
out 
the 
questionnaire. Six participants were excluded from the 
analyses because their age was below 50 years. The mean 
age of the remaining fifty-seven participants was 67 (SD: 
9.26, range: 51-85). Twenty-one of them (37.5%) were male 
and twenty-eight (49.1%) had one or more chronic diseases 
(including diabetes type I and II, cardiovascular diseases, 
diseases of the joints, cancer, diseases of the nervous 
system, respiratory diseases, depression and/or anxiety 
disorders). 
     Six participants agreed to participate in an interview, of 
which 4 (66%) were male. The mean age of the interviewed 
participants was 64.4 (SD: 10.16, range: 52-76).  
B. Scores subscales questionnaire 
Figure 1 shows the mean scores of subscales of the 
questionnaire. The mean score of general technology 
experience was 3.42 (SD: .95), the mean score of experience 
with technology in healthcare was 2.22 (SD: 1.17). The 
mean score of perceived benefits was 3.88 (SD: .77), the 
mean score for perceived barriers of taking action 2.85 (SD: 
.93). External cues to action scored 3.56 (SD: .86). The 
mean scores of attitude towards using and the behavioral 
intention to use were respectively 3.83 (SD: .82) and 3.79 
(SD: 1.00).  
Figure 2 shows the spread of participants on the different 
subscales. It can be seen that 50% of the participants had a 
mean score between 3.5 and 4.25 on perceived benefits. The 
mean scores were lower for perceived barriers: 50% of the 
sample had mean scores between 2.0 and 3.67. Furthermore, 
50% of the participants scored between 3.0 and 4.13 on 
external cues to action. In addition, half of the participants 
had mean scores between 3.33 and 4.67 on attitude towards 
using and scores between 3.0 and 4.63 on intention to use. 
      
 
 
Figure 1. Mean scores of the different subscales of the questionnaire. 
243
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Looking at the differences between groups there was a 
significant difference (p: .050) between age groups on 
general technology experience, with a mean score of 3.66 
(SD: .90) for participants with an age below 65, compared 
with a mean score of 3.15 (SD: .95) for participants aged 65 
years or older. In addition, there were significant differences 
between 
participants 
with 
low 
general 
technology 
experience and high general technology experience on 
perceived benefits (p: .013), attitude towards using (p: .001) 
and intention to use technology in primary care (p: .001), 
with higher mean scores for participants with high general 
technology experiences (respectively 4.14, SD: .54; 4.19, 
SD: .70 and 4.25, SD: .67) compared with participants with 
low general technology experiences (respectively 3.63, SD: 
.86; 3.48, SD: .80 and 3.38, SD: 1.10). Furthermore, no 
significant differences were found between the other 
subgroups.  
C. Preferences for specific care technologies  
At the end of the questionnaire the open question “What 
kind of technologies would you like to use at home? And 
why?” was asked. The most frequently mentioned 
technology was an AAL motion tracking system (n: 11), 
followed by self-monitoring systems to monitor blood 
pressure, heartbeat or glucose level (n: 5), online 
appointments (n: 5) and online video consults (n: 5). In 
addition, six participants responded that they did not want to 
use care technologies in care at that moment, five 
participants mentioned that they had no idea, and twenty-
three participants did not answer the question. 
D.   Structured interviews 
In general, at the start of the interview participants had 
some ideas about what kinds of technologies could be used 
in primary care. Most participants linked these technologies 
with using a computer.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Spread of participants on the different subscales. The boxplots are 
demonstrating extremes, interquartile range (25%-50% light grey; 50%-
75% dark grey) and median.  
 
“Today, when my blood pressure needs to be measured, I 
first have to make an appointment with the general 
practitioner, and I have to take some time off. That’s a 
hassle…” (Female, 54 years) 
“If you don’t feel quite well at night, and you call the 
doctor, it would be good if they could give you advice on the 
basis of self-measured data. Then, you feel more 
reassured…” (Male, 52 years) 
“Nowadays, if there is something wrong I have to call my 
neighbors. If I can contact caregivers with just one push on 
a button I don’t have to call them.  That’s a big advantage, 
and I can receive help quicker. (Male, 75) 
“Many elderly persons have difficulties with walking. It is a 
great advantage if you only have to push a button to directly 
contact a care institution. Just with a simple connection…” 
(Male, 52 years) 
 
     Besides these positive responses, many participants 
doubted if care technologies were not too difficult in use.  
 
“But that is just too difficult for us. It’s the age, we did not 
grow up with technology… Reading an email is already too 
difficult for us…” (Male, 75) 
 
     The participants with an age over seventy linked 
technology immediately to difficult to use computers and 
mobile phones. When we showed them an Ipad, they were 
surprised about the small size and the user-friendly design.  
 
“I really don’t want to have a computer, I just don’t want 
to.” After showing her the Ipad:”Is this the entire device? Is 
everything included? Internet as well? So this doesn’t have 
to be connected to a wire?.... If I push on this button I can 
send a message? This is not difficult, for this I don’t have to 
follow a computer course. I was thinking about a big 
screen…” (Female, 76) 
 
     In addition, participants doubted if personal contact will 
not disappear when using primary care technologies.  
 
“I think using technologies in primary care is positive, 
however, if you need care, you need human contact. Not 
only devices, it should be a combination between technology 
and personal attention…” (Female, 54) 
“I hope that technology can accompany care, but that 
contact will always exist. That is really important…” (Male, 
52) 
 
     Furthermore, some participants mentioned that getting 
feedback from the care giver is important.  
 
“If I take the effort to measure my blood pressure and send 
the data to my general practitioner, I would like to get a 
message like: you’re blood pressure is okay, in three months 
you get a new message…” (Female, 54) 
244
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

“At this moment I write my blood pressure results on a 
note…. However, if I take the results with me to the general 
practitioners or specialist, they do nothing with these data. 
With these new technologies, you sent a lot of data to the 
general practitioner, however, they should do something 
with it…” (Male, 65) 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Overall, participants had a positive attitude towards using 
technologies in primary care and their behavioral intention 
to use technology in primary care was high. These results 
are in line with studies investigating attitude and intentions 
regarding telecare and eHealth [19, 20]. In addition, scores 
of perceived benefits were higher than scores of perceived 
barriers. Participants with a high degree of general 
technology experiences had significantly higher scores on 
perceived benefits, attitude towards using and intention to 
use technology in primary care, than participants who had 
less experience with general technology use. Similar results 
were found in a study by Wilson et al. [21] that showed that 
participants who already relied on the internet in daily life, 
were more likely to accept eHealth.  
Structured interviews revealed that time-saving, comfort 
and a higher degree of safety were the most expected 
advantages of using technologies in primary care. On the 
other hand, the possible lack or decrease of personal contact 
and usability difficulties were the most frequently expected 
disadvantage of using primary care technologies. Time-
saving as advantage and less face-to-face contact as 
disadvantage were also found in previous research [22] 
investigating patients’ expectations and experiences towards 
an online appointment booking system. In a study 
investigating the risks and benefits of home telecare [20], 
trust of the equipment was found to be a concern among 
patients. This was not found in the present study.  
In a recently published eHealth monitor in which the 
development and progress of eHealth in the Netherlands 
was described [23], it was indicated that the Dutch 
population is still relatively unfamiliar with eHealth and the 
use of eHealth applications. eHealth applications that can 
monitor health data are not commonly used. This is in line 
with the low scores we found on experiences with 
technology in primary care. 
A. Strengths and limitations  
A strength of this study is that it aimed to investigate the 
expectations towards using care technology on a larger scale 
in primary care in an important ‘potential user group’ of this 
technology. By not focusing on the expectations regarding 
one specific technological innovation but on the broad use 
of telecare technologies and eHealth applications, this study 
provided insights that could be taken into account when 
implementing such technologies in primary care.  
In this study a cross-sectional mixed method approach 
was used, combining quantitative and qualitative data.  
Besides questionnaires, interviews were conducted to gather 
more in-depth information about expectations of care 
technologies in primary care. These interviews were 
conducted with different participants than the people who 
filled out a questionnaire. Therefore, a cross validation of 
the data could not be made.  
Another possible limitation of this study is that the 
number of currently included participants is small and 
therefore no generalizations can be made based on the 
preliminary results reported in this paper. In addition, in 
studies by Huang et al. [16, 17] in which the Health Belief 
Model was used to predict the intention to use telecare, a 
distinction was made between chronically ill patients [16] 
and general public [17]. The factors which had an influence 
on intention to use telecare differed between the two 
samples according to Huang et al. [16, 17]. In the current 
study no differences were found between patients with a 
chronic disease and patients without a chronic disease. This 
could also be caused by the small sample size of the present 
study. In addition, more than half of the participants did not 
respond to the question which technologies they would like 
to use at home or answered that they do not need it at this 
moment. This might be the result of the fact that these 
people currently do not have any complaints for which these 
technologies could be used.  
Furthermore, the study took place in a sports hall during 
an event about health exercises for elderly people. Because 
of this event, the noise level was quite high which could 
have influenced the data collection process to some extent. 
However, the noise level did not seem to disturb the study 
and it created an informal atmosphere. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper discusses the preliminary results of this 
study. In the upcoming months, the data collection will be 
continued. Based on the preliminary results it can be 
concluded that middle-aged and elderly persons have a 
positive view towards primary care technologies.  
Recently the project eLabEL [24] has started within the 
Centre for Care Technology Research [25]. In this three-
year program ‘living labs’ within primary care centers will 
be established in which new care technologies can be 
implemented and evaluated in ‘real life’ environments on a 
substantial scale. Ten large primary care centers in the 
Netherlands will be equipped to adopt existing state of the 
art technologies as part of their standard care routines.  
Before eHealth applications and telecare technologies can 
be implemented, several other factors should be further 
investigated. For example, privacy and security are 
important issues while sharing personal health related 
information [26]. In addition, connecting and integrating 
different technologies to one database will be a challenge 
[27]. These factors will be further explored in the eLabEL 
project during the next two years.  
The present study provides insights in the views of 
Dutch middle-aged and elderly persons towards using 
telecare technologies and eHealth applications in primary 
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

care, which should be taken into account during the 
implementation of primary care technologies.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
eLabEL is a project of the Center for Care Technology 
Research [25]. This work is partly funded by a grant from the 
Netherlands 
Foundation 
for 
Health 
Research 
and 
Development (ZonMw); grant number: 10-10400-98-009.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
Population Division, “World population ageing: 1950–2050,” 
2002, 
retrieved 
from 
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/worldageing19
502050/ assessed on October 31, 2013  
[2] G. Paré, M. Jaana, and C. Sicotte, “Systematic review of 
home telemonitoring for chronic diseases: The evidence 
base,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 14, 2007, pp. 269-
277, doi: 10.1197/jamia.M2270 
[3] K. H. Bowles, and A. C. Baugh, “Applying Research 
Evidence to Optimize Telehomecare,” J. Cardiovasc. Nurs., 
vol. 22, 2007, pp. 5-15 
[4] T. Botsis, and G. Hartigsen, “Current status and future 
perspectives in telecare for elderly people suffering from 
chronic diseases,” J. Telemed. Telecare, vol. 14, 2008, pp. 
195-203, doi: 10.1258/jtt.2008.070905 
[5] J. M. Peeters, T. A. Wiegers, and R. D. Friele, “How 
technology in care at home affects patient self-care and self-
management: a scoping review,” Int. J. Environ. Res. Public 
Health, 
vol. 
10, 
2013, 
pp. 
5541-5564, 
doi: 
10.3390/ijerph10115541 
[6] J. Frühauf, G. Schwantzer, M. Ambros-Rudolph, W. Weger, 
V. Ahlgrimm-Siess, W. Salmhofer, and R. Hofmann-
Wellenhof, “Pilot study on the acceptance of mobile 
teledermatology for the home monitoring of high-need 
patients with psoriasis,” Australas. J. Dermatol, vol. 53, 2012, 
pp. 41–46, doi: 10.1111/j.1440-0960.2011.00852.x 
[7] E. J. Gómez, M. E. Hernando, A. Garcia, F. del Pozo, J. 
Cermeño, R. Corvoy, E. Brugués and A. de Leiva, 
“Telemedicine  as  a  tool  for  intensive  management  of  
diabetes:  The  DIABTel experience,” Comput. Methods 
Programs. Biomed., vol. 69, 2001, pp. 163-177, doi: 
10.1016/S0169-2607(02)00039-1 
[8] J. Finkelstein, O. Lapshin, H. Castro, E. Cha, and P. G. 
Provance, “Home-based  physical telerehabilitation in patients 
with multiple sclerosis: A pilot study,” J. Rehabil. Res. Dev., 
vol. 
45, 
2008, 
pp. 
1361–1374, 
doi: 
10.1682/JRRD.2008.01.0001 
[9] S. de Rouck, A. Jacobs, and M. Leys, “A methodology for 
shifting the focus of e-health support design onto user needs: 
A case in the homecare ﬁeld,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 77, 
2008, pp. 589-601, doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2007.11.004 
[10] C. Pagliari, “Design and evaluation in eHealth: challenges and 
implications for an interdisciplinary ﬁeld,” J. Med. Internet 
Res., vol. 9, 2007, pp. doi: 10.2196/jmir.9.2.e15 
[11] M. I. Hwang, R. G. Thorn, “The effect of user engagement on 
system success: A meta-analytical integration of research 
ﬁndings,” Inform. Manage., vol. 35, 1999, pp. 229-236, doi. 
10.1016/S0378-7206(98)00092-5 
[12] L. Damoran, “User involvement in the systems design process 
- a practical guide for users,” Behav. Inforfm. Technol., vol. 
15,1996, pp. 363-377, doi: 10.1080/014492996120049 
[13] S. van der Weegen, R. Verwey, M. Spreeuwenberg, H. Tange, 
T. vander Weijden, L. de Witte, “The development of a 
mobile monitoring and feedback tool to stimulate physical 
activity of people with a chronic disease in primary care: a 
user-centered design,” JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, vol. 1, 2013, 
doi 10.2196/mhealth.2526 
[14] R. Verwey, S. van der Weegen, H. Tange, M. Spreeuwenberg, 
T. van der Weijden, L. de Witte, “Get moving: the practice 
nurse is watching you! A case study of the user-centred 
design process and testing of a web-based coaching system to 
stimulate the physical activity of chronically ill patients in 
primary care,” Inform. Prim. Care., vol. 20, 2012, pp. 289-298 
[15] J. Vermeulen, J. C. Neyens, M. D. Spreeuwenberg, E. van 
Rossum, W. Sipers, H. Habets, D. J. Hewson, and L. P. de 
Witte, "User-centered development and testing of a 
monitoring system that provides feedback regarding physical 
functioning to elderly people,” Patient Prefer. Adherence, vol. 
7, 2013, pp. 843-854, doi: 10.2147/PPA.S45897 
[16] J. C. Huang, and Y. C. Lee, “Model construction for the 
intention to use telecare in patients with chronic diseases,” 
Int. J. Telemed Appl., vol. 2013, pp. 1-6 2013, doi: 
10.1155/2013/650238 
[17] J. C. Huang, S. P. Lin, “Exploring the Key Factors in the 
Choice of Home Telehealth by Using the Health Belief 
Model,” Telemedice and e-Health, vol. 15, 2009, pp. 87-92, 
doi: 10.1089/tmj.2008.0069 
[18] IBM Corp, IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 21.0, 
Released 2012, Armonk, NY: IBM Corp 
[19] M. L. Jung, and K. Loria, “Acceptance of Swedish e-health 
services,” J. Multidiscip. Healthc., vol. 3, 2010, pp. 55-63, 
doi: 10.2147/JMDH.S9159 
[20] G. Demiris, S. Speedie, and S. Finkelstein, “A questionnaire 
for the assessment of patients' impressions of the risks and 
benefits of home telecare,” Health Care Sciences & Services, 
vol. 6, 2000, pp. 278-284, doi: 10.1258/1357633001935914 
[21] E. V. Wilson, and N. K. Langton, “Modeling Patients’ 
Acceptance of Provider-delivered E-health,” J. Am. Med. 
Inform. 
Assoc., 
vol. 
11, 
2004, 
pp. 
241-248, 
doi: 
10.1197/jamia.M1475 
[22] D. Flynn, P. Gregory, H. Makki, and M. Gabbay, 
“Expectations and experiences of eHealth in primary care: A 
qualitative practice-based investigation,” Int. J. Med. Inform., 
vol. 
78, 
2009, 
pp. 
588–604, 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2009.03.008 
[23] J. Krijgsman, J. de Bie, A. Burghouts, J. de Jong, G. J. Cath, 
L. Gennip, and R. Friele, “eHealth, verder dan je denkt: 
eHealth-monitor 2013,” Den Haag, 2013 
[24] http://www.caretechnologyresearch.nl/elabel 
assessed 
on 
January 21, 2014 
[25] http://www.caretechnologyresearch.nl assessed on January 
21, 2014 
[26] T. M. Burkow, and P. A. Bakkevoll, “The Grid as an Enabler 
for Home Based Healthcare Services” in Proceedings of MIE 
2005 Connecting Medical Informatics and Bio-Informatics, R. 
Engelbrecht et al. (Eds.). ENMI, 2005, pp. 1305–1310 
[27] D. D. Vergados, “Service personalization for assistive living 
in a mobile ambient healthcare-networked environment” Pers. 
Ubiquit. Comput., vol 14, 2010, pp. 575-590  
 
 
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

