mHealth Solution for Remote Intrapartum Monitoring: A Feasibility Study  
Hiwale Sujitkumar, Krishnan Navaneetha, Addepalli Jeevan Ram, and Ulman Shrutin  
Philips Research India, 
Philips Innovation Campus, Manyata Tech-Park, 
Bengaluru, India-560045 
e-mail: sujit.hiwale@philips.com 
 
 
Abstract—The primary objective of this study was to evaluate 
feasibility of a mHealth-based Digital Labour and Delivery 
Solution (DLDS) for information exchange among healthcare 
professionals for remote intrapartum monitoring and decision 
making. The inclusion criteria for the study were a live-
singleton pregnancy with cervical dilatation > 4 cm but < 8 cm 
at the time of admission, and presenting without any 
complication 
necessitating 
an 
immediate 
intervention. 
Throughout labour, all the subjects were monitored using 
conventional workflows. After each assessment, the in-charge 
doctor took one management decision from four possible 
options- (1) “Wait and watch”; (2) “Accelerate the labour”; (3) 
go for “Assisted vaginal delivery”; and (4) go for “Caesarean 
section”. For each subject, clinical history, examination, and 
decision details were entered in the DLDS. A doctor located 
remotely was asked to use the DLDS application to review two 
records per subject and take one of the four management 
decisions. The effectiveness of the DLDS for intrapartum 
information exchange was evaluated by comparing the 
decisions taken by a remote doctor using the DLDS to that of 
decisions taken by a doctor in a labour room. In total, 110 
subjects were enrolled for the study. The overall agreement 
between the two doctors for 220 independent decision points 
was 0.764 using unweighted Cohen’s kappa and 0.723 using 
weighted Cohen’s kappa statistic. The substantial agreement 
between the two doctors for intrapartum decision making 
demonstrates the feasibility of the DLDS for remote 
intrapartum monitoring and decision making. However, 
further investigation is required to assess effectiveness and 
safety of DLDS for a general purpose remote intrapartum 
monitoring. 
Keywords-feasibility 
study; 
inter-observer 
variability; 
intrapartum; mHealth; obstetrics; partograph, telemedicine. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Intense monitoring and prompt decision making is very 
important during the intrapartum phase due to a short time 
interval between onset of complications and time to 
intervene. This is further emphasized by the fact that 
complications during this phase are responsible for almost 
42% of maternal mortality and 23% of neonatal mortality 
[1]. Effective monitoring during the intrapartum phase needs 
an 
effective 
collaboration 
between 
the 
healthcare 
professionals.  Among various issues, which have an adverse 
impact on teamwork during delivery, poor communication 
patterns have been identified as one of the most important 
issues. This is evident by a fact that issues in communication 
have been identified as the root cause in 72% of total cases 
related to infant deaths and injuries during delivery [2].  
Poor communication is usually a result of a poor 
transmission or exchange of information. Paper based 
methods 
and 
telephonic 
communication 
are 
two 
conventional methods of communication during intrapartum 
monitoring. However, these methods have limitations when 
it comes to clear and real-time information exchange during 
intrapartum and have been shown to be either inadequate or 
cumbersome for this purpose [3][4].  
To improve communication during intrapartum care, 
many tools such as partograph, digital partograph have been 
introduced.  These are shown to be effective but 
underutilized due to time constrain and a stiff learning curve 
[5]–[8]. 
To 
standardize 
telephonic 
communication, 
techniques such as Situation–Background–Assessment–
Recommendation (SBAR) have been proposed. However, 
SBAR is a difficult technique to learn and practice, and 
requires extensive education and training for effective 
implementation [9]. Moreover, none of these techniques 
provide an integrated solution for intrapartum monitoring, 
making them of limited use for a conventional setup.  
Structured and instant communication are areas where 
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) can 
play a major role. In recent times, mobile devices 
(smartphone and tablet) have emerged as one of the most 
important enablers of ICT in healthcare. Considering the 
need gaps in intrapartum communication and the potential of 
mobile devices for telehealth, we have designed a Digital 
Labour and Delivery Solution (DLDS).  DLDS is a tablet-
based solution designed for systematic information gathering 
and sharing during intrapartum monitoring.  
The primary objective of this study was to evaluate 
feasibility of the DLDS in information exchange among 
health care professionals for remote intrapartum monitoring 
and decision making.  We had a primary hypothesis that a 
remote doctor can be equally adept at decision making if he 
is provided with all the necessary information. The 
effectiveness of the DLDS was evaluated by comparing the 
decisions taken by a remote doctor using intrapartum 
information provided by the DLDS to that of decisions taken 
by a doctor in a labour room (in-charge doctor). 
The rest of the paper is arranged as follows, Section II 
provides details of the study protocol and statistical 
methodology. The study results are summarized in Section 
III. Section IV provides commentary on overall results and 
their possible implications for clinical practice. Section V 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

concludes with the most important findings and future work 
directions. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
This section provides details about the study protocol and 
statistical methodology. 
A. Study design 
This observational study was conducted in a medical 
college hospital in Mysuru (Mysore), India in 2016. 
Inclusion criteria for the study were a live-singleton 
pregnancy with cervical dilatation > 4 cm but < 8 cm at the 
time of admission to a labour room. All the cases with 
planned caesarean section or cases with complication(s) or 
indication(s), which require immediate intervention or where 
a trial of labour is contraindicated were excluded. The study 
was conducted in accordance with local regulations after 
approval of an institutional review board. Subjects were 
enrolled only after obtaining informed consent in writing 
B. Study protocol 
All the enrolled subjects were managed as per the 
established clinical workflows and protocols of the hospital. 
The subjects were regularly assessed by an in-charge doctor 
(doctor involved in active management of a subject). After 
each assessment, the in-charge doctor took one management 
decision from four possible options- (1) “Wait and watch”, 
i.e., to continue the expectant management without any 
active intervention; (2) “Accelerate the labour”, i.e., 
accelerate the labour process either by means of artificial 
rupture of membranes or by medication; (3) go for “Assisted 
vaginal delivery”, i.e., use of forceps or vacuum extraction 
method for delivery; and (4) go for “Caesarean section”.  
All the subjects and newborns were monitored up to 24 
hours after delivery for any adverse outcomes. Outcomes 
monitored included obstructed labour, uterine rupture, post-
partum haemorrhage, stillbirth, early neonatal mortality, 
Apgar score at five minutes, and newborn’s admission to a 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU).  
For each subject, complete clinical history, examination, 
investigation details and management decision for each 
assessment were entered in the DLDS. To prevent any 
influence of the DLDS on clinical workflow and patient 
management an additional nurse (not actively involved with 
patient management) was appointed for data entry in the 
DLDS. 
C. DLDS application 
DLDS is developed as a monitoring and communication 
solution for labour, delivery and immediate post-partum 
care. DLDS is a tablet-based solution built on an Android 
platform and allows secured sharing of information over a 
Wi-Fi network. Its intuitive design and user interface allows 
systematic and easy entry of the past and present history, 
examination and investigation details of the patient with an 
option to customize entry fields. It also provides an advanced 
visualization for various clinical trends and partograph. 
DLDS can be used as a stand-alone delivery solution or 
could be integrated with maternal telehealth platforms such 
as Mobile Obstetrics Monitoring [10]. For the study, two 
DLDS tablets were used; the one in the labour room was 
designed to anonymize and securely transmit information to 
the other tablet over a wireless network connection. 
D. Workflow of the remote doctor 
A doctor who is not involved in the management of any 
of the study subjects was assigned as a ‘remote doctor’. To 
ensure that there is no discrepancy in decision making due to 
skill and knowledge differences, a doctor with a similar 
profile as the in-charge doctor was selected as a remote 
doctor. The remote doctor was asked to use the second 
DLDS application to review case records (without 
management decision information) and enter one of the four 
management decisions in the DLDS. For each subject, the 
remote doctor reviewed the first record (at the time of 
admission) and the last record before any active intervention 
or delivery. 
E. Statistical analysis methodology 
The decisions taken by both the doctors for each case 
record were extracted from the two DLDS applications. The 
agreement between the in-charge doctor and the remote 
doctor on the four types of management decisions was 
assessed using the Cohen’s kappa statistics. However, as 
different types of management decisions have different 
implications in clinical practice, it is important to study not 
only overall agreement between the two doctors but also an 
extent of disagreement for individual decisions.  This is 
important as some decisions are closer to each other when 
compared to other decisions (e.g., a decision to go for 
“Caesarean section” is much closer to a decision to go for 
“Assisted vaginal delivery” in comparison to a decision of 
“Wait and watch”).  
As Kappa analysis does not account for the difference in 
decision types, weighted Kappa analysis was used for this 
purpose. The weights used to grade the differences in 
decisions are presented in Table I. The agreement scale 
proposed by Landis and Koch was used to grade the 
agreement between the doctors [11].  
TABLE I.  
WEIGHT MATRIX FOR DECISION GRADING  
Decision 
taken by 
in-charge 
doctor 
Decision taken by the remote doctor 
Wait and 
watch 
Accelera-
te labour 
Assisted 
vaginal 
delivery 
Caesarea
n section 
Wait and 
watch 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Accelerate 
the labour 
1 
0 
1 
2 
Assisted 
vaginal 
delivery 
2 
1 
0 
1 
Caesarean 
section 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 
All statistical analyses were done using Microsoft Office 
Excel-2016 and R (version 3.4.4). 
 
 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
RESULTS 
The study results are summarized in this section. 
A. Demographic characteristics of the study population  
In total, 110 subjects were enrolled for the study. The 
mean maternal age was 24.21 + 2.69 year, with a mean body 
mass index of 24.48 + 2.08 kg/m2. The nulliparous women 
constituted 30.43% of the study population. Gestational age 
was in the range of 37 to 41.6 weeks (median = 39.55 
weeks).  The mean birth weight of the neonates was 3037.98 
+ 345.25 g, with a range of 2320 g to 4040 g. 
B. Intrapartum monitoring and labour outcomes 
Throughout labour, all the subjects were monitored using 
the conventional workflows and protocols of the hospital. 
None of the cases had any significant antenatal complication. 
The average duration of labour was 7 hours 3 minutes (+ 63 
minutes). On an average, each subject was assessed 15.63 (+ 
0.518) times during labour, which comes out to be one 
assessment per 28 minutes. During each assessment, vital 
parameters, examination details and management decision 
for a subject were entered in the DLDS application. 
Five cases were delivered by caesarean section. Two 
cases were delivered by forceps extraction method due to 
failure to progress. The rest of the cases were delivered 
vaginally.  None of the cases had any adverse intrapartum or 
immediate postpartum outcome.  All the neonates had Apgar 
score of eight or more at five minutes and none of them 
required admission to a NICU.  
C. Agreement between the two doctors for the 
management decisions 
The remote doctor was asked to review 220 records (two 
records per case) using the DLDS.  The confusion matrix of 
the four management decisions taken by both the doctors is 
summarized in Table II. It was observed that for the “Wait 
and watch” decision the remote doctor was in a perfect 
agreement with the decisions of the in-charge doctor in 
91.15% of total records; for “Accelerate the labour” this 
agreement was 88%.  Agreements for “Assisted vaginal 
delivery” and “Caesarean section” were 50% and 20%, 
respectively.  Nevertheless, small sample sizes in these two 
categorizes makes it difficult to draw a valid conclusion.  
TABLE II.  
DECISION AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE DOCTORS 
Decision 
taken by 
in-charge 
doctor 
Decision taken by the remote doctor (using 
DLDS) 
Total 
Wait and 
watch 
Accelera-
te labour 
Assisted 
vaginal 
delivery 
Caesarea
n section 
Wait and 
watch 
103 
10 
0 
0 
113 
Accelerate 
the  labour 
11 
88 
0 
1 
100 
Assisted 
vaginal 
delivery 
1 
0 
1 
0 
2 
Caesarean 
section 
2 
2 
0 
1 
5 
Total 
117 
100 
1 
2 
220 
 
The overall agreement between the two doctors for all the 
decisions combined was 0.764 using unweighted Cohen’s 
kappa statistics. The weighted Cohen’s kappa between the 
two doctors was 0.723.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
One very important aspect of the modern intrapartum 
care is a teamwork approach towards pregnancy and 
delivery. Despite this, it has been observed that the 
intrapartum care is still troubled with poor team work. In a 
study conducted by Guise et al., they observed that  less than 
50% doctors and less than 37% nurses in labour rooms rated 
their teamwork as adequate [12], indicating the need to 
address this issue on a priority basis. The difference in 
knowledge, skill set and communication style among nurses 
and doctors has been shown to be responsible for this poor 
teamwork [13].   
One very crucial part of communication is transmission 
or exchange of information in a structured way for effective 
decision making. Unfortunately, the existing modes of 
intrapartum communications are shown to be insufficient for 
this purpose. Telephonic communication is universally 
available and offers advantages of real time communication. 
However, it is highly skill and experience dependent [3] and 
can lead to misunderstanding due to miscommunication [14]. 
The paper-based methods are simple to follow but are non-
standardized, static and prone to manual errors; making them 
a less reliable medium for information exchange [4][15]. 
Partograph, a paper-based tool has shown to be an 
effective method for monitoring labour progress but 
unfortunately, it is underutilized. Time constraints, staff 
shortage, lack of knowledge and negative attitude among 
healthcare providers are some of the obstacles, which are 
known to hinder an appropriate use of the partograph [5]–[7]. 
The digital alternatives to partograph are trying to solve 
these problems by having an easy way of partogram plotting 
and ability to share it remotely [8]. However, no single 
solution exists yet, which comprehensively addresses 
communication needs during intrapartum care. This is the 
area where ICT devices can play a major role. Emergence of 
affordable smartphones, increased computational capacity, 
wider coverage and faster data transfer speed have provided 
a further boost to the use of the mobile as a platform for 
delivery of healthcare services. DLDS is one such mHealth 
solution for intrapartum care. 
The main objective of this study was to evaluate 
feasibility of the DLDS application for remote intrapartum 
monitoring and decision making.  This was done by 
comparing decisions taken by a remote doctor using the 
DLDS to that of the in-charge doctor. In this regard, a 
substantial agreement was observed between the two doctors 
for intrapartum decision making.  This demonstrates the 
feasibility of the DLDS for remote intrapartum monitoring 
and decision making. However, as only seven cases were 
delivered by a non-vaginal route, it is difficult to generalize 
findings of this study to mode of deliveries other than 
vaginal.  
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

It was observed that the agreement between the doctors 
for non-operative mode of deliveries was significantly higher 
than for operative delivers. This finding is in line with the 
published literature, where complete agreement for caesarean 
section decision has been observed to be about 65% [16].  
Nevertheless, the lower agreement for operative deliveries 
(in particular more decisions of “Assisted vaginal deliveries” 
and “Caesarean section” by the in-charge doctor) needs 
further investigation. This could be due to the remote doctor 
missing some crucial information or the doctor in-charge 
getting negatively influenced by real-life factors such as 
stress of other emergencies to attend, lack of sleep, or 
pressure from the healthcare workers or patients. 
Small sample size from a single center and recruitment of 
just one doctor in the labour room and one for remote 
assessment are two important limitations of our study. 
However, as this was a feasibility study we first wanted to 
test and verify our concept before conducting a large study 
with multiple doctors. Despite having a small sample size, 
we compared 220 independent decisions points between the 
two doctors. Furthermore, as none of the cases in our study 
had any adverse outcome, it was not possible to assess 
adequacy and quality of information provided by the DLDS 
to the remote doctor in such situations. Nevertheless, it was 
observed that the remote doctor could use the DLDS 
application for decision making for all the study cases.  
On the study design, the use of an additional nurse for 
data entry is likely to have contributed to better and more 
comprehensive data gathering, which may not have been 
possible in conventional workflows. However, having a 
complete and accurate data entry is prerequisite for any 
digital solution and it is bound to have some change in the 
existing workflow.  It also brings the advantage of enhanced 
patient 
safety 
by 
improving 
the 
communication, 
comprehensiveness, and organization of patient notes [17]. 
Moreover, it has been also indicated that introduction of 
digital records are likely to reduce risk and liability for 
obstetric providers, especially in the intrapartum care [18]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION  
The strength of this study lies in being one of the first 
studies where the feasibility of a telehealth solution for 
remote intrapartum monitoring and decision making has 
been studied systematically. The finding of this study could 
serve as an important input for further research in this area. 
In the future, we would like to extend this work on a larger 
sample size with recruitment of more remote doctors.    
To conclude, our study has demonstrated a substantial 
agreement in the decisions taken by a remote doctor using 
the DLDS and intrapartum decisions taken by a doctor in a 
labour room.  This supports the hypothesis that it is possible 
to remotely monitor intrapartum labour progress and take 
appropriate decisions if a remote doctor is provided with all 
necessary information. It further supports use of telehealth 
solutions such as DLDS for remote intrapartum monitoring. 
Considering limited resources and shortage of trained 
healthcare workers in the developing countries, we believe 
that there is a huge need for intrapartum telehealth solutions 
in such countries. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We duly acknowledge help of the staff of JSS, Medical 
college, Mysuru, India for this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. E. Lawn et al., “Two million intrapartum-related 
stillbirths and neonatal deaths: where, why, and what can be 
done?,” Int. J. Gynaecol. Obstet. Off. Organ Int. Fed. 
Gynaecol. Obstet., vol. 107 Suppl 1, pp. S5-18, S19, Oct. 
2009. 
[2] 
J. Commission, “Sentinel Event Alert, Issue# 30, Preventing 
Infant Death and Injury During Delivery,” Wash. DC Jt. 
Comm., 2004. 
[3] 
P. Giesen et al., “Safety of telephone triage in general 
practitioner cooperatives: do triage nurses correctly estimate 
urgency?,” Qual. Saf. Health Care, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 181–
184, 2007. 
[4] 
T. Schabetsberger et al., “From a paper-based transmission 
of discharge summaries to electronic communication in 
health care regions,” Int. J. Med. Inf., vol. 75, no. 3–4, pp. 
209–215, Mar. 2006. 
[5] 
“World Health Organization partograph in management of 
labour. World Health Organization Maternal Health and 
Safe Motherhood Programme,” Lancet, vol. 343, no. 8910, 
pp. 1399–1404, Jun. 1994. 
[6] 
T. Lavender, A. Hart, and R. M. D. Smyth, “Effect of 
partogram use on outcomes for women in spontaneous 
labour at term,” Cochrane Database Syst. Rev., vol. 7, p. 
CD005461, 2013. 
[7] 
S. Tayade and P. Jadhao, “The impact of use of modified 
who partograph on maternal and perinatal outcome,” Int. J. 
Biomed. Adv. Res., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 256–262, 2012. 
[8] 
H. Underwood, J. Ong’ech, G. Omoni, S. Wakasiaka, S. R. 
Sterling, and J. K. Bennett, “Improving partograph training 
and use in Kenya using the partopen digital pen system,” in 
Biomedical Engineering Systems and Technologies, 
Springer, 2014, pp. 407–422. 
[9] 
B. B. Pope, L. Rodzen, and G. Spross, “Raising the SBAR: 
how better communication improves patient outcomes,” 
Nursing2014, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 41–43, 2008. 
[10] 
“Philips - Mobile Obstetrics Monitoring Maternal telehealth 
software,” Philips. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.philips.co.id/healthcare/product/HC867055/mo
bile-obstetrics-monitoring-maternal-telehealth-software. 
[Accessed: 09-Jan-2019]. 
[11] 
J. R. Landis and G. G. Koch, “The measurement of observer 
agreement for categorical data,” Biometrics, vol. 33, no. 1, 
pp. 159–174, Mar. 1977. 
[12] 
J.-M. Guise and S. Segel, “Teamwork in obstetric critical 
care,” Best Pract. Res. Clin. Obstet. Gynaecol., vol. 22, no. 
5, pp. 937–951, 2008. 
[13] 
C. D. Beckett and G. Kipnis, “Collaborative 
communication: integrating SBAR to improve 
quality/patient safety outcomes,” J. Healthc. Qual., vol. 31, 
no. 5, pp. 19–28, 2009. 
[14] 
E. Joffe, J. P. Turley, K. O. Hwang, T. R. Johnson, C. W. 
Johnson, and E. V. Bernstam, “Evaluation of a problem-
specific SBAR tool to improve after-hours nurse-physician 
phone communication: a randomized trial,” Jt. Comm. J. 
Qual. Patient Saf., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 495–501, 2013. 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[15] 
K. Nagpal et al., “Information transfer and communication 
in surgery: a systematic review,” Ann. Surg., vol. 252, no. 2, 
pp. 225–239, 2010. 
[16] 
S. A. Pillai et al., “Decisions to Perform Emergency 
Caesarean Sections at a University Hospital: Do 
obstetricians agree?,” Sultan Qaboos Univ. Med. J., vol. 16, 
no. 1, pp. e42-46, Feb. 2016. 
[17] 
J. Cowan, “Clinical governance and clinical documentation: 
still a long way to go?,” Br. J. Clin. Gov., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 
179–182, 2000. 
[18] 
J. Stausberg, D. Koch, J. Ingenerf, and M. Betzler, 
“Comparing paper-based with electronic patient records: 
lessons learned during a study on diagnosis and procedure 
codes,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 470–
477, 2003. 
 
 
 
 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

