Multi-Factor Authentication in Telemedicine Systems
Dayana P. B. Spagnuelo, Jean E. Martina, Ricardo F. Cust´odio
Laborat´orio de Seguranc¸a em Computac¸˜ao
Departamento de Inform´atica e de Estat´ıstica
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina
Florian´opolis, Brazil
{dayspagnuelo,everson,custodio}@inf.ufsc.br
Rafael Andrade
Instituto Nacional de Convergˆencia Digital
Departamento de Inform´atica e de Estat´ıstica
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina
Florian´opolis, Brazil
andrade@inf.ufsc.br
Abstract—Telemedicine systems require authentication ser-
vices that are strong enough to ensure data conﬁdentiality and
privacy, and ﬂexible to meet the needs of health professionals
and patients. The focus of this work is the authentication
process. We propose an authentication service for telemedicine
technologies based on web services. This service makes use of
scalable authentication methods based on two-factor authenti-
cation mechanisms. Its main characteristics are: ﬂexibility of
conﬁguration for the authentication mechanisms, as well as the
use of a robust system for recording events. In this paper we
deal with the engineering requirements of the security system
and the details of its implementation. We also discuss the
efﬁcacy and ease of use of different authentication methods.
Keywords-Multi-factor Authentication; Telemedicine
I. INTRODUCTION
The increasing development in technology has enabled
the use of electronic media for communication and the
execution of services. In this context, information systems
present viable solutions too many types of problems, in-
cluding social ones. Similarly, telemedicine and e-health
environments facilitate access to health services to people
redas well as they simplify the use of technology by health
care professionals [1].
However, this growth does not only bring beneﬁts, it also
exposes the fragility that many systems have in relation to in-
formation security. The authentication process, for example,
can be responsible for many of the vulnerabilities and errors
if it is not properly applied. Today, we still see a scenario
where most systems use a login and password model-based
authentication. This tends to be weak, given the current
technological advances and capabilities of intruders. One
of the main vulnerabilities of this model is identity theft,
which may occur by the guessing or the stealing of a user’s
credentials. These types of attacks are fairly common since
users are usually not aware of the existing threats.
The risk of such threats increases when the information in
the system is private and the authentication model is weak.
Given the sensitivity of the information in telemedicine sys-
tems, identity theft cannot only cause information leakages,
but can also lead to serious or damaging circumstances that
can harm the doctor/patient relationship. Thus, the use of a
more efﬁcient authentication with stronger methods becomes
a way to increase the overall security. An important issue
is that these methods must not make the access of health
record and patient care more difﬁcult.
Moreover, strong authentication methods are commonly
related with the use of speciﬁc cryptographic devices
[1][2][3][4][5]. Such devices are linked to specialized hard-
ware to allow their use. These types of devices have low
interoperability. In other words, they have a high impact
on mobility and usability of a web system. Within the
virtual environment of telemedicine there is still another
problem: a doctor should be able to access medical systems
from anywhere at any time because any impediment by
the system can mean a life-threatening situation. Thus, the
authentication model should be strong enough to guarantee
security, but should not rely on devices that affect mobility
and usability for the sake of efﬁciency.
This paper proposes a new authentication model that uses
modular and ﬂexible methods with a two-factor authentica-
tion as a secure web service. The proposal is based on the
real needs of the Santa Catarina Integrated Telemedicine and
Telehealth System (STT/SC, in Portuguese), a project of the
Federal University of Santa Catarina (UFSC, in Portuguese)
in partnership with the Santa Catarina State Health Ofﬁce
(SES/SC, in Portuguese). Within the proposal, the STT/SC
integrates various methods of the two-factor authentication
based on the possession of auxiliary devices, such as a
cellphone, or physical presence in a particular geographical
location by using land-line systems. An important feature in
our proposed system is the ﬂexibility of the authentication
process by using a list of acceptable mechanisms.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
a brief discussion about the Integrated Telemedicine and
Telehealth System is presented in Section II. Section III has
an inventory of related work with an analysis of the adequacy
of each work in regard to the subject. Sections IV and V
describe the construction stages of the proposed model, from
inception to completion. The implementation of the model
is presented in Section VI. The authentication methods used
in this work are presented in Section VII. Technical analysis
of the authentication methods and the proposed model are
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

presented in Section VIII. Finally, Section IX contains the
conclusion and suggestions for future work.
II. INTEGRATED TELEMEDICINE AND TELEHEALTH
SYSTEM
The increase of information technology development in
recent years has enhanced virtualization of various types of
services. Among these types, the ones that deserve special
attention are telematic environments. Telematic environ-
ments present viable solutions to many types of problems,
including social ones like public health, citizenship, etc. [1]
As part of solutions to social problems The Catarinense
Telemedicine Network (acronym for RCTM, in Portuguese)
[6] is an example. Aiming to facilitate the access to tests
of medium and high complexity in the country side, UFSC
and SES/SC conceived the RCTM.
The main purpose of the RCTM was to extend the the
availability of medical equipment such as electrocardio-
grams, computer tomography and magnetic resonance to
smaller cities. A pilot project was created in 2005, which
began by connecting two cities in the interior of Santa
Catarina with the state capital, Florian´opolis [7].
The STT/SC is a virtual environment to support medicine,
which aims to facilitate access to speciﬁc health services to
people who could not have them in the conventional way.
The main problems people face are physical disabilities,
geographical distance, and ﬁnancial difﬁculties. [8]. The
STT/SC makes available over the web, images, signals and
medical reports generated from accredited health institutions
distributed throughout the state of Santa Catarina - Brazil.
Currently, the system has an average of 50,000 examinations
per month and has more than 2.5 million examinations and
images stored since 2005.
While all this growth brought beneﬁts, it also exposed
weaknesses that the model has in relation to information se-
curity. The high sensitivity of the information may raise the
risk of exposing them to attacks, damage, or compromise.
Fraud and forgeries on medical diagnoses and altered entries
are serious threats, as they can put people’s lives in danger.
Identity theft is a common attack in this type of system. It
is closely linked to the authentication process. For example,
if the authentication process is weak and allow the use of
short passwords, the chances of such an attack increases.
Therefore, the adoption of a more efﬁcient and stronger
authentication system is a simple way to increase the overall
security.
III. RELATED WORK
Security in medical systems has gained the attention
of governments, healthcare providers, research centers and,
consequently, has been a recurring theme in the publications.
Most proposals to the authentication process use a second
factor of authentication and can be separated into two major
groups: those based on digital certiﬁcates, and those based
on biometrics.
Mart´ınez et al. [1] propose an interoperable security
design capable of providing secure authentication and au-
thorization based on digital certiﬁcates. The proposal comes
from a study of business models for applications of e-
government and e-health, which often have the same needs
when it comes to security. The model is based on authentica-
tion and authorization web services to ensure interoperability
between different systems, and it uses digital certiﬁcates to
ensure the user’s identity.
With similar goals, Ahn and Shin [2] proposed a frame-
work for authentication based on cryptographic tokens that
aims to provide more security to protect the data of this
type of system. The focus of this work is the design of a
framework that is able to strongly authenticate a user in
different ways (through the use of signatures, passwords
or biometrics) and secure access to its data. In this model
there is an effort to abstract the different technologies of
smart tokens from the authentication layer, allowing the
interoperability between several different services related to
e-health systems.
Still following the same line, Al-Nayadi and Abawajy [3]
propose the design and implementation of an architecture
for authentication and authorization also based on digital
certiﬁcates that aims to integrate different e-health systems
maintained by various institutions in order to centralize
patient’s data. This model is based on the fact that each
system has an Identity Certiﬁcation Authority (ICA) that
distributes and signs certiﬁcates of its users. Each ICA in
the network trusts in the others and performs authentication
to remote systems through veriﬁcation of a certiﬁcate. The
authorization is based on the attributes of each certiﬁcate.
With a different approach, Han et al. [4] proposes a
framework for authentication and authorization based on
ﬁngerprints. The framework is intended to enhance the
authorization of e-health services and to ensure access for
their users. Authentication is based on ﬁngerprints with a
Personal Identiﬁcation Number (PIN).
In a line similar of Han et al. [4], Garson and Adams
[5] propose a system design for e-hospital security and
privacy. Their work presented an authentication model based
on ﬁngerprint and RFID. In addition to user authentication,
the proposal prevents data from leaving the hospital by
blocking user authentication from outside the building. Not
only concerned with the authentication process, the authors
also present a new encryption method that seeks to prevent
the system from theft, loss and copies of documents.
The papers presented above show a concern for interop-
erability between systems, and are mostly based on digital
certiﬁcates. In such models is necessary to have smart card
readers to perform basic operations. Such readers have low
interoperability and make the use of the system in mobile
devices more difﬁcult. Therefore, the use of readers affects
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

one of the main characteristics of a web system: mobility.
One alternative for solving the problem with the readers
is to use the software certiﬁcate (also cited in the presented
works) which allows the model to be interoperable and
mobile, but also reduces the level of security that can be
provided. Depending on the way which the certiﬁcates are
stored, the required effort to attack the model is similar to
attack a model that uses a simple password.
Other papers presented follow a line using biometrics
as the second factor of authentication. The reading of a
ﬁngerprint is made by a speciﬁc hardware, which has the
same problems of the smart card readers. Moreover, they
often don’t have compatibility with each other. In practice,
this approach is even worse than the model based on digital
certiﬁcates, since the user (patient/doctor) is forced to use
a computer that meets all the installation requirements of
the reader. Furthermore, this is a technique that has false
positives and negatives rates higher than acceptable.
Our proposal is based on the strengths of the papers
presented, and seeks to correct the problems identiﬁed and
provides a better adaptation to the telemedicine systems. To
achieve the goals of creating a new two-factor authentication
process, we did an examination of requirements using the
STT/SC as a case study. The process of construction of our
proposal is presented in the following sections.
IV. CASE STUDY AND REQUIREMENTS
To better understand the requirements of an authentication
model looking at the medical context, we conducted a study
about the use of this type of system using the STT/SC.
Actual usage scenarios showed us that there are cases
where users (usually medical specialists that provide reports)
need to access the system from a computer outside the
hospital, for example, when they are traveling. Thus, the ﬁrst
requirement is to maintain the mobility of the web system.
The authentication service has to cope with that.
It is assumed that such a system should not block the
work of a doctor, because this may put patients live at risk.
Therefore, a user should be able to access the telemedicine
system from any computer, tablet or mobile phone, since
it has an Internet connection. Because of this requirement,
the adoption of authentication methods that require crypto-
graphic hardware, and that need speciﬁc readers, such as
smart cards and biometrics, is unfeasible.
Moreover, it was noticed that there were cases where
access to the system was urgent, and in these cases, the
user should not have their access prevented. So in the
same way that the device used to access the system cannot
be limiting, the devices that are used as second factor of
authentication should also not restrict access. And this is
the second requirement of authentication model: ﬂexibility.
Cryptographic tokens are very speciﬁc devices and can be
easily lost or forgotten. Thus, we avoid the use of speciﬁc
hardware and try to replace them with other devices of daily
use, like cell phones, which normally are carried by users.
Furthermore, the ﬂexibility of the services requirements also
requires a user to be able to access the system even when
they are not in possession of any device required. The model
should provide this kind of situation and offer alternatives.
V. PROPOSAL
Besides the requirements presented in the previous sec-
tion, we must also take into account requirements common
to the authentication models. For that, we built the ﬁrst
prototype. This was a dedicated library responsible only for
the authentication process and to make available a set of
authentication methods, allowing the system to decide the
way that these methods will be used. In order to allow
STT/SC to decide witch method use to authenticate the
users, the library had to be written in PHP [9], same
programming language of STT/SC.
All authentication methods involved in this model are used
as a second factor of authentication, i.e., in our proposal the
user authenticates exactly the same way they do today and,
in a second step, gives some information to prove that he
has possession of certain unique device. The authentication
methods used were selected in such a way that they would
not change the characteristic of mobility of STT/SC. This
was done using common devices, such as smartphones and
landlines instead of speciﬁc cryptographic tokens. Further-
more, we do not use methods of authentication that depend
on token readers, such as those based on smart cards and
biometrics.
But even in this scenario, we cannot assume that all users
of the system have the required device during authentication.
To meet the requirement of ﬂexibility, it was necessary
to provide the possibility of changing the authentication
method to an alternative (that depends on another type of
device), which is also provided by the library. Therefore, the
model preserves the characteristics of mobility and ﬂexibility
of the system, while it does not prevent access to its users
as provided in the requirements.
The scenario presented above meets the requirements and
ﬁts well in cases where the user is not with his smartphone,
or it is out of battery. However, it’s not well suited to cases
where the user makes constant access to the system but does
not have such a device. This implies that one more process is
needed to change the authentication method for each access
attempt. To avoid frustrated users who might try to bypass
the authentication process, a new model was proposed.
A new strategy was then conceived: each user has a list
of authentication methods that are enabled. Thus, the user
keeps disabled methods that uses devices which he does
not have, and prevents cases as described previously. With
the inclusion of user’s data and the different combinations
of authentication methods that the system may possess,
this new model began to store a much larger amount of
information. No longer behaving like a library, it became
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

an authentication service. Now has its own context and
independence from the system that uses it.
VI. IMPLEMENTATION
The proposed model was implemented as a secure authen-
tication web service using the standard remote procedure
call (RPC). In this implementation, we used the XML-RPC,
which is a simple pattern of RPC that allows communication
between systems of different architectures and languages.
This is possible because the communication is done via
HTTPS and the encoding of calls is done with XML, two
standards quite solid and disseminated.
Since the goal of the service is only to authenticate
users, we opted for a simpler protocol. Thus, we have
avoided transforming the authentication (which only carries
the credentials of a user) into a complex and long procedure.
The use of a mutually authenticated HTTPS was neces-
sary to prevent the user’s credentials transit in unprotected
networks upon communication between the STT/SC and the
web service.
The web service has an interface that centralizes all
authentication methods available, called Authenticator. Each
call to one of the methods of the Authenticator is actually the
process of authenticating a user. The data of these users are
maintained by the web service in a local database. Thus, it
was necessary to introduce an administrative interface to the
service for the maintenance of users. This interface is called
ServiceManager and it takes care of all the maintenance
of data related to users. These include the maintenance of
lists of authentication methods enabled for each user and the
system authentication policy.
The policy is a form of combining the authentication
methods and its level of priority. In other words, a user will
authenticate with the method that the system considers the
most priority. The list of enabled authentication methods
deﬁnes which methods the user can use, i.e., if a user does
not have a smartphone, then all authentication methods that
rely on such a device are disabled.
With this approach it was possible to automate the change
of the authentication method. The web service uses the
policy and the list of enabled methods of the user, and with
this information it mounts a third list with the intersection
of both, ordered in the same way that the policy. It is still
possible to analyze if the methods that depend on the internet
are online, avoiding attempts that would result in failure.
The Figure 1 describes an authentication process in the
telemedicine system integrated with the authentication ser-
vice. In the ﬁrst step, the user gives his credentials to the
system. In the second step, the system pass the credentials
to the authentication service, so that can verify it (step 3). If
the veriﬁcation succeeds the authentication service combines
the list of enabled methods of the user and the policy to
make a third list with the intersection of both (step 4). In
other words, the third list contains the methods that the
user is able to use (the user has the required device) and
the system supports, sorted by the priority of the policy.
In the step 5, the authentication service requires to the
telemedicine system to use the priority method, in this case
Phone call. In the step 6, the system requires to the user to
use the Phone call method. In the step 7, the user makes
the call, concluding the authentication process. In this case
the system avoided two methods that user cannot use to
authenticate himself because he does not have the required
devices.
In this approach, the change of the authentication method
is a sporadic process, where the user says he is not in
possession of any of the requested devices and bypasses the
second check. Such cases are provisioned in the service,
since ﬂexibility is a requirement, but are recorded in a
database of logs and accounted for by user. These data are
available to the system, so it can use the records in the way it
wants, the system can allow a speciﬁc number of bypasses,
or even block access to a user if it detects a possible attack.
In this new model, the only actor existent is the
telemedicine system. This emphasizes the separation be-
tween the layers of authentication and authorization. The
service does not worry about which user is performing the
operation, since it has been authorized by the STT/SC. Each
of the three speciﬁc requirements has been addressed in this
model. Mobility and ﬂexibility are characteristics inherited
from the ﬁrst model and the impact on usability is reduced
by automating the change of authentication methods.
VII. AUTHENTICATION METHODS
The methods used in this work are all authentication
factors based on something the user possesses. According
to Cheng [10] in multi-factor authentication system, each
factor must be in possession only of the user and an attacker
should not be able to access it easily.
Our proposal tries to use personal devices, which are
usually carried all the time by users, thus making any
attempted attack easily noticeable. We avoid the use of
speciﬁc cryptographic tokens because they are not common
objects for users of medical systems, and they usually have
low interoperability, besides that, they are very expensive.
There are three methods chosen to be developed in this
research: One-Time Password, SMS and phone calls.
As it’s name suggests One-Time Passwords [11] are pass-
words that are used only once, generated from a previously
shared seed. According to Haller et al. [11], the process
of generating OTPs should have two entities: a generator
and a validation server. The generator is usually a device
of personal use, in this work we use a smartphone with
an application developed based on Google Authenticator to
generate passwords [12].
The SMS (Short Message Service) based method is an
Out of band authentication method. According to FFIEC
[13] an Out of band, authentication can be deﬁned as an
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Telemedicine 
System
Authentication 
Web Service
2 - auth{username, password}
3 - verify{username, password}
4 - intersection{Policy, 
UserAuthMethods}
5 - require Phone call
6 - require Phone call
7 - Phone call
1 - auth{username, password}
Figure 1: Authentication Service
authentication technique that allows the identity of the user
who originated the transaction to be veriﬁed through another
channel from the one used to start the operation. This method
consists in sending a random alphanumeric password via
SMS to the user’s cellphone. When the user receives the
password it is used as a second factor of authentication to
prove the possession of the phone line (cellphone).
The phone calls based authentication method is also Out
of band and consists of recording the caller ID of a call made
by the user to one of the allowed phones in the telemedicine
system. The allowed phones are VoIP phones that run a
script that gets the caller ID when a call is received and ends
it. The script also records via the web service authentication
the obtained caller ID. When the web service receives an ID
it identiﬁes the user who owns that number and records the
time of the call. To authenticate, the user enters his username
and password (ﬁrst factor) and in a second stage informs
that already made the call. The service veriﬁes that the
information is true and checks whether the operation has not
expired. The expiration time of a call and the allowed class
of the phone (ﬁxed or mobile) is deﬁned by the telemedicine
system. The fact that the user has executed a call to one of
authorized numbers is a proof of possession of the second
factor, in this case access to a cellphone or landline.
VIII. ANALYSIS
This session presents an analysis on security and usability
of each authentication method. The analysis is based on
their characteristics, as well as other general analysis of the
proposed model.
The technical analysis of the authentication methods is
based on the Eletronic Authentication Guideline [14] of
NIST - USA (National Institute of Standards and Technol-
ogy). The guideline contains recomendation for remote au-
thentication over open networks, like internet. The technical
guidance supplements OMB guidance, that deﬁnes four lev-
els of assurance (Level 1 to 4) in terms of the consequences
of the authentication errors and misuse of credentials. The
NIST guidance speciﬁc technical requirements for each of
the four levels of assurance in ﬁve areas. In this analysis we
consider only the area of tokens.
A. Analysis of authentication methods
In our proposal, One-Time Passwords uses smartphones
as passwords generators. Because they are personal devices,
users already are familiar with their interfaces and their
forms of interaction. Because of that, this model does not
cause a great impact on the usability of STT/SC. It does
not require a user to interact with unknown cryptographic
devices, which are difﬁcult to use sometimes.
One-Time Passwords are quite common and well accepted
in banking environments. Similarly to these environments,
operations in medical systems can also be considered of high
risk. Thus, the use of OTP in a system like that is justiﬁed.
According to FFIEC [13] passwords generators are secure
for the time-sensitive nature or synchronized authentication.
Also according to FFIEC [13], randomness, unpredictabil-
ity, and uniqueness of the OTPs substantially increase the
difﬁculty of an attacker to obtain a password. Moreover, the
process of generating an OTP is ofﬂine and cyber attacks
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

could only be realized when the password is already used.
Whereas after its use, OTPs are invalidated, the chances of
success of such an attack are quite low.
The attack by guessing also has a very small chance
of success too. According to M’Raihi et al. 2005 [15] the
probability of success of a guessing is:
Sec =
s.v
10Digit
The probability is a function of size s of the window
provided by resynchronization method, the quantity v of
attempts that an attacker can do before being blocked and
the amount of digits that the OTP has.
Because smartphones are of a very personal nature, physi-
cal attacks like theft would be easily perceived. Unlike cyber
attacks, robberies and thieves of physical devices are not
usually discrete and the user knowing the attack and its
consequences, may take appropriate action to mitigate it,
such as cancellation or temporary blocking his account.
Smartphones are sophisticated and expensive equipment.
Thus, the SMS authentication is an alternative that is more
far-reaching, in regards to smartphones. According to ANA-
TEL (Brazilian Agency of Telecommunications) [16] the
amount of mobile accounts in May 2012 in Brazil is more
than 254 million, a sum greater than the population which
according to the population census of 2010 [17] is about
190 million. And one of the advantages of this model is the
fact that most users already have cellphone and already are
familiar with the SMS system too.
According to Alzomai et al. [18] the main advantage
of using an SMS-based model is that the messages are
sent through the mobile phone network, which is separate
and independent from the internet. According to Jøsang et
al. 2007 [19] security schemes like this are based on the
assumption that it is difﬁcult for an attacker to steal a user’s
cellphone or to attack the mobile network. The chances of
success of an attack by guessing are similar to those in
previous model since the characteristic of randomness is also
present in this model.
However, the SMS model has a high cost for the STT/SC.
Each authentication requires sending a message and, the
cost of maintaining the model increases with the number of
accesses. As an alternative to this high cost was presented
the third model, based on caller ID.
The model based on caller ID has the same features of
the SMS model: it uses devices that users already have and
know; it uses an independent network and the security level
is also similar. The advantage of this model over SMS is
that it’s free for the STT/SC and can also be a free method
for users, depending on the contract plan with the carrier.
B. Analysis of the Model
The security level of the model is very tied to the level of
security provided by each of the methods that the STT/SC
uses. According to the technical guidance of NIST, basic
OTP generators can be considered a Single-factor OTP
device. These types of device can reach 2 in the level of
assurance. Because our application uses a password to block
access to the OTP generator, it can be considered a Multi-
factor OTP device – since the password is something that
the user knows, and the OTP proves that the user has the
generator device – reaching 3 in the level of assurance.
The SMS-based method can be considered an Out of band
token, it means that is uniquely addressable and supports
communication over a channel that is separate from the pri-
mary channel for authentication. According to the technical
guidance of NIST, these types of tokens can reach 2 in the
level of assurance. Likely the OTP device, this token can
reach the level 3, but only in cases where the user becomes
aware of the existents threats and conﬁgures his cellphone
to use some kind of password to block it.
The caller ID based method does not ﬁt the tokens
classiﬁcation of NIST because it does not use any password
in the process. Despite that, it can be also considered an Out
of band token because of its similarity with the SMS-based
method, and reach a level of security close to the provided
by the level of assurance 2.
However, the methods presented are only one of the
factors used in the authentication process. According to Di
Pietro et al. [20], an attacker who successfully break some
of the methods presented, still would not have access to
the STT/SC without knowing the user’s login credentials.
Furthermore, our proposal gives the system the freedom to
deﬁne how to use the methods, so that it can use more than
one at a time, increasing the difﬁculty of an attack.
The authentication process is completely separated from
the business rules of STT/SC. This means that the web
service can be used in security critical areas of the system,
not just the login. By increasing the number of factors used
in an authentication or the amount of sessions that require
authentication, it increases the level of security. Of course,
overuse may lose usability. According to Alzomai et al. [18],
when users encounter frustrating security tasks, they tend to
avoid them or ignore them. Thus the ﬂexibility of the model
is shown as an important feature because it allows the system
to deﬁne where and how it wants to use the web service.
IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented a new authentication model based
on secure web service. This model is geared to the security
needs of STT/SC, which contains high sensitive information.
In order to ﬁt the main requirements of this type of system,
the model uses multi-factor authentication. It also provides
a set of authentication methods that can be combined to
provide greater ﬂexibility and reliability to the process.
Our model operates as a web service and therefore does
not imposes some technological limitations, such as the
implementation language. It also does not require the use
of speciﬁc cryptographic tokens. For that it can be easily
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

integrated into various systems. Its high interoperability and
its efﬁciency could be demonstrated by a prototype of the
service. The proposal is fully implemented and integrated
into a telemedicine system in operation in all the cities of
the state of Santa Catarina and used by more than 6,000
users (doctors, nurses and technicians).
Our analysis shows that, the proposed model ﬁts well
to telemedicine systems. It provides ﬂexibility and can be
molded in order to meet the needs of such systems. In this
analysis, we included the main features of STT/SC, which
are ﬂexible enough to avoid interposition between the system
and the doctor-patient relationship. Its high interoperability
and system event log robustness is also demonstrated.
Besisdes that, our analysis also demonstrates a increase
in the security of the authentication process of the STT/SC.
That can be demonstrated by the levels of assurance, which
reaches 1 when the system uses only the simple password
based method, and reaches up to 3 with our proposal.
The analysis also demonstrated that the model covers the
major attacks involving the authentication process. In our
model we can provide authentication properties not present
in most other models, such as guaranteeing geographical
authentication, based on the use of landline system.
In order to improve the authentication service offered
it is suggested to add new authentication methods. Our
next steps in improvement of authentication mechanisms
are the inclusion of an identity based encryption to allow
authentication of users not registered in the system. We
also plan the implementation of a system for sending one-
time password (OTP) via dial tones, which makes the OTP
method even more affordable.
X. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The
authors
would
like
to
thank
Coordenac¸˜ao
de
Aperfeic¸oamento de Pessoal de N´ıvel Superior for support-
ing this work and Laborat´orio de Seguranc¸a em Computac¸˜ao
for assisting this work and helping to improve it from the
very beginning.
REFERENCES
[1] J.-F. Mart´ınez, V. Hern´andez, M.-A. Valero, A. G´omez,
E. P´erez, I. Pau, H.
´Alvarez, and L. Vadillo, “Security
services provision for telematic services at the knowledge
and information society,” in Proceedings of the 2007 Euro
American conference on Telematics and information systems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 41:1–41:7.
[2] G.-J. Ahn and D. Shin, “Towards scalable authentication in
health services,” in WET ICE 2002. Proceedings. Eleventh
IEEE International Workshops on, 2002, pp. 83 – 88.
[3] F. Al-Nayadi and J. Abawajy, “An authentication framework
for e-health systems,” in Signal Processing and Information
Technology, 2007 IEEE International Symposium on, Dec.
2007, pp. 616 –620.
[4] S. Han, G. Skinner, V. Potdar, and E. Chang, “A framework
of authentication and authorization for e-health services,” ser.
SWS ’06.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006, pp. 105–106.
[5] K. Garson and C. Adams, “Security and privacy system
architecture for an e-hospital environment,” ser. IDtrust ’08.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 122–130.
[6] Cyclops, “Sistema catarinense de telemedicina e telessa´ude,”
https://www.telemedicina.ufsc.br/rctm, 2010.
[7] J. Wallauer, D. Macedo, R. Andrade, and A. von Wan-
genheim, “Building a national telemedicine network,” IT
Professional, vol. 10, pp. 12–17, 2008.
[8] A. von Wangenheim, L. F. de Souza Nobre, H. Tognoli, S. M.
Nassar, and K. Ho, “User satisfaction with asynchronous
telemedicine: A study of users of santa catarina system of
telemedicine and telehealth.” Telemed J E Health, vol. 18,
no. 5, pp. 339–46, 2012.
[9] The PHP Group, “Php documentation,” http://php.net/, 2013.
[10] F. Cheng, “Security attack safe mobile and cloud-based one-
time password tokens using rubbing encryption algorithm,”
Mob. Netw. Appl., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 304–336, Jun. 2011.
[11] N. Haller, C. Metz, P. Nesser, and M. Straw, “A One-Time
Password System,” RFC 2289 (Standard), Internet Engineer-
ing Task Force, Feb. 1998.
[12] T. B. Idalino and D. Spagnuelo, “Senhas descart´aveis em dis-
positivos m´oveis para ambientes de telemedicina,” in SBSeg
2012 WTICG, http://sbseg2012.ppgia.pucpr.br/, Nov 2012.
[13] FFIEC, “Authentication in an internet banking environment,”
Outubro 2005, http://www.fﬁec.gov/press/pr101205.htm.
[14] W. E. Burr, D. F. Dodson, E. M. Newton, R. A. Perlner, W. T.
Polk, S. Gupta, and E. A. Nabbus, “Sp 800-63-1. electronic
authentication guideline,” Gaithersburg, MD, United States,
Tech. Rep., 2011.
[15] D. M’Raihi, M. Bellare, F. Hoornaert, D. Naccache, and
O. Ranen, “HOTP: An HMAC-Based One-Time Password
Algorithm,” RFC 4226 (Informational), Internet Engineering
Task Force, Dec. 2005.
[16] Agˆencia
Nacional
de
Telecomincac¸˜oes,
“Quantidade
de
acessos/plano
de
servic¸o/unidade
da
federac¸˜ao,”
http://sistemas.anatel.gov.br/SMP/Administracao/Consulta
/AcessosPrePosUF/tela.asp, 2012.
[17] IBGE,
“Sinopse
do
censo
demogr´aﬁco
2010,”
http://www.censo2010.ibge.gov.br/sinopse/, 2010.
[18] M. Alzomai, A. Josang, A. McCullagh, and E. Foo, “Strength-
ening sms-based authentication through usability,” in ISPA
’08. International Symposium on, Dec. 2008, pp. 683 –688.
[19] A. Jøsang, M. A. Zomai, and S. Suriadi, “Usability and
privacy in identity management architectures,” ser. ACSW
’07.
Darlinghurst, Australia, Australia: Australian Computer
Society, Inc., 2007, pp. 143–152.
[20] R. Di Pietro, G. Me, and M. Strangio, “A two-factor mobile
authentication scheme for secure ﬁnancial transactions,” in
ICMB 2005, July 2005, pp. 28 – 34.
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

