Towards a Mobile, Assistive and Intuitive 
Videoconferencing 
Víctor Torres-Padrosa, Eusebi Calle, Jose L. Marzo, Mercè Rovira 
Universitat de Girona, Spain 
{victor.torres, eusebi.calle, joseluis.marzo, merce.rovira}@udg.edu 
 
Abstract—In this paper we present TAM-TAM (Tele Assistance 
and Monitoring), a tool devised to provide assistive and intuitive 
videoconferencing. It can be used to provide social support, 
remote consultation, remote monitoring and training or 
rehabilitation 
group 
sessions 
through 
multi-user 
videoconferencing. TAM-TAM relies on a simple and minimalist 
interface based on accessible standard web technologies and open 
video streaming solutions. We also describe our progress for 
bringing TAM-TAM mobile, targeting Android and iOS tablet 
PCs and mobile market.  
Keywords–videoconferencing; teleconsultation; social care; 
nursing home; group home; elderly. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The accelerating pace of the world’s population aging is 
remarkably 
changing 
the 
demographic 
distribution 
of 
population, as predicted by the last International Population 
Report issued by the U.S. National Institute on Aging [1], 
which foresees that the global population aged 65 and over 
(about 7 percent of the world’s population in 2008) will rise to 
14 percent of the total by 2040. In Europe, the number of 
Europeans aged over 65 will increase by 52.3% from 2005 to 
2030, with more than 100 million people older than 80 years by 
2020 [2]. 
The ageing of the population together with changes in 
lifestyle become two key factors in the growing prevalence of 
chronic disorders [3], which put in risk the current healthcare 
system since it is more focused on the treatment of acute 
diseases. In 2002, the World Health Organization (WHO) 
launched the Innovative Care for Chronic Conditions (ICCC) 
initiative, which formulated the basic principles and strategies 
to improve the management of chronic patients: disease 
prevention, an increasing implication of the patient and 
relatives in the management of the disease and a joint work 
between primary, secondary care and all the actors involved in 
healthcare. 
In this context, there is a need for technological tools that 
help to deploy this integrated care for chronic patients, who are 
mainly composed by the elderly, impaired and long-term care 
patients. Hence, videoconferencing postulates as a very 
powerful technology to enhance social support, loneliness and 
depressive status of those collectives [4]. 
However, there is still a lack of intuitive applications for 
those collectives. According to [5], Internet technologies would 
be more used if they were better adapted to the elderly. On the 
other hand, the main reasons adduced by non-cybernauts for 
not using the Internet are the difficulty (71%) and the effort 
required for learning how to use it (60%). Among the proposals 
for improving the usage of Internet technologies, price and 
simple interfaces are considered to be prominent. 
In this paper we present TAM-TAM (Tele Assistance 
Monitoring), a tool that offers an intuitive interface for the 
elderly, impaired and long-term care people as well as for 
health professionals to provide social support, remote 
consultation, remote monitoring and training and rehabilitation 
group sessions through multi-user videoconferencing. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Although there are several initiatives and projects dealing 
with devices and applications devised for the aforementioned 
collectives, whenever a hardware device is needed but not 
produced in mass, it results in a relevant increase of the cost of 
the system, which is not affordable by public health systems. 
That’s why TAM-TAM focuses on standard hardware such as 
PCs and tablet PCs, as discussed in subsequent sections. Some 
related projects do not include videoconferencing functionality 
(ALZ-AVANZA project [6]), they rely on the use of a specific 
set top box connected to a TV display (ATTENTIANET 
project [7) or they have built their specific tactile hardware and 
specific software (Colabor@ project [8]).  
On the other hand, there is also a wide range of 
videoconferencing applications, either open or proprietary that 
could be adopted for being integrated in a new application. In 
general, videoconferencing solutions can be classified into two 
types: dedicate systems and desktop systems.  
Dedicate systems consist of an integrated equipment 
including all the interfaces with external devices (i.e. camera, 
microphone, speakers, display) and a hardware or software 
codec for the audiovisual digital transmission. Some examples 
of manufacturers are Sony, Tandberg, Polycom and Cisco, 
amongst others. These systems are, in general, expensive and 
rely on specific proprietary hardware. Moreover, changes in 
their interfaces are not easy to implement. 
Desktop systems are applications that can be installed or 
run on a computer and are very diverse in nature and number. 
Some relevant free tools include Ekko, TokBox and Vawkr, 
which can be easily embedded in a web site or as part of 
another application. However, they lack some functionality 
such as recording conferences or sharing documents, and they 
are not open source, so they cannot be freely modified or 
improved to be adapted to specific medico social environments 
(see section III.A). Among payment solutions it is worth 
mentioning Adobe Acrobat Connect Pro and ViewCat, both 
flash-based, 
and 
Skype, 
which 
currently 
supports 
videoconferencing in iOS (4.0 or above) and a subset of 
Android (2.1 or above) devices. Regarding open source 
solutions, the most relevant is OpenMeetings, a flash-based 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

tool that includes shared desktop, blackboard, and multi 
videoconferencing. However, the complexity of the application 
odds with the goal of providing a very intuitive interface and 
makes it difficult to run it on tablet PCs. 
Finally, we need not forget about HTML5, a recent 
standard that could be used in the next future for developing 
videoconferencing solutions. Currently, the specifications and 
implementations of HTML5 in different browsers support the 
rendering of video streams in the same browser without the 
need of external plugins. The main unsolved issue is the access 
to the local camera for streaming the video, although some lab 
experiments have already proven its feasibility [9]. 
III. 
REQUIREMENTS AND FUNCTIONALITY 
A. System Requirements 
TAM-TAM has been developed in the context of a working 
group lead by the BCDS research group [10] in coordination 
with the Social Services Cohesion Board depending of the 
Girona’s Council. This working group, called “ICT, 
socialization and active ageing” explores and promotes new 
efficient ways for supporting the elderly, dependent and 
impaired people through the use of ICT technologies. This 
collaboration relies in the collection of the requirements from 
end users but also in testing with real users in a real 
environment, which includes nursing and group homes as well 
as particular homes involving the target collectives. 
Five scenarios have been identified for the provision of 
videoconferencing services in medico social environments. 
1) Rendezvous: Given an appointment, the patient accesses 
the application and waits until the professional is ready to 
assist them. Only when the professional is ready, the 
videoconference is started. This is the typical operation in real 
life, where patients wait for the doctor to be available for the 
consultation. The professional constantly monitors waiting 
patients and selects who is to be attended next. 
2) Remote camera control: The patient is contacted by a 
professional or call center. This scenario is foreseen for cases 
where alarms are involved, where the patient’s impairment is a 
barrier to use technology or when an intensive monitoring is 
needed. Since the videoconference is not started by the patient, 
it involves privacy issues that should be formalized in an 
agreement with the patient or their family. 
3) Call center: The patient contacts an intermediary, 
which redirects them to the appropriate professional if needed. 
Here the patient may or may not have an appointment with the 
professional. The call center may act as the receptionist of the 
professional or as an integrated service that can be used to 
manage emergency calls and filter user requests according to 
the criteria of an  intermediate  health or social professional. 
4) Single videoconferencing: This is the typical scenario 
present in most of videoconferencing tools. A user has a set of 
contacts with which they are able to interact as long as they 
are all connected at the same time. This set of contacts may be 
static (not modifiable by the user) or dynamic (modifiable) 
depending on the requirements of the application and the skills 
of the target user. 
5) Multi videoconferencing: This scenario is foreseen to 
enable the practice of training or rehabilitation group sessions 
for patients (e.g. occupational therapy), improving the feeling 
of belonging to a group of people with similar problems and 
concerns. Moreover it is also useful for holding medical or 
training sessions among professionals and/or the members of 
the patient’s support group, as their familiars and carers. 
 
B. System Functionality 
Current main functionalities present in TAM-TAM are 
described in detail next. 
Videoconferencing. It is the central element in TAM-TAM, 
as it is needed for providing telemonitoring and teleassistance 
health and social services. Videoconferencing has proved to be 
very useful both from the medical and social perspective. On 
one hand, from the medical point of view, it enables a closer 
monitoring of the patients while improving their compliance to 
the prescribed treatment or therapy [11]. On the other hand, 
from the social perspective, it alleviates the patients’ loneliness 
and depressive status and improves their emotional and social 
support thanks to their interaction with their families, social 
carers or psychologists [4]. TAM-TAM currently supports 
scenarios 1, 2, 4 and 5 from those identified in section III.A, all 
of which rely on the same core. This fact proves how versatile 
the system can be by adapting the front-end operation and 
interface. The video quality can be dynamically tuned to fit the 
available bandwidth and avoid delays in the transmission. 
Calendar, messages and notifications. A relevant feature in 
some environments is the presence of a reminder mechanism 
for activities or actions that need to be carried out punctually or 
periodically, such as drug administration, exercises to be 
carried 
out, 
medical 
appointments 
(physical 
or 
by 
videoconference). TAM-TAM offers different interfaces for 
that purpose. First, it provides a calendar-like interface for 
editing and consulting any activity or action that is linked to a 
certain date, time and periodicity, what we call a notification. 
Each notification can be configured with an urgency degree 
(low, medium and high), which determines whether it will 
trigger a visible warning when the user accesses TAM-TAM or 
whether it will be kept in the calendar with no visible warning. 
Then, we also provide a mailbox-like interface for enabling 
users to send customized messages to any other user associated 
to them. Calendars become a very powerful tool when people 
belong to nursing or group homes, which are monitored by 
specific associations, as they can be used to manage the 
patient’s agenda from the association itself. Edition interfaces 
can be configured to be accessible to all or part of the 
application users, depending on their profile and skills. 
Instant messaging and chat. These features introduce a 
higher complexity in the use of telemonitoring and 
teleassistance applications, since they need a direct interaction 
of users with physical or tactile and virtual keyboards, which 
might be something not affordable when dealing with some 
types of patients. However, in some occasions when the 
audiovisual interaction between two parties becomes not 
feasible due to temporal bandwidth constraints, it may act as a 
backup means of communication. Moreover, for users that do 
not have difficulty in using technology, this may act as an 
added value to establish and maintain a less formal 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

communication with other users. Therefore, TAM-TAM can be 
configured 
to 
provide 
instant 
messaging 
and 
chat 
functionalities depending on the user profile. 
User authentication. Since user authentication needs to be 
kept as simple as possible, a user and password approach has 
been adopted, offering the possibility to remind them for future 
accesses. In tablet PCs or if the user device is to be used by a 
single patient, authentication can be highly simplified by 
following an initial setup that bundles the application to the 
user. 
User contacts. TAM-TAM enables bundling a set of 
predefined contacts to a user by the system administrator as 
well as adding new users by sending invitations. The user’s 
contact list is available to determine whether a user is 
connected so that a communication can be started. 
IV. 
ARCHITECTURE 
A. Architecture 
TAM-TAM consists of two main parts: the portal or front-
end, and the server or back-end, as depicted in Fig.1.  
The front-end is the application that users access, either 
from their web browsers or as an installed application. It offers 
the interface for the whole system functionality, i.e. 
videoconferencing, calendar, messages and notifications, 
instant messaging and chat, authentication, user contacts, etc. 
The back-end is composed of the modules that obtain and 
manage the information stored in the system’s databases. 
TAM-TAM currently uses two different relational databases, 
one for users, contacts and profiles and a different database for 
managing the calendar, messages and notifications. Regarding 
the 
modules, 
they 
provide 
the 
intelligence 
for 
the 
functionalities offered by TAM-TAM and the interfaces with 
the corresponding databases. For example, there is a module 
responsible for managing notifications, messages and the user’s 
calendar. This module is implemented as a web service that 
offers the functions to store create new events, messages and 
notifications as well as to consult them for a specific user. The 
front-end makes use of those functions whenever a new 
notification is to be created or when a user logs into the system 
to consult any pending urgent notification. There is also a 
module dealing with videoconferencing, which receives all the 
audio and video streams and forwards them to those users that 
belong 
to 
the 
same 
audiovisual 
single 
or 
multi 
videoconferencing. This module is a servlet running on the 
multimedia server. Fig. 2 identifies the technologies being used 
in TAM-TAM, described in subsequent sections. 
B. Client Technology 
TAM-TAM client technology is based on the Adobe Flash 
and Adobe AIR technologies. While the first is used for 
generating a Rich Internet Application (RIA) to be run on a 
web browser, the latter is used to build native applications for 
mobile and tablet devices (see section V). 
RIA technologies offer in the web browser some features of 
traditional desktop applications, while making the update 
process transparent for the user, avoiding the reload of web 
pages and offering capabilities for designing intuitive 
interfaces.  
Among the available frameworks used for the development 
of RIAs, JavaFX, Microsoft Silverlight, AJAX, Google Web 
Toolkit and Adobe Flash are the most relevant and adopted. 
Adobe Flash was chosen for TAM-TAM, since it enables the 
development of web applications in a simple manner by means 
of the Adobe Flex framework. Adobe Flex is an open source 
compiler and SDK based on two underlying programming 
languages: MXML and ActionScript (AS). While the first is 
used for easing the design of user interfaces, which can be 
based on Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), the latter offers an API 
that can be used for achieving interactivity and, in our case, for 
integrating audio and video conferencing in a simple way. AS 
is an open source object-oriented language that can be 
compiled into a SWF file to be run on the Adobe Flash Player. 
The control of multimedia flows in Flex is achieved by 
using the NetConnection and NetStream classes offered by the 
AS API to create a RTMP connection to the media server and 
stream an audio and video transmission over that connection.  
 
 
Fig. 1. TAM-TAM architecture components 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Fig. 2. TAM-TAM technologies 
Moreover, the possibility of invoking web services from the 
AS language simplifies the extension of current functionalities 
and its integration with external services. This has been the 
approach followed to generate and consult calendar events, 
notifications and messages, implemented as a PHP web 
service. The same approach will be used to consult and modify 
the patient’s electronic health record, presumably stored in 
remote Hospital Information Systems. 
C. Server Technology 
The multimedia server architecture is based on Red5 [12], 
an open source Flash server written in Java and hosted on 
Google Code. Red5 supports the delivery of multimedia 
content through the RTMP, RTMPT and RTMPS protocols, 
whose specification is open for the public use. 
The fact that Red5 is an open source project eases the 
modification of the server and enables the development of 
cheaper and open solutions with respect to other proprietary 
server alternatives as Adobe Flash Media Server and Wowza. 
Red5 contains an HTTP and application server that can host 
a custom-made servlet managing the multimedia streams and 
generating specific events for the connected clients to notify 
any change produced in the shared objects.  
On the other hand, the server part also consists of an AMP 
server, which combines an Apache web server, a MySQL 
database server and PHP.  Whereas the web server hosts the 
Flash web application, the MySQL database server is needed 
for the different databases regarding users, contacts and 
profiles and the calendar, messages and notifications. 
Finally, it is important to remark that both Red5 and AMP 
servers are available for GNU/Linux, Windows and Mac OS X 
operating systems, which eases the deployment of TAM-TAM 
in different production environments. 
V. 
TOWARDS MOBILE VIDEOCONFERENCING 
In the last years, with the increasing development of the 
tablet PC market, very few companies or initiatives have taken 
benefit of the new capabilities provided by those devices for 
developing videoconferencing applications other than video 
calls [13][14]. Tablet PCs have long-lasting batteries and 
capacitive screens that ease their use with respect to PCs and 
portable PCs. They can be easily transported and charged, 
sustained and connected to external displays by using docks. 
Main operating systems running on tablet PCs are iOS, 
Android and Windows 7, being Android the most adopted in 
mobile devices and tablet PCs other that the Apple iPhone and 
iPad.  
Next, we describe the progress for bringing TAM-TAM 
mobile in different operating systems in the mobile context. 
Since TAM-TAM is to be run on the Adobe Flash Player, any 
operating system (OS) or device supporting Flash will be 
suitable for running the client application, as long as it has a 
microphone, a front webcam and a fixed, Wi-Fi or mobile 
Internet access. 
Currently, the use of Adobe Flash technology enables the 
development of applications to be run on the browser targeting 
a very large part of the market, excluding iOS and some old 
versions of the most common OSs. In order to be run on the 
browser, Adobe has specific versions of the Flash Player for 
different OSs and browsers [15].  
From 
our 
experience 
and 
tests, 
Flash-based 
videoconferencing performs well on all Windows, Linux and 
Mac OS X PCs, tablets and/or mobiles, but it still has some 
limitations when running on Android and is not compatible 
with iOS.  
When an Adobe Flash (version 10.3 or higher) application 
is run in the browser on an Android 3.0 (Honeycomb) device, 
the execution sandbox does not allow it to access the local 
camera for streaming the local video and audio. While in other 
operating systems the Flash player asks the user for permission 
to get access to the local camera, in Android this feature is 
disabled, thus preventing the user to send his own video stream. 
This issue will presumably not be solved in future releases 
since Adobe has recently announced that the Adobe Flash 
player plugin for mobile browsers will not be continued. 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Fig. 3. TAM-TAM “Rendezvous” operation mode screenshots (left: patient view, right: professional view) 
 
Fig. 4. TAM-TAM “Multi videoconferencing” operation mode screenshot 
The solution to deal with the aforementioned limitations 
relies on the use of the Adobe AIR middleware, which enables 
to build standalone Flash-based client applications that are run 
like native applications. Adobe AIR is available for different 
operating systems, including Android and iOS. Whenever 
installing an AIR-based application in iOS or Android, if 
Adobe AIR is not installed or embedded into the application, 
the user will be required to do so. When developing AIR 
applications for Android, a manifest file needs to be configured 
for stating which are the local resources the application will 
have access to, such as the camera, microphone, contacts, etc. 
This step is not required for iOS applications, since 
applications are trusted. Whenever the user installs the AIR-
based Android-enabled application, they will be asked to 
accept the security permissions required by the application, 
which, from that moment, will be capable of accessing those 
resources without any further explicit authorization. Our 
experience and findings using Adobe AIR shows that current 
release (AIR 3.0) fully supports the access to the front camera 
in Android 3.0 or higher, which was not possible on previous 
releases. On the other hand, Adobe AIR is perfectly suitable for 
flash-based iOS videoconferencing.  
A reduced version of TAM-TAM has been successfully 
tested as a standalone application on three tablet PCs: Acer 
Iconia A500 (Android 3.0), Acer Iconia W500 (Windows 7) 
and Apple iPad (iOS). 
VI. 
INTUITIVE VIDEOCONFERENCING 
Making videoconferencing intuitive is one of the major 
goals when designing medical and social applications, since 
they need to deal with a large diversity of users and different 
degrees of technology knowledge. For that purpose, TAM-
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TAM has been designed to be intuitive, as in the operation 
modes illustrated in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, which present different 
views of the rendezvous and multi videoconferencing modes 
implemented in TAM-TAM.  
In the rendezvous operation mode, the role of the user 
determines the presentation and functionality being displayed 
to the user. On one hand, the professional has the full control 
over the system, since he is responsible for selecting the user to 
be attended from a patient’s queue, controlling the video 
quality whenever needed and pausing or ending the 
consultation. The videoconference is started, paused and 
finalized according to the professional’s decisions. On the other 
hand, the patient just logs into the application and waits for the 
professional, which will conduct the teleconsultation. When the 
videoconference is not active the user views notification 
messages like “Your doctor is online, please wait to be 
attended”, “Your doctor is currently busy, please wait to be 
attended” and “Your consultation has been finalized”.  
In the multi videoconferencing mode, a group of users 
belonging to the same group interact with each other. When 
logged, they all can see who else in the group is already 
available and start videoconferencing by just a single click on 
the user’s name or picture.  
Regarding authentication, when running TAM-TAM in a 
browser, login information can be saved for further accesses. 
Additionally, when dealing with tablets, the application can 
operate in the same manner or even be individually bundled to 
a single user. 
This simple user interfaces ease very much interaction for 
people for which technology may be an impairment. Moreover, 
when using tablets or mobile devices, the possibility to access 
videoconferencing applications by just a single touch on the 
screen makes the difference with respect to other type of 
devices. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We have presented TAM-TAM functionalities, architecture 
and underlying technology. TAM-TAM uses the Adobe Flex 
framework, which enables the design of usable interfaces and 
provides videoconferencing support, while opening the door to 
the development of portable health applications on iOS and 
Android mobile phones and tablet PCs. 
The multi videoconferencing and rendezvous operation 
modes of TAM-TAM are accessible for demonstration at [16], 
where additional videos and resources can be also found. 
Currently, we have started small-scale tests with selected 
users who are running standard PCs in their homes. Next step 
will include the usage of tablet PCs. This work is being done in 
the context of the “ICT, socialization and active ageing” 
working group depending on the Girona’s Council. The results 
are being taken into account for improving the usability of the 
TAM-TAM application. Additional clinical assessment as well 
as non-functional tests and measurements need to be carried 
out, 
including 
the 
cost-effectiveness 
assessment, 
videoconferencing performance, delay, scalability and jitter 
depending on the type of connectivity (WiFi, mobile, etc.). 
Other relevant features that will be adopted in the future 
include audio and video recording, to take pictures of the 
patient’s aspect or some types of lesions and to adopt more 
secure authentication mechanisms, mainly when dealing with 
health professionals, through the use of X.509 digital 
certificates. Moreover, we also foresee the integration of TAM-
TAM with Hospital Information Systems, so that health 
professionals have access to the patient’s electronic health 
record. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the Spanish Ministry 
of Science and Innovation Project TEC 2009-10724, and by the 
Generalitat de Catalunya Research Support Program SGR-
1202.The authors thank Raul Romero for his collaboration. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Kinsella and W. He. International population reports. “An aging 
world: 2008”. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2009, 
retrieved: November, 2011.  
http://www.census.gov/prod/2009pubs/p95-09-1.pdf 
[2] 
European Commission’s Green Paper on Demographic Change, 2005. 
[3] 
J. Roca, A. Alonso, and C. Hernandez. “Integrated care for COPD 
patients: time for extensive deployment”. Breathe, vol. 5, n. 1, pp. 27–
35, 2008. 
[4] 
H. Tsai, Y. Tsai, H. Wang et al. “Videoconference program enhances 
social support, loneliness, and depressive status of elderly nursing home 
residents”. Aging & Mental Health, vol. 14, n. 8, pp. 947–954, 2010. 
[5] 
H.R. Schelling and A. Seifert. “L'utilisation de l'internet par les 
personnes âgées”. Centre de gérontologie sur mandat de Pro Senectute 
Suisse, en collaboration avec l'Office fédéral de la communication 
(OFCOM) et l'Institut für Publizistikwissenschaft und Medienforschung 
de l'Université de Zurich. 
[6] 
ALZ-AVANZA Project, retrieved: November, 2011.  
http://www.aideca.net/alz_avanza.php 
[7] 
ATTENTIANET project, retrieved: November, 2011. 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/eten/cf/opdb/cf/project
/index.cfm?mode=detail&project_ref=ETEN-517316 
[8] 
Colabor@ project, retrieved: November, 2011. 
http://grandesclientes.telefonica.es/articulo.php?id=56&id_submenu=.  
[9] 
Ericsson Labs, retrieved: November, 2011. 
https://labs.ericsson.com/developer-community/blog/beyond-html5-
conversational-voice-and-video-implemented-webkit-gtk 
[10] Broadband Communications and Distributed Systems research group. 
Universitat de Girona, retrieved: November, 2011. http://bcds.udg.edu/.  
[11] R. Antonicelli, P. Testarmata et al. “Impact of telemonitoring at home on 
the management of elderly patients with congestive heart failure”. 
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 14, pp. 300–305, 2008. 
[12] Red5 website, retrieved: November, 2011.  
http://red5.org/, http://code.google.com/p/red5/ 
[13] Cisco Cius, retrieved: November, 2011.  
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/products/ps11156/index.html 
[14] Apple Facetime for iPad, retrieved: November, 2011. 
http://www.apple.com/ipad/built-in-apps/facetime.html 
[15] Adobe Flash system requirements, retrieved: November, 2011.   
http://www.adobe.com/products/flashplayer/systemreqs/ 
[16] TAM-TAM, retrieved: November, 2011.  
http://tamtam.udg.edu/ 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

