Wearable and App-based Resilience Modelling in Employees (WearMe) 
Herman de Vries, 1,2,3,6, Wim Kamphuis2,7, Hilbrand Oldenhuis1,8, Cees van der Schans4,9  
& Robbert Sanderman3,10 
1 Hanze University of Applied Sciences, Professorship Personalised Digital Health, Groningen, The 
Netherlands 
2 TNO, Department of Human Behaviour & Organisational Innovation, Soesterberg, The Netherlands 
3 Department of Health Psychology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands  
4 Hanze University of Applied Sciences, Centre of Expertise Healthy Ageing, Groningen, The Netherlands  
5 Deptartment of Psychology, Health and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands 
E-mail: 6 h.j.de.vries@pl.hanze.nl; 7 wim.kamphuis@tno.nl; 8 h.k.e.oldenhuis@pl.hanze.nl;  
9 c.p.van.der.schans@pl.hanze.nl; 10 r.sanderman@umcg.nl
Abstract – Occupational stress can cause all kinds of health 
problems. Resilience interventions that help employees deal 
with and adapt to adverse events can prevent these negative 
consequences. Due to advances in sensor technology and 
smartphone 
applications, 
relatively 
unobtrusive 
self-
monitoring of resilience-related outcomes is possible. With 
models that can recognize intra-individual changes in these 
outcomes and relate them to causal factors within the 
employee’s own context, an automated resilience intervention 
that gives personalized, just-in-time feedback (e.g., a virtual 
coach) can be developed. This ‘Work in Progress’ paper 
presents the study protocol for the Wearables and app-based 
resilience Modelling in employees (WearMe) project that aims 
to develop such models. A cyclical conceptual framework 
based on existing theories of stress and resilience is presented, 
as the basis for the WearMe project. The included concepts 
are operationalized and measured using sleep tracking (Fitbit 
Charge 2), heart rate variability measurements (Elite HRV + 
Polar H7) and Ecological Momentary Assessment (mobile 
app), administered in the morning (7 questions) and evening 
(12 questions). Analyses will target the development of both 
within-subject (n=1) models, as well as between-subjects 
models. If successful, future work will focus on further 
developing these models and eventually exploring the 
effectiveness of the envisioned personalized resilience system.  
Keywords – Occupational Stress; Personalized eHealth; 
Sensors; Wearables; Virtual Coaching 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Occupational stress can cause health problems, such as 
musculoskeletal disease, cardiovascular disease, depression 
and burnout [1], but also has financial consequences due to 
treatment costs, productivity loss and absenteeism [2]. 
Especially the cumulative wear and tear on bodily systems 
caused by stress or inefficient management of mechanisms 
that promote adaptation is detrimental for health and well-
being [3]. This so-called ‘allostatic load’ increases the 
brain’s sensitivity to appraise stimuli as threats and reduces 
resources to cope, which can result in a loss spiral.  
There are all kinds of ways people cope with stress. The 
process of positively adapting to adverse events is also 
known as resilience [4]. In order to demonstrate positive 
adaptation (e.g., maintaining job performance and health), 
both individual (e.g., personality) and contextual (e.g., 
social support) resources can be used to cope with adversity 
[5]. By using these resources, resilient individuals are able 
to recover from the negative impact of stress relatively 
quickly and thus decrease their risk of negative long-term 
consequences.  
Resilience interventions are often offered to a broad 
population. However, those that target employees with a 
higher risk of experiencing stress tend to have better long-
term effects [6]. An even more personalized approach could 
be to monitor for early signs of the consequences of stress, 
relate these to causal factors in the employee’s context, and 
provide personalized advice to better cope with the stressor. 
Due to advances in sensor technology and smartphone 
applications, relatively unobtrusive self-monitoring of 
changes in resilience related outcomes is possible [7]. What 
is needed are models that can recognize intra-individual 
changes in these outcomes and relate these to causal factors 
and future consequences. With such models, one can 
potentially create an automated resilience intervention that 
gives personalized, just-in-time feedback, for instance in a 
virtual coaching application.  
In this ‘Work in Progress’ paper, we present the study 
protocol of the ongoing Wearables and app-based resilience 
Modelling in employees (WearMe) project. After 
introducing the WearMe project in Section I, a cyclical 
conceptual framework that is based on existing theories on 
stress and resilience is described in Section II. In Section 
III, we elaborate on how these concepts are operationalized 
in the first WearMe study. This includes the use of 
consumer-available 
wearables 
and 
an 
Ecological 
Momentary Assessment (EMA) app. In Section IV, some 
possible approaches for future work are described in our 
overarching goal to develop predictive models of employee 
resilience that can be used in personalized interventions 
such as virtual coaching applications.  
II. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
The conceptual framework presented in Figure 1 has a 
cyclical nature and is based on several existing theories on 
stress and resilience.  
When (job) demands such as time pressure or physical 
workload are interpreted as threats because the available 
resources to adaptively cope with the demands are 
perceived to be insufficient, it results in stress [8]. 
Depending on whether the person can utilize the available 
resources to adaptively cope with the demands, the short-
term accumulated stress determines the individual’s 
perceived need for recovery afterwards, which is 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

characterized by feelings of exhaustion and having less 
vigour to undertake new activities [9], [10]. The need for 
recovery therefore has a negative impact on the individual 
resources to appraise and cope with new demands – unless 
there is sufficient recovery present to alleviate this effect 
[9]. Besides causing a perceived need for recovery, stress 
also decreases sleep quality [11] and psychological 
detachment [12], which are aspects of recovery [13]. 
The cyclical nature of the conceptual framework is also 
supported by the Conservation of Resources theory [14] 
that states that resource loss leads to stress and that initial 
loss of resources may cause a loss spiral because resources 
are also used to prevent resource loss.  
III. MEASUREMENT CYCLE 
Based on the conceptual framework, a measurement 
cycle was developed that suggests how the described 
concepts may be operationalized using consumer-available 
wearables and EMA smartphone application to monitor for 
early signs of the consequences of stress. With exception of 
adaptive coping, which was not included because it is 
highly context-specific and thus difficult to quantify, all 
concepts are measured daily (Figure 2). 
Although the resources that are needed to cope with 
demands are context-specific as well, several individual 
psychological and physiological resources were identified 
that are be relevant in a broad spectrum of situations, that 
may change on a day-to-day basis, and that can be measured 
using consumer-available wearables and apps. The first 
resource, Heart Rate Variability (HRV), is a measure for the 
variability in the intervals between two heartbeats and is 
considered to be a proxy for autonomous nervous system 
functioning [15]. While HRV is mostly known as a 
parameter that illustrates physiological changes during 
acute stress, the resting HRV can remain decreased during 
and afterwards acute stress [15] [16]. In contrast, having a 
lowered resting HRV has been associated with an increased 
sensitivity for stress [18], decreased emotion-regulation 
[19], a decrease in physical performance [20] and an 
increased risk of long-term physical or mental health 
problems [21]. In the WearMe study, resting HRV is 
therefore considered to be a potential indicator for the 
accumulation of stress, as well as an individual resource 
used in the appraisal of and coping with upcoming 
demands. Participants measure their resting HRV in the 
morning after waking up and before getting out of bed 
during 2 minutes in a supine position using the Elite HRV 
smartphone application [22] and a Polar H7 chest strap [23].  
Besides HRV, perceived happiness, work engagement 
(vigour and dedication) and generalized self-efficacy are 
individual resources that are measured in a short EMA 
questionnaire in the morning and evening. Similarly, 
perceived demands, stress and need for recovery during the 
day are measured during the evening EMA questionnaire in 
a smartphone application.  
The concept of recovery consists of two components 
that are known to limit the spill over of a perceived need for 
recovery during the next day; sleep and being able to 
psychologically detach from work during leisure time [24]. 
Therefore, psychological detachment is measured in the 
evening EMA questionnaire, while the morning EMA 
questionnaire includes an item on the perceived sleep 
quality. Furthermore, sleep onset latency, the number of 
awakenings, wake time after sleep onset, total sleep time 
and sleep efficiency are also objectively measured using the 
Figure 1. Conceptual framework for the WearMe study. 
Figure 2. Measurement cycle of the WearMe study. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Fitbit Charge 2 wrist-worn tracker [25]. Since stress is also 
known to have a negative effect on sleep quality [11] and 
psychological detachment [12], it is also considered to be a 
potential indicator for the accumulation of stress.  
Finally, alcohol intake [26] and physical activity [27] 
were measured due to potential confounding effects on 
sleep and/or HRV.  Alcohol intake during the previous 
evening was measured in the morning EMA questionnaire 
and physical activity (steps, sedentary minutes, minutes of 
moderate-to-vigorous physical activity) was measured 
throughout the day using the Fitbit Charge 2.  
III. PRESENT STUDY 
The first WearMe study aims to explore the feasibility 
of the described measurement cycle to monitor for early 
signs of the accumulation of stress and to relate these to 
other factors based on the hypotheses described in the 
conceptual framework. Additionally, the development of 
population models will be explored. The study protocol was 
approved by the ethical committee of the Hanze University 
of Applied Sciences Groningen (heac.2018.008).  
A. Population 
For this ongoing 15-week study, twelve students in 
Applied Psychology (n=5) and Social Work (n=7) that are 
on their first full-time internship, are at least 18 years old 
and own an Android or iOS smartphone were recruited. Due 
to the potentially stressful nature of the context of these 
internships, as well as this being the participants’ first full-
time internship in their curriculum, we anticipate this 
population to be at risk of experiencing stress.  
B. Data collection 
Besides the daily measurements that were described in 
section two, several questionnaires are being administered 
to benefit the development of population models using 
between-subject analyses. Therefore, questionnaires on 
personality traits [28], coping strategies [29], burnout [30], 
work engagement [31] and symptoms of somatisation, 
distress, depression and anxiety [32] were administered at 
study onset. The questionnaires on burnout, work 
engagement and symptoms of somatization, distress, 
depression and anxiety will also be administered after 5, 10 
and 15 weeks. Finally, participants will fill out a resources 
questionnaire to retrospectively assess the perceived 
personal and environmental resources throughout the 
internships after 15 weeks.  
C. Data analysis 
Data analyses will target the development of within-
subject (n=1) models to predict changes in individual 
physiological and psychological resources (resting HRV, 
vigour, happiness, generalized self-efficacy) and recovery 
(sleep, psychological detachment) based on the hypotheses 
described in the conceptual framework. Furthermore, the 
development of population models will be explored. While 
no specific data-analysis techniques are pre-defined, both 
the use of traditional statistical analysis techniques and 
machine learning will be explored.  
IV. CONCLUSION 
If the results affirm that tracking sleep and resting HRV 
using consumer wearables is feasible and may be useful in 
resilience modelling, the current models could be 
expanded. Future studies will therefore focus on the 
development of predictive models that allow early detection 
of stress-related symptoms. In addition, expanding the 
current model by using additional consumer-available 
wearables or apps that can unobtrusively collect potentially 
relevant data (e.g., GPS location, calendar events) may be 
explored. When our conceptual framework that illustrates 
hypotheses based on deductive reasoning shows to be valid, 
a more inductive approach to data-analysis may be explored 
(e.g., using machine learning) to increase the explained 
variance of the individual models. If successful, these 
models can be implemented in applications that create 
personalized feedback on how to cope with demands.  
Furthermore, it is possible that within-subject models 
can be formed but require a long period of data collection. 
If subgroups with similar outcome trajectories can be 
identified using between-subject analyses of baseline and 
first-week data in a larger sample in order to create a 
classification algorithm, it might be possible to develop a 
system that combines both methods [33]. In such a system, 
participants would first receive semi-personalized feedback 
based on their subgroup classification and start receiving 
fully personalized feedback when enough within-subject 
data are available.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. W. Colligan and E. M. Higgins, ‘Workplace stress: 
Etiology and consequences’, J. Workplace Behav. Health, 
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 89–97, 2006. 
[2] 
S. Béjean and H. Sultan-Taïeb, ‘Modeling the economic 
burden of diseases imputable to stress at work’, Eur. J. 
Health Econ., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 16–23, 2005. 
[3] 
B. S. McEwen, ‘Stress, adaptation, and disease: Allostasis 
and allostatic load’, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., vol. 840, no. 1, 
pp. 33–44, 1998. 
[4] 
T. D. Cosco, A. Kaushal, R. Hardy, M. Richards, D. Kuh, 
and 
M. 
Stafford, 
‘Operationalising 
resilience 
in 
longitudinal 
studies: 
a 
systematic 
review 
of 
methodological approaches.’, J. Epidemiol. Community 
Health, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 98–104, Jan. 2017. 
[5] 
T. W. Britt, W. Shen, R. R. Sinclair, M. R. Grossman, and 
D. M. Klieger, ‘How Much Do We Really Know About 
Employee Resilience?’, Ind. Organ. Psychol., vol. 9, no. 
02, pp. 378–404, 2016. 
[6] 
A. J. Vanhove, M. N. Herian, A. L. U. Perez, P. D. Harms, 
and P. B. Lester, ‘Can resilience be developed at work? A 
meta‐analytic review of resilience‐building programme 
effectiveness’, J. Occup. Organ. Psychol., vol. 89, no. 2, 
pp. 278–307, 2016. 
[7] 
R. L. Drury, ‘Wearable biosensor systems and resilience: a 
perfect storm in health care?’, Front. Psychol., vol. 5, p. 
853, 2014. 
[8] 
R. S. Lazarus and S. Folkman, ‘Transactional theory and 
research on emotions and coping’, Eur. J. Personal., vol. 
1, no. 3, pp. 141–169, 1987. 
[9] 
M. Van Veldhoven, ‘Need for recovery after work: An 
overview of construct, measurement and research’, in 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Occupational health psychology: European perspectives 
on research, education and practice, vol. 3,  de J. 
Houdmont and S. Leka, Eds. Nottingham, 2008, pp. 1–25. 
[10] 
A. B. Bakker and E. Demerouti, ‘The Job Demands‐
Resources model: state of the art’, J. Manag. Psychol., vol. 
22, no. 3, pp. 309–328, 2007. 
[11] 
E.-J. Kim and J. E. Dimsdale, ‘The effect of psychosocial 
stress on sleep: a review of polysomnographic evidence.’, 
Behav. Sleep. Med., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 256–278, 2007. 
[12] 
S. Sonnentag, I. Kuttler, and C. Fritz, ‘Job stressors, 
emotional exhaustion, and need for recovery: A multi-
source study on the benefits of psychological detachment’, 
J. Vocat. Behav., vol. 76, no. 3, pp. 355–365, 2010. 
[13] 
S. Sonnentag and C. Fritz, ‘The Recovery Experience 
Questionnaire: development and validation of a measure 
for assessing recuperation and unwinding from work.’, J. 
Occup. Health Psychol., vol. 12, no. 3, p. 204, 2007. 
[14] 
S. E. Hobfoll, ‘The Influence of Culture, Community, and 
the Nested-Self in the Stress Process: Advancing 
Conservation of Resources Theory’, Appl. Psychol., vol. 
50, no. 3, pp. 337–421, 2001. 
[15] 
J. F. Thayer, F. Ahs, M. Fredrikson, J. J. Sollers III, and T. 
D. Wager, ‘A meta-analysis of heart rate variability and 
neuroimaging studies: implications for heart rate 
variability as a marker of stress and health.’, Neurosci. 
Biobehav. Rev., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 747–756, Feb. 2012. 
[16] 
M. Hall et al., ‘Acute stress affects heart rate variability 
during sleep.’, Psychosom. Med., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 56–62, 
Feb. 2004. 
[17] 
E. Hynynen, N. Konttinen, U. Kinnunen, H. Kyrolainen, 
and H. Rusko, ‘The incidence of stress symptoms and heart 
rate variability during sleep and orthostatic test.’, Eur. J. 
Appl. Physiol., vol. 111, no. 5, pp. 733–741, May 2011. 
[18] 
G. Park, J. J. Van Bavel, M. W. Vasey, and J. F. Thayer, 
‘Cardiac vagal tone predicts inhibited attention to fearful 
faces.’, Emot. Wash. DC, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1292–1302, 
Dec. 2012. 
[19] 
D. P. Williams, C. Cash, C. Rankin, A. Bernardi, J. Koenig, 
and J. F. Thayer, ‘Resting heart rate variability predicts 
self-reported difficulties in emotion regulation: a focus on 
different facets of emotion regulation.’, Front. Psychol., 
vol. 6, p. 261, 2015. 
[20] 
S. Jimenez Morgan and J. A. Molina Mora, ‘Effect of Heart 
Rate Variability Biofeedback on Sport Performance, a 
Systematic Review.’, Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback, 
vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 235–245, Sep. 2017. 
[21] 
D. Liao, M. Carnethon, G. W. Evans, W. E. Cascio, and G. 
Heiss, ‘Lower heart rate variability is associated with the 
development of coronary heart disease in individuals with 
diabetes: the atherosclerosis risk in communities (ARIC) 
study’, Diabetes, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 3524–3531, 2002. 
[22] 
A. S. Perrotta, A. T. Jeklin, B. A. Hives, L. E. Meanwell, 
and D. E. R. Warburton, ‘Validity of the Elite HRV 
Smartphone Application for Examining Heart Rate 
Variability in a Field-Based Setting’, J. Strength Cond. 
Res., vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 2296–2302, 2017. 
[23] 
D. J. Plews, B. Scott, M. Altini, M. Wood, A. E. Kilding, 
and P. B. Laursen, ‘Comparison of heart-rate-variability 
recording with smartphone photoplethysmography, Polar 
H7 chest strap, and electrocardiography’, Int. J. Sports 
Physiol. Perform., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 1324–1328, 2017. 
[24] 
S. Sonnentag and C. Binnewies, ‘Daily affect spillover 
from work to home: Detachment from work and sleep as 
moderators’, J. Vocat. Behav., vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 198–208, 
2013. 
[25] 
M. de Zambotti, A. Goldstone, S. Claudatos, I. M. Colrain, 
and F. C. Baker, ‘A validation study of Fitbit Charge 2TM 
compared with polysomnography in adults’, Chronobiol. 
Int., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 465–476, 2018. 
[26] 
D. S. Quintana, I. S. McGregor, A. J. Guastella, G. S. 
Malhi, and A. H. Kemp, ‘A meta-analysis on the impact of 
alcohol dependence on short-term resting-state heart rate 
variability: implications for cardiovascular risk.’, Alcohol. 
Clin. Exp. Res., vol. 37 Suppl 1, pp. E23-29, Jan. 2013. 
[27] 
S. F. Smagula, K. L. Stone, A. Fabio, and J. A. Cauley, 
‘Risk factors for sleep disturbances in older adults: 
Evidence from prospective studies.’, Sleep Med. Rev., vol. 
25, pp. 21–30, Feb. 2016. 
[28] 
J. J. A. Denissen, R. Geenen, M. A. G. Van Aken, S. D. 
Gosling, and J. Potter, ‘Development and validation of a 
Dutch translation of the Big Five Inventory (BFI)’, J. Pers. 
Assess., vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 152–157, 2008. 
[29] 
W. C. Kleijn, G. L. Van Heck, and A. Van Waning, 
‘Ervaringen met een Nederlandse bewerking van de COPE 
copingvragenlijst: De COPE-Easy’, Gedrag Gezondh., vol. 
28, pp. 213–226, 2000. 
[30] 
J. R. B. Halbesleben and E. Demerouti, ‘The construct 
validity of an alternative measure of burnout: Investigating 
the English translation of the Oldenburg Burnout 
Inventory’, Work Stress, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 208–220, 2005. 
[31] 
W. B. Schaufeli, A. B. Bakker, and M. Salanova, ‘The 
measurement of work engagement with a short 
questionnaire: A cross-national study’, Educ. Psychol. 
Meas., vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 701–716, 2006. 
[32] 
B. Terluin et al., ‘The Four-Dimensional Symptom 
Questionnaire 
(4DSQ): 
a 
validation 
study 
of 
a 
multidimensional self-report questionnaire to assess 
distress, depression, anxiety and somatization’, Bmc 
Psychiatry, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 34, 2006. 
[33] 
G. Spanakis, G. Weiss, B. Boh, L. Lemmens, and A. Roefs, 
‘Machine learning techniques in eating behavior e-
coaching: 
Balancing 
between 
generalization 
and 
personalization’, Pers. Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, 
pp. 645–659, 2017. 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

