Advancing in Digitalized X-ray Images Post-processing 
 
Desislava Georgieva 
New Bulgarian University 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: dvelcheva@nbu.bg 
Vesselin Gueorguiev, Maria Nenova, Ivan Evgeniev 
Technical University - Sofia 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: veg@tu-sofia.bg, mvn@tu-sofia.bg, iei@tu-sofia.bg 
 
 
Abstract—The aim of this paper is to present some results and 
comments about the process of increasing the quality of 
digitalized X-ray images. The presented results are obtained 
under several projects. The work is aiming at increasing the 
quality of computer-assisted methods for diagnosis, based on 
digital X-ray images. Some techniques and solutions for 
reducing and removing defects in images are discussed. As a 
conclusion, some new problems and requirements for these 
systems have been pointed out. 
Keywords-computer-assisted methods; digital X-ray image; 
adaptive filtering algorithms 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
he development of medical imaging applications based 
on 2D medical images and their processing can be divided 
into two stages - before and after 2008. The first stage was 
focused on the development of medical imaging applications 
oriented to Computer-Aided Diagnosis systems (CAD 
systems) [1]. One of the major characteristics of this period 
is the big growth of CAD systems tools and modules market. 
The combination between the increasing of the interest of 
hospitals 
management 
in 
new 
CAD 
systems 
and 
technologies and the increased use of digital medical 
imaging devices and tools (X-ray, Magnetic-Resonance 
Imaging, Computer Tomography, etc.) led to annual growth 
per year expressed by two-digit number in percentage [2]. At 
the same time, the quality of medical results has been 
continuously improved and all this determined the growing 
demands for this class of application in medical and hospital 
practices. 
Since the middle of 2008 this trend has been changed 
dramatically. Some of the reasons for this are the following: 
 
Who 
is 
the 
customer 
of 
medical 
imaging 
applications – patients or hospitals? Today the right 
answer is ‘The hospitals are medical imaging 
applications customers. Patients are customers of 
hospital services.’ But after 2008 hospitals have had 
limited funding for development of new systems and 
they divert the full financial burden to patients.  
Patients refuse to pay extra money for services they 
do not understand and they do not know they need. 
This resulted in the fact that hospitals decreased 
investments 
in 
new 
imaging-based 
diagnosis 
applications and this is the expected trend for the 
next several years.  
 
What types of applications are of interest - stand-
alone applications or modules and tools for 
integration with existing Hospital Information 
Systems (HIS)? An analysis of the market shows 
that stand-alone applications have seriously been 
losing their market position. The market needs 
modules and tools that can be built-in as subsystems 
of the existing HIS. This has changed investments in 
research from more general to specific areas which 
results in products to be directly put on the market.  
The additional effects can be divided into two trends and 
their impact on the new developments has continued to 
grow. Any of these trends affects the new research and 
applications directly and indirectly [3][4][5][6]: 
 
The first problem can best be defined by the 
conclusion: 
"Doctors 
expect 
from 
the 
new 
technologies only to increase their sensitivity and 
ability to understand information. They do not want 
automated diagnosis services and they do not want 
to be technicians. They want to be doctors.“ 
 
The rapid increase of Telemedical tools and devices 
and future trends in this area generated many 
questions of comparability of the CAD-application 
results based on images from different sources for 
one and the same patient. One of the telemedical 
approaches is based on distributed medical data 
obtaining, analysis and diagnosis. The results should 
be identical regardless of the source of the digital 
image (a digital X-ray or a digitalized old X–ray 
plate), and whether it is made in one or another 
hospital. For example in 10 years it is expected that 
there will be a new generation of machines and the 
image quality they will deliver will differ greatly 
from current quality. 
This article is based on the results of an 8 year study and 
on a project in collaboration with the biggest Bulgarian 
hospital complex (the Medical University of Sofia). The 
main task of this collaborative work was to create a vision 
and architecture for a new generation HIS, taking into 
account the performance in Telemedicine, m-Health and p-
Health approaches and applications and new devices for 
hospital and outpatient diagnostics. This has led to several 
interesting studies related to the investigation of techniques 
and solutions for increasing the quality of digital X-ray 
images which is the topic of this paper. The surveys on 
different techniques for digitalization of radiographic images 
[3,9] focus our studies on assessing the impact of various 
T 
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

factors on the quality of digitalized X-rays. Three main 
groups of factor were identified: the process of creating X-
ray plates, the condition of digitalized X-ray plates and the 
technology for digitalization. The results of these studies are 
presented below.  
General 
and 
innovative 
structures 
of 
Hospital 
Information Systems are presented on Figure 1. Data sources 
for HIS and the data flows in these systems are presented on 
Figure 2. 
 
a) HIS Classic view [10] 
 
b) Modern HIS [11] 
Figure 1. Classic and modern HIS structures and data flows 
 
a) Classic data sources and handling [12] 
 
b) HIS inside data network [13] 
 
c) HIS outside data network [14] 
 
Figure 2. Data sources  and data flows in HIS  
II. 
THE PROCESS OF DIGITAL X-RAY IMAGES CREATION 
AND THEIR QUALITY  
The effect is expressed by looking at two sides: 
 
The need to have methods for normalizing/aligning 
digital images. The computer-based comparison 
methods need images of the same quality and 
characteristics. But different technologies create 
images with varying contrast, luminance and level of 
noise.   
 
Different X-ray machines (by producer and/or 
settings) produce a different level of illumination in 
patients with the same health condition. Very often 
this is accepted as an overexposure (large black 
areas) and underexposure (large white areas). 
 
In case of underexposed image, shown on Figure 3, the 
main problem is the lack of information on the image. These 
types of images have a small dynamic range and unimodal 
histogram (Figure 3b): a pronounced peak is located at the 
top of the histogram and there are many small local peaks 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

(the histogram isn’t smooth). In this case the classical 
methods for image manipulation based on the histogram 
correction do not create credible images from a medical 
point of view: the resulting image is often characteristic of 
severe pathologies. 
This requires methods which will be used to smooth the 
local peaks in the upper histogram. One useful solution to 
this problem is the implementation of adaptive filtering 
algorithms (Figure 3c). 
а. 
  b. 
   
c. 
  d. 
 
Figure 3. The underexposed X-ray image: a) a digitalized generic image 
and b) its histogram; c) the image after correction (without medical 
artifacts) and d) its histogram. 
In case of overexposure the problems in X-ray images are 
different because the dynamic range is much larger and the 
histogram has a bimodal nature (Figure 4). The results of 
overexposure are the soft tissue (grayscale levels near black) 
and areas with low pass X-rays having grayscale tones near 
white (e.g. thicker bones). In this case the corrections are 
made at transitions to a unimodal histogram by minimization 
of the peak in the dark area. 
The experiments lead to the conclusion that many of the 
X-ray plates with the described types of defects can be 
properly digitalized and can be used for medical purposes. 
Before the implementation of this processing in many cases 
the diagnosis made on the basis of defect X-ray plates was 
impossible or unreliable which led to additional X-ray 
taking, i.e. increased radiation load of patients. 
III. 
THE CONDITION OF X-RAY PLATES AS A FACTOR OF 
DIGITALIZED IMAGES QUALITY 
The defects in the digitalized X-ray images resulting 
from changes and defects in the X-ray plates are the next 
group of problems. The main reasons for these changes are 
improper storage of plates (usually exposure to direct 
sunlight) or the effect of aging. As a result, the plates whiten 
and / or become stained. 
 
a. 
  b. 
   
c. 
  d. 
 
Figure 4. The overexposed X-ray image: a) a digitalized generic image 
and b) its histogram; c) the image after correction (without medical 
artifacts) and d) its histogram. 
When defects in digitalized images occur the results of 
physical damages on the surface (scratches, breaking of 
plates, etc.) a lack of adjustment was demonstrated during 
the experiments. The reason for this is the lack of 
information which will allow determining whether the 
affected place was the fault lesion. Very often the initial 
form of lesions affect areas of around 2-3 pixels in size and 
the condition and characteristics of adjacent image areas do 
not allow to determine the nature of the image in the 
damaged area. 
The changes to the image, which will occur when there is 
whitening as a result from constant exposure to external 
light, lead to the following limitations in the digitalized 
image: 
 
Reduction of the dynamic range of the image. 
 
Reduction of the image contrast: uneven whitening 
of dark and light areas. 
It should be noted that these changes can have either 
global or local nature (according to the exposed area of the 
plate). 
When the change affects the entire image, the actions 
taken to correct the defects can greatly improve the 
digitalized image. Examples of these corrections are shown 
in Figure 3 and Figure 4. In some cases, the order of the 
application of treatments is essential for the final result. 
The quality of the X-ray plate material and the way plates 
were stored lead to staining, i.e., they are no longer grayscale 
(Figure 5). For physicians it is not a serious problem to use 
these modified X-ray plates because of the peculiarity of the 
human visual system, known as ‘approximate color 
consistence’ [3]. Unlike humans, computers do not have this 
ability. Therefore, after digitalization the added colors often 
distort the information in terms of computer applications. 
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Doctors also began to notice the color: approximate color 
consistence in this case does not work. This makes it 
mandatory to switch from color to grayscale when the 
images will be used for the purposes of clinical diagnosis. 
 
a. 
     b. 
  
c. 
     d. 
          
e. 
      f. 
 
Figure 5. The staining of X-ray plates as a result of improper storage: a), 
c) and e) generic image; b), d) and f) the histograms of digitalized images 
(histograms of R, G, and B channels are added). 
To minimize the occurrence of artifacts, i.e. to obtain 
credible medical images, it is necessary to solve the 
following two major problems: the algorithm used to convert 
from a color to a grayscale image and the moment of 
conversion (before or after defect image correction). The 
studies have shown that the use of grayscale digitalizing 
devices (scanners or other) is not a solution because today 
color scanning systems are used. These systems have 
embedded algorithms for converting the scanned color image 
to a grayscale one. Unfortunately, assessing the quality of 
conversion is based on the requirements for printing images 
and not for medical imaging. 
The process of choosing the moment of transformation is 
essential for the improvements of image characteristics, 
because the results are not identical. This is due to the fact 
that these are not commutative operations, i.e. the removal of 
the color component and processes for quality improvement 
(correction of the histogram, dynamic range and contrast) 
give different outcomes in each different order of execution.  
In Figure 6, the difference between processing the image 
before and after conversion from color to grayscale image is 
shown. 
 
a. 
 b. 
   
c. 
 d. 
 
e. 
  f. 
 
Figure 6. The difference between processing the image before and after 
conversion from a color to a grayscale image ( ‘a’ and ‘c’– refocusing; ‘b’ 
and ‘d’ – local contrast correction): a, b) the correction is on the color 
image; c, d) the correction is on the grayscale image; e) the difference 
between ‘a’ and ‘c’ (‘a’ is converted to grayscale); f) the difference 
between ‘b’ and ‘d’ (‘b’ is converted to grayscale). 
The purpose of processing the digitalized image is 
improving its quality without the occurrence of medical 
artifacts. Processing of underexposed images (very white) 
proved that the negative treatments give an easier way to 
implement changes (it is easier to select the degree of 
change). The reason for this is the problem with the visual 
weight of objects in the image and the perception of the 
degree of correction. The experiments and tests have shown 
that for the grayscale image, the differences between whether 
correction is on the normal image or on the negative image 
are very small and most often do not generate medical 
artifacts. In colored images it is not the same - even less 
staining leads to very big image differences (Figure 7). 
а. 
 b. 
 
c. 
 d. 
 
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

f. 
 
Figure 7. For a color image, the difference between whether the 
correction is on the normal image or on the negative image is significant: 
a) generic image; b) corrected image; d) negative of generic image; e) 
corrected negative image (correction is the same as ‘b’); f) the difference 
between corrections in normal and negative mode. 
Over the years some, research of color-to-grayscale 
converting methods based on a survey by Čadík has been 
conducted [4]. The metrics proposed by the authors were not 
acceptable because they are oriented to image processing for 
the needs of B/W printing. For medical needs, the quality of 
the conversion must be determined by the occurrence of 
medical artifacts or loss of important information needed for 
the diagnosing of diseases. At this point, we use a heuristic 
criterion based on the degree of difference between the 
application of the basic treatment method on a normal and 
negative image. 
 
The negative image (Figure 8d) is created from a 
generic (color) image (Figure 8a). 
 
The generic and the negative images are converted 
to grayscale images using the chosen algorithm 
(Figure 8b, 8e). 
 
Testing correction is applied to grayscale images 
(Figure 8c, 8f). 
 
The corrected negative image is inverted back a 
normal image (Figure 8g). 
 
The quality is measured by the difference between 
the corrected images in a normal form and a negative 
form (Figure 8h).  
IV. 
SOME COMMENTS ON THE TECHNOLOGY FOR 
DIGITALIZATION AS A FACTOR FOR THE QUALITY OF THE 
DIGITALIZED IMAGES 
The influence of the technology for digitalization 
generally demonstrates its impact as follows: 
 
The possibility to  digitalize plates greater than the 
device dimensions and the type of organization of 
this process  
 
The existing systems for digitization as color 
systems 
 
The characteristics of the lighting systems of the 
digitalization device. 
 
The lighting system in the scanners is very interesting 
and has a significant impact on image quality: it can either 
create defects, or helps to eliminate existing defects. The 
results received after the experiments leads to the following 
conclusions:  
 
a.
 b.
 
c.
 d. 
 
e. 
 f. 
 
g. 
   h. 
 
Figure 8. Consecutive activities to evaluate the quality of color-to-
grayscale converting methods for medical purposes: a) generic (color) 
image; b) grayscale image from ‘a’; c) corrected image ‘b’; d) negative 
image of ‘a’; e) grayscale image from ‘d’; f) corrected image ‘e’; g) 
inverted image ‘f’; h) difference between ‘g’ and ‘c’ (image histogram is 
stretched). 
 
The use of a lighting source with variable intensity 
allows extracting more information compared to the 
ones with constant intensity. This can be observed 
better in underexposure images or images with 
strong staining in the cyan spectrum. 
 
To take additional advantage of the control of the 
lighting source intensity it is necessary to develop an 
algorithm which to determine the optimal intensity. 
Currently our research does not make possible the 
development of an automatic procedure for optimal 
intensity selection: we use manual control and 
analysis of the resulting images (looking for 
overexposure areas). 
 
The use of sources with a different spectrum and the 
subsequent 'fusion' of the resulting images allows to 
obtain much more information than the classical 
lighting spectrum. Here the fusion procedure follows 
the procedure of images conversion to grayscale.  
 
The scanners are systems with constant exposure 
time and parameters. Using a scanner with 
controllable exposure duration enables the creation 
of High Dynamic Range Images (HDRI). After 
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

conversion to Low Dynamic Range Image (LDRI) 
this allows to obtain a reliable medical image with 
much more information in comparison to images 
obtained after a standard digitization procedure 
(Figure 9). This method produces good results for 
plates with different quality but its advantages are 
most pronounced for overexposed images. 
a. 
 b. 
   
c. 
  d. 
 
Figure 9. HDRI scanning vs. LDRI scanning: a) generic image (classical 
scanning procedure); b) its histogram; c) resulting image after HDRI 
scanning procedure; d) its histogram. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The need to archive digitalized images obtained during a 
period of 30-35 years and their use in HIS requires new 
implementation 
approaches. 
According 
to 
this, 
the 
generation and saving of the native (generic) images, is one 
of the basic problems to be solved. The need for 
comparability of the results adds a new level of complexity 
to this process because it affects the quality concept. When 
analysis is done by humans (in this case medical doctors) the 
images quality and comparability is very important but the 
final result is determined by the doctors’ qualification. When 
the analysis is to be done by computer processing, it requires 
other approaches. The combination of these contradictory 
requirements and the fact that doctors refuse to become 
computer specialists brings new challenges to the well-
known area of data handling and representation. One such 
example is the X-ray images generation, digitalization, 
handling and processing. This presupposes the development 
of automated procedures for the preparation of digital 
radiographic images to be used in the medical system. New 
types or modifications of the existing adaptive filtering 
algorithms are also to be developed.    
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is funded partially by Bulgarian NSF under 
DO02/113, D01-1250 and DRNF02/3 projects. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Meziane, P. Mazzone, E. Novak, M. Lieber, O. Lababede, 
M. Phillips, and N. A. Obuchowski, “A Comparison of Four 
Versions of a Computer-aided Detection System for 
Pulmonary Nodules on Chest Radiographs”, Journal of 
Thoracic Imaging, January 2012, vol. 27, Issue 1, pp. 58–64 
[2] Growth Partnership Service: Medical Imaging, Frost & 
Sullivan's Medical Imaging Research and Consulting practice, 
Available: http://www.frost.com/prod/servlet/svcg.pag/HCIM 
[3] V. Gueorguiev and I. Ivanov, “Digital Cameras as Low-cost 
Tools for Telemedicine and e-Health:  Opportunities and 
Constraints”, 
4th 
International 
Joint 
Conference 
on 
Biomedical 
Engineering 
Systems 
and 
Technologies 
(HEALTHINF2011),  Rome, Italy, 26-29 January, 2011, pp. 
608-613 
[4] M. Čadík, “Perceptual evaluation of color-to-grayscale image 
conversions”, Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 27(7), 
pp. 1745–1754, 2008. 
[5] R. V. Stavitskii at al., “An approach to decreasing dose load 
in prophylactic X-ray examination”, Biomedical Engineering, 
Volume 40, Issue  4,  July 2006,  pp. 191-193  
[6] H. Fujita, Y. Uchiyama, T. Nakagawa, D. Fukuoka, Y. 
Hatanaka, T. Hara, G. N. Lee,Y. Hayashi, Y. Ikedo, X. Gao, 
X. Zhou, “Computer-aided diagnosis: The emerging of three 
CAD systems induced by Japanese health care needs”, 
Computer methods and programs in biomedicine, 2008, 
volume 92, issue 3, pp. 238–248 
[7] L. H. Eadie, P. Taylor, A. P. Gibson, “Changes in 
performance of computer-assisted diagnosis and cancer 
imaging over time”, IADIS International Conference e-Health 
2010, Freiburg, Germany, 29-31 July 2010 ,pp. 275 - 278 
[8] Kunio Doi, Computer-Aided Diagnosis in Medical Imaging: 
Historical Review, Current Status and Future Potential, 
Comput Med Imaging Graph. 2007; 31(4-5): 198–211 
[9] V.Gueorguiev, I. Ivanov, “Optimized representations of X-ray 
images”, Proc. Med-e-Tel 2010, Global Telemedicine and 
eHealth Updates: Knowledge Resources, Vol. 3, 2010, ISSN 
1998-5509, Luxemburg, 2010., pp. 286-290 
[10] http://www.chinacnit.com/en/page.php?column_id=331 
[11] www.birlamedisoft.com 
[12] http://www.mulsol.com/solutions.htm#Solutions_CDDVDarc
hiva 
[13] I. Gannot, http://www.eng.tau.ac.il/~gannot/MI/Introduction-
lesson.ppt 
[14] I. Gannot, http://www.eng.tau.ac.il/~gannot/MI/Introduction-
lesson.ppt  
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

