Worklife Ergonomics in eHealth Co-Creation Governance
“You can’t manage what you don’t measure”
Niels F. Garmann-Johnsen1,2, Migle Helmersen1
1Agderforskning
Kristiansand, Norway
Emails: {niels.frederik,
migle.helmersen}@agderforskning.no
Tom Roar Eikebrokk2
2Dept. of Information Systems,
University of Agder
Kristiansand, Norway
Email: tom.eikebrokk@uia.no
Abstract—This is a conceptual article where we seek to
combine the concepts of information systems frameworks and
newer co-creation literature as a means to devise a model for
servitization and digitalization. Servitization and digitalization
are two megatrends that affect healthcare and public services
along with other sectors in general. A new model is needed to
prescribe how governance in an increasingly changing world of
modern healthcare could be undertaken in a successful
manner. The concept of good worklife ergonomics is studied,
both as a prerequisite and as a success factor. This article
proposes that the moderating, risk mitigating, factor of
broadly based employee involvement in all phases from
planning and design to implementation will greatly improve
quality in both innovation-process, and outcomes. A case-study
from a public homecare living lab eHealth-project in Norway
is visited to highlight some of the challenges ahead. Our
discussion and conclusion end up devising the proposed model,
and further research into how this model can be implemented
is recommended.
Keywords-Co-creation;
servitization;
digitalizaton;
healthcare; eHealth; worklife ergonomics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this article is to develop a conceptual
process-model for co-creation in eHealth innovation, that
also supports a good worklife ergonomics for employees.
The article is a result of a cross-disciplinary collaboration,
between one medical doctor, specializing in health and work
environment, and two doctors of philosophy in social
science, with management information systems as speciality.
In many industrial countries, people live longer, but
habitually with chronic diseases, due to better living
standards and medical treatment advances. These changing
population demographics mean there is an increasing
demand for healthcare services [1]. eHealth technologies
accompanied by changes in healthcare delivery processes
and services, offer possibilities for a lower cost healthcare
system, needed to meet future increases in demand for
services. These changes can be referred to as servitization
transformation [2] and put an emphasis on the interaction
with customers that requires providers to offer customized
and total solutions [2]. Digitalization capabilities support
such servitization through employees’ involvement and
codetermination of what should count as key performance
indicators. Digitalization is “the use of digital technologies to
change a business model and provide new revenue and
value-producing opportunities; it is the process of moving to
a digital business” [3].
But, such change-projects often meet unforeseen barriers.
Objections may be raised by the various professional groups
themselves. Poor rooted changes risks leading to inferior
solutions over time, which may work against their purpose.
In Norway, primary care and homecare is a concern for the
public sector; municipalities. Generally, new technologies
and working methods, as well as new service providers, will
have to absorb all the "tacit knowledge" inherent in the
public organization to add new values to the services in an
efficient manner. If employees are involved, they may be
more inclined to become a driving force in the pursuit of a
servitization strategy, that relies on developing digitalization
capabilities, because the process of defining performance
criteria promotes organizational learning [4].
In Norway, primary healthcare and homecare is the
concern of the municipalities. Local government-initiated
eHealth pilot-projects are often unconnected experiments. A
shared and common process management methodology for
both
development
and
implementation
phases,
that
incorporates employee involvement and collaboration, will
arguably be a useful tool for public sector change leaders
who want to introduce new technologies and working
methods, or invite new service providers that relieve or
complete the overall welfare offer to citizens. We will term
this as Co-creation governance (‘Co-creation’ as a term is
disseminated further in Section IV). Such a tool will be
useful in the complex task of maintaining quality for both
service
recipients
and
service
providing
personnel
–
employees in the healthcare system. Lenka et al. [2] has
recently proposed a model for co-creation between a product
or service vendor and end-consumers. But, in eHealth
innovation in the Norwegian context, system vendors, and
health care providers are most often separate entities, so the
health care provider generally add value through the
combination of human services and the application of
technology, not technology alone. Seen from the point of
view
of
the
health
care
provider,
the
research
and
development challenge can be put as:
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

-
How employees’ involvement is ensured in eHealth
co-creation governance?
-
How
this
involvement
contributes
to
ensuring
performance quality on all levels of responsibility?
A potential solution to this challenge is the development
of a shared digital capability to continually improve service
quality. When in place, this capability will ensure that
internal and external service producers act through a
continuous quality improvement cycle from plan, check, act,
and correct that improves service quality over time. This
understanding of digital capabilities is in line with Lenka et
al.’s model. But this article argues that this capability must
be developed along two dimensions of co-creation or
collaborative innovation:
-
Horizontally along the chain of value co-creation,
from ICT-vendor, through service-provider to home
care service users, but also
-
Vertically
along
a
line
of
innovation-process
governance,
from
front-stage
service-personnel
employees to top-management.
These capabilities must subsequently be built "bottom
up" with the involvement and participation of all relevant
municipal employees, ensuring that new and increasingly
more technology enabled work processes still remain
employee friendly, and thus improve the quality of worklife
of employees as well as patients’ quality of life [5]. This
article will also show how Lenka et al.’s aspects of
digitilization, servitization and co-creation are linked to our
highlighted aspects of (worklife) ergonomics, Business
Performance
Management,
and
(Information
System)
governance.
Ergonomics
is
an
applied
science
concerned
with
designing and arranging things people use so that the people
and things interact most efficiently [6]. Ergonomics is the
science of designing the workplace, keeping in mind the
capabilities and limitations of the worker and in such way,
fulfil the goals of occupational health and safety, and
productivity of employees [7]. The implementation of new
digital services in healthcare involves several new work
tasks, and thus represents new work processes and potential
risk factors at the workplace. Knowledge of this should be
addressed to prevent potential negative health effects among
employees.
This
article
proposes
the
term
worklife
ergonomics as a holistic term that encompasses the system of
service production that spans over workplaces and involved
employees. As such, worklife ergonomics as a concept
considers
the
whole
information
system
with
people,
processes
and
technology.
Employee
engagement
and
involvement brings a new and needed perspective into co-
creation servitization, and digitalization.
Effective
Business
Performance
Management,
and
(Information System) governance are important factors in
achieving successful innovation, and the authors will show
that such management tools need to be activated in parallel
with
the
system-
and
service
development
processes.
Employee involvement in the creation and execution of such
management tools will serve to ensure the goals are met, and
risks for failure are mitigated.
The rest of this article is structured as follows: In Section
II, the authors shortly renders the methods used; literature
search, and a comparison of the findings from this, with a
research project performed in a Living Lab context. In
Section III, the results from the literature search is presented;
ergonomics in organizational change in general (A), and in
the context of eHealth (B). In Subsection C, the result of the
comparisons with application of concepts the case study is
presented. In Section IV, using the Lenka et al. model as a
guide, we propose a model for governance that incorporates
principles for good worklife ergonomics in eHealth. In
Section V, we conclude that the proposed model may
contribute to meeting the research challenges proposed in
this introduction and also devise avenues for further
research.
II.
METHOD
To devise a conceptual model of worklife ergonomics, we
conducted a literature review to explore how ergonomics are
used in relation to the concepts of eHealth, digitalization and
co-creation. The authors were looking for principles in the
literature that could guide us conceptually in designing a
system that would encompass good worklife ergonomics.
A literature review was performed in October 2017.
Using Google scholar, the literature was searched for articles
containing the criteria (search string); ergonomics AND
digitalization
AND
servitization
AND
health
AND
employees. By using such Boolean-logic operators; ‘AND’,
the authors ensured that the findings where narrowed to only
articles including all the key-terms, thus covering the desired
context. This search and screening, resulted in three articles
that provided concepts with substantially new insight (the
rest of the articles screened, only briefly touched the key
criteria).
The identified concepts from literature (see III, Results,
Section A and B), were compared with findings from
discussions from awareness-workshops in an eHealth Living
Lab action research project in a municipality in Norway (see
III, Results, Section C). In this project, the research team
(including the authors of this article) held six awareness
workshops
together
with
representatives
from
the
municipality
(a
joint
project
manager,
ICT
manager,
management and employee representatives from municipal
homecare and nursing services). The workshops focused on
these topics:
•
Stakeholder analysis
•
Service design and ‘design thinking’ methods
•
ICT-business as innovation partners (ref. co-creation
with ICT-system vendors)
•
Capabilities and organizational learning
•
Enterprise performance management, and
•
Scaling up innovations from a Living lab.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Two of the authors also visited design workshops where
front-line personnel employees in home nursing, together
with municipal healthcare-department managers and eHealth
researchers, discussed issues and requirements related to a
specific
service
innovation,
the
use
of
digital
night
surveillance for patients in need of this, staying at home,
with use of cameras with video conferencing functionalities.
III.
RESULTS
The results are presented in relation to the key terms of
the literature search. The identified articles offered design
principles that can govern good worklife ergonomics in
eHealth co-creation processes.
A. Ergonomics in co-creation – the role of employees
Neubauer
and
Stary
[8]
describe
ergonomics
as
acknowledging the role of employees in innovation as
leading to both improvements and financial benefits, through
human-centred design.
Human-centred design for interactive systems promotes
the following key principles [8]:
•
The design is based upon an explicit understanding
of users, tasks and environments
•
Users
are
involved
throughout
design
and
development
•
The design is driven and refined by user-centred
evaluation
•
The process is iterative
•
The design addresses the whole user experience
•
The design team includes multidisciplinary skills
and perspectives.
Of advocation policies that could improve on this, Lopez-
Gomez et al [9] suggest:
•
Promoting the access to highly qualified personnel to
develop new concepts and service innovations in-
house
•
Developing training methods for personnel to be
able to adapt innovations acquired from external
sources
•
Need to better adapt curricula in education and
training schemes to the demands of service economy
•
Recognizing informal learning so as to increase the
attractiveness of continuous training for employees
•
Promoting
modern
innovation
management
approaches
that
better
support
creativity
and
autonomy of service workers [9]
B. Operationalizing these principles in eHealth
While the forgone citations are from industrial contexts,
Beaumont et al [1] focus on service-design in eHealth, and
propose
that
socio-technical,
human-centred
design
approaches are better alternatives to techno-centric design.
The article promotes joint innovation tools like service
blueprints [10][11] and stakeholder analysis [5] in the form
of Systems Scenario Tool (SST) [12]. SST combines
stakeholder, and system gap-analysis.
The key points in the article are [1]:
•
Telehealth
equipment
and
services
offer
opportunities for bridging the future gap between
available health resources and demand created by an
increase in life expectancy.
•
Current use of telehealth is limited by inadequate
business models and service designs that fail to
generate successful partnerships and value for
customers and suppliers.
•
Traditionally, healthcare providers have taken a
techno-centric approach to the implementation of
new technologies, which often results in unforeseen
barriers to success.
•
Design and implementation of new services can
benefit from a socio-technical approach, which
gives
equal
consideration
to
both
social
and
technical aspects of a complex system.
•
Co-creation of value requires new tools, such as the
System
Scenarios
Tool,
which
provides
stakeholders with a holistic framework to help
model the implications of service offering and
business model choices.
C. Design principles applied on a Living Lab project
Comparing these organizational design principles with
experiences
from
the
Living
Lab
project
workshops,
methods such as stakeholder analysis [5], and service
blueprints (op. cit.), as devised in Beaumont et al, found in
the literature review [1], proved to be useful in helping to
design new services. To the known service blueprint
template for process notation (swim lane diagram) we found
it useful to add a band for step purpose and key performance
indicators, see Fig. 1. In addition to showing the process
following a timeline or sequence (steps), the process diagram
shows activities at different levels of the information system.
The levels include both those parts that are visible to the end-
user and the processes back stage, below the “line of
visibility” [11]. Adding the purpose of each step purpose
makes it possible to extract user stories to form a system
requirement documentation for hand-over to Information
Technology Infrastructure Library methods (ITIL) [13]-[15]
or agile system development [16], and refined further to
precise technical architectures and instructions to ICT-
system engineers. At the same time, adding key performance
indicators can be a starting point for defining inputs to a joint
enterprise process and performance management system.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 1. Service Blueprint diagram template, with “lanes” for purpose and performance indicators added
By adding the iteration of a workshop with all involved
front-stage and back-stage personnel-employees, like in the
Living lab-case (see Section II; Method), more aspects of a
proposed innovation can be explored, before expensive
investments and changes are made. Although our process
modelling exercise showed the proposed camera-surveillance
case to be technically feasible and may give potential
benefits to homecare patients, it also showed that such an
innovation also has major implications for the worklife for
e.g., home nurses, as well as legal and privacy-issues in
general, that needs to be examined and discussed further.
The status, as this article is being written, is that the camera-
surveillance
case
has
been
postponed,
while
other
innovation-paths are explored; e.g., a new contact-centre and
alarm-reception central.
IV.
PROPOSITION
This article proposes that enterprises that want to succeed
with eHealth innovation and co-creation over time, need to
secure the involvement of their frontline personnel, because
they are key to establishing a Business Performance
Measurement system. There are numerous definitions of
what
a
Business
Performance
Measurement
system
contains. In a literature review, Franco-Santos et al. [17]
identified these main features [17]:
1.
Performance measures
2.
Objectives/goals
3.
Supporting
infrastructures
(including
data
acquisition and analysis)
4.
Targets (gauges – does the enterprise meet its
targets)
5.
Causal models (what are drivers for successful
performance)
6.
Hierarchy/cascade
(organization,
delegation
of
concern)
7.
Performance
contract
(negotiated
contractual
relationships with stakeholders)
8.
Rewards (incentives)
Co-creation is a relatively new term. It has become part
of the slogan and strategy of many universities. But what
does it mean in practice and where does the term come from?
A recent review by Galvagno and Dalli [18] traces the term
back to three theoretical perspectives including service
science,
innovation
and
technology
management,
and
marketing and consumer research. The literature on co-
creation operates on two levels of analyses: company centred
vs. customer experience centred. Apparent themes in the
literature
include
co-creating
value
through
customer
experience and competence, service innovation, including
digital customer involvement. Today, service science and
marketing play a major role in the literature and refer to the
involvement of customers in the supplier's product- and
service development. In information systems research and
management research, the term co-creation has been used by,
among others, Grönroos and Voima [19], and Lenka et al.
[2].
Lenka et al. have provided a model that will explain the
connection between "megatrends" in industry and working
life; digital development and change ("digitalization") and
development of a service culture in production-oriented
environments ("servitization") through co-creation processes.
As authors, we agree with Lenka et al., that an important
prerequisite for success is the development of digitalization
capabilities
in
service-based
organizations.
These
digitalization capabilities in turn, will govern the "Value Co-
creation" mechanisms; consisting of two main mechanisms;
one linked to needs analysis (perceptive mechanisms) and
one linked to design and construction cycles (responsive
mechanisms). Between these two (from observation to
design and construction), knowledge about measurement
Service Blueprint diagram
Pre service
Post service
Step name/no.
Step purpose
Key performance indicators
Service evidence
User action
Front stage personnel action ↓ "Visibilityline"
Back stage personnel action
Infrastructures (legal,
standards, technical)
Legend
Descision
Connection
During service
Event
Process
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

points is transferred to goals and values that form the basis
for
implementation
of
the
service
(in
design
and
construction). Both mechanisms must be repeated for each
overlapping link in the value chain.
Moreover, we propose that the change work done in
these overlapping links in the value chain can be expressed
(including the core, the actual digitalization capability) as
Deming Cycles (Plan-Do-Study-Act), see Fig. 2.
Figure 2. Deming cycles
Iterative development-cycles like this allow the time for
involvement of both external and internal stakeholder
groups,
and
should
include
discussing
goals
and
measurements. The saying “You can’t manage what you
don’t measure”, referring to our sub-title, is attributed to both
W. Edwards Deming and Peter Drucker.
Focus in achieving worklife ergonomics will be the
relationship between the observational input and response
outputs from the service co-creation and system co-creation
cycles as a prerequisite for successful eHealth co-creation
governance. Lenka et al. states, that value is added at each
part of the chain, as new actors bring in new experiences, see
new opportunities and add new value to the service. This
includes the service consumers themselves, and their next-of-
kin. The measurement system will be a trigger for new
innovations, while being a missed "GPS" guidance system,
to find the way [20]. Such a system will also act to spur
organizational learning, providing incentives that motivate
and intensify innovation [20].
To stay relevant, since the frames, and context, of the
eHealth area is rapidly changing, we believe that the overall
quality system (Process and
performance management
system) itself must be agile and subject to at least annual
evaluation (a slower Deming cycle), while the services that
the system controls, go through its many and fast Deming
cycles. Together, these form a proposed conceptual process-
model for co-creation in eHealth innovation, that also
supports
good
worklife
ergonomics.
The
concept
is
illustrated in Fig. 3.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 3. Process-model for co-creation in e-Health innovation; The ecosystem (Based on Lenka et al., 2017)
When it comes to the Plan-Do-Study-Act cycles in the
value-chain (system co-creation, service co-creation) –
different process modelling tools, like swim lane diagrams,
can be used to visualize, convey, and discuss the consumer
journey with stakeholders, using e.g., “Service Blueprint” or
similar [10]-[21].
All in all, the goal is that the entire ecosystem is set in a
state of continuous improvement and value innovation, and
that
a
shared
and
improved
service
culture
in
the
municipalities and their partners, (servitization), develops
through digital transformation. This secures the ability to go
back and start again, if necessary.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This article has shown that for the purpose of establishing
a Living Lab concept, and achieving digitalization and
servitization throughout the organization, the following
elements are necessary; digital governance capabilities,
process and performance management methods and systems
that align new technologies with high quality work processes
(worklife ergonomics), and appropriate tools to visualize and
communicate processes and services with end-users, as well
as different professional employee groups involved, front
stage and back stage. By involving employees though
iterative project-cycles and achieving a general consensus on
what goals and measures should count, the necessary sorting
and maturing of ideas is achieved, so that failed changes can
be avoided before too great investments are made and lost.
Other factors that are necessary are processes that align
local service strategies with central government legal and
technical frames (compliance). In Norway, much of this is
still in the making, and health information systems are
generally
not
interoperable,
but
a
joint
information
infrastructure is under development in mid-Norway (a joint
health information platform and the “One resident – One
joint health journal” project), and is expected to go national
in 2022 [22]. More research is needed on how these different
eco-systems (central, local) can be efficiently combined.
More research is needed into innovative means of
capturing both qualitative and quantitative data about end-
users or patients’ using “Big data”; combining e.g., social
media and transaction data from the service systems. More
action, design and evaluation research are also needed for
devising
how
the
proposed
model
(Fig.
3)
can
be
implemented and operationalized in a manner that ensures
both employee and end-user involvement and commitment
for achieving a high quality, lower cost health care system,
while maintaining a high quality of worklife.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Beaumont, L. E. Bolton, A. McKay, and H. P. N. Hughes,
“Rethinking service design: a socio-technical approach to the
development of business models”, in Product Development in
the Socio-sphere2014, Springer. pp. 121-141.
[2]
S.
Lenka,
V.
Parida,
and
J.
Wincent,
“Digitalization
Capabilities as Enablers of Value Co‐Creation in Servitizing
Firms”. Psychology & Marketing, 2017, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 92-
100.
[3]
Gartner, IT glossary. 2017 [cited 2018 Jan. ]; Available from:
https://www.gartner.com/it-glossary/digitalization/.
[4]
R. G. F. Braz, L .F. Scavarda, and R. A. Martins, “Reviewing
and improving performance measurement systems: An action
research,” International Journal of Production Economics,
2011, vol. 133, no. 2: pp. 751-760.
[5]
N. F. Garmann-Johnsen and Ø. Hellang, “Collaborative
Process
Modelling
and
Evaluation
in
E-health”.
in
Scandinavian Conference on Health Informatics; August 22;
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

2014;
Grimstad;
Norway.
2014.
Linköping
University
Electronic Press.
[6]
Merriam-Webster, Dictionary. 2017
[cited 2018 Jan.];
Available
from:
https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/ergonomics'.
[7]
L. Punnett et al., “A conceptual framework for integrating
workplace health promotion and occupational ergonomics
programs.” Public Health Reports, 2009, vol. 124, no. 4
(suppl. 1): pp. 16-25.
[8]
M. Neubauer and C. Stary, S-BPM in the Production Industry.
2017: Springer.
[9]
C. López-Gómez et al., “Emerging trends in global advanced
manufacturing,” 2013, University of Cambridge: Policy links.
[10] G. Lynn Shostack, “How to design a service.” European
Journal of Marketing, 1982, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 49-63.
[11] M. J. Bitner, A. L. Ostrom, and F. N. Morgan, “Service
blueprinting: a practical technique for service innovation.”
California management review, 2008, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 66-
94.
[12] H. P. Hughes, C. W. Clegg, L. E. Bolton and L. C. Machon,
“Systems scenarios: a tool for facilitating the socio-technical
design of work systems”. Ergonomics, 2017: pp. 1-17.
[13] T. R. Eikebrokk and J. Iden, “ITIL implementation: The role
of ITIL software and project quality.” in Database and Expert
Systems Applications (DEXA), 2012 23rd International
Workshop on. 2012. IEEE.
[14] J. Iden and T. R. Eikebrokk, “Using the ITIL process
reference model for realizing IT Governance: An empirical
investigation.” Information Systems Management, 2014, vol.
31, no. 1, pp. 37-58.
[15] J. Iden and T. R. Eikebrokk, “Implementing IT Service
Management: A systematic literature review.” International
Journal of Information Management, 2013, vol. 33, no. 3. pp.
512-523.
[16] R. Hoda, J. Noble, and S. Marshall, “Self-organizing roles on
agile software development teams.” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, 2013, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 422-444.
[17] M. Franco-Santos et al., “Towards a definition of a business
performance measurement system” International Journal of
Operations & Production Management, 2007, vol. 27, no. 8,
pp. 784-801.
[18] M. Galvagno and D. Dalli, “Theory of value co-creation: a
systematic literature review.” Managing Service Quality,
2014, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 643-683.
[19] C. Grönroos and P. Voima, “Critical service logic: making
sense of value creation and co-creation.” Journal of the
academy of marketing science, 2013, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 133-
150.
[20] A. Pavlov and M. Bourne, “Explaining the effects of
performance measurement on performance: An organizational
routines perspective.” International Journal of Operations &
Production Management, 2011, vol 31, no. 1, pp. 101-122.
[21] J. Schneider
and M. Stickdorn, “This is service design
thinking: basics, tools, cases” 2011: Wiley.
[22] Helse-Midt-Norge, “Én journal for hele helsetjenesten i Midt-
Norge (in English: One journal for the entire health service in
central Norway).” 2017
[cited 2018 Jan.]; Available from:
https://helse-midt.no/vart-
oppdrag/prosjekter/ehelse/helseplattformen#slik-er-
helseplattformen-organisert.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

