1
Bridging the Gap Between Consumer eHealth and Public Health
Through a Diagnostic Decision Support System
Takashi Okumura
Kenichiro Taneda
Hiromitsu Ogata
National Institute of Public Health, Japan
{taka,kentaneda,ogata}@niph.go.jp
Abstract—For sound development of the consumer eHealth,
the market needs to have proper connection to the public health
authority. On the other hand, in public health, tracking of
patients has been a bottleneck in the scientiﬁc process. To address
the problems altogether, we propose an approach to automate
the case registration through a diagnosis support system. In
the proposed approach, we set up a diagnostic decision support
system for physicians, coupled with a support system for patients,
on the Internet. In this setting, symptomatic data of anonymized
patients automatically accumulate from the physicians’ search
proﬁle and the patients’ reports. Then, researchers in need can
ﬁnd appropriate cases on the symptomatic database, to recruit
them for further study. The paper illustrates the case registration
model with decision support system, and discusses the pros and
cons of the proposed model. The qualitative analysis suggests
that the model can accumulate information of cases that cannot
be collected at a reasonable cost using traditional approaches.
Keywords-Diagnostic decision support system; Patient registry;
Patient diary
I. INTRODUCTION
Symptom checkers [1], [2] are considered to be embodi-
ment of the consumer eHealth, which improves delivery of
medical care in a novel and efﬁcient way through information
technology. They are a class of diagnostic decision support
system, which can be used to guide patients to appropriate
hospitals, or to clinics. It can also be used to suggest Over-
the-counter (OTC) drugs, to avoid costly medical consultation
for low income populations, which would contribute to save
the rising costs for medical care in most countries. However,
is it a truly reasonable way to take?
In the viewpoint of patients, convenience matters most, to
ﬁnd cheaper remedy, even without hospital visit, or to ﬁnd
doctors easily, who simply match their needs. However, the
“consumers” are self-interested, and thus, just by meeting
the needs of the consumers, the service would be detached
from “public” health, which, in the long run, do harm the
patients. They might decide not to visit a clinic, satisﬁed with
the agreeable automated diagnosis, which could be an early
symptom of fatal subarachnoid hemorrhage. If symptoms of a
certain disorder do not impact the quality of life of the patients,
they would not look for medical services, resulting in the poor
understanding of such disease.
Accordingly, for further development of the consumer
eHealth ﬁeld, it would be crucial that the ﬁeld satisﬁes
patient’s point of view, as well as more public point of view.
This indicates that the consumer eHealth must be properly
connected to public health authorities. The paper illustrates
such a trial we made in Japan, a research for accumulation of
unclassiﬁed disease proﬁles [3] through a diagnostic decision
support system.
We ﬁrst describe the motivation in Section II and illustrate
the overview of the approach in Section III. These sections
are followed by detailed description of our prototype in
Section IV. We summarize the discussion for the proposed
approach in Section V, and conclude the paper in Section VI.
II. MOTIVATION
In the heart of clinical research and public health lies
“patient registry”. However, it is not uncommon that the
number of registered patients does not accumulate enough for
statistical analysis in a given period. Indeed, it is the most la-
borious and time-consuming phase in clinical research, which
annoys the steering committees of many research attempts.
The shortage of cases in clinical research might be ascribed
to several factors. First of all, complicated registration process
might serve as a barrier for clinicians to register their patients.
Secondly, case registration would certainly be difﬁcult for rare
diseases, because of the scarcity of the qualiﬁed subjects.
Third, it would be hard for researches to collect patients, if
the case deﬁnition is vague. Indeed, there is a certain class
of patients, who develop incomprehensible symptoms, which
are called Medically Unexplained Symptoms (MUS). Most of
these symptoms derive from psychosomatic disorder, but, they
are also targets of modern medicine, as a task force of the US
National Institutes of Health states; ”Medically unexplained
syndromes present the most common problems in medicine”
[4].
Accordingly, the challenge for public health ﬁeld is how to
accumulate the information of patients, including vague symp-
toms, possibly from uncertain disorders. An approach for this
goal is the Electric Health Records (EHRs) [5], in which all
the data are digitally stored and exchanged through computer
network [6], [7]. However, prevalence of such system is not
at satisfactory level in most countries, including Japan, and
22
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

2
Fig. 1.
Overview of the decision support system model for case registry
technology is not mature enough to comprehensively process
the medical records written in natural languages.
Another approach that Google demonstrated is to harness
the consumer behaviors to such a public health need. Google
Flu-trend [8] utilizes Internet search trends to monitor preva-
lence of infectious agents, instead of gathering symptomatic
data from medical institutions. This is based on an assumption
that there is a strong correlation between search trends and
prevalence of the disease in a region, inferred from the users’
access proﬁle. As the service suggests, careful design could
bridge the consumer eHealth and public health. Next section
illustrates such a model for case registry.
III. DIAGNOSIS SUPPORT MODEL FOR CASE REGISTRY
A simple approach for case registry is to store search
proﬁle of symptom checkers [1], [2]. In the same way as the
Google ﬂu-trend mechanism, the symptom checkers would
be able to accumulate symptomatic information of patients,
which might be useful for public health study. However,
the straightforward approach is vulnerable to patients’ biased
self-assessment, and cannot accumulate objective information
suitable for clinical research. It would be preferable that the
data is qualiﬁed enough for epidemiological analysis. Further,
the self-assessment model cannot accumulate lab results that
can be obtained even at the smallest clinics.
Consequently, we propose a combined setting (Figure 1), in
which the physician support system and the patient support
system cooperate together, for collection of useful patient
information. In the approach, the diagnosis support system for
physicians takes symptomatic data, and returns a list of differ-
ential diagnosis. The system is built to support physicians, with
features useful to make clinical decisions, and thus, physicians
would willingly input their information for better patient care
and to save their time.
For the patient part, the system issues a registration ticket for
each patient, requested by a doctor. The ticket allows a patient
to create an on-line account for an anonymous symptomatic
diary system. The diary is reviewed by the physicians and by
the researchers, who can send suggestions of diagnosis and
recruitment messages for more detailed study to the patients.
Because the patients with undiagnosed disease are highly
motivated, they also willingly register their detailed symptoms
and their history onto the system, expecting higher chances of
diagnosis.
The registration ticket establishes the logical link, between
the symptomatic data and the clinical ﬁndings, for anonymous
patients. In this setting, subjective and objective data are
independently collected and appropriately associated to each
other, which serve as a virtual case registry for researchers.
23
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

3
Fig. 2.
Diagnosis Support System (in Japanese) - The table provides an
symptomatic input form in a clinically structured way
IV. A PROTOTYPE SYSTEM
This registration model automatically accumulates the pa-
tient information, harnessing the motivation of physicians and
patients into the case registry. To demonstrate the proposed
scheme, we implemented a prototype in a research project for
national registry of unclassiﬁed diseases [3]. The prototype
comprises a physician support system, a patient support sys-
tem, and a researcher support system, which will be outlined
in this section.
A. Physician support system
The physician support system is an automatic diagnosis
system [9], [10], [11], [12], which is designed to provide a
variety of information useful for clinicians having trouble with
difﬁcult cases. The system takes chief complaints, physical
examination, and laboratory results, as input (Figure 2). On
the screen, selected symptoms are listed in the rightmost col-
umn. Then, when the diagnosis button is pressed, the system
returns a list of differential diagnosis (Figure 3), calculating
possibility of each disease utilizing a disease knowledge base.
The physician support system also includes a Bulletin Board
System and a Wiki system, to discuss difﬁcult cases and other
valuable topics. Further, we provided a feedback system, to
efﬁciently collect various feedback and suggestions from the
users, to continuously improve the system.
The symptomatic data, submitted to the system as a query,
are anonymously stored in the system, and will be used for
further analysis by researchers. Although the system does
not have novelty as an automated diagnosis system, each
item in the list has hyperlinks to related documents, such as
review articles and other disease databases to further help the
physicians. For the future revisions, we are planning to provide
premium access service to commercial EBM (Evidence Based
Medicine) resources, such as UpToDate [13] and DynaMed
Fig. 3. Differential diagnosis list (in Japanese) - Each item in the list contains
useful links to clinical references
[14], on the link list, to further motivate the clinicians to use
the decision support system.
B. Patient support system
For difﬁcult cases, physicians can issue an anonymous
registration ticket, on the system. The ticket is passed to
patients, to be used to create a patient account on the patient
support system. The system comprises a patient diary, which
is considered to be useful to support their life [15], and
communication tools. The patient diary stores symptomatic
data in the system, with logical links to the patient record for
physicians, in an anonymized way (Figure 4). Because of the
logical link, physicians can collect symptomatic information of
the patient, without keeping privacy information of the patient,
such as name, sex and data of birth. Downside of the setting is
that, researchers cannot contact the patients via postal service
or via telephone call, because their privacy information is
stripped on the system. Accordingly, the system provides a
messaging system, for study recruitment by researchers.
For the patients, it would be desirable that they can store and
manage all the health information on the system, throughout
their lives. Such an idea is called Personal Health Record
(PHR), nowadays. However, PHR necessarily stores personal
information, because there are many types of data that cannot
be easily anonymized, such as medical images, which mostly
contain personal names and other identiﬁcation. Consequently,
PHR service requires higher level of information security,
which is beyond the focus of the prototype system. Thus, on
our system, we simply provided a link to a third-party PHR
service so that patients can allow researchers to access their
detailed health records, for more proper diagnosis.
24
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

4
Fig. 4.
Patient Support System (In Japanese) - Showing a symptomatic diary
for a registered patient
C. Researcher support system
For researchers, the prototype includes a search engine of
the case registry, to ﬁnd cases who present a certain set of
symptoms. Then, they can contact the patients by sending
messages, if they need further investigation. The system also
provides a BBS and a Wiki for researchers. Additionally, to
study disorders that do not fall in a known category of human
disease, researchers need a database of known diseases. For
this purpose, we also implemented a disease knowledge base,
integrated into the automated diagnosis system, which can
store information of disease and its major symptoms, coupled
with epidemiological proﬁle.
Note that a patient record comprises more various and more
detailed information, including demographic information, past
medical history, family history, medications, etc. The registry,
on the other hand, provides a very primitive symptomatic
database, and thus, it could be insufﬁcient for clinical research.
Accordingly, we are planning to provide a data migration
tool and a more ﬂexible patient registry, coupled with patient
recruiting tool, so that researchers can start up a survey for
speciﬁc purposes at low cost, utilizing the data in the primitive
registry as a basis.
V. DISCUSSION
An advantage of the proposed model is that the model can
extensively accumulate data of patients at low cost, including
hard-to-diagnose cases, rare cases, and MUS cases. This
property also favors the model as an outbreak monitor of
unknown health hazard, because the public health authorities
cannot afford detailed surveillance of every patient. They can
continuously monitor the search trends, and can even detect
unclassiﬁed disorder, by matching the symptom set with the
known disease proﬁles.
There has been many types of Computer-assisted diagnostic
decision support systems; for general diagnosis, for each
specialty, and for speciﬁc category of medical images [9].
Most of the systems have been built as stand-alone systems,
or integrated into clinical workstations in hospital information
systems. The proposed model, on the other hand, behaves like
an Internet search engine, which takes symptomatic data as
input and returns a list of possible diagnosis with a variety of
useful Web links, while keeping a log of the search queries as
a patient symptomatic database. Indeed, this model instantiates
another application area for computer-based decision support
systems, which automatically accumulate useful information
at low cost.
As a diagnosis support system, the prototype currently
covers roughly 1600 diseases, which exceeds 650 entries in
INTERNIST-1 [9], but, the quality of the knowledge base and
the diagnosis algorithm are still premature. Accordingly, we
are now improving the algorithm and trying to extend the
coverage through automated generation of disease proﬁle by
text-mining technique on rare disease database such as Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) [16] and Orphanet
[17].
High-quality EBM resources, such as UpToDate [13] and
DynaMed [14] are focusing on major diseases and topics, and
emphasis is on their quality of the articles, not on the coverage.
On the other hand, rare disease databases such as OMIM and
Orphanet covers thousands of minor disorders, but, common
disorders are out of their focus. Accordingly, our attempt may
bridge the gap, between the common and the rare, by providing
integrated interface for disease databases, as a disease search
engine, searchable by symptoms and ﬁndings.
VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Patient registries are key components in public health, but
require substantial commitment by physicians. Accordingly,
most of the budget and the time are spent on this part in
clinical research. However, physicians can hardly beneﬁt from
the case registration, which tends to result in the shortage of
registered cases.
In the proposed model, patient data are submitted separately
by physicians and patients, motivated for their own goal.
This setting brings a unique property to the model that the
participants voluntarily turn in their data, driven by their own
incentives, which realizes exceedingly cost-effective surveil-
lance.
This model also possesses a unique property, in respect to
information security. For protection of patient privacy, clin-
ical information systems have higher security requirements,
which tends to compromise the system usability [18]. Indeed,
the HIPAA Privacy Rule decreased the number of patients
available for clinical research [19]. On the other hand, our
proposed approach separates the registration of patient data
25
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

5
into two parts, one for automated registration of anonymized
symptomatic data by physicians, and the other for description
of the illness by the patients. Because of the separation,
the physician support system can be optimized for system
usability, without worrying too much about the patient privacy.
The more detailed information is voluntarily provided by the
patients themselves, which also minimizes the privacy concern
in the system.
Although there is ample room for further improvement in
the current prototype, the model has the favorable properties
for consumer eHealth and for public health. We will continue
the investigation of the data acquisition model, and will shortly
proceed to a proof-of-concept study to prove the efﬁcacy of
the proposed model.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The disease knowledge base used in the study is originally
developed by Dr. Keijirou Torigoe, and is gratuitously offered
by I’ROM Holdings, Japan.
REFERENCES
[1] Health Grades Inc. Symptom cheker.
http://symptoms.wrongdiagnosis.com/.
[2] WebMD, LLC. Symptom checker from WebMD.
http://symptoms.webmd.com/.
[3] National Institute of Public Health.
Research group for national
repository of unclassiﬁed diseases. http://undiag.niph.go.jp/.
[4] D. H. Hellhammer and J. Hellhammer. Stress: The Brain-Body Connec-
tion. S. Karger AG, Switzerland, ﬁrst edition, 2008.
[5] E. H. Shortliffe.
The evolution of electronic medical records.
Acad
Med., 74(4):414–9, April 1999.
[6] Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium.
CDISC.
http://
www.cdisc.org/standards/.
[7] R. H. Dolin, L. Alschuler, C. Beebe, P. V. Biron, S. L. Boyer, D. Essin,
E. Kimber, T. Lincoln, and J. E. Mattison. The HL7 Clinical Document
Architecture. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
8(6):552–569, 2001.
[8] Google Inc. The google ﬂu trends website.
http://www.google.org/about/ﬂutrends/how.html, 2008.
[9] R. A. Miller. Computer-assisted diagnostic decision support: history,
challenges, and possible paths forward. Advances in Health Sciences
Education, pages 89–106, 2009.
[10] P. Ramnarayan, A. Tomlinson, G. Kulkarni, A. Rao, and J. Britto. A
novel diagnostic aid (isabel): Development and preliminary evaluation
of clinical performance. In Medinfo. 2004, pages 1091–5, 2004.
[11] O. Bouhaddou, L. Frucci, K. Cofrin, D. Larsen, H. Warner Jr., P. Huber,
D. Sorenson, C. Turner, and H. Warner.
Implementation of practice
guidelines in a clinical setting using a computerized knowledge base
(iliad). In Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care, pages 258–62, 1993.
[12] G. O. Barnett, K. T. Famiglietti, R. J. Kim, E. P. Hoffer, and M. J.
Feldman.
Dxplain on the internet.
In AMIA Symp., pages 607–11,
1998.
[13] UpToDate, Inc. UpToDate. http://www.uptodate.com/.
[14] DynaMed, LLC. Dynamed. http://www.ebscohost.com/dynamed/.
[15] Health Experience Research Group. DIPEx, the database of individual
patient experience. http://www.healthtalkonline.org/.
[16] Johns Hopkins University.
Online mendelian inheritance in man.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim.
[17] Orphanet. Orphanet. http://www.orpha.net/.
[18] A. Whitten and J.D. Tygar.
Why johnny can’t encrypt: A usability
evaluation of pgp 5.0.
In 9th USENIX Security Symposium, August
1999.
[19] D. Armstrong, E. Kline-Rogers, S. M. Jani, E. B.Goldman, J. Fang,
D. Mukherjee, B. K. Nallamothu, and K. A. Eagle. Potential impact of
the hipaa privacy rule on data collection in a registry of patients with
acute coronary syndrome. Arch Intern Med., pages 1125–1129, 2005.
26
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

