Antibiotic Information App for Nurses 
Development and Preliminary Effects 
Jobke Wentzel, Julia E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen 
Dept. of Psychology, Health and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands 
m.j.wentzel@utwente.nl 
 
 
Abstract—Antibiotic stewardship programs aim to optimize 
antibiotic use in order to control antibiotic resistance. Nurses 
need easily accessible information on antibiotics to perform 
antimicrobial-related tasks optimally. A task supporting 
antibiotic information application was developed to support 
nurses. With log file analysis, scenario-based tests and 
information behavior questionnaires we evaluated the app. 
The results show steady, continuing use. Instruction pages are 
most popular, and first responses to the application are 
positive regarding look and feel and accessibility of 
information.  
Keywords-eHealth; antibiotic stewardship; nurse; task-
support 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mis- or over-use of antibiotics contributes to the problem 
of antibiotic resistance. Due to their resistance to antibiotics, 
infections caused by resistant pathogens are difficult to treat. 
To stop resistance forming and preserve their effectiveness, 
prudent use of antibiotics is needed [1]. Antibiotic 
Stewardship Programs (ASPs) aim to optimize antibiotic use 
in clinical settings. Formulary restrictions, antibiotic cycling, 
multidisciplinary bed-side consultation and improved 
diagnostics are some strategies that are used. Infectious 
disease specialists, clinical microbiologists, pharmacists and 
physicians work together in ASP to improve antibiotic use. 
Optimal antibiotic therapy relies on timely adjustment of 
therapy, based on lab results (diagnostics) as well as careful 
monitoring of patient progress and vital signs. Correct 
execution of antibiotic therapy (including preparation and 
administration of the medications) as prescribed by the 
physician stands at the base of successful ASPs. In addition 
to expert input in ASPs, nurses contribute a great deal. 
Nurses spend much time caring for and observing patients, 
they are the eyes and ears of the physician and notice 
changes in patient status that call for antibiotic therapy 
adjustment. 
In earlier research, we already identified nurses as an 
important stakeholder for ASPs [2], even though scientific 
literature on ASPs focuses mainly on physicians and clinical 
experts [3]. As earlier research indicated that nurses have 
high information needs regarding the antibiotic care process, 
we aimed to optimally support nurses in their antibiotic-
related tasks. We applied human centered design to develop 
an information application, that takes into account user needs 
and provides bed-side task support. 
Information and communication technology holds the 
promise of facilitating information transfer and offering 
support in a variety of health care settings [4, 5]. 
Applications aimed to support health care workers (HCWs) 
are abundant, both in mobile applications (for smartphone or 
tablet) or websites and web apps [6]. However, sometimes 
apps and websites that are supposed to facilitate and support 
HCW‟s jobs are perceived as distracting, user-unfriendly and 
ill-fitted to work practice, thereby possibly compromising 
patient safety [7-9]. In some cases, taking a more user- or 
practice- based focus throughout the design phases may help 
to overcome these difficulties [8, 10]. Also, incorporating 
persuasive system design into technology may help to 
improve uptake and effectiveness. In this model, the targeted 
behavior is reinforced, shaped or changed by the technology, 
thereby „persuading‟ its users [11]. Designing technology in 
such way that it is unobtrusive, useful and easy to use helps 
to blend the technology seamless into users‟ work (or life) 
and quickly reach their goals [11]. With regard to nurse 
support 
in 
antimicrobial 
stewardship, 
no 
dedicated 
applications were identified in literature, as nurses are often 
overlooked as stakeholder in ASPs. Nurse tasks in ASPs are 
demanding and ask for good information integration and 
decision making: nurses gather information from different 
information systems, integrate it, and decide whether further 
action is required. We suspect that especially task support 
and system credibility strategies from the Persuasive 
Systems Design model are influential; formative evaluations 
revealed a lack of task support and easy accessible 
information, which is a barrier for nurse empowerment in 
ASP [2]. Based on this understanding of the work context, 
we developed an application. 
In this paper, we describe preliminary summative 
evaluation results of an antibiotic information app for nurses, 
by focusing on actual use and effects of use on antibiotic 
stewardship-related tasks. The following research questions 
guided this research:  
1. How is the application being used? 
2. Does the application support nurses in their 
antibiotic-related tasks? 
3. Is app-use more efficient than standard information 
sources ? 
4. How do nurses experience the use of the app? 
II. 
THE ANTIBIOTIC INFORMATION APP 
Based 
on 
formative 
evaluations, 
the 
antibiotic 
information app was developed [12]. In focus groups, 
interviews, scenario tests and usability tests nurses in our 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

pilot research expressed a need for an easily accessible, 
centralized information application, where they could find all 
information on the use of antibiotics they need during their 
work. This included instructions on preparation and 
administration, as well as background information and 
information that is needed on specific occasions only (e.g., 
when side effects occur). First, a prototype was created in 
WordPress [13], with some alterations to fit our specific 
content management demands. Based on its evaluations a 
final release was launched. The application is web-based, 
and can be run from the hospital‟s own server. However, for 
the pilot the system was made available via the internet, and 
was taken up in the nurses‟ personal hospital start page so 
that it could be accessed easily. Besides PC, the application 
is optimized for mobile (tablet, smartphone) use. For the 
app‟s content, the information sources that were already used 
by the nurses served as input. These sources were „chopped 
up‟, selecting only the content that is necessary for nurses to 
execute their tasks (the original sources often contain much 
information aimed at physicians or medical expert, irrelevant 
and confusing to nurses). The different types of content are 
ordered according to the mental models of the nurses as they 
resulted from the card-sort study. Information is grouped by 
the following categories: information needed to perform the 
primary tasks, important information and warnings, general 
or background information, extra checks and safety 
information, and information for specialists and medical 
background (see Figure 1). A demo version (in Dutch) of the 
app can be accessed via [14]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Screenshot of antibiotic overview page. A: task instructions, B:important information and 
warnings, C: general or background information, D: Safety checks and quality control, E: 
information for specialists and medical background, F: search field for antibiotic or select from list, 
G: search all pages (per antibiotic). 
By providing easily accessible information, nurses may 
be better equipped to perform antibiotic related tasks, and are 
able to recognize and address instances of suboptimal 
antibiotic use. This supports improved knowledge and 
recognition of instances to optimize antimicrobial use and 
nurse empowerment to discuss patient therapy and alert 
physicians in case of suboptimal antibiotic use. Figure 2 
shows an instruction page of the application, where nurses 
can read how to administer a certain antibiotic, including 
what to pay extra attention to. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshot of antibiotic overview page. A:back-button B: print and email buttons, C: 
search field, D: breadcrumb trail, E: instruction block on administration, F: source of the information 
with link, G: information on last update of the information block  
III. 
METHODS 
A. Participants 
Two lung wards of a local 1000-bed teaching hospital 
participated in this research. The wards have total of  57 
beds. During the pilot phase, 62 nurses (45 FTE) worked at 
the two wards. A number of them were informed about the 
app and the importance of antimicrobial stewardship in 
presentations, all received an email with instructions and 
instructional fact-sheets on antimicrobial stewardship and 
the app were distributed repeatedly throughout the wards. 
B. Information behaviour questionnaire 
We created a questionnaire to measure satisfaction and 
usability of information sources. In addition, items to 
measure to what extent nurses feel secure and confident to 
report and discuss suboptimal antibiotic use were added to 
the questionnaire. The questionnaire consists of existing 
scales that we adapted to better fit our research questions: 
To measure to what extent nurses feel supported by the 
information supply and its usability we adapted parts of 
Persuasive Systems Design (PSD) questionnaire (task 
support, persuasiveness, unobtrusiveness) [15, 16], and the 
 
 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Website Evaluation Questionnaire (WEQ): relevance, user 
friendliness, hyperlinks, speed [17]. To measure to what 
extent nurses feel confident to discuss antibiotic therapy 
suggestions with physicians we used parts of The 
Organization and Management of Intensive Care Units,  by 
Shortell and Rousseau (openness, accuracy, understanding) 
[18], and the Safety Attitudes Questionnaire (teamwork 
climate) [19]. Lastly, four ASP-specific items and seven 
items to measure demographics and internet experience [20] 
were added. Questionnaire items that were originally in 
English were translated into Dutch and back-translated into 
English to check for translation errors. The questionnaire 
was sent by email, and in case of non-response, up to two 
reminders were sent. 
C. Scenario-based user tests 
Ten scenarios were created together with a pharmacist 
and clinical microbiologist. The scenarios present situations 
that can arise during the nurse‟s work, eliciting some 
information 
need 
regarding 
the 
(correct) 
use 
of 
antimicrobials. The most critical moments in antimicrobial 
use, where mistakes are most likely and better information 
could have prevented them, were translated into cases. The 
cases addressed e.g. interaction of multiple types of 
medication, administering two or more medications at the 
same time, (sub) optimal dose due to abnormal weight, etc. 
Sixteen nurses participated in the baseline measurement 
tests, forty nurses will participate in the post-measurements 
(consisting of two conditions). The participants vary in age, 
work experience and gender. 
During baseline measurement all nurses had no 
experience with the antibiotic information app and had to 
resolve the scenarios relying on their usual information 
sources. During post measurement (in progress), all nurses 
will have had >6 months of experience using the app 
(having had >6 months access to it). One group will be 
randomized into the condition that they have to resolve the 
scenarios without the antibiotic information application 
(thus again using their usual information sources), the other 
group is allowed to use the application. All participants are 
presented with a scenario, and asked to give a solution (what 
would you do/needs to be done). They are asked to perform 
their information-search activities while talking out loud; 
e.g., look it up in a computer, ask a colleague, call the 
pharmacist, etc. This activity is recorded on audiotape as 
well as video. 
The audio and video files are analyzed to determine a) 
whether the scenario was resolved correctly b) what 
information source(s) was used c) whether any problems 
arose during the search; and d) how much time was needed 
to resolve the scenario. 
D. Log-file analysis 
The application was introduced at the two pilot wards 
where users could access the application directly on a pc 
without login. Mobile use was possible only via login. 
Throughout the pilot we monitored the use of the app to 
ensure whether it fulfills information needs, at what moment 
these needs arise most, and what type of content is viewed. 
The use of the application is being logged using Google 
Analytics, as well as a Wordpress (the app‟s software) plug-
in [13]. Log information of interest includes visits per day, 
time of day with most visits, most frequently viewed content 
and visit duration.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
In this paper, we present preliminary results because post 
measurements and analysis are ongoing. The available 
results include log file results and baseline measurements. 
A. Information behaviour questionnaire 
The baseline questionnaire was completed by 27 nurses 
(24 women, 3 men) out of 64 nurses that were invited to 
participate (42%). Their mean age was 36 years old (sd 
10.4), and on average they had 8.1 (sd 6.1) years of 
experience working on their ward, and 12.3 (sd 9.8) years of 
experience working as a nurse. Their internet experience, as 
measured by the amount of hours they use the internet per 
day (work and private use) is 2.7 (sd 2.7) hours. 
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONNAIRE OUTCOMES 
Information behavior 
questionnaire 
Subdomain or scale 
(number of items) 
Mean 
score 
Experience, 
satisfaction 
and 
usability of information 
Task support  (2) 
3.0 
Reliability (1) 
2.8 
Persuasiveness (3) 
2.9 
Unobtrusiveness (4) 
1.9 
Relevance (3) 
2.7 
User friendliness (3) 
2.0 
Speed (2) 
1.5 
Hyperlinks (2) 
2.4 
Nurse-physician communication 
Openness (4) 
2.7 
Accuracy (5) 
2.4 
Understanding (8) 
2.2 
Safety culture 
Teamwork (14) 
2.8 
Stewardship Climate 
ASP-questions (4) 
2.3 
a. Mean scores are presented per scale. All individual items were scored on a 5-point Likert scale, 
with scores ranging from 0 (totally disagree), 1 (disagree), 2 (don‟t agree, don‟t disagree), 3 (agree),  
to 4 (totally agree)  
With the questionnaire, we measured the following 
subdomains: Task support: 2 items, Reliability: 1 item, 
Persuasiveness: 
3 
items, 
Unobtrusiveness: 
4 
items, 
Relevance: 3 items, User friendliness: 3 items, Speed: 2 
items, Hyperlinks: 2 items, Openness: 4 items, Accuracy: 5 
items, Understanding: 8 items, Teamwork: 14 items, ASP: 4 
items. Table 1 shows the accumulated, averaged scores of 
all participants on the scale. Negative items were conversed. 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Higher numbers means a more positive score on that domain 
(e.g., better communication, more persuasiveness of 
available information sources, etc.). Table 1 shows that 
although nurses experience the information they use to be 
supportive of their task, score of 3.0 (on a 0-4 scale), it is 
not easy or user friendly to find information, given the low 
scores on unobtrusiveness (1.9), speed (1.5) and user 
friendliness (2.0). Further, moderately lower scores are 
found 
on accuracy (2.4), understanding (2.2) and 
stewardship (2.3).  
 
B. Scenario tests 
The reported results are preliminary (see Future Work for 
planned analyses) 
Sixteen nurses were presented with three scenario‟s 
each. Nurses needed different amounts of time to resolve the 
scenario‟s, ranging from instantly resolving it (ready 
knowledge), to up to 8 minutes needed to find the 
information. To complete the scenario‟s, nurses used the 
following strategies: read drug instruction leaflet, search 
pharmacy 
information 
website, 
search 
on 
national 
pharmacologic information site, search protocol database, 
search in (outdated) print instruction manual, call physician, 
call pharmacist, ask a colleague, search in Google, and in 
some cases, the nurse had sufficient (ready) knowledge to 
solve the scenario. 
Among the experienced problems when resolving the 
scenarios are: difficulty to decide on the correct source to 
search in, difficulty to access a source (including technical 
problems/long page loading time/login problems), difficulty 
to localize and comprehend the precise information needed 
(re-reading large amounts of text), and more in general, time 
needed to find the information. 
C. Log file analysis 
Intended use is somewhat difficult to establish. First of 
all, nurses indicated during development phases that they 
especially look for instructions when dealing with antibiotics 
that are unfamiliar to them and this does not happen 
frequently (otherwise, they would quickly become familiar 
with the antibiotic and the related information). Further, 
information is needed when a patient reacts to the medication 
in an unexpected way (side effect or allergy). Lastly, 
inexperienced nurses may need to look up information more 
often than experienced nurses. Thus, information need 
instances do not arise regularly and are difficult to predict, 
but when they arise finding correct information fast is 
important. The application was launched at the end of March 
2013, and has been used four times per day on average since. 
The bounce percentage is 8% (users leaving directly after 
entering). The log files show a steady use of the application 
(see Figure 3). Pages that are viewed most, aside from the 
welcome page and antibiotic overview pages (see an 
example page in Figure 1), include instructions on 
preparation and instructions on administration. Information 
on 
the 
antibiotics 
Amoxicillin-Clavulanic 
acid 
and 
Ceftazidim was viewed most often. The first is used 
frequently, but the second is used much less on these wards. 
The users prefer to search for an antibiotic by typing it in the 
search field; 74% vs. 26% out of 3,060 search instances. 
 
 
Figure 3. Daily app visits throughout the pilot period.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Effects on work process 
During development, nurses already proclaimed that 
having all their information centralized to one location is 
helpful. However, with the explosion of available medical 
apps, information systems and other information sources, 
providing more information is not always better [21]. This is 
supported by the baseline questionnaire that measured 
several aspects of information seeking behavior and 
appraisal. It shows that although nurses show they have good 
information, it is not user friendly and costs time to find. The 
scenario-based tests show similar results; nurses loose time 
locating the desired information. So, information quality is 
not a problem, finding the right information quickly is. This 
problem might be overcome with the app, as we hypothesize, 
because it tailors information and provides chunks that match 
the information need.  
Centralized, tailored information possibly helps to 
empower nurses in order to function optimally in antibiotic 
stewardship. Tailored information is one of the areas where 
the questionnaire and scenario tests results show room for 
improvement, as well as stewardship culture. For nurses to 
be able and feel confident to detect and discuss sub-optimal 
antibiotic use, they need to be able to rely on quickly 
available information. However, organization safety culture 
and nurse physician interaction play a big role and need to be 
addressed as well. Possibly, standardized communication 
aided with alerts and checklists of when to alarm or discuss 
with a physician can be useful [22]. 
B. App use 
The log file analysis shows that the app does support 
nurses during their work: use remains steady over time, and 
the bounce percentage is low. As original sources of 
information are still available to the nurses, the data show 
that at least some nurses prefer to use the app instead of 
conventional materials, as they keep accessing the app, 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

months after its release. Relatively little introductory 
activities were undertaken; some nurses attended an 
instructional meeting and fact sheets on antibiotic 
stewardship and the app were distributed. The minimal 
introduction may have sufficed because the intended users 
initially proclaimed they liked the concept and look and feel 
of the app, which has possibly led to increased willingness to 
start to use the app, and spread the word. It makes a strong 
case for human centered design, as involvement in the 
development process generates user commitment. It might be 
more difficult to reach this type of involvement on a large 
scale however.  
As the most popular pages of the app are instructions on 
preparation and administration of antimicrobials, task 
support can be better. Of course, these pages are expected to 
be visited most frequently, because preparation and 
administration of antimicrobials are tasks that occur most 
often, whereas side effects or unexpected progress or 
deterioration in patient status occurs much less frequent. 
However, the app should provide support in these not-so-
frequent occasions so in the app‟s evaluation, attention will 
be paid to precisely what content of the app is most useful to 
the nurses, and why other content is used less often. 
C. Considerations for implementation 
Nurses 
spend 
much 
time 
and 
effort 
gathering 
information, so surely an application that centralizes 
information has much to offer. However, this implies that 
somehow the information from different sources needs to be 
centralized and the ability to do so automatically depends 
heavily on the information sources that underlie the app. In 
our case, „filling‟ the app and managing its content was done 
manually because automatizing this process would be too 
complex and costly in this pilot phase. Individual hospitals 
and sometimes even individual wards use different 
information systems, so a one fits all solution may be 
difficult to achieve. For long term implementation and 
sustainment this is an issue that must be resolved, for 
example by assigning quality staff or specialized nurses to 
maintain information up to date. 
With regard to implementation throughout the hospital, 
nurses outside our pilot ward found the app on the intranet of 
the hospital and wanted to use it. In this sense, the app 
implemented itself just by being available. In addition, 
physicians who the app was demonstrated to were interested 
in a physician-aimed version. To some extent, the positive 
reactions to the app can be explained by the fact that often 
medical information applications are developed and 
managed by experts. They offer an expert-based view and 
scope of information. We tailored the various expert-based 
sources to fit clinical practice, something that is not done 
often because it costs time, effort, and multidisciplinary 
cooperation and understanding. Human centered design can 
help to meet end-user needs [23]. However, when these 
needs require highly tailored information via applications 
with dynamic content that need of frequent quality checks 
and updates, this poses some challenges. Design teams 
should then find a balance between available resources to 
manage the information, and generalizability and up-scaling 
possibilities. 
D. Limitations 
The outcomes of this research must be interpreted with 
care because of several possible limitations. First of all, the 
application was developed and tested with the help of nurses 
of two wards in one hospital. Generalizing the results greatly 
depends on the specific information sources in place and the 
app‟s effectiveness may differ in other settings. This is to 
some extent a consequence of the design approach of 
zooming in in local needs and local contexts. Agile methods 
can be used for re-design in other wards or institutes. In this 
case, identification of local information sources and 
integrating them in the app are among such up-scaling 
activities.  
Further, the questionnaire baseline measurements suffer 
from a substantial non-response (58%). Even though for 
survey research this might not be high, given the relatively 
small sample (64 nurses participated in the pilot) the results 
must be interpreted cautiously. However, with the scenario-
based tests we were able to reproduce some of the 
questionnaire results regarding nurse experience of finding 
and using information; the scenario tests show, as well as the 
questionnaires that this is time-consuming and user-
unfriendly. 
Another point of caution lies in the operationalization of 
antibiotic stewardship work processes. To detect the effects 
of the app on work processes regarding antibiotic 
stewardship is difficult, especially in a short period. As 
nurses are not the actual prescribers, the effect of more 
knowledge and empowerment can only indirectly influence 
actual use. With the questionnaire we are able to detect some 
antimicrobial stewardship-related behaviors; e.g., whether 
nurses give physicians suggestions regarding antibiotic 
treatment, or alert physicians when treatment seems to be 
sub-optimal. Besides, we plan to study hospital statistics on 
antimicrobial use and length of stay to get an indication of 
possible effects on actual antibiotic use. Antibiotic therapy 
appropriateness and optimization (adjusting therapy timely 
based on patient progress) is determined on a per-patient 
basis [24], as it depends on every patient‟s unique status (in 
other words, what „optimal‟ is, depends on patient-specific 
characteristics). Therefore, the effects of the app on 
antibiotic stewardship would be incomplete when looking at 
overall antibiotic use alone. So, depending on post-
measurement results and the up scaling of the app, per-
patient analysis will be done as well. 
E. Future Work 
In-depth analysis of the scenario-test recordings and 
transcripts will enable statistical comparisons between the 
three scenario research conditions: information search 
without app, before implementation; information search with 
app, after implementation; and information search without 
app, after implementation. The conditions will be compared 
on the following variables: time needed for search, number 
of encountered problems during search, number of times a 
scenarios was resolved correctly. Furthermore, scenario 
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

results regarding encountered problems as vocalized by the 
participants will be analyzed and grouped. As mentioned 
before, on a patient basis, changes in quality of care will 
also be studied using time series analysis on variables such 
as length of stay, antibiotic use, and mortality. 
The application will be introduced on different wards 
and in other hospitals as well, following short re-design or 
adaptation of the app and its content to fit local work 
methods. This broad implementation will be accompanied 
by evaluations on use and user satisfaction.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project was funded by the Interreg IV “EurSafety 
Health-net” project. We thank the various participants in the 
pilot for their cooperation in this research: the nurses, chest 
physicians of the A4/C4 department, and hospital 
pharmacists of the Medisch Spectrum Twente hospital in 
Enschede, The Netherlands. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. MacDougall, and R. Polk, Antimicrobial stewardship 
programs in health care systems. Clinical microbiology 
reviews, 2005. 18(4): p. 638. 
[2] J. Wentzel, M. van Limburg, J. Karreman, R. Hendrix and L. 
van Gemert-Pijnen. Co-creation with stakeholders: a Web 2.0 
Antibiotic Stewardship Program. Proc. Etelemed 2012. 
[3] M. van Limburg, R. Köck, J. Karreman, B. Sinha, N. de Jong, 
J. Wentzel, et al., Towards an implementation strategy for 
antibiotic/antimicrobial stewardship: a systematic review. 
Under review. 
[4] M. Prgomet, A. Georgiou and J. I. Westbrook, The impact of 
mobile handheld technology on hospital physicians' work 
practices and patient care: a systematic review. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, 2009. 16(6): pp. 
792-801. 
[5] C. A. Caligtan, D. L. Carroll, A. C. Hurley, R. Gersh-
Zaremski and P. C. Dykes, Bedside information technology to 
support patient-centered care. International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, 2012. 81(7): pp. 442-451. 
[6] S. H. Koch, C. Weir, M. Haar, N. Staggers, J. Agutter, M. 
Görges, et al., Intensive care unit nurses' information needs 
and recommendations for integrated displays to improve 
nurses' situation awareness. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, 2012. 19(4): pp. 583-590. 
[7] A. Holzinger, M. Baernthaler, W. Pammer, H. Katz, V. 
Bjelic-Radisic and M. Ziefle, Investigating paper vs. screen in 
real-life 
hospital 
workflows: 
Performance 
contradicts 
perceived superiority of paper in the user experience. 
International Journal of Human Computer Studies, 2011. 
69(9): pp. 563-570. 
[8] B. Middleton, M. Bloomrosen, M.A. Dente, B. Hashmat, R. 
Koppel, J.M. Overhage, et al., Enhancing patient safety and 
quality of care by improving the usability of electronic health 
record systems: Recommendations from AMIA. Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, 2013. 20(E1): 
pp. e2-e8. 
[9] R. J. Katz-Sidlow, A. Ludwig, S. Miller and R. Sidlow, 
Smartphone 
use 
during 
inpatient 
attending 
rounds: 
Prevalence, patterns and potential for distraction. Journal of 
Hospital Medicine, 2012. 7(8): pp. 595-599. 
[10] J. E. W. C.van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, 
H. C. Ossebaard, S. M. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, et al., A 
holistic framework to improve the uptake and impact of 
eHealth technologies. Journal of medical Internet research, 
2011. 13(4). 
[11] H. Oinas-Kukkonen, and M. Harjumaa, Persuasive systems 
design: Key issues, process model, and system features. 
Communications of the association for Information Systems, 
2009. 24(1): pp. 485-500. 
[12] J. Wentzel, L. Van Velsen, M. Van Limburg, N. De Jong, J. 
Karreman, M. G. R. Hendrix, et al., Participatory eHealth 
Development to support Nurses in antimicrobial Stewardship. 
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, in review. 
[13] Wordpress, accessed on 31-01-2014 via: http://wordpress.org 
[14] Demo Information Application for nurses. Accessed on 31-
01-2014 via http://abnurseapp.infectionmanager.com 
[15] F. Drozd, T. Lehto and H. Oinas-Kukkonen, Exploring 
Perceived Persuasiveness of a Behavior Change Support 
System: A Structural Model, in Persuasive Technology. 
Design for Health and Safety, M. Bang and E. Ragnemalm, 
Editors. 2012, Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 157-168. 
[16] T. Lehto, H. Oinas-Kukkonen and F. Drozd. Factors affecting 
perceived persuasiveness of a behavior change support 
system. 2012. 
[17] S. Elling, L. Lentz and M. De Jong, Website evaluation 
questionnaire: Development of a research-based tool for 
evaluating informational websites. 2007. pp. 293-304. 
[18] S. M. Shortell, D. M. Rousseau, R. R. Gillies, K. J. Devers 
and T. L. Simons, Organizational assessment in intensive care 
units (ICUs): construct development, reliability, and validity 
of the ICU nurse-physician questionnaire. Medical Care, 
1991. 29(8): pp. 709-726. 
[19] J. B. Sexton, R. L. Helmreich, T. B. Neilands, K. Rowan, K. 
Vella, J. Boyden, et al., The Safety Attitudes Questionnaire: 
psychometric properties, benchmarking data, and emerging 
research. BMC health services research, 2006. 6(1): p. 44. 
[20] S. M. Kelders, E. T. Bohlmeijer and J. E. W. C. Van Gemert-
Pijnen, Participants, usage, and use patterns of a web-based 
intervention for the prevention of depression within a 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of medical Internet 
research, 2013. 15(8). 
[21] L. van Velsen, D. J. Beaujean and J. E. van Gemert-Pijnen, 
Why mobile health app overload drives us crazy, and how to 
restore the sanity. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision 
Making, 2013. 13(1). 
[22] M. Leonard, S. Graham and D. Bonacum, The human factor: 
The 
critical 
importance 
of 
effective 
teamwork 
and 
communication in providing safe care. Quality and Safety in 
Health Care, 2004. 13(SUPPL. 1): pp. i85-i90. 
[23] S. Kujala, User involvement: A review of the benefits and 
challenges. Behaviour and Information Technology, 2003. 
22(1): pp. 1-16. 
[24] R. C. Owens Jr., and P. G. Ambrose, Antimicrobial 
stewardship 
and 
the 
role 
of 
pharmacokinetics–
pharmacodynamics in the modern antibiotic era. Diagnostic 
Microbiology 
and 
Infectious 
Disease, 
2007. 
57(3, 
Supplement): 
pp.S77-S83.
 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

