 
 
Gluco Coach—A Self-Management Application for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus 
User testing to understand comfort levels and sustained patient engagement 
 
Way Kiat Bong 
Department of Computer Science 
OsloMet – Oslo Metropolitan University 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: wayki@oslomet.no  
Kuthethur Sneha Jagannath Das, Felix Janszen 
Inpaqt Technology Solutions B.V. 
16, Marconistraat 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands 
e-mail: sneha.das@inpaqt.com, felix.janszen@inpaqt.com 
 
 
Abstract—The increase in the number of patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus is a global concern. Using information and 
communications technologies, particularly mobile applications, 
to empower patients with remote self-management has shown 
promising results. However, there is still a lack of evidence 
regarding an app content’s contribution to making sustained 
impacts on the users’ lifestyle behaviors and hence health. To 
make a positive health change through such a self-management 
app, the users are expected to be engaged in using the app. 
This engagement has to be sustained for a long period of time 
to reflect on both lifestyle behavioral and health changes. In 
our project, we developed Gluco Coach, a type 2 diabetes 
mellitus self-management app focusing on supporting type 2 
diabetes mellitus patients to achieve and sustain healthy 
lifestyle behaviors. This paper presents work on understanding 
type 2 diabetes mellitus patients’ comfort levels and interest in 
using Gluco Coach. User testing were conducted, and the 
findings showed potential in Gluco Coach and resulted in a list 
of lessons learned concerning design that aims to provide high 
usability and functionality, positive user experience, and thus 
sustained patient engagement.  
Keywords: type 2 diabetes mellitus; self-management; self-
monitoring; patient-centered design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The prevalence of chronic conditions is increasing 
globally, and it affects the quality of life of many 
individuals; type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is one of these 
chronic conditions [1][2]. The presence of T2DM is 
associated with various other comorbidities, such as obesity, 
cardiovascular issues, and renal issues [2]. It is estimated that 
by 2040, the number of people with T2DM will increase to 
642 million globally [3]. The blood glucose level (BGL) of a 
T2DM patient rises due to insulin resistance or the 
ineffective use of insulin. Hence, in T2DM care, the goal is 
to maintain the BGL within the target range. The crux of 
T2DM care is remote self-management of lifestyle behaviors 
from the patient’s side [4]. 
Growth in information and communications technologies 
(ICT) has led to the development of mobile health (mHealth) 
solutions, which predominantly consist of smartphone 
applications (apps) and wearables. Studies have shown the 
benefits of mHealth in chronic disease management [5][6]. 
Through mHealth, virtual coaching can be implemented in 
aiding the self-management of lifestyle behaviors. Many 
apps focusing on T2DM care are commercially available on 
the Apple App Store and the Google Play Store. These apps 
have the features of blood sugar tracking, reminders for 
meals, tracking calories burned, and T2DM care information. 
These are some essential features required for optimal 
T2DM self-management. 
A popular definition of user engagement focuses on the 
aspect of the users’ experiences with a technology [7]. 
Studies have shown that positive user engagement is a 
prerequisite for achieving positive health effectiveness 
[8][9]. However, while these apps are initially engaging for 
users, the aspect of sustained user engagement has not been 
thoroughly addressed [8][9]. Bringing about a positive 
health behavior change through an mHealth intervention 
requires users to engage with the interventions. This 
engagement needs to be sustained for a long period to 
reflect on the patients’ behavioral and lifestyle changes. In 
addition, there is insufficient thorough information available 
about app content such as lifestyle behaviors along with 
evidence concerning their efficacy [10]. Studies have also 
emphasized the point that these apps still lack the clinical 
focus that a T2DM app requires [10][11]. Some examples of 
these apps are My Sugr Diabetes Logbook, Diabetes Pal, 
Diabetes Connect, Sugr Sense, and Health2Sync [10]. 
To address these knowledge gaps, in our project, we 
developed Gluco Coach, a T2DM self-management app 
focusing on supporting T2DM patients to achieve healthy 
lifestyle behaviors. The app is targeted to be science- and 
evidence-based concerning the aim of sustaining the 
patients’ user engagements through personalization, which is 
lacking in current T2DM apps [10]. The personalization 
factor will be implemented using artificial intelligence (AI), 
which forms the crux of Gluco Coach. The evidence-based 
approach will lead the way to proving the clinical efficacy of 
the app. This position paper describes user testing conducted 
among T2DM patients to understand their comfort levels and 
interest in using Gluco Coach. These user testing were 
conducted as one of the first steps to understand patient 
engagement in relation to using a self-management app. In 
our earlier study, the CeHReS roadmap methodology was 
used throughout the development of Gluco Coach 1.0, where 
expert stakeholder sessions, think-aloud sessions, and a 
questionnaire study with T2DM patients were implemented 
to understand user engagement [12]. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
II. 
GLUCO COACH 
Gluco Coach is currently under development as a 
science- and evidence-based intervention. Aspects of T2DM 
physiology, along with behavior science, have been 
integrated into the app design to bring about the core feature 
of self-management. Pursuit of regular physical activity, a 
healthy diet, and adherence to prescribed medicines or 
insulin are integral to optimal T2DM care and can be 
understood as healthy lifestyle behaviors for the patients 
[11][13]. These features, along with T2DM care awareness 
messages, are the core functions of the app.  
In addition, features such as personalized goal setting, 
self-monitoring, providing feedback, reminders, cues, and 
suggestions were incorporated into the app as virtual health 
coaching. The aim was to have users achieve healthy 
behavior changes. To implement this virtual health coaching, 
various behavioral science theories, such as goal-setting 
theory, the health belief model, the information-motivation 
behavior skills model, and protection motivation theory, 
were incorporated in the app design [14][15][16][17]. These 
theories were chosen as they involve personalized goal 
setting, adapted to the user [14], and provide information 
about T2DM care and the user’s individual progress to 
motivate them to pursue healthy behaviors [15][16][17].  
Figure 1 illustrates the main functionalities of Gluco 
Coach. Users can set personalized goals in terms of step 
count and diet in terms of calorie consumption and provide 
feedback on goal achievements in the form of visuals such as 
pie charts. The component of goal setting comes from goal-
setting theory, while the components of self-monitoring and 
feedback come from the health belief model, the 
information-motivation behavior skills model, and protection 
motivation theory. The component of providing general 
T2DM care information also arises from these theories. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
In this study, user testing with four T2DM patients (P1–
P4) were conducted. They were recruited by convenience 
sampling because they were easily accessible. Their 
demographic information is summarized in Table 1. First, 
they were briefed about the project. Second, they were asked 
to provide their consent prior to participating in the user 
testing. The user testing consisted of providing their 
demographic background, performing a series of testing 
tasks, and answering a System Usability Scale (SUS) 
questionnaire. To avoid participants feeling exhausted, the 
testing tasks had to be prioritized, which were as follows: 
1) Sign up (using a username and one-time code). 
2) Enter physiological information, i.e., weight, height, 
blood 
pressure, 
BGL, 
and 
presence 
of 
other 
comorbidities. The information was based on what the 
participants knew previously, e.g., from their last health 
check, last self-measurement at home, etc. 
3) Type in a medicine name and time for intake (dosage was 
not required). 
4) Change the medication time for intake reminders. 
5) Delete the medicine. 
6) Inspect the navigation function. 
7) Inspect the home page. 
8) Insert the goal for the step count. 
9) Log diet. 
10) Investigate the T2DM care function. 
TABLE I.  
DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION OF ALL PARTICIPANTS 
 
Age 
(years) 
Gender 
Self-rated ICT skills (1 
is very bad and 10 is 
very good) 
Highest 
education 
obtained 
P1 
56 
Male 
2 
High school 
P2 
34 
Male 
9 
Master’s 
P3 
58 
Female 
4.5 
High school 
P4 
43 
Male 
8 
Bachelor’s 
When the participants were performing the tasks, they 
were observed and their actions were clarified, if required. 
They were also asked for their opinions on the main 
functions after completing the testing tasks. Each user testing 
lasted around one hour.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
The participants could complete most of the testing tasks 
without much guidance. The two tasks that needed the most 
help were tasks 2 and 9. The reason P1 and P3 struggled with 
task 2 was because they did not understand some terms, such 
as “mmol/L” (millimoles per liter), a unit of BGL (see 
leftmost panel of Figure 1) and “Hemoglobin A1c” (Hb1Ac), 
a test for diabetes giving average (avg) BGL over the past 
two to three months. For task 9, the issues were due to 
finding a matching food name and amount. The function 
could only now offer to insert and search for a set of meals
 
Figure 1.  Gluco Coach. From left to right: home page, goal for step count, log diets, log medication intake, and T2DM care with awareness messages 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
with predefined amounts of food. 
The participants managed to use the medication taking 
functions. They liked that the time for taking the medication 
could be set for each medicine and all participants 
appreciated the reminder function. They wanted it to be like 
an alarm, which could repeat to remind them to take the 
medicines, or the reminder could stay on the screen until the 
users acknowledged that they had taken the medicines. Only 
P4 perceived the logging diet function as useful to her. P1 
and P3 expressed that they were not particularly interested in 
logging their diet. Instead, they preferred suggestions or to 
be instructed on what they should eat less or more of. They 
wanted to be guided to make better choices, rather than 
purely just logging the diet.  Concerning the T2DM care 
function, all participants agreed that the information was 
useful. However, there was too much text; hence, it appeared 
boring and was not very attractive to them. They suggested 
having small tips provided to them one at a time, and the tips 
should be made based on their data. 
TABLE II.  
SUMMARY OF AVG SCORE FOR SUS SURVEY 
SUS statements (to rate from 1 to 5; 1 = strongly disagree, 2 
= disagree, 3 = neutral, 4 = agree, 5 =  strongly agree) 
Avg 
1. I think that I would like to use this system frequently. 
2.25 
2. I found the system unnecessarily complex. 
3.25 
3. I thought the system was easy to use. 
2.25 
4. I think that I would need the support of a technical person 
to be able to use this system. 
3 
5. I found the various functions in this system were well 
integrated. 
3.25 
6. I thought there was too much inconsistency in this system. 
3.75 
7. I would imagine that most people would learn to use this 
system very quickly. 
2.5 
8. I found the system very cumbersome to use. 
2.5 
9. I felt very confident using the system.  
3.5 
10. I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going 
with this system. 
2 
Lastly, SUS results are presented in Table 2. Based on 
the avg scores, the participants perceived Gluco Coach as 
slightly complicated (statements 2, 3, and 8) due to 
inconsistency (statement 6). After clarifying with them, it 
was found that they wanted a more consistent and similar 
design for inserting meals and medicines. Both the 
placement and color of the buttons for adding meals and 
medicines were different (see Figure 1). The appearance of 
headings for some pages was not consistent, either. For 
example, the adding breakfast page in Figure 1 has a 
different heading from the other pages. Despite these issues, 
they agreed that the functionalities in Gluco Coach were well 
integrated (statement 5), which was aligned with their 
feedback when performing testing tasks. The participants 
saw potential in Gluco Coach as a self-management app for 
T2DM patients. Their SUS results indicate that they 
themselves have confidence in using it (statements 9 and 10). 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
User testing with four participants for the first working 
prototype of Gluco Coach was conducted as one of the first 
steps in examining its design concerning usability, 
functionality, and user engagement. The findings indicate 
that Gluco Coach as a self-management T2DM app has the 
potential to sustain user engagement. However, some issues 
have to be addressed accordingly. Previous studies have 
indicated the importance of having features of reminders, 
personalized suggestions, feedback, and self-monitoring, 
which form a part of health coaching [18][19]. The diet 
function in Gluco Coach consists of a regular diary entry 
theme for logging food. From the user feedback, the feature 
of food suggestion would be much appreciated in addition to 
a more user-friendly way of logging diets. A personalized 
food suggestion that is relevant to the user can contribute to 
enhancing user engagement. Commercialized apps such as 
MyNetDiary [20] and HealthifyMe [21] have the feature of 
personalized food suggestions. These features can be 
implemented based on the person’s BGL variation in a day, 
preferences, and allergies [11][22]. 
The feature of T2DM care information with awareness 
messages was appreciated, although the participants would 
prefer to have less text. To achieve this, coaching and 
awareness messages should be more personalized, like the 
above-mentioned personalized food suggestions, with tips to 
increase physical activities, for example. Personalization 
needs to be a pervasive feature of the app, as it supports user 
engagement [9]. These features can be implemented through 
AI with developing a context-aware feature, which can be 
utilized and implemented in the further development of 
Gluco Coach, since it will help in developing a more 
personalized and interactive user interface [23].  
In task 2, it was observed that terms such as “mmol/L” 
and “Hb1Ac” were not easily understood by some 
participants. To alleviate such concerns, these terms can be 
explained to the users as a part of T2DM care and education 
in an interactive format. More visual and interactive forms of 
representation can be explored, such as the use of avatars to 
impart a more intuitive and fun way of raising awareness 
[24]. Lastly, the medication system of the app was well 
received by the participants. The idea of reminders was 
appreciated, and the participants suggested optimizing the 
reminders further in a more solid form. For instance, they 
should persistently appear on the screen until the users have 
taken the medicine and logged their medication taking. 
Through user testing, a list of lessons learned have been 
compiled 
concerning design that will sustain user 
engagement 
among 
Gluco 
Coach 
users. 
They 
are 
summarized as follows, and they will be used to guide the 
further development of Gluco Coach in addition to 
suggestions from other relevant work [11][13][24]: 
1) Offer personalized messages in the form of small tips that 
cover the three main areas of lifestyle, i.e., physical 
activity, diet, and medication adherence. 
2) Provide necessary guidance or interactive education 
regarding T2DM. 
3) Have a consistent design across pages in the app. 
4) Make reminders more solid, e.g., persistent alarms and 
strong visuals on the app screen. 
5) Suggest what to eat, besides logging the meals. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
6) Offer a more user-friendly way to log diets, e.g., taking 
photos. 
This study’s major limitation is the small number of 
participants, and hence lacking diversity in the demographic 
backgrounds. Therefore, they do not represent the entire user 
group of T2DM patients. However, findings from the testing 
of four users can almost be sufficient to identify usability 
issues at this stage, as suggested by Nielsen [25]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper demonstrates the ongoing work of developing 
a self-management app, Gluco Coach, for T2DM patients. 
The app is targeted to be science- and evidence-based 
regarding the sustainability of patients’ user engagement. 
User testing with four TD2M patients were conducted 
concerning their comfort level and interest in using the app. 
The findings indicate the potential of Gluco Coach despite 
some 
usability 
and 
functionality 
issues. 
Design 
recommendations were gathered as a list of lessons learned.  
This study is one of the first steps toward understanding 
patient engagement. When conducting these user testing, the 
focus was on designs that provide good user experience and 
therefore sustained user engagement. Hence, our future work 
will include improving Gluco Coach based on the feedback 
from participants and lessons learned, and conducting user 
testing and a longitudinal study with more T2DM patients 
with diverse backgrounds to probe their user engagement.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank the participants for their 
participation and willingness to contribute to this study, and 
also Yuan Jing Li from OsloMet for data collection, and 
Boris Mogilevski and Sumeet Kumar S Mulay from Inpaqt 
for their contribution in the development of Gluco Coach. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. A. B. Khan, M. J. Hashim, J. K. King, R. D. Govender, H. 
Mustafa, and J. Al Kaabi, “Epidemiology of type 2 diabetes–
global burden of disease and forecasted trends,” J. Epidemiol. 
Glob. Health, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 107, 2020. 
[2] M. C. Adriaanse, H. W. Drewes, I. Van Der Heide, J. N. 
Struijs, and C. A. Baan, “The impact of comorbid chronic 
conditions on quality of life in type 2 diabetes patients,” Qual. 
Life Res., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 175–182, 2016. 
[3] World Health Organization, “Global Report on Diabetes,” 
Geneva, 2016. ISBN: 978 92 4 156525 7 
[4] M. Sina, J. Graffy, and D. Simmons, “Associations between 
barriers to self-care and diabetes complications among 
patients with type 2 diabetes,” Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract., vol. 
141, pp. 126–131, 2018. 
[5] G. Maresca, M. C. De Cola, S. Caliri, R. De Luca, A. Manuli, 
et al., “Moving towards novel multidisciplinary approaches 
for improving elderly quality of life: the emerging role of 
telemedicine in Sicily,” J. Telemed. Telecare., vol. 25, no. 5, 
pp. 318–324, 2019. 
[6] K. Fan, and Y. Zhao, “Mobile health technology: a novel tool 
in chronic disease management,” Intell. Med., vol. 12, no. 3, 
pp. 467, 2021. 
[7] H. O’Brien, and P. Cairns, “An empirical evaluation of the 
User Engagement Scale (UES) in online news environments,” 
Inf. Process. Manag., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 413–427, 2015. 
[8] L. A. Nelson, T. D. Coston, A. L. Cherrington, and C. Y. 
Osborn, “Patterns of user engagement with mobile-and web-
delivered self-care interventions for adults with T2DM: a 
review of the literature,” Curr. Diab. Rep., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 
1–20, 2016. 
[9] L. Yardley, B. J. Spring, H. Riper, L. G. Morrison, D. H. 
Crane, et al., “Understanding and promoting effective 
engagement with digital behavior change interventions,” Am. 
J. Prev. Med., vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 833–842, 2016. 
[10] S. Izahar, Q. Y. Lean, M. A. Hameed, M. K. Murugiah, R. P. 
Patel, et al., “Content analysis of mobile health applications 
on diabetes mellitus,” Front. Endocrinol., vol. 8, pp. 318, 
2017. 
[11] N. den Braber, M. M. Vollenbroek-Hutten, M. M. Oosterwijk, 
C. M. Gant, I. J. Hagedoorn, et al., “Requirements of an 
application to monitor diet, physical activity and glucose 
values in patients with type 2 diabetes: The diameter,” 
Nutrients, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 409, 2019. 
[12] K. S. J. Das, and F. Janszen, “Identifying Sociodemographic 
Factors for a User Engaging Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Mobile 
Self-Management Application,” in 8th ICT4AWE, pp. 254–
260, 2022. 
[13] R. Shan, S. Sarkar, and S. S. Martin, “Digital health 
technology and mobile devices for the management of 
diabetes mellitus: state of the art,” Diabetologia, vol. 62, no. 
6, pp. 877–887, 2019. 
[14] E. A. Locke, and G. P. Latham, “Building a practically useful 
theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 35-year 
odyssey,” Am. Psychol., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 705, 2002. 
[15] N. K. Janz, and M. H. Becker, “The health belief model: A 
decade later,” Health Educ. Q., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–47, 1984. 
[16] J. D. Fisher, and W. A. Fisher, “Changing AIDS-risk 
behavior,” Psychol. Bull., vol. 111, no. 3, pp. 455, 1992. 
[17] R. W. Rogers, “Cognitive and psychological processes in fear 
appeals and attitude change: A revised theory of protection 
motivation,” Social psychophysiology: A sourcebook, pp. 
153–176, 1983. 
[18] I. Gupta, B. Di Eugenio, B. Ziebart, B. Liu, B. Gerber, et al., 
“Towards Building a Virtual Assistant Health Coach,” in 
2018 
IEEE 
ICHI, 
2018, 
pp. 
419–421, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICHI.2018.00081. 
[19] S. Michie, M. Richardson, M. Johnston, C. Abraham, J. 
Francis, et al., “The behavior change technique taxonomy 
(v1) of 93 hierarchically clustered techniques: building an 
international consensus for the reporting of behavior change 
interventions,” Ann. Behav. Med., vol.46(1), pp. 81–95, 2013. 
[20] MyNetDiary. “MyNetDiary - Free Calorie Counter and Diet 
Assistant,”Available from: www.mynetdiary.com 2022.04.26. 
[21] HealthifyMe. “HealthifyMe Indian Calorie Counter & Calorie 
Calculator App,” Available from: www.healthifyme.com 
2022.04.26. 
[22] R. Z. Franco, R. Fallaize, J. A. Lovegrove, and F. Hwang, 
“Popular nutrition-related mobile apps: a feature assessment,” 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. e5846, 2016. 
[23] H. Op Den Akker, M. Cabrita, R. op den Akker, V. M. Jones, 
and H. J. Hermens, “Tailored motivational message 
generation: A model and practical framework for real-time 
physical activity coaching,” J. Biomed. Inform., vol. 55, pp. 
104–115, 2015. 
[24] K. S. J. Das, T. Beinema, H. Op Den Akker, and H. Hermens, 
“Generation of Multi-Party Dialogues among Embodied 
Conversational Agents to Promote Active Living and Healthy 
Diet for Subjects Suffering from Type 2 Diabetes,” In 
Proceedings of the 5th ICT4AWE, pp. 297–304, 2019. 
[25] J. Nielsen, “How many test users in a usability study?” 
Available from: www.nngroup.com/articles/how-many-test-
users 2017. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

