Heuristic Evaluation for Interactive Games within Elderly Users 
Jaime Andres Garcia Marin, Elaine Lawrence 
mHealth Laboratory, iNEXT 
University of Technology Sydney, FEIT 
Sydney, Australia 
Jaime.GarciaMarin;Elaine.Lawrence@uts.edu.au 
Karla Felix Navarro, Christian Sax 
mHealth Laboratory, iNEXT 
University of Technology Sydney, FEIT 
Sydney, Australia 
Karla.FelixNavarro@uts.edu.au,  
Sax.Christian@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents the results obtained after 
performing a number of demonstrations followed by a series of 
interviews concerning the usage of interactive games as a tool 
to improve both physical and mental well-being of elderly 
persons. This study points out the importance of a proper 
design regarding the usability of video games for the aged to 
ensure the elderly benefit from such games.  
Keywords-elderly; game design; interactive game; usability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to recent studies, both Australia and the entire 
world, are dealing with a dramatic increase of the aged 
population which could be considered a crisis, if this 
problem is not addressed effectively and in a timely fashion 
[1].  Furthermore, there has been a huge increase in the 
development of systems which have improved the well-being 
and quality of life of seniors looking for the prevention of 
diseases and injuries related to ageing. The usage of some 
interactive technologies such as video games, has shown a 
positive impact in health outcomes for the elderly [2].  
Research has been applied to find feasible methods to 
encourage and engage seniors with the use of these games 
[3], [4]. However, recent studies [4], [5] also state that those 
practices could result in  undesirable consequences, even 
negative impacts regarding issues related to the usability of 
the video games among  older users.  
The goal of this paper is to present the results of the 
evaluation of four Nintendo Wii balance games under the 
observation of six experts in health and wellbeing 
techniques. For our research, we conducted a series of 
recorded and transcribed structured interviews where the 
suitability of the games for the elderly users was assessed. 
This paper provides an overview of previous studies 
related to this topic, a description of the games assessed and 
the scenario of our interviews. We present the factors 
assessed and the results that we obtained, as well as a 
discussion concerning the findings, followed by our 
conclusion. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The usage of video games as a method to keep and / or 
improve the health condition of the elderly has shown both 
positive and negative effects [4]. Regarding the former, there 
have been improvements after the  use of  videogames as a 
tool for balance disorder treatments and post-stroke 
rehabilitation [3], [6] ,[7]. These practices have demonstrated 
the benefits of involving interactive technologies for 
maintaining wellbeing and improving health outcomes. 
However, the usability of these games for the elderly needs 
to be improved [5]. It is relevant to mention that the new 
genre of games require a different way to interact with them. 
Currently the youth-oriented interfaces feature sounds, 
flashing lights and colours which create enjoyable 
experiences for young players, but could lead to negative 
feelings for the elderly users. Some of the most notable 
problems include confusion caused by pressing or releasing 
buttons in the appropriate time or anxiety and stress 
engendered by the inability to reach the game goals [4]. 
Because of the above, efforts have been made to establish 
formal methods and techniques to assess the usability of 
videogames. Some methods are focused on technical issues 
such as the game aesthetic, sound events and programming 
errors instead of evaluating game interfaces, the mechanics 
of the game and how enjoyable it could be. One approach to 
this is the ISO 9241 standard of usability which uses 
effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction as basic metrics [8]. 
However, the technique of  heuristic evaluation of video 
games has been gaining status because of  its flexibility and 
adaptable nature [9]. The term Heuristic Evaluation is an 
inspection technique where a set of usability principles is 
established and used by evaluators to explore an interface. 
These principles are called heuristics. 
In [8], the heuristic evaluation  is divided into five stages. 
These are: (1) the identification of usability problems as well 
as their categorization; (2) the observation of players while 
interacting with the videogames under the observation of 
evaluators; recording facial expressions, verbal reactions, 
etc; looking for new problems which could be missed from 
the first stage; (3) the re-categorization of usability problems; 
(4) the description of the ways to resolve problems 
encountered previously by the creation of heuristics; (5) the 
testing of heuristics applying the methodology of user 
logging combining the thinking aloud protocol.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

TABLE I.  
INTERVIEWEES’ DETAILS [10] 
Traditional 
Medicine 
Expert 1: 
Professor Aged Care, Sydney Hospital Researcher 
and director of Health and the Aged Centre. 
Expert 2: 
Physiotherapist at an large Aged Care Facility in 
Sydney 
Expert 3: 
Associate Professor Chronic Care at a Sydney 
university.  
Alternative 
Health 
Techniques 
Expert 4: 
Certified Feldenkrais Movement Practitioner in 
Sydney. 
Expert 5: 
Certified Alexander Technique Practitioner in 
Sydney. Own Practice. 
Expert 6: 
Expressive Arts & Music Therapy Specialist at a 
university in Sydney as well as having a Sydney 
private practice. 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
During July and August 2010, we demonstrated and then 
evaluated four Wii balance games (see Table 2) with the 
cooperation of six health professionals, three of them 
representing alternative health techniques, and the other three 
representing  traditional medicine (see Table 1). 
Overall, the sessions were conducted by following these 
stages: (1) One semi structured interview with each health 
professional  concerning the procedures which each one 
performed with the patients over 65, as well as their 
experience, if any,  involving interactive technologies within 
their practices. (2) A demonstration of the four Wii balance 
games which were: Skate Board Arena, Tightrope Walk, 
Balance Bubble, and Table Tilt; all of them part of the Wii 
Fit Plus suite (see Table 2). These demonstrations were 
performed by one of our researchers. In one interview, our 
interviewee offered to perform the activity. During all the 
demonstrations, the interviewee was providing oral feedback 
by remarking on the strengths and weaknesses of the video 
games. They offered suggestions to make the games much 
more enjoyable and suitable for their elderly patients.(3) This 
material was transcribed and has been analysed using 
Leximancer, 
a 
specialist 
analytics 
technology 
for 
unstructured, qualitative, textual data [13]. 
 
IV. 
THE HEURISITC EVALUATION 
Based on previous studies, our heuristics were focused on 
the usability of videogames for elderly users. They 
concerned factors such as: engaging with the game, avoiding 
mental distress and physical damage by controlling extreme 
emotions and considering the changes related such as loss of 
cognitive and motor abilities. 
 
 
TABLE II.  
GAME’S DESCRIPTION [11] 
Game 
Objective1 
Procedures2 
Rules3 
Conflict 
Balance 
Bubble 
Navigate it 
along a 
river to the 
rainbow 
finish line. 
Shift weight 
to propel the 
bubble 
along the 
river. 
Hazards 
such as 
rocks and 
river 
banks, and 
bees. 
Reach the 
goal 
avoiding 
hazards 
and 
respecting 
the time 
limit. 
Table 
 Tilt 
Tilt the 
tables so 
that the 
balls drop 
into the 
hole(s). 
Shift weight 
to tilt the 
table. The 
table could 
have at least 
one hole in 
it; the balls 
must be 
guided into 
the hole(s). 
Hazards 
such as: 
unguarded 
edges, 
slopes, 
blocks. 
Dropping 
balls could 
lose more 
balls as 
well as 
causing 
delays, 
time limit. 
Tightrope 
Walk 
Walk a 
rope strung 
between 
two 
buildings. 
Walk across 
the rope, 
jump when 
biting 
machines 
appear. 
Biting 
machines, 
obscured 
view, and 
wind. 
Leaning, 
falling off 
the rope,   
unbalanced 
jumps, 
time limit. 
Skateboard 
Arena 
Show off 
your 
technique 
with a 
skateboard. 
Turn the 
balance 
board 
through 90 
degrees 
clockwise, 
push off 
with your 
back foot to 
start and 
jump when 
obstacles. 
Ramps, 
half-pipes, 
etc. 
The 
scoring 
depends on 
your tricks 
on ramps 
or half-
pipe. 
 
After following the heuristic evaluation methodology we 
developed this list which contains a general categorization of 
the problems found [8], [9]: 
a) Customization Issues: User cannot modify the game 
settings according to their needs. 
b) Inability to avoid non-playable content: User cannot 
skip introductory videos or parts of the game which are 
repetitive. 
c) Control of actions: Excess or deficiency of 
sensibility of controllers. 
d) Training: The video game does not provide training 
practices before playing the real game. 
e) Goal feasibility: Extreme difficulty to avoid hazards 
respecting the time limits. Too many obstacles and limited 
time periods. 
f) Correspondence between user movements and 
display: The game must respond according to the user 
movements, mirroring the real world. Connection between 
what the users see and do. 
                                                        
1 According to the game design theory, Procedure is everything that player 
can do respecting the rules. 
2 The Rules describe objects and behaviours. 
3 Conflict is everything which does not let you reach the goal directly. [12] 
131
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

g) Provision of Rules, Information and Instructions: 
Lack of explanation, inadequate timing, content and/or 
format of the provided information. For example the 
inappropriate usage of language.  
h) Mental Health: Feelings of stress, anxiety and/or 
disturbance due to excessive memorization, inadequate 
concentration requirement and dealing with the conflict of 
the game.  
i) Physical Health: Physical issues caused by 
tightening up, falls, loss of balance, excessive requirement 
of workout, coordination and flexibility. 
j) Engagement: 
Lack 
of 
commitment 
and/or 
engagement due to the thematic, challenges and/or diversion 
factors of the video game. 
TABLE III.  
GAME’S DESCRIPTION [11] 
Categories 
Experts 
Total 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
D. Training 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
E. Goal feasibility 
1 
 
 
 
1 
 
2 
F. Correspondence 
between user 
movements and 
display 
 
 
 
1 
 
1 
2 
G. Provision or Rules, 
information and 
Instruction 
1 
1 
 
 
3 
3 
8 
H. Mental Health 
1 
 
 
 
1 
1 
3 
I. Physical Health 
 
1 
 
 
2 
2 
5 
J. Engagement 
2 
1 
1 
 
 
1 
5 
Total 
6 
3 
1 
1 
7 
8 
26 
 
 
After categorization, we developed our heuristics. Some 
categories were deleted due to their lack of occurrence 
(Category A, B and C) and one resulted in the union of 
related categories (Category H and I which became Heuristic 
V). The final game heuristics are listed below: 
1) Provide training phases: The game should have 
training phases before the real game starts, allowing the 
users to become familiar with the technology. Additionally, 
these training stages must be easy to skip when they are not 
required anymore 
2) Create feasible goals: The goals must be reachable 
by adapting the difficulty of hazards to take into account the 
physical abilities of the aged cohort. 
3) Establish appropriate relations between movements 
and display: The game must respond according to the user 
movements. 
4) Provide rules, information and instructions in an 
adequate way: The information regarding rules, suggestions 
and instruction should be given before and during the game, 
so the user does not have to read instructions and operate at 
the same time. Also, this information should be provided by 
audio. 
5) Consider the mental and physical condition of the 
player: The player should not feel frustrated and upset 
because of hard goals. The objective of a game is to 
entertain the player, so practices involving excessive 
memorizing 
must 
be 
avoided. 
Avoid 
unnecessary 
requirements for workouts involving coordination and 
flexibility outcomes. If possible, preclude the need for 
complex movements so the elderly users do not require 
frames to maintain balance. 
6) Engage the user: The thematic of the video game 
must be in accordance with the audience’s interest to avoid 
lack of commitment. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Frequency of the problems ordered by their occurrence. 
V. 
RESULTS 
After running the evaluation and categorizing the 
problems found, we concluded that the total number of 
unique usability problems was 26. Each health professional 
found around 4 problems on average and the range of 
problems seen for each specialist was between 1 and 8 (see 
Figure 1 and Table 3). We now map the appropriate heuristic 
to address each particular problem that has been identified.  
Figure 1 shows the frequency of problems found for each 
category ordered by their occurrence.  It was found that the 
main problems were related to the provision of rules, 
information and instructions. One participant mentioned that 
reading instructions spread across the screen may be 
confusing and less compatible with kinesthetic awareness 
than auditory feedback.  Such games require a variety of 
instruction mechanisms   such as text and audio together 
(Heuristic IV). 
 
132
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

The next three most common problem categories were 
concerned with the physical health, engagement and mental 
health of the user. One of the experts stated that falling from 
a tightrope between two skyscrapers is an anxiety-producing 
stimulus, which makes people tighten their necks and 
shoulders and sabotages their balance reflex resulting in 
risks for the physical condition of the elderly. Additionally, 
when playing the Balance Bubble, one of our interviewees 
said If the elderly are learning from this game to lean back in 
response to wanting to slow down it could actually lead to 
falling backwards, that is potentially dangerous for the aged 
(Heuristic V). Also, some of our evaluators believed that 
providing a balance frame could be useful for older people 
when playing this kind of game, so they could hold onto it to 
gain confidence and avoid getting injured. During the 
evaluation of the Skate Board game, some of the experts 
stated that elderly people could reject playing this game 
because it was outside their own experiences and more suited 
to a younger audience. This supported the idea that the 
thematic of a video game is a relevant factor  when trying to 
engage an elderly user (Heuristic VI).  
The remaining categories F, E and D concern problems 
relating to the correspondences between the user movements 
and display, goal feasibility and training.  We found that 
games like Tightrope could be a bit confusing for the user as 
the picture is opposite to what they do e.g. the picture shows 
one foot in front of the other; however, on the board, the feet 
are apart (Heuristic III). Although game theory points out 
that the conflict of the game creates a challenge which is the 
main reason to engage the user [12], one of our experts 
claimed that you don’t want to have activities that are 
impossible to achieve as it becomes too distressing for 
people and they just give up, losing their commitment to the 
game (Heuristic II).  Consequently, it was found that some 
games could require preliminary training as well as 
customisation allowing the aged user to get familiar with the 
activities provided by the video game. Regarding the above, 
it was suggested that they could pick up speed over time: 
Start very slowly until they get used to these things (Heuristic 
I). 
DISCUSSION 
As explained earlier in this paper, the use of videogames 
by aged people requires a deep inspection to guarantee 
optimum results on health outcomes. The use of heuristic 
evaluation to assess the usability of interactive video games, 
and the insights of health specialists, revealed some 
unexpected results about the mental and physical health of 
the elderly. A disconnect between what is on the screen and 
what the user is actually doing,  may cause confusion for the 
player, resulting in feelings of anxiety and frustration while 
also affecting their balance reflex and mental satisfaction.  
As users age, their sight and hearing often deteriorates 
making it difficult for them to read or listen to instructions 
while the game is running.  
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
The usage of video games and interactive technologies 
for health purposes has shown positive outcomes for the 
aged. However, these practices could also result in 
drawbacks for them if their mental and physical conditions 
are not taken into account. Furthermore, testing the usability 
and suitability of videogames is critical to obtain the 
improvements expected.  In this paper we have applied 
heuristic evaluations to assess the suitability of such games 
for the elderly.  The interviews with six healthcare experts 
were crucial in this investigation.  They helped us to identify 
hidden problems in the chosen video games.  We believe that 
much more effort should be applied to develop reliable 
guidelines which would help designers to create games 
especially for the elderly. In our next investigation we will 
be examining the suitability of the Kinect system for this 
cohort [14]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Hugo, "Contextualising the 'Crisis in Aged Care' in Australia :: A 
Demographic Perspective," Australian Journal of Social Issues, The, 
vol. 42, pp. 169-182, Winter 2007 2007. 
[2] 
S. T. Smith, A. Talaei-Khoei, M. Ray, and P. Ray, "Electronic Games 
for Aged Care and Rehabilitation," in e-Health Networking, 
Applications and Services, 2009. Healthcom 2009. 11th International 
Conference on, 2009, pp. 42-47. 
[3] 
H. Sugarman, A. Weisel-Eichler, A. Burstin, and R. Brown, "Use of 
the Wii Fit system for the treatment of balance problems in the 
elderly: A feasibility study," in Virtual Rehabilitation International 
Conference, 2009, 2009, pp. 111-116. 
[4] 
C. Neufeldt, "Wii play with elderly people," International Reports in 
Socio-Informatics, vol. 6, 2009, pp. 50-59. 
[5] 
W. Ijsselsteijn, H. H. Nap, Y. d. Kort, and K. Poels, "Digital game 
design for elderly users," presented at the Proceedings of the 2007 
conference on Future Play, Toronto, Canada, 2007, pp. 17-22 
[6] 
J. A. Gil-Gomez, J. A. Lozano, M. Alcaniz, and S. A. Perez, 
"Nintendo Wii Balance board for balance disorders," in Virtual 
Rehabilitation International Conference, 2009, 2009, pp. 213-213. 
[7] 
J. E. Deutsch, D. Robbins, J. Morrison, and P. G. Bowlby, "Wii-based 
compared to standard of care balance and mobility rehabilitation for 
two individuals post-stroke," in Virtual Rehabilitation International 
Conference, 2009, 2009, pp. 117-120. 
[8] 
S. Papaloukas, K. Patriarcheas, and M. Xenos, "Usability Assessment 
Heuristics in New Genre Videogames," presented at the Proceedings 
of the 2009 13th Panhellenic Conference on Informatics, 2009, pp. 
202-206. 
[9] 
D. Pinelle, N. Wong, and T. Stach, "Heuristic evaluation for games: 
usability principles for video game design," presented at the 
Proceeding of the twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human 
factors in computing systems, Florence, Italy, 2008. 
[10] E. Lawrence, K. F. Navarro, J. A. G. Marin, and C. Sax, "Healthcare 
Professionals’ Perspectives on Interactive Games for the Aged," The 
Sixth International Conference on Systems ICONS 2011January 23-
28, St Maartins.   
[11] Wii Fit and Wii Fit Plus 
 Available: http://www.fitgameforum.com/wiki/index.php/Main_Page 
[12] T. Fullerton, Game Design Workshop, Second Edition ed. Burlington, 
MA: Elsevier Inc., 2008. 
[13] Anonymous. (October 14, 2010). What is Leximancer. Available: 
www.leximancer.com 
[14] Anonymous. (October 14, 2010). Introducing Kinect for Xbox 360. 
Available: http://www.xbox.com/en-AU/kinect/ 
133
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

