High Tech for Sports Medicine 
Supporting employees improving their health and fitness  
 
Hilco Prins, Wasim Alsaqaf, Marike Hettinga 
Research Group ICT-innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
h.prins@windesheim.nl 
Sietske van Berkel 
Department of Sports Medicine 
Isala 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
s.v.berkel@isala.nl
 
 
Abstract—This work in progress 
paper describes the 
development of a eHealth system for sports physicians who 
support employees in improving their health and fitness. 
Regular physical activity improves quality of life and has 
various health benefits. Companies have an interest in the 
health and fitness of employees. Besides, sporting together can 
improve 
interaction 
between 
employees 
of 
different 
departments. For employers it is important to encourage this 
in a safe way. To this end, the sports physicians of Isala 
Hospital in Zwolle, The Netherlands, offer sports medical 
examination and guidance programs to companies. The sports 
physicians want to use smartphone technology to improve and 
expand their services. To that end, an online data tracking 
system will be developed that makes it possible to: give 
employees access to their medical examinations results with 
personalized standard values; insert goals and training 
schedules by participant, trainer or sports physician; couple 
sensors and apps for data entry by participants themselves; 
compare one’s results with those of (company) peers; 
automatically provide feedback to individual participants; 
support contact between participants and sports physician or 
trainer; produce management reports and perform scientific 
analyses. Since details of the end product are not clear yet, the 
incremental and iterative development method Scrum will be 
used to develop the system. We will further ‘feed’ the project 
with an elaborated state of the art study, small pilot studies 
and an expanded evaluation study. A first version of the 
central database and app has already been developed. 
Keywords-sports medicine; guidance; employees; training; 
medical examination. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This work in progress paper describes the foundation and 
development of a eHealth system for sports physicians who 
support employees of companies in improving their health 
and fitness. 
Sports Medicine is the medical specialty that focuses on 
promoting, safeguarding and restoring the health of people 
who (want to) sport or exercise. It also aims to promote and 
restore the health of people with chronic conditions through 
sports or exercise. For both facets, the balance between 
specific physical load and capacity are explicitly taken into 
account [1]. 
Regular physical activity improves quality of life and has 
various health benefits [2][3]. However, about 40% of the 
Dutch population does not meet the Dutch Standard for 
Healthy Exercise for their age group [4]. This standard 
focuses on maintaining health in the long term. 
Companies have an interest in the health and fitness of 
employees as this may have an effect on sickness 
absenteeism and productivity. This is especially relevant 
nowadays because of the ageing of the working population. 
Besides, the increase of screen work contributes to non-
compliance with the guidelines for sufficient exercise. 
Employers may want to actively maintain or even improve 
their employees’ health and fitness. A company could 
present itself as a good employer to offer its employees 
counseling by sports physicians as part of occupational 
health care and fringe benefits.  
The sports medicine department of Isala in Zwolle, The 
Netherlands, performs sports medical examinations and 
guidance for groups of employees of external companies 
with the aim of encouraging movement and improving the 
health of the workers. Participants are periodically examined 
and supervised regarding their training and health during a 
year. With the aid of the physician, each participant 
determines his own goal. To this end, employers can choose 
specific sporting events in which their employees can 
participate at the end of the year, such as a half marathon or 
bike ride. Participants receive an individual report with 
advice and the companies receive a general management 
report. 
Until recently, only data of the sports medical 
examinations were locally stored in individual files per 
participant. This 
had 
several 
major drawbacks: 
a) 
participants could not see their own data, b) training 
activities of participants were not included, c) health 
parameters of the participants could not be followed during 
the training period, d) it was not clear whether the individual 
goals were met, and e) it was not possible to analyze data 
about groups and set up management reports. 
The method of data storage of medical examinations and 
the way of guiding participants needed renewal. The sports 
physicians wanted to use smartphone technology to improve 
and expand their services. They wanted more insight in the 
progress of health and fitness status of the participants, and 
to provide the participants themselves with meaningful and 
motivational information. To that end, we looked for an 
online data tracking system with the following features:  
 
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

1. Central, secure and adequate data storage; 
2. User-friendly and reliable data entry by the sports 
medicine staff; 
3. Various authorizations for different types of users; 
4. Insert goals and training schedules by participant, 
trainer or sports physician; 
5. Coupling of sensors and apps for data entry by 
participants themselves; 
6. Give participants meaningful insight in their own 
sports medical examination results and progress in 
training and health parameters, e.g., compared to 
personalized standard values or goals, and/or  results 
of their (company) peers.  
7. Automatic feedback to individual participants via an 
app to stimulate or warn; 
8. Support contact between participants and sports 
physician or trainer; 
9. Automated standard analyzes and reports; 
10. Basis for scientific sports medical research.  
 
The sport physicians searched by asking colleagues and 
on the internet for systems that met these requirements. A 
system that fully supported the sports physicians’ guidance 
model was not found. 
Therefore, the sports physicians contacted the research 
group ICT-innovations in Health Care of Windesheim 
University of Applied Sciences, Zwolle, The Netherlands. 
Together they started a project of which the primary 
objective was to build a system that met all the requirements 
of the sports physicians and made use of new technology in 
the field of monitoring and communication of sports and 
health parameters, such as web services, database servers, 
sensors, apps and smartphone technology. The secondary 
objective was to make students of information sciences 
acquainted with, and train them for a position in the field of 
medical informatics. Furthermore, we wanted to encourage 
knowledge exchange between the hospital and the university 
of applied sciences and to stimulate the development and use 
of technology for the benefit of health and healthcare. The 
project was named Hightech4SportsMedicine. 
In Section 2, we will present the approach that we have 
chosen in order to develop the system. In Section 3, we show 
the first, preliminary results and in Section 4, we discuss the 
work that has to be done in the future.  
II. 
APPROACH 
A. State of theArt study 
We initially performed a short literature study on systems 
that were available for sports physicians and athletes to share 
their training progress, training experiences and health 
parameters to support medical guidance. Later we will 
conduct a more comprehensive, systematic inventory 
through literature review and desk research. The findings 
provide further input for the system to build.   
B. Students, integration with education 
We deploy ICT students to develop the system. In this 
way we give the students the opportunity to develop skills in 
the field of medical informatics. The school of Information 
Sciences and the research group ICT-Innovations in Health 
Care have expressed the intention to give three to four 
students the opportunity to participate in the project in the 
context of the minor App Development. Different groups of 
students will be provided this opportunity during four 
consecutive semesters. The school will provide additional 
and customized education and guidance, and contribute to 
the continuity of the project. Three ICT students have, as part 
of an internship, developed a first basic version of the central 
database for a data-tracking system. Three other students 
now further develop the system and work on an app and 
sensors for the employees. For next semesters we will recruit 
new students. 
C. Agile / Scrum 
Many things in this project are still unclear. Research to 
investigate the needs, desires and possibilities forms a major 
part of this project. Therefore, an ease of communication and 
social integration with the stakeholders and end users are 
heavily 
desirable. 
Besides, 
working 
iteratively 
and 
incrementally makes it possible to quickly obtain the 
advantage of new insights because the planning and the 
priorities can be easily adjusted once new information 
becomes available. Also, good control and coordination 
mechanisms are important for delivering usable increments. 
Scrum provides us with the needed instruments to clarify the 
needs and manage the project [5]. It also provides defined 
meetings and activities and gives structure and clarity for the 
team and stakeholders. 
The role of the students regarding the important elements 
of Scrum are: 
1) Product backlog 
The product backlog is basically a prioritized list of features 
that the customer wants, described using the customer’s 
terminology. The ICT students of each semester together 
with the product owner (a sports physician) are responsible 
for setting up the product backlog document and managing 
it. 
2) Sprint planning 
A scrum sprint is a confined to a regular, repeatable work 
cycle. Sprint planning is a critical meeting. The functionality 
to be delivered in the sprint is planned at this meeting. The 
ICT students plan this meeting and invite the product owner 
to attend the meeting. They discuss the product backlog and 
decide which functionality is to be delivered in the next 
sprint, taking the following factors into consideration: 
• 
The sprint length; 
• 
The available capacity and resources; 
• 
The priority and importance of the functionality; 
• 
The scope of the functionality; 
• 
The time estimate for the functionality. 
The meeting results in a sprint backlog document. The 
ICT students ensure that all the privies are provided with a 
copy of the sprint backlog document. 
3) Sprint 
The sprint is the heart of Scrum. Within the sprint the 
needed functionality is implemented, tested, integrated and 
accepted. To make the feedback cycles short and effective 
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

enough, the sprint is limited to two weeks. The ICT students 
start the sprint with making an appropriate design. The 
design should fit the overall architecture of the software. The 
ICT students distribute the functionality to be implemented 
among them. Regardless who is implementing the 
functionality, all the ICT students are responsible for the 
performed work. Working in this way should enhance the 
team spirit and ensure the distribution of knowledge. The 
sprint is closed with a sprint review. In the sprint review the 
ICT students demonstrate the work done within the sprint 
and get the performed work accepted by the stakeholders. 
The functionality that has not been accepted by the 
stakeholders or finished by the ICT students will be put back 
in the product backlog. For a delivered functionality to be 
accepted, it should satisfy a set of rules that has been defined 
by the ICT students and the product owner. This set of rules 
is called a Definition of Done. After the sprint review, the 
ICT students plan the next sprint planning meeting to start 
the scrum cycle again. 
D. Evaluation study. 
If parts of the system have been developed that can be 
tested on end users, we will set up pilot projects with the aim 
to evaluate the system. We will first evaluate the 
performance and usability of the system, and the information 
value for participants and sports physicians. The aim is 
primarily to improve the system. After the pilots, we want to 
evaluate the value of the system in terms of routine use of the 
system, satisfaction of end users, compliance to training 
programs and effectiveness of medical support in terms of 
health, fitness and goal achievement. 
Once the database is filled with sufficient data, we hope 
to scientifically evaluate the effectiveness of several sport 
medical advices and do subgroup analyses. 
III. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
A. Preliminary State of the Art 
There are information systems that support sports 
physicians in recording patient data and are thus in fact 
electronic patient records (EPRs). However, these EPRs do 
not usually give patients access to their data. Besides, there 
are no specific EPRs for sports medicine. Additionally, there 
are apps that support the physician or athlete in the diagnosis 
and treatment of a specific sports injury. Examples are the 
“Medical iRehab AnkleSprain” [6] and the “Medical iRehab 
Tennis Elbow" [7]. Furthermore, there are countless apps for 
athletes focusing on the monitoring of training and health 
parameters, whether or not equipped with training schedules 
and advice. We found, however, no systems specifically 
aimed at sports medical examination, advice and guidance 
where the main objective is to assist employees in safe sports 
practice and promoting health and fitness. Moreover, the 
systems found showed no alignment of data collection by the 
athletes and the information needs of the sports physicians, 
no fitting with the care processes of the physicians and no 
provision of an own, secure and insightful database for 
management reports and scientific analysis. 
B. The proposed architecture 
The proposed architecture of the system consists of 
several elements, see Figure 1. These include: 
1) Central database 
A centralized database where monitoring data and health 
measurements will be saved. No personal data will be saved 
that can be directly or indirectly linked to physical persons. 
The database will also give the possibility for retrieving data 
for management reports as well as scientific analysis. 
2) Web Services 
For achieving data quality and data security, secure web 
services are built. They are a set of functionality, which is 
used for data entry and data retrieval. It forms the only entry 
point to the central database. 
3) User applications 
In this context the term user applications refers to the 
applications that could be used by the end users for data 
entry and data retrieval, and for communication between 
participants and sports physicians. A web site is built for this 
goal and a native mobile application is being implemented. 
4) Sensors 
The ICT students will investigate the possibility to integrate 
sensors. The sensors will also be used for data entry. The 
sensors will be placed on the body of the employee and send 
measured data to the mobile application installed on the 
mobile device of the patient. The way the sensors will be 
coupled with the mobile application is still unclear. The ICT 
students are investigating the following options: 
 
The coupling through ANT+ [8]; 
 
The coupling through Bluetooth Low Energy 
(Bluetooth LE) [9]. 
C. Central database, data quality 
A first basic version of the central database for a data-
tracking system, called the "Isala Sport Monitor", has been 
developed. The sports physicians currently use this version 
of the system. At this time, the results of the periodical sport 
medical examinations can be recorded in a simple manner. 
Data quality is achieved by working with value limits for 
data entry, automatic alerts when capturing improbable 
values and automatic calculation of values from other values, 
e.g., BMI from length and weight, and body fat percentage 
from multiple skinfold measurements. 
D. Sports Medicine App with sensor 
A first, but not yet complete version of the app has been 
developed for the iPhone. This version allows participants to 
see their sports medical test results, like peak expiratory 
flow, cholesterol level, fat percentage, orthopedic tests, 
maximum heart rate, ECG, etc. Personified, age and sex 
dependent standard values, will be added soon. Further, 
trainings data like type of sports, duration, distance, speed, 
route, heart rate zones and energy consumption have been 
implemented. The app works with a heart rate sensor.   
 
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
No information system can be found on the market that 
supports the sports medical guidance model of the sports 
physicians of Isala in all its facets. Therefore, we started an 
innovative project in which a system is built using new 
technologies. The innovation mainly concerns the integration 
of the use of apps, sensors, web services, smartphone 
technology and a database server with a feedback function to 
participants, sports physicians and employers in one sports 
medical guidance program and not as separate parts. This 
makes it possible in the future to link advised training 
programs to actual training and health data in the course of 
time for large groups of participants who are employees and 
mostly recreational, non-performance-oriented athletes. 
Since details of the end product are not clear yet, the 
incremental and iterative development method Scrum will be 
used to develop the system. We will further ‘feed’ the project 
with an elaborated state of the art study, small pilot studies 
and an expanded evaluation study. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank Tech For Future, Centre of 
Expertise HTSM (http://www.techforfuture.nl) for its 
financial support. The centre is an initiative of Saxion and 
Windesheim, universities of applied sciences and was 
established with the support of the Province of Overijssel, 
The Netherlands.  
We also thank ICT students Kay van Bree, Joep 
Kemperman and Patrick Wobben for the development of the 
first version of the central database of the Sport Monitor in 
the context of their mid-internship, and Wisam Bahnam, 
Maikel Gommans and Thomas Visch for their initial work on 
the apps and sensors in the context of the minor App 
Development.   
REFERENCES 
[1] Vereniging voor Sportgeneeskunde, “Professional Profile Sport 
Physician” (in Dutch: “Beroepsprofiel Sportarts”), Bilthoven, 2012. 
[2] US DHHS, “Physical activity and health: a report of the Surgeon 
General”. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
1996. 
[3] G. C. W. Wendel-Vos, “What are the possible health effects of 
physical (in)activity?” (in Dutch: “Wat zijn de mogelijke 
gezondheidsgevolgen 
van 
lichamelijke 
(in)activiteit?”) 
In: 
Volksgezondheid 
Toekomst 
Verkenning, 
Nationaal 
Kompas 
Volksgezondheid. Bilthoven: RIVM [Online]. Available from:  
http://www.nationaalkompas.nl/gezondheidsdeterminanten/leefstijl/li
chamelijke-activiteit/ [retrieved: January, 2015]. 
[4] H. G. C. Kemper, W. T. M. Ooijendijk, and M. Stiggelbout, 
“Consensus about the Dutch Standard for healthy Excercise.” (in 
Dutch: “Consensus over de Nederlandse Norm voor Gezond 
Bewegen”, Tijdschr Soc Gezondheidsz., 78, 2000, pp. 180-183.  
[5] K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland, “Scrum Guide”, 2014 [Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/v1/Scrum-Guide-
US.pdf#zoom=100 [retrieved: January, 2015].  
[6] Medical 
iRehab 
AnkleSprain 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://appcrawlr.com/ipad/medical-irehab-anklesprain-for [retrieved: 
January, 2015]. 
[7] Medical 
iRehab 
Tennis 
Elbow 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://appcrawlr.com/ios/medical-irehab-tennis-elbow 
[retrieved: 
January, 2015].  
[8] ANT+ [Online]. Available from: http://www.tisisant.com [retrieved: 
January, 2015].   
[9] Bluetooth light: BTLE [Online]. Available from:  http://en.wikipedia. 
org/wiki/Bluetooth_low_energy [retrieved: January, 2015]. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The architecture of the Isala Sport Monitor. 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

