A Population-based Study from Electronic Health Records on the Comorbidities of 
Dementia Older Adults in Hong Kong  
 
J.P. Zhong, N.X. Dong, L.H. Chen, Kevin K.F. Yuen, Arnold Y.L. Wong, Sam C.C. Chan 
 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR 
{Joni.zhong, pearl.chen, kevin.yuen, arnold.wong, samcc.chan} @polyu.edu.hk 
nanxi.dong@connect.polyu.hk 
 
Abstract—Dementia is a condition characterized by a group of 
symptoms that affect memory, learning, and cognitive 
function. It negatively impacts patients' daily functional skills 
and independence, particularly in the later stages of the disease 
when comorbidities are often present. With the global aging 
problem leading to an increasing number of dementia cases, 
there is a significant burden on healthcare systems worldwide. 
Despite growing research on risk mitigation, early diagnosis, 
and intervention of dementia, few studies have focused on the 
developmental trajectory of the disease. In this study, we 
utilized the Hospital Authority (HA) Electronic Clinical 
Record to analyze structured clinical data of dementia patients 
in Hong Kong. Using mixed methods, we created a population-
based case-control cohort to determine the association between 
dementia and other disease diagnoses based on ICD-10 codes. 
We identified significant associations with comorbidities in the 
categories of "Endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases" 
and "Mental, Behavioral and Neurodevelopmental disorders". 
Further, we plan to employ machine learning models to predict 
patient comorbidities data and understand the complex short-
term and long-term dependencies in dementia progression. 
Keywords-dementia; 
comorbidities;clinical 
data;machine 
learning. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Dementia includes a group of symptoms affecting 
memory, learning, and at least one other cognitive domain 
(such as aphasia, apraxia, agnosia, or executive function), 
which may be part and all impaired in different stages of the 
disease. Dementia negatively affects the patient's daily 
functional skills and independence, especially when they 
enter the later stages with comorbidities. Therefore, the 
increasing number of dementia with the worldwide ageing 
problem results in a significant burden for general health 
care 
in 
many 
countries, 
especially 
since 
several 
comorbidities are usually with dementia. There is growing 
research focus on risk mitigation, early diagnosis and 
intervention of dementia, but few have been conducted to 
determine the developmental trajectory of dementia (For 
review, please see [1]).  
 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
To better understand the comorbidity of dementia in the 
Hong Kong ageing population, a population-based study was 
conducted to analyze the structured clinical data of dementia 
patients using the real world clinical data. Our objective is to 
determine whether we can discover the higher risk of 
comorbidity of dementia through their dementia journey, 
since the patients were diagnosed with dementia. To achieve 
this, we utilized the Hospital Authority (HA) Electronic 
Clinical Record with a sample of 200,000 patients’ digital 
files in the years of 2007 to 2017.  
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY AND INTERIM RESULTS 
The current study used mixed method to conduct the data 
analysis. First, our objective in this stage was to determine 
which disease diagnosis (in the format of structured ICD-10 
codes) had a significance association with the diagnosis of 
dementia. We created a population-based case-control cohort 
of patients based on the presence (cases) and absence of 
dementia (controls) during this period in the database. We 
then filtered the data with the diagnosis of dementia in any 
year using The International Classification of Diseases, 
Tenth Version (ICD-10) codes (F00-F03). The related 
clinical data can be extracted, including their comorbidities 
throughout their disease journey. As in the control group, a 
set of random samples of individuals was matched by those 
based on the age of diagnosis of dementia and gender with a 
1:1 ratio. The dependent variables are the comorbidity in the 
format of ICD-10 coding. By going through the categories of 
A to Z in ICD-10, we identified the essential dependent 
variables (i.e. comorbidity) that had a significant association 
with dementia. The significant association is tested using 
Chi-Square Test. We found that significant associations exist 
in “Endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (Category 
E)” and “Mental, Behavioral and Neurodevelopmental 
disorders (category F)” in the Hong Kong population.  
After the major categories of comorbidity with 
significant association with dementia have been identified at 
the first stage, we will further employ machine learning 
models to learn the development of comorbidity after the 
diagnosis of dementia. In this part, we will build and validate 
predictive machine learning models to predict patient 
comorbidities data (Fig 1). We will primarily focus on the 
multivariate and temporal nature of patient comorbidities 
data. Using this data-driven method [2], which can build 
relationships underlying all the available factors, we aim to 
create inherent relationships at multiple levels and scales, 
including 1) the short-term scale recording, indicating the 
correlations between consecutive medical records during one 
clinical episode within a short timeframe (e.g., a few days) 
and clinical events such as necessary lab tests involving a 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

wide range of vital sign measurements or medical notes 
indicating the progression over a short period of time; and 2) 
the long-term dependence, which usually happens among 
different clinical episodes and indicates the trend in patients’ 
progression of comorbidities. Such trends also rely on the 
summary of each clinical episode. The integration of short 
and long-term dependence on clinical data is required to 
provide more precise predictions. For example, the trend of a 
patient’s vital signs during the previous 24 hours on the 
prognosis, some of the comorbidities (e.g., diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, stroke, hip fracture, etc.) and the 
demographic data (e.g., older age, male gender, or lower 
socioeconomic position) may indicate a higher probability of 
mortality [3]. In this view, a predictive model should follow 
and capture the complex short-term changes of clinical 
events and their influences over time (i.e., long-term 
dependencies) to understand the context of dementia 
progression (e.g., a hip fracture incident and its recovery 
influence on the dementia progression).  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Melis, René JF, Miriam L. Haaksma, and Graciela Muniz-
Terrera. "Understanding and predicting the longitudinal 
course of dementia." Current opinion in psychiatry 32.2 
(2019): 123. 
[2] Liu, Yuxi, Zhenhao Zhang, Antonio Jimeno Yepes, and Flora 
D. Salim. "Modeling long-term dependencies and short-term 
correlations in patient journey data with temporal attention 
networks for health prediction." In Proceedings of the 13th 
ACM 
International 
Conference 
on 
Bioinformatics, 
Computational Biology and Health Informatics, pp. 1-10. 
2022. 
[3] Rajamaki, 
Blair, 
Sirpa 
Hartikainen, 
and 
Anna-Maija 
Tolppanen. "The effect of comorbidities on survival in 
persons with Alzheimer’s disease: a matched cohort study." 
BMC geriatrics 21 (2021): 1-9.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.   Input and Output of the Machine Learning Model 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

