Measuring C-Reactive Protein using Microring
Resonators
1st Lodewijk Arntzen
THUAS, Delft, NL
l.h.arntzen@hhs.nl
2nd Nils Boertjes
THUAS, Delft, NL
nilsboertjes@hotmail.com
3rd Bart de Boer
Delta Diagnostics, Rotterdam, NL
bart.de.boer@deltadiagnostics.nl
4th Vanessa Jungbluth
Delta Diagnostics, Rotterdam, NL
vanessa.jungbluth@deltadiagnostics.nl
5th John Bolte
THUAS, Delft, NL
J.F.B.Bolte@hhs.nl
Abstract—A rapidly developing application of microring res-
onators is highly specific biosensing. By covalently binding
antibodies to a microring chip, interaction with its corresponding
protein will effect a change in mass concentration, which can be
read out as an optical wavelength shift. Using low-cost setups
for both microfluidic and optical input/output components, we
have successfully performed concentration measurements of C-
Reactive Protein in order to establish the output sensitivity in the
linear regime. Through the use of these commercially available
components, we underline the effectiveness and accessibility that
microring resonators offer as biosensors.
Index Terms—Microring Resonator, Point of Care, Diagnostics,
C-Reactive Protein, Biosensor
I. INTRODUCTION
Microring resonators (MRRs) are optical sensors that are
able to measure changes in the refractive index of fluid
samples accurately. This is done by coupling laser light into a
waveguide, from where its evanescent field reaches an adjacent
microring [1] [2]. Due to the evanescent field of the microring
itself, the total optical path length of the ring also depends
on the fluid that runs on top of the ring. By sweeping the
wavelength of the laser light, the relative effective refractive
index neff of a ring of length L, can be determined from
resonant wavelength(s) λm
λm = L · neff
m
,
(1)
corresponding to resonance mode m = 1,2,3.., . Covalently
binding antibodies to the microring allows this process to
be used for biosensing, allowing only a specific protein to
bind and enact such a change in relative refractive index
[4]. By performing these measurements at different protein
concentrations, the sensitivity s of the sensor can be deter-
mined, which is defined as the change in relative refractive
index per unit of protein concentration. The setup required to
perform protein measurements with MRRs is dependent on
two additional systems: an optical setup to couple laser light
into a sensor chip and read out the resonant wavelengths, and a
microfluidic setup to flow the protein samples over the sensor
Funding provided by the SIA MKB-RAAK program.
chip [3]. This paper discusses the MRR setup using low-
cost, readily available components, and presents representative
measurements on C-reactive protein [5].
II. LOW-COST SETUP
A. Optical Input and Readout
For the optical system, an Agilent 8164A sweeping laser was
connected as the input and a PicoScope 2206B computer
oscilloscope as the readout device. To control the laser light
in the microring resonator, an Agilent 8164A Lightwave Mea-
surement System was used with an Agilent 81640A Tunable
Laser as the active module. This system can perform a laser
sweep in a wavelength range of 1400-1670 nm, allowing the
setup to continuously search for resonant wavelengths in a set
range. The different Agilent instruments are synchronized via
TTL triggers. The chip holder stage allows for translation and
rotation in the horizontal plane, and is used to get a consistent
alignment of the sensor chip and makes it possible to couple
light into the chip at different points.
B. Microfluidic Components
For the microfluidic system, a Harvard Apparatus 33 DDS
syringe pump and AMF RVMLP rotary valve have been
integrated. All of these instruments are controlled through a
single GUI that has been developed in Python, allowing for
platform-independent usage. The Harvard Apparatus 33 DDS
syringe pump produces a vacuum to move the liquids through
the setup by having a stepper motor move the plunger of
an inserted syringe. Rather than connecting various syringes
with different samples in sequence that are pushed through
the setup, the choice is made to have the syringe pump create
a vacuum and use the syringe as a waste container that the
samples are drawn into. This does necessitate the use of a
rotary valve in order to selectively draw from the samples.
Fluids that are to be used during an experiment are first stored
in Eppendorf tubes, which are connected to an AMF RVMLP
rotary valve. After passing the rotary valve, a fluid is drawn
over the MRR-chip that is sealed of with a flow cell. Before
ending up in the syringe, the flow speed of the liquid is
measured in an Elveflow MFS4 flow sensor, the results of
which can be read out via the accompanying software. The
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

tubing between the Eppendorf tubes and the rotary valve has
an inner diameter of 0.2 mm, in order to minimize the amount
of reagents that is wasted while purging. The rest of the tubing
has an inner diameter of 0.8 mm. A schematic overview of the
complete microfluidic setup is shown in figure 1.
Fig. 1.
Schematic overview of the microfluidic setup, consisting of the
following components: A. Measurement PC; B. Delta Diagnostics MRR; C.
Harvard 33 DDS syringe pump; D. MRR chip; E. AMF RVMLP rotary valve;
F. Eppendorf tubes containing reagents.
III. C-REACTIVE PROTEIN
A. Concentration Measurement Method
The sensor chip that is used contains six microrings, and
has been coated with a hydrogel by XanTec. Of these six
rings, ring 4 is covered with a silicon-oxide layer, which
shields the microring from the reagents and allows it to
function as a reference regarding pressure and temperature
influences. The hydrogel serves as the base layer upon which
the antibodies are placed. The chip is functionalized with
mouse-derived CRP-antibodies, acquired from ThermoFisher.
Before the actual start of a measurement, the tubing is purged
to prevent contamination during the experiment. The CRP
has been dissolved in Phosphate-Buffered Saline solution with
Tween (PBST). This buffer solution does not interact with the
protein, and allows for a stable reference measurement if no
CRP is dissolved in it. A concentration measurement starts by
regenerating the sensor chip, or removing contaminants, by
flowing the buffer solution, followed by a 50 mM glycine
solution, and another round of the buffer solution. This is
done for 1 minute per reagent, with a flow speed of 100
µl/min. Once the regeneration process is completed, the buffer
solution is flowed over the sensor chip with a flow speed of
20 µl/min for 5 minutes to create a stable readout baseline.
Then the CRP sample is introduced, likewise by flowing at
20 µl/min for 5 minutes, followed by the buffer solution. It is
during this final step that the response is determined, at a set
time after switching to the buffer solution, to ensure that the
measured response is a result of protein-antibody interaction
rather than electrostatic attraction of the protein. Afterwards,
the regeneration process is repeated in order to quickly remove
all of the bound protein from the chip.
B. Dose-Response Results
Measurements have been performed with doses of 0.3, 1.0, 3.0
and 10 µg/ml CRP. The measurement of 10 µg/ml is shown
in figure 2 as an example. It can be seen how rings 1, 5,
and 6 show a response when the CRP sample is introduced,
which slowly moves toward an equilibrium state where the
rate of association and dissociation between the CRP and the
antibodies are equal. The difference in response between these
rings can be explained by the fact that they are placed in a
straight line on the sensor chip: the CRP first reaches ring
1, thereby lowering the amount of available molecules in the
sample that reaches the later rings. It is unclear why rings 2
and 3 show a lower response. By repeating this measurement
at different concentrations, a dose-response curve can be
created, as is shown in figures 3-5 for the individual rings.
The corresponding fit values are included in table I.
The
Fig. 2.
Results of concentration measurements of samples with a CRP
concentration of 10 µg/ml. Only ring 1, 5 and 6 are functionalized with mouse-
derived anti-CRP.
Fig. 3. Dose-response curves for ring 1 of the formed CRP complexes with
mouse-derived anti-CRP.
measurement results of ring 1, 5 and 6 are presented in figures
3-5. The response of the measured complex (CRP binding with
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Fig. 4. Dose-response curves for ring 5 of the formed CRP complexes with
mouse-derived anti-CRP.
anti-CRP) is plotted against the dose, in which the x-axis is
plotted logarithmically. The fit for the dose response curve is
obtained by using non-linear regression in Python with the
curve fit function from Scipy with the Levenberg-Marquardt
algorithm. The resulting fit parameters for ring 1, 5 and 6 are
listed in table I. From these fits, the sensitivity s has been
determined, resulting into s1 = (80±12) RU(µg/ml)−1, s5 =
(76±5) RU(µg/ml)−1 and s6= (77±10) RU(µg/ml)−1 for rings
1, 5 and 6 respectively.
Fig. 5. Dose-response curves for ring 6 of the formed CRP complexes with
anti-CRP produced in a mouse from the company ThermoFisher.
TABLE I
MEASUREMENT RESULTS
Ring
Fit Values
1
R(d) = (80 ± 12) · log (d) + (324 ± 17)
5
R(d) = (76 ± 5) · log (d) + (231 ± 9)
6
R(d) = (77 ± 10) · log (d) + (228 ± 14)
IV. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have outlined a method to create a low-cost
optical and microfluidic setup that can be used to perform
biosensing experiments with microring resonators. To prove
this concept and display the accessibility of this technique, we
have successfully performed concentration measurements of
C-Reactive Protein. The determined sensitivity s of the setup
is (80±12) RU(µg/ml)−1, (76±5) RU(µg/ml)−1 and (77±10)
RU(µg/ml)−1 for the three different microrings on the sensor
chip. The relatively large uncertainty is caused by the limited
amount of different concentrations that have been measured
due to time constraints. This implies that the uncertainty can
be reduced without further investments. Furthermore, these
measurements have only been performed in the linear regime
of the dose-response curve. It is not yet clear what the lower
limit of detection of the setup is and, while unlikely, whether
the setup will influence the sensitivity near the upper limit of
its dynamic range.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank former Bachelor Engineering Physics
students Daan Koopman and Thomas Toet for their dedicated
experimental work.
REFERENCES
[1] W. J. Westerveld, J. Pozo, P. J. Harmsma, et al., “Characterization of a
photonic strain sensor in silicon-on-insulator technology,” Optics Letters,
vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 479–481, 20
[2] Y. Feng, J. Pan, D. Sun, S. Yang, Z. Fu, L. Wan, H. Shang, D. Shi,
S. Zhu, and Z. Li, “On-chip self- referenced micro-resonators enhanced
by digital optical frequency comb for ultra-sensitive c-reactive protein
detection,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 40, pp. 6303–6309,
September 2022.
[3] D. G. e. a. Myszka, “Equilibrium analysis of high affinity interactions
using biacore,” Anal.Biochem, no. 265, pp. 326–330, 1998.
[4] S.
Malthesh
and
N.
K,
“A
Ring
Resonator
with
Liquid
Crystal
for
Biosensing
Application,”
Dec.
2017,
pp.
1–4.
doi:
10.1109/WRAP.2017.8468552.
[5] M. Moutachakkir, A. L. Hanchi, A. Baraou, A. Boukhira, and S.
Chellak, “Immunoanalytical characteristics of C-reactive protein and
high sensitivity C-reactive protein,” Annales de Biologie Clinique, vol.
75, Apr. 2017. doi: 10.1684/abc.2017.1232.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

