Recommendations for the Implementation of Exergames in the Context of 
Workplace Health Promotion: Results From Expert Interviews 
 
Frederik Kerssenfischer 
Technische Universität 
München 
Munich, Germany 
ozodis@googlemail.com 
Svenja Simonsen 
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-
Universität Greifswald 
Greifswald, Germany 
Svenja.Simonsen@gmx.net 
Tobias Fritsch 
Technische Universität 
Dresden 
Dresden, Germany 
t.fritsch@gmx.net 
Helmut Krcmar 
Technische Universität 
München 
Munich, Germany 
Krcmar@in.tum.de 
 
 
 
Abstract—Exergames are digital games which promote or 
assist physical activity that is more than sedentary activity. 
Positive health effects have been reported by several studies. 
Because exergames have become a popular tool for health 
promotion it can be assumed that it could be a new promising 
tool for workplace health promotion. For this purpose, 23 
semi-standardized interviews with experts of a financial and 
insurance company were conducted. The analysis of the 
collected 
data 
identified 
influence 
factors 
for 
the 
implementation of exergames in a workplace environment. Out 
of these, five recommendations for the implementation process 
were deducted, e.g., the ease of use, the target group, and the 
acceptance of exergames.  
Keywords- exergames; expert interview; workplace; health 
promotion.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
For health promotion in the context of workplace 
environment currently major changes can be observed due to 
the advancing introduction of IT-supported programs. 
Mainly behavioral adjustments of the participants are further 
fostered through IT-supported developments such as: initial 
motivation barriers, long-term motivation or home vs. public 
environment problematic [1]. Products that adapt these 
topics arise from different businesses areas like sporting 
goods manufactures, smartphone applications, and gaming 
consoles [2]. Latter should be further investigated in this 
article.  
Exergames started to develop out of the motion sensor 
based gaming consoles environment and beginning to touch 
areas outside the living rooms. Nintendo started in the year 
2006 with their Wii console the bandwagon of sport 
activities combined with classical console gaming [3]. Soon 
after, Sony and Microsoft adapted these concepts with their 
respective gaming devices.  
For a long time, digital games (the generic term for 
computer, video, and mobile games) have been associated 
with predominantly negative health impacts (e.g., obesity) 
[4, 5, 6, 7]. In contrast of this view, a new type of digital 
games was developed in recent years. 
Serious games are "games or game-like applications that 
are using technology and design developed from the 
entertainment software industry and are not primarily or 
solely for entertainment" [8]. They differ from traditional 
digital games with its serious purpose [4]. While traditional 
digital games are primarily created for leisure time and serve 
exclusively as entertainment, serious games should facilitate 
knowledge acquisition and behavioral change [9]. These 
games must be designed with a balance of entertainment and 
information or education values [8]. 
Digital games "that promote or assist in user engagement 
in some form of body exercise" are known in literature 
typically as exergames [10]. The term exergame (also 
exergaming) is a combination of the English words 
"exercise" and "game" or "gaming". Terms such as 
"Motivating Physical Activity Games" [11], "games for 
health" [4] or "Active video games" [12, 13] are used 
interchangeably in the field of exergames. The paper is 
structured as follows: The next part covers the definitions of 
the relevant topics as well as a rough overview about the 
current state of research in this area. In the third part the 
method of expert interviews is explained and the application 
details for the research topic are shown. Following, the 
results of the interviews are presented, separated by 
qualitative and quantitative findings by the expert interviews. 
Finally, we discuss the research results and formulate 
requirements 
for 
the 
successful 
implementation 
of 
exergames into a workplace environment and give a short 
outlook of future research following from the gained 
knowledge for exergames. The conclusion pinpoints the 
most important insights of the conducted expert interviews. 
 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Exergames differ from classical computer, video, and 
mobile games in the intensity of physical movements that 
must be exerted in order to play the games. While traditional 
video games train the manual dexterity and / or fine motor 
skills of the players (for example by moving and clicking the 
computer mouse), exergames require the usage of large 
muscle groups, resulting in a state of physical exhaustion 
comparable to sport activities [14, 15, 7]. Many well-known 
exergames include strength, balance, and flexibility exercises 
disguised in sports games like tennis, boxing, and aerobics in 
which players have to realistically simulate the typical 
athletic movements to move his avatar on screen [14].  
271
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In this way, athletic movements are embedded in a 
playful context and motivate the players by having fun to a 
higher incidence of physical activity [16]. Depending on the 
nature of the game and intensity of the execution of the 
movements, an increase in heart rate and energy 
consumption over the basal metabolic rate can be achieved 
[14]. This effect blurs the boundary between health-
promoting sporting activities that have a deliberate, planned, 
and continued improvement of physical fitness for purpose 
and exergames.  
In recent years, the interest in research on the health-
promoting effects of exergames has increased greatly. The 
effects on physical activity and energy consumption were 
analyzed most frequently. But a general statement about the 
physical effects of exergames can not derived as they 
strongly vary with the various consoles, games, skills of the 
users and movement techniques. However, all studies meet 
the joint statement that exergames are able to stimulate the 
cardiovascular system and the musculoskeletal system and 
increase the energy consumption above the level of inactivity 
[17, 18, 19, 20]. Nevertheless, it is repeatedly stressed that 
exergames cannot be a substitute for real sporting activities 
but is better than no physical activity at all. 
Although exergames have become a popular tool for 
health promotion, there are no studies on its use in workplace 
context. It can be assumed that the positive effects of 
exergames can be transferred to the field of workplace health 
promotion. 
Workplace Health Promotion is a modern corporate 
strategy to reduce impacts on employees health and increase 
health-promoting resources by interventions in private and 
public companies [21, 22]. The workplace poses numerous 
health risks to employees but at the same time opportunities 
for self-fulfillment, personal development and well-being 
[23]. In addition to direct influences, work also indirectly 
affects one’s health including health behavior or lifestyle 
[24]. The workplace is a major influence factor for one’s 
health with the possible range from adverse health or 
debilitating factors to health sustaining or promoting 
conditions [25]. 
Being such a huge success in the private sector the 
question aroused if the potential of an accessible, little time 
consuming and comparably cheap solution can be used for 
workplace health promotion. However, one has to consider 
that in such an environment much more regulations and rules 
are applied than at home. The article serves to answer the 
following research question: 
RQ: “Which factors influence the implementation of 
exergames into a workplace environment?” 
III. 
METHODE 
During September 2011 until April 2012 a series of semi-
structured 
interviews 
with 
experts 
from 
different 
departments and business areas was conducted regarding the 
introduction of exergames into the setting of a company. 
A. Recruitment 
Several ways were chosen in the recruitment process for 
the expert interviews. First, a list of important stakeholders 
was created to obtain the knowledge of well-know experts 
within 
the 
company. 
This 
list 
contained 
C-Level 
Management, executives, members of the workers council, 
company doctors, as well as employees. Experts were 
recruited in meetings to the topics such as occupational 
health and safety. During these meetings, recommendations 
from the participants for further experts were solicited, 
which could help to broaden the view on the topic of 
exergames. Secondly, additional interviewees were recruited 
through the network of contacts from the authors within the 
company. During the selection process of interview 
candidates a strong focus was to ensure that a variety of 
views were contained and being represented. Due to this 
selection, candidates from different departments and 
different levels of hierarchy within the company where 
selected.  
A total of 23 experts were recruited, which were either 
responsible in the selection and decision process regarding 
occupational health topics, or added knowledgeable insights 
about criteria for the introduction of exergames within their 
organization. To obtain unadulterated information and 
therefore the best possible data anonymity was ensured to all 
participants for all statements made during the interview 
process. Table I provides an overview about the different 
stakeholders and their roles in the company. 
TABLE I.  
ROLES OF INTERVIEWED EXPERTS 
Role 
Frequency 
C-Level 
2 
Executives 
5 
Workers Council 
4 
Doctors 
2 
Academic Researcher 
4 
Employees 
6 
Total 
23 
 
Different general backgrounds of the experts were 
observed. While 35 percent had management experiences, 26 
percent offered a medical or health related background and 
the remaining 39 percent provided user perspective and 
experience. The roles were defined regarding the job position 
in the company and the main activity area of the 
interviewees. For example, members of the workers council 
can be employees, but in the context of the interviews they 
answered in their role of workers council members. 
In addition to the 23 experts the responsible facility 
manager was questioned concerning issues of location, 
accessibility and safety. The selection of 23 participants as 
the sample-size allowed the fitting balance between time- 
and resource-intensive interviews and data gathering versus 
the marginal return of additional insights from further 
participants. During the interview phase the answers from 
different experts were quiet homogenous regarding the 
discussed topic, suggesting that an overall sufficient number 
of important criteria were received. 
B. Interview 
All interviews were conducted with a semi-standardized 
interview protocol [26]. This method allows the creation of 
comparable responses from the participants, while enabling 
272
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the interviewer to flexibly ask further questions on relevant 
areas which are revealed during the interview. The average 
time of an interview was about 60 minutes, while the fastest 
was 25 minutes and the longest over 100 minutes. The 
interviews typically were conducted in-person, beginning 
each with the question about a short background description 
of the responsibilities of the interviewee, following a short 
set of open-ended questions. Afterwards the participants 
were asked to specifically name Strengths, Weaknesses, 
Opportunities and Treats for the implementation of 
exergames into a workplace environment. The experts filled 
the categories with their recommendations and provided 
additional feedback to them. At the end of each interview the 
experts were asked about the single most important criterion 
in their view for the successful implementation and 
application of exergames in a workplace environment. This 
allowed the creation of a prioritized ranking of influence 
factors for the analyses. 
C. Analyses 
Following the completion of each interview the recorded 
answers to the discussed questions were documented into a 
data spreadsheet for further analysis. This approach enabled 
us to synthesize the most commonly named criteria for each 
area by selecting the most reoccurring answers in the 
interview process. Furthermore aspects were included, which 
were mentioned by just one or two participants, but seemed 
to be an important addition to the identification process of 
influence factors. 
D. Limitations 
Our results are subject to a number of limitations: Firstly, 
all of the experts were from Germany, therefore a 
international representative statement cannot be drawn from 
the results, and a german-centred view is presented. 
Secondly, all experts were employed for the same large 
financial and insurance company, so all statements made are 
situational for a specific company.  
The findings show how our predefined set of 
stakeholders describes their thoughts about the topic at hand. 
All statements made are personal perceptions of the 
interviewees and not an assessment of underlying reasons 
and driving factors which motivated the given answers of the 
experts. At every possible occasion a cross-check of 
statements were made between the information provided to 
us by participants with public available data, such as 
announcements, 
surveys, 
and 
research 
publications. 
Furthermore, the status “expert” of the interviewees holds 
not for all areas and explains certain biases. E.g., while 
management experts focused on aspects of motivation the 
occupational health experts focused heavily on the possible 
health 
status 
improvement 
of 
employees 
after 
the 
introduction of exergames. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Qualitative analyses 
The examination of the interview documentation 
indicated a qualitative difference between the experts 
answers. Some experts provided more elaborate insights than 
others and showed a deeper understanding of the topic 
exergames. In the interviews all experts mentioned at least 
one factor for each of the questioned areas, such as 
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats. A 
commonly made statement for example by one of the experts 
was: 
…The idea of a gaming console for a team room sounds 
very interesting,…it´s an innovative approach to be active 
and surely could fit our company…. On the other hand there 
must be some rules to use it, otherwise people will play all 
the time or find other ways to abuse it…..and there will be 
others who don´t like this kind of activity, because they feel 
it´s inappropriate for them…  
This answer was coded for our SWOT overview in the 
following way: strength-innovative, weakness-clear rules, 
threat-acceptance. In this example, expert opinion is missing 
a clear statement for the opportunities of the introduction of 
exergames into the workplace environment. 
Another participant responded to the same questions 
during the interview with the following: 
…I think this is a good way to improve the working 
breaks, I mean these consoles are cheap compared to what 
else we spend day-by-day for other stuff… why not use them 
to get a little more varied gaming opportunities…  
In these sentences the expert mentioned the cost-
efficiency of exergames, which was therefore coded as an 
opportunity for the introduction. However, the experts 
showed the tendency to put arguments forward mostly for 
one or two of the designated areas: strength/opportunity, 
weakness/opportunity, strength/threat, and weakness/threat. 
This was mostly regarded to the fact that once the 
conversations were taking a direction of pro or contra for 
exergames, the experts stuck to their opinion and gathered 
further arguments to support these viewpoints. E.g., 
strength/opportunity 
and 
respectively 
weakness/treat 
arguments were mentioned in the interviews.  
TABLE II.  
OVERVIEW ABOUT THE INTERVIEW RESULTS  
 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Opportunities 
 Innovative 
 Ease of use 
 Cost-efficiency  
 (Health)Effects 
 Place/ time 
 Clear rules 
Threats 
 Time efficient 
 Target group 
 Employee 
satisfaction 
 Missing long-term 
development / 
experience  
 Acceptance 
 Target group 
 
B. Quantitative analyses 
After the interviews, the statements of the experts were 
coded comparable to the two examples above and were 
recorded and counted in a spread sheet. Out of this 
aggregated interview result an overview of the most 
important factors was created in Table II.  
The overview depicts for each SWOT area the three most 
commonly mentioned factors for the implementation 
process. While the innovative approach was clearly seen as 
the most important strength/opportunity (15), the unclear 
273
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

resulting (health) effects were the frequently mentioned 
weakness/opportunity (10). For the possible strength/threats 
the time efficiency received the largest reference with 11 
mentioning 
and 
the 
missing 
or 
unclear 
long-term 
development of the topic exergames (8) was especially seen 
as a weakness/threat.  
TABLE III.  
OVERVIEW MOST IMPORTANT CRITERION BY 
STAKEHOLDER  
Role 
Criteria 
C-Level 
Cost-effectiveness 
Executives 
Employee satisfaction 
Workers Council 
Clear rules, anonymity 
Doctors 
Ease of use 
Academic Researcher 
Communication / information 
transparency towards everybody 
Employees 
Ease of use, innovative 
 
In addition to the general influence factors, the different 
factors by the stakeholder groups were analyzed. In Table III 
an overview is presented by the different roles of the experts 
and their mainly mentioned success factor for the 
implementation of exergames in a workplace environment. 
C-Level Management named cost-effectiveness as the most 
important factor for the application of exergames in the 
workplace environment. Executives regarded the effect of 
employee satisfaction as critical. Members of the Workers 
Council stated that clear rules and anonymity for users must 
be ensured for the introduction. The ease of use aspect was 
the general concern of the interviewed doctors, while the 
academic 
researchers 
mentioned 
the 
necessity 
of 
communication and information transparency towards 
participants. Finally, concluded by the employees the ease of 
use and the innovative character of exergames were the most 
important criteria. However, the numbers of interviewees in 
the different groups was very low, preventing further 
meaningful statistical evaluation of the gathered data. At the 
same time it adds transparency about the general and 
background interests of the participating experts. 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The role of exergames in a workplace environment and 
the use for health promotion purposes is influenced by a 
wide amount of factors. The advantages of exergames are the 
innovative character of gaming consoles, the ease of use 
compared to general health promotion activities and the cost-
efficiency of the solution. In contrast, the long term 
development of exergames is at present unclear. Similar 
results were observed for the acceptance and the fitting target 
group and the measure pose a potential risk in the success of 
exergames in a workplace environment. The missing 
evidence in the application of exergames for health 
promotion purposes is a barrier that must be overcome to 
establish it as an alternative way for companies to address 
the topic of employee health.  
Nevertheless, our respondents feel that exergames can 
help to improve health promotion if the factors are correctly 
addressed. Particularly the implementation process needs to 
be defined and analyzed, since exergames have scarcely been 
able to show their potential because of the difficulty to show 
the long term development of health effects. Therefore 
recommendations were deducted from the expert answers to 
address the main problems that are linked to exergames for 
health promotion purposes in a company environment. 
 
Recommendations: 
Our 
expert 
interviews 
revealed 
information on the incentives and background thoughts about 
the topic exergames. Below, a set of recommendations is 
formulated which reflect the critical factors for the 
implementation of exergames. 
A. The gaming console chosen for exergaming must be 
easy to use 
The simplicity of exergames is crucial. In the application 
scenario, e.g., lunch break, informal meetings, etc. no time 
consuming ramp ups and further configuration and 
preparation can be allowed to start with the measure. 
B. There must be a clear set of rules for the allowed use of 
exergames in a workplace environment 
Because of the novelty of the topic, clear rules help the 
employees to adapt to exergames. This might, however, be 
specifically the case for the German environment in which a 
set of rules is expected to exist. 
C. The introduction of exergames need to be properly 
announced to every employee in the company 
The communication to every employee is from utmost 
importance to ensure the success and the long term 
utilization in the company. In contrast a silently introduced 
new measure will find a small group of users, but will fail to 
yield a widespread impact on the health status of the 
employees. 
D. There must be a clear cost-benefit evaluation for the 
introduction of exergames. 
To further promote and evaluate the measure a clear 
statement is required regarding the cost-benefit topic. 
Especially the benefits within a company environment need 
to improve to make reliable forecasts.  
E. The exergames solution needs to be adapted to a 
specific target group within the company. 
In a counter-intuitive way to the implications of C., the 
selection and adaption of the exergames measure to a 
specific target group is an important recommendation. The 
selection, e.g., of obese and inactive people is a great 
leverage to create a positive health effect through the 
introduction of exergames. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This article reported 12 factors in four categories (see 
summarized in Table II) and five recommendations that were 
drawn from 23 semi-structured interviews with experts from 
a large company. Our findings suggest that exergames have 
the potential to develop into a new form of health promotion 
in a workplace environment. Due to the innovative character, 
274
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the general easy to use devices and the comparable cost-
efficiency of exergames they have the potential to blend in 
and further evolve the health status of employees. 
The experts identified several important factors which 
influence the implementation of exergames into a workplace 
environment. They pointed out which are the strengths and 
weaknesses for the use in a company and named the largest 
barriers. To resolve these, five points were recommended 
which have to be considered in an implementation process. 
However, further study of these points is needed to correct, 
improve and verify our findings. 
In terms of a successful implementation, collaboration 
between the different stakeholders in the workplace 
environment is as often, the key. Therefore it is 
recommended to fostering it in any possible way. Finally, 
experts agreed that health promotion is an important factor 
for companies, which is not emphasized enough. However, 
to make exergames a fully accepted way of health promotion 
in the context of a company health promotion program, more 
experience and additional studies regarding the actual use 
must be conducted. This is why field experiments with 
different sets of gaming consoles should evaluate the 
suitability of the measure and document the success in terms 
of health and employee satisfaction. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Kerssenfischer and T Fritsch, “A Systematic Review of IT 
Based Health Interventions,“ Proc. of Med-e-Tel 10th Conf., 
Luxembourg, 2012. 
[2] F. Kerssenfischer, T. Fritsch, and S. Simonsen, “Motivational 
Aspects for Workplace Health Interventions,” Proc. Of the 
3th International Sport & Society Conf., Cambridge, UK, 
2012. 
[3] Nintendo, 
“Company 
History,” 
2012, 
Retrived 
from 
http://www.nintendo.com/corp/history.jsp 
(last 
check 
20.09.2012). 
[4] J. Wiemeyer, “Gesundheit auf dem Spiel? – Serious Games in 
Prävention und Rehabilitation,” Deutsche Zeitschrift für 
Sportmedizin, vol 61, no 11, pp. 252-257, 2010. 
[5] M. Wanner, “Evaluation of National Interventions to Promote 
Physical Activity in Switzerland with Focus on Internet-based 
Approaches,” 
2010. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://edoc.unibas.ch/1292/1/PhD_thesis_MWanner_electroni
c_def.pdf (last check 25.07.2012). 
[6] S. Yang, B. Smith, and G. Graham, “Healthy Video Gaming: 
Oxymoron or Possibility?,” Journal of Education, vol. 4, no. 
4, 2008. 
[7] A. Wood, “Assessing the perception of motion capture 
technology 
in 
exergames,” 
2011. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/uclic/taught_courses/distinction/2010_ 
theses/WoodA.pdf (last check 25.07.2012). 
[8] A. C. Marr, „Serious Games für die Informations- und 
Wissensvermittlung – Bibiliotheken auf neuen Wegen,“ In: 
B.I.T.online – Innovativ, vol. 28. Wiesbaden: Dinges & Frick 
GmbH, 2010. 
[9] T. M. Connolly, E. A. Boyle, E. MacArthur, T. Hainey, and J. 
M. Boyle, “A systematic literature review of empirical 
evidence on computer games and serious games,” Computers 
& Education, vol. 59, pp. 661-686, 2012. 
[10] E. Kalapanidas, C. Davarakis, F. Fernández-Aranda, S. 
Jiménez-Murcia, O. Kocsis, T. Ganchev, H. Kaufmann, T. 
Lam, and D. Konstants, “Play Mancer: Games for Health with 
Accessibility in Mind,” Communications & Strategies, no. 73, 
p. 105, 1st quarter 2009 
[11] K. M. Gerling, I. J. Livingston, L. E. Nacke, and R. L. 
Mandryk, “Full-Body Motion-Based Game Interaction for 
Older Adults,” Proc. of CHI’12, May 5-10, 2012, Austin, 
Texas, USA. 
[12] E. Bidiss and J. Irwin, “Video Games to Promote Physical 
Activity in Children and Youth. A systematic review,” Arch 
Pediatr Med, pp. 665-672, 2010. 
[13] L. E. F. Graves, N. D. Ridgers, K. Williams, G. Stratton, G. 
Atkinson, and T. C. Nigel, “The Physiological Cost and 
Enjoyment of Wii Fit in Adolescents, Young Adults, and 
Older Adults,” Journal of Physical Activity and Health, vol. 7, 
pp. 393-401, 2010. 
[14] A. E. Staiano and S. L. Calvert, “The promise of exergames 
as tools to measure physcial health,” Entertainment 
Computing, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 17-21, 2011. 
[15] F. F. Mueller, M. R. Gibbs, and F. Vetere, “Taxonomy of 
Exertion Games,” Proc. of OZCHI 2008, December 8-12, 
2008, Caims, QLD, Australia, 2008. 
[16] L. Gorgu, A. Cambell, M. Dragone, and G. M. P. O’Hare, 
“Exergaming: a future of mixing entertainment and exercise 
assisted 
by 
mixed 
reality 
agents,“ 
Computers 
in 
Entertainment, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1-3, 2010. 
[17] N. M. Mullins, K. A. Tessmer, M. L. McCarroll, and B. P. 
Peppel, 
“Physiological 
and 
Perceptual 
Responses 
to 
Nintendo® 
Wii 
Fit™in 
Young 
and 
Older 
Adults,” 
International Yournal of Exercise Science. 
[18] B. L. Haddock, S. Jarvis, N. R. Klug, T. Gonzales, B. 
Barsaga, S. R. Siegel, and L. D. Wilkin, ”Measurements of 
Energy Expenditure while Playing Exergames at a Self-
selected Intensity,” The Open Sports Science Journal, vol. 5, 
pp. 1-6, 2012.  
[19] L. Lanningham-Foster, R. C. Foster, S. K. McCrady, T. B. 
Jensen, N. Mitre, and J. Levinve, ”Activity-promoting video 
games and increased energy expenditure,“ J Pediatr 2009; vol. 
154, pp. 819-823. 
[20] S. R. Siegel, B. L. Haddock, A. M. Dubios, and L. D. 
Wilkins, „Active Video/Arcade Games (Exergaming) and 
Energy Expenditure in College Students,” Int J Exerc Sci, vol. 
2, no. 3, pp. 165-174. 
[21] BZgA, “Leitbegriffe der Gesundheitsförderung, Glossar zu 
Konzepten, 
Strategien 
und 
Methoden 
in 
der 
Gesundheitsförderung,” Schwabenheim a. d. Selz, 2003. 
[22] I. Spicker and A. Schopf, “Betriebliche Gesundheitsförderung 
erfolgreich umsetzen,” Springer-Verlag, Wien, 2007. 
[23] E. 
Bamberg, 
A. 
Ducki, 
and 
A.-M. 
Metz, 
„Handbuchbetriebliche Gesundheitsförderung: Arbeits- und 
organisationspsychologische 
Methoden 
und 
Konzepte, 
Zeitschrift für Arbeits- und Organisationspsychologie, vol. 
44, no. 1l., pp. 45-47, 1998.  
[24] S. Deplazes and H. Künzli, „Arbeit und Gesundheit – 
Betriebliches Gesundheitsmanagement,“ In: B. Werkmann-
Karcher & J. Rietiker, Angewandte Psychologie für das 
Human Resource Management, Springer-Verlag, Berlin 
Heidelberg, pp. 435-449, 2010. 
[25] W. Quaas, S. Kubitscheck, and L. Thiele, “Betriebliche 
Gesundheitsförderung 
durch 
Arbeitsgestaltung 
und 
Unternhemenskultur,” 
Zeitschrift 
für 
Gesundheitswissenschaften, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 208-238, 1997. 
[26] U. Flick, “An Introduction to Qualitative Research,” (4th ed), 
London, SAGE, 2009.  
 
275
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

