Towards uniﬁed tooling for easing the qualiﬁcation
of medical normed environments
Anthony Gelibert∗†, S´ebastien Jean∗, Denis Genon-Catalot∗, G´erard Santailler† and Ioannis Parissis∗
∗LCIS
Grenoble Institute of Technology
Valence, France
{anthony.gelibert}{sebastien.jean}{denis.genon}{ioannis.parissis}@lcis.grenoble-inp.fr
†Nocosium SAS
2 rue Stalingrad
Vaulx-en-Velin, France
{a.gelibert}{g.santailler}@nocosium.com
Abstract—Medical conﬁned environments are characterized
by a very stringent set of standards and regulations, depending
on a wide range of parameters. These are very difﬁcult to
handle because of the lack of appropriate tools to qualify before
use, monitor during use and audit after use. Providing these
tools requires to tackle the complexity of gathering all the
different elements of the environment proﬁle (building topology,
standards and rules, instrumentation) in a single model which
could be statically validated and dynamically checked against
events. This article both focuses on introducing the context of
medical conﬁned environment regulation and issues faced when
trying to design and implement qualiﬁcation and monitoring
tools, and on presenting the approach and work in progress.
Index Terms—Requirements Engineering; Model-Driven Engi-
neering; Medical conﬁned environment; Qualiﬁcation
I. CONTEXT
Conﬁned environments can be deﬁned as space-limited areas,
hosting a product or process, in which all uncontrolled transfers
between the inside and the outside world are forbidden. In
some cases, motivation is to protect the process against outside
contaminations (such as in surgery). In other cases, it is much
more to protect the outside against contaminations by the
process itself (such as in virology).
Conﬁned environment characteristics (such as use, manufac-
turing, high attendance, location...) imply strong constraints
and, therefore are ruled by several design methods and use
guides. These regulations lead to the deﬁnition of “normative
layouts”, consisting in a set of standards a given environment
has to comply with. Moreover, the norms are not all opposable,
some are only good practice or advice (such as the World
Health Organization (WHO) documents [1]).
To illustrate the needs and issues related to our work, we
will use a simpliﬁed “Centralized Reconstitution of Cytotoxic
Drugs Unit (CRCDU)” (Fig. 1) all along the article. In these
environments, users are expected to prepare drugs, under
chemical hoods in a dedicated room, which will be used for
antineoplastic treatments. Here, conﬁnement protects prepa-
rations from external contamination by a gradual asepsis [2].
Inter alia, it consists in several pressure stages as well as by
the rooms’ conformance to several (and gradual) ISO levels
(ISO 14644-1 [3] standard deﬁnes the allowed concentration of
particles of various sizes). In France, depending on the context
of implementation, a different set of laws, best practices [4]–[6]
and norms [3], [7], [8] regulate these units.
The ﬁrst room is a clearance room, remaining in a particular
pressure level in order to protect itself from outdoor atmosphere
(whose pressure is considered as a reference). An airlock allows
users to dress, and thus acts as a ﬁrst decontamination stage.
Finally, users reach the preparation room with the highest
pressure level and the lowest ISO class.
Preparing room
( +++ )
Clearance room
( + )
Airlock
( ++ )
Outside
( = ) 
ISO 8
ISO 7
Figure 1. Illustration case: simpliﬁed CRCDU
II. MOTIVATIONS AND ISSUES
Human and ﬁnancial risks related to the design, or the use,
of noncompliant environments lead to the need for qualiﬁcation
of such environments before commissioning, but also for their
monitoring and auditing after the operation. To support this
assertion, it is enlightening to remember that in France, there
are more deaths each year by nosocomial infections than
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

by road accidents. There is a strong need for an integrated
toolset, presented in Fig. 2, operating cooperatively all along
the conﬁned environment lifecycle (design, commissioning and
use).
To summarize:
• upstream of any project checking (0), an analysis is
required to proceed with the next two steps ;
• for each project:
– during the design (1), it should be possible to qualify
a conﬁned environment by using only its technical
data, to determinate, a priori, its conformance ;
– during the usage (2), the need is to trace usage in order
to follow the evolution of the conﬁned environment
and to keep its history for audit purposes.
“Qualiﬁcation”
report
1
2
Normative 
analysis
Events
“Dashboard”
“Audit” 
report
Time
Preliminary 
analysis
0
Design
Building / Use
Qualiﬁcation
Traceability
Figure 2. Required process
This section details the required features.
A. Analysis (0)
This is the entry point of the toolset, its preamble, the basis
of all the process. The objective is to constitute the normative
layout of a kind of medical conﬁned environment and process it
to extract the elements required by the qualiﬁcation (II-B) and
the monitoring (II-C). This operation will be done according
to the type of environment or according to the “version” of
the normative layout, evolving in the same manner.
In the chosen example, it is the analysis of the documents
composing the normative layout of a CRCDCU (among which
the documents [3]–[8]).
B. Qualiﬁcation (1)
During the design phase (next section), it should be possible
to qualify a conﬁned environment by using only its technical
data, to determinate, a priori, its conformance with its targeted
usage. It is a typical case of Requirements Engineering (RE) [9].
To simplify, it is an engineering domain, targeting the checking
of a product against its requirements ; all the process is
considered from the requirements elicitation up to the product
conformity checking. In this step, the objective is to produce
a “qualiﬁcation” report, which will provide the decision aids
allowing to enhance and maximize the conformity of the project
with its normative layout.
In our use case, considering the foreseen use of the unit,
rooms (size, volume, relative layout. . . ) and their instrumenta-
tion (sensors, actuators, external systems. . . ), the qualiﬁcation
would consist in checking all required systems are present
(“Heating, Ventilation and Air-Conditioning (HVAC)”, access
control...) and that they are properly conﬁgured.
C. Monitoring and traceability (2)
After commissioning, it is necessary to trace usage in order
to follow the evolution of the conﬁned environment and to
keep its history for audit purposes. Monitoring then aims at
delivering a “specialist-oriented” feedback, giving a clear and
cohesive view of running operations to various users rather
than trying to automate a complete normative usage analysis.
Thus, a customizable “dashboard”, displaying only the relevant
information, could perfectly embody this feature.
In our example, this could consist in recording the evolution
of the pressure in the various rooms, in checking that airlock
system is properly running as air velocity and throughput are
compliant to requirements...
III. APPROACH AND WORK IN PROGRESS
Our work focuses on the design of a uniﬁed process (called
the “methology” in this section) to answer the need presented
in Fig. 2. We drew the sketch of the process architecture in a
previous paper [10] and conduced additional research to reﬁne
its operating and set its technical details. Figure 3 presents this
enhanced version, based on model design and transformation,
for which we are addressing steps 0 to 2.
The qualiﬁcation tool (0 & 1) has to take some abstract
representations as inputs, in other words, models of both
technical data and applying standards. This leads to tackle an
RE problem using “Model-Driven Engineering (MDE) [11]” ;
an approach called “Model-Driven Requirements Engineering
(MoDRE)”. The realization of these models could be uniﬁed
in a megamodel [12], interconnecting the metamodels of
each component with the required weaving models and so
on. As most of the time the normative layout also induces
alternatives that lead to several solutions (i.e. building and
instrumentation that conforms to it), a notion of “prominence”
in the qualiﬁcation process consequently has to be taken into
account. These models (and the linked constraints) represent
the abstract syntax and semantic of our modeling language for
conﬁned medical environments, the last point is the concrete
syntax. As a reminder, this is the syntax (graphic or textual)
that the user will manipulate and use to model their project. The
challenge is to design metamodels ﬂexible enough to support
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the whole targeted domain while providing a framework strict
enough to automate checking and data extraction operations.
This means a trade-off between the ability to easily model
the target and the expressivity required for the transformations
generating the “qualiﬁcation” report and the next step.
About the applied proﬁle (2), its presence is required by
the need to reengineer “high-level” model of the targeted envi-
ronment and its “normative layout”. Indeed, the environment
proﬁle used during qualiﬁcation is too abstract to be used
directly by the monitoring platform. A strict rule such as “two
doors of an airlock cannot be opened simultaneously” has
little concrete links within the “computer world”: what is an
airlock? What is a door? How should its state be read? The
model produced by the user to assess their project should
partially or completely be automatically reiﬁed in an easily
manageable version by the monitoring platform. In our example
(Fig. 1), this could lead to explicit constraint deﬁnitions like
“P1 pressure sensor value should always be greater than
P2 one”, “opening indicators cannot be active at the same
time”. . . Obviously, required information should be introduced
in models, to identify P1, P2 and opening indicators. Proﬁle
generation is a requirements reengineering problem, consisting
in automatically extracting relevant parameters from the abstract
proﬁle in order to conﬁgure the monitoring platform.
Concerning the traceability platform (3), among the complete
set of exploitation constraints, the most important are: the
qualiﬁcation as “Medical Device” [13] ; the data use in legal
cases which requires integrity-guaranteed data [14] ; the support
of all the legacy systems already deployed in the targeted
conﬁned environment and the adaptability to a proﬁle and an
environment which will evolve over time. Here, the challenge
is thus as much in the design of the tools themselves as in this
speciﬁc context of deployment.
We are currently setting up the methodology on real
cases. We are working on the analysis step (0). The design
of the metamodels enabling to model the building and its
instrumentation was the ﬁrst step and now, we are handling the
normative processing. The production of the normative layout
and its analysis is a manual process, leading to extract a relevant
megamodel which will be the core behind the modeling work-
shop. It is specialist-oriented work, requiring great knowledge
of the concerned domain, provided by Nocosium. As stated
in the previous section, we do not aim at a very sharpened
concrete syntax and we work more on the methodology than
on the user experience. The concrete syntax (presented in the
Section II-B) is more an “engineering” problem which would
be better tackled later by engineers because there are no real
research locks. These further works should investigate the
current business processes and determine how to integrate the
modeling part in their workﬂow.
Our ﬁrst application scenario is the CRCDU presented all
along this article. This work enables us to achieve a kind of
typology of the normative constraints. Indeed, we can discern
several types of constraints depending on the veriﬁcations
required to conform with. For example, the constraints based
on the presence of a speciﬁc element (e.g. pressure sensor to
Veriﬁcation
“Qualiﬁcation”
report
Modeled environment
Transformation
1
2
3
Modeling workshop
Valid environment
Targeted environment
Normative analysis
Traceability platform
Events
“Dashboard”
“Audit” 
report
“Applied” proﬁle
Time
Norms
Preliminary 
analysis
0
Design
Building / Use
produce
Figure 3. Proposed approach
ensure pressure monitoring) differ from constraints based on
the conﬁguration of a sensor (e.g. frequency of the pressure
monitoring) or from functioning constraints (e.g. the calibration
of pressure sensors). The means to check them are different.
So, we are currently analyzing the CRCDU “normative
layout”. For each norm, we classify the constraints and report
them into the megamodel or later in the methodology. The
produced metamodels are Nocosium’s property and will not
be presented in this publication.
IV. DISCUSSION
Requirements engineering is a transversal thematic spanning
over several scientiﬁc ﬁelds, not necessarily technical, like
in contributions examining the adequacy of a process of
requirement validation with a company’s workﬂow. In this
thesis, we adopt a fully technical stance and we assess its
feasibility, efﬁciency and limits. Hence, we have to compare our
contribution to the other technical approaches for requirement
engineering.
The contribution presented in this paper is downstream of
typical IT approaches for requirements engineering, like the
“Knowledge Acquisition in automated Speciﬁcation (KAOS)”
method [15]. These works aim at identifying the inconsistencies
and the conﬂicts in the targeted requirements for a given project.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

This is not our case: we adopt the point of view of the “maitrise
d’ouvrage” for which the normative layout cannot be altered.
We aim at checking the project against the normative layout.
In the same search area, we can also quote the PhD work
of Nicolas Sannier [16], on the coherency analysis and the
conﬂict detection, between the various versions of the same
norm. Once more, this work is upstream our own objectives.
We can also quote the PhD thesis of Panesar-Walawege [17]
aiming at analyzing the conformity of safety-critical systems
with the relevant IEC norm, by the UML modeling of the
norm to extract the list and calendar of the artefacts to produce.
However, we handle different (although complementary) as-
pects. We will not check if the “maitrise d’ouvrage” produces
the required elements but if the project is conform. To put
it shortly, it is almost, an opposition between syntactic and
semantic analysis.
To conclude, there is not much research on global approaches
of requirements engineering (from conception to audit) target-
ing normed environments.
V. CONCLUSION
Conﬁned environments are controlled working zones where
all unmanaged transfers between the inside and the outside are
forbidden. We intend to deﬁne a methodology to qualify the
normative conformity of an environment, then checking the
durability of such compliance over time. The ﬁrst steps of this
process will be validated at the end of the engaged PhD thesis.
Environment qualiﬁcation should be done only using its
technical data. We suggest to address this requirements engi-
neering problem by allowing the deﬁnition of an integrated
environment proﬁle merging three components: “building”,
“instrumentation” and “requirements”.
Environment monitoring should allow to trace use and to
give immediate feedback to practitioners via a dashboard,
but also to collect data for further audits. We propose to
address monitoring platform implementation issues by the
use of service-oriented architectures, particularly to sustain
environment changes (building, requirements, instrumentation).
There is not much research on global approaches of require-
ments engineering (from conception to audit) targeting normed
environments. It is this lack that we aim at tackling and in this
thesis we validate the ﬁrst steps of our proposition.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is funded by the Nocosium company under a
French “Convention Industrielle de Formation par la REcherche
(CIFRE)” Doctoral Convention.
REFERENCES
[1] Intermittent Preventive Treatment in Infants, “WHO Policy recom-
mendation on Intermittent Preventive Treatment during infancy with
sulphadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP-IPTi) for Plasmodium falciparum
malaria control in Africa,” World Health Organization, WHO Policy
Recommendation, Mar 2010.
[2] T. Hoet, “Le concept de l’asepsie progressive et son impact sur le
comportement dans le bloc op´eratoire,” Inter Bloc, pp. 24–27, 1994.
[3] International Organization for Standardization, “Cleanrooms and associ-
ated controlled environments — Part 1: Classiﬁcation of air cleanliness,”
International Organization for Standardization, ISO 14644-1, 1999.
[4] Agence Franc¸aise de S´ecurit´e Sanitaire des Produits de Sant´e, “Bonnes
Pratiques de Pr´eparation,” Minist`ere du travail, de l’emploi et de la sant´e,
Tech. Rep., Dec 2007.
[5] ——, “Bonnes Pratiques de Fabrication,” Minist`ere du travail, de l’emploi
et de la sant´e, Fascicule sp´ecial 2011/8 bis, Jul 2011.
[6] Direction de l’Hospitalisation et de l’Organisation des Soins, “Bonnes
Pratiques de Pharmacie Hospitali`ere,” Minist`ere de l’Emploi et de la
Solidarit´e – Minist`ere d´el´egu´e `a la sant´e, Tech. Rep., Jun 2001.
[7] Agence Franc¸aise de NORmalisation, “´Etablissements de sant´e - Zones
`a environnement maˆıtris´e - Exigences relatives `a la maˆıtrise de la
contamination a´eroport´ee,” Agence Franc¸aise de NORmalisation, Tech.
Rep. NF S90-351, Apr 2013.
[8] International Organization for Standardization, “Cleanrooms and associ-
ated controlled environments — Part 4: Design, construction and start-up,”
International Organization for Standardization, ISO 14644-4, 2001.
[9] P. Zave, “Classiﬁcation of research efforts in requirements engineering,”
ACM Comput. Surv., 1997.
[10] A. Gelibert, S. Jean, and D. Genon-Catalot, “Plateforme Ouverte de
Supervision et de Trac¸abilit´e pour les Environnements Conﬁn´es,” in
Actes de la conf´erence MajecSTIC 2012, Oct 2012.
[11] D. C. Schmidt, “Model-Driven Engineering,” IEEE Computer, vol. 39,
no. 2, Feb 2006.
[12] J. Bezivin, F. Jouault, and P. Valduriez, “On the need for Megamodels,”
in Conference on Object-Oriented Programming Systems, Languages,
and Applications, 2004.
[13] European Parliament and Council, “Directive 2007/47/EC,” European
Union, Directive 2007/47/CE, Sep 2007.
[14] Food US, “Drug Administration, 21 CFR Part 11 Electronic Records,”
Electronic Signatures (Final Rule), 1997.
[15] A. van Lamsweerde, A. Dardenne, B. Delcourt, and F. Dubisy, “The
KAOS Project: Knowledge Acquisition in Automated Speciﬁcation of
Software,” in AAAI Spring Symp. Series, ser. Track: ”Design of Composite
Systems”.
Stanford University, Mar 1991, pp. 59–62.
[16] N. Sannier, B. Baudry, and T. Nguyen, “Formalizing standards and
regulations variability in longlife projects. a challenge for model-
driven engineering,” in Proceedings of the Model-Driven Requirements
Engineering workshop (MoDRE’11) at RE’11, Trento, Italy, Aug 2011.
[17] R. Panesar-Walawege, “Using Model-Driven Engineering to Support the
Certiﬁcation of Safety-Critical Systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, University
of Oslo, Jul 2012.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

