Taking the Difference Between Leisure Time and Workdays Into Account to Improve
Virtual Coaching
Talko Dijkhuis1,2, Johan Blok1, Hugo Velthuijsen1, Koen Lemmink 2
1Hanze University of Applied Sciences, Institute for Communication, Media & IT, Groningen, The Netherlands
2University of Groningen, Center for Human Movement Sciences, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
1{t.b.dijkhuis, j.blok, h.velthuijsen}@pl.hanze.nl
2{t.b.dijkhuis, k.a.p.m.lemmink}@umcg.nl
Abstract—A sedentary lifestyle is a cause for many health
problems. To motivate employees to a healthier lifestyle and to
physical activity, the Hanze University initiated a health promo-
tion program, including a fortnightly coaching on lifestyle and
activity. An activity tracker was used to monitor the participants’
steps. However the used activity tracker doesn’t provide timely
personalized coaching. In this paper, we investigate the possibility
of enhancing timely personalized virtual coaching. Therefore we
investigated the manner in which the predictability of physical
activity of a participant during the day can be improved. We
focussed on the individual differences as well as the difference
in activity and the circadian rhythm between free time and
workdays. Exploring the data of the experiment the collected
step count data was used to examine whether there was a
signiﬁcant difference between leisure time, such as weekends,
holidays, and workdays. Taking the ﬁndings of this investigation
into account, we augmented individual machine learning models.
The training of algorithms per participant in combination with
time sliced datasets improved the accuracy of the prediction
during the day of one meeting his or her daily goal. The use of
personalized prediction models, applied machine learning, and
the consideration of the difference between leisure time and
workdays, will become a valuable and viable addition to a virtual
coaching system helping the participants in achieving a healthy
lifestyle and enabling a virtual coaching system that intervenes
at the appropriate points in time.
Keywords–monitoring physical activity; circadian rhythm; in-
ference statistics; machine learning; intervention.
I.
INTRODUCTION
An unhealthy lifestyle with insufﬁcient daily physical ac-
tivity shortens life expectancy. Insufﬁcient physical activity
is associated with 5.3 million deceases globally in 2008 [1].
Contrarily sufﬁcient physical activity is related to a reduced
risk of metabolic syndrome [2], cardiovascular disease [3]
and mortality [4]. To promote a healthy lifestyle and physical
activity during the workday, the Hanze University of Applied
Sciences (HUAS) initiated a health promotion program called
-in Dutch- ’Het Gezonde Nieuwe Werken’ (HGNW). This
initiative contained a focus on the improvement of physical
activity. Participants received an activity tracker to increase
the awareness of their daily progress in achieving their goals
in terms of numbers of steps. The daily feedback of the activity
tracker was complemented with a fortnightly coaching session
on lifestyle and physical activity. However, the feedback of
the activity tracker and its platform didn’t provide the partic-
ipant with timely personalised feedback. Furthermore, current
activity trackers do not provide a personalized probability
of reaching the daily goal or take the difference between
leisure time and workdays into account, therefore lacking an
ability to adapt timing of coaching interventions to optimal
points in time. Leisure time and workdays are known to show
different patterns in activity [5] as well as a different circadian
rhythm [6]. To enable a more personalized virtual coach these
differences have to be taken into account.
In this paper, we investigate the inﬂuence of the circadian
pattern of leisure time, workdays and holidays on the physical
activity pattern during the day. In addition we investigate
whether the level of activity depends on leisure and working
time. Pattern differences due to these factors provide an
opportunity to implement personalized automated intervention
strategies for an individualized virtual coach.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
ﬁrst section introduces the state of the art on measuring
activity levels, and the use of machine learning for monitoring.
Subsequently, we describe the study on health promotion at
HUAS, the collected dataset on daily physical activity of the
participants, the method of statistical analysis of the difference
between week, workweek, weekend, holiday and bank holiday,
and measuring the performance of the trained machine learning
models. In the third section we present the results of the
statistical analysis and the performance of trained machine
learning models. The conclusion on the results and a short
discussion on future work completes the paper.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
Activity trackers provide a measure for the number of steps
and enable monitoring progress during the day and over time.
Adding an activity tracker on steps to physical therapy or coun-
selling was effective in some groups [7] [8]. The collection of
step data is not only effective for therapy or counselling, it is
also an intervention mechanism in itself [9]. Only the fact of
using an activity tracker could motivate physical activity and
improvement of health [10]. To improve on physical activity
in combination with activity tracking monitoring, coaching is
helpful. Effectiveness of (e)Coaching depends on timeliness
and on personal contextual information in combination with
actionable insights [11]. In other words the participant needs to
receive the information and the advice when it is most relevant.
To the best of our knowledge no studies exist on the use
of activity trackers in combination with the circadian pattern
and machine learning algorithms to establish individualized
models or studies on individualized models used in virtual
coach systems on monitoring activity helping the participant
to improve his or her physical behaviour.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III.
METHODS
In this section, we present the study design of the HNGW,
the data set we analysed, the statistical method to identify the
differences in physical activity between leisure time and work
week, and the training of algorithms with time sliced data and
the methods used for analysis of the accuracy of the trained
models.
A. Study design
The study data stems from the HNGW project. Forty eight
healthy employees were recruited from the HUAS. The 48
participants were divided according to age, gender, BMI, and
baseline self-reported health prior to being randomized into
two groups. Group A followed a twelve-week health promotion
intervention; the other group, group B, served ﬁrst as a control
group and thereafter also received the twelve-week health
promotion intervention. Only the intervention period was used
to study. The outcome measures included, among other values,
the daily steps. The daily steps were measured with the Fitbit
Flex, which is known to be a trustworthy and valid activity
tracker for step count [12] and suitable for health promotion
programs [13].
B. Data set
We prepared the individual participants available minute
step data to investigate the difference between the activity
patterns on the weekends, the holidays, the bank holidays
and the workdays, and the corresponding activity patterns. We
followed a step-by-step approach. First, we performed a data
pre-processing step to remove the incomplete records from the
data set. We also eliminated all records per day whenever no
step was gathered during that day. Second, we augmented an
hourly summarised data set per participant with new derived
variables representing:
1)
the year (2014-2015)
2)
the week of the year (range 0-52)
3)
the day of the week (range 0 - 6)
4)
the hour of day (range 0 - 23)
5)
the steps per hour
6)
the cumulative sum of the steps per hour
Third, the work week is deﬁned as the weekdays Monday till
Friday. Fourth, a weekend is deﬁned as Saturday and Sunday.
Fifth, because all employees work on at an university of
applied sciences, they have the same holidays and information
on the holidays was added to the data set. Sixth, the bank
holidays were identiﬁed and added. For the column the average
number of steps per participant per day the amount of steps
between 6:00AM and 11:00PM was considered. The average
number of steps per participant per day the amount of steps
column was regarded as a threshold per day in order to
determine the binary outcome column. Finally, we constructed
individual binary outcome variables based on the threshold of
the time slices work week, weekend, holiday, bank holiday,
and week.
C. Statistical Analysis
To determine whether there were differences in level of
activity and moment of activity, we ﬁtted a regression model
and used the ANOVA analysis in conjunction with the Tukey
HSD post-hoc analysis to identify possible correlations and
differences between the hourly datasets whole week, work
week, weekend, holiday and bank holiday. We reject the null
hypothesis when the mean of the steps per hours is equal
between the different time slices.
The Random Forest algorithm was chosen as the algorithm
to enable prediction on whether a participant would meet his
daily threshold. Random Forest is known as one of the most
accurate algorithms predicting the participant meeting his or
her goal [14]. The Random Forest algorithm was trained for
the individual participant and hourly time sliced datasets. The
techniques cross validation and parameter tuning were used to
optimize the trained model. To investigate the performance
of individualized hourly work week, weekend, holiday and
bank holiday models, we compared these predictions with
the predictions of a baseline model. The baseline model was
trained per participant on the whole data set without distinction
between the time slices work week, weekend, holiday or bank
holiday and then the baseline model predicted adopting the
four time sliced datasets leading to four sets of predictions.
Next the four models for the work week, weekend, holiday
and bank holiday predicted adopting the four time sliced
datasets. The confusion matrix method was used to classify
the difference between the predicted value and the actual value
of both the baseline model and the time sliced models. A
confusion matrix provides an overview of the true positives
(TP; a predicted a ’true’ and the actual data contained a ‘true’ ),
true negatives (TN; the model predicted a ‘false‘ and the actual
data was a ’false’ ), false positives (FP; the model predicted
a ’true’ label, but the actual data was a ’false’), and false
negatives (FN; the model predicted a ’false’ label, but the data
was ‘true’) of a model. The confusion matrix served as a basis
for the calculation of the performance measure F1-score and
the accuracy [15].
The F1-score and accuracy are calculated for each model
on group level, both metrics have a range of zero to one,
where one is the best score. To calculate the F1-score, two
other metrics known as the precision and the recall are used.
Precision is the proportion of the true positives and the false
negatives, and is calculated as:
T P
(T P +F N)
Recall is the true positive rate, which is calculated as follows:
T P
(T P +F P )
Using precision and recall, the F1-score is calculated as:
2 · P recision·Recall
P recision+Recall
To calculate the accuracy is a metric to determine the nearness
of the prediction to the true value. A value of the accuracy
close to one indicates the best performance. It calculates the
ratio between the correctly classiﬁed cases and all cases as:
T P +T N
T P +T N+F P +F N
The personalized work week, weekend, holiday and bank
holiday models were studied on the performance in comparison
with the baseline week model.
IV.
RESULTS
The ANOVA test and the Tukey HSD post-hoc analysis
identiﬁed signiﬁcant differences between the hourly level of
activity and the time sliced datasets. The ANOVA test found a
signiﬁcant difference in activity level (p<0.001) between the
work week, the weekend, the holiday and the bank holiday
at six, seven, eight o’clock. The participants were less active
in the beginning of the day. Fig. 1 is an illustration of the
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

difference of level of activity per hour of the day between the
work week and the weekend.
Figure 1. The difference in pattern of number of steps per hour during the
work week versus the weekend.
The Tukey HSD post-hoc analysis showed where there are
signiﬁcant differences between the time sliced datasets. The
majority of the datasets (21 out of 30) showed signiﬁcant
differences at six, seven, and eight o’ clock. In the remainder
of the day the differences between the different time sliced
datasets were not signiﬁcant.
Table I is an example of the Tukey HSD post-hoc analysis
representing the seven o’clock results.
TABLE I. MULTIPLE COMPARISON OF MEANS - TUKEY HSD,
ALFA=0.05 EXAMPLE
Dataset 1
Dataset 2
Hour
Mean difference
Reject
all week
bank holiday
7
-225
True
all week
holiday
7
-167
True
all week
weekend
7
-316
True
all week
work week
7
165
True
bank holiday
holiday
7
88
False
bank holiday
weekend
7
-60
False
bank holiday
work week
7
421
True
holiday
weekend
7
-148
True
holiday
work week
7
333
True
weekend
work week
7
481
True
The personalized Random Forest models based on the
hourly datasets proved to show a better F1-score and accuracy
then the baseline week model. Table II an Table III represent
the improvement of the performance when using the work
week, weekend, holiday and bank holiday model instead of
the baseline weekmodel.
TABLE II. COMBINATIONS OF TIME SLICE BASED MODELS AND THEIR
F1-SCORE.
Model 1
F1-score
Model 2
F1-score
Difference
week model
0.59
weekend model
0.86
48%
week model
0.58
holiday model
0.71
22%
week model
0.57
bank holiday model
0.68
19%
week model
0.81
work week model
0.96
18%
V.
CONCLUSION
The level of activity in the morning is inﬂuenced by
the difference between leisure time and work time. The in-
dividualized time sliced models improved the F1-score and
accuracy in comparison to the non-time sliced week model. It
TABLE III. COMBINATIONS OF TIME SLICE BASED MODELS AND THEIR
ACCURACY.
Model 1
Accuracy
Model 2
Accuracy
Difference
week model
0.89
weekend model
0.92
2.9%
week model
0.89
holiday model
0.89
0%
week model
0.76
bank holiday model
0.98
28%
week model
0.81
work week model
0.96
18%
is recommended to construct time sliced models per individual
to improve the performance of the individualized models. In
the future, contextual data that inﬂuences physical activity, like
weekly non-workdays, sports, and celebrations, may be taken
into account. Another possible future direction is to individu-
alize interventions that allow for more personalized coaching.
The individualization of the predictive models enables auto-
mated personalized, contextualized, and timely coaching. The
results of this paper will be applied in the preventive eHealth
virtual coach platform as suggested by Blok et al. [16].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the Hanze University Health Program,
especially M. van Ittersum, for providing the physical activity
data of the Health Program, all the participants in the exper-
iment, and M. Aiello for suggestions on the structure of the
paper.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. Min-Lee et al., “Effect of physical inactivity on major non-
communicable diseases worldwide: An analysis of burden of disease
and life expectancy,” The Lancet, vol. 380, no. 9838, 2012, pp. 219–229.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61031-9
[2]
D.
Zhang
et
al.,
“Leisure-time
physical
activity
and
incident
metabolic
syndrome:
a
systematic
review
and
dose-response
meta-analysis
of
cohort
studies,”
pp.
36–44,
oct
2017.
[On-
line]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28927737https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S002604951730207X
[3]
S. A. Lear et al., “The effect of physical activity on mortality
and
cardiovascular
disease
in
130
000
people
from
17
high-
income,
middle-income,
and
low-income
countries:
the
PURE
study,” www.thelancet.com, vol. 390, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
[4]
D. D. Carter, K. Robinson, J. Forbes, and S. Hayes, “Experiences of
mobile health in promoting physical activity: A qualitative systematic
review and meta-ethnography,” PLOS ONE, vol. 13, no. 12, dec 2018,
p. e0208759. [Online]. Available: http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0208759
[5]
C. E. Matthews et al., “Sources of Variance in Daily Physical Activity
Levels in the Seasonal Variation of Blood Cholesterol Study,” American
Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 153, no. 10, 2001, pp. 987–995.
[6]
S.-J. Paine and P. H. Gander, “Explaining ethnic inequities in sleep
duration: a cross-sectional survey of Mori and non-Mori adults in New
Zealand.” Sleep health, vol. 2, no. 2, jun 2016, pp. 109–115. [Online].
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28923252
[7]
H. J. de Vries, T. J. Kooiman, M. W. van Ittersum, M. van Brussel, and
M. de Groot, “Do activity monitors increase physical activity in adults
with overweight or obesity? A systematic review and meta-analysis,”
Obesity, vol. 24, no. 10, oct 2016, pp. 2078–2091. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/oby.21619
[8]
M. Miyauchi, M. Toyoda, N. Kaneyama, H. Miyatake, E. Tanaka,
M. Kimura, T. Umezono, and M. Fukagawa, “Exercise Therapy
for Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: Superior Efﬁcacy of
Activity Monitors over Pedometers,” Journal of Diabetes Research,
vol. 2016, sep 2016, pp. 1–7. [Online]. Available: https://www.hindawi.
com/journals/jdr/2016/5043964/
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[9]
L. A. Cadmus-Bertram, B. H. Marcus, R. E. Patterson, B. A.
Parker, and B. L. Morey, “Randomized Trial of a Fitbit-Based
Physical Activity Intervention for Women.” American journal of
preventive medicine, vol. 49, no. 3, sep 2015, pp. 414–8. [Online].
Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26071863http://www.
pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC4993151
[10]
Z. H. Lewis, E. J. Lyons, J. M. Jarvis, and J. Baillargeon, “Using
an electronic activity monitor system as an intervention modality: A
systematic review,” BMC Public Health, vol. 15, no. 1, dec 2015,
p. 585. [Online]. Available: http://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/
articles/10.1186/s12889-015-1947-3
[11]
M. Gerdes, S. Martinez, and D. Tjondronegoro, “Conceptualization
of a Personalized eCoach for Wellness Promotion,” in Proceedings
of ACM 11th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Computing.
Barcelona: Association for Computing Machinery, 2017.
[12]
T.
J.
M.
Kooiman,
M.
L.
Dontje,
S.
R.
Sprenger,
W.
P.
Krijnen, C. P. van der Schans, and M. de Groot, “Reliability and
validity of ten consumer activity trackers,” BMC Sports Science,
Medicine and Rehabilitation, vol. 7, no. 1, dec 2015, p. 24.
[Online]. Available: http://bmcsportsscimedrehabil.biomedcentral.com/
articles/10.1186/s13102-015-0018-5
[13]
J.
Wang,
R.
Chen,
X.
Sun,
M.
F.
H.
She,
and
Y.
Wu,
“Recognizing human daily activities from accelerometer signal,”
Procedia
Engineering,
vol.
15,
2011,
pp.
1780–1786.
[Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2011.08.331
[14]
T. B. Dijkhuis, F. J. Blaauw, M. W. van Ittersum, H. Velthuijsen,
and M. Aiello, “Personalized Physical Activity Coaching: A Machine
Learning Approach,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 2, feb 2018, p. 623.
[Online]. Available: http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/2/623
[15]
S. Schoeppe et al., “Efﬁcacy of interventions that use apps to
improve diet, physical activity and sedentary behaviour: a systematic
review,” International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical
Activity, vol. 13, no. 1, dec 2016, p. 127. [Online]. Available:
http://ijbnpa.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12966-016-0454-y
[16]
J. Blok, A. Dol, and T. Dijkhuis, “Toward a Generic Personalized Virtual
Coach for Self-management : a Proposal for an Architecture,” no. c,
2017, pp. 105–108.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

