Toward a Business Continuity Plan for Home-Care Systems 
 
 
Olfa Rejeb1,2,Elyes Lamine1,2, François Marmier1  
1. Université de Toulouse - Mines d’Albi, CGI 
Campus Jarlard, Route de Teillet, 81013 Albi Cedex 09, 
France 
{olfa.rejeb,elyes.lamine,françois.marmier}@mines-
albi.fr 
 
Hervé Pingaud2, Rémi Bastide2 
2. Université de Toulouse, IRIT, CUFR J.F. 
Champollion, Département ISIS, 
Avenue George Pompidou, 81104 Castres, France 
{herve.pingaud,remi.bastide}@univ-jfc.fr 
 
Abstract—Demographic 
changes 
in 
recent 
years 
have 
contributed to a shift in care models, with the development of 
home-care as a new alternative to traditional hospitalization. 
On the other hand, our society is increasingly influenced by 
modern Information and Communication Technology (ICT). 
The health care has greatly benefited from these technological 
advances. However, the use of these technologies for real life 
application may pose problems resulting in system failure, 
which might have significant impacts on patient safety and on 
the ability to deliver high-quality care services. Thus, 
continuity of service remains a critical area of concern for 
home-care. Appropriate means must then be taken to ensure 
an efficient, robust and advanced home-care system. In this 
context, we propose an approach based on Business Continuity 
Management (BCM) to ensure the ability to operate in spite of 
unforeseen events and to quickly recover from any type of 
business interruption. This paper provides a framework for 
BCM and its key concepts. Then, we describe a generic 
methodological approach for introducing BCM to home-care; 
outlining key issues to be considered. 
Keywords-Continuity in eHealth Care; Safety; Detection 
emergency situations 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Demographic changes, especially a rapid ageing of the 
population and a growing segment of people with chronic 
illnesses and physical disabilities [1][2], in addition to the  
increasing costs in the healthcare sector [3][4], are having a 
growing and profound impact on the health care system [5]. 
These changes lead to a need for new care delivery 
mechanisms and structures [5][6]. 
As a result, many countries tried different alternatives. 
One of these new initiatives is the home-care [8]. In the 
recent years, we are noting an increasing demand for home-
care services; in France, as it mentioned in [9], between 2005 
and 2009, the number of persons under home-care increased 
by 120%, the number of hospitalization days in home-care 
raised by 119% and the number of patients increased 148%.   
 
In Canada too, home-care organizations are growing 
rapidly. It is even the most rapidly expanding sector of the 
Canadian health care delivery system [8].  Indeed, finding 
ways to deliver high quality health care adapted to the needs  
of these patients is a major challenge for health care system 
[9]. In response to this challenge, there is a considerable 
international interest in exploiting the Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) solutions to enhance the 
quality and safety of Health Care, in general, and home-care 
in particular [10]. 
These trends are strong incentives for e-Health research. 
The European Union has undertaken a number of research 
projects to assist the elderly [1], proposing solutions to the 
issues of mobility (I2HOME), communication (SHARE-it), 
remote monitoring (CAALYX, eCAALYX), timely access to 
patient specific information (COGKNOW, EasyLine+) [1], 
and involving patients more actively in their own care 
process (Coplintho). 
Nowadays, the introduction of new technology in 
practice is confronted with some problems resulting in 
system failure [4][7], which lead to unexpected and possibly 
harmful effects [11], such as delay in appointments, 
problems with data transmission of patients’ records, etc. 
The projects we have mentioned, and even others using 
information and communication technologies in the health 
sector, have largely dealt with the benefits of their solutions 
to enhance the delivery of health care services. However, 
they did not consider constraints and challenges faced in 
using ICT effectively in the health sector. No plans were 
proposed in case of failure of their solution, such as solutions 
to face a power outage, a unavailability of the system or even 
when the patient does not know how to use the device, etc. 
As ICT becomes more integrated with health programs 
and activities, the impact of ICT outage on the system 
remains a critical area of concern. This should be taken into 
consideration when designing the system in order to ensure 
business continuity. Appropriate  recommendations must 
then be taken to ensure an efficient, robust and advanced 
health care system. 
However, while there is a growing focus in literature to 
discuss telemedicine applications for home-care [4][7][10] 
[11][12][13], less attention has been paid to take into 
consideration organizational business interruptions, and 
issues involved in the use of telemedicine applications for 
daily delivery of home-care services.  
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
We propose the development of a Business Continuity 
Management 
methodology 
(BCM) 
for 
home-care 
organizations to ensure the ability to operate in spite of 
unforeseen events and quickly recovering from any type of 
business interruption. 
It's is the purpose of the BCM, which is supposed to 
investigate actions to put in place in case of unavailability of 
the system. The BCM is then an appropriate approach for 
such critical need for these new systems based on the use of 
new technologies. 
The present work carried out in the framework of a 
regional research project “SySO”, supported by the French 
region Midi-Pyrénées, aiming at supporting continuity of 
home-care under technical or organizational failure; this 
project is linked to a national project “Plas’O’Soins”[30], 
funded by the French Agency for Research (ANR) intending 
to develop a software platform to improve coordination 
between different care providers in home-care. 
This paper is organized into three main sections. First, we 
review relevant concepts related to Business Continuity 
Management (BCM). Second, we outline the characteristics 
of home-care processes. We present then a methodology to 
introduce BCM to home-care field. Finally, we offer 
conclusions and future research.  
II. 
BUSINESS CONTINUITY MANAGEMENT 
It is vital to accept that disruptive events will continue to 
happen despite our best efforts to mitigate risks.  
Organizations are increasingly concerned with their ability to 
continue serving their customers in spite of those 
incidents [14]. 
The present section carries out a brief review of literature 
on Business Continuity Management key concepts. 
A. Business Continuity Management  concepts 
The British Standard BS25999, published by the British 
Standard Institute (BSI) [15], defines BCM as a “holistic 
process that identifies potential threats to an organization and 
the impacts to business operations,…, it provides a 
framework for building organizational resilience with the 
capability for an effective response that safeguards the 
interests of key stakeholders, and value-creating activities,...“ 
 
Most of the relevant literature advocates that BCM is a 
decision-making process [14]; it includes the concepts of 
business resilience, long term performance, and value 
preservation [15][16].  
BCM aims to offer an “uninterrupted availability” of all 
key activities and resources [17]. It incorporates treatments 
and controls to continue essential business processes, once 
an outage event has occurred [18]. 
Zambon [19] and Cerullo [20] articulate that the purpose 
of BCM is also to recover operations within a “predefined 
time”, and to reduce the “time required” to restore conditions 
to a state of business as usual.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Business Continuity Management Lifecycle (BS25999-1:2006). 
B. BCM Lifecycle 
Until recently, no widely agreed methodology was 
available to implement BCM. The standard BS25999 has 
changed this situation providing guidelines to understand, 
develop and implement a BCM: The Business Continuity 
Institute's Good Practice Guidelines [21]. 
The BCM life-cycle as it is proposed in BS25999 [21], 
Figure 1, integrates a four-stage process. It takes an 
organization through: 
 
An initial understanding of the organization  by the 
identification of activities and resources supporting 
key processes of the organization, 
 
 Determining BCM strategy, a description of what 
the plan is trying to achieve and how to make it 
work; 
 
Developing and implementing a BCM response: 
based on a Business  Impact Analysis, to evaluate 
the impact of the disruption of the core processes 
previously identified; and determining the incident 
response structure, preparing and agreeing the 
content of the contingency plans, and developing 
the plans, 
 
Exercising and testing of the plans, the management 
of the plan through training, rehearsals, and reviews, 
to ensure the plan stays effective and up to date. 
 
A further review of the literature provides us with some 
common inclusions compliant with the BS25999 BCM life-
cycle. Some researchers [18][20][22] suggest that BCM 
should address three interdependent objectives: 
 
Business impact analysis (BIA): Identify major risks 
and impacts of business interruption,  
 
Business 
continuity 
plan 
development:  
Develop a plan to mitigate or reduce the impact of 
the identiﬁed risks, 
 
Exercising, testing and updating of the plan. 
 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Paramedical Staff
Coordinator
Patient/Family
Hospital
Units for funding
Platform
Coordination 
System
Medical Staff
Pharmacy
Evaluation dénutrition
 
Paramedical Staff
Coordinator
Patient/Family
Hospital
Units for funding
Platform
Coordination 
System
Medical Staff
Pharmacy
Evaluation dénutrition
They also state that the primary output from the BCM 
process is a Business Continuity Plan (BCP), which is a set 
of procedures and documents describing a sequence of 
actions, and people responsible for carrying them out, to 
resume business processes following a disruption [23][24]. 
However, as we noted, as it is also mentioned in different 
guides and papers [18][19][21], there is no standard format 
for BCP; therefore each organization needs to assess its own 
requirements. 
C. BCM in Health Care 
1) Traditional Hospitalization  
BCM within the health care context is in its infancy [14], 
but, today, most health care administrators recognize that 
BCP is not solely about planning for a sudden influx of 
patients, but also about planning for disasters that harm their 
IT systems and physical facilities [25].  
As the Health Care system employs more digital 
technology to improve the quality of care, organizations are 
becoming increasingly concerned with their ability to 
continue serving their patients in spite of unforeseen events 
[14][20]. 
However, managing business continuity in health care 
environment is more sensitive [26], since Health sector is 
very sensitive to any kind of interruption that would impact 
their operations, their ability to help people and the vast 
amounts of data they require. 
2) Home-care 
Home-care is increasingly common in care delivery 
systems; it plays an important role as a mechanism for 
integration and coordination between health care actors [5]. 
Like other organizations, home-care organizations are 
vulnerable to internal and external events and risks that can 
interrupt their business operations and ability to accomplish 
their primary and critical missions. 
The home-care process is a collaborative process [13][27] 
connecting an important number of technical and human 
resources, that involve multidisciplinary care providers [28] 
(doctors, 
nurses, 
case 
managers, 
physiotherapists, 
occupational 
therapists, 
dieticians, 
social 
workers, 
physicians, etc.) and personnel who provide a range of basic 
activities to support daily living for patients (home health 
aide, personal care worker, home health attendant, and home 
support worker ),  regional public units for funding, patients 
and their relatives [8].  
This multidisciplinary collaboration is both indispensable 
and complicated [26]. In addition, the deployment of such a 
process takes place in a specific context: a very dynamic and 
uncertain environment [27].    
In order to coordinate this complex cooperative process, it 
is crucial for it to be supported by telemedicine applications, 
as shown in Figure 2. The platform that we propose to 
develop in the Plas’O’Soins project offers a package of 
services such as coordinating the activities of home-care   
caregivers, facilitating communication between them, 
managing activities schedule, etc. 
Figure 2.  Home-care ecosystem. 
This imposes that home-care organizations should adapt 
their business to include a response to both organizational 
and technical dysfunctions. Then, home-care organizations 
need not only to be able to manage the disruption caused by 
such incidents, but also to have plans to deliver their care 
services to patients 24/7. 
Our aim is to define a BCM methodology and adapt it to 
the particularities of the Home care processes.  
III. 
PROPOSED BCM APPROACH IN HOME-CARE 
The proposed Business Continuity Plans that we found in 
literature are a set of procedures and documents in a text 
format, determining how the organization will keep 
functioning after a disruptive event until the restoration of 
interrupted activities within a predetermined time. That 
means, for example, that solutions and a list of people who 
need to be informed as a priority are all part of the plan. 
 
Our aim is to formalize a Business Continuity Plan 
(BCP), following a model-centered approach, in order to 
provide a BCP model for home-care. 
In this section, we present steps and considerations to 
model and formalize a BCP for home-care organizations, 
which will improve their chances of continuing operations 
during or after disruptive events. 
 
1) The method 
We stay compliant with the BCM lifecycle proposed by the 
BS25999 standard, and we model each of the different steps: 
1. 
Organization Modeling: to describe how the home-
care is organized, to represent process related concepts, 
actors and their roles, and data flows, so that the current 
processes may be analyzed. For this we choose a process 
oriented modeling approach to design and model home-
care existing processes and the exchanged data. So to be 
able to analyze the processes, different views are required: 
organizational view, data view, and business process view. 
For these reasons ARIS software (Architecture of 
Integrated Information System) [31] was retained. 
  
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

2. 
Business Continuity Plan Modeling: to develop a 
BCP model we will start by developing a BCP meta-model, 
defining BCP main related concepts, and BCP elements. 
Then, to support continuity of care under technical and 
organizational failure, and to ensure the resilience and 
robustness the system and keep it operational 24/7; the BCP 
model that we propose will be defined based on the 
organizational 
and 
technical 
models 
of 
home-care 
organizations. 
The home-care sector depends on an important number 
of regulatory requirements and crucial business processes 
have time constraints, since we can’t represent everything 
with events, to generate an appropriate response to anomalies 
based on organizations’ business policies, best practices and 
regulatory requirements, we have to elicit business rules 
adequately.  The anomaly detection process, could then be 
modeled using Complex Event Processing (CEP) concepts 
[29]. 
 
The CEP is a strategic technology especially effective in 
situations involving numerous factors that interact in 
variable ways [29]. It allows applications to identify 
complex sequences of events, events that are an abstraction 
of two or more events, like event A is followed by B, then 
by C. These complex patterns of events can have temporal 
constraints (within 5 hours) or spatial constraints (within 5 
miles). 
3. 
Exercising: Anomaly Treatment Process 
 
BCP shows how to continue doing business until recovery is 
accomplished. Thus, we need to analyze the anomalies. 
Based on the organizational model, and the BCP model, we 
will define how these models evolve in response to 
anomalies. The principle phases of the anomaly treatment 
process that we propose are depicted in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Anomaly Treatment Process. 
 
Phase 1: ‘Cause Analysis” holds identifying the 
failure and analyzing its potential causes. The 
sources of anomalies may be hardware or software 
failure, 
technical 
problems 
or 
organizational 
dysfunctions, due to a drift of a business rule, a 
processes that has failed to complete or disruptive 
events occurring on devices. 
 
Phase 2: “Consequence Evaluation” focuses on the 
impact of the outage including both the likelihood 
and consequence; it involves also assessing the 
severity of impacts that are likely to occur from the 
failure. For this we need firstly to identify relevant 
impact criticality criteria to set the priorities. This 
impact evaluation defines the maximum acceptable 
outage for each key business process and sets the 
recovery priorities for the activities and resources 
underpinning them. 
 
Phase 3: “Resolution” In this phase, we propose a 
number of treatments form the BCP to ensure the 
business continuity after the outage has occurred. 
 
Phase 4: Finally, the BCP should  be dynamic, 
evolving as the business environment changes and 
its dependency on advanced technology changes, 
thus a BCP “update”  phase after an interruption is 
imperative, we may add new solutions , new 
consequences, new causes, or new anomalies … 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
Discontinuities are inevitable in complex systems such as 
our home-care system. If they are not identified and treated, 
they contribute to decreases in patient safety. 
 
Ensuring business resilience has proven to be increas-
ingly challenging as the home-care field employs more ICT 
applications and all signs for the future point to even more 
reliance on digital data.  
In this position paper, we presented a framework for a 
Business Continuity Management approach to ensure the 
permanence of key processes in home-care system supported 
by an e-platform.  
To provide a level of preparedness in order to respond, 
manage and recover from disruptive events so that a return to 
'business as usual' status is achieved in the shortest possible 
timeframe; the Business Continuity Plan for home-care 
organizations that we propose helps detecting the outage and 
restoring operations as soon as possible. 
Our ongoing work is to achieve a formal description of 
the BCP, following an approach grounded in Model-Driven 
Engineering (MDE). This formal description will be based 
on a combination of several models, e.g., Complex Event 
Processing rules, Business Rules, Temporal Logics, as well 
as organizational models, such as Role maps or Business 
Process models. These complementary approaches will 
provide the ability to react to event as they occur, and will 
offer an effective decision management solution. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work presented here, as well as the PhD of Olfa 
Rejeb, is mainly funded by French Region Midi-Pyrénées, 
with support from Ecole des Mines d’Albi Carmaux.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. N. Kamel Boulos et al., “Connectivity for Healthcare and 
Well-Being Management: Examples from Six European 
Projects,” International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, vol. 6, no. 7, pp. 1947-1971, Jul. 2009.  
[2] I. Robert-Bobée, Projections de population pour la France 
métropolitaine à l’horizon 2050 : la population continue de 
croître et le vieillissement se poursuit, Division Enquêtes et 
études démographiques, INSEE, pp. 1-2, 2006. 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[3] R. Haux, E. Ammenwerth, W. Herzog, and P. Knaup, “Health 
care in the information society. A prognosis for the year 
2013,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 66, 
no. 1-3, pp. 3-21, Nov. 2002. 
[4] A. Essén and M. Conrick, “New e-service development in the 
homecare 
sector: 
Beyond 
implementing 
a 
radical 
technology,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, 
vol. 77, no. 10, pp. 679-688, Oct. 2008. 
[5] R. M. M. Cotta, M. Morales Suárez-Varela, J. S. Cotta Filho, 
A. Llopis González, J. A. Días Ricós, and E. R. Real, “Home 
hospitalization in light of demographic changes and new 
health challenges,” Revista Panamericana De Salud Pública = 
Pan American Journal of Public Health, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 
253-261, Apr. 2002. 
[6] P. van Bilsen, J. Hamers, W. Groot, and C. Spreeuwenberg, 
“Demand of elderly people for residential care: an exploratory 
study,” BMC Health Services Research, vol. 6, pp. 39-39, 
Mar. 2006. 
[7] A. Jacobs, M. Leys, and S. De Rouck, “A methodology for 
shifting the focus of e-health support design onto user needs: 
a case in the homecare field.,” International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 77, no. 9, pp. 589-601, 2008. 
[8] A. Côté, G. Fox, The future of home-care in Canada: 
roundtable outcomes and recommendations for the future, 
Public Policy Forum, pp. 4-5, 2007. (www.ppforum.ca) 
[9] FNEHAD, Livre blanc des systèmes d’information en 
hospitalisation à domicile, white paper (in French), pp. 15-19, 
2009. 
[10] A. D. Black et al., “The impact of eHealth on the quality and 
safety of health care: a systematic overview,” PLoS Medicine, 
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. e1000387, 2011 
[11] R. Haux, “Aims and tasks of medical informatics,” 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 44, no. 1, 
pp. 9-20; discussion 39-44, 45-52, 61-66, Mar. 1997. 
[12] M. Duke and A. Street, “Hospital in the home: constructions 
of the nursing role - a literature review,” Journal of Clinical 
Nursing, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 852-859, Nov. 2003. 
[13] R. Bastide, S. Zefouni, and E. Lamine, “The homecare digital 
ecosystem: An information system support architecture,” 4th 
IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems and 
Technologies, pp. 475-480, 2010. 
[14] B. N. L. Geelen-Baass and J. M. K. Johnstone, “Building 
resiliency: ensuring business continuity is on the health care 
agenda,” Australian Health Review: A Publication of the 
Australian Hospital Association, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 161-173, 
Feb. 2008. 
[15] BSI, British Standard Institute, BS25999 Business Continuity 
Management. Code of Practice, pp. 3-3,  2006. 
[16] B. Herbane, D. Elliott, and E. M. Swartz, “Business 
Continuity Management: time for a strategic role?,” Long 
Range Planning, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 435-457, Oct. 2004. 
[17] M. Devargas, “Survival is not compulsory: an introduction to 
business continuity planning,” Computers & Security, vol. 18, 
no. 1, pp. 35-46, 1999. 
[18] ANAO, Australian National Audit Office, Better practice 
guide: Business Continuity Management, keeping the wheels 
in motion, pp. 27-50, 2000.  
[19] E. Zambon, D. Bolzoni, S. Etalle, and M. Salvato, “A Model 
Supporting Business Continuity Auditing and Planning in 
Information Systems,” Second International Conference on 
Internet Monitoring and Protection (ICIMP 2007), pp. 33-33, 
2007.   
[20] V. Cerullo and M. Cerullo, “Business Continuity Planning: A 
Comprehensive 
Approach,” 
Information 
Systems 
Management, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 70-78, Jun. 2004. 
[21] BSI, British Standard Institute, Business Continuity Institute's 
Good Practice Guidelines (GPG), pp. 3-14,  2010. 
[22] S. Buchanan and Gibb, “A framework for business continuity 
management,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Information 
Management, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 128-141, 2006. 
[23] C. Frost, “Effective Responses for Proactive Enterprises: 
Business Continuity Planning,” Disaster Prevention and 
Management, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 7-15, 1994 
[24] R. Stanton, “Beyond disaster recovery: the benefits of 
business continuity,” Computer Fraud & Security, vol, no. 7, 
pp. 18-19, July 2005. 
[25] Paul Rozek, Don Groth, “Business Continuity Planning,” 
Technology health management, pp. 1-1, 2008 
[26] C. A. Woodward, J. Abelson, S. Tedford, and B. Hutchison, 
“What is important to continuity in home care?. Perspectives 
of key stakeholders,” Social Science & Medicine (1982), vol. 
58, no. 1, pp. 177-192, Jan. 2004. 
[27] E. Lamine, S. Zefouni, R. Bastide, and H. Pingaud, “A 
System Architecture Supporting the Agile Coordination of 
Homecare 
Services,” 
Collaborative 
Networks 
for 
a 
Sustainable World, vol. 336, pp. 227-234, 2010. 
[28] A. van Wersch, J. Bonnema, B. Prinsen, J. Pruyn, T. Wiggers, 
and A. N. van Geel, “Continuity of information for breast 
cancer patients: the development, use and evaluation of a 
multidisciplinary care-protocol,” Patient Education and 
Counseling, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 175-186, Feb. 1997. 
[29] D. Luckham, “The Power of Events: An Introduction to 
Complex 
Event 
Processing 
in 
Distributed 
Enterprise 
Systems,” Computer Science, vol. 5321, pp. 3-3, 2008. 
[30] Project “Plas’O’Soins”, funded by the French Agency for 
Research (ANR), http://plasosoins.org/ 
[31] A.W. Scheer, ARIS-Business Process Modeling, 3rd ed., 
Springer-Verlag, pp. 21-102, 2000.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

