Reduced Elective Surgery Cancellations 
Through Patient Involvement In Pre-Operative Planning In Norway 
 
Conceição Granja 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
conceicao.granja@telemed.no 
Kari Dyb 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
kari.dyb@telemed.no 
Stein Roald Bolle 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
stein.roald.bolle@telemed.no 
 
Gunnar Hartvingsen 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Tromsø 
Tromsø, Norway 
gunnar.hartvigsen@telemed.no
 
 
Abstract—Surgery cancellations are undesirable in hospital 
settings as they increase costs, reduce productivity and 
efficiency, increase waiting lists, and directly affect the patient. 
The elective surgery cancellations problem in a North 
Norwegian University Hospital is addressed. Based on 
observations and interviews, conducted at the hospital, lack of 
information during the pre-operative planning was identified as 
the main cause of elective surgery cancellations. The problems 
with the existing pre-operative process were identified and a 
new process is proposed. By studying the pre-operative planning 
at the hospital, we have determined that part of the information 
flow can be moved to the patient at home. From the work 
presented herein, we conclude that the assessment information 
required during the pre-operative planning can be compiled in 
a personal health assessment questionnaire, and requested from 
the patient, at an earlier stage. 
Keywords-elective 
surgery 
cancellations; 
pre-operative 
planning; communication; process optimization; Norway 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Surgical departments are simultaneously the major source 
of investment, and the greatest source of revenue for most 
hospitals [1, 2]. However, it is known that between 10 and 40 
% of elective surgeries are cancelled [1, 3-5]. In western 
countries, up to 20 % of elective surgeries are cancelled on the 
day of surgery [6-8]. Furthermore, it has been reported that 50 
% of these cancellations might be avoided [1, 9, 10]. 
Surgery cancellations are undesirable in hospital settings 
as they increase costs, reduce productivity and efficiency, 
increase waiting lists, and directly affect the patient [3, 8, 11]. 
Considerable resources are invested in maintaining operating 
theatres, and having surgeons and theatre staff available on an 
agreed schedule [1, 12]. In spite of this, the cancellation rate 
of elective surgeries is high, especially in the public sector [9, 
13]. Cancellations can significantly inconvenience patients 
and their families [14, 15]. It is also reported that patients may 
suffer psychological stress, and/or financial hardships [9]. 
Accordingly, cancellations are stressful and costly, with a high 
level of emotional involvement before surgery [1]. 
The causes for elective surgery cancellation are diverse 
and may be divided in two major categories: (a) hospital, and 
(b) patient related reasons, when considering who took the 
underlying decision to cancel. Hospital related reasons are the 
most frequent and encompass causes such as the 
unavailability of the surgical team [3, 7, 8], incomplete pre-
operative study/preparation [7, 16], lack of surgical/anesthetic 
readiness [7, 8], and lack of theatre time due to extended 
duration of scheduled surgeries [7]. On the other hand, patient 
related causes are mostly due to patient no-shows and refusal 
to undergo surgery [7, 8, 16]. It is argued that the majority of 
cancellations are due to information that existed prior to the 
day of surgery, but was not available when required [9, 13, 17-
20]. 
In line with what is reported in literature, our site of 
research, the University Hospital of North Norway (UNN), 
has identified inadequate planning due to lack of information 
as a main cause for cancellations (Figure 1). The hospital has 
reported that more than 50 % of all cancellations at UNN are 
related to inadequate pre-operative planning [17]. It is 
anticipated that the pre-operative planning process may be 
improved if adequate patient information is gathered at an 
earlier stage, before the patient is admitted at the hospital. 
In this paper, the elective surgery cancellation problem 
caused by inadequate pre-operative planning, in a University 
Hospital in Norway, is addressed. We started by mapping and 
evaluating the pre-operative process at UNN, and explored a 
system for gathering information from patients on his/her 
condition through a personal health assessment questionnaire. 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
Figure 1. Causes for day of surgery cancellations distribution at UNN from January to June 2011. 
This paper is divided in six sections. In the first section the 
problem object of the study is described and classified 
according to its causes. In the second section a brief review of 
the state of the art is presented. Data collection methodologies, 
with which the results were obtained, are presented and 
explained in the third section. The results are disclosed and 
interpreted in sections four and five. In the last section 
conclusions about the results are drawn, and some indicators 
of future work in the area foreseen. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Elective surgery cancellations, due to lacking information, 
at UNN are mainly related to inadequate pre-operative 
planning. In literature, pre-operative planning is reported to be 
approached in several different ways. A brief literature review 
on some of the approaches is presented below. 
A widely studied approach to the elective surgery 
cancellation problem is the establishment of pre-operative 
assessment clinics (POACs). The aim of a POAC is to prepare 
patients for the administration of anesthesia and for surgery. 
The implementation of POACs may take different 
configurations relating to the worker leading the appointment. 
Doctor-led POACs were implemented by [16, 21-23] in an 
attempt to solve elective surgery cancellations due to lacking 
information. In this settings, patients are referred to the POAC 
either from the ward or the outpatient clinic. It was concluded 
that the number of cancellations was reduced but considered 
not significant [16]. In nurse-led POACs [24-26] the role of 
the physicians is transferred to the nurse. Thus, in such 
environments, the pre-operative assessment is undertaken by 
nurses, 
with 
overall 
supervision 
of 
a 
consultant 
anesthesiologist. Nurse-led pre-operative assessment systems 
POACs do not address the hypothesis that the pre-operative 
assessment information may be collected from the patient at 
home. 
A different approach to improve pre-operative planning is 
to re-evaluate the role of health workers in the pre-operative 
process, and create tools that enable the transfer of 
responsibilities from physicians to nurses. It is advocated that 
the pre-operative assessment of elective surgical patients may 
be undertaken by trained nurses [18, 27, 28]. Following this 
hypothesis, nurse-led pre-operative assessment systems have 
been implemented [18, 27, 28], using protocols to guide 
nurses in the decision making process. Nurse-led pre-
operative systems do not address the hypothesis that the pre-
operative assessment information may be collected from the 
patient at home.  
Searches on the major academic literature databases (e.g. 
PubMed, Web of Science, Inspec, SCOPUS), on pre-operative 
planning that use communication with the patient at home, did 
not retrieve any relevant result. Following, an approach to the 
problem of elective surgery cancellations by contacting the 
patient at home is presented. 
Telephone calls are being studied as a solution to reduce 
elective surgery cancellations, due to patient no-shows, on the 
day-of-surgery 
[29, 
30]. 
Such 
studies 
propose 
a 
communication channel between the patient and the provider 
to enable the confirmation of the patient’s intention to attend 
surgery, or simply address patient questions and concerns. 
Information exchange between health personnel and patients, 
while the patients are still at home, may solve some of today’s 
challenges with late pre-surgical planning and, consequently, 
cancellations of surgical procedures. 
The aim of our research is to reduce the elective surgery 
cancellations at UNN, by studying pre-operative planning and 
determine if it may be moved from the hospital to the patient 
at home. We will explore if surgical patients and health 
personnel can collaborate in a team while the patient is still at 
home, and if this reduces elective surgery cancellations, by 
better preparing hospitals and patients for surgical procedures. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Frequency
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The management at UNN, our site of research, is 
determined to reduce the cancellation rate at the hospital. 
Resources have been allocated, and a Lean process for elective 
surgical patient pathways at the Operation and Intensive care 
clinic has been initiated at UNN. Lean projects are commonly 
used to transform healthcare organizations for improvements 
in patient care through the development of a quality driven 
culture [11]. At UNN, Lean is defined to concern the right 
things at the right place, time and amount, with a minimum of 
waste while, at the same time, being flexible and prepared for 
changes. The Lean process at UNN is organized as a project 
team, including a project manager, a Lean consultant, a Lean 
mentor, an economics and an IT-consultant. In addition, the 
Lean project has an executive board, a project group and a 
focus group. At the start of the Lean Project, the focus group, 
which is the actual working group, consisted of; one 
anesthetist nurse, one theatre nurse, two anesthesiologist, 
three surgeons, one member of the staff responsible for 
sterilization of surgical equipment, three staff members 
responsible for elective surgery planning and waiting lists in 
the surgery ward, one pediatric nurse, two ICT consultants 
(one responsible for the EHR), one employee representative, 
and one user (patient). 
Two researchers from our research team have followed the 
Lean process since the initial group meeting in April 2012. 
One has participated solely as a researcher, conducting 
observations during Lean meetings, while the other had an 
active role and contributed as an anesthesiologist in the Lean 
process. The researchers observed and participated in more 
than twenty meetings. In addition to following the Lean 
process, we have accomplish three weeks of fieldwork at the 
Operation and Intensive care clinic, conducting observations 
and 
unstructured 
interviews 
while 
following 
an 
anesthesiologist and an anesthetist nurse in their daily work. 
We have also conducted thirteen structured interviews with 
physicians, nurses and administrative personnel. 
Data collected through observations and interviews was 
analyzed together with observational data from the Lean 
project. Our analytical qualitative approach focuses on the 
interaction between technical and social factors that produces 
particular outcomes [31].The preliminary results are limited to 
the identification of the information needed for pre-operative 
assessment from the anesthetists and surgeons’ point of view. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The observations and interviews, described in section III, 
allowed the definition and mapping of the generic pre-
operative process model shown in Figure 2. A process model 
facilitates a systematic description of the events permitting the 
identification of decision activities, and the health worker 
responsible for each of them. In addition, it allows us to learn 
about the information flow, and to identify the underlying 
process issues that are causing the patient assessment 
information not to be available when required. At UNN, as 
seen in Figure 2, final pre-operative planning is often done 
after the patient has arrived for the scheduled surgery. Which 
means, the final pre-operative planning might me done the day 
before, or even on the day of surgery. During this final 
planning process, new information is gathered from patients 
which may lead to cancellations. 
Considering the data collected during the observations and 
interviews, and the analysis of the existing pre-operative 
process, all the decision activities were identified and 
characterized. Based on the information requirements on each 
of those activities, a new pre-operative process was proposed. 
In the new pre-operative process the assessment information 
is requested to the patient at an earlier stage and while the 
patient is still at home. The assessment information identified 
as required might be included in the personal health 
assessment questionnaire which some departments ask the 
patients to fill out and bring to the hospital when hospitalized 
for surgery. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This paper addresses the elective surgery cancellations 
problem at UNN, a North Norwegian University Hospital. 
Observations and interviews were conducted at UNN, and 
lack of information during the pre-operative planning was 
identified as the main cause of elective surgery cancellations. 
The problems with the existing pre-operative process were 
identified and a new process was proposed. In the new 
process, the assessment information is systematized in a 
personal health assessment questionnaire, and provided by the 
patient at an earlier stage, while the patient is still at home. 
The mapping of a generic pre-operative process model 
facilitated the identification of the decision activities, and the 
health worker responsible. The identification of activities, and 
their responsible health worker, allowed us to carry out semi-
structured interviews to determine the information required to 
complete the pre-operative assessment. Surgeons and 
anesthesiologists at UNN considered that the identified 
information may be provided by the patient. Some 
departments ask the patients to fill out a personal health 
assessment questionnaire and bring it to the hospital when 
hospitalized for surgery. The information classified as 
required might be included in this questionnaire. Such 
questionnaires can be sent to the patient through the postal 
system, and the patient can fill it out at home. 
In developed countries, like Norway, where the population 
is well prepared and able to use ICT (e-readiness), a new 
approach is possible [32] to promote patient-centered health 
care [33, 34]. Many patients [35], including elderly or less-
educated [36], are strongly motivated to use electronic 
services [37]. This has been implemented at the Mayo clinic 
(Rochester, MN, USA) for primary care, with a 40 % decrease 
of office visits [38]. Increased collaboration with patients, as 
active participants, through ICT solutions, are also defined as 
a priority area, as stated in the Norwegian Ministry of Health 
and Care Services’ Coordination Reform [39]. Currently, an 
extensive ICT investment is taking place in the northern health 
region of Norway, including at the UNN hospital, our site of 
research. Helse-Nord, the Northern Norway Regional Health 
Authority, is investing € 62.5 million in the FIKS (from the 
Norwegian Felles innføring kliniske systemer) project to 
develop the electronic health record for the future -– a 
fundamental tool for high-quality patient treatment [40]. The 
planning tool on the surgical module in the EHR system has 
been recognized as an unused resource by FIKS, Helse-Nord 
and the Lean Project [40]. The described health care trends in 
Norway open new possibilities to approach the elective 
surgery cancellation problem. 
 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Referral
Patient 
registration
Order entry
Start referral 
evaluation
Sufficient 
Information
Request information from 
referral institution or GP
Get information
Call the patient
Patient referred to 
Outpatient Clinic
No need for health care from 
specialist (Return to GP)
N
Letter to Patient 
and referral 
institution/GP
END
Inpatient Admission
Y
End referral 
evaluation
Letter to Patient and referral 
institution/GP acknowledging 
the referral was received 
Letter to Patient and 
referral institution/GP 
with time frame
Letter to Patient and 
referral institution/GP 
with time frame
Schedule patient to 
surgery (Day surgery)
Letter to Patient and 
referral institution/GP 
with time frame
Sufficient 
Information
N
Y
Appointment at 
Outpatient Clinic
Schedule patient to 
surgery (to himself)
Patient referred to 
appointment with 
another specialist
Internal Referral
No need for surgery
Letter to Patient 
and referral 
institution/GP
END
Schedule 
Follow-up
2nd Referral 
Evaluation
Letter to Patient 
and referral 
institution/GP
Letter to Patient and referral institution/
GP with appointment date/time and 
indication of additional examinations
Surgery planning meeting
Patient arrives at the 
hospital (if not Inpatient)
Procedures in surgical 
department
Surgical Assessment
Treatment
Medical Exam
Surgery 
Cancelled
Discharge
Information 
Required
Anesthesia 
Preparation
Surgery
Surgery form 
(operasjonmelding)
N
Y
OK for 
surgery
N
Y
Had Anesthesia 
Assessment
N
Y
Anesthesia 
Assessment
Admitted for 
Surgery
Admitted for 
Observation
Patient Observation & 
Further Investigation
Schedule for 
Surgery
Schedule 
Follow-up
Discharge
Secretary
Surgeon
Anesthesiologist
 
 
Figure 2. Scheme of the surgery process at UNN. Assessment activities after patient arrival (Box with green border), may contribute to late cancellations 
(box with red border) while there are many possibilities for hospital-patient interaction at earlier stages (Letters to patient and patient at the hospital). 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
By studying the pre-operative planning at UNN, we have 
determined that parts of the information flow can be moved to 
the patient at home. From the work presented herein, we 
conclude that the assessment information required during the 
pre-operative planning can be compiled in a personal health 
assessment questionnaire, and requested from the patient, at 
an earlier stage. 
The authors acknowledge that the paper-based pre-
operative planning process proposed is not in line with the best 
practices suggested in literature. When using the postal system 
the information flow between the patient and the hospital is 
time consuming, and it is not possible for the hospital to 
confirm the reception and submission of the personal health 
assessment questionnaire. At the same time, due to: (a) the 
patient prioritization rules in Norway [41], (b) waiting list, (c) 
and emergency surgeries, surgeries can be delayed and the 
patient might be requested to complete the personal health 
assessment questionnaire more than once. On the other hand, 
when asking the patient to answer a personal health 
assessment questionnaire from home, the patient might 
require support from health workers when interpreting the 
questions, and selecting the relevant information.  
The international healthcare trends on paperless and 
patient focused clinical processes, combined with the e-
readiness in Norwegian society, point to new possibilities on 
how to gather assessment information from the patient at 
home. To access this information, low-cost communication 
with patients and their families has been recommended [12]. 
Thereby improving pre-operative planning, and reducing the 
number of cancelations, due to lack of information. In order 
to enable the communication between the patient and the 
hospital, the interaction with patients should take place 
through a variety of synchronous and asynchronous secure 
communication channels, including phone, messaging 
systems, email, and web-pages. 
As patients use several types of communication devices, 
they should have the opportunity to be contacted on different 
platforms as well, such as smartphones, pads, and laptops. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the regional health 
authority Helse-Nord for funding the research project HST 
1119-13 and HST 1125-13. We would also like to thank the 
personnel at UNN and the Lean project, especially Tonje 
Drecker. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. N. Schofield, G. L. Rubin, M. Piza, Y. Y. Lai, D. 
Sindhusake, M. R. Fearnside, et al., "Cancellation of operations 
on the day of intended surgery at a major Australian referral 
hospital," Medical Journal of Australia, vol. 182, pp. 612-615, 
2005. 
[2] B. Denton, J. Viapiano, and A. Vogl, "Optimization of surgery 
sequencing and scheduling decisions under uncertainty," 
Health Care Manag Sci, vol. 10, pp. 13-24, 2007. 
[3] Audit Commission for Local Authorities the National Health 
Service in England Wales, "Operating Theatres: Review of 
National Findings," London, 2003. 
[4] M. J. Lacqua and J. T. Evans, "Canceled Elective Surgery: An 
Evaluation," American Surgeon, vol. 60, pp. 809-811, 1994. 
[5] B. Ivarsson, P. O. Kimblad, T. Sjoberg, and S. Larsson, 
"Patient reactions to cancelled or postponed heart operations," 
J Nurs Manag, vol. 10, pp. 75-81, 2002. 
[6] Aaserud M, Trommald M, and B. J., "Elektiv kirurgi - 
strykninger, skjerming og effektivitet," Tidsskr Nor Lægeforen 
vol. 21, pp. 2516-2519, 2001. 
[7] A. González-Arévalo, J. I. Gómez-Arnau, F. J. DelaCruz, J. M. 
Marzal, S. Ramírez, E. M. Corral, et al., "Causes for 
cancellation of elective surgical procedures in a Spanish 
general hospital," Anaesthesia, vol. 64, pp. 487-493, 2009. 
[8] S. Z. Yoon, S. I. Lees, H. W. Lee, H. J. Lim, S. M. Yoon, and 
S. H. Chang, The effect of increasing operating room capacity 
on 
day-of-surgery 
cancellation 
vol. 
37. 
Edgecliff, 
AUSTRALIE: Anaesthesia Society of Anaesthetists, 2009. 
[9] T. L. Trentman, J. T. Mueller, S. L. Fassett, C. L. Dormer, and 
K. P. Weinmeister, "Day of Surgery Cancellations in a Tertiary 
Care Hospital: A One Year Review," Journal of Anesthesia & 
Clinical Research, vol. 1, 2010. 
[10] P. Sanjay, A. Dodds, E. Miller, P. J. Arumugam, and A. 
Woodward, "Cancelled elective operations: an observational 
study from a district general hospital," J Health Organ Manag, 
vol. 21, pp. 54-8, 2007. 
[11] R. R. Cima, M. J. Brown, J. R. Hebl, R. Moore, J. C. Rogers, 
A. Kollengode, et al., "Use of Lean and Six Sigma 
Methodology to Improve Operating Room Efficiency in a 
High-Volume Tertiary-Care Academic Medical Center," 
Journal of the American College of Surgeons, vol. 213, pp. 83-
92, 2011. 
[12] V. Haana, K. Sethuraman, L. Stephens, H. Rosen, and J. G. 
Meara, "Case cancellations on the day of surgery: an 
investigation in an Australian paediatric hospital," ANZ 
Journal of Surgery, vol. 79, pp. 636-640, 2009. 
[13] M. B. Ferschl, A. Tung, B. Sweitzer, D. Huo, and D. B. Glick, 
"Preoperative clinic visits reduce operating room cancellations 
and delays," Anesthesiology, vol. 103, pp. 855-9, 2005. 
[14] M. G. Perroca, M. d. C. Jericó, and S. D. Facundin, "Surgery 
cancelling at a teaching hospital: implications for cost 
management," Revista latino-americana de enfermagem, vol. 
15, pp. 1018-1024, 2007. 
[15] A. R. Tait, T. Voepel-Lewis, H. M. Munro, H. B. Gutstein, and 
P. I. Reynolds, "Cancellation of pediatric outpatient surgery: 
economic and emotional implications for patients and their 
families," Journal of clinical anesthesia, vol. 9, pp. 213-219, 
1997. 
[16] M. Knox, E. Myers, I. Wilson, and M. Hurley, "The impact of 
pre-operative assessment clinics on elective surgical case 
cancellations," Surgeon-Journal of the Royal Colleges of 
Surgeons of Edinburgh and Ireland, vol. 7, pp. 76-78, 2009. 
[17] R. Busund, "Rapport fra prosjekt: Optimal ressursutnyttelse av 
opperasjonskapasiteten i UNN," Norway, 2008. 
[18] M. R. Rai and J. J. Pandit, "Day of surgery cancellations after 
nurse-led pre-assessment in an elective surgical centre: the first 
2 years," Anaesthesia, vol. 58, pp. 692-9, 2003. 
[19] A. R. Seim, T. Fagerhaug, S. M. Ryen, P. Curran, O. D. Sæther, 
H. O. Myhre, et al., "Causes of Cancellations on the Day of 
Surgery at Two Major University Hospitals," Surgical 
Innovation, vol. 16, pp. 173-180, 2009. 
[20] W. A. van Klei, C. L. Rutten, K. G. Moons, B. Lo, J. T. Knape, 
and D. E. Grobbee, "Limited effect of Health Council guideline 
on outpatient preoperative evaluation clinics in the 
Netherlands: an inventory," Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd, vol. 145, 
pp. 25-9, 2001. 
[21] M. A. Starsnic, D. M. Guarnieri, and M. C. Norris, "Efficacy 
and financial benefit of an anesthesiologist-directed university 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

preadmission 
evaluation 
center," 
Journal 
of 
clinical 
anesthesia, vol. 9, pp. 299-305, 1997. 
[22] M. Agah and B. Radpay, "Efficacy of Anesthesia Clinic on 
Preoperative Evaluation, Preparation and Related Costs," 
Tanaffos, vol. 3, pp. 63-8, 2004. 
[23] R. Odijk, "Process optimization of the preoperative anesthesia 
clinics at ZGT Almelo and Hengelo," 2012. 
[24] M. Reed, S. Wright, and F. Armitage, "Nurse-led general 
surgical pre-operative assessment clinic," Journal of the Royal 
College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, vol. 42, pp. 310-313, 1997. 
[25] B. J. Kirkwood, K. Pesudovs, P. Latimer, and D. J. Coster, 
"The efficacy of a nurse-led preoperative cataract assessment 
and postoperative care clinic," Medical journal of Australia, 
vol. 184, p. 278, 2006. 
[26] H. Walsgrove, "Piloting a nurse-led gynaecology preoperative-
assessment clinic," Nursing times, vol. 100, p. 38, 2004. 
[27] AmandaBeck, "Nurse-led pre-operative assessment for 
elective surgical patients," Nursing Standard, vol. 21, pp. 35-
38, 2007. 
[28] H. Kinley, C. Czoski-Murray, S. George, C. McCabe, J. 
Primrose, C. Reilly, et al., "Effectiveness of appropriately 
trained nurses in preoperative assessment: randomised 
controlled equivalence/non-inferiority trial," BMJ (Clinical 
research ed.), vol. 325, p. 1323, 2002. 
[29] M. A. G. de Avila and S. C. M. Bocchi, "Confirmação de 
presença de usuário à cirurgia eletiva por telefone como 
estratégia para reduzir absenteísmo," Rev Esc Enferm USP, vol. 
47, pp. 193-7, 2013. 
[30] K. Haufler and M. Harrington, "Using Nurse-to-Patient 
Telephone Calls to Reduce Day-of-Surgery Cancellations," 
AORN journal, vol. 94, pp. 19-26, 2011. 
[31] B. Latour, Science in action: How to follow scientists and 
engineers through society: Harvard university press, 1987. 
[32] H. K. Andreassen, M. M. Bujnowska-Fedak, C. E. Chronaki, 
R. C. Dumitru, I. Pudule, S. Santana, et al., "European citizens' 
use of E-health services: a study of seven countries," BMC 
Public Health, vol. 7, p. 53, 2007. 
[33] B. Kaplan and P. F. Brennan, "Consumer Informatics 
Supporting Patients as Co-Producers of Quality," Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 8, pp. 309-
316, 2001. 
[34] E. Randeree, "Personal Health Records: Patients in Control," 
in Health Information Systems: Concepts, Methodologies, 
Tools, and Applications, J. Rodrigues, Ed., ed: IGI Global, 
2010, pp. 2111-2124 pp. 
[35] L. Millsopp, S. Frackleton, D. Lowe, and S. N. Rogers, "A 
feasibility study of computer-assisted health-related quality of 
life data collection in patients with oral and oropharyngeal 
cancer," Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg, vol. 35, pp. 761-4, 2006. 
[36] P. E. Kummervold, D. Gammon, S. Bergvik, J. A. Johnsen, T. 
Hasvold, and J. H. Rosenvinge, "Social support in a wired 
world: use of online mental health forums in Norway," Nord J 
Psychiatry, vol. 56, pp. 59-65, 2002. 
[37] P. M. Webb, G. D. Zimet, J. D. Fortenberry, and M. J. Blythe, 
"Comparability of a computer-assisted versus written method 
for collecting health behavior information from adolescent 
patients," J Adolesc Health, vol. 24, pp. 383-8, 1999. 
[38] S. C. Adamson and J. W. Bachman, "Pilot study of providing 
online care in a primary care setting," Mayo Clin Proc, vol. 85, 
pp. 704-10, 2010. 
[39] Helse-og omsorgsdepartement, "Samhandlingsreformen," ed: 
Det Kongelige helse-og omsorgsdepartement, 2009. 
[40] Helse-Nord. (2012, 4 November 2013). Dette er de nye 
systemene. Available: http://www.helse-nord.no/helse-nord-
nytt/dette-er-de-nye-systemene-article90645-1526.html 
[41] Nasjonal Prioriteringsveiledere, Helsedirektoratet, 2009. 
Available: 
http://www.helsebiblioteket.no/retningslinjer/prioriteringsveil
edere 
 
 
 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

