Taking Adaptable Co-design Action: Flexible Learning Between Health Experts, 
End-Users and Technology Experts in the Early Stage of eHealth Design 
 
 
Jan Aidemark 
Department of Informatics 
Linnaeus University 
Växjö, Sweden 
email: Jan.Aidemark@lnu.se 
Linda Askenäs 
Department of Informatics 
Linnaeus University 
Växjö, Sweden 
email: Linda.askenas@lnu.se 
 
 
Abstract— Co-design, as a way of integrating users’ 
perspectives and technical possibilities, has been subject to a 
multitude of interpretations. To facilitate the development of 
patient-empowerment services, co-design is a central approach 
needed to ensure high acceptance among users. In this 
research, we offer a flexible co-design approach by building on 
adaptive and continuous planning based on sets of co-design 
actions directed towards participants’ mutual learning. The 
research is based on the experiences of a co-design process 
within the area of eHealth, specifically the fall prevention area, 
as a special case of self-training systems and self-management 
systems. The project team comprises a variety of member 
groups, including the elderly, technical developers, business 
developers, methods experts and project management. The key 
success factor was identified among the persons of the different 
groups as achieving possibilities for learning. To make learning 
processes requires adaptability and flexibility in interacting 
different planning actions in order to balance both the need for 
technology development and the understanding of users’ 
needs.  
Keywords: Co-design; learning; adaptable; eHealth; fall 
detection. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Understanding the interaction between actors in a 
systems development process is a multi-faceted affair, open 
to interpretations of the different preferences of diverse 
participants. Within eHealth, this is even more complicated 
due to the nature of the application area, i.e. dealing with 
sick people, on the one hand, and with professional people 
responsible for delivering safe and approved care, on the 
other. The central approach in the field of eHealth is 
Experience-Based Co-Design (EBCD). EBCD builds on the 
notion that collecting facts about patients and professionals 
enables the building of effective and useful support systems 
[1][2]. Other approaches to co-design stress, e.g., co-creation 
[3], the transfer of power from technology and design aspects 
to user perspectives. Empowering users to be active in 
decision-making is arguably an important step towards better 
information systems. It can thus be assumed that good co-
design should include both facts about practice, users and 
professionals and the power to act. To achieve positive 
effects of flexible co-design like these requires, to a great 
extent, the creation and transfer of knowledge. The co-design 
process as such could therefore be understood as a learning 
process. Ward et al. [4] argue that there is a gap within the 
peer-reviewed literature on how to conduct co-design in 
practice. In this research, we look at how co-design can 
become an effective learning experience for the participants 
by setting it up as an adaptable and flexible method and 
applying a continuous process of re-planning. We target the 
early formative parts of the design process, which Sander 
and Stappers [3] call the fuzzy front end. This is done to 
ensure that the project receives a proper start and a 
development of all the parties involved by raising them to 
sufficient levels of relevant knowledge. Different groups 
within the co-design process have different needs, which 
necessitates a well-balanced set of co-design actions that are 
continuously re-evaluated and re-planned in the process. 
Although the research revolves around a fall prevention 
project and the development of technical solutions, we focus 
in this paper on the properties of the co-design process and 
reflect on how the experiences can be used to improve co-
design practice. Since it has been claimed that it is the 
flexibility of EBCD that gives good results [5], the aim of 
this paper is to look closer into how to actually achieve this. 
The paper is structured accordingly by a quick initial view of 
the current state of EBCD and related co-design methods, 
followed by an overview of the research setting and the 
systems development project forming the core of the 
research. As a result, a generalized example is provided of 
how to structure co-design processes in a flexible and 
adaptable way on the basis of the experiences of the 
development project. The paper ends with a discussion of 
central issues related to how to structure a project for 
learning that helps parties of all types to be active and 
productive co-designers. A neutral project management with 
a co-design expertise background could be one path towards 
a better project structure where all participants can gain 
sufficient knowledge to be empowered to become creative 
co-designers. The paper is organized according to the 
following structure: Section 2 provides a theory background 
with focus on EBCD and co-design; Section 3 gives the 
research approach and an overview of the case; Section 4 is 
the analysis of co-design actions; Section 5 contains a 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

discussion of the result, with concluding remarks and future 
research.  
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND: EBCD AND CO-DESIGN 
PERSPECTIVES 
Co-design in general and EBCD in particular currently 
attract strong interest, not least in the face of the current 
surge in eHealth applications. Hence, we give an overview of 
current topics, issues and debates that seem important for 
improving 
the 
practice 
of 
co-design 
for 
eHealth 
development.  
The basic approach of EBCD is the design of new 
solutions, (e.g., ways of working, IT systems or new 
procedures) based on facts gathered from professionals and 
patients, molded through joint sessions of design, and 
hopefully leading to new ways of working that are 
acceptable to all parties. Bate and Robert [1] provide a basic 
EBCD cycle, including set-up, gathering experiences, and 
co-design in groups. 
In the area of health, co-design can be seen as a 
framework for managing an intervention project [6][7]). Co-
design functions as a way of creating change in a project 
research style and as such becomes a ´method for 
organizational development.  
The practice and real effects of EBCD are studied in a 
review of EBCD studies. Gleeson et al. [8] note that a great 
many EBCD projects only deal with minor changes in work 
practice, which are more helpful in implementation than in 
finding novel solutions. They [8] also observe that surveys 
are a common way of collecting facts for EBCD projects.  
In a larger perspective, EBCD could be understood as a 
spirit that is supposed to drive a development project 
including important values like empowerment, trust, 
autonomy and self-determination among both users and 
professionals [9]. By this approach, we are looking for more 
than a technique for cooperation during design.  
Brocklehurst et al. [10] point to the fundamental change 
that EBCD could bring about, from a traditional top-down 
approach to developing a design that is based on the end 
user’s situation and interests. This is supposed to be 
especially true when it comes to co-design with elderly 
people who are moving into a life of greater dependence on 
support and help from others.  
EBCD, as noted by Matthews et al. [11], can be used not 
only for collecting facts from users but also for engaging 
them in the co-production, design and development of new 
services. 
In addition to being an important property of the method 
area [5], flexibility is, in our view, important for the 
engagement of patients, families and staff. 
The situation for both professionals and patients changes 
when they enter into a co-design process. They are then 
forced to look upon their situation from new perspectives 
and to step out of their traditional positions where they feel 
comfortable [12]. 
As healthcare staff and patient experiences with patient 
processes differ, this creates many complex problem 
situations. To understand and deal with these, a collaborative 
approach is needed to capture all areas needing improvement 
and to create solutions that respect all parties. [13]. 
Hill et al. [14] argue that theories of adult learning need 
to be part of co-design in order to support user learning 
during the project. This is a necessity, particularly in light of 
the different backgrounds of eHealth users, as they are 
patients and often find themselves in difficult situations.  
Since knowledge processes are regarded as central in the 
research [15], Langley et al. argue that co-design should be 
understood as a process where knowledge is discovered, 
created and shared between different groups of stakeholders. 
III. 
RESEARCH SETTING 
The research approach builds on the interpretations of 
what takes place in an action research tradition [16]. The 
research setting is an innovative development project in the 
area of eHealth fall prevention solutions for the elderly. The 
context of designing fall prevention systems is a drive for 
helping the elderly to continue living at home. This was 
designed as an innovative technical project in need of a co-
design process to ensure a well-functioning connection to 
potential users. The general approach to fall prevention was 
to have a data-driven learning system for changing habits 
and improving the understanding of personal risk behaviors. 
To attain these goals, the project has devised a co-design 
process, whose focus in this research lies on the formative 
first half year.  
During this period, an initial technical solution was 
developed in cooperation between different user groups, 
including experts, professionals and end users. Five 
categories of participants were involved in this process: 
technical experts, end users, professional users, design 
experts, and project managers. The end users were still 
relatively healthy elderly people, who were able to live 
independently in apartments or houses. There were 5 
participants in this category, whose age ranged between 70 
and 75. From the technical side, 3 representatives from 
private companies (from which they also received further 
support) were active in the co-design in crafting the practical 
IT solutions. The design and management team consisted of 
project management for the healthcare sector and eHealth 
experts from universities, a total of 6 people. The health care 
professionals had 3 representatives, including physicians and 
physiotherapists. Besides, invited quests were added to some 
of the meetings. In total, approximately 16 persons were 
active at the co-design meetings. Two types of meetings 
were used: physical meetings in a conference room setting, 
and web conference, voice and video meetings. Both 
recordings and field notes were used to capture the 
proceedings. Interspersed between these were periods of 
field action, patient observations or home testing, as well as 
of technology development. These activities were prepared 
in planning meetings. Together, these formed a series of co-
design cycles, four of which were performed during the first 
part of the project. The results of this paper focus on the way 
actions were mixed during the different cycles. 
As the project constituted an action research effort, the 
authors were active members of the design team. Hence, 
active observation formed a way of capturing and 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

understanding the nature of the co-design process. The 
research stance was interpretative and self-reflecting, aiming 
at giving a generalizable account of what worked during the 
project, while simultaneously learning from its mistakes and 
successes. The further aim was to apply a “reflective 
practice” approach [17][18] to better understand current 
practices and provide generalized ones for a knowledge- and 
learning-oriented way of working with co-design. To do 
research in the manner of “reflective practice” is a new way 
of creating a critical awareness of current practices and of 
facilitating change [19]. Schön [17] works with a view of 
knowledge and knowledge generation that is based on an 
epistemology of action. Although experts with their practical 
knowledge often contribute in a tacit or unspoken form, 
Schön sees this as a possibility of attaining intellectual rigor 
in scientific work. The basis of the approach, referred to as 
reflection in action, lies in the capacity of reflecting on the 
knowledge that emerges from action.  
IV. 
RESULT: CO-DESIGN AS ADAPTIVE LEARNING 
Based on the experiences of the case study, sets of co-
design actions organized into cycles of design, which are 
planned and adapted continuously, can be proposed. We 
present this in two steps, first in sets of design actions, which 
are here somewhat generalized in comparison with the actual 
project. After this, we provide examples of how to combine 
these into cycles of design.  
A. Co-design action sets 
The actions are divided into four sets plus a planning set. 
Each set consists of a number of possible types of actions. 
The planning set deals with the formation of the co-design 
actions and their enactment during various meetings and 
stages of the project. The four action sets form the movement 
of the design process including the initiation of purpose and 
mission, the requirements collection and the testing and 
solution formulation, all guided by planning actions. The list 
is not exhaustive, but rather a set of key examples that serve 
as illustrations of how co-design actions can be devised. The 
list follows a clear and straightforward logic usually 
associated 
with 
a 
“waterfall” 
model. 
However, 
in 
implementing the practical cycles of co-design, these should 
be mixed and repeated, as they are needed to achieve the 
desired solutions to a desired state, as well as bringing the 
co-designers to a state of knowledge and understanding to 
enable them to make informed decisions about what a good 
design entails. The sets include the following actions:  
1) Action set: Planning Actions 
- Preparing the co-design project. This entails setting the 
general direction of the project and stating the purpose and 
role of co-design. It is very important to be explicit about 
what outcomes are expected of the co-design process. This 
action is also important for understanding what the biases of 
the project are and what taken-for-granted assumptions are 
held by those setting up the co-design process.  
- Preparing the co-design process. This includes, e.g., the 
style and location of meetings, and the resources and 
competences required. Setting dates, outlines of meetings, as 
well as the principles of the planning and coordination of the 
process, is also included.  
- Evaluations and feedback of the project progress. This 
means tracking the learning and knowledge development of 
the project participants. On the basis of an understanding of 
how the co-designers develop during the project, the process 
should be adapted to the needs and pre-conditions of the 
members of the team. Active evaluation and analysis form 
keys to a flexible and adaptive co-design process. To 
strengthen this feedback process, it is an advantage if end 
user representatives are invited to planning sessions.  
- Recruitment of participating co-designers. Finding and 
motivating people to take part in a project is a major 
undertaking. The selection of participants could be decisive 
for the outcome of the design effort. Their abilities to 
contribute and remain throughout the project are important to 
consider to be able to structure the process and meet the 
goals and expectations of both the users-to-be and the project 
at large.  
- Ethics board approval. As co-design often takes place in 
the context of research efforts, the ethical aspect of this 
project could be problematic, as the method also works with 
discovery and change, which entails that many of its aspects 
may be unknown beforehand. This makes ethical approval 
difficult unless the board understands the nature of co-design 
and agrees with its benefits.  
2) Actions set: Initiating phase: facts and purpose 
- Ascertaining the facts about the current health care area. 
In the current project, this means including lectures, e.g., by 
fall prevention experts and by experts advising people on 
how to live safer at home. As this is a mainstay of EBCD, it 
should establish a base line of knowledge shared by all.  
- Technology orientation. Experts on current IT trends 
provide an overview for the design group of the technical 
possibilities. Providing users and health care professionals 
with sufficient knowledge is another cornerstone of co-
design. To give both groups the right message is a 
pedagogical challenge. It is also a question of giving just 
enough information and not drowning people in tech facts, as 
the insight disseminated must be useful for taking part in 
discussions and making a personal judgement on the 
possibilities and usefulness of the technology.   
- Project purpose. It entails, in this case, to explain the 
purpose and mission of fall prevention. The focus lies on 
current project goals, especially on the purpose of the co-
design process. The questions to be addressed here concern 
what the project is set out to achieve, why co-design is 
employed as part of the project, and what are the 
expectations of co-design. The different participant groups 
need different messages here, since catering for all is 
decisive for the continued process.  
- Story telling. The participants of this project were asked 
to give their own accounts of the problem area, in this case 
personal or other people’s experiences of fall situations. This 
meant that all participants told their stories, including tech 
people, old persons (users), health care experts, project 
leaders and researchers. The purpose of this was to share an 
insight into the problems of fall prevention but also to make 
everyone personally engaged in the problem. This does not 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

only involve knowing about the particular stories, but also 
creating a personal understanding, which is important for all, 
not least for the professionals.  
3) Action set: Requirements – initial design 
- Initial suggestions for technical solutions. Solution 
providers give presentations and demonstrations, including 
both those engaged in the project and selected external 
solution providers. The sessions comprise the initial testing 
of solutions, whereby the design group is given the 
opportunity to see and interact with the solutions (in dry 
runs) in a conference setting.  
- Technology adaptation. Based on experiences, a 
selection is made of solutions that seem to fit and of 
redevelopment, when needed. The initial testing, in turn, 
leads to adapting solutions to current situations and needs.  
- Preparing for field testing. This comprises the 
presentation and demonstration of solutions in a conference 
setting, including actions such as practical planning for field 
tests, the assignment of technology to people, and 
instructions for its operation. 
- Field testing: installation and practical support. 
Packages of solutions are installed on site in the participants’ 
homes. If and when needed, revisits or telephone 
consultancy to fix problems, capture feedback or change 
equipment are performed. The co-designers use the 
equipment at home and in everyday life, making notes of 
problems and experiences of use in general.  
- Open dialogues. This may be regarded as a key action 
in a focus group style for creating a deeper understanding of 
problem scenarios and of how technology can support a 
better life situation. Small mixed groups of people from the 
different sides of the design groups are engaged in open 
conversations around topics provided by a session leader. 
The open and dialogue-styled format is important for 
allowing all participants to give their views on the topic. The 
purpose is not to create a consensus around certain solutions 
but to open up new views on problematic situations, users’ 
needs and technological possibilities.  
4) Action set: Design of the solution. 
- Feedback sessions from users. Continuous feedback 
may consist of, e.g., conversations, telephone calls, emails, 
or meetings between technical staff and testing co-design 
users.  Both physical and web-conference meetings were 
used to sum up the findings.  
- Technical evaluation. Based on field testing, technical 
evaluations of how the solution performed is conducted. 
Technical deficiencies or problems of practical use are 
analyzed, and alternative solutions are developed. If changes 
are deemed serious enough, it might be necessary to reiterate 
the field testing of the solution.  
- In-depth analysis of the key systems that have emerged 
during the process and how these have performed vis-à-vis 
goals and expectations. Here an expanded analysis is 
undertaken, connecting back to, for instance, overall project 
goals, more general applications, business cases or general 
feasibility.  
- The design of a solution package for large-scale field 
testing. This could be seen as the final stopping point of the 
first part of the project and a period of transition to a second 
part consisting of large-scale testing. 
B. Cycles of flexible and adaptive co-design 
There is need for a continuous adaption of the co-design 
process to ensure that the different participating parties 
evolve on a par with each other. This means a continuous 
process involving the re-planning of actions taken during 
the design process. The project works with a general pattern 
of four types or phases of project activities: Planning 
session, physical meetings, home activities/testing, and web 
sessions with user feedback. Four full cycles were 
performed in the reported project, ending with a final 
physical meeting of the whole design group. It should be 
noted that “planning actions” are not limited only to the 
“planning” phase of the cycle. To illustrate this, an example 
of one such cycle is provided.  
TABLE 1. EXAMPLE OF ONE CO-DESIGN CYCLE. 
Phase 
Actions 
Planning, including 
representatives of all 
groups 
- Feedback analysis 
- Agenda setting, meeting 
- Design group communication 
Meeting - Physical 
meeting with all of the 
parties of the design 
process.  
- Facts about fall detection 
- Technology presentations 
- Group discussion about living 
longer at home 
Field work - the user at 
home acting and observing. 
- Gear testing at home,  
- Recording habits 
- Critical incident reports 
Web meeting, feedback 
and reflection meeting 
- Feedback of experiences such as 
gear testing 
- Suggesting future actions 
 
To achieve an adaptable approach, we combine actions 
during the different phases, based on the outcomes from the 
continuous planning and feedback actions. Table 2 
combines the phases of a cycle in a co-design process. The 
key to a successful planning of the next cycle is repeated 
feedback action during all the phases of the cycle. The 
feedback is the challenge of the project and is central to 
involving the end-users in particular in the design process. 
As the planning session is central, representatives of the 
different parties should be present, including the users.  To 
instill a feeling of empowerment especially in the end user 
is necessary for the dynamics of an innovative design 
process.  
V. 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The challenges of co-design and the need for an adaptive 
process can be discussed from several angles. The main 
arguments revolve around the notion of biases, as they 
always influence the proceedings of the design process. To 
elevate the knowledge of those concerned with the project is, 
as we argue in this paper, a key aspect in avoiding the 
problems of skewed design and ineffective solutions. In the 
following, we discuss a number of issues that can help 
avoiding such problems in the project.  
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

There is need for co-design methodology expertise, 
considering the set of people with separate skills that form 
the driving force of the project. Too often, designers with a 
background in health care are project leaders and thus 
become the ones defining the rationale of the project, as well 
as planning the co-design process. In co-design, a very 
complex stakeholder landscape must be managed. To pick 
the key driving persons from one of the dominant parties will 
eventually tilt the progression in that direction. However 
careful or active those forming a project management are in 
their effort to create a balance, they will be affected by their 
professional background. A neutral corner of project 
management with a methodology expert background could 
be one path to explore, as a means of working with these 
types of problems.  
Learning during co-design helps participants to evolve in 
areas of which their knowledge is low was present at the 
very outset of the project. Self-understanding and the 
articulation of user experiences are equally important as 
learning new things. To evoke the everyday experience of 
living during design sessions might be harder. Users need to 
be given time to work with their own experiences to be able 
to retell them in the design setting.  
One challenge is to clarify and explain the mission and 
purpose of the project as well as how to convey an 
understanding of its rationale. A project means different 
things to different groups. As initial expectations can vary in 
a very high degree, it can be a hard task to convey the core 
message to everyone. However, a unitary view of the project 
might not always be an advantage, but everyone must at least 
be given the chance of understanding (a topic further 
discussed in a coming section). A solid piece of advice 
would be never to take anything for granted, not even the 
most basic assumptions.  
It is necessary to achieve a human-technology balance. 
There is a challenge in how to set up a project so as to 
achieve a good balance between creativity and innovation 
based on the needs of users and the possibilities that 
technical experts offer or perceive as possible. This division 
seems still to be a very important one, which remains very 
hard to handle. The experience from the current project is 
that it is actually harder to get the technical professionals to 
engage in user perspectives than for users to adopt a 
technological way of thinking. The human-technology 
balance question as posed in this section underlines the need 
of raising both experts and users to relevant knowledge 
levels in their respective areas. This includes the necessity of 
becoming aware of hidden biases and assumptions. To 
achieve this requires a more neutral project management 
perspective which is not entrenched in any particular corner.   
An EBCD project in a research setting functions under 
special 
conditions. 
The 
differences 
between 
an 
organizational development situation and a research setting 
could strongly influence how EBCD works out. One very 
important aspect here could be the ethics approval, which is 
required in a research context. An approval from an ethics 
board is customary, but the understanding of EBCD and its 
open-ended plan of action could create difficulties to obtain 
this. As the process is a search for unknown solutions, it 
might be hard to predict all that will happen. This could be 
seen as a weakness in the eyes of an ethics board.  
There is a hard question of how to deal with a multiple 
and complex goal structure. The sentiment of co-design all 
too often seems be a feeling of constituting a big family that 
will somehow get along. This might not be the case, nor even 
very desirable. Co-design seems to build on a consensus 
view of the group and the design issues. A mechanism for 
handling disagreements seems in general to be lacking. The 
experiences of this project show that technology restraints 
often obtain the role of putting discipline into the design 
group, by claiming “this cannot be done”, or “this will be too 
expensive” and similar  arguments that often stop 
discussions. A great many actions within a co-design process 
aim at getting “all on board”. There could be more active 
ways of exploring the potentials of dissent as a source of 
innovation and thinking outside of the box solutions. On the 
methodology side, this should be explored by using tools and 
methods that can handle such rather delicate processes. A 
comparison could be made with ‘critical systems thinking’ 
schools [20] where expressions of dissent are regarded as a 
fact and systems design as a way of resolving them and 
creating better solutions for more people. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The conclusion of this research is that a standard model 
of co-design in the area of eHealth, such as EBCD, must be 
viewed as a learning vehicle that enables the different 
parties to acquire the necessary knowledge to be productive 
in the project. The basic model of EBCD seems to rely on 
facts that can be acquired from participants. In this article, 
we argue for co-design as a formative process of creation 
and discovery based on experiences of both patients and 
professionals, especially in the early “fuzzy front-end” 
stage, as focused on in this paper. An adaptable approach to 
co-design is needed which tracks the learning progress and 
adds necessary co-design action to ensure the ability of all 
participants to grow and learn. The empowerment process 
includes all the different parties, like users, health care 
professionals and tech people. As there is a clear trap if the 
co-design planners and leaders have too clear a connection 
to any of these areas, a more definite co-design expertise 
should be at the helm of the process. Compared to a 
traditional EBCD approach [2], a more iterative and multi-
track approach is proposed here, for the purpose of elevating 
all parties to a point where they can be active and co-
responsible. There is a cross connection of fact and 
empowerment dimensions in co-design that warrants more 
research into its theory and practice. The outcome of this 
particular project shows the necessity for high levels of 
engagement and drive to find the right solutions that will 
work in practice both in a technological sense and in the life 
world of the user. To achieve this reality the knowledge and 
learning dimension must be at the core of the co-design 
process. No co-design is possible unless there are well 
planned processes of what could be described as “co-
learning”. In this study, we have proposed some outlines of 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

what a method of co-design could look like, but further 
research should be performed to formulate a consistent 
concept of co-design by co-learning.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Celtic+ and Vinnova, 
founding the project FRONT-VL, Project-ID: C2016/2-5. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Bate and G. Robert, Bringing user experience to healthcare 
improvement, Oxford: Radcliffe, 2007. 
[2] S. Donetto, V. Tsianakas and G. Robert, Using Experience-
based Co-design to improve the quality of healthcare: 
mapping where we are now and establishing future directions, 
London: King’s College London, 2014. 
[3] E. B-N. Sander and J. P. Stappers, “Co-creation and the new 
landscapes of design”, International Journal of Cocreation in 
Design and the Arts. 4(1) pp. 5-18, 2008. 
[4] M. Ward, et al., “Using Co-Design to Develop a Collective 
Leadership Intervention for Healthcare Teams to Improve 
Safety Culture”, International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 15(6), 1182, pp. 1-17, 2018. 
[5] R. Blackwell, K. Lowton, G. Robert, C. Grudzen and Grocott, 
P. “Using Experience-based Co-design with older patients, 
their families and staff to improve palliative care experiences 
in the Emergency Department: A reflective critique on the 
process and outcomes”, International Journal of Nursing 
Studies, 68, pp. 83-94, 2017. 
[6] S. Hintistan, N. Nural, D. Cilingir and A. Gursoy, “The effect 
of nursing telephone counselling upon chemotherapy related 
symptoms and quality of life among patients with lung 
cancer”, European Journal of Oncology Nursing, 18, pp. S14, 
2014. 
[7] P. Outlaw, S. Tripathi, J. Baldwin, and Z. Malpus, “Using 
patient experiences to develop services for chronic pain”, 
British Journal of Pain, 12(2), pp. 122-131, 2018. 
[8] H. Gleeson, A. Calderon, V. Swami, J. Deighton, M. Wolpert, 
and J. Edbrooke-Childs, “Systematic review of approaches to 
using patient experience data for quality improvement in 
healthcare settings”, BMJ Open, 6(8), E011907, pp. 1-11 
2016.  
[9] V. Palmer, et al., “The Participatory Zeitgeist: An explanatory 
theoretical model of change in an era of coproduction and 
codesign in healthcare improvement”, Medical Humanities, 
28, pp. 1-11, July, 2018. 
[10] P. R. Brocklehurst, et al., “How do we incorporate patient 
views into the design of healthcare services for older people: a 
discussion paper”, BMC Oral Health, 18(1), pp. 1–7, 2018.  
[11] E. Matthews, M. Cowman, and S. Denieffe, “Using 
experience‐based co‐design for the development of 
physical activity provision in rehabilitation and recovery 
mental health care” Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health 
Nursing, 24(7), pp. 545-552, 2017. 
[12] S. Gustavsson, and  T. Andersson, “Patient involvement 2.0: 
Experience-based co-design supported by action research”, 
Action Research, pp. 1-23, August, 2017. 
[13] S. Gustavsson, “Improvements in neonatal care; using 
experience-based co-design”, International Journal of Health 
Care Quality Assurance, 27(5), pp. 427-438, 2014. 
[14] D. Hill, L. Walter, J. Casas, K. DiDomenico, J. Szymczak, 
and A. Feudtner, “The codesign of an interdisciplinary team-
based intervention regarding initiating palliative care in 
pediatric oncology”, Supportive Care in Cancer, 26(9), pp. 
3249-3256, 2018. 
[15] J. Langley, D. Wolstenholme, and J. Cooke, “Collective 
making' as knowledge mobilisation: The contribution of 
participatory design in the co-creation of knowledge in 
healthcare”, BMC Health Services Research, 18(1), pp. 1-10, 
2018. 
[16] C. Argyris, R. Putnam, and D. M. Smith, Action Science: 
Concepts, Methods, and Skills for Research and Intervention, 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1985. 
[17] D. Schön, The reflective practitioner: How professionals think 
in action, Aldershot: Arena, 1995. 
[18] B. Taylor, Reflective practice for nurses and midwives: a 
practical guide, Allen and Unwin, St Leonards, 2000. 
[19] B. Taylor, B. Bulmer, L. Hill, C. Luxford, J. Mcfarlane, J. 
Reed, and K. Stirling, “Exploring idealism in palliative 
nursing care through reflective practice and action research”, 
International Journal of Palliative Nursing, 8(7), pp. 324-30, 
2002. 
[20] R. L. Flood, and M. C. Jackson, Creative Problem Solving: 
Total Systems Intervention, Wiley, Chichester, 1991. 
 
 
TABLE 2. ACTIONS AND MEETINGS MATRIX DURING A DESIGN CYCLE. 
Actions type 
Cycle phase 
Planning 
Physical meeting 
Field test: User at 
home 
Web conference 
Planning Actions 
 
 
 
 
Initiating phase: facts and purpose 
 
 
 
 
Requirements – initial design 
 
 
 
 
Design of the initial solution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

