Strategic Framework for Cloud Computing Decision-Making in Healthcare Sector 
in  Saudi Arabia  
 
Fawaz Alharbi1,2  
1Huraymila College of Science and 
Humanities 
Shaqra University 
Saudi Arabia 
a030659c@student.staffs.ac.uk 
Anthony Atkins2  
2School of Computing 
Staffordshire University  
Stafford, UK 
a.s.atkins@staffs.ac.uk 
Clare Stanier2 
2School of Computing 
Staffordshire University  
Stafford, UK 
 C.Stanier@staffs.ac.uk
 
 
 
Abstract—This paper outlines some of the challenging issues 
faced by traditional healthcare services in Saudi Arabia (SA) 
covering a relatively large geographical area including remote 
areas requiring healthcare facilities similar to urban areas.  
There are also issues of shortages of healthcare professionals 
together with an increase of chronic diseases, such as diabetes, 
hypertension, heart diseases etc. Many initiatives have been 
undertaken to reform healthcare systems including e-Health 
and the concept of Cloud Computing. This paper discusses 
some of the issues for e-health projects and how Cloud 
Computing will help in solving some of these issues. Then, the 
paper proposes a strategic framework for Cloud Computing 
decision making processes based on a Holistic Approach 
Framework for use in Saudi Arabia to assist in improvements 
for stakeholders involved in healthcare services. 
Keywords: Cloud Computing; e-health; Strategic framework;  
Saudi Arabia. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Improving the healthcare system is one of the main 
priorities for many governments and organisations and the 
traditional healthcare system is facing many issues.  
The increase of life expectancy is an issue for the 
traditional healthcare system for instance life expectancy in 
Canada is 82 years, 75 years in SA, 80 years in the UK and 
in the USA 79 years [1]. Geography is another obstacle for 
the development of the healthcare system for many nations 
for example Canada  covers an area of 10 million km2 with a 
population of approximately 30 million and in comparison  
SA has 2.2 million  km2 and a population of 27 million both 
countries having remote sparsely populated areas [2]. 
Providing healthcare for all citizens with the same quality 
particularly in rural areas such as in SA results in challenging 
issues for traditional healthcare organisations [3]. The 
shortage of healthcare professionals, such as physicians, 
nurses and pharmacists together with the increase of chronic 
diseases, such as diabetes, hypertension, and heart diseases, 
and childhood obesity contribute to the issues for healthcare 
systems [2] and these factors contribute the higher 
operational cost of health services provision in SA.  Total 
expenditure on health in SA has been increased from 5.5% in 
2008 to 6.8% in 2012 of the national budget [4]. 
Many initiatives have been implemented to deal with 
these challenges and to find ways to reform the healthcare 
systems for examples privatisation of healthcare services and 
the movement toward preventive healthcare. Another 
initiative is the use of information and communication 
technology (ICT) in health organisations to deliver 
healthcare more efficiently and effectively. This movement 
towards applying ICT in healthcare systems is subsumed by 
the term e-health.  Eysenbach [5] defined e-health as ‘an 
emerging field in the intersection of medical informatics, 
public health and business, referring to health services and 
information delivered or enhanced through the Internet and 
related technologies. In a broader sense, the term 
characterizes not only a technical development, but also a 
state-of-mind, a way of thinking, an attitude, and a 
commitment for networked, global thinking, to improve 
health care locally, regionally, and worldwide by using 
information and communication technology’. This definition 
is preferable because it takes e-health beyond the technology 
aspect [6]. It covers other aspects that may affect healthcare 
such as business and organisational issues. Although this 
definition was presented in 2001, new technologies such as 
mobile phones and Cloud Computing can fit well in this 
definition.    
E-health encompasses many applications, systems and 
services. Each system has different functions and different 
stakeholders’ perspectives. E-health or Health Information 
technology (HIT) provides many benefits for health 
organisations and patients.   It eases the information sharing 
for patients, physicians and other clinicians [7]. The adoption 
of HIT in hospitals improves health care quality and safety 
[8]. E-health also reduces human errors in medical 
procedures [7]. Many e-health applications have been used 
as a medium for education and behaviour change for patients 
and physicians [8].   
Current e-health practices face many challenges from 
development to implementation. The challenges of e-health 
projects can be categorized into six general categories 
(Economic, Technical, Organizational, Behavioural and 
Environmental and Legal) [9]–[11]. One of the main issues 
facing e-health is the need to change the traditional business 
model of healthcare system. Current healthcare systems are 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

doctor-centred, reactive and focused on disease. This should 
be changed to patient-centred, proactive and preventive and 
focused on quality of life and well-being [6]. The higher cost 
of implementing HIT projects is considered another critical 
barrier for e-health. The cost of IT systems in healthcare 
services is very expensive due to the higher cost in terms of 
capital expenditure (CAPEX) and operational expenditure 
(OPEX). Maintenance, supporting and updating ICT projects 
in health organisations are challenging and require further 
funding and support. Another obstacle that faces some e-
health projects is the need for skill enhancement in the 
development, management and maintenance of ICT projects 
in healthcare organisations [12]. Additionally, change will be 
required in work procedures and routines for the healthcare 
providers. This change will affect the healthcare services and 
the related administrative processes [9].  However, this issue 
has been overlooked by researchers [11]. Support from top 
management is vital for widespread adoption of e-health. 
This support can be hindered because of the high cost and 
other risks that allocated with HIT projects [11]. 
To overcome e-health issues and problems, many 
healthcare organisations are moving towards new business 
models and leveraging technologies. One of the new 
computing models is Cloud Computing.  
The aim of this paper is to develop a strategic framework 
for Cloud Computing decision making processes based on 
Holistic Approach Framework. This paper is organised as 
follows. 
Section 
II 
describes 
current 
E-health 
implementation in Saudi Arabia. Section III presents the 
concept of Cloud Computing and why it useful in the domain 
of e-health. Section IV discusses the related works. In 
section V, the proposed framework will be presented. 
Section VI concludes the paper.  
II. E-HEALTH IN SAUDI ARABIA:  
The Saudi government has noticed the importance of 
using ICT to provide high quality services to Saudi citizens. 
As a result, the first national E- government strategy was 
launched in 2005. Consequently, many healthcare services 
providers have adopted some ICT solutions in their facilities. 
In 2011, the Ministry of Health (MOH) launched the 
National E-health Strategy to support the primary MOH 
business goals [13]. The adoption of HIT in Saudi healthcare 
organisations is still low for many reasons [14]. Khudair [15] 
discussed the implementation of ICT in healthcare 
organisations from physicians’ perspective. The researcher 
expounded the reasons as poor leadership, the weakness of 
the information system infrastructure and technical support 
and the absence of implementation strategy. Khalifa [14] 
found that factors related to human dimensions such as 
shortage of health informatics specialists, lack of experience 
of computer applications and lack of experience and 
knowledge of using EMRs (Electronic Medical Records) are 
the main barriers that hinder successful implementation of 
EMRs. The paper also stated that financial barriers such as 
high initial cost of EMRs implementation and high operation 
and maintenance costs of EMRs are the second category of 
barriers that challenge EMR use in Saudi hospitals. Alkraiji, 
Jackson and Murray [16] studied the barriers to the adoption 
of health data standards in SA. They found other barriers in 
addition to the barriers mentioned in [14]. Issues related to 
technology context such as complexity, compatibility and 
insufficient IT infrastructure could delay the adoption of 
health data standards. Hasanain and Cooper [17] found social 
barriers such as language and resistance to the use of new 
systems affected EMR implementation in Saudi hospitals.  
They also mentioned some technical barriers such as:  
instability of EMR vendors and lack of computers for staff.  
As a result of these barriers, implementation of e-health 
services in SA is still facing difficulties.  However, there are 
some success stories such as the King Faisal Specialist 
Hospital and Research Centre (KFSH) which has almost 
fully implemented an EMR system [17]. Despite these 
barriers, Healthcare providers in Saudi Arabia have 
demonstrated a willingness to implement and improve e-
health services. This creates a foundation for the use of new 
technologies and models that may move them forward such 
as the adoption of Cloud Computing. 
III. 
MIGRATION OF E-HEALTH TO CLOUD E-HEALTH: 
A. The concept of Cloud Computing: 
The continuous revolution and evolution of ICT has 
affected the way that organisations conduct their business. 
The ICT industry has moved through many stages, starting 
from mainframe computing to Cloud Computing. Cloud 
Computing is a new computing paradigm that has changed 
the way of delivering IT services [18].  
 Although there is no generally accepted definition of 
Cloud Computing [19] [20], most of the definitions 
emphasise some aspects. First of all, Cloud Computing is a 
model of delivering IT services and resources not new 
technology.  Secondly, the provisioning of resources is 
automatic and with a minimum of human interaction. 
Thirdly, the access to the large pool resources is over a 
network. Fourthly, IT services and resources are available on 
demand with dynamic scalability and elasticity. The 
provisioning of IT resources should be independent of device 
and location (i.e., ubiquity).  Finally, the use of IT resources 
must be built on a clear business model and clear 
measurement methods. Figure 1 provides a Cloud 
Computing definition schema based on National Institute of 
Standards and Technology's (NIST) definition [21]. 
In literature, researchers have recognised many benefits 
and advantages for Cloud Computing. Costs reduction in 
either operational [20] [22] or upfront costs [20] is 
considered as one of the main benefits of Cloud Computing. 
For example, Maharashtra Government in India saved Rs. 50 
Crore by using Cloud Computing solutions [23]. Decreasing 
the upfront cost will eliminate obstacles to entry in new 
markets [20] [24]. This could be a clear advantage 
particularly for Small and Medium sized Enterprises (SMEs) 
[20]. On-demand promises of Cloud Computing provide 
scalability and elasticity advantages that allow the 
organisations to react quickly for their customer demand 
[22]. Another business benefit from Cloud Computing is the 
flexibility to react to changing market conditions [20]. Green 
computing is another advantage of Cloud Computing since it 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

has the potential to reduce companies’ carbon footprints 
[18]. Cloud Computing can eliminate IT obstacles to 
innovation [20] [25]. Cloud Computing also helps 
organisations to provide new services that were not possible 
before as result of higher cost for IT solutions [20].  As a 
result, all the benefits and advantages of Cloud Computing 
enables organisation to become more focused on their core 
business [20].  
    Cloud Computing has its own disadvantages and risks. 
One potential risk is Data Lock-In where customers may 
have difficulty of extracting their data from the Cloud [26].  
User privacy could provide an issue for Cloud Computing 
[20] and security issues are the main obstacles for some 
organisation for not going Cloud [22]. Lack of proper 
regulations and standards is another barrier to Cloud 
Computing adoption.  However, there is more research being 
undertaken to deal with the obstacles of Cloud Computing 
either via technology [22] or policies and legislations [20].   
B. E-health Cloud: 
 The Cloud computing market in healthcare is reported to 
reach more than $5.4 Billion by 2017 [27]. Many researchers 
suggested that the health care industry should move toward 
Cloud computing. Some researchers have discussed the 
opportunities and challenges of Cloud Computing in e-health 
[3] [28] [29]. They indicated many advantages for cloud in e-
health such as better patient care, reduced cost, enhanced the 
support for research, and overcome the shortage. However, 
they pointed out some issues like privacy and security issues, 
data ownership and lack of legislations and standards. 
Examples of real and lead projects in the healthcare domain 
include the MUNICH platform and DACAR project. 
DACAR is a first e-Health Cloud platform in Europe aiming 
to develop and implement a secure platform in the Cloud to 
support Data Capture and Auto-Identification technology [3]. 
DACAR has been implemented successfully in London’s 
Chelsea and Westminster hospital [30]. 
Cloud computing may solve some of the challenges of 
healthcare organisations in Saudi Arabia. Since financial 
issues are affecting e-health projects in the country, Cloud 
Computing can offer economic savings by decreasing the 
initial and operational costs of e-health projects in Saudi 
hospitals. Cloud Computing can eliminate the obstacle of 
shortage of health informatics and IT since less technicians 
than before will be required by the healthcare organisations 
[30]. Cloud-based medical applications will also make IT 
departments at healthcare organisations to focus more on 
supporting the implementation of e-health projects by 
moving some of their responsibilities to the Cloud providers’ 
side. For healthcare organisations, Cloud Computing will 
provide better integration and exchange of medical records 
across multiple organizations. By using Cloud Computing, 
Saudi healthcare organisations will be able to have   
sufficient computing resources to deal with large amount of 
data that are created by e-health services. This feature will 
also help R&D departments in healthcare organisation on the 
national level. Cloud Computing with collaboration with 
other technologies such as Internet of Things, m-health and 
Big data will help reshape healthcare services in Saudi 
Arabia.  
Some researchers recommended that Cloud Computing 
in general and in e-health particularly is still in its early 
stages and need more research and efforts [3] [22] [28].  
Although, there are many studies and projects about 
Cloud Computing in the health sector, most of them are 
focusing on the operational level.  Successful Cloud 
Computing adoption in the health sector requires strategic 
planning and risk assessment to avoid the risks and gain the 
full advantages of this new model [28].  
IV. 
RELATED WORK: 
In healthcare, few studies have discussed Cloud 
Computing decision-making procedures [3]. Kuo [28] 
recommended four aspects to be assessed when adopting the 
health Cloud Computing: management, technology, security, 
and legal. Kuo also proposed a Healthcare Cloud Computing 
Strategic Planning (HC2SP) model. This model could react 
as a SWOT analysis for health organisations to determine 
how to migrate from traditional health services to cloud-
based services. This model did not focus on the decision 
making process. Lian, Yen and Wang [31] studied the 
decision to adopt Cloud Computing. They integrated 
Technology-Organisation-Environment (TOE) framework 
and Human-Organisation-Technology fit (HOT-fit) model to 
study the adoption of Cloud Computing in Taiwan. Their 
study indicated that the five most critical factors are: data 
security, perceived technical competence, costs, top 
manager’s support, and complexity. This study focused on 
small and medium sized hospitals in Taiwan. Hence, the 
result of this paper would not be generalised to large 
hospitals. Rijnboutt and et al. [29] categorised the challenges 
that are facing the use of Cloud Computing in e-health 
Broad network 
access 
Cloud Computing 
Deployment 
Models 
Cloud computing 
service delivery 
models 
 
On-demand 
self-service 
Cloud Computing 
Characteristics 
Resource 
pooling 
Measured 
service 
 Rapid 
elasticity 
 Public Cloud 
 Private Cloud 
  Hybrid 
Cloud 
Community 
Cloud 
Infrastructure 
as service 
 Platform as 
service 
 Software as 
Service 
Figure 1. Cloud Computing Definition Schema 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

services into six categories (technical, privacy, legal, 
organisational, economical and medical).  However, this 
paper ignored environmental issues. Additionally, this model 
did not focus on the decision making process. 
Evaluating the existing frameworks for Cloud Computing 
decision-making, these frameworks are limited (i.e., they do 
not cover multiple perspectives). Current models and 
frameworks also focus mainly only on the operational and 
tactical level (i.e., ad hoc frameworks). Furthermore, while 
most of the frameworks are emphasising the technical side of 
Cloud Computing, they ignore the other sides such business 
and organisational. There is also a lack of quantitative 
measures in the reviewed frameworks. The use of 
quantitative measures within the framework is important 
because they make the decision-making process more 
accurate and objective [32]. Although, Low, Chen and Wu 
[33] pointed out that the influences of environmental and 
organisational factors on Cloud Computing adoption vary 
across different industry contexts, most of the frameworks 
are designed to be general and do not focus on specific 
sectors. Healthcare industry environments may vary across 
different countries. As a result, each country must be 
considered to be studied as individual case (i.e., private and 
public health care). Although, some concepts of Cloud 
Computing will be generic, some of the concepts will be 
different due to the variation of the contexts and country 
requirements. For example, Cloud Computing applications 
must comply with HIPAA privacy and security rules in USA 
[34]. 
Cloud Computing in Saudi Arabia has not received much 
attention [35] and little research has been conducted in 
studying the implementation of Cloud Computing in the 
country.  For example, Alharbi [36] studied users’ 
acceptance of Cloud Computing in Saudi Arabia based on 
Technology 
Acceptance 
Model 
(TAM). 
From 
an 
organisation level, Yamin [35] completed a survey of Cloud 
Computing awareness in Saudi Arabia. The study showed 
that Cloud technologies will be a new trend for Saudi’s 
organisations. However, this research provided a general 
view of Cloud Computing adoption in Saudi Arabia. Yamin 
claimed that his study is the first of its kind in Saudi Arabia. 
This indicates that adoption of Cloud Computing in Saudi 
Arabia in general (and in healthcare sector in particular) 
needs more investigative efforts.  
V. 
THE PROPOSED STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK FOR CLOUD 
COMPUTING DECISION-MAKING IN HEALTHCARE SECTOR: 
Many researchers have recognised a need to use holistic 
and 
multidisciplinary 
approaches 
when 
studying 
or 
designing HIT frameworks in healthcare [37] [38]. The 
framework is supposed to support the decision maker in 
health organisations in by covering multi perspectives. It will 
be also designed in a flexible way to be adaptable to 
changing market conditions. 
The decision of adopting Cloud Computing is potentially 
a complex process and consequently there are many 
perspectives to be considered. Thus, studying this process 
requires 
multi-perspective 
framework. 
The 
proposed 
framework will integrate more than one theoretical 
framework to make the suggested framework more robust 
and cover multi aspects of the organisation. TOE has been 
chosen as a concept for this research together with Strategic 
Triangle and HOT-fit. 
Since Cloud Computing is a new innovation of dealing 
with IT services [18] the appropriate framework is the one 
which is aiming to study innovation decision making at firm 
level. 
Technology-Organisation-Environment 
(TOE) 
Framework was introduced by Tornatzky, Fleischer and 
Chakrabarti [39].  This framework focuses on the process by 
which a firm adopts and implements technological 
innovations and how the technological context, the 
organisational context, and the environmental context can 
affect the implementation of new innovation. Oliveira and 
Martins [40] suggested that TOE framework is useful in 
studying the adoption decision-making process of different 
types of IT innovation. TOE studies the adoption decision-
making process at an organisation-level not at user-level 
which makes it relevant for this paper [20]. Many researchers 
have studied technology innovation based on TOE 
framework. Many examples could be mentioned here such as 
RFID Adoption in the Healthcare Industry [41],   in web site 
development [42], in e-commerce [43], in Cloud Computing 
adoption by SMEs in England [44] and in Cloud Computing 
adoption by hospitals in Taiwan [31]. Although, TOE 
framework has been implemented by many researchers for 
different technology innovation, some researchers argued 
that the TOE framework does not contain all the variables in 
each context. Hence, for new complex technology adoption 
such as Cloud Computing, more than one theoretical 
framework is required to express a better understanding of 
the adoption decision [33].  
Business concepts must be taken into consideration by 
any decision maker [20]. Thus the strategic triangle will be 
combined with TOE framework to add the strategic value to 
the proposed framework. The strategic triangle is a concept 
developed by Frenzel [45] which emphasises the importance 
for the organisations to have an alignment between three 
strategies 
perspectives 
(Business, 
Organisation 
and 
Information). This research will apply some of the concepts 
of a strategic framework for outsourcing decision-making 
that was called Holistic Approach Business, Information, and 
Organisation (HABIO). HABIO is a well-documented 
framework used for outsourcing, and has been discussed by 
many academic researchers [32]  [46]  [47]. 
Human factors are also critical in the adoption of any 
new IT innovation. Those factors should be considered 
carefully when making the decision of adopting Cloud 
Computing in health industry. Hence, Human, Organisation 
and Technology-fit (HOT-fit) framework will be integrated 
with previous frameworks. HOT-fit was introduced in [48] 
as an evaluation framework for health information systems. 
The proposed framework will be focused on five 
dimensions 
which 
are 
Organisation, 
Technology, 
Environment, Human and Business. The proposed strategic 
framework is presented in Figure 2. 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The technology dimension represents the technical issues 
that will affect the decision of Cloud Computing adoption. 
Health organisations which are intending to implement 
Cloud Computing need to assess all technological 
characteristics that available at the organisations. Relative 
advantage factor refers to checking if the adoption of Cloud 
Computing technology will have clear benefits over others 
technologies for certain health organisation. This factor is 
expected to be an important and positive significant factor 
for the decision of Cloud Computing adoption. Alharbi [36] 
showed that perceived usefulness will positively affect users’ 
attitude towards adopting cloud computing in Saudi 
organizations. Technology readiness could be an enabler 
factor of the decision of Cloud Computing adoption [49]. 
Some researchers found that existing infrastructure has a 
negative impact on the adoption of health data standards in 
Saudi Arabia [16]. However, Cloud Computing can solve the 
problem of the availability of IT resources. E-health usually 
encompasses many health information systems. Thus, 
compatibility of Cloud Computing implementation with 
existing IT systems inside the health organisation should be 
another factor to be consider when adopting Cloud 
technology [50]. Some Saudi healthcare organisations found 
difficulty in making new systems compatible with current 
clinical systems [51]. Consequently, the complexity can be a 
significant determinant for Cloud adoption [49]. In the 
healthcare industry, data security and privacy protection are 
required not only demanded by the patients themselves, but 
in most countries they are also required by law. Thus, data 
security should be essential factor that should be considered 
during any Cloud Computing implementation [50].  
The organisational factors also have their influences on 
the success or the failure of e-health projects. They are 
internal factors of an organization that are controlled and by 
the organization itself. They play an important role in the 
decision-making process. Top management support can be a 
significant factor in Cloud adoption [44]. This factor refers to 
how executives identify the nature and functions of Cloud 
Computing technology and how this technology will affect 
the overall organisation [44]. Current research showed that 
employees in managerial positions in Saudi organizations 
had positive attitudes toward Cloud Computing adoption 
[36]. However, the situation in healthcare organisations may 
be different due to the nature of such organisations. The 
successful adoption of new technologies requires various 
changes to be made to the organisational structure, such 
change may face resistance from physicians, administrative 
and IT staffs [48]. A recent study showed that resistance to 
the use of new system is affecting EMR implementation in 
Saudis hospitals [17]. This factor should be considered when 
adopting Cloud computing solution in health organisation. 
Firm size could be also considered as a factor that will affect 
the adoption of Cloud Computing [33]. 
Environmental context refers to the different attributes of 
the external world in which the organisation conducts its 
business [31]. The use of Cloud Computing in e-health will 
be affected by the relationship between different parties. 
Government legislation and policies can affect the decisions 
of health firms trying to adopt new technology [48]. With the 
current security and privacy issues in the Cloud, this factor 
must be considered carefully. Additionally, most health 
organisations rely on trading partners for their IT solutions 
so sufficient support from the Cloud vendors will be an 
influential factor affecting the decision of Cloud Computing 
adoption [33]. Instability of EMR vendors was found to be 
one of the barriers of EMR implementation in Saudi 
Hospitals [17]. Another factor that is associated with 
sufficient support from the vendor is the availability of 
external expertise [32]. E-health usually encompasses many 
health information systems and requires expertise from 
various domains such as medicine, IT and business 
processes. Thus the availability of such expertise will affect 
the decision of Cloud Computing adoption.  
Human dimension should be considered before the 
implementation of any IT project as it is one of the factors 
that influence the adoption of an innovative technology [48]. 
Hospitals usually are slow in adopting new information 
technologies due to the decision makers’ characteristics [52]. 
Thus, the innovativeness of decision makers’ considerably 
influences the decision to adopt Cloud Computing [31]. 
Another factor which will affect the decision of Cloud 
Computing adoption is the capability of IT staff inside the 
hospital to deal with such technologies [31]. Physicians with 
insufficient technical knowledge can be consider as another 
barrier for e-health projects in general [11]. Thus, prior 
technology experience or the Cloud/IT skills of non-IT 
employees are also expected to impact the diffusion of Cloud 
Computing inside health organisations [53]. Human factors 
Figure 2. The Proposed Strategic Framework for Cloud 
Computing Decision-Making in Healthcare Sector 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

were identified as the main obstacles of successful 
implementation of EMR in Saudi healthcare organisations 
[14]. 
Business perspective refers to the consideration of 
business issues related to the adoption decision.  The first 
factor is the financial issues regarding to the implementation 
of Cloud Computing solutions.  The cost should be analysed 
in both capital expenditure (CAPEX) and operational 
expenditure (OPEX). The decision regarding which 
deployment models should be implemented also needs to be 
discussed carefully [29]. The organisation should have clear 
procurement strategies for Cloud Computing. Another 
related issue is the impact of the adoption of Cloud 
Computing on medical and business processes [3]. The 
absence of implementation strategy has negatively affected 
e-health projects in Saudi Arabia [15]. The use of Cloud 
Computing will help the hospitals to move from the 
traditional health care model (doctor-centred model) to the 
new health care model (patient-centred model) [6]. Another 
factor that should be discussed is the strategic value that will 
be added to the health firm by using Cloud Computing 
technologies. Adopting Cloud Computing will give the 
possibility for new classes of applications and delivers 
services that were not possible before, such as mobile health, 
telemedicine and big data [3].  
The proposed framework will help health organisations 
in the decision making process by evaluating various factors 
affecting the Cloud Computing adoption. Migrating towards 
Cloud needs a multi prospective strategy that supports Cloud 
Computing capabilities [52]. This framework will try to help 
the health organisation in bridging the gap between their IT 
projects and providing better medical care with lower cost 
and high standards.  
VI. 
CONCLSUION AND FUTURE WORK 
E-health is one of the ambitious initiatives that try to 
solve the traditional healthcare challenges. However, e-
health projects usually face many issues. The higher cost and 
complexity of e-health projects beside the shortage of skilled 
staff in ICT domain can be consider as obstacles of e-health. 
Cloud Computing is a leveraging technology that provides 
many solutions for e-health projects. Healthcare firms may 
have many concerns about Cloud Computing. Thus, adopting 
Cloud Computing solutions in healthcare domain requires 
strategic plan that cover multi prospective.   
This paper provides a holistic framework that can support 
healthcare organisations in their movement toward Cloud 
Computing.  This framework covers five main aspects that 
are Organisation, Technology, Environment, Human and 
Business. 
In future, a questionnaire and focus groups will be used 
to collect the necessary data amongst Saudi healthcare 
informatics participants. Factor analysis will be used to test 
the validity and reliability of the items constructed to 
measure the identified factors.  
Finally, this framework is still work-in-progress. So, it will 
have more enhancements in the near future to cover all 
relevant factors that may affect Cloud Computing adoption 
in healthcare organisation in Saudi Arabia. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank the financial support of the 
Ministry of Higher Education- Saudi Arabia and also to 
Alison Atkins in assisting in the proof reading of the paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] WHO, “World health statistics 2013,” 2013. 
[2] M. Almalki, G. Fitzgerald, and M. Clark, “Health care system 
in Saudi Arabia: an overview.,” East. Mediterr. Health J., vol. 
17, no. 10, Oct. 2011, pp. 784–93. 
[3] E. AbuKhousa, N. Mohamed, and J. Al-Jaroodi, “e-Health 
Cloud: Opportunities and Challenges,” Futur. Internet, vol. 4, 
no. 4, Jul. 2012, pp. 621–645. 
[4] MOH, “Health Statistics Annual Book,” 2012. 
[5] G. Eysenbach, “What is e-health?,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 
3, no. 2, 2001, pp. 1–3. 
[6] S.-H. Chen, P.-C. Wen, and C.-K. Yang, “Business concepts 
of 
systemic 
service 
innovations 
in 
e-Healthcare,” 
Technovation, Apr. 2014, pp. 1–12. 
[7] V. Kumar, “Impact of Health Information Systems on 
Organizational Health Communication and Behavior,” 
Internet J. Allied Heal. Sci. Pract., vol. 9, no. 2, 2011, p. 1. 
[8] S. G. Cunningham, D. J. Wake, A. Waller, and A. D. Morris, 
“Definitions of eHealth,” in eHealth, Care and Quality of 
Life, A. Gaddi, F. Capello, and M. Manca, Eds. Milano: 
Springer Milan, 2014, pp. 15–30. 
[9] M. M. Altuwaijri, “Electronic-health in Saudi Arabia,” Saudi 
Med. J., vol. 29, no. 2, 2008, pp. 171–178. 
[10] G. Paré and M.-C. Trudel, “Knowledge barriers to PACS 
adoption and implementation in hospitals.,” Int. J. Med. 
Inform., vol. 76, no. 1, Jan. 2007, pp. 22–33. 
[11] A. Boonstra and M. Broekhuis, “Barriers to the acceptance of 
electronic medical records by physicians from systematic 
review to taxonomy and interventions.,” BMC Health Serv. 
Res., vol. 10, Jan. 2010, p. 231. 
[12] S. N. Khalifehsoltani and M. R. Gerami, “E-health 
Challenges, Opportunities and Experiences of Developing 
Countries,” 2010 Int. Conf. e-Education, e-Business, e-
Management e-Learning, 2010, pp. 264–268. 
[13] MOH, “National e-Health Strategy,” 2011. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/Ministry/nehs/Pages/default.aspx. 
[Accessed: 20-Sep-2014]. 
[14] M. Khalifa, “Barriers to Health Information Systems and 
Electronic Medical Records Implementation. A Field Study of 
Saudi Arabian Hospitals,” in The 3rd International 
Conference on Current and Future Trends of Information and 
Communication Technologies in Healthcare (ICTH), vol. 21,  
2013, pp. 335–342. 
[15] A. A. Khudair, “Electronic Health Records : Saudi Physicians 
’ Perspective.” in Appropriate Healthcare Technologies for 
Developing Countries, 2008, pp. 1–7. 
[16] A. Alkraiji, T. Jackson, and I. Murray, “Barriers to the 
widespread adoption of health data standards: an exploratory 
qualitative study in tertiary healthcare organizations in saudi 
arabia.,” J. Med. Syst., vol. 37, no. 2, Apr. 2013, p. 9895. 
[17] R. A. Hasanain and H. Cooper, “Solutions to Overcome 
Technical and Social Barriers to Electronic Health Records 
Implementation in Saudi Public and Private Hospitals,” vol. 8, 
no. 1, 2014, pp. 46–63. 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[18] N. Sultan and S. van de Bunt-Kokhuis, “Organisational 
culture and cloud computing: coping with a disruptive 
innovation,” Technol. Anal. Strateg. Manag., vol. 24, no. 2, 
2012, pp. 167–179. 
[19] A. Asatiani, U. Apte, E. Penttinen, M. Ronkko, and T. 
Saarinen, “Outsourcing of Disaggregated Services in Cloud-
Based Enterprise Information Systems,” in System Sciences 
(HICSS), 2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on, 
2014, pp. 1268–1277. 
[20] S. Marston, Z. Li, S. Bandyopadhyay, J. Zhang, and A. 
Ghalsasi, “Cloud computing—The business perspective,” 
Decis. Support Syst., vol. 51, no. 1, 2011, pp. 176–189. 
[21] P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing,” National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(U.S. Department of Commerce), U.S.A, 2011. 
[22] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Griffith, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. 
Konwinski, G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, and I. Stoica, “A 
view of cloud computing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 53, no. 4, 
2010, pp. 50–58. 
[23] S. Mohapatra and L. Lokhande, Cloud Computing and ROI A 
New Framework for IT Strategy. Springer International 
Publishing Switzerland, 2014, pp. 90–100. 
 [24] R. Harms and M. Yamartino, “The economics of the cloud,” 
Microsoft whitepaper, Microsoft Corp., 2010. 
[25] M. G. Avram, “Advantages and Challenges of Adopting 
Cloud Computing from an Enterprise Perspective,” Procedia 
Technol., vol. 12, 2014, pp. 529–534. 
[26] R. Buyya, J. Broberg, and A. M. Goscinski, Cloud 
Computing: Principles and Paradigms. Wiley, 2010. 
[27] marketsandmarkets, “Healthcare Cloud Computing (Clinical, 
EMR, SaaS, Private, Public, Hybrid) Market - Global Trends, 
Challenges, Opportunities & Forecasts (2012 – 2017),” 
marketsandmarkets, 2012. 
[28] A. M. Kuo, “Opportunities and challenges of cloud 
computing to improve health care services,” J. Med. Internet 
Res., vol. 13, no. 3, 2011, p. 67. 
[29] E. Rijnboutt, D. Routsis, N. Venekamp, H. Fulgencio, M. 
Rezai, and A. van der Helm, “What challenges have to be 
faced when using the cloud for e-health services?,” 2013 
IEEE 15th Int. Conf. e-Health Networking, Appl. Serv. 
(Healthcom 2013), no. Healthcom, Oct. 2013, pp. 465–470. 
[30] N. Sultan, “Making use of cloud computing for healthcare 
provision: Opportunities and challenges,” Int. J. Inf. Manage., 
vol. 34, no. 2, Apr. 2014, pp. 177–184. 
[31] J.-W. Lian, D. C. Yen, and Y.-T. Wang, “An exploratory 
study to understand the critical factors affecting the decision 
to adopt cloud computing in Taiwan hospital,” Int. J. Inf. 
Manage., vol. 34, no. 1, 2014, pp. 28–36. 
[32] L. Ho and A. S. Atkins, “Outsourcing Decision-Making: A 
review of Strategic Frameworks and Proposal of a Multi-
Perspective Approach,” H. S. Kehal and V. P. Singh, Eds. Igi 
Global, 2006, p. 165. 
[33] C. Low, Y. Chen, and M. Wu, “Understanding the 
determinants of cloud computing adoption,” Ind. Manag. data 
Syst., vol. 111, no. 7, 2011, pp. 1006–1023. 
[34] C. a Klein, “Cloudy confidentiality: clinical and legal 
implications of cloud computing in health care.,” J. Am. 
Acad. Psychiatry Law, vol. 39, no. 4, Jan. 2011, pp. 571–8. 
[35] M. Yamin, “Cloud Economy of Developing Countries,” 
World J. Soc. Sci., vol. 3, no. 3, 2013, pp. 132–142. 
[36] S. T. Alharbi, “Users’ Acceptance of Cloud Computing in 
Saudi Arabia,” Int. J. Cloud Appl. Comput., vol. 2, no. 2, 
2012, pp. 1–11. 
[37] M. Lluch, “Healthcare professionals’ organisational barriers 
to health information technologies-a literature review.,” Int. J. 
Med. Inform., vol. 80, no. 12, Dec. 2011, pp. 849–62. 
[38] J. E. W. C. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, 
H. C. Ossebaard, S. M. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, and E. R. 
Seydel, “A holistic framework to improve the uptake and 
impact of eHealth technologies.,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 
13, no. 4, Jan. 2011, p. e111. 
[39] L. G. Tornatzky, M. Fleischer, and A. K. Chakrabarti, 
Processes of technological innovation. 1990. 
[40] T. Oliveira and M. F. Martins, “Literature Review of 
Information Technology Adoption Models at Firm Level.,” 
Electron. J. Inf. Syst. Eval., vol. 14, no. 1, 2011, pp. 110–121. 
[41] C.-P. Lee and J. P. Shim, “An exploratory study of radio 
frequency identification (RFID) adoption in the healthcare 
industry,” Eur. J. Inf. Syst., vol. 16, no. 6, 2007, pp. 712–724. 
[42] T. Oliveira and M. F. O. Martins, “A Comparison of Web Site 
Adoption in Small and Large Portuguese Firms.,” in ICE-B, 
2008, pp. 370–377. 
[43] M. Liu, “Determinants of e-commerce development: An 
empirical study by firms in shaanxi, china,” in Wireless 
Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing, 2008. 
WiCOM’08. 4th International Conference on, 2008, pp. 1–4. 
[44] Y. Alshamaila, S. Papagiannidis, and F. Li, “Cloud computing 
adoption by SMEs in the north east of England: A multi-
perspective framework,” J. Enterp. Inf. Manag., vol. 26, no. 3, 
2013, pp. 250–275. 
[45] C. W. Frenzel, Management of information technology. 
Cengage Learning, 1992. 
[46] L. Ho and A. Atkins, IT Portfolio Management: A Holistic 
Approach to Outsourcing Decisions. IGI Global, 2009, pp. 
1140–1167. 
[47] A. Atkins, B. Sharp, and L. Atkins, “Evaluating UK Intra-
National Outsourcing to North Staffordshire,” Cult. Technol. 
Influ. Glob. Bus., 2013, pp. 384–396. 
[48] M. M. Yusof, J. Kuljis, A. Papazafeiropoulou, and L. K. 
Stergioulas, 
“An 
evaluation 
framework 
for 
Health 
Information Systems: human, organization and technology-fit 
factors (HOT-fit).,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 77, no. 6, Jun. 
2008, pp. 386–98. 
[49] T. Oliveira, M. Thomas, and M. Espadanal, “Assessing the 
determinants of cloud computing adoption: An analysis of the 
manufacturing and services sectors,” Inf. Manag., vol. 51, no. 
5, Apr. 2014, pp. 497–510. 
[50] M. Z. Nkhoma and D. P. T. Dang, “Contributing Factors of 
Cloud Computing Adoption: a Technology-Organisation-
Environment Framework Approach Approach,” Int. J. Inf. 
Syst. Eng., vol. 1, no. 1, 2013, pp. 38–49. 
[51] D. M. Barakah, A. M. Alrobia, and S. Alwakeel, “Strategic 
Plan and Development Projects for Modern Health Clinical 
Information Systems at King Saud Medical City,” Int. J. Inf. 
Electron. Eng., vol. 4, no. 4, 2014, pp. 317– 321. 
[52] P. Haddad, M. Gregory, and N. Wickramasinghe, “Business 
Value of IT in Healthcare Peter,” in Lean Thinking for 
Healthcare, N. Wickramasinghe, L. Al-Hakim, C. Gonzalez, 
and J. Tan, Eds. New York, NY: Springer New York, 2014, 
pp. 55–81. 
[53] H. P. Borgman, B. Bahli, H. Heier, and F. Schewski, 
“Cloudrise: Exploring Cloud Computing Adoption and 
Governance with the TOE Framework,” 2013 46th Hawaii 
Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., Jan. 2013, pp. 4425–4435.  
 
 
 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

