Multiple Sites, Multiple Technologies, One Objective: 
A Work in Progress 
 
Anthony P. Glascock, Ph.D. 
Department of Anthropology 
Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104 
glascock@drexel.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract--This paper reports on the early stages of a 
demonstration project in which selected technologies are 
introduced into eight facilities which provide care to 
individuals with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities or 
Severe and Persistent Mental Illness. A two-year planning 
process emphasized that the project was to determine which 
technologies would be introduced, not if technologies were to 
be introduced. Thus, emphasis was placed upon evaluating: 
how the technologies altered staff performance; the quality of 
care; and the ability to be reimbursed for the care provided. 
 
Keywords—telecare; 
multiple 
technologies; 
demonstration 
project; intellectual and developmental disabilities; severe and 
persistent mental illness 
 
I.   INTRODUCTION 
 
The necessity to contain the cost of health care has seen 
the development of new technologies, as well as the 
innovative use of existing technologies, in an ever enlarging 
number of care models. Thus, it should not be surprising 
that technologies aimed at the provision of care and services 
to individuals with Intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities (IDD) and with Severe and Persistent Mental 
Illness (SMI) are increasingly being developed and used 
[1][2]. As in the use of new technologies, in each and every 
care model there are challenges to using innovative 
technologies in addressing the needs of these two 
populations, but the necessity to contain, and if possible, 
reduce the cost of providing care to these populations, 
makes the use of technology, in some form, inevitable. 
There are two main reasons for the urgency to develop 
more efficient care models for the IDD and SMI 
populations: the cost of care; and the aging of the 
populations. Deinstitutionalization, in both the United States 
and Europe took place from the mid-1960’s through the 
1970’s, had a dramatic impact on the care models used for 
both populations [3][4]. Prior to the deinstitutionalization 
the majority of care was provided for individuals with IDD 
and 
SMI 
in 
large 
institutions 
which 
were 
often 
dehumanizing. The impact of deinstitutionalization on the 
cost of care varied significantly, but the impact on the care 
model was significant as most individuals with IDD and 
SMI moved into the community, many living in some form 
of group home. The number of individuals living in any 
particular group home varies based upon the needs of the 
individuals. The most common number of residents is four 
with some group homes having as many as eight to ten 
residents. In the most severe cases, a resident could live 
alone. Although costs of providing care to the residents in 
group homes vary based upon the needs and location, the 
average cost is between $40-50,000 per year per resident 
and if an individual needs to live alone, the cost can top 
$150,000 per year [5][6]. 
Adding even greater cost to the care of IDD and SMI 
populations is the rapidly increasing number of such 
individuals brought about by the same demographic factors 
as for the general population [7]. As individuals with IDD 
or SMI age they are as susceptible to chronic illnesses as the 
general population, but the cost of caring for them is much 
greater. For example, care for an individual with IDD who 
has congestive heart failure costs approximately eight times 
more than for a person without IDD [5]. The ratios for other 
chronic diseases and individuals with IDD versus SMI vary 
somewhat, but the reasons are consistent. Many individuals 
with IDD and SMI make poor lifestyle decisions—use 
tobacco products and abuse alcohol and drugs. In addition, 
many are unable to self-manage disease, e.g., adhere to 
complicated medication regimes and follow complex health 
care instructions. Thus, greater cost of care for individuals 
with IDD and SMI when combined with the cost of 
residential care in general, results in a compelling reason for 
attempting to use technology to contain costs. 
In the next section, the overall project is described 
including the eight locations, the technologies being 
introduced, the economic model employed and the changes 
needed in how care is to be delivered.  In Section III, the 
methodology employed to evaluate the effectiveness of the 
technologies in the delivery of care is discussed, as well as 
the common methods which are being used across the eight 
locations.  In the concluding section, the reasons for the 
success of the project, up to this point, is presented. 
 
II.   THE PROJECT 
 
I was hired in March 2013 as a consultant by a large 
($500 million annual revenue) multi-state care organization 
to help develop, organize and evaluate a multi-year, multi-
site demonstration project of a variety of technologies aimed 
at aiding in the provision of care to individuals with IDD 
and SMI. Even though my previous work was with at-risk 
elderly individuals living in their own residences, there was 
agreement that my experience could translate well to the 
IDD and SMI populations [8]. As a consultant, I have not 
been responsible for the major decisions concerning the 
scope of the project, nor have I had the ability to play a 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

major role in the selection of the sites or technologies to be 
included in the project. However, I have been more than a 
passive observer as I have been asked to help develop 
installation, training and evaluation protocols. In addition, I 
have had access to material describing the staff and clients 
to be included in the demonstration project and I have 
reviewed each of the technologies to be employed. Perhaps 
my most important contribution has been to emphasize that 
the project is not a test of whether the various technologies 
work, but rather an evaluation of whether and how the 
technologies can be incorporated into the organization’s 
care models. In other words, the project’s focus had to be on 
people and how they did their jobs, not the technology. 
 
 
A.   The Planning Process 
 
Planning for the demonstration project began in mid-
2012 with a statement from the CEO of the organization 
emphasizing the need to introduce innovative technologies. 
A committee was formed, headed by an upper administrator, 
and employees were encouraged to propose sites at which 
new technologies could be used. During the remainder of 
2012, proposals were received and evaluated based upon 
specific criteria: administrative and staff buy-in; existence 
of suitable technology; evidence that technology would 
enhance care provision; evidence that, if successful, the 
technology could be used at a large number of other care 
facilities within the organization; and a financial model 
showing 
that 
the 
technology 
was 
sustainable—the 
organization would be reimbursed for its use. Finally, there 
was an attempt to achieve a rough balance among the 
different care models employed throughout the organization. 
This process took over a year, which frustrated individuals 
who wanted to move more quickly, but afforded a thorough 
evaluation of the resources available at each of the selected 
sites. The final decision was confirmed at an all-day 
meeting of administrators and representatives from each of 
the chosen sites in the fall of 2013. 
 
B. The Selected Sites  
 
Eight sites were selected for inclusion in the 
demonstration project. In order to ensure confidentiality, no 
names, or even locations, are used to identify the sites, but 
rather, the sites are numbered consecutively. Given the large 
number or identical sites within the organization, reference 
to the specific care model and the number of residents at 
each site should not jeopardize the sites’ identity. Six of the 
sites provide care to individuals with IDD:  
 
Site 1 community group home, four females with    
physical disabilities; 
Site 2 community group home, four males each 
medically fragile; 
Site 3 congregate intermediate care facility, sixteen 
individuals with physical disabilities; 
Site 4 community intermediate care facility, five 
males with medical issues; 
Site 5 community intermediate care facility, four 
males with physical disabilities; 
Site 6 day program, variable number of males and 
females with physical disabilities. 
 
Two of the sites provide care to individuals with SMI: 
 
Site 7 long term structured residence, eight 
individuals some with predatory sexual behavior; 
Site 8 outpatient clinic with approximately 150 
individuals in the project. 
 
Team leaders were appointed at each of the sites and 
staff at all levels was included in the planning for the 
introduction of the technology. Start dates were sequenced 
in order to reduce the stress on both local staff and 
administrators if and when things went wrong. The first 
sites began their projects during June 2014 and the final 
sites began operation at the end of November 2014. 
 
C.   The Selected Technologies 
Unlike other projects with which I have been 
associated, there was no one-size-fits-all approach to the 
selection of the technologies. Thus, staff at each of the eight 
sites 
was 
charged 
with 
researching, 
testing 
and 
recommending the technologies which best suited the needs 
of their clients and the specific care model. Allowing staff at 
each of the sites to select the technologies to be used took 
much more time than if administrators had imposed a 
centrally selected technology. However, the benefits of 
allowing local administrators and staff to choose the 
technology to be employed, not only ensured buy-in, but 
also established ownership over the demonstration as a 
whole. This is not to diminish the complexity of vetting 
numerous technologies, negotiating with several, rather than 
one, vendor, nor the time it took to get each separate 
technology and vendor approved by individuals at each of 
the eight locations, the organization’s administrative 
committee, and ultimately by the organization’s chief 
operating and chief financial officers, but the benefits of this 
approach far outweighed the added time. 
There 
was, 
however, 
overlap 
in 
the 
selected 
technologies. For example, in five of the sites (1, 2, 4, 7 and 
8) it was decided that vital signs needed to be collected—
blood pressure, weight, temperature and pulse rate—and the 
decision was made to work with a single vendor. In this 
way, not only would the cost be reduced, but there would be 
more comparable data collected across the sites. At the other 
end of the spectrum, bed and door monitors are being 
employed in only one of the sites (3), smart televisions in 
only one site (5) and a specialized computer interface 
system in one site (6).  
 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

D.   Paying for the Technology 
An essential consideration in the selection of any 
technology to be used in the provision of health care is, 
“who pays.” In my previous work, the question of who pays 
for the technology after the pilot project ended was always 
the most perplexing question; and the one question that was 
never adequately addressed during the project [9]. A key 
factor in answering this question in this project is that a 
significant majority of the organization’s revenue derives 
from Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement for services. 
Thus, any new technology employed by the organization has 
to be a “billable service” to Medicare and Medicaid if the 
use of the technology was to be sustainable over time.  
On one level, it didn’t matter whether the selected 
technology worked as proposed and that it aided in the 
provision of care. It really didn’t even matter if the 
technology actually reduced the cost of delivering care. 
What mattered was that the selected technology was 
considered a billable service under existing Medicare and 
Medicaid regulations. A brief example illustrates how the 
reality of reimbursement impacted the selection of the 
technology to be used in the project. One of the objectives 
of using vital signs sensors was so that alerts indicating an 
abnormal reading could be sent off-site to a nurse who could 
contact the live-in care provider and assess the severity of 
the situation without traveling to the residence. The problem 
was that if the nurse traveled to the residence her visit was a 
billable service, if she solved the problem over the phone, it 
was not. Quite simply, if Medicare and Medicaid did not 
change its reimbursement policy, there is no point to install 
and use the new technology because the organization could 
not be paid for the services it provided. The good news for 
the project is that Medicare and Medicaid are in the process 
of changing their policy and will reimburse virtual nursing 
visits. 
 
E.   Change in Care Models 
 Equally important as the issue of resolving who pays 
for the successful introduction of a new technology is the 
recognition of and the planning for a change in how people 
will do their jobs after the technology is introduced. In my 
experience, if there is no plan to deal with the fact that after 
the introduction of the new technology, people at all levels 
within the organization will have to change how they do 
their jobs, the technology will not be adopted [9]. This is the 
case even if the upper administrators are committed, there 
are champions for the use of the technology and there is a 
general belief that the technology works. It may be trite to 
state that people don’t want to change how they do their 
jobs, but being trite doesn’t make it wrong. 
The almost two years of planning for the demonstration 
project has allowed for a thorough discussion of how the 
introduction of the new technologies would alter jobs. In 
particular, there is the recognition that, for example, some 
nurses will be spending more time looking at computer 
screens and talking to people on the phone rather than 
driving to residences. The nurses who are looking at screens 
are clearly providing care; it is just through a different care 
model. It is a fact of life that some people are more willing 
to alter how they do their jobs than others and some care 
providers only want to have a face-to-face relationship with 
a patient, while others are comfortable making care 
decisions at a distance. Administrators and supervisors at 
the organization have been careful to channel individuals 
who are willing to change into the demonstration project, 
while allowing others to remain outside. This approach has 
worked very well for the demonstration project, but other 
strategies will have to be adopted when the technologies 
rollout throughout the organization. 
 
III. METHODOLOGY 
My major consulting role has been to develop a means 
of evaluating the demonstration project. This evaluation is 
complicated by the number of sites, the variation in the care 
models employed and the fact that different technologies are 
employed in different sites. It would obviously be a simpler 
task if the project consisted of a single site or if only a single 
care model was included or a single technology employed. 
However, the real world of care provision is not that simple 
and the selection of sites, care models and technologies 
were based upon the belief that a number of new 
technologies 
must 
be 
incorporated 
throughout 
the 
organization and thus, the evaluation must deal with the 
existing complexity. 
 
A. What is Not Being Evaluated    
     The technology itself is not being evaluated. All the 
products being used in the project have been on the market 
for years and, from a technology perspective, do what they 
were designed to do. What is being evaluated is how the 
technologies can be used to bring about better and timelier 
care while being 
cost effective. Additionally, 
the 
organization is not using the demonstration project to 
determine whether it wants to introduce new technologies. 
The strategic decision has already been made that new 
technologies must be incorporated into the organization. 
The objective of the demonstration project is to determine 
which technologies can be the most beneficial to the 
provision of care. 
 
B. What is Being Evaluated    
As a consequence, the evaluation is focused on: 1) the 
way that staff uses the technology to provide care to their 
clients; and 2) on how the clients are impacted by the 
introduction of the technology. To facilitate this evaluation a 
series of very specific outcomes were developed for each of 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the sites along with the factors that needed to be measured 
in order to gauge whether the outcomes were achieved.  
For example, at Site 1 the desired outcomes are: 
improved 
physical 
health; 
better 
chronic 
disease 
management; decreased visits to the emergency room; and 
decreased hospitalizations. In order to assess whether these 
outcomes were achieved, five factors need to be assessed: 
vital signs for each of the residents; information on the 
communication of vital signs information to medical 
personnel; data on number of visits to emergency rooms; 
and number of and reasons for hospitalizations. In addition, 
it was decided to use both a short life satisfaction and 
depression scales in order to determine if the introduction of 
the technology brought about change in the residents’ well-
being. The actual instruments to be used are a combination 
of self-created and “packaged” products. At Site 1 the vital 
signs are automatically recorded by the system that is being 
used, while a baseline for each of the residents has been 
established by recording the information in the resident’s 
medical records for the last six months. An incident form 
has been created to record events that require medical 
intervention whether by a nurse, a referral to a physician, an 
emergency room visit or a hospitalization. Once again, a 
baseline has been established by extracting this information 
for each resident for the six months prior to the start of the 
project. Standardized life satisfaction and depression scales 
have been administered at the beginning of the project and 
at three month intervals during the project. 
In contrast, at Site 5 the desired outcomes are: to 
improve the residents’ quality of life; to offer new 
opportunities in order to increase independence; and to 
create efficiencies in operation. Thus, the factors to be 
measured at Site 5 are: residents’ level of participation in 
meal preparation; residents’ independent access to kitchen 
equipment; and monthly utility costs. As at Site 1, both a 
short life satisfaction and depression scales are used in order 
to determine if the introduction of the technology brought 
about change in the residents’ well-being. Once again, the 
actual instruments to be used are a combination of self-
created and “packaged” products. Obviously, the utility bills 
are standardized and can be easily compared from before 
and after the project’s initiation. Similarly to Site 1, 
standardized life satisfaction and depression scales have 
been administered at the beginning of the project and will be 
at three month intervals. Residents’ independent access to 
the kitchen and participation in meal preparation have been 
recorded by staff  on a daily basis for approximately three 
months prior to the start of the project and will continue to 
be recorded throughout the project.  
 
C.  Common Methods 
Although in general, the outcomes, the factors to be 
measured and the instruments employed are site specific, 
there is a relatively large degree of overlap. The same scale 
to record vital signs data is being used, the same life 
satisfaction and depression scales are being administered at 
the same time intervals and the same incident form is being 
used. Therefore, there will be an opportunity to compare 
findings across sites at which the same data have been 
collected. However, the main emphasis is on evaluating the 
contribution made by the selected technologies on the 
provision of care at each individual site. 
 
IV.     CONCLUSION 
 
The project is now underway at all eight sites. This is 
not to say that there have not been some problems. There 
were initial difficulties with the use of the vital signs 
technology at two of the five sites in which it is being used. 
The problem, however, was not with the technology per se, 
but instead with the staff’s use of the system. Additional 
staff training alleviated this problem. Remodeling at Site 5 
took two months longer than anticipated, thus delaying the 
start of the project at this location. The start of the project at 
Site 8 was delayed by almost three months because of the 
complexity inherent in the use of innovative technologies at 
an outpatient clinic; especially the need to train non-
professional individuals in the use of the vital signs 
technology and ensuring that the organization would be 
reimbursed for the cost associated with the collection and 
transmission of the resultant data. However, overall the 
project is proceeding well and data from all of the sites 
should be available by the end of the year. 
There are several, on the surface, simple reasons why 
the project has gone as well as it has. First and foremost, the 
decision by the organization’s upper administration to make 
the introduction of new technologies a key element in the 
organization’s strategic vision was essential. Second, the 
thorough planning taking two years allowed all stakeholders 
to be involved at each of the project’s stages: selection of 
sites; choosing the technologies; developing outcome 
measures; and deciding which instruments to use. Third, 
from the very beginning, the emphasis of the project was on 
making the technologies financially sustainable. The project 
was not a pilot to see if the technologies worked, but instead 
a demonstration of how the technologies could be 
incorporated into the organization’s care models and, at the 
same time, ensuring that their use was billable. Only when 
the data collected are analyzed will it be possible to judge 
the overall success of the project, but, the fact that such 
analysis is possible elevates this project far above many 
other similar projects.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] G. Demiris, B. Hensel, M. Skubic, and M. Rantz, “Senior 
residents’ perceived need of and preferences ‘smart home’ 
sensor technologies,” Inter J of Tech Ass in Health Care, vol 
24, no. 1, 2008, pp. 120-124. 
[2] E. Stip and V. Rialle, “Environmental cognitive remediation 
in schizophrenia: Ethical implications of ‘smart home’ 
technology,” Canadian J of Psychiarty, vol 50, no. 5, 2005, 
pp. 281-291. 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[3] E. Novella, “Mental health care and the politics of inclusion: a 
social systems account of psychiatric deinstitutionalization,” 
Theor Med Bioeth, vol 31, 2010, pp. 411-427. 
[4] M. Knapp, J. Beecham, D. McDaid, T. Matosevic, and M. 
Smith, “The economic consequences of deinstitutionalization 
of mental health services: lessons from a systematic review of 
European experience,” Health and Social Care in the 
Community, vol 19, no. 2, 2011, pp. 113-125.  
[5] National Council on Disability. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.ncd.gov/publications/2012/DIToolkit/Costs/inDet
ail/, retrieved September, 2014. 
[6] National Institute of Mental Health. [Online]. Available from:  
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/statistics/index.shtml, 
retrieved 
September, 2014. 
[7] Administration on Aging—Projected Future Growth of Older 
Population. [Online]. Available from:  http://www.aoa.gov/ 
Aging_Statistics/future_ growth/future_growth.aspx, retrieved 
September, 2014.  
[8] A. Glascock, “If they designed it, why don’t they want it? The 
lack of acceptance of an ehealth data records system,” Proc. 
eTELEMED 2014, L. Van Gemert-Pijnen, H. C. Ossebaard, 
Eds, 2014, pp. 116-122. 
[9] A. Glascock, “A conflicted view of telehomecare after a 20 
year journey”, Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2012. 
 
 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

