Telecardiology Assistance in Senior Living Houses 
 Milica Kaladjurdjevic 
Department of Public Health  
School  of Pharmacy, University of Camerino 
Camerino, Italy 
milica.kaladjurdjevic@unicam.it
 
 
Abstract-The Chronic Heart Failure represents one of major 
cause of mortality and morbidity in developed countries. It is 
expected that incidence of heart failure associated with aging, 
will rise exponentially, due its higher prevalence among 
population over 75 years. The Senior Living House are missing 
an adequate secondary healthcare assistance in order to provide 
a qualitative secondary prevention to the resident. We have 
conducted a pilot project of telecardiology in one Senior Living 
House  in 2013,  with duration of 6 months; we decided to 
expend the project as an observational trial with primary 
objective to evaluate impact  of telemedicine  on  secondary 
prevention of clinical cardiovascular outcomes /hospitalization 
in senior living house setting  and secondary objectives to 
evaluate quality of life using Minnesota living with Heart 
Failure questionnaire and  to evaluate  cost savings and 
additional benefits earned by Telemedicine. For the study, 85% 
powered at the 5 % level of significance; to detect differences, we 
need 310 patients, including 10 % drop out. As results, during 
the pilot project, 23 patients with median age of 86 years were 
monitored;  we  are currently enrolling new senior  living house 
and patients with CHF that resides in senior living house. 
 
Keywords-Chronic 
Heart 
Failure; 
Telemedicine; 
Telecardiology; Secondary prevention; Senior Living House; 
ECG; Oxygen Saturation; Cardiovascular. 
 
I.  INTRODUCTON  
The CHF (Chronic Heart Failure) is one of principle causes of 
re-hospitalization, in population over 75 years of age. With future 
aging process, the prevalence of cardiovascular disease will rise 
exponentially [1]. The ratio of healthcare spending for elderly 
population is already 4 fold higher versus healthcare spending for 
population under 65 years old [3]. In near future, the elderly will  
represent  one fourth (1/4) of total population; it is estimated that 
aging process by 2050 will achieve an important share of  25% of 
total population, represented by elderly population over 65, while in 
Italy this percentage will reach 33%  [1]. Considering the aging 
process and associated increase of chronic disease prevalence in next 
future, healthcare systems will face financial and professional 
constraints in provision of qualitative and equally accessible 
healthcare services.  
The chronic heart failure represents one of major cause of 
mortality and morbidity in industrialized countries. The incidence of 
heart failure is estimated from 1 to 5 cases per 1000 population with 
exponential increase in the population over 65 old, because of what 
heart failure is considered a disease of aging  [4]. High incidence of 
re-hospitalization due to frequent CHF exacerbation makes this 
group of patients among the highest consumer of healthcare and 
social services. 
Secondary prevention is an important gatekeeper of 
hospitalization and over consumption of tertiary care service.    
Secondary prevention can detect early signs of organ worsening and 
prevent further deterioration, by intervening with adequate treatment. 
In order to detect early symptoms, it is necessary to monitor 
frequently patient's vital signs.  
Telemedicine showed  positive results in regards of secondary 
prevention. We posed the question whether the telecardiology 
assistance in long term trial of  24 months, on large sample  can 
show decrease in re-hospitaliaztion and improvement of quality of 
life. The article aims at presenting an work in progress project, the 
methodology used in develompent of the project, the problems that 
have been encountered and further perspectives. The quality of  data 
transmitted still represent a limitation for telemedicine wider use. We 
present the Chronic Heart Failure as a future public healthcare 
problem by introducing telecardiology assistance in SLH and our 
project pilot. Finally, we present a protocol developed on the basis of 
project pilot results. Major results are not available yet. 
 
II.     CHRONIC HEART FAILURE - FUTURE PUBLIC 
HEALTHCARE IMPACT   
The heart failure represents a terminal syndrome of heart 
function deterioration, often affected by number of pathology 
associated with process of aging. The heart insufficiency has an 
important effect on long life perspective and quality of life 
characteristics as capacity to perform everyday activity.  
Quality of life and social activity are in relation with patient's 
mobility. With aging, the level of disability is increasing; according 
to Global Burden of Disease Study, cardiovascular diseases will 
generate 18(10³) DALY (Disability Adjusted Life Years) by 2020 
[1].   The prevalence of CHF increases with  age: 2%  for persons 
from 40 to 59 years, more than 5%  for patients  between 60 and 69 
years, and 10% for persons more than 70 years old [2]. A heart 
failure is considered a cause of 20% of all re-hospitalization 
generated by patient's over  65 year old.  
 The cost of heart failure care is estimated as percent of total 
healthcare spending equal to 1,3%, with the highest  cost spent for 
hospital care, that represents 77% of total healthcare spending for 
heart failure [3]. The major causes of re-hospitalization are non 
adherence to treatment and  non adherence to physician advices [4]. 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

These issues are minor causes of re-hospitalization when 
patients reside in senior living house, where they are assisted by a 
nurse. Still senior living house requires cardiology secondary care 
consultation and additional monitoring of cardiovascular patients. 
These additional support provided by telemedicine at distance would 
prevent worsening of patient health status and frequent re-
hospitalization, by early symptoms detection and optimization of 
therapy. 
III.  SENIOR LIVING HOUSE- ITALY  
A Senior Living House (SLH) are residential structure for 
elderly who is partially or completely non auto-sufficient. The 
primary function of a SLH is to guarantee physical health and 
psychological well being. A SLH provides a medical geriatric, nurse 
and rehabilitation assistance; however, there is a lack of secondary 
care prevention assistance. Therefore, we want to address an added 
value of telemedicine in SLH setting, characterized with elderly 
population mostly affected by cardiovascular diseases, who are  in a 
need for monitoring and secondary cardiology prevention assistance. 
The percentage of elderly population who resides in SLHs varies by 
country. The secondary care and tertiary care services provided to 
the residents of a SLH are reimbursed by national healthcare 
insurance. 
The presence of healthcare professionals, as nurses, in SLHs 
was important for our project as it facilitated communication 
between Cardiology Department and SLH. A SLH, usually, has a 
medical doctor, a nurse, and caregivers; the specialized assistance as 
cardiologic consultation may be an additional benefit in order to 
improve the quality of care provided. 
IV.  SOCIAL INCLUSION – ROLE OF TELEMEDICINE AND 
PREVIOUS CLINICAL TRIALS OF TELEMEDICINE IN CHF 
PATIENT 
A 
distance 
clinical 
monitoring 
system 
combining 
telecommunication technology and medical device for transmission 
of  vital signs measurement can decrease readmission rate and 
improve social well being [5] [6]. 
Telemedicine can offer monitoring of ECG and blood pressure 
at distance, early detection of symptoms and signs, and secondary 
prevention through optimization of therapy. Optimization of therapy 
is represented by real-time titration and adequate dosing of 
medication through tight follow-up of the patient symptoms.  In 
previous years, research has shown that tight home care monitoring 
improves functional status of the elderly [7]; the trial conducted by 
Kornowski [8], who evaluated a weekly home visit by internist 
specialist, has shown a significant decrease of readmission to the 
hospital, improved functional status of the patient, with  consequent 
decrease of healthcare expenditure.  
V.     CLINICAL TRAIL PROPOSAL  
 
         The project pilot has been conducted in 2013, with duration of 
6 months. During 6 months period, 23 patients affected by 
cardiovascular disease has been enrolled, after the verbal inform 
consent has benn given by their family member. The project pilot 
has shown limitations in regard of telemonitoring frequency and 
readability of ECG. 
 ECG readability is very important for accurate recognition of 
ECG changes from its baseline. We have faced a problem of 
interferences around the patient (cell phone, TV, vibration from 
bedsore mattress) which intervened with morphology of ECG line. 
The readability of ECG has been improved after pilot project; we 
added additional filters that improved readability and accuracy of 
ECG . 
During the pilot project, the average age of patient enrolled was 
86; considering Italian longevity, this population is considered very 
old. During the pilot project, we had seven hospitalization for non 
cardiac diagnosis, with length of stay of 76 days cumulative. The 
number of re-hospitalization for CHF was 2, with the stay length of 2 
days and with mortality rate during re-hospitalization of 100%. 
The pilot project had the objective to evaluate feasibility of 
telecardiology, to understand the problems of technology and to 
evaluate professionals’ and patients’ responsiveness to the 
telecardiology. The patients enrolled in pilot project were affected by 
any type of cardiopathy; those affected by CHF represented  50% of 
patients included in pilot project. 
 
TABLE I. SUMMARY ON THE PARITICIPANTS. 
 
Pilot project in short figures 
No. of 
patients 
Patients 
with 
CHF 
Average age 
Intervention 
Number of 
teleconsultation 
23 
10 
86,7 
ECG 
PA 
Saturation 
510 
        
The adherence to the guidelines for CHF treatment is one of 
prerogative of adequate treatment. We evaluated if every patient 
affected by CHF (10 patients) was using beta blockers and diuretics. 
In further extended trial, we will observe change in therapy and  the 
need for optimization of therapy, taking in consideration co-
morbidities associated with CHF. 
 
TABLE II. DETAILS ON CHF THERAPY. 
 
Usage of CHF therapy, represented in pilot project 
Beta 
blocker 
Diuretics 
Antitrombotics, 
Anticoagulant 
Clexane,Cardioasp
irina, 
Plavix, 
Arixtra, warfarin 
Statins 
Inotropic 
drugs  
100 % 
100% 
100% 
8% 
8% 
  
  A.   Extended clinical Trail 
As prevalence of CHF increases with age, the population over 
75 years of age was considered as target group population, where  
secondary prevention via telecardiology would demonstrate a  
positive effect. 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

      Primary Objectives: To evaluate impact of telemedicine on 
secondary prevention and reduction of clinical cardiovascular 
outcomes /hospitalization in senior living house setting  
      Secondary Objectives: To evaluate quality of life using 
MlwHF(Minnesota living with Heart Failure) and cost – 
effectiveness  
B.      Definition of patients 
The patients were over 75 years old who live in a SLH and with 
New York Heart Association (NYHA) II and III, but not on dialysis. 
We choose over 75 years of age, as the prevalence of CHF and 
re-hospitalization rate is higher in this population, hence this group 
will benefit more from secondary prevention than younger group of 
population. 
The patients living in a SLH affected with CHF have nurse 
assistance; additionally, with trial, we will provide a frequent and 
continuous monitoring and pharmaceutical- drug titration adjustment 
provided by cardiologist via telemedicine.  
Inclusion Criteria: Patients with heart failure diagnosis based 
on guidelines ESC (European Society of Cardiology); Patient over 
75; Patient NYHA II – III; Patient with ischemic and valvular heart 
pathology; hypertensive and dilatative cardiomyopathy; EF= 35% 
Exclusion Criteria: Patients below 75 years; Patient affected 
by  psychiatric disease and dementia; Patient on dialysis; Cahexia; 
Non cooperative patient. 
C. Study Design  
An observational trial, have a duration of 24 months. The  
telemedicine monitoring will have frequency of weekly vital 
parameters measurement (blood pressure, oxygen saturation, weight 
and ECG). In a previous pilot project, we didn't observe weight 
measurement changes, as most of patients were very old (86 years, 
average) and were bedridden.Variation in body weight is an 
important diagnostic parameter of CHF symptomatology, 
The design of trial does not include the control group. The rate 
of re-hospitalization in population over 75 years old, affected by 
CHF is established from previous large clinical trails. Results from 
this trial will be compared with results established by large registries 
for CHF (OPTIMIZE, ADHERE) [9][10][11]. 
D.         Sample size calculation  
The previous studies conducted using randomized clinical trial 
design showed a decrease in readmission of 20-40% with 
telemedicine [12][13][14][16]. 
The difference expected is at least 15% decrease of hospital 
readmission. For the study, 85% powered at the 5 % level of 
significance, to detect difference we need 310 patients including 10 
% drop out. Cumulative probability and survival curves will be 
constructed using Kaplan-Meier estimates [18] and compared using 
the Log-Rank test [19]. The rate of hospital readmission, i.e., Hazard 
Ratio (HR)[19] and 95% Confidence Interval (CI) will be calculated 
using a Cox regression model [20]. Probability values < 0.05 will be 
considered significant.  
E.             Subgroups  
Elderly population is affected by multi-pathology; the CHF 
causes reduced perfusion of other organs. Inadequate perfusion has a 
negative impact on an organ's function, altering its function. We 
want to evaluate the effect of secondary prevention for CHF, and its 
secondary effect on organ functional preservation. Therefore, the 
next subgroup evaluation will be conducted: 1. Diabetes vs. no 
Diabetes; 2. Hypertension vs. no Hypertension; 3. Ischemic CM vs. 
no Ischemic CM; 4. B blockers vs. no B blockers; 5. Dose of loop 
diuretic (40 mg vs. >40 mg/day). 
The co-morbidities represented in subgroups are most frequent 
co-morbidities, related to structural and functional organ's 
modification, associated with aging process. We didn't establish a 
number of patients that would be necessary for each group, to 
demonstrate significant results among the groups. If during the trial a 
difference between groups in regard of primary objective (re 
hospitalization) will be observed, further adjustment of design will 
be done in order to demonstrate significant results in subgroups. 
The long term therapy with diuretics usually causes drug 
resistance, which requires an increase of drug dosage in order to 
obtain the same effect. We want to evaluate the effect of combined 
tight monitoring and secondary prevention via telemedicine on 
lower dosage of diuretics vs. higher dosage of diuretics consumption. 
F.        Telemedicine Equipment  
A consolidated platform for telemedicine that supports multi-
specialty tele-consultations is used. The technical system needs only 
to be configured at the moment of deployment to the user and is 
really easy to use. The software allows real-time and storage and 
forward data sending to manage different need of use and possible 
lacks of connectivity without data loss. It integrates different types of 
medical devices tailored for the nurse use. The cardiologist 
communication and consultation are supported with storing, 
reporting, real-time communication and high resolution visualization 
of the documents. Every kit contains medical device (blood pressure 
device, oxygen saturation device, weight control device, ECG – 12 
leads, electronic stethoscope), and  a tablet with easy to use software. 
G.           Intervention 
A nurse once a week, usually in the morning, would perform 
measurements of vital signs, and send them to cardiology 
department; after clicking on the button send, nurse receives the 
message that measurement has been sent successfully. The 
Telemedicine kit is very easy to use; after the access to the Internet, 
the software application opens instantly, and displays 4 images, 
representing the access to separate pages of 4 vital signs 
measurement (saturation, blood pressure, weight, and ECG); all data 
measured from medical devices are acquired by the software 
installed on a tablet, via a Bluetooth connection. When data are 
transmitted from medical devices to software, they will appear in 
defined boxes on display; the nurses have to control if data 
transmitted on tablet correspond to data obtained by the medical 
device; afterwards the nurses have to push button send and wait until 
a message that confirms that data have been sent successfully 
appears. This procedure is repeated for each of four measurements. 
Every morning, one of cardiologists at cardiology ward 
accesses the software application by logging with his username and 
password; the application will open by displaying a list of patients 
enrolled in the trial. 
When clicking on patient name and choosing clinical data 
option, the patient's page will appear; it contains all measurement 
sent by the user, with date of the performed measurement. The 
cardiologist has the opportunity to consult previous measurements 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and to visualize all data graphically; graph contains all changes in 
patient's vital signs from the first measurement. 
H.        Quality of life Evaluation and cost effectiveness analysis 
The Minnesota living with Heart failure questionnaire will be 
used for evaluation of quality of life improvement. The Minnesota 
living with Heart Failure questionnaire is a patient self-assessment 
measurement, being developed to evaluate the therapeutic response 
to intervention for heart failure [13]. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
During  the project pilot, 23 patients affected by 
cardiovascular disease who were living in a SLH were 
monitored three times per week for the period of 6 months. 
The results showed limitation in regard to the readability of 
ECG and medical doctors’ culture about telemedicine. After 
conclusion of pilot project on the end of 2013, these issues 
were addressed. Then, the clinical trial protocol presented in 
this paper was developed. 
On March 2014, we started with selection of new SLH 
and consultation with senior living house board managers, 
in order to establish their interest and their point of view 
regarding benefits of telemedicine service in SLH setting. 
The consultation process has been concluded by the 
recipient with positive feedback in regard to our request to 
conduct our project at SLH. In June 2014, we have 
presented telemedicine platform and Telemedicine kit, with 
following Telemedicine training to health professionals at 
SLHs [7].  
From June 2014 to September 2014, SLH nurses and 
medical doctors had opportunity to test the platform and kits 
in order to evaluate, amount of time necessary for 
measurements and its process of sending to cardiology 
department. On September 2014, we received written 
response of their consent to participate at the project and to 
use telemedicine platform. We are at the moment enrolling 
the patients with CHF who are living in a SLH, as well we 
are enrolling new SLH located in Region Marche, Italy. 
Major results are not still available. 
VII.      CONCLUSION 
The promise of technology development allows a healthcare 
system to provide service in a simplified manner from a distance.  
The telemedicine allows continuity of care, versus episodic 
encounters between patients and physician seen in usual care, and 
better secondary prevention. A lack of large clinical trials on 
telemedicine and healthcare system's rigid attitude towards 
interventions with scarce evidence based results, are the reason why 
telemedicine is not widely used for monitoring and consulting of 
elderly population. 
We believe that secondary prevention intervention  
provided through cardiology department to institution where 
elderly population resides may permit better healthcare 
services for elderly population wherever they lives. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C.J.L Murrey and A.D. Lopez, “Alternative projection of 
mortality and disability by cause 1990-2020: Global burden 
disease study, ” Lancet, vol. 349, pp. 1498-1504, 1997 
[2] R. Rozzini, T. Sabatini, T. Costa, and M. Trabucchi, ”Il 
trattamento dello scompenso cardiaco nell’anziano: modelli di 
cura a confronto, “ Geriatria & Pratica Medica; vol. 2, pp. 8-
10, 2004 
[3] C. Politi, A. Deales, F. Cicchitelli, A. Marcobelli, P. 
Barbadoro, R.Zorzan, and F.Di Stanislao, ”Analisi dei costi 
sanitari per lo scompenso cardiaco nella regione Marche, 
“PharmacoEconomics - Italian Research Articles; 7th edition, 
vol.  3, pp. 165-175, 2006 
[4] A. di Lenarda et al.,“Current presentation and management of 
heart failure in cardiology and internal medicine hospital 
units: A tale of two worlds—The TEMISTOCLE study,” 
American Heart Journal, October 2003 
[5] N. B. Shah, E. Der, C. Ruggerio, P. A. Heidenreich, and B. M. 
Massie, ” Prevention of hospitalizations for heart failurewith 
an interactive home monitoring program,” Am Heart J., vol. 
135, pp. 373-378, 1998 
[6] M.W. Rich, “Heart Failure Disease Management: A Critical 
Review, “Journal of Cardiac Failure, vol. 5, no 1, 1999 
[7] R. Antonicelli et al., "Impact of telemonitoring at home on the 
management of elderly patients with congestive heart failure," 
J .Telemed Telecare, vol. 4, no 6, pp. 300-305, 2008 
[8] R. Kornowski et al., “Intensive home-care surveillance 
prevents hospitalization and improves morbidity among 
elderly patients with severe congestive heart failure,” Am 
Heart J., vol. 129, pp. 762-766, 1995 
[9] S. J. Rossi et al., “Influence of coronary artery disease and 
coronary revascularization status on outcomes in patients with 
acute heart failure syndromes: A report from OPTIMIZE-HF 
(Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment in 
Hospitalized Patients with Heart Failure),” European Journal 
of Heart Failure, vol. 10, pp. 1215–1223, 2008 
[10]  R. J. Mentz et al., ”Clinical characteristics and outcomes of 
hospitalized heart failure patients with systolic dysfunction 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: findings from 
OPTIMIZE-HF,“ European Journal of Heart Failure, vol. 14, 
pp. 395–403, 2012 
[11] K.F.jr Adams et al.,“Characteristics and outcomes of patients 
hospitalized for heart failure in the United States: Rationale, 
design, and preliminary observations from the first 100,00 
cases in the Acute Decompensated Heart Failure National 
Registry (ADHERE),” American Heart Journal, February  
2005 
[12] R. A. Clark, S. C. Inglis, F. A. McAlister, J. G.F. Cleland, and 
S. Stewart, “Telemonitoring or structured telephone support 
programmes for patients with chronic heart failure: systematic 
review and meta-analysis,“ BMJ, vol. 334, April 2007 
[13] J. G. F. Cleland, A. A. Louis, A. S. Rigby, U. Janssens  and A. 
H.M.M. Balk, “Noninvasive Home Telemonitoring for 
Patients With Heart Failure at High Risk of Recurrent 
Admission and Death The Trans-European Network–Home-
Care Management System (TEN-HMS) Study,“ Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology, vol. 45, no 10, 2005 
[14] P. Dendale et al., “Effect of a telemonitoring-facilitated 
collaboration between general practitioner and heart failure 
clinic on mortality and rehospitalization rates in severe heart 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

failure: 
the 
TEMA-HF 
1 
(TElemonitoring 
in 
the 
MAnagement of Heart Failure) study,” European Journal of 
Heart Failure, vol. 14, pp. 333–340, 2012 
[15] TS. Rector, SH Kubo and JN Cohn, ”Patients' self-assessment 
of their congestive heart failure. Part 2: Content, reliability 
and validity of a new measure, the Minnesota Living with 
Heart Failure questionnaire,” Heart Failure, pp. 198-209, 
Oct/Nov 1987 
[16] M. J. Hall, S. Levant and C. J. DeFrances, ”Hospitalization 
for Congestive Heart Failure:  United States, 2000–2010,” 
NCHS Data Brief: No. 108, October 2012 
[17] B.Efron, ”Logistic Regression, Survival Analysis, and the 
Kaplan-Meier Curve,” Journal of the American Statistical 
Association,vol.83, issue 402, 1988 
[18] D.E. Matthews and V.T.Farewell, ”Using and Understanding 
Medical Statistics,” Basel,S.Karger AG, pp. 67-75, 2007, doi: 
10.1159/000099422 
[19] L. D. Fisher and D.Y. Lin, “Time-Dependent Covariates in the 
Cox Proportional-Hazards Regression Model,” Annual 
Review of Public Health, vol. 20, pp. 145-157, May 1999 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

