Expectations and Fears of Urban Versus Rural Population Regarding the use of an 
Electronic Health Record 
Qualitative Survey About Usage and Acceptance of an Electronic Health Record in Austria 
 
René Baranyi, Susanne Schinkinger, Wolfgang Schramm, Thomas Grechenig 
Research Group for Industrial Software 
Vienna University of Technology 
Vienna, Austria 
{ rene.baranyi, wolfgang.schramm, thomas.grechenig}@inso.tuwien.ac.at; e0325127@student.tuwien.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays electronic health records are evaluated 
and implemented worldwide. Future stakeholders, especially 
patients are not always integrated into all aspects of this 
process. An important problem with the rollout of a 
countrywide e-health project is the unequal distribution of the 
access to modern media, especially to computer and internet 
(“regional digital gap”), of people living in urban and rural 
areas - and if there are differences regarding the usage of an 
electronic health record between these two groups. Differences 
in these aspects between urban and rural areas where 
evaluated using an empirical trial. This qualitative survey was 
based on 20 interviews focused on the discrepancy between 
urban and rural areas regarding the opinion on the electronic 
health record in Austria. The results show that differences in 
some aspects regarding “personal data input”, “health 
information”, "own usage" and "data abuse" of an electronic 
health record exists. 
Keywords - electronic health record; patient empowerment; 
qualitative survey; medical informatics. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The commonly used term for the country wide electronic 
health record in Austria is ELGA (which is a German 
acronym for electronic health record) and defined as 
followed: “ELGA consists of multimedia and health related 
data and information corresponding to a unique identified 
person. The data and information originate from different 
sources of the health sector and may also come from the 
patient himself and are stored in multiple information 
systems (virtual record). The data and information can be 
accessed by authorised people according to their roles and 
data privacy rules in a tailored way wherever the patient is 
treated (time- and location-independent)” [15].  
The health reformation law, which defines the goal of a 
nationwide electronic health record, can be considered as a 
starting point for ELGA and was legislated in 2005 [16]. The 
next important step was a feasibility study [13] where the 
situation in Austria was analyzed and a few important 
concepts towards a nationwide ELGA were identified. It was 
stated, that one important part for the realization of ELGA is 
the acceptance of the Austrian citizens, which means, that 
opinions, wishes and fears of the population should be 
considered in the design and implementation process. For the 
realization of an electronic health record (EHR) several 
important aspects were identified: preliminaries (e.g., 
acceptance), basic components (e.g., patient portal) and core 
functions (e.g., exchange of lab reports) [14]. The patient 
portal includes some important functions for patients: 
“Health information”, which allows the patient to get access 
to public accessible health information. The second function 
“result retrieval” allows patients to read all their results, 
which were created and stored at registered doctors - e.g., 
from general practitioners. The last function “personal data 
input” allows patients to store health related personal data in 
their EHR, e.g., blood pressure [14][17]. 
The latest implementation of an EHR related project in 
Austria is the patient portal (www.gesundheit.gv.at), which 
was released in 2010. At present other defined aspects (e.g., 
standardization and physician index) are investigated and 
looked into. More information about past and defined 
milestones toward an EHR in Austria can be found in [7]. 
 
This paper is structured beginning with a description of 
related work (Section 2), the methodology and the used tools 
within the study (Section 3). Afterwards the results are 
presented (Section 4) and discussed (Section 5). Finally 
some conclusions of the gained results are listed (Section 6). 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A few interesting studies among patients and physicians 
concerning the above stated aspect about acceptance of an 
EHR were published [1][4][5][10] but none of them consider 
differences between rural and urban areas. The paper 
published by Hoerbst [1] describes attitudes and behaviours 
among Austrian and German citizens from urban areas. The 
results point out, that citizens have a positive attitude 
towards an EHR but also some concerns (e.g., data 
protection) including problems with information deficits. 
Another study with patients from London point out, that they 
are interested in accessing their records to improve the 
relationship with the clinicians [5]. Requirements for an 
EHR from the point of view of citizens, physicians and other 
relevant stakeholder were identified through an Austrian 
pilot project. Citizens want a secure access, to add own 
entries and to have control about the access privileges. 
Physicians wish to have a time- and location-independent 
169
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

 
 
Figure 1. Methodology used in the study setting 
 
access to relevant information for the treatment in a short 
time, and the opportunity to write an electronic prescription 
[10]. The uncertainty among physicians in Austria as well as 
fears (e.g., additional workload and cost, data will be used by 
unauthorized people) was shown in another study [4].  
People in Austria are spatially not homogeneously 
distributed, which results in differences between people and 
their characteristics, which have to be considered in terms of 
an EHR and its acceptance. The regional digital gap is one of 
these differences, which describes not only the unequal 
distribution of the access to modern media, but also 
considers social environment, education, finances and 
infrastructure aspects in urban and rural areas. And even 
though this digital gap is getting smaller over the years, 
studies can demonstrate that it is still existing [6][8][9][11]. 
III. 
METHODS 
To gather the required information from the people from 
urban and rural areas, an empirical comparative study was 
used. The aim of the study was to gather relevant data 
covering different characteristics of people’s opinion through 
interviews. The whole study setting was divided into four 
parts (see Figure 1 for a detailed methodology description). 
First we conducted some preliminary tasks. Afterwards the 
study population was acquired for the next step, in which the 
interviews were conducted. In the last step, the data was 
analyzed in terms of different aspects through a qualitative 
content analysis according to Mayring [3]. 
A. Preliminary tasks: 
First a literature research was carried out to get 
fundamental information about current research in the topics 
EHR and qualitative surveys as well as state of the art 
publications about acceptance of EHRs. Afterwards this 
information was used to conduct 10 pre-interviews (5 people 
from urban and 5 people from rural areas). These interviews 
were used to get a baseline opinion of people from urban and 
rural areas. The interviews were open like a discussion and 
the relevant answers were noted. For a good validity of the 
results an equal distribution among the attributes “age”, 
“gender” and “education” was used (which is also called 
parallelization [12]). The results of these pre-interviews as 
well as the literature research were used to define the 
questions for an interview guideline and the definition of the 
study setting (e.g., which people form where should be 
asked). 
The study population for the empirical study was 
constructed by choosing people living in Austria who belong 
to a rural or a urban area. For correctness of the study the 
sample had to be stratified. The stratification characteristics 
were “area” with the groups “rural” and “urban”. The criteria 
for people belonging to these groups can be found in Table 1. 
Every person had to fulfil each criterion of one particular 
group to be considered as part of this group sample. 
Additionally everyone had to meet the definitions of rural or 
urban (see Table 2) according to their belonging group. 
B. Acquiring test people: 
At the beginning of this phase a flyer was created, which 
should be used to help finding participants from urban and 
rural areas. On this flyer the important facts of the study and 
their activities were clearly stated and contact addresses were 
given. Afterwards this flyer was given out using digital 
copies and on paper. After someone expressed interest in 
participating in this study, an appointment was made for 
conducting the interview. People who participated in the 
study were also found by using gatekeepers (people who 
help finding participants). These gatekeepers were informed 
about the content of the study and asked to find people 
matching the criteria in Table 1 and Table 2 and who like to 
participate in the study. 
C. Realization: 
Upon the defined questions and study settings in phase 1 
an interview guide and a short questionnaire were created for 
conducting the (qualitative) problem centred interviews 
according to Witzel [2]. Before using the interview 
guide/questionnaire a few test interviews were conducted 
among friends and relatives of the study authors to see if the 
questions are understandable. A few adaptations were 
necessary before the interviews could be conducted. The 
interviews itself were held were the interviewee was 
comfortable, in most cases their homes or working places, 
only a few interviews were held in public places. The course 
of action was always similar - after a small talk the next steps 
were illustrated and the participants had to fill out the short 
questionnaire. Afterwards a tape recording was started and 
 
TABLE I.  
CRITERIA FOR THE TWO STUDY GROUPS 
characteristics 
criteria 
rural 
urban 
living 
& 
working 
Person is now living & 
working in an rural area 
Person is now living & 
working in an urban area 
childhood 
Person has grown up in an 
rural 
area 
(especially 
between the age 6 and 18) 
Person has grown up in an 
urban 
area 
(especially 
between the age 6 and 18) 
sense 
of 
belonging 
Person feels related to a 
rural area 
Person feels related to a 
urban area 
place 
of 
residence 
Person spent a big part of 
its live in a rural area 
Person spent a big part of 
its live in a urban area 
 
170
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

TABLE II.  
DEFINITION FOR RURAL AND URBAN AREAS 
characteristics 
definition 
rural 
urban 
Population 
density 
max. 200 residents/km² 
min. 1.000 residents/km² 
Agglomerat
ion 
no agglomeration 
with agglomeration 
residents 
max. 2.000 residents 
min. 20.000 residents 
 
the interview began. Subsequently all questions were 
answered and the interview ended by stopping the tape 
recording. 
D. Analysis: 
After finishing all interviews the corresponding tape 
records were transcribed for further analysis. Then the 
interviews were analyzed in terms of different aspects 
through a qualitative content analysis by Mayring [3].  
IV. 
RESULTS 
The study population consisted of 20 participants – 10 
from urban and 10 from rural areas. In each group (urban 
and rural) one female and one male person from each of the 
following age classes were asked: 18-30 years, 31-43 years, 
44-56 years, 57-69 years and 70-82 years.  
A. Planned EHR-functions 
Three of the planned EHR functions in Austria were 
evaluated with regard to the frequency of utilization and a 
possible discrepancy between people from urban and rural 
areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1) personal data input 
The results show that 60% (6) of the sample from urban 
areas in relation to 30% (3) of the sample from rural areas 
would like to use this function and preferring it over a paper-
based documentation of their personal health data. Figure 2 
shows the results for the planned EHR-function “personal 
data input”. 
The answers to this topic were divided into three 
categories:  
• 
“utilization” – the participant would use the function,  
• 
“utilization after demand” – the participant would 
use the function only when the doctor requests it,  
• 
“no utilization” – the participant would not use the 
function and prefer a paper-based documentation of 
the personal health data. 
 
      In terms of age the results in Figure 3 show that 50% (3) 
of the interviewed people from urban areas older than 43 
years would use the planned EHR-function “personal data 
input” after a request from their doctors. In comparison with 
the interviewed people from rural areas older than 43 years 
who would not use the planned function at all and prefer a 
paper-based documentation of their personal health data in 
case of need over an EHR. 
The data was analyzed and is displayed in Figure 4 and 
demonstrate that 80% (4) of the interviewed women from 
urban areas would use the planned EHR-function “personal 
data input” after the request from a doctor. In contrast only 
40% (2) of the interviewed women from rural areas would 
do likewise. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Planned EHR-function “personal data input” with focus on 
women 
 
Figure 3. Planned EHR-function “personal data input” with focus on 
people older than 43 years 
 
Figure 2. Planned EHR-function “personal data input” 
 
Figure 5. Planned EHR-function “health information” with focus on 
people older than 43 years 
171
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

2) health information 
The general results for the second planned EHR-function 
“health information” shows no discrepancy between the 
participants from urban and rural areas. But with the focus 
on age (refer to Figure 5) 50% (3) of the participants from 
rural areas older than 43 years in comparison to 16,67% (1) 
of the participants from urban areas older than 43 years 
would use the offered function “health information” of the 
EHR in Austria. 
Independent of the discrepancy, participants who said 
that they would probably not use the planned EHR-function 
“health information” explained their decision with the 
following arguments: 
• 
Enough other information sources exist. 
• 
Loss of anonymity. 
• 
General practitioner is the only information source. 
The other information sources were defined upon request as 
internet, media and institutions like health ministry, health 
insurance, etc. 
3) result retrieval 
The evaluation of the third planned EHR-function “result 
retrieval” shows no differences between the sample from 
urban and rural areas.  
B. Utilization of an EHR and its related functions 
During the evaluation of the results and the question if 
the participants trust themselves about using an EHR and its 
related planned functions with their own computer and 
internet skills, it turned out that the assessment was 
independent of the particular EHR-functions. 
As shown in Figure 6, 90% (9) of the participants from 
urban areas estimate their own computer and internet skills 
good enough to handle an EHR and its functions on their 
own. As opposed to this only 50% (5) of the participants 
from rural areas would estimate their computer and internet 
skills good enough. The rest feels incapable about using an 
EHR on their own and would submit this task to somebody 
else (e.g., general practitioner, or relatives). 
C. Fears and anxieties 
In terms of fears and anxieties the results show some 
differences between people from urban and rural areas. 
Table 3 shows how the answers from the participants 
regarding the topic of fears and anxieties about a possible 
data abuse when using an EHR were divided into three 
categories. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE III.  
CATEGORIES OF ANSWERS REGARDING FEARS AND 
WORRIES 
characteristic 
Data risk in comparison to 
the condition without an 
EHR 
Concerns that the 
employer can get one’s 
hands on the data stored 
in an EHR 
category 
increased 
steady 
yes 
no 
High fears 
and 
anxieties 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
Medium 
fears 
and 
anxieties 
X 
 
 
X 
No 
fears 
and 
anxieties 
 
X 
 
X 
 
Figure 7 shows the results of analyzing the data and 
demonstrates a discrepancy: 70% (7) of the sample from 
rural areas indicate that they have no fears and anxieties 
about a misuse of data through the utilization of an EHR. 
They don’t believe that the risk of data fraud is increased by 
using an EHR in contrast to the condition without an EHR. 
They also have no concerns that the employers can get 
one’s hands on the data stored in an EHR. In the contrary 
only 50% (5) of the sample from urban areas think about this 
topic in the same way. 
 
D. Confidence in the general practitioner 
The answers from the interviewed people regarding the 
issue of confidence in their general practitioner were divided 
into four categories dependent on the approval to the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Fears and anxietiesabout using an EHR 
 
Figure 6. Dare of utilization of an EHR and its related functions 
 
Figure 8. Confidence in the general practitioner 
172
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

 
Figure 9. Information needs about the introduction of an EHR in 
Austria 
following statements: 
• 
Satisfaction with the general practitioner. 
• 
General practitioner as first contact point for all 
health problems. 
• 
Provision of information by the general practitioner. 
Depending on the amount of approvals to the statements, the 
four categories were characterized as follows: 
• 
“high confidence”: approval to all three statements 
• 
“medium confidence”: approval to two of the three 
statements 
• 
“low confidence”: approval to one of the three 
statements 
• 
“no confidence”: no approval to any of the three 
statements 
     As shown in Figure 8, 80% (8) of the participants from 
rural areas have confidence in their general practitioner, 
which can be classified from medium to high. In comparison 
to this only 30% (3) of the participants from urban areas who 
classify their confidence in their general practitioner equally. 
Furthermore 20% (2) from the participants from urban areas 
in relation to 0% (0) from rural areas have no confidence in 
their general practitioner at all. 
E. Information needs 
The participants were asked if they estimate that they 
have enough information about the upcoming introduction of 
an EHR in Austria and about the EHR itself or if their 
information needs about the current situation are satisfied 
yet. 
Figure 9 shows the results and demonstrates that 100% 
(10) of the sample from urban areas still need more 
information about an EHR in Austria beyond the information 
they received by now through media (e.g., newspaper, TV, 
radio) and/or physicians. In the contrary only 70% (7) of the 
sample from rural areas who also still have information 
needs. The rest is satisfied with the information they have 
about an EHR and don’t need more details. 
F. Attending a course in using an EHR 
The interviewed people were asked if they would 
embrace the opportunity if a course of learning how to 
handle an EHR provided for instance by the health ministry. 
The general results show no differences between the 
interviewed people from urban areas and those from rural 
areas. But in terms of age (shown in Figure 10) 50% (3) of 
the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants from urban areas older than 43 years would 
attend such a course. As opposed to this only 16,67% (1) of 
the participants from rural areas older than 43 years would 
also attend a course of learning how to handle an EHR. 
Those participants who said that they would attend a 
course were also asked if they would pay for it: 66,6% (2) of 
the sample from urban areas and 100% (1) of the sample 
from rural areas would pay a small amount. The rest thought 
that such a course has to be offered for free. 
Independent of the discrepancy, participants who said 
that they would not attend a course assume that an EHR can 
be handled with average computer and internet skills. As a 
result they would use tools like online help, hotline and/or 
user manuals. 
G. Bias 
During the implementation the following points may 
have influenced the results: 
The sample size (20 people) is small and the results 
should be only considered as a trend. During some 
interviews other people like husband/wife or children were 
present: Some of them were only listening to the interview. 
But some of them were interrupting the interview many 
times and/or wanted to answer for the participants. Therefore 
the answers of the participants could be influenced in a way 
and/or the participants receded from their opinion. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The trial pointed out differences in the acceptance and 
the utilization of an EHR between people from urban and 
rural areas, although there is no direct connection regarding 
EHR in terms of membership to one of these areas. One 
deciding factor of this discrepancy can be the “regional 
digital gap”, which could influence people from rural areas  
for a lack of motivation in using an EHR compared to people 
from urban areas, because fewer opportunities for access, 
low frequency of use and poor skills in handling computer 
and internet may exist. Also the utilization of the planned 
EHR-function “personal data input” might be associated with 
these reasons: The computer and internet is more part of the 
daily living by people from urban areas than from those from 
rural areas. Therefore people from urban areas are possibly 
more willing to use this EHR-function than people from rural 
areas who use computer and internet less. 
Furthermore there might be a relation between the 
regional digital gap and the attending of a course about using 
 
Figure 10. 
Willingness of attending a course about using an EHR 
173
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

an EHR: People from urban areas older than 43 years are 
more willing to attend such a course because they own more 
often a computer with internet access in comparison with 
people from rural areas older than 43 years. People from 
rural areas older than 43 years may have less experience with 
using a computer and/or with utilizing the internet and think 
that they are too old for these things and that such a course 
would be useless for them. 
People from rural areas have less fears and worries about 
a possible data abuse when using an EHR. One reason for 
that could be that more people from rural areas work in 
family businesses and therefore may not have issues, that 
their employer – who is at the same time a family member – 
is informed about their personal health data. 
For quite a lot of people from rural areas the only contact 
point for questions about health topics might be their general 
practitioner: Commonly general practitioners have a more 
important role for patients in rural areas than in urban areas. 
As a consequence people from urban areas may have 
apparently more sources where they get the needed 
information about health topics and do not have to use the 
planned EHR-function “health information”. 
More information about an EHR and its introduction in 
Austria is needed probably by people from urban areas 
because they are very critical and want to know all about it 
before they decide to use it or not. As opposed to this people 
from rural areas seemingly trust their general practitioner and 
would probably follow their attitude according to their 
statements. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the results different actions could be taken to 
support the introduction of an EHR and to improve its 
acceptance for people from urban areas and rural areas: 
• 
It is important that people from urban areas are 
informed about the introduction of an EHR through 
media or corresponding institutions (e.g., health 
ministry) to dispel concerns about data abuse. 
Whereas people from rural areas should be informed 
via the general practitioner: Therefore it could be 
useful to inform the general practitioners who are 
working in rural areas in detail about an EHR so that 
they can pass the information to their patients. 
• 
The planned EHR-function “health information” 
should be promoted more to people from urban 
areas. People from urban areas will use this function 
hereafter as an equal or better substitute for their 
previous sources. 
• 
Establishing an online help, hotline and user manual 
is a crucial measure to support the potential user 
with problems. 
• 
People from rural areas might get trust in themselves 
about using an EHR on their own if they will be 
shown how an EHR can be handled.  
      Follow up studies are necessary because of the small 
sample size. However this trend can act as a starting position 
for a quantitative trial with a large sample size. The objective 
of such a trial should be to gain more comprehensive results.  
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Hoerbst, C. Kohl, P. Knaup, and E. Ammenwerth, „Attitudes and 
behaviors related to the introduction of electronic health records 
among Austrian and German citizens,“ International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 79, pp. 81-89, 2010. 
[2] A. Witzel, “The problem-centered interview,” Forum: Qualitative 
Social Research, vol. 1, no. 1, art. 22, January 2000. 
[3] P. Mayring, “Qualitative Content Analysis,” Forum: Qualitative 
Social Research, vol. 1, no. 2, art. 20, June 2000. 
[4] W. Hackl, A. Hoerbst, and E. Ammenwerth, “The Electronic Health 
Record in Austria: Physicians' Acceptance is Influenced by Negative 
Emotions,” Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, vol. 150, 
pp. 140-144, 2009. 
[5] A. Honeyman, B. Cox, and B. Fisher, “Potential impacts of patient 
access to their electronic care records,” Informatics in Primary Care, 
vol. 13, no. 1, pp.55-60, 2005. 
[6] G. Aichholzer and R. Schmutzer, “The digital divide in Austria - 
country report prepared for the Conference ‘Stepping Stones into the 
Digital World’, 21-22 September 2000, Bremen, Germany,” Institute 
of Technology Assessment, Austrian Academy of Sciences; 1st 
edition, 
July 
2000. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.digitale-
chancen.de/assets/includes/sendtext.cfm?aus=11&key=41 
(20.9.2010) 
[7] W. Dorda, G. Durftschmid, L. Gerhold, W. Gall, and J. Gambal, 
“Austria’s Path toward nationwide Electronic Health Records,” 
Methods of Information in Medicine, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 117-123, 
2008. 
[8] M. Jäckel, T. Lenz, and N. Zilien, „Stadt-Land-Unterschiede der 
Internetnutzung - eine empirische Untersuchung der regionalen 
digitalen Spaltung,“ Medien + Erziehung, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 17-28, 
2005. 
[9] J. Kerschbaum, „Digital Divide in Österreich - ein empirischer 
Befund 
zur 
Nutzung 
und 
dem 
Verständnis 
moderner 
Kommunikationstechnologien 
in 
Österreich,“ 
University 
of 
Economics of Vienna, dissertation, 2007. 
[10] T. Schabetsberger et al., „Auf dem Weg zur Elektronischen 
Gesundheitsakte – Ein Pilotprojekt zwischen Tirol und Wien,“ 2005. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.gmds2006.de/Abstracts/310.pdf 
(20.9.2010) 
[11] R. Scheule, „Das ‚Digitale Gefälle‘ als Gerechtigkeitsproblem,“ 
Informatik-Spektrum, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 474-488, 2005. Available 
from: 
http://www.springerlink.com/content/76158n1237283238/fulltext.pdf 
(20.9.2010) 
[12] J. Bortz and N. Döring, „Forschungsmethoden und Evaluation für 
Human- und Sozialwissenschaftler,“ Springer, 3rd edition, 2002. 
[13] IBM, „Machbarkeitsstudie betreffend Einführung der elektronischen 
Gesundheitsakte (ELGA) im österreichischen Gesundheitswesen,“ 
2006. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.arge-
elga.at/fileadmin/user_upload/uploads/download_Papers/Arge_Paper
s/Machbarkeitsstudie_ELGA_Endbericht_21112006.pdf (20.9.2010) 
[14] IBM, „ELGA Systemkomponenten und Masterplan,” 2007. Available 
from: 
http://www.bmgfj.gv.at/cms/site/attachments/7/2/0/CH0709/CMS116
9796766007/ergaenzungsstudie.pdf (20.9.2010) 
[15] ELGA GmbH, Definition of ELGA from http://www.arge-
elga.at/index.php?id=2 (20.9.2010) 
[16] The 
health 
reformation 
law 
(Gesundheitsreformgesetz, 
Gesundheitsreformgesetz 2005), BGBl. I Nr. 179/2004, 2005. 
[17]  ELGA GmbH, The electronic health record in Austria – perspective to 
the 
first 
implementation 
phase 
from 
http://www.arge-
elga.at/fileadmin/user_upload/uploads/download_Papers/Arge_Paper
s/ELGA_Umsetzung_Phase1__V2.0.pdf (20.9.2010) 
 
174
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

