ePublic Health: Fresh Approaches to Infection Prevention and Control 
Social media in public health
 
Hans C. Ossebaard 
National Institute for Public Health and the Environment 
(RIVM), Bilthoven, The Netherlands. 
hans.ossebaard@rivm.nl  
 
 
 
 
 
Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen, Erwin R. Seydel 
IBR-Institute for Social Sciences and Technology 
University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands. 
j.vangemert-pijnen@utwente.nl, e.r.seydel@utwente.nl  
 
 
Abstract  - Prevention and control of infectious diseases 
suffer from deficient compliance with preventive measures 
or guidelines of both professionals and general audience. 
This poses a threat to public health. Current approaches to 
prevent risk behavior are in need of innovation. Fresh 
approaches to education, information and communication 
are needed. In this study five social media tools i.e., (micro-
)blogs, social networks, podcasts, mobile applications, RSS 
feeds, are (re)designed and operated with regard to four 
areas of infection prevention and control. They are evaluated 
according to their impact on public and professional 
adherence, compliance rate and other indices. Here we 
present outcomes of the first part of the study; a literature 
review of social media use in public health, specifically in the 
Netherlands. Empirical studies are scarce. However 
anecdotic studies, practices and experiences are reported 
that imply a range of innovative possibilities and potential 
impact of social media in the field of prevention and control 
of infectious diseases, as well as in public health at large. 
Keywords - Information technology, Social media, ePublic 
Health, Participatory health care, Adherence, Infectious 
diseases 
 
I.  
INTRODUCTION 
Prevention and control of infectious diseases, in 
particular during large-scale epidemics or incidental high 
risk outbreaks, increasingly suffer from deficient 
compliance with preventive measures or guidelines of 
both professionals and general public. Examples are the 
no-show rate among the general audience after receiving a 
personal appeal to obtain an influenza or a human 
papillomavirus (HPV) - vaccination, or similar low 
compliance among health care workers with preventive 
measures such as wearing protective gear (like masks, 
gowns and protection glasses) during professional care for 
potentially infectious patients [1]. This is worrisome 
especially in view of recent developments of infectious 
diseases 
in 
the 
Dutch 
population 
and 
abroad. 
Antimicrobial resistance is increasingly observed in the 
Netherlands, 
particularly 
in 
hospitals. 
Antibiotic 
resistance poses a potentially growing threat to public 
health because it is more difficult to treat infections with 
resistant 
pathogens. 
Compliance 
with 
preventive 
measures would make a difference. In the Netherlands, 
the use of antimicrobials is low in human health care, but 
high in the veterinary sector. This high level of antibiotic 
use may bring risks to humans, as resistant bacteria can 
spread from animals to humans. In addition, the 
emergence 
of 
ESBL 
(Extended 
Spectrum 
Bèta 
Lactamase) 
producing 
bacteria 
and 
enterobacteria 
resistant to multiple classes of antibiotics is a major threat 
to patient health care. It is anticipated that the use of 
antibiotics will increase in the future due to aging of the 
population, which will contribute to further increasing of 
resistance pathogens. It is therefore important to keep the 
use of antimicrobials as low as possible in the future. 
Cautious surveillance is a tool to identify and monitor 
resistant pathogens. But prevention and control are 
equally essential [2]. 
 
The Dutch RIVM Centre for Infectious Disease 
Control (CIb) has an executive and coordinating task in the 
national prevention and control of a wide range of 
infectious diseases manifesting themselves in incidental 
outbreaks of mixed origin, scale and risk level, as well as 
in various epidemics. This is one of RIVM’s most 
important and most visible statutory public assignments.  
In order to be able to effectively implement the 
national infection prevention and control policy in the near 
future it is of strategic interest to counter the 
abovementioned public health risks. From health sciences 
we know what psychological, social and cultural factors 
influence non-compliance. We also know that current 
approaches to collective prevention of risk behavior need 
innovative 
ways 
for 
education, 
information 
and 
communication [3].  
 
Fresh approaches are needed. We find these in eHealth 
marketing; a sub domain of social marketing. eHealth 
marketing concerns public health practice. It draws from 
27
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

traditional marketing theories and principles, and adds 
evidence-based strategies to prevention, communication, 
health promotion and health protection. It provides a 
framework of theories, strategies and techniques that can 
be used to guide work in public health research, 
interventions, and communication campaigns. eHealth 
marketing typically uses emerging technologies and ‘new 
media’ to improve the impact of health marketing and 
communication. Web-based and mobile technologies offer 
tools that are cheap, ubiquitous, interactive, real-time, 
many-to-many and that are participative in nature. They 
can be put to action for RIVM’s objectives to make 
content, tools and services available when, where and how 
users want them. This we call ePublic health. 
 
The present paper depicts a strategic research enterprise to 
study social media in public health. First it describes the 
background of emerging technologies and the five social 
media under study. Than it explains their relevance for 
public health i.c. infectious diseases. After stating the 
specific objectives of the study and the methodological 
design the outcomes are presented of the first part of the 
study; the assessment of current approaches in ePublic 
health via a literature review, with specific consideration 
for the Dutch situation. 
II. 
EPUBLIC HEALTH 
A. Emerging technologies 
The utilization of information technologies, the 
Internet (Web 2.0) and communication technology could 
meet the need for improvements in infection prevention 
and control and other vital public health issues. Web 2.0 is 
a term that refers to a) improved communication and 
collaboration between people via social-networking 
technologies, b) improved communication between 
separate software applications via open Web standards for 
describing and accessing data, and c) improved Web 
interfaces that mimic the real-time responsiveness of 
desktop applications within a browser window. 
 
These technologies, tools and services have already 
shown 
to 
influence 
behavioral 
and 
motivational 
compliance with preventive measures [4, 5, 6]. It is 
expected that these developments and approaches will 
profoundly affect the health information economy, public 
and professional engagement in health and health care, as 
well as biomedical research itself [7]. After the e-citizens, 
the Dutch e-patient is taking shape [8]. Gradually, the use 
of 2.0 technologies as well as semantic web (3.0) tools 
increase to facilitate social networking, participation,  
apomediation, collaboration, and openness within and 
between these user groups 
Availability and accessibility of these technologies is 
evidently a condition sine qua non. Recent figures re-
affirm high use of Internet by the Dutch population. In the 
year 2005 a total of 78% of Dutch households had an 
internet connection. In 2010 that number has grown to 
91% of all Dutch households. Over 75% of users use the 
Internet (almost) every day. Among younger people 
(<25y) this is 90%. [9, 10, 11]. Top of the list in broadband 
penetration - 38.1 broadband subscribers on every 100 
inhabitants [10] - Dutch cell phone use is even higher, 
beyond the 100% mark.  
Social media use continues to grow in popularity 
accordingly. From a global survey in 2010 [12] it appears 
to be the fourth most popular use of the internet, next to 
searching for information, emailing and checking the 
news. In the US, 57% of all 14-75 year olds use social 
networking sites like Facebook [13]. Furthermore, 10% of 
14-17 year olds, 13% of 44-62 year olds and 17% of 63-
75 year olds maintain a Twitter account [14]. Podcasting 
is slightly less popular, but still 25% of Americans age 12 
and up have listened to or watched a podcast at least once 
[15].  
 
In The Netherlands 70% of adults use social media. 
Mostly in their roles as ‘spectator’ or ‘joiner’ and mainly 
in the age of 18-44 years (Table 1) [16]. An estimated 
third of chronically ill people make use of on line 
communities for information and sharing. Young people 
use social media not so much for health information but 
mostly for other reasons [17a]. 
B. Social media 
The present study examines five tools with regard to 
four distinct and limited public health issues. These five 
social media tools are selected for piloting because of their 
expected cost-efficiency, feasibility, operability. The 
selection may be adapted as a consequence of previous 
study outcomes. The developmental process will be guided 
by exemplary questions added below. Selected for piloting 
are: 
a) Blogs. A blog is a regularly updated online 
journal that anyone with an Internet connection 
can access.  Some target a small audience, others 
boast a national readership. Microblogs, also 
known as ‘tweets’, are disseminated through 
Twitter.com and comprise short text messaging. 
Over 14% of Dutch internet users blog about 
health issues [17]. What can we learn from 
experiences in the health ‘blogosphere’ where 
e.g., blogwriters and twitterers share information 
or communication techniques to prevent and 
control lice infestation or where on line seminars 
(webinars) are held for ‘parent bloggers’ to 
discuss basic information on RSV-infection and 
share research on key messages that have been 
proven to motivate people to take preventive 
measures? 
b) Social networks. Social networks are interactive 
websites in which users create a profile that may 
28
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

contain photos, blogs, music, messages from 
friends, and other information. The high use of 
sites like MySpace, Hyves or Facebook [16] has 
been well documented. Many smaller sites for 
professionals, patients, parents, teachers or 
citizens have emerged, offering a targeted 
approach to increase reach. These networks are 
quickly becoming a mainstream format for 
information exchange, relationship building and 
knowledge sharing.  Increasing amounts of 
Dutch Internet users participate in social 
networks while more and more patients make 
choices in healthcare after consulting friends and 
relatives in stead of medical professionals. Could 
we employ social networks to engage users in 
health topics (i.c. scabies) and empower 
stakeholders to comply with preventive measures 
at home, in (nursing) homes and risk settings? 
c) Podcasts. A podcast is a digital audio or video 
file that is episodic, downloadable, program-
driven, mainly with a host and/or theme, and 
convenient, usually via an automated feed with 
computer software. Is podcasting for RIVM an 
opportunity to share information on Pediculus 
humanus infestation in an enjoyable way while 
allowing listeners to select topics relevant to 
them? Should RIVM develop a podcast library 
for the general public or for health care workers 
or their own staff (e.g., vodcasting conference 
proceedings)? 
d) Mobile applications. The ubiquity of mobile 
devices makes them an ideal medium for health 
messaging and promotion. Cell phones and other 
mobile 
devices 
have 
the 
potential 
to 
revolutionize 
public 
health 
communication.  Research on how these devices 
can be used to provide immediate access to 
reliable just-in-time health information is rising; 
end 2009 the penetration of mobile internet is ca. 
20%, while just under 2.8 people use their cell 
phone for internet access [17]. What innovative 
ways of exchanging vital information or 
technology 
to 
promote 
healthy 
and 
safe 
behaviors via mobile platforms could be 
envisioned e.g., for responding to sudden 
outbreaks of infectious diseases? 
e) RSS feeds. Internet users often subscribe to RSS 
(Really Simple Syndication) feeds of frequently 
read websites in order to receive notification of 
content updates. These feeds may empower 
individuals 
(teachers, 
parents, 
health 
care 
workers) to access and utilize the health 
information they view as most valuable. RSS 
feeds capitalize on this personalization of 
information by allowing users to select the topics 
that are most interesting to them. Will the impact 
of RIVM’s output increase by ensuring that 
timely and relevant health information is 
delivered to users when, where, and how they 
want it? Should we provide professionals and 
citizens with the opportunity to subscribe to RSS 
feeds for thematic website pages e.g., on lice 
prevention 
notifying 
subscribers 
whenever 
updates are made? 
 
To create awareness, to encourage and to persuade the 
users to comply with prevention and control guidelines 
these tools are developed through participatory healthcare 
design  and business modeling, explicitly engaging users 
and stakeholders from the start [18, 19].  
C. Infestations and infectious diseases 
The tools will accordingly be put into operation with 
regard to four distinct and limited public health issues: 
 
1. Prevention and control of the common human 
lice (Pediculus humanus capitis) infestation 
among children (3-12y) in family and primary 
school settings; 
2. Prevention and control of  seasonal RSV-
infection (respiratory syncytial virus) among 
young children (0-4 y) in ‘crowded’ kindergarten 
and pre-school settings. It is epidemic in that its 
incidence is circa 413 in every 100.000 children; 
resulting in 209 hospital admissions (0-4y) [20]; 
3. Prevention and control of scabies (Sarcoptes 
scabiei) in nursing homes and homes for the 
elderly. Prevalence among particular populations 
is estimated to amount to 30% [20]; 
4. Control of incidental, sudden outbreaks or 
explosions among limited populations e.g., at 
dance festivals, scouting jamborees or other mass 
gatherings. 
 
All of these public health issues belong to the 
competence and responsibility of RIVM CIb.  For 1-3 
professional and public guidelines are in force and many 
different 
stakeholders 
(children, 
parents, 
teachers, 
kindergarten, schools, staff, residents, police, health 
authorities etc.) are directly involved. Though having 
relatively high prevalence and incidences figures in the 
Netherlands, they do not generally cause severe, primary 
and secondary health problems, rendering this a relatively 
safe area for exploration and study. 
D. Objective and deliverables 
The study’s objectives recapitulated: 
1. To develop five social media tools using 
participatory health care design method; 
2. To operate these tools with regard to four areas 
of infection prevention and control; 
29
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

3. To evaluate their impact on public and 
professional adherence, compliance rate and 
other indices; 
4. To integrate 1-3 into a models/scenarios for 
development and operationalization of social 
media for health and risk communication and for 
disease prevention and control. 
 
From this explorative and evaluative research we 
derive a) a specific model for development and application 
of mobile and web-based media for infection prevention 
and control; b) a generic model for development and 
application of mobile and web-based media interventions 
for safe, swift, effective and efficient health and risk 
communication and response; and c) an scientific 
evaluation tool to measure the effects of new media 
interventions.  
III. METHODOLOGY 
The present study uses principles of human centred 
design [19, 21-23] and a mixed model of quantitative and 
qualitative methods. In chronological order the following 
methods will be used to advance the project. 
A. Assessment of current approaches 
Prior to developing new tools an assessment will be 
done to establish the nature and the extent of social media 
use in current public health practices in the Netherlands 
and abroad. 
 
Firstly, a literature review will be carried out to assess 
knowledge, practices and experiences with social media 
in public health as reported in peer-reviewed journals. 
Results of the latter are presented sub IV. of this paper. 
Secondly a consultation of sisters (foreign) organizations 
takes place driven by the question of what underpins the 
choice of these media and what are the perceived benefits 
and 
shortcomings 
in 
current 
health 
and 
risk 
communication? The assessment is done by desk study 
and interviews of stakeholders and communication 
experts.  
B. Reviewing new media use for infection control 
A content analysis of social media like Twitter, 
Facebook, weblogs, wikis with respect to (seasonal) 
infections (i.c. RSV), infestations (i.c. lice and scabies) 
and outbreaks (unknown) is carried out over a period of 
time. Trends in communication, opinions and attitudes 
will be electronically monitored, analysed and reported. 
The outcomes provide input for the development of 
specific social media tools in the next stage.  
C. Participatory design of social media 
The tools are designed and developed through 
participatory health care design in order to use them in an 
effective, safe and efficient manner. Participatory health 
care design is a human-centered design approach. It aims 
to engage all stakeholders (e.g., employees, partners, 
customers, citizens, patients, end users) in the design 
process to help ensure that the product designed meets 
their needs and is usable, thereby increasing chances for 
acceptance, adoption and adherence [21-23]. It relates to 
concepts of Health 2.0 and collaborative medicine where 
creating (virtual) environments that are more responsive 
and appropriate to their users' cultural, emotional and 
practical needs, is vital. The focus is on processes and 
procedures of design, not on design style. These processes 
are research in themselves, the outcomes of which will 
feed the production of ‘persuasive’ tools in order to put 
them to work in real life.   
D. Knowledge to action 
Once developed and constructed the tools will be put 
into practice with regard to four distinct and limited 
public health areas c.q. infectious disease prevention and 
control (sub II-C.). They have been selected to provide a 
safe test bed for the project since: i) no serious individual 
and public health damage is involved; ii) relatively high 
prevalence/incidence; iii) many stakeholders are directly 
involved; iv) preventive measures and/or guidelines are in 
force and available; and v) they belong to the competence 
and responsibility of RIVM CIb. The results will be used 
for RIVM’s mission with regard to public health. 
E. Evaluation 
By webanalytic methodology we quantify, analyze 
and evaluate parameters of participation (rate, range et al.) 
and social media use by the stakeholders. Eysenbach [24] 
developed a set of useful ‘infodemiological‘ methods to 
search and analyze communication behavior on the 
Internet and social media that will be used in the present 
evaluation. On line surveys, on-site focus groups and 
interviews with stakeholders will be used to collect 
qualitative data among the respective target groups 
(parents, teachers, health care workers, staff, nurses, 
kindergarten staff, police et al.). These methods are 
distinctly applied to the public health areas under study: 
lice, RSV, scabies and sudden outbreaks. For every area 
the effect of the five social media is systematically and 
longitudinally 
assessed 
in 
terms 
of 
knowledge, 
information needs, attitude, adherence (use, willingness-
to-return, 
attrition), 
motivation 
(to 
comply 
with 
preventive measures), health behaviour (self-report), 
impact 
(perceived 
significance) 
and 
other 
social 
psychological indices. Special attention is given to the 
added value of the tools with respect to both traditional 
media (TV, radio, brochures) and convergent/cross-media 
use. Via analysis of reputation rate the image of RIVM as 
a credible and reliable source of information is observed.  
F. Modelling scenarios 
The outcomes of the developmental stage, the 
operational stage and the evaluation stage are used to 
30
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

construct a practical model for immediate use in a wider 
public health context. Results and practical experience 
provide building blocks for a specific, evidence-based 
scenario to develop and operate evidence-based mobile 
and web-based media for infection prevention and control. 
The application of 
participatory 
design principles 
generates persuasive and motivational tools that allow for 
optimal adherence to prevention and control measures 
among professional and the general public. Once this 
succeeds the specific scenario is extended to a generic 
model to develop and operate persuasive mobile and web-
based media interventions for evidence-based, safe, swift, 
effective and valid health and risk communication and 
response.  
 
These models/scenarios may form part of RIVM 
‘toolkits’ as offered to professional partners for disease 
prevention and health education or be disseminated in 
different ways. In the process the last product to be 
delivered is an evaluation tool that allows for measuring 
the effects of social media interventions on health 
information behavior 
IV. 
OUTCOMES 
In this paper, we present outcomes of the first 
part of the study c.q. III.A Assessment of current 
approaches. What kinds of social media are currently 
used in (international) infectious disease control to create 
awareness, to motivate or to persuade the public and 
health care workers to ‘do the right thing’ in risk 
situations?   
A. Literature review 
We have searched the databases Science direct, 
Scopus, PsychInfo, Picarta, PubMed, Google Scholar and 
Web of Science. We developed a search syntax composed 
of terms such as: infection prevention, infection control, 
social media, outbreak control, implementation, social 
networking, Netherlands, Twitter, new media and 
FaceBook, health communication, disease, web 2.0. and 
Dutch synonyms of these. The search was conducted 
during September-October 2010 and was limited to 
studies in English and Dutch published between 1990-
2010. 
 
If allowed by advanced search options adaptations to the 
syntax were made. Wildcards were used to account for 
differences in spelling of search terms or term endings. 
Identified ‘key references’ have been traced until 
saturation was reached (no new articles were identified). 
Excluded were advisory reports and articles that did not 
(also) treat the use of media. In this way we found 43 
articles. 
 
 
 
B. Results  
Papers generally depict the authors’ view 
(whether or not based on scientific theory) on how social 
media should be used rather than presenting empirical 
evidence. A minority describe the way social media are 
actually used and implemented for infection prevention 
and outbreak control, very few report on social, 
behavioral or health effects.  
 
Both international and Dutch articles on social media use 
in public health may be grouped into five more or less 
distinct categories that indicate the primary objective; 1) 
distribution of health information, 2) delivery and 
promotion of health services or products, 3) peer-support, 
4) education and training of professionals, and finally 5) 
research.  
 
With regard to distributing health information 
we found promising outcomes e.g., in HIV/AIDS 
prevention information via chat sessions [25] or sharing 
health information via social networks [26]. Reynolds 
[27] describes how U.S. Centres for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) use social media such as Twitter, 
Facebook, podcasts, YouTube and RSS feeds to inform 
the general public e.g with regard to the A/H1N1 
epidemic in 2009. This resulted in an increase of visits to 
their 
websites 
and 
an 
improvement 
of 
CDC’s 
trustworthiness in public perception. CDC’s ‘i know’ 
campaign also uses Twitter, YouTube and Facebook for 
prevention of HIV/AIDS among African-American 
youngsters. The campaign employs social networks to 
reduce stigmatizing and taboo and to encourage 
participation in the campaign [28]. Murray et al. [29] 
describe several ways in which podcasts can be used in 
health-related settings.  
 
Hivatlas.org is a social media initiative that aims “to 
collect, collate, classify and disseminate the information 
on HIV, TB & Malaria so that people living with HIV and 
the people working in the field can be on top of the 
information generating from more than 700 online and 
offline resources”.  
 
Anecdotic examples of social media use to disseminate 
information are an individual dermatologist using Twitter 
to share information about skin and skin care with her 
followers [30]; Medpedia, a wiki launched in 2009 by 
medical specialists on health information [31]; lay people 
disseminating medical news and information via blogs 
[32]; medical professionals blogging about medical news 
and knowledge [33]; ICYou, a site for sharing video 
material about experiences on treatments and disease or 
sites using RSS feeds to inform on pre-selected subjects 
[34]. Although such outcomes are interesting no empirical 
studies have been found with regard to the effectiveness 
31
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

of social media use with regard to the distribution of 
health information. 
 
With regard to delivering and promotion of 
health services it can be noted that anno 2010 in the UK 
social media, mainly Twitter, are used by 40% of health 
organizations for prevention [35]. Many American 
hospitals 
use 
social 
media 
for 
marketing 
& 
communication [30, 36]. They send general messages 
referring to their official home page via Facebook e.g., 
announcing an Open Day via Twitter, or an operation on 
YouTube for educational purposes or even release real-
time progress reports via Twitter during surgery.  
 
A survey by Beard et al. [37] reveals a wide range of 
health-related activities in the on line virtual world of 
Second Life. Agencies, companies and private groups 
apparently have chosen to integrate (features of) Second 
Life into their Web 2.0 communication strategies. 
 
In spite of such findings no empirical studies have been 
found concerning the effectiveness of social media use 
with regard to the delivery of health services. In a 
randomised trial Lester et al. [38] find that mobile phones 
may be effective tools to improve patient outcomes in 
low-resource settings. Kenyan patients receiving SMS 
support had significantly improved antiretroviral therapy 
adherence and rates of viral suppression compared with 
individuals in the control group.  
 
Peer-support was already a noticeable objective 
of internet activity before the dawn of Web 2.0.  On line 
communities for support, comparison, advice and 
communication have grown and diversified. Murray et al. 
[29] also describe the use of blogs and wiki’s in health 
contexts and Hardey [39] mentions user reviews of health 
services. Patientslikeme.com is a successful American 
social network site, sponsored by pharmaceutical 
industries, for chronically ill people with over 65.000 
members. Patients follow new developments for their 
specific disease and have access to user generated 
information, tools and experiences to manage their 
condition. 
 
 
Launching social media for reasons of education, 
consultation and training for health care professionals is 
gradually increasing. Yensen [40] mentions successful use 
of RSS feeds to provide up-to-date health information. 
Though many initiatives have been taken to use social 
media for educational purposes no empirical evidence is 
reported as of yet. 
 
Social media and the internet can be used as a 
research environment for the study of human behavior. 
Eysenbach [41, 42] started to analyse behaviour and 
content on the internet and later in social media use. He 
was the first to show a correspondence between influenza-
related searches on Google and influenza cases occurring 
in the following week in Canada, later to be extended to 
analysis of A/H1N1 communications on Twitter, a 
discipline he coined ‘infodemiology’ or ‘infoveillance’ 
[24]. Corley et al. [43] used data-mining techniques to 
establish 
a 
strong 
correlation 
between 
blogposts 
mentioning ‘influenza’ (and related terms) and data of the 
Centre for Disease Control (CDC) on the influenza virus.  
 
C. Social media and public health in the Netherlands 
 
Reports on social media in all five categories can 
be found sparsely for the Netherlands. We generally find 
reports that advise public authorities to make use of social 
media (e.g. in infection prevention) or anecdotic studies. 
There are no empirical studies on the use of social media 
and its effects in this respect. Social media have not (yet) 
acquired an established position in public crisis 
communication, though some positive experiences have 
been reported [44, 45]. These have led Dutch ministries 
(Ministry 
of 
Economic 
Affairs, 
Agriculture 
and 
Innovation; Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport; 
Ministry of Foreign affairs) to incorporate social media as 
instruments for crisis communication in a wider strategy. 
Especially micro-blogging (Twitter) seems to provide 
opportunities for authorities to communicate with citizens. 
In some instances it has been used for factual information 
on Q-fever and influenza. Some examples exist of training 
and education in social media for health professionals or 
civil servants. The latter have received guidelines on how 
to use social media responsibly and safely 
 
In a wider health context there is more to be found. A 
remarkable case has been a Dutch private initiative (April 
2010) to canvass new organ donors via social networking. 
Hyves-users received a question on their personal page if 
they would save someone’s life. Consequently they could 
officially register for organ donation resulting in 25.000 
new applicants, 80% of which became actual donors. In 
comparison; a large scale nationwide TV broadcast in 
2007 resulted in 7300 new applicants. The Dutch Pink 
Ribbon campaign encourages people to actively take part 
and join in raising funds for breast cancer research (see: 
twitter.com/pinkribbon_NL).  
 
Dutch hospitals increasingly use social media such as 
LinkedIn, Twitter or YouTube [46]. Use of LinkedIn rose 
from 2 % (Jan. 2010) to 53 % (Sep. 2010), and use of 
Twitter from 4,5% to 32,6%. Not so much for cooperation 
and dialogue with patients but rather for promotion and 
human resource management. Some have a Twitter 
account but never or rarely used it. Others send news-
tweets about their hospitals, the consequences of budget 
cuts, or building activities. 26% of hospitals use YouTube 
32
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

in ways that vary from uploading promotional corporate 
videos and material about special events to explanatory 
videos about daily routines or intake procedures. 
Approximately 21% use RSS, 15% Hyves (over 10 
million users) while blogging is done from 6% of Dutch 
hospitals. Facebook - with over 2 million Dutch users - 
was not considered in the study. 
Two Dutch general practitioners tentatively started a free 
primary care consultation service on Twitter in 2009 [47]. 
Their preliminary findings show that consultations via 
Twitter encompass all areas of regular primary care 
practice. About one thirds of the communication takes 
place on the public timeline, the other two thirds via the 
private Direct Message function.   
On line communities on health issues are pervasive and 
participation increases. Patients clearly benefit from 
actively taking part while possible detrimental effects are 
rarely reported [48]. 
  
In conclusion, we observe that in spite of the 
country’s high use of web based and mobile technology 
very little empirical research has been done in the 
Netherlands. However the body of literature on the 
subject 
is 
growing 
and 
interestingly 
shows 
the 
possibilities 
of 
using 
social 
media 
for 
health 
communication, prevention and control of infectious 
diseases. Dutch public health organizations increasingly 
use social media; mainly for conventional, one-way 
marketing, communication and information purposes but 
increasingly so for encouraging participation and 
interaction.  
 
Lessons for the Dutch may be learned from the American 
Centres for Disease Control (CDC) that are collecting 
experience and building knowledge about using social 
media in crisis and emergency-risk communication. CDC 
developed guidelines on how to use such tools which are 
relevant for the Dutch situation. The importance of trust 
for the relationship with the general audience is 
emphasized. To establish trust and credibility four 
elements 
of 
persuasive 
communication 
are 
vital: 
expressing empathy and caring, showing competence and 
expertise, remaining honest and open and being 
committed. According to CDC their work was worth the 
effort, since social media helped to go where people are, 
tailor health messages, empower people when making 
health decisions and facilitate interactive communication. 
CDC claims to have gained more trust and satisfaction 
with the use of social media [27]. However, this can only 
be achieved if professionals have the skills to use them. 
The typical collaborative nature of Web 2.0 is only useful 
if health professionals overtly participate and refrain from 
‘old school’, one way communication [35, 49]. 
 
McNab [50] mentions some guidelines to use 
social media for health communication wherein such 
professional participation is critical: “Be strategic and 
choose wisely. Identify what needs to be said and why, to 
whom and when. Focus efforts on the specific social 
media tools relevant to the audience and use them 
consistently. A string of abandoned or infrequently tended 
social media accounts hurts credibility. Critically, health 
professionals need to use social media to engage in a 
conversation, not only to "pass down" information. The 
global social media community expects to be able to add 
value to the conversation, to help correct rumors or 
misinformation, provide feedback or offer personal 
experience.” Guidelines are also proposed by medical 
professional organizations such as the American Medical 
Association who emphasizes the ethical and legal aspects 
of social media use by doctors.  
 
Vance 
et 
al. 
[51] 
acknowledge 
some 
disadvantages such as unknown authors, unclear sources 
or opinions presented as facts. From the advent of the 
internet these have been addressed in discussions on how 
to look after the credibility of medical information. 
Ethical standards such as the international Health on the 
Net code (HONcode) apply to professional use of social 
media as well as to the internet. 
 
Though we have anecdotic studies, practices and 
experiences rather than empirical studies the available 
material implies a range of innovative possibilities and 
potential impact of social media in the field of prevention 
and control of infectious diseases, as well as in public 
health at large for a growing population of both patients 
and professionals. 
V. DISCUSSION 
Social media are popular sources for health 
information among (young people). Cheap, many-to-
many, real time, ubiquitous and interactive as they are, 
social media offer many opportunities for much needed 
innovation in public health communication.  They have 
changed the media landscape completely and the old 
‘trusted media’ must relate to the new ‘chaotic’ media. 
 
These can potentially connect the world of science, public 
authorities and the general public while maintaining 
balance between rational information c.q. education and 
irrational alarming is a responsibility for all party’s 
involved. 
 
Dutch health authorities have taken interesting initiatives 
in public health to improve health communication via 
social media. Though it seems sometimes, as a Dutch 
saying goes, that they “have heard the bell tolling but 
don’t know were the tongue is hanging.” The original 2.0 
33
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

features make social media inherently suitable for peer-to-
peer 
interaction 
on 
health 
issues, 
professional 
collaboration and education and health services delivery. 
Social media use can be studied as any human behaviour 
can be studied, and specific methods are currently being 
developed to obtain most of these data. 
 
As is the case with other eHealth technologies 
[52] the lack of robust evidence prevents a clear 
assessment of the assumed benefits. More knowledge and 
practices are needed with regard to how social media 
could be successfully applied in public health to counter 
the never-ending threat of infectious disease. The actual 
experts in social media use are the users. Future research 
should focus on users and what works for them. 
Information from such studies should inspire effective 
social media use by organizations, and this in turn will 
increase the reach and impact of their public health 
message and contribute to close the science-practice gap 
[53]. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This article is one in a series of research reports on consumer health 
informatics in the Netherlands, in cooperation with the University of 
Twente, funded by the RIVM Strategic Research Program.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Verhoeven, F. (2009) When Staff Handle Staph: User-Driven Versus 
Expert-Driven Communication of Infection Control Guidelines. Thesis. 
Enschede: University of Twente, The Netherlands. 
[2] Bijkerk P., Roede B.M., van Lier E.A., & M.E.E. Kretzschmar (Dec. 
2010) State of Infectious Diseases in the Netherlands. RIVM report 
210211006. Bilthoven: National Institute for Public Health and the 
Environment (RIVM). 
[3] Van den Berg, M. & C.G. Schoemaker (2010) Effectivity of 
prevention; Part of the Dutch Public Health Forecast Reports 2010 series 
[Effecten van preventie; RIVM report 270061007, Deelrapport van de 
VTV 2010 Van gezond naar beter ]. Bilthoven: National Institute for 
Public Health and the Environment (RIVM). 
[4] Wilson, K. & J. Keelan (2009) Coping with public health 2.0 J of the 
Canadian Medical Association, 180(10). p 1080. 
[5] Chou W.S., Hunt Y.M., Bechjord E.B., Moser R.P. & B.W. Hesse 
(2009) Social media use in the United States: Implications for Health 
communication. J Med Internet Res; 11(4):e48 
 
[6] Webb, T. L., Joseph, J., Yardley, L., & Michie, S. (2010). Using the 
Internet to promote health behavior change: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the impact of theoretical basis, use of behavior change 
techniques, and mode of delivery on efficacy. J Med Internet Res, 12(1). 
http://www.jmir.org/2010/1/e4/PDF 
 
[7] Eysenbach G. (2008) Medicine 2.0: Social Networking, 
Collaboration, Participation, Apomediation, and Openness. J Med 
Internet Res, 10(3):e22  http://www.jmir.org/2008/3/e22/ 
doi:10.2196/jmir.1030 
 
[8] SCP [Netherlands Institute for Social Research] Steyaert, J. & J. de 
Haan (Eds.)(2007) Yearbook ICT and society: Accustomed to digital 
[Jaarboek ICT en samenleving 2007: Gewoon digitaal ]. Amsterdam: 
Uitgeverij Boom. 
 
[9] EUROSTAT (2010) 
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_PUBLIC/4-08122009-
BP/EN/4-08122009-BP-EN.PDF as accessed 15-04-2010. 
 
[10] Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development (2009) 
http://www.oecd.org/document/54/0,3343,en_2649_34225_38690102_1
_1_1_1,00.html as accessed 15-04-2010. 
 
[11] Statistics Netherlands [Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek] (2010) 
Households with access to the internet. 
http://statline.cbs.nl/StatWeb/publication/?VW=T&DM=SLNL&PA=71
102ned&D1=a&D2=0&D3=%28l-11%29-l&HD=100201-1929 as 
accessed 11-10-2010. 
 
[12] Deloitte Global Services Limited (2010). Deloitte’s state of the 
media democracy survey, fourth edition. 
http://www.deloitte.com/assets/Dcom-
global/Local%20Assets/Documents/State%20of%20Media%20Democra
cy%20Survey_4th_Edition.pdf as accessed 11-10-2010. 
 
[13] Emarketer (2010): Baby Boomers Get Connected with Social 
Media. http://www.emarketer.com/Article.aspx?R=1007484 as accessed 
11-10-2010. 
 
[14] Social Media Differences Among Teens, Boomers and Moms: New 
Study Findings (2010). http://www.socialmediaexaminer.com/social-
media-differences-among-teens-boomers-and-moms-new-study-
findings/ as accessed 11-10-2010. 
 
[15] Podcast Consumer Revealed 2009. 
http://www.slideshare.net/webby2001/the-podcast-consumer-revealed-
2009 as accessed 11-10-2010. 
 
[16]  Mans, R. (2010). Figures on social media use in The Netherlands. 
Cijfers over social media gebruik in Nederland.   
http://www.marketingfacts.nl/berichten/20100322_cijfers_over_social_
media_gebruik_in_nederland/ as accessed 11-10-2010. 
 
[17] RVZ (2010). Health 2.0 [Gezondheid 2.0]. The Hague: Council for 
Public Health and Health Care [Raad voor de Volksgezondheid en 
Zorg]. 
 
[17a] Van Rijen, O. (2010). Sociale media zijn voor jongeren maar niet 
bij gezondheid, ziekte en zorg. 
http://www.frankwatching.com/archive/2010/03/01/sociale-media-zijn-
voor-jongeren-maar-niet-bij-gezondheid-ziekte-en-zorg/ as accessed 11-
10-2010. 
 
[18] Van Limburg AHM, Hendrix RMG, Ossebaard HC, Seydel ER, 
Van Gemert-Pijnen JEWC. Business modelling to advance the 
development and implementation of eHealth technologies (J Med 
Internet Res, in press). 
 
[19] Nijland, N. (2011) ‘Grounding eHealth; towards a holistic 
framework for sustainable eHealth technologies’. Thesis. Enschede: 
University of Twente, The Netherlands. 
 
[20] Van der Lucht F. & J.J. Polder (2010) Dutch Public Health Forecast 
Report 2010 (Kernrapport van de Volksgezondheid Toekomst 
Verkenning 2010 ‘Van gezond naar beter’). Bilthoven: National Institute 
for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM). 
34
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

[21] Mauro, A. (2009). Patient-Centered E-Health Design. In: E. V. 
Wilson (Ed.) Patient-Centered E-Health. New York: Medical Info 
Science Reference. 
 
[22] Muller, M. (2003). Participatory design: the third space in HCI. In 
A. Sears & J. A. Jacko (Eds.), Human-Computer Interaction: 
Development Process (pp. 1051-1068): CRC Press. 
http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~meghana/AB/Muller2003.pdf 
 
[23] Pagliari, C. (2007). Design and evaluation in eHealth: Challenges 
and implications for an interdisciplinary field. J Med Internet Res, 9(2). 
http://www.jmir.org/2007/2/e15/PDF 
 
[24] Eysenbach G (2009) Infodemiology and Infoveillance: Framework 
for an Emerging Set of Public Health Informatics Methods to Analyze 
Search, Communication and Publication Behavior on the Internet. J Med 
Internet Res; 11(1):e11 http://www.jmir.org/2009/1/e11 doi: 
10.2196/jmir.1157  
 
[25] Moskowitz, D.A., Melton, D. & J. Owczarzak (2009). PowerON: 
The use of instant message counseling and the internet to facilitate 
HIV/STD education and prevention. Patient Education and Counseling, 
77 (1), 20-26.  
 
[26] Scanfeld, D., Scanfeld, V. & E.L. Larson, (2010). Dissemination of 
health information through social networks: Twitter and antibiotics. 
American Journal of Infection Control, 38 (3), 182-188.  
 
[27] Reynolds, B.J. (2010). Building trust through social media. CDC’s 
experience during the H1N1 influenza response. Marketing Health 
Services, 30 (2), 18-21. 
 
[28] Oza, M. (2010). Did You Know? CDC’s “I Know” campaign raises HIV 
awareness within African-American communities. 
http://www.aidsbeacon.com/news/2010/04/14/did-you-know-
cdc%E2%80%99s-%E2%80%9Ci-know%E2%80%9D-campaign-
raises-hiv-awareness-within-african-american-communities/ as accessed 
11-10-2010. 
 
[29] Murray, P. J., Cabrer, M., Hansen, M., Paton, C., Elkin, P. L. & W. 
S. Erdley (2008). Towards addressing the opportunities and challenges 
of web 2.0 for health and informatics. IMIA Yearbook of Medical 
Informatics. 16,  44-51. 
 
[30] Shah, N. (2009, November 9). Doctors embrace social networking. 
The Miami Herald. 
http://www.miamiherald.com/2009/11/09/1322850/doctors-embrace-
social-networking.html as accessed 11-10-2010. 
 
[31] Howard, A.B. (2010). 5 Ways social media helps promote good 
health. http://mashable.com/2010/07/13/social-media-health-
trends/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=F
eed:+Mashable+(Mashable) as accessed 11-10-2010. 
 
[32] Kovic, I., Lulic, I. & G. Brumini (2008). Examining the medical 
blogosphere: An online survey of medical bloggers. Journal of Medical 
Internet Research, 10(3), e28. 
 
[33] Terry, M. (2009). Twittering healthcare: Social media and 
medicine. Telemedicine and eHealth, 15 (6), 507-510. 
 
[34] Khanna, P.M. (2008). Icyou: How social media is the new resource 
for online health information. The Medscape Journal of Medicine, 10(5), 
113. 
 
[35] Hawker, M.D. (2010). Social networking in the national health 
service in England: a quantitative analysis of the online identities of 152 
primary care trusts. Studies in Health Technologies and Informatics, 160 
(1), 356-60. 
 
[36] Gamble, K.H. (2009). Just a tweet away. Healthcare Informatics, 
26(5), 30-36. 
 
[37] Beard, L., Wilson, K., Morra, D. Keelan, J. A Survey of Health-
Related Activities on Second Life J Med Internet Res 2009;11(2):e17 
[38] Lester, R.T. , Ritvo, P., Mills, E.J., Kariri, A., Kranja, S., Chung, 
M.H., Jack, W., Habyarimana, J., Sadatsafavi, M., Najafzadeje, M., 
Marra, C.A., Estambale, B.,Ngugi, E., Ball, T.B., Thabane, L., Gelmon, 
L.J., Kimani, J., Ackers, M., Plummer, F.A. Effects of a mobile phone 
short message service on antiretroviral treatment adherence in Kenya 
(WelTel Kenya1): a randomised trial The Lancet, Vol. 376 Iss. 9755 
pp.1838-1845, 27 November doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61997-6 
[39] Hardey, M. (2008). Public health and web 2.0. The Royal Society 
for the Promotion of Health. 128 (4), 181-189.  
 
[40] Yensen, J. (2005). Leveraging RSS Feeds to Support Current 
Awareness. Computers, Informatics, Nursing. 23 (3) 164 -167. 
 
[41] Eysenbach G. SARS and Population Health Technology J Med 
Internet Res 2003;5(2):e14) 
 
[42] Eysenbach G. (2006) Infodemiology: tracking flu-related searches 
on the web for syndromic surveillance. AMIA Annu Symp Proc:244-248 
 
[43] Corley, C.D., Cook, D.J., Mikler, A.R. & Singh, K.P. (2009). Text 
and structural data mining of influenza mentions in web and social 
media. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 7, 596-615. 
 
[44] COT (2010) Institute for Safety, Security and Crisismanegement 
[Instituut voor Veiligheids- en Crisismanagement]. Twitter in 
crisiscommunicatie. Een onderzoek naar de mogelijkheden van het 
gebruik van Twitter tijdens crises. Den Haag. 
 
[45] TNO Information and communication technology (2008). Naar een 
‘User Generated State’? De impact van nieuwe media voor overheid en 
openbaar bestuur. Delft: TNO/ Ministery of Domestic Affairs. 
 
[46] Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre (2010); 
http://lucienengelen.posterous.com/ as accessed 30-10-2010. 
 
[47] Brandenburg B.J. & E. Jansen (2010) The Proof of the 
Pudding: First Results of a Primary Care Consultation Service on 
Twitter. Oral presentation at Medicine 2.0 conference 29-30 Nov 
2010, Maastricht, The Netherlands.  Cf. 
http://www.medicine20congress.com/ocs/index.php/med/med2010/p
aper/view/415  
 
[48] Van Uden-Kraan, C.F. (2008) On line peer support for patients with 
somatic diseases. Thesis. Enschede: University of Twente, The 
Netherlands. 
 
[49] Rietmeijer, C.A. & M. McFarlane (2009). Web 2.0 and beyond: 
risks for sexually transmitted infections and opportunities for prevention. 
Current Opinion in Infectious Diseases, 22 (1), 67-71. 
 
[50] McNab, C. (2009). What social media offers to health professionals 
and citizens. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 87 (8), 565-644. 
 
[51] Vance, K., How, W. & R.P. Dellavalle (2009). Social Internet sites 
as a source of public health information. Dermatologic Clinics, 27 (2). 
133-136. 
 
35
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

[52] Black AD, Car J, Pagliari C, Anandan C, Cresswell K, et al. (2011) 
The Impact of eHealth on the Quality and Safety of Health Care: A 
Systematic Overview. PLoS Med 8(1): e1000387. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000387 
[53] Green, L.W., Ottoson, J.M., Garcia, C. & R.A. Hiatt. Diffusion 
theory and knowledge dissemination, utilization, and integration in 
public health. Ann Rev Pub Health 2009. 30: 151-174.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 1. Figures on social media use in the Netherlands, October 2010 [16]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Inactives
Spectators
Joiners
Collectors
Critics
Creators
Percentage (%)
18-24
25-34
35-44
45-54
55+
36
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2011. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

