Interaction Space: Older Adults and in-Home Systems 
Exploring technology with and for older people 
 
Jeroen Blom, Tara French, Gemma Teal 
Institute of Design Innovation  
The Glasgow School of Art 
Forres, UK 
Email: j.blom@gsa.ac.uk, t.french@gsa.ac.uk, g.teal@gsa.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— This paper discusses important considerations 
when developing assistive technology with and for older adults. 
Two case studies demonstrate the use of Experience Labs to 
engage older adults in a participatory design process in the 
early stages of development of novel sensor systems. Firstly, we 
present the ‘Interaction Space’ as a holistic way to model and 
understand interaction between people, products, technology 
and environments when developing complex systems. It is 
argued that looking at the interaction between older adults and 
technology benefits from a holistic view of the Interaction 
Space in which primary and secondary users are continuously 
acting together with the technology. We then highlight 
considerations when developing technology systems with 
participants who are not confident technology users, in order 
to design meaningful spaces for critical reflection and creative 
collaboration. We conclude that the Experience Lab approach 
enables the complex Interaction Space of sensor systems to be 
dissected into comprehensible elements leading to a better 
understanding of the impact of the proposed technologies. 
Keywords- older people; participatory design; interaction 
design; technology; sensor system.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The health and care environment is fertile ground for 
innovation to support patients, families, and health 
professionals to achieve the Scottish Government ‘2020 
Vision’ that “everyone is able to live longer healthier lives at 
home, or in a homely setting” [1]. Digital technology has the 
potential to make an important contribution to realising this 
vision. In this respect, it is becoming increasingly important 
to involve those who will be using the technology, whether 
in receipt of or in the delivery of care, at a much earlier stage 
of the design process [2] to ensure that the proposed 
technology solution meets their needs and is adopted in use. 
The field of participatory design offers a wealth of 
approaches to meaningfully involve end users in the design 
process [3]. When designing digital technologies with and 
for patients, families and health professionals, it can be 
challenging to separate out the different responses and 
reactions to the proposed technology within a complex 
interplay of people, objects and spaces with or within which 
users interact. The concept of an Interaction Space to 
describe human-computer interaction has been explored in a 
variety of ways. The Mixed Interaction Space is used to 
distinguish camera-based interaction from other types of 
sensor-based interaction in terms of the ability to track a 
fixed point in relation to the mobile device [4]. The 
Multimodal Interaction Space presents a framework to 
explore the different levels, modes and modalities of 
interaction [5]. Finally, the Continuous Interaction Space 
describes the physical space above a traditional touch surface 
to form part of the interaction experience [6]. These 
interpretations all focus on the physical environment around 
a device at the moment of active interaction. We propose the 
Interaction Space as a means of exploring the impact of 
individual and cumulative interactions with the different 
parts of the system, as distinct from the physical interaction 
individuals engage in. The role and position of new 
technologies within the Interaction Space between humans 
and systems is of particular interest when considering 
technological developments in the area of health and care.  
In the following part of the introduction we will explore 
existing knowledge on older adult’s perception of technology 
and the principles of experience design. In Section 2 we will 
outline the methodology of an Experience Lab and highlight 
previous work exploring the Interaction Space in Experience 
Lab projects. In Section 3 we present two case studies 
describing the context, Interaction Space and findings for 
each project. Finally, in Section 4 we will discuss how the 
methodology of an Experience Lab leads to a holistic 
understanding of the Interaction Space for older adults and 
in-home systems. 
A. Older adults and technology  
A key factor contributing to the increased demand on 
health care services is the global issue of an aging 
population and shifting demographic [7]. Older adults are 
therefore a key group to involve in discussions about 
technology, in order to determine the ways in which 
technology can benefit everyday lives. General experience 
with technology is lower for older adults than younger 
generations, but in health and social care they often form the 
target users that proposed technologies aim to support. 
Research on the interaction between older adults and 
technology is primarily focussed on using computers and 
accessing the Internet [8]-[11]. Barriers to using technology 
as expressed by older adults are often related to a lack of 
confidence leading to a dismissive attitude [8], low 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

awareness of the benefits of technology [9], and the fear of 
‘breaking something’, strengthened by overestimating the 
price of technological devices [10]. Incentives to start using 
technology and particularly the Internet relate to a change in 
health condition, mobility or social contact (e.g., to 
communicate with family who live at a distance) [11]. 
Previous research has identified that older adults do 
show a willingness to adopt new technologies. Particularly 
in the health and care domain it is recognised that there are 
several benefits, e.g., to support disease management, 
medication 
observation, 
remote 
patient 
monitoring, 
cognitive fitness and assessment, and social networking 
[12]. The social aspect of taking part in a training session 
and subsequently sharing the knowledge gained with peers 
was also appreciated [10]. 
Everyday technology is widely perceived to be designed 
for a younger target group, but this does not mean that 
supportive technology for older adults needs to be designed 
specifically for them as this can feel stigmatizing. Rather 
there is a need to understand the wider context of how older 
adults live and the potential role for technology. Therefore, 
when designing a new technology or application of 
technology, it is important to involve older adults at the 
beginning of the design process and to employ a 
participatory approach. This ensures that the ideas taken 
forward meet the needs and expectations of older adults. 
B. Understanding and designing for experience  
The introduction of technological products or services for 
older adults is the means to an end and not the end in itself 
[9]. This is particularly true in the health and care 
environment where the goal is to enhance the wellbeing of 
the individual. Wellbeing is rarely achieved by the simple act 
of using a technology, but rather it depends on the support 
being provided by other professionals and individuals. This 
kind of interaction is a continuous interplay between the 
older adult, other individuals and the technology. Edmund 
Husserl and Martin Heidegger first described the experience 
of this interaction in the early 20th century in their philosophy 
of phenomenology [13]. Phenomenology opposed the 
Cartesian view that there is a truth in looking at things 
abstracted from reality, and that the ability to think and 
analyse determined our place in this world [14]. 
Phenomenology described the fact that we have a body and 
our presence in this world at this very moment determined 
how we perceive and experience things. French philosopher 
and phenomenologist Maurice Merleau-Ponty later argued 
that perception is inherently interactive: it is an interplay 
between perceiver and perceived [15]. Interaction does not 
happen because the person has an exact cognitive model of 
steps, be it person-to-person, person-to-technology, or 
person-through-technology-to-person. Rather it is an event 
that continuously unfolds depending on how things are 
perceived and responded to. The study of design is therefore 
focused on designing products and systems aimed at intuitive 
and engaging interaction that do not require a cognitive 
model of use [16]. Experiential approaches to design put 
“experience 
before 
functionality… 
leaving 
behind 
oversimplified calls for ease, efficiency, and automation or 
shallow beautification” [17]. This requires an understanding 
of what really matters to the desired end users and how their 
experiences of using technology can be more meaningful. 
II. 
THE INTERACTION SPACE WITHIN AN EXPERIENCE 
LAB 
The Experience Lab methodology provides a way to 
understand the needs and experiences of users within the 
design process. Led by the Glasgow School of Art, 
Experience Labs form a core part of the Digital Health and 
Care Institute, an innovation centre based in Scotland. There 
is a clear need to involve users at an early stage in the design 
process [2] and methods of addressing that need are well 
documented [18]. The Experience Labs build on human-
centred design knowledge and existing research methods, 
e.g. Living Labs, and aim to provide a safe space for 
collaboration and creativity, affording the opportunity for 
experiential learning [19].  
In terms of enhancing or achieving wellbeing for older 
adults through the use of technology, we define the 
Interaction Space as a conceptual space encompassing all 
individuals and the technology being proposed. The different 
streams of interaction between persons or person and 
technology all contribute to the perceived benefits of the 
system. We propose that Experience Labs offer a method for 
exploring the perceived benefits of new technology systems 
with end users. The Experience Lab aims to create a holistic 
understanding of the Interaction Space, and enable 
participants to perceive how different streams of interaction 
all lead to a continuous and holistic experience. This 
experiential understanding enables participants to provide 
insight and feedback to inform the development of the 
technology.  
Exploring the Interaction Space with participants in the 
early stages of concept development is a challenge, as the 
proposed technology may be intentionally undefined. To 
address this, Experience Labs create pop-up spaces for 
multiple stakeholders (e.g., patients and primary users, 
academic, business and civic partners) to engage in iterative 
exploration and early trialling of ideas, concepts and 
prototypes in a safe and collaborative environment. The pop-
up spaces chosen for the Labs are based on real intended use 
environments. Each Experience Lab, or set of Labs, is 
bespoke to a project. Typically, projects selected for a Lab 
propose 
a 
conceptual 
solution, 
often 
with 
limited 
consideration of the needs of the potential user. The Labs 
provide the opportunity to step back and (re)discover the 
needs of the different users and reflect on how the proposed 
solution can be strengthened in response to the needs and 
experiences expressed [20].  
The goal of an Experience Lab is to enable participants to 
be at the centre of a participatory design process in which 
their lived experiences form a rich contribution to ideas and 
concepts. The sessions in a Lab break down the complex 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

reality of a new supportive technology and provide 
participants with the tools to experience elements that make 
up the Interaction Space. Using generative tools and bespoke 
artefacts, the Labs allow participants to experience a concept 
that is unknown to them, and reflect and provide feedback as 
well as share and build on each other’s ideas. 
Previous work reviewed the Interaction Space of six 
Experience Lab projects, highlighting three potential roles 
for technology within the Interaction Space, with different 
levels of complexity as shown in Figure 1. The Venn 
diagram shows the potential cross-overs, particularly when 
technologies are intentionally undefined.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Different roles of technology in the Interaction Space.  
 
The first area involved understanding the way technology 
provided an information source to the user. Experience Labs 
for projects such as these focussed on what information 
needed to be available, when, and how that information was 
presented (e.g., a directory of services for ambulance 
clinicians [20]). For these projects, the technology needed to 
be available when required but did not have a role in 
facilitating communication with other people. 
The second area involved understanding the role of 
technology in facilitating interaction between people through 
an online platform. The Interaction Space in this area 
included a minimum of two people communicating through a 
digital medium (e.g., a community platform to broker 
receiving and delivering small services). 
The third and most complex Interaction Space involved 
understanding technology taking an active role by 
responding to behaviour of people and the animate world. In 
this space, it was possible for the technology to trigger 
actions (e.g., sending alerts to carers in response to abnormal 
behaviour) that influenced how users perceived the 
environment. 
III. 
CASE STUDIES 
The two projects that reflect the complex Interaction 
Space are further elaborated on in this paper, in particular 
how the Experience Labs support older adults to understand 
the potential of the new technology and how it might 
influence existing relations with other people. 
A. Case study 1: Assisted living for older adults 
1) Context: The project described in this case study 
explored and developed a new concept for assisted living 
which aimed to support and empower older adults to live 
independently at home for longer [21]. The project involved 
three sequential Experience Labs, which were designed to 
explore the full potential of the proposed system and user-
test the initial hypotheses behind the concept by developing 
and validating a refined solution with users. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Diagram of the Interaction Space for case study 1, showing 
potential streams of interaction.  
 
2) Interaction Space: The Interaction Space in this 
project (see Figure 2) involved the proposed observing 
system shown as the box, participants who were older adults 
living at home (blue person) and a family member or friend 
from the older adult’s support network (green person). The 
streams of interaction, as visualized by the arrows, happen 
between different people and the system. The system can 
observe the environment of the older adult (dashed arrow) 
and potentially trigger a response to the older adult. Another 
stream of interaction could also be between the system and a 
carer who may look after the wellbeing of the primary user 
remotely. The first Experience Lab involved visiting older 
adults in their homes to understand their home life, routines, 
networks of support and current use of technology. The 
second Lab involved a field trip to a department store to 
allow participants to interact with technology and supportive 
home products, with the aim of understanding their 
perceptions of and preferences for technology and the types 
of scenarios-of-use. These initial Experience Labs provided a 
rich understanding of the participants’ current awareness, use 
and perceptions of technology and informed the design of the 
final Lab.  
The challenge was to create a realistic environment in 
which older adults could experience and interact with the 
proposed assisted living system. The final Experience Lab 
involved creating a non-functioning prototype, which was 
operated by a member of the team to give the impression that 
the system was fully functional. Participants were guided 
through a role-play scenario using the prototype, allowing 
them to experience the Interaction Space, physically and 
interactively, and to discuss the potential use of the system in 
their own home. The Lab team helped users explore the 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

concept and share their feedback and ideas for improvement. 
The Lab also provided the opportunity for the family 
member or friend to observe the system in use. As an 
extension of the experience, participants were then invited to 
a workshop environment where they were given the 
opportunity to explore and visualise ideas using playful 
materials (e.g., clay, puppets, craft materials and an 
electronic sensor/actuator kit) to allow them to construct 
scenarios where they felt the proposed system might provide 
support. 
3) Findings: The sequential nature of the Experience 
Labs 
allowed 
participants 
to 
gradually 
build 
an 
understanding of the system. The first Lab took place in the 
home environment and provided the opportunity to gain 
perspective on the current role of technology in the everyday 
lives of older adults: their perceptions and usage. Building on 
this experience, the field trip to a department store enabled 
insight to be gathered on the types of technology and 
products that are preferred by older adults, and provided 
insight into their buying decisions. Finally, by creating an 
opportunity to explore the system in a realistic environment, 
participants were able to experience the concept in a non 
threatening way and the use of an unfinished aesthetic, 
together with playful materials, encouraged participants to 
become ‘makers and designers’ themselves by making their 
ideas tangible. 
The findings of the Labs indicated that personalisation 
was of key importance given the differing circumstances of 
older adults in terms of home environment, networks of 
support and confidence with technology. The findings 
revealed that participants were already making adaptations 
using both low and hi-tech solutions to make everyday life 
easier and address personal challenges. Through visiting the 
participants in their homes, it was possible to see these types 
of solutions already in use. Progressing the Labs sequentially 
also made it possible to ideate solutions together with 
reference to existing technology (e.g., products available in 
the department store) and to generate ideas for the system 
through scenarios and experiential learning in the final Lab. 
B.  Case study 2: A novel indoor tracking system for 
people living with dementia 
1) Context: 
The 
project, 
initiated 
by 
Glasgow 
Caledonian University, focussed on developing a novel 
unobtrusive indoor tracking system for people living with 
dementia. The aim of the system was to recognise abnormal 
behaviour (e.g., wandering in the middle of the night) and 
alert the carer for a timely response, thereby positively 
affecting the safety and wellbeing of individuals. The project 
aimed to understand the experience of living with dementia, 
and the perceptions of the indoor behaviour tracking system 
from the perspectives of people living with dementia and 
their professional and personal carers. 
2) Interaction Space: The Interaction Space in this 
project (see Figure 3) includes the proposed sensor system 
shown as the box, the person living with dementia (blue 
person), a professional carer (red person) and a personal 
carer or relative (green person). The system is tracking the  
 
 
Figure 3. Diagram of the Interaction Space for case study 2, showing 
potential streams of interaction. 
 
behaviour of the person with dementia (dashed line). It could 
potentially send continuous data or alerts to a professional 
carer. A personal carer has the opportunity to log into a 
platform, allowing them to observe registered behaviour. 
Both carers can then take action as required, responding to 
the person living with dementia. The proposed system was at 
proof of concept stage and therefore it was not possible for 
participants to engage with the system in the Experience Lab. 
The challenge was to create an environment that allowed 
participants, in particular people living with dementia, to 
understand the proposed system and express lived 
experiences relevant to the system’s potential use, reflecting 
on the impact the system might have on their lives and the 
behaviour of others.  
The first Experience Lab explored the different 
elements of the Interaction Space for the tracking system in a 
series of bespoke activities and design tools. Scenario cards 
as shown in Figure 4 were used to focus the conversation on 
experiences of living with dementia, of large indoor 
environments and the support gained from other people. A 
second session introduced a small wearable device to present 
the potential sensor, which participants were asked to wear 
during lunch. Researchers ‘tracked’ participants with pen and 
paper as they moved between rooms, as well as their 
behaviour within the room. This tracking information was 
used to discuss potential insights a system might get on 
behaviour during everyday events. Finally, the appearance of 
a wearable sensor itself was discussed by relating it to 
accessories worn by participants on the day and the 
associated experience. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Scenario cards designed for the project to focus conversation 
topics. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Insights gained from the first Lab led to the 
development of three scenarios-of-use to discuss potential 
Interaction Spaces representing shared experiences, concerns 
and ideas. The scenarios particularly focussed on expressing 
how the system was introduced, what behavioural aspects 
were captured by the system, and how and to whom this 
information was shared. The scenarios were acted out by 
researchers and filmed, each resulting in a two-minute video. 
During the second Experience Lab the videos were shown 
one at a time and participants were invited to reflect on what 
was shown and how it would affect their individual situation. 
3) Findings: The first Lab provided conversation topics 
including the experience of indoor environments and 
wearable devices. The sessions relied on the participants to 
imagine the implementation, opportunities and implications 
of the indoor tracking system. This led to the identification 
of a number of concerns in relation to the anticipated support 
that would be provided and the sharing of positioning data. 
Participants phrased this as a desire to “know who is at the 
other end”. This phrase embodied concerns about the human 
support they expected, the reliability of support and the 
potential privacy issues of tracking in their homes. It is 
suggested that these concerns emerged because there was no 
concrete solution participants could either agree or disagree 
with. The presented Interaction Space was open and relied 
on input from participants to express their preferences for the 
tracking system. An aspect of the Interaction Space that 
participants could conceive very well was the appearance of 
the sensor. The sensor was required to be in direct or indirect 
line of sight with the light source, meaning that it would have 
to be visible and not hidden. Relating it to visible accessories 
participants felt strongly about not wanting to wear a 
necklace, preferring an arm-worn device or something you 
could pin onto clothes. They also wanted the aesthetic design 
of the sensor to empower individuals rather than show 
vulnerability. 
The second Lab presented videos that showed a ‘closed’ 
potential Interaction Space in which it was made clear: the 
people involved, information shared and support offered by 
the system and/or carer. Although real life was of course 
seen to be more complex than the scenarios presented, 
participants no longer felt as strongly about the privacy 
concerns. When issues from the first Lab were revisited, 
participants unanimously responded by acknowledging that 
the support they were provided with, e.g., by a relative, 
professional or informal carer, was more important than the 
privacy concerns they had previously expressed. The 
involvement of carers was seen as the key value in the 
system, and the technology was merely seen as a means of 
initiating timely contact. 
 Both Experience Labs focussed on creating an 
environment for participants to understand the proposed 
technology and the support it could deliver. The technology 
was well received in the first Lab, yet with some concerns 
about data sharing. The second Lab addressed these concerns 
by proposing realistic scenarios showing what information 
would be shared when and with whom. In the overall project 
the Interaction Space was described by participants’ own 
experience in combination with the proposed technology in 
the first Lab and then concretised for further feedback in the 
second Lab. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Breaking down complex interactions 
The systems presented in both case studies represent two 
highly complex systems which have the potential to 
positively impact the lives of older adults. At the initial 
stages of participatory design in the Experience Labs it can 
be difficult for participants to imagine the potential use of 
any complex technological solution. The use depends on a 
variety of factors such as what the system or sensors are 
capable of measuring and registering (e.g., movement, light, 
sound), in what environment they are deployed, the types of 
events that would trigger a response and how this could 
possibly lead to false triggers, and what the result of a 
trigger will be.  
The progressive and sequential nature of the Experience 
Labs described within the case studies provided a way to 
break down the complexity of the system and introduce 
participants to the new technology. By exploring the 
everyday experiences of participants and their current 
relationship with technology, the Labs helped participants to 
recognise the ways in which these technologies could 
impact on their everyday lives. Focussing on separate 
elements of the system enabled participants to realise what 
criteria were important to them. For example, case study 
two overcame challenges in communicating a complex 
indoor tracking system by breaking the system down into 
individual elements, with activities in the first Lab 
separately exploring: experiences of indoor environments, 
tracking daily activities, support provided by other people 
and a wearable sensor device. These sessions covered 
different streams making up the Interaction Space between 
individuals and the system. Subsequently the final 
Experience Lab could create an experience prototype 
embodying these criteria, enabling the participants to reflect 
on each element as part of a holistic experience and give 
meaningful feedback.  
The older adults involved in the Labs were reasonably 
familiar with technology through computer and occasional 
mobile phone use. However, many of the barriers 
highlighted in the introduction were also supported in the 
case studies such as lack of confidence with technology and 
fear of breaking something [9]. Considering this somewhat 
limited experience with technology, it is essential to 
incrementally build understanding by relating it to 
participants’ existing technology references, environments 
and daily life. In this way it becomes easier for participants 
to imagine how the proposed technology fits with their 
everyday life and home environment. There is a need to 
create a balance between an open and suggestive approach 
when ideating with older adults in order to ensure that the 
proposed technology is comprehensible to participants. 
Failure to do so may lead to limited ideas and feedback. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

While some might argue that this limits the possibility for 
radical innovation [22], in practice it uncovers insight into 
the real needs and aspirations of older people and highlights 
places where technology is not acceptable, opening up new 
opportunities to innovate services to support older people. It 
also offers insight into how new technology can be 
marketed to support adoption [21]. The use of bespoke 
design tools as described in the case studies demonstrates a 
promising method of introducing complex technology to 
older adults in a meaningful way.  
B. Older adults and technology over time 
Older adults see technology as a means to an end. It is 
important to consider the individual streams making up the 
Interaction Space to enable a valuable discussion with 
participants regarding the effect on achieving this ‘end’, 
particularly when multiple people are involved. For 
example, in relation to case study two, information picked 
up by the sensors can be shared with carers to alert them to a 
safety issue or reassure them that the older person stable. In 
the case of safety issues, the exchange of potentially private 
information is less of a concern for the older adults as long 
as they know it will achieve the end result of getting them 
human support at a time of need. 
The next generation of older adults are often described 
as digital natives, or at least familiar with using smart 
devices. However, the development of technological devices 
and support systems will not slow down, rather it is likely to 
diversify, for example looking at developments such as the 
Quantified Self, Internet of Things, virtual immersive 
environments and autonomous systems. This diversification 
indicates that the barriers to using technology today as 
experienced by older adults are not likely to dissolve with 
the next generation. Alongside the increasing complexity of 
technology, the ageing process of older adults can amplify 
barriers to usage, particularly where older adults are living 
with dementia. Discussing the potential benefit of a 
supportive sensor system in case study two highlighted an 
important aspect for participants, namely to introduce a 
system at an early enough stage when people, particularly 
when living with dementia, still have the capability to 
comprehend the changes and benefits. This highlights an 
additional requirement for the technology, namely ensuring 
it is not stigmatising and offers progressive functionality 
that can adapt to the changing needs of the owner. 
Participants were aware of the progressive nature of their 
condition 
and 
appreciated 
being 
involved 
in 
the 
participatory design process at an early stage when they 
could share what aspects were experienced as empowering 
or as stigmatising. The progressive nature of long term 
conditions suggests that this increase in support over time 
can be seen to be beneficial. The Interaction Space then 
becomes not only a model to describe how different streams 
of interaction between person and technology influence 
other streams, it can also be seen to include an element of 
time; describing how interactions could be adapted to lead 
to different results at a later phase of life. Implementations 
of the support systems in the case studies are recommended 
to adapt or present opportunities for personalisation to 
reflect changing needs. The changing needs are expressed as 
an incentive to start using technological support [11]. The 
Experience Lab can provide the opportunity to consider the 
anticipated changing needs and how these can enhance the 
experienced benefits of a system. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The Experience Labs provided a platform to involve 
older adults at an early stage in the design process. The Labs 
encouraged sharing of experiences and reflecting on 
proposed concepts of technology to address potential 
barriers for older adults to accept and use a new system. 
Through an iterative approach the complexity of support 
systems was broken down into elements of the Interaction 
Space that participants could relate to and understand. The 
Interaction Space model was used to reflect on the case 
studies in this paper. This presents an opportunity to reflect 
on and understand the different modes of interaction within 
a complex system to identify challenges, opportunities and 
ideas within participatory design research. Further research 
is required to explore if and how the Interaction Space 
model could be communicated to facilitate an active 
dialogue 
with 
participants 
to 
further 
support 
the 
understanding of a complex system.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank all our participants who took part 
in the Experience Labs described in the case studies. We 
would also like to thank our project partners. We would like 
to acknowledge the support from our Experience Lab 
colleagues throughout the projects.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Scottish Government. Achieving sustainable quality in 
Scotland’s healthcare a ’20:20’ vision. 2011. Retrieved: 
January 2016 
http://www.gov.scot/resource/0039/00398668.doc 
[2] E. B. N. Sanders and P. J. Stappers, “Co-creation and the new 
landscapes of design,” Co-Design: International Journal of 
CoCreation in Design and the Arts, vol. 4, 2008, pp. 5-18. 
[3] M.J. Muller, “Participatory design: the third space in 
HCI”, Human-computer 
interaction: 
Development 
process, 4235. 2003. 
[4] T.R. Hansen, E. Eriksson, A. Lykke-Olesen, “Mixed 
interaction space: designing for camera based interaction with 
mobile devices”. CHI '05 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '05). ACM, New 
York, 
NY, 
USA, 
2005. 
1933-1936. 
doi:10.1145/1056808.1057060 
[5] B. Bongers and G.C. van der Veer, “Towards a multimodel 
interaction space: categorisation and applications”. Personal 
and Ubiquitous Computing, 11(8), 2007, pp. 609-619, 
doi:10.1007/s00779-006-0138-8 
[6] N. Marquardt, R. Jota, S. Greenberg, J.A. Jorge, “The 
continuous interaction space: interaction techniques unifying 
touch and gesture on an above digital surface”. Human-
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Computer Interaction – INTERACT, 6948, 2011, pp. 461-
476, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-23765-2_32 
[7] Scottish Government. Demographic change in Scotland 
report. 2010. Retrieved: March 2015 
http://www.gov.scot/Publications/2010/11/24111237/1 
[8] Age Concern. Introducing another world: older people and 
digital 
inclusion. 
2009. 
Retrieved: 
March 
2016 
http://www.ageuk.org.uk/documents/en-gb/for-
professionals/computers-and-
technology/140_0809_introducing_another_world_older_peo
ple_and_digital_inclusion_2009_pro.pdf?dtrk=true 
[9] J. Morrison and A. Barnett. Older people, technology and 
community: the potential of technology to help older people 
renew or develop social contacts and to actively engage in 
their communities. Independent Age, 2010. 
[10] Sheridan Elder Research Centre (SERC). Introducing older 
persons to benefits of technology. September, 2005. 
[11] T.L. Mitzner, et al. “Older adults talk technology: technology 
usage and attitudes” Comput Human Behav. November, 2010  
1; 26(6): 1710–1721. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.06.020. 
[12] D. Lindeman, “Briefing Paper: technologies to help older 
adults 
maintain 
independence: 
advancing 
technology 
adoption”. Public Health Institute, 2009. 
[13] T. Ruspoli, Being in the world [video]. 2010. 
[14] C.C.M. Hummels. Matter of transformation: Sculpting a 
valuable tomorrow. Eindhoven University of Technology 
September 2012. 
[15] D. Abram. The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and 
Language in a More-than-Human World. Vintage Books, 
New York. 1996. 
[16] C.C.M. Hummels and P.D. Levy. “Matter of transformation: 
Designing 
an 
alternative 
tomorrow 
inspired 
by 
phenomenology”. Interactions 20, 6, 2013, pp. 42–49. 
[17] M. Hassenzahl, “Experience design: technology for all the 
right reasons”, Synthesis Lectures on Human-Centered 
Informatics 2010 3:1, 1-95. 
[18] M. Pallot, B. Trousse, B. Senach, D. Scapin. Living Lab 
Research Landscape: From User Centred Design and User 
Experience towards User Cocreation. First European Summer 
School ”Living Labs”, Paris, France, August, 2010.  
[19] P. Reason and H. Bradbury. The SAGE handbook of action 
research. London: Sage Publication Inc. 2008. 
[20] T. French and G. Teal, “Co-designing a digital directory of 
services,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 63, September, 
2015, pp. 445-450, doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.366. 
[21] T. French and G. Teal, “ Transforming healthcare through 
design-led 
innovation”. 
Design 
4 
Health 
European 
Conference, 2015, pp. 1-11. 
[22] D. A. Norman and R. Verganti, “Incremental and radical 
innovation: Design research vs. technology and meaning 
change,” Design Issues, 30(1), 2014, 78-96.  
 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

