Developing evidence guidelines for eHealth Small and Medium-sized Enterprises 
Towards feasible yet convincing evidence 
 
Ruud Janssen, Marike Hettinga, Hilco Prins, Sikke 
Visser, Robbert Menko, and Irene Krediet 
Research group ICT Innovation in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{TJWM.Janssen}{M.Hettinga}@windesheim.nl 
Timber Haaker and Lianne Bodenstaff 
Novay 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
{Timber.Haaker}{Lianne.Bodenstaff}@novay.nl 
 
 
Abstract—eHealth applications hold many promises, for 
instance to improve the quality of health care, to increase its 
accessibility, or to reduce the cost. Yet, many eHealth 
innovations never reach the stage where they get embedded 
into routine health care. This is due in part to a lack of 
evidence that these innovations indeed deliver what they 
promise. For small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in 
particular, 
collecting 
convincing 
evidence 
for 
eHealth 
innovations proves to be a challenge as the available time, 
resources and expertise to do so are often limited. In response 
to this challenge, the research group ICT Innovation in Health 
Care initiated the project Successful Entrepreneurship in 
eHealth. The project is a cooperation between 24 parties in The 
Netherlands: eHealth SMEs, health care providers, patient 
organizations, health insurance companies, and national health 
care authorities. Its aim is to speed up eHealth innovation by 
providing eHealth SMEs with guidelines for collecting feasible 
yet convincing evidence. In this paper the project’s approach is 
introduced and some preliminary results and lessons learnt are 
discussed. 
Keywords: eHealth; innovation; evidence; guidelines; SME 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Getting an eHealth innovation embedded into routine 
health care often turns out to be a challenge. Several causes 
can be identified, including a narrow focus on technological 
aspects of the innovation, too little involvement from key 
stakeholders during design and implementation, or lack of a 
good underlying business model [1]. The research group ICT 
Innovation in Health Care at Windesheim University of 
Applied Sciences (Zwolle, The Netherlands) has dedicated 
itself to study these issues and to support small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs; in The Netherlands defined as 
companies with up to 250 employees) in overcoming them. 
For instance, the research group recently published the first 
version of the eHealth Innovation Matrix [2]; an online 
assessment and library that offers eHealth SMEs (i.e., SMEs 
offering eHealth products and services to health care 
providers and the public) guidance in developing and 
evaluating a business model for their eHealth innovations. 
A. Collecting evidence for eHealth innovations 
In a recent series of workshops organized for eHealth 
SMEs and health care parties, an inventory was made of the 
problems encountered when getting eHealth innovations 
embedded in routine health care. Among the list of problems, 
collecting evidence for an innovation came out first. To get 
their innovation accepted by patients and care providers, 
reimbursed by health insurance companies, endorsed by 
patient organizations, or approved by national health care 
authorities, innovators often need to show evidence for the 
innovation’s effectiveness, for instance to increase treatment 
quality or reduce the cost of delivering health care. 
For a typical eHealth SME it is often unclear what kind 
of evidence is expected and by whom, and according to 
which standards this evidence should be collected. In other 
cases, the standard may be clear (e.g., a randomized 
controlled trial) yet practically unfeasible for an SME due to 
a lack of available time, (financial) resources, or expertise. 
To complicate matters further, care providers, insurance 
companies and care authorities offer no clear guidelines for 
eHealth innovators. They recognize that this discourages 
eHealth adoption and that it impedes innovation within the 
Dutch care system [3]. 
B. Towards feasible yet convincing evidence 
At the beginning of 2012 the project Successful 
Entrepreneurship in eHealth (SEE) was initiated by the 
research group to address these challenges. The project 
constitutes a cooperation between 24 eHealth SMEs, health 
care providers, patient organizations, health insurance 
companies, and national health care authorities in The 
Netherlands. The project’s aim is to establish guidelines for 
collecting evidence in such a way that (i) it is practically 
feasible for eHealth SME’s to do so and (ii) the resulting 
evidence is acceptable and potentially convincing for care 
providers, health insurers, or care authorities. Hence the 
project’s motto: towards feasible yet convincing evidence. 
To achieve its aim, the project will address the following 
research questions: 
1. What kinds of evidence for eHealth innovations are 
generally recognized? Are there any commonly 
accepted evaluation frameworks? 
2. What are relevant outcome indicators and methods 
to collect specific kinds of evidence? How do these 
compare in terms of methodological quality and 
practical feasibility? 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

3. Which parties in the Dutch care system (patients, 
care providers, health insurance companies, national 
care authorities, others) will need to be convinced of 
the effectiveness of an eHealth innovation before it 
can be embedded into routine practice? 
4. How do these parties value the kinds of evidence 
mentioned earlier? What typically constitutes 
“convincing evidence” for these parties? 
 
By generating answers to these questions the project will 
offer guidance to eHealth SMEs: which parties will need to 
be convinced of the effectiveness of an innovation, what 
evidence will be required, and how to collect this evidence in 
a feasible yet acceptable way. 
II. 
APPROACH 
The project is structured into four phases which are 
briefly outlined in this paragraph. 
A. Inventory 
During this phase an inventory is made of generally 
recognized types of evidence. This is done by means of a 
literature review, interviews with health care experts in The 
Netherlands, and workshops with representatives of Dutch 
health care providers, insurers, patient organizations, and 
national health care authorities. Questions to be answered 
include: Which parties are involved when getting an eHealth 
innovation embedded in routine health care? What kind of 
evidence is generally needed, and how should it be 
collected? How do parties value various kinds of evidence? 
What criteria are typically used? The results will include: 
 
An initial overview of commonly required types of 
evidence, 
possibly 
clustered 
into 
themes 
or 
categorized by type of eHealth application;  
 
A series of fact sheets, one for each type of evidence, 
containing purpose, relevance for various parties, 
methods, criteria, and practical feasibility. 
B. Case studies 
Whereas the analysis during the Inventory is top-down, 
the analysis during the case studies is deliberately bottom-up 
– to involve the SMEs and to enrich the analysis with 
examples of concrete situations, dilemmas and obstacles 
encountered. Cases from the participating eHealth SMEs will 
be selected for a detailed study by means of analysis of 
available documentation, workshops with experts, and in-
depth, semi-structured interviews. Questions to be answered 
include: How are SMEs trying to get their innovations 
embedded into routine care? Which stakeholders do they 
identify and involve? What kinds of evidence do these 
stakeholders require? What evidence did the SMEs collect so 
far, and in what ways? How did stakeholders evaluate the 
evidence, against what criteria? The results will include: 
 
Detailed, in-depth descriptions of successful and 
unsuccessful strategies followed by SMEs to get 
their eHealth innovations embedded in routine health 
care; 
 
Specific examples of evidence that was required, 
whether and how it was collected and, if applicable, 
how it was evaluated by health care providers, 
insurers, patient organizations, or national health 
care authorities. 
C. Guidelines and best practices 
In this phase, the case studies will serve as input to a 
series of workshops with health care experts and 
representatives of health care providers, insurers, patient 
organizations, and national health care authorities. Learning 
lessons from these specific examples, and building on the 
results of the Inventory, best practices for embedding 
eHealth innovations in routine health care will be identified. 
Furthermore, guidelines will be developed for collecting and 
evaluating the required evidence. Best practices and 
guidelines will then be combined into a systematic approach 
for collecting and evaluating evidence for eHealth 
innovations. To validate the newly developed systematic 
approach it will be applied and evaluated in a second series 
of case studies. Thus, the results of this phase will include: 
 
An initial, systematic approach for collecting and 
evaluating evidence as required for getting an 
eHealth innovation embedded in routine health care; 
 
Validation of the systematic approach, including an 
inventory of practical issues and points for 
improvement. 
 
A revised, final systematic approach. 
D. Consolidation and tool development 
In this final project phase, the systematic approach 
described above will be consolidated in a web-based tool and 
documented in a handbook: 
 
The web-based tool will offer eHealth SMEs 
guidance in planning and implementing evidence 
collection for their eHealth innovation; 
 
The handbook will document the various types of 
evidence for eHealth innovations, including methods 
for collecting evidence and criteria for evaluating it. 
III. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
The project Successful Entrepreneurship in eHealth 
started at the beginning of 2012 and will conclude at the end 
of 2013. At the time of writing, the first project phase, 
Inventory, is nearing completion while the second phase, the 
case studies, has just been started with the first in-depth 
interviews. This paragraph highlights some preliminary 
results and lessons learnt. 
A. No generally accepted standards for collecting evidence 
During the literature study several articles and reports 
offering proposals for evaluation frameworks were found, 
with guidelines for the evaluation of eHealth applications, 
lists of outcome indicators, and descriptions of methods to 
collect evidence [e.g., 4, 5]. However, the general consensus 
in the literature is that there are currently no commonly 
accepted standards for collecting evidence for eHealth 
applications [6, 7]. The assumptions, methods, and study 
designs of experimental science may altogether be less suited 
for application in the socio-political context in which eHealth 
evaluations usually take place, and alternative approaches 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

that view evaluation as social practice rather than scientific 
testing need to be considered [8]. Moreover, the tendency to 
focus on “hard” evidence provided by randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs) may result in disregard for the interests and 
experiences of the individual patient [9]. Some researchers 
therefore argue for a contextualized approach in which all 
relevant stakeholders are actively involved in the definition 
of the outcome indicators that will be used for evaluation 
[10, 11]. 
B. Stakeholders recognize three themes for evidence 
During the interviews with health care experts and the 
workshop with representatives from health care providers, 
insurers, patient organizations, and national health care 
authorities, three dominant themes were recognized by the 
participants within the larger concept of evidence: 
effectiveness (“did health care get any better?”), cost 
efficiency (“did it get any cheaper?”) and labor savings (“did 
it get any less labor intensive?”). Below we briefly describe 
each theme, including a few relevant issues mentioned by the 
participants. 
1) Effectiveness 
This kind of evidence relates to clinical effectiveness, 
quality of care, safety, accessibility, timeliness, and patient 
satisfaction. However, eHealth’s primary purpose may not 
always be patient recovery; frequently, eHealth is directed at 
retaining autonomy, strengthening the involvement from 
relatives, maintaining social participation, or improving a 
patient’s wellbeing. Although these aspects are hard to 
measure, they are important from the patient’s perspective 
and also valued by care professionals and society as a whole. 
2) Cost efficiency 
This includes evidence with regard to cost savings, cost 
control, and efficiency in terms of time, money, and other 
resources. eHealth applications have traditionally been 
considered as a promising way to reduce the cost of 
delivering health care. With the growing emphasis on budget 
control in health care, evidence for eHealth’s cost efficiency 
is becoming increasingly relevant for decision makers. The 
current Dutch health care policy, for instance, is directed at 
stimulating cost-efficient eHealth applications that are 
replacing (instead of supplementing) traditional forms of 
care [3].  
3) Labor savings 
This relates to evidence that the same number of patients 
can be treated with the same quality, but with fewer hours 
worked by health care professionals. Although labor savings 
might be considered a special case of cost efficiency, the 
predicted labor shortage in the Dutch health care system 
justifies this kind of evidence to be considered separately. 
Labor savings also occur when an eHealth application 
reduces the complexity of a particular task, allowing highly 
schooled professionals to delegate part of their work to less 
skilled staff. 
 
Various indicators and methods relating to the above 
types of evidence have been identified during the interviews 
and workshop and also from the literature. They are currently 
being complied into three sets of fact sheets, i.e., one set for 
each theme.  
C. How stakeholders value evidence 
From the interviews and workshop it has become clear 
that “heavy” forms of evidence (obtained using, e.g., 
randomized controlled trials) are certainly not always 
necessary to facilitate the uptake of eHealth applications. 
The participants agreed that RCTs are not always useful, 
necessary or practically feasible. Furthermore, care providers 
and health care insurers indicated that they will still rely on 
their own patient data to support any decisions they make 
about embedding eHealth applications. 
National care authorities, on the other hand, hold the 
view that eHealth applications typically only change the way 
in which health care is being delivered. As long as there are 
no indications that clinical effectiveness is at stake, and 
within the limits defined by the health care system, care 
providers and health care insurers are free to negotiate and 
decide about the use (and reimbursement) of eHealth 
applications. 
D. “Innovation routes” for embedding eHealth innovations 
One topic which arose very prominently during the 
workshops, is that it is not straightforward which path an 
SME should follow within the care system to get an eHealth 
innovation embedded into routine care. In part this is due to 
the wide variety of applications that fall under the common 
denominator of eHealth, but it is also due to the complexity 
of the Dutch care system, which is highly regulated and in 
which various authorities and other parties each play a 
distinct role. From a myriad of options an SME should 
consider very carefully which “innovation route” to follow, 
as the chosen route will determine which stakeholders to 
address and involve. Stakeholders will have their own roles, 
responsibilities and interests, and hence will need their own 
arguments to get convinced of an eHealth application’s 
added value. It is, therefore, the chosen innovation route that 
determines the context in which evidence will be collected 
and the purpose for which it is collected. 
IV. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
Returning to the project’s slogan, towards feasible yet 
convincing evidence, it has become clear that it is absolutely 
essential to consider the purpose for which the evidence will 
be used. Any collected evidence effectively constitutes the 
foundation beneath a business model in which all relevant 
stakeholders and their interests have been accounted for. 
Although this conclusion may perhaps be obvious, the first 
case study interviews with SMEs indicate that they do not 
always realize this or act accordingly. SMEs should therefore 
identify and involve stakeholders as early as possible, and 
preferably define and collect any required evidence in a 
cooperative effort together with all relevant stakeholders. 
The preliminary results clearly point out that eHealth 
SMEs require a “map” – not just to find the most promising 
innovation routes within the Dutch care system, but also to 
identify relevant stakeholders and their interests. Creating 
such a map, and embedding the evidence fact sheets within 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

it, will provide SMEs with essential information they need to 
collect convincing evidence in a feasible way. In the coming 
months, this will therefore be the project’s highest priority. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank Stichting Innovatie Alliantie 
for financially supporting this project. Furthermore, they 
would like to thank the eHealth SMEs who have joined the 
project and all other participating organizations: Achmea, 
ActiZ, Be4Care, Bonstato, College voor Zorgverzekeringen, 
Dutch IT Consultants, Eusamed, Evalan, EvoCare, Focus 
Cura, Health Valley, Isala Klinieken, MS Nederland, 
Nederlandse Zorgautoriteit, Novay, Nederlandse Patiënten 
Consumenten Federatie, Nederlandse Vereniging voor 
eHealth, SalesSpirit, SymaX, Syntens, Valetudo Interpres, 
Vos Projectadvies Gezondheidszorg, and VRC Telecom.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J.E. van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, M. van Limburg, H.C. 
Ossebaard, S.M. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, and E.R. Seydel, “A 
holistic framework to improve the uptake and impact of 
eHealth technologies,” J. Med. Internet Res., 2011, 
13(4):e111. 
[2] T. Haaker, S. Visser, R. Menko, and M. Hettinga, “From 
Buzz to Business: eHealth innovation toolbox,” Proc. Med-e-
Tel 2012, Apr. 2012, pp. 374-377. 
[3] Koninklijke Nederlandsche Maatschappij tot bevordering der 
Geneeskunst, Nederlandse Patiënten Consumenten Federatie, 
and Zorgverzekeraars Nederland, “Nationale Implementatie 
Agenda 
(NIA) 
eHealth,” 
2012. 
[“National 
eHealth 
implementation agenda, in Dutch]. 
[4] R.E. Scott, F.G. McCarthy, P.A. Jennett, T. Perverseff, D. 
Lorenzetti, A. Saeed, B. Rush, and M. Yeo, “Telehealth 
outcomes: a synthesis of the literature and recommendations 
for outcome indicators,” J. Telemed. Telecare, 2007, 13 Suppl 
2:1-38. 
[5] C.M. Cusack, C. Byrne, J.M. Hook, J. McGowan, E.G. Poon, 
and A. Zafar, “Health Information Technology Evaluation 
Toolkit: 2009 Update,” Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality, 2009. 
[6] A.G. Ekeland, A. Bowes, and S. Flottorp, “Methodologies for 
assessing telemedicine: a systematic review of reviews,” S. 
Int. J. Med. Inform., 2012, 81(1):1-11. 
[7] A.D. Black, J. Car, C. Pagliari, C. Anandan, K. Cresswell, T. 
Bokun, B. McKinstry, R. Procter, A. Majeed, and A. Sheikh, 
“The impact of eHealth on the quality and safety of health 
care: 
a 
systematic 
overview,” 
PLoS 
Med., 
2011, 
8(1):e1000387. 
[8] T. Greenhalgh and J. Rusell, “Why do evaluations of eHealth 
programs fail? An alternative set of guiding principles,” PLoS 
Med., 2010, 7(11):e1000360. 
[9] E. Cummings and P. Turner, “Patients at the centre: 
methodological considerations for evaluating evidence from 
health interventions involving patients use of web-based 
information systems,” Open Med. Inform. J., 2010, 4:188-94. 
[10] M.P. Gagnon and R.E. Scott, “Striving for evidence in e-
health 
evaluation: 
lessons 
from 
health 
technology 
assessment,” J. Telemed. Telecare, 2005, 11, Suppl 2:S34-6. 
[11] H. Hyppönen, E. Ammenwerth, and N. de Keizer, “Exploring 
a methodology for eHealth indicator development,” Stud. 
Health Technol. Inform., 2012, 180:338-42. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

