Development of eHealth Applications Applying the eHix Framework 
 
Jan M. Nauta, Elles Gyaltsen-Lohuis, Marike Hettinga 
Research group IT Innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{jm.nauta, ege.lohuis, m.hettinga}@windesheim.nl 
 
George Wink, Age Braad 
Frion 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{GWink, AgeBraad}@frionzorg.nl 
 
Guido van Alphen 
Stichting TriVici 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
g.alphen@trivici.nl 
 
Karste de Vries 
VAC Thuistechnologie 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
karste@vacbv.nl 
 
Abstract—This paper presents, as part of the Hightech@home 
project, the development of eHealth applications applying the 
eHix framework. The eHix framework is presented together 
with comparable approaches. Then, a development method 
based on the Value Proposition, the User Requirements, the 
Technology Scan and the Design cells of the eHix framework is 
described. Following a case-based approach, this development 
method was applied to design eHealth applications intended to 
support clients and client guides of an organization caring for 
people with intellectual disabilities. This resulted in a design of 
an alarm system augmented with video communication and 
sensor technology. The method is considered suitable for small-
scale development processes with a high degree of client 
customization, although it was recognized that the resulting 
applications represented a more general concept.  
Keywords- eHealth; development framework; requirements 
analysis; user-centred design.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Despite numerous promising eHealth initiatives it has not 
gone unnoticed that many of the implemented systems did 
not survive beyond the pilot phase [1][2]. A participatory 
development process involving stakeholders, such as 
patients’ associations, government officials, insurers, and 
decision-makers [3][4], preferably embedded within a 
business-model approach [5], has been advocated to improve 
the development and implementation of eHealth. In such an 
approach, application design based on an investigation of 
end-user requirements [6] plays an important role. In this 
paper, requirements elicitation and design of eHealth 
applications in cooperation with the intended users will be 
presented.  
The eHealth development was carried out in association 
with Frion as part of the Hightech@home-project [7]. Frion 
is an organization in the Dutch province of Overijssel that 
supports some 950 people with intellectual disabilities. More 
specifically, eHealth applications were considered for both 
an intramural and an extramural department.  
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, existing 
approaches for the development of eHealth will be discussed 
including the eHix framework [5]. This approach, which is 
being developed by the Research group IT Innovations in 
Health Care, has been adopted as the basic framework for 
this study. In Section III, the method applied for 
requirements elicitation and design are presented, followed 
by the results achieved in Section IV. Finally, in Section V, 
the paper is completed with a discussion, a conclusion, and a 
description of future work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
In this section, the eHix framework will be discussed 
together with related work.  
A. The eHix framework 
The eHealth innovation Matrix (eHix) is intended as a 
tool to achieve successful implementations of eHealth 
innovations [1][5]. In this approach, the business model 
domains of the STOF method [8] are utilized, namely:  
 
the Service domain describing the service offering, 
its added value, and the market segment in view. 
 
the Technology domain describing the technology 
necessary to realize this service. 
 
the Organization domain describing the network of 
parties which together will provide the service. 
 
the Financial domain describing, amongst other 
things, the way in which these parties will generate 
revenues from the service offering. 
To these four domains five phases, which describe the 
innovation process, are added: 
 
the Inventory phase, in which needs and conditions 
of the users of the new service are explored, as well 
as what is necessary to realize and maintain it. 
 
the Design & Development phase, in which the 
intend service is realized. 
 
the Experimental phase, in which the newly created 
service is tested, typically in laboratory conditions. 
 
the Pilot phase, in which the service is tested under 
realistic conditions, typically involving end users. 
 
the Implementation phase, in which the service is 
launched once it is considered feasible.  
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 The four domains and five phases together form a matrix 
with 20 cells as depicted in Figure 1. A cell describes the 
steps and choices for a specific domain and phase. The 
accompanying website [9] contains information and tools for 
that purpose. Because in this paper requirements elicitation 
and design are considered, it is only necessary to focus on 
the four cells in the upper-left corner of the matrix: 
 
the Value-Proposition cell comprising aspects such 
as the envisaged end users, their needs, and the value 
the new service will offer them. 
 
the User-Requirements cell comprising aspects such 
as e-readiness and the elicitation of requirements for 
the service, fulfilling the needs of the end users.  
 
the Technology-Scan cell containing a scan to 
investigate the available technology for realizing the 
intended service. 
 
the Design cell comprising the aspects of the 
application’s design, such as the architecture and the 
development method.  
Figure 1.  The eHix, comprising twenty cells 
B. Related work 
In this section, related work will be discussed, not only to 
demonstrate similarities and differences with the framework 
of choice, but also to present useful notions from the 
literature which will be applied in Section III.  
1) Technical Action Research 
The design-science approach presented in [10] does not 
start with a general problem for which an artefact is then 
designed, but at the opposite end with the design of the 
artefact, which is iteratively improved. To distinguish this 
artefact-driven approach from a problem-driven one it is 
called technical action research (TAR). 
The notion of an engineering cycle for the development 
of a useful artefact (e.g., an eHealth application;  it should be 
noted that the artefact concept is taken broadly by the 
authors: “Artifacts may consist of software or hardware, or 
they may be conceptual entities such as methods and 
techniques or business processes.”) plays a central role in 
Technical Action Research. This cycle consists of a Problem 
Investigation task, comparable to the Inventory phase of the 
eHix, followed by an Artefact Design task comparable to the 
Design & Development phase. The engineering cycle 
presented in [10] does not explicitly contain a counterpart for 
the Experimental phase, although it is recognized that the 
artefact should be tested first under idealized circumstances 
in a laboratory. It does, however, contain a Design 
Validation task resembling the Pilot phase, followed by an 
Implementation task, in which the artefact is transferred to 
the economy. The results of the following Implementation 
Evaluation may lead to new questions for a next Problem 
Investigation, thus closing the cycle.  
The Design Validation task may be carried out by 
performing one or more pilot studies. Each of these studies 
again contains all the steps of the engineering cycle. 
2) The CeHRes Roadmap 
The CeHRes Roadmap is designed for planning, 
coordination, and execution of eHealth development in 
which stakeholder participation is of vital importance. 
Ideally, at the outset a multidisciplinary team is formed 
which carries out research and development in five main 
phases. In the Context Inquiry phase problems, end users, 
and stakeholders are identified. In the subsequent Value 
Specification phase, values of stakeholders are identified and 
user requirements are defined. Then, in the Design phase, 
technology (including prototyping and business modelling) 
is developed, preferably in a joint effort by the design team, 
prospected users and stakeholders. Next, the technology is 
launched in the Operationalization phase, after which it is 
evaluated in a final Summative Evaluation phase (preceding 
phases are evaluated formatively). This last phase, 
comparable 
to 
TAR’s 
Implementation 
Evaluation, 
complements the eHix phases. 
A requirements development approach, embedded in the 
CeHRes Roadmap, is treated in [11][12]. This approach 
again consists of five phases coinciding with the first three 
phases mentioned above. Again the process starts with 
forming a multidisciplinary team deciding on the goals of the 
eHealth 
technology. 
After 
this 
Preparation 
phase 
requirements development passes through an End User and 
Stakeholder 
Identification 
phase. 
In 
the 
subsequent 
Requirements Elicitation phase stakeholders are consulted to 
determine what the application should do and how it should 
be implemented. After a Requirements Analysis phase a 
design document is eventually created in the final 
Requirements Communication phase.  
3) User-centered design 
The importance of user involvement, pointed out in [11] 
[13], is fundamental in User-centred design (UCD). In [14] 
eHealth applications are designed applying UCD together 
with a conceptual model for the analysis of interactions 
between agents. Here, the design process comprises four 
phases: Analysis, Design, Implementation, and Evaluation. 
In all four phases, medical specialists were involved while 
patients were consulted in the last three phases. 
The development of an eHealth system for fall detection 
based on end-user centred design is presented in [15]. Not 
only care takers and elderly and their relatives are involved, 
but also health professionals and electricians.  
In [16], user requirements are investigated using UCD for 
a tool to stimulate physical activity. A detailed user 
requirements document was written after three stages: 
Identification of end 
users 
and concepts, 
Concept 
development, and Tool (Re)design. To attain this result 
literature research, expert meetings, and (focus group) 
interviews were carried out.  
 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
METHOD 
To develop a concrete method for requirements 
elicitation and realization of eHealth applications the four 
cells of the eHix matrix (i.e., Value Proposition, User 
Requirements, Technology Scan, and Design) were 
augmented with insights from the studies mentioned above. 
Following the ideas of Technical Action Research, an 
artefact-driven approach was adopted taking a limited 
number of cases as a starting point. The development was 
carried out by a multidisciplinary team which collaborated 
closely with users or their representatives from the beginning 
[11][14]-[16]. In the remainder of this section the main 
participants in the process will be introduced, after which the 
steps which were carried out will be discussed.  
A. Participants 
An overview of the main participants is presented in 
Table I. Since halfway the project a new Project Manager 
was appointed, two managers are mentioned in the table. The 
first five participants are members of the Research group IT 
Innovations in Health Care, while the next five are employed 
by the healthcare organization. Participants 7 to 10 possess a 
long-term experience in guiding clients.  
TABLE I.  
MAIN PARTICIPANTS 
No.  
Organization 
Position 
Gender 
1 
Research Group 
Project Manager 
F 
2 
Research Group 
Project Manager 
F 
3 
Research Group 
Researcher (requirements) 
M 
4 
Research Group 
Junior Researcher 
F 
5 
Research Group 
Researcher (technical) 
M 
6 
Frion 
Operations Director 
M 
7 
Frion 
Member team Care and Home 
Automation 
M 
8 
Frion 
Member team Care and Home 
Automation 
M 
9 
Frion 
Client Guide (intramural) 
F 
10 
Frion 
Client Guide (extramural) 
F 
11 
TriVici 
Consulting engineer #1 
M 
12 
TriVici 
Consulting engineer #2 
M 
 
Contrary to one of the major principles of UCD no 
clients could be invited to participate in the user 
requirements elicitation, because it is unreasonable to expect 
a significant contribution from the clients in the intramural 
setting. Observing or interviewing the extramural clients 
living at home was not only considered an infringement of 
their privacy but false expectations should also be avoided. 
However, the clients were represented by experienced 
employees of Frion (Participants 7 – 10), who expressed the 
client’s needs to the best of their knowledge.  
B. Steps for Value Proposition 
Value Proposition started with a kick-off meeting, 
attended amongst others by the Project Manager and the 
Operations Director. This led to two interviews with both 
Client Guides, in which researchers received information 
about the clients of the care facility. Moreover, eHealth 
opportunities were explored. The Client Guides were then 
invited to present concrete cases. Desk research was 
performed to gain further insight into the target group. Since 
Technical Action Research is intended as an evaluation tool 
in the Pilot phase, a problem investigation scheme adopted 
from [10] was applied to complete the Value Proposition 
steps.  
C. Steps for User Requirements 
Based on the concrete cases put forward by the Client 
Guides, scenarios were written: short stories sketching the 
situation of the clients. The purpose of the scenarios was not 
only to verify whether the researcher’s picture of the 
situation of the clients was correct, but also to present 
possible solutions. Further, the researchers had the 
opportunity to carry out observations in the intramural 
setting. Subsequently, mock-ups were made, which were 
then reviewed in a focus group interview. Finally, a report 
summarizing the results was written.  
D. Steps for Technology Scan 
After determining the criteria for the intended 
applications, 
a 
technology 
scan 
was 
carried 
out. 
Additionally, experience with the resulting technology was 
gained in two preliminary implementations. Based on the 
outline of the intended applications from the previous 
investigations, a study of literature was carried out.  
E. Steps for Design 
Upon entering the design phase it was decided to focus 
mainly on the extramural cases. Because of the clear outline 
of the intended applications and a well-developed 
requirements analysis, the V-model [17] was selected as a 
development methodology.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
Based on four cells of the eHix framework a method to 
develop an eHealth application was presented in the previous 
section. In the present section the results obtained are 
described, again taking the four cells of the eHix matrix as a 
starting point.  
A. Results for Value Proposition 
The kick-off meeting and the additional interview 
showed a need to deploy eHealth technology: in the 
intramural setting to better ensure the safety of the clients 
and in the extramural setting to give the clients a sense of 
security. Moreover, the healthcare organisation wished to set 
off at a micro level, working closely with (end) users, which 
corresponded to TAR’s artefact-driven approach.  
The invited client guides informed the development team 
about the living conditions of their clients, the difficulties 
people with intellectual disabilities face in modern society, 
and what it meant for them to guide their clients. It was 
agreed that the guides would come up with specific cases, 
describing real clients for which they expected eHealth to be 
promising. In a subsequent interview with the client guide 
from the intramural setting a case was presented describing a 
client for whom it is important to know his whereabouts, 
mostly indoors but also outside. For the extramural situation, 
two cases were presented: a client who might ask for 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

assistance in difficult situations and a client who needed help 
to get up after a fall, which occurs frequently.  
Desk research made clear that in the Netherlands the 
prevalence of people with intellectual disabilities is 
estimated to be between 0.7 and 1.4 % [18][19]. This 
percentage is expected to remain stable in forthcoming years,  
although the proportion of elderly is expected to increase. 
Moreover, a trend toward “extramuralisation” is visible [20],  
which means that fewer people are eligible for admission to a 
nursing home. This will only increase the need for eHealth to 
support clients living at home.  
The problem investigation scheme mentioned in Section 
III C listed for example the stakeholders and their goals, such 
as the increased independence of a client as well as better 
and more efficient care. 
B. Results for User Requirements 
Based on the needs which had become clear from the 
cases presented, scenarios were written. For privacy reasons 
fictitious names were used for clients, guides and others.  
In the intramural case, the scenario depicted the everyday 
life of the client, sketching a tool helping him to structure his 
daily activities, while the tool informed his guides about his 
localisation indoor and outdoor. For the extramural case of 
the client who would ask for assistance, an incident was 
described in which the client would be lost driving his 
microcar. During a video call his guide would manage the 
situation, reassuring the client, after she had recognized the 
surroundings. For the other extramural case three scenarios 
could be formulated, suggesting a solution with a personal 
alarm, a solution in which a fall was automatically registered 
after a certain period, and a smartphone application that 
enabled the exchange of messages via text or simple buttons.  
In all three cases, these scenarios appeared to be a good 
basis for discussion and feedback, although the response 
differed. In the intramural setting it became clear that the 
case described was too limited: there appeared to be a 
broader need for the application of sensors such as bed 
sensors and nurse call applications. Discussing the 
extramural case for the client in his microcar, it proved 
desirable to add Global positioning system (GPS) 
localisation. In the other extramural case there was a general 
agreement on the last-mentioned option.  
As mentioned before, extramural clients could not be 
observed at home by the development team for privacy 
reasons. Instead, their guide asked them about their opinion. 
This had to be done very carefully to avoid unrealistic 
expectations. The clients reacted positively. However, the 
development team did have the opportunity to observe the 
intramural clients and speak with the client guide’s 
colleagues. This provided a better understanding of the target 
group, and made clear why the intramural scenario 
mentioned above was less appropriate. Moreover, it became 
clear that the required sensors would particularly be used at 
night, when the clients slept unobserved in a large home with 
only a single client guide present. Other homes within the 
organisation are overseen at night from an incident room. 
Visiting this incident room revealed the important role of 
audio surveillance.  
Elicitation of user requirements was completed by 
making mock-ups in the form of sketches of the computer 
screens for the intended applications. These drawings were 
not intended as a definitive design of the application’s user 
interface, but as a means for further reflection on the 
required functionality.  
The focus group discussing the mock-ups consisted of 
researchers (requirements and technical), members of the 
Care and Home automation team and client guides, so that 
aspects such as usability, e-readiness of users, and technical 
details could be taken into account.  
These requirements elicitation efforts culminated in a 
report summarizing the considerations made together with a 
list of concrete requirements. This report was again reviewed 
within the development team.  
C. Results for Technology Scan 
The technology scan carried out was partially determined 
by the agreements that were set out in the Hightech@home 
project plan. The use of open source software was required 
[7]. Moreover, WebRTC was chosen at the outset of the 
project for video and data communication [21]. The open 
source portal made available by the TriVici Foundation [22] 
implied the application of the Joomla! content management 
system [23].  
Based, among other things, on this technology two 
preliminary implementations were realised in order to 
increase the understanding of the chosen technology. The 
first implementation focused on WebRTC video and data 
communication together with the real-time Session Initiation 
Protocol (SIP). In addition to WebRTC two other approaches 
for data transport were considered: HTML5 Local Storage 
and a direct connection between a single-board computer and 
a server. Building on the results of the first implementation 
the second rudimentarily realised the connection of sensors 
to a Joomla! website using the direct-connection approach. 
After considering a number of data-transmission protocols 
Message Queue Telemetry Transport (MQTT) was selected. 
In their search for devices for the intended applications 
the development team realized that a smartphone was not 
only suitable to implement video contact and GPS location, 
but also added the opportunity of adding a fall detection 
sensor, using the accelerometer available in many 
smartphones [24]. An accompanying study of literature for 
the extramural cases therefore focused on four themes: (a) 
personal alarm [25][26], because clients would seek contact 
with their guides in case of an emergency or in a difficult 
situation, (b) video communication [27][28], which was 
expected to be a more effective means to reassure clients 
compared to audio contact, (c) fall detection [24][29]-[31], 
aimed at client who fall frequently, and (d) GPS localisation 
[32][33] to determine the location of clients in need of help. 
This study made clear that, besides technical aspects, 
attention should also be paid to issues such as privacy, 
acceptance, ease of use, autonomy of users and wishes of 
other stakeholders. It could further be noticed that the  
development of fall sensors receives much attention in the 
literature. Literature studied regarding the intramural setting 
showed that commonly used nurse call systems may be 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

augmented with additional information, making the systems 
context aware [34].  
D. Results for Design 
Although at the time of writing the design, realization 
and testing of the intended applications were not completed, 
a sketch of the application, as depicted in Figure 2 can be 
presented. On the left of the figure, the device for the client 
is visible, equipped with an alarm button, fall detection 
and/or GPS functionality. The Internet connects the client 
application with devices for the client’s guides together with 
functionality for administration and logging. A storage and 
processing unit stores logging data and generates the web 
pages of the TriVici portal.  
Figure 2.  Sketch of the intended application(s) 
The design of Figure 2 may be considered as an 
expansion of the well-known personal alarm with sensors as 
well as video instead of audio communication. Note that 
other sensors could be applied as well. In this concept the 
guide will be better informed about conditions of her clients 
(including the possibility of an automatically generated 
alarm, e.g., in the case of a fall) and has better means of 
communication at her disposal, compared to traditional 
personal alarm systems.  
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONLUSION 
In the previous sections, the development of eHealth 
applications to support clients and client guides of an 
organization entrusted with the care of people with 
intellectual disabilities has been sketched. This resulted in an 
alarm system augmented with video communication and 
sensor technology.  
The 
development 
process, 
carried 
out 
by 
a 
multidisciplinary team, was based on a few well-documented 
but anonymous cases put forward by the client guides. The 
development process followed the relevant cells of the eHix 
framework and included written scenarios and mock-ups. 
A. Discussion 
Although the actual clients were described in the 
scenarios, unfortunately it was not possible to interview them 
directly, which in a user-centred approach is undesirable. 
They were, however, represented by their guides, who know 
them well, but only after a pilot it will become clear whether 
the applications are suitable for them. 
It may further be noticed that the design is based on only 
a small number of cases, contrary, for example, to the 
development of personas found in [35]. However, the clients 
considered here often demand a higher degree of 
customization. In that case the more lightweight approach 
presented here may be advantageous. Moreover, focusing on 
concrete cases makes the researchers aware of relevant 
details. Remarkably, the resulting design was recognized by 
Frion’s employees as a generic concept. Following a case-
based method, a generally applicable approach has been 
derived. 
A further characteristic of the specific approach used here 
is the tight connection of user-requirements elicitation, 
finding solutions, selecting technology, and design of 
solutions. We may notice, in other words, a risk of “jumping 
to solutions” with too little room for the creativity of the 
design team [11]. Again, a balance should be found between 
thoroughness and the practical demands of a development 
process with a high degree of client customization.  
Finally, it was found that in the process of co-creation the 
scenarios and mock-ups proved their value in facilitating the 
communication between members of the multidisciplinary 
development team.  
B. Conclusion and future work 
Based on the experiences described, it may be concluded 
that a practicable development approach for eHealth 
applications 
with 
a 
considerable 
degree 
of 
user 
customization has been presented. Clearly, the design should 
be completed for the intended applications, and the other 
cells of the first two phases should be taken into account. 
Then, in the subsequent Experimental and Pilot phase the 
usefulness of the result should be established, after which it 
can be determined whether further implementation will be 
promising.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank TechForFuture, Centre of 
Expertise HTSM [36] for its financial support. The centre is 
an initiative of Saxion and Windesheim, Universities of 
Applied Sciences, and was established with the support of 
the Province of Overijssel. 
We thank Colinda Mensink and Els Emmink for sharing 
their insights regarding the wishes of their clients. We also 
thank Annelien de Haan, Ander de Keijzer, Ruud Janssen 
and Rob Hermans for their contributions, as well as OpenXS, 
and Castbasics for their cooperation in the project. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Hettinga, Telezorg: van Buzz naar Business? Zwolle: 
Christelijke Hogeschool Windesheim, 2009. (Telecare: from 
Buzz to Business? In Dutch) 
[2] L. Van Dyk, M. J. Wentzel, A. Van Limburg, L. Van Gemert-
Pijnen, and C. S. Schutte, "Business models for sustained 
eHealth implementation: lessons from two continents," 
Computers & Industrial Engineering Conference Proceedings, 
2012. 
[3] R. Janssen et al., "An eHealth Innovation Map for Small and 
Medium-sized Enterprises," in eTELEMED 2014, The Sixth 
 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine, 2014, pp. 292-301. 
[4] L. van Gemert-Pijnen et al., "eHealth Wikiplatform to 
Increase the Uptake and Impact of eHealth Technologies," in 
eTELEMED 2012, The Fourth International Conference on 
eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2012, pp. 184-
188. 
[5] R. A. Menko, S. Visser, R. Janssen, M. Hettinga, and T. 
Haaker, "Applying the STOF Business Model Framework in 
eHealth Innovations," in eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine, Nice, France, 2013, pp. 108-113. 
[6] L. M. Cysneiros, "Requirements engineering in the health 
care domain," in Proceedings. IEEE Joint International 
Conference on Requirements Engineering, 2002, pp. 350-356. 
[7] M. Hettinga et al., "Open Source Home Care Technology, 
Technical Design and Development, User Research, Cost-
Benefit Analysis, and Business Modeling," in eTELEMED 
2014, The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2014, pp. 267-270. 
[8] E. Faber and H. De Vos, Creating Successful ICT-Services. 
Enschede, The Netherlands: Telematica Instituut, 2008. 
[9] Windesheim 
(2014, 
December 
24). 
eHix. 
Available: 
http://www.ehix.nl (In Dutch) 
[10] R. Wieringa and A. Morali, "Technical Action Research as a 
Validation Method in Information Systems Design Science," 
presented at the Seventh International Conference on Design 
Science Research in Information Systems and Technology, 
Las Vegas, USA, 2012, pp. 220-238. 
[11] L. Van Velsen, J. Wentzel, and J. E. Van Gemert-Pijnen, 
"Designing eHealth that matters via a multidisciplinary 
requirements 
development 
approach," 
JMIR 
research 
protocols, vol. 2, 2013. 
[12] University of Twente (2014, December 29). CeHRes 
Roadmap. Available: http://www.ehealthresearchcenter.org/ 
wiki/index.php/Main_Page 
[13] D. J. E. W. C. v. Gemert-Pijnen et al., "A holistic framework 
to improve the uptake and impact of eHealth technologies," 
Journal of medical internet research, vol. 13, 2011. 
[14] C. I. Martínez-Alcalá, M. Muñoz, and J. Monguet-Fierro, 
"Design and customization of telemedicine systems," 
Computational and mathematical methods in medicine, vol. 
2013, 2013. 
[15] R. Planinc and M. Kampel, "E-Health System Development 
based on End User Centered Design," in eTELEMED 2013, 
The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine, 2013, pp. 83-86. 
[16] S. van der Weegen, R. Verwey, M. Spreeuwenberg, H. Tange, 
T. van der Weijden, and L. de Witte, "The development of a 
mobile monitoring and feedback tool to stimulate physical 
activity of people with a chronic disease in primary care: a 
user-centered design," JMIR mhealth and uhealth, vol. 1, p. 
e8, 2013. 
[17] M. Pol, R. Teunissen, and E. van Veenendaal, "Testen 
volgens TMap, Tutein Nolthenius,’s-Hertogenbosch," ISBN 
90-72194-58-61999. (Testing according to TMap. In Dutch) 
[18] W. v. Staalduinen and F. t. Voorde, Trendanalyse 
verstandelijk gehandicaptenzorg: TNO, 2011. (Trend analysis 
of care for the intellectually disabled. In Dutch)  
[19] B. M. Tinselboer et al., Zorgaanbod van de AVG: NAVG, 
2012. (Care provided by physicians for the intellectually 
disabled. In Dutch) 
[20] Vilans. (2014, December 24). Nieuwe toelatingseisen 
verzorgingshuis. 
Available: 
http://www.zorgvoorbeter.nl/ 
ouderenzorg/Nieuwe-toelatingseisen-verzorgingshuis.html 
(New admission requirements for nursing homes. In Dutch) 
[21] (2014, 
December 
24). 
WebRTC. 
Available: 
http://www.webrtc.org/ 
[22] (2014, 
December 
24). 
Open 
Portaal. 
Available: 
http://www.openportaal.nl/ (Open Portal. In Dutch) 
[23] (2014, 
December). 
Joomla! 
Available: 
http://www.joomla.org/ 
[24] M. A. Habib, M. S. Mohktar, S. B. Kamaruzzaman, K. S. 
Lim, T. M. Pin, and F. Ibrahim, "Smartphone-based solutions 
for fall detection and prevention: challenges and open issues," 
Sensors, vol. 14, 2014, pp. 7181-7208. 
[25] K. Johnston, K. Grimmer-Somers, and M. Sutherland, 
"Perspectives on use of personal alarms by older fallers," 
International journal of general medicine, vol. 3, 2010, pp. 
231-237. 
[26] K. Johnston, A. Worley, K. Grimmer-Somers, M. Sutherland, 
and L. Amos, "Personal alarm use to call the ambulance after 
a fall in older people: characteristics of clients and falls," 
Australasian Journal of Paramedicine, vol. 8, 2010. 
[27] A. Panayides, I. Eleftheriou, and M. Pantziaris, "Open-source 
telemedicine 
platform 
for 
wireless 
medical 
video 
communication," International journal of telemedicine and 
applications, vol. 2013, 2013. 
[28] V. Torres-Padrosa, E. Calle, J. L. Marzo, and M. Rovira, 
"Towards 
a 
Mobile, 
Assistive 
and 
Intuitive 
Videoconferencing," presented at the eTELEMED 2012, The 
Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine, Valencia, Spain 2012, pp. 24-29. 
[29] F. Hijaz, N. Afzal, T. Ahmad, and O. Hasan, "Survey of fall 
detection and daily activity monitoring techniques," presented 
at the International Conference on Information and Emerging 
Technologies (ICIET), Karachi, 2010, pp. 1-6. 
[30] M. Mubashir, L. Shao, and L. Seed, "A survey on fall 
detection: Principles and approaches," Neurocomputing,, vol. 
100, 2013, pp. 144-152. 
[31] R. Igual, C. Medrano, and I. Plaza. (2013, Challenges, issues 
and trends in fall detection systems. Biomedical engineering 
online 12(1).  
[32] A. M. Pot, B. M. Willemse, and S. Horjus, "A pilot study on 
the use of tracking technology: Feasibility, acceptability, and 
benefits for people in early stages of dementia and their 
informal caregivers," Aging & Mental Health, vol. 16, 2012, 
pp. 127–134. 
[33] J. M. Nauta, J. Brangert, M. Roest, R. Janssen, and M. 
Hettinga, "TalkMeHome: an in situ evaluation of a service to 
guide a lost person with dementia home safely," Journal of the 
International Society for Telemedicine and eHealth, vol. 1, 
2013, pp. 54-61. 
[34] F. Ongenae et al., "An ontology-based nurse call management 
system (oNCS) with probabilistic priority assessment," BMC 
health services research, vol. 11:26, 2011. 
[35] L. Van Velsen, V. Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, D. Beaujean, 
and J. Van Steenbergen, "Personas: The linking pin in holistic 
design for eHealth," in eTELEMED 2012, The Fourth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine, 2012, pp. 128-133. 
[36] (2014, 
December 
24) 
Tech 
for 
Future. 
Available: 
http://www.techforfuture.nl (In Dutch) 
 
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

