Repeatable Experimental Framework for Wellness Indicator Testing/Evaluation: 
Environmental Setup 
 
Chitsutha Soomlek 
Electronic Systems Engineering 
University of Regina 
Regina, Canada 
chitsutha@hotmail.com 
Luigi Benedicenti 
Software Systems Engineering 
University of Regina 
Regina, Canada 
luigi.benedicenti@uregina.ca
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents more detailed information 
relative to an experimental framework for evaluating a 
wellness visualization system, mainly focuses on setting up an 
appropriate environment for conducting a testing session. 
Relative issues and considerations, e.g., selecting a testing 
location, suggested list of equipments and survey tools, and 
privacy issues, are also discussed. 
Keywords-testing methodology; system testing; wellness 
visualization system;  information visualization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
An agent-based wellness visualization system was 
presented in the previous publications [1-3] as a proof of 
concept of personal wellness indicator that is designed to 
assist a person to monitor, learn, and therefore promote their 
state of well-being; plus, providing decision support 
information to a caregiver with an alternative communication 
channel between a patient and a caregiver. The wellness 
indicator is constructed in accordance with the concept of the 
operational wellness model, as described in [2]. In order to 
verify and confirm the validity of the agent-based wellness 
visualization system, a repeatable framework for evaluating a 
wellness visualization system was developed. Two sets of 
questionnaires and evaluation metrics have been constructed 
from this framework. The wellness indicator will be 
evaluated by following the protocols described in the 
framework. Detailed information relative to the framework 
for testing a wellness visualization system can be found in 
[3]. 
The protocols, sets of questionnaires, and evaluation 
metrics are not enough for pursuing an effective 
measurement. There are other factors that can support and 
lead us to a well-performed testing session with high 
possibility of success; for example, location, equipments, 
number of volunteers per staffs per one testing session, etc. 
In this paper, we discuss the issues and solutions relative to 
setting up an appropriate environment for testing a wellness 
visualization system.      
The paper is organized as follows. Next section gives 
background information relative to the operational wellness 
model and agent-based wellness visualization system. 
Section III provides the summary of the testing framework. 
The issues relative to setting up a testing environment are 
discussed in Section IV. Conclusions and future work are 
provided in the last section of the paper.  
II. 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
This section provides summarized information relative 
to the operational wellness model and agent-based wellness 
visualization system. More information is available in [1-3]. 
A. Operational Wellness Model 
The operational wellness model is a wellness model that 
is created for an automatic measuring system and it is also a 
fundamental for developing our wellness indicator [2].  The 
model includes the operational definition of wellness and 
operational wellness evaluation model [2].  
In this research, the term wellness is defined as “a state 
of achieving best possible state of physical health and 
lifestyle within a person’s capability” [2]. Each person can 
have personal sets of wellness indicators; and each indicator 
has a certain target value or range [2]. A person might not 
be able reach the highest level of wellness but still can 
achieve their desirable level of wellness; in which case we 
consider them as being well [2]. A person having disability 
can be considered as being well (in certain areas), if they 
can manage to achieve the targets/goals of their wellness 
indicators. The visualization system supports monitoring of 
three sets of parameters, mainly focused on physical health, 
and to their improvement towards the target values/ranges 
[2]. The three sets of parameters are as follows: 
 
1. Case-based indicator: initial sets of clinical objective 
parameters that are relative to certain cases. These 
parameters are predefined and provided to the end-users to 
choose. [2] 
 
2. User defined indicator: a set of indicators defined by 
a user. The user can define personal indicators with target 
values or target ranges by following certain instructions and 
rules. [2] 
 
3. Healthcare-professional defined indicator: a set of 
indicators defined for a patient by caregivers. [2] 
 
A person can have a personal set of indicators for 
monitoring 
their 
personal 
wellness 
level 
and 
can 
expand/modify it as need. Thus, the operational wellness 
model is flexible, customizable and expandable.  
 
The 
operational 
wellness 
evaluation 
model 
is 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

constructed based on the operational definition of wellness. 
Both single indicator wellness and overall wellness level are 
measured [2]. Single indicator wellness indicates the 
wellness level as perceived through a single indicator [2]. 
The results from a series of case-based indicators and 
healthcare-professional defined indicators are combined to 
become the overall wellness level of a person [2]. The latest 
results can be compared with the previous evaluations to 
find the progress and trend. 
 
B. Agent-Based Wellness Indicator 
The agent-based wellness indicator is an information 
visualization system and a physician/patient support system 
that employs the benefits of the information provided by 
existing electronics resources such as personal health 
monitoring devices and e-Health services [1-3]. The 
visualization system supports a person to enhance their 
knowledge relative to personal state of well-being and 
encourages the user to improve their wellness level [1-3]. 
The wellness indicator also assists a caregiver to gain access 
to a patient’s wellness and analyzed information, including 
utilizing decision supporting tools provided by the system 
[1-3]. The wellness indicator employed the results from both 
types of wellness evaluation to visualize the state of 
wellbeing of a person in simple graphical formats [2]. 
A user can access to the system through personal 
computers, small form factors, and, in the future, 
televisions. The content presented on all types of devices is 
the same but on different layouts; mainly because of the 
screen size and the limitation of those devices.  
The wellness indicator has various screens designed for 
supporting the two types of users who have different 
backgrounds and requirements [1]. A general user can 
access both regular and advanced modes [1]. The advanced 
mode allows a general user to view how their information is 
presented to the authorized caregivers [1]. A healthcare 
professional user has advanced screens only because these 
are specifically designed for supporting caregivers’ tasks 
and the information provided in this mode covers the 
content in the regular mode.  
 
For more detailed information of the agent-based 
wellness indicator, please refer to [1-3]. 
  
III. 
TESTING FRAMEWORK 
Standard and de facto methods for measuring a wellness 
visualization system are not available at the time of writing. 
Therefore, a testing framework for evaluating a wellness 
visualization system is created to support the need [3]. The 
following information gives a brief summary of the testing 
framework. 
The framework is created by following the Goal-
Question-Metric approach [3-5]. The framework covers 
benchmarking in term of software quality, usability, and 
user’s impression [3]. A wellness visualization system is 
measure in seven major aspects: system verification, system 
validation, verification of system’s functionalities, validation 
of system’s functionalities, usability of the GUI and 
graphical presentations, accessibility, and impression [3]. In 
other words, technical requirements, user’s impression, 
feeling, and satisfaction are all measured. Both technical-
oriented and user-oriented tools/methods are employed in 
this framework [3]. Examples of the employed testing 
tools/methods are questionnaires, comparative methods, and 
peer review [3]. 
We have created two sets of questionnaires and 
evaluation 
metrics 
from 
the 
framework 
[3]. 
Both 
questionnaires contain a combination of scale, forced 
choices, and open-end questions; a series of tasks; and 
instructions. The questions are formed in regard to the testing 
goals [3]. Each testing goal is created from the research’s 
goal [3]. The questionnaires will be employed to collect 
information from both general and healthcare professional 
users. The collected data and the evaluation metrics will be 
used for measuring the agent-based wellness indicator.  
IV. 
SETTING UP A TESTING ENVIRONMENT 
As mentioned earlier, there are other issues and factors 
that we need to take into consideration to conduct an 
effective testing session. The followings are the important 
issues that we have encountered in our preparation phase of 
the testing process. 
A. Selecting a Testing Location 
It is important to select an appropriate testing location 
because good location allows a testing session to go 
smoothly and supports all relevant activities when 
conducting a study. It would be best if the location can 
represent where people normally do tasks and has no or, at 
least, minimum distraction. Therefore, some difficulties and 
problems caused by a real-life situation can be easily 
identified.   
When selecting a testing location, one of the most 
important questions is “what do we need?”. A list of tasks 
and activities, required equipments, survey tools, and 
supporting things must be created. Then, we can compare the 
list with the facilities and functionalities provided by each 
potential location. In addition, the following issues should be 
taken into consideration: volunteers, budget, accessibility, 
and timeline.  
During a testing session, a user will be asked to follow a 
series of tasks, explore the wellness indicator, and answer the 
given questions [3]. A user can access to the GUI of the 
agent-based wellness indicator through both personal 
computer and small form factor [1-3]. Thus, the location 
must have enough space for at least one personal computer, 
one mobile device, one volunteer, one staff, a set of table and 
chairs, computer network connection tools/accessories, and 
survey tools. A space for a staff to make observation is also 
required. 
Since there are two groups of volunteers, i.e., general and 
healthcare professional users, there might be special 
requirements from each of the groups. For both groups, we 
have to ensure the availability of the selected location 
matches with the schedule of our volunteers and can be 
accessed by all of them. In case of the general users, the user 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

can be a healthy, unhealthy, older, or disable person. Thus, 
accessible location is preferred.  
For the healthcare professional user, asking them to leave 
their daily routine to participate in the study could be 
difficult because of their work and schedule. The testing 
location should be close, easy to access for this type of users, 
in order not to interfere with their tasks. It might be a good 
idea to make the testing site be able to relocate when it is 
necessary. 
Moreover, we need to ensure that the location is in a 
private area. It should not be easy to access by an outsider. 
The private area can isolate the testing session from an 
unwanted distraction and unauthorized person. It also 
ensures the volunteers that we do respect their privacy.     
In case of this research, testing session will be conducted 
in the University of Regina’s area. One of the reasons is that 
the university provides an easy access to the locals and 
others; including people with special needs. The university is 
a place designed for studying, meeting, and performing an 
experiment and research; thus, it offers a good environment, 
i.e., appropriate lighting levels, well equipped rooms, privacy 
supported area, internet connection, parking area, etc. The 
university is also close to major hospitals and clinics. 
However, in case that the chosen location is not convenient 
for a participant, performing a test at the user’s site is 
possible if permission is granted. 
B. Equipments and Survey Tools 
The followings are the major equipments and survey 
tools that are needed for this study and can be adopted by 
other research in the same area: 
- 
Scripts and consent forms 
- 
Researcher’s contact information or business card 
- 
Questionnaires 
- 
The prototype 
- 
Personal computer and/or laptop 
- 
Mobile device 
- 
Cables and extension cords  
- 
Router or network hub 
- 
Audio recorder with relevant accessories 
- 
Video recorder with relevant accessories 
- 
Secured data storage 
- 
Stationary, e.g., pen, paper, and clip board 
- 
Stop watch 
- 
Compensation for volunteers, if provided 
 
Providing some refreshments is also a good idea as they 
help people feel refreshing and comfortable, and sometimes 
can relieve frustration. Thus, the volunteers and staffs trend 
to be more comfortable and cooperative during a testing 
session; which leads us to an effective testing session. 
When conducting a test at the user’s site, there might be 
more stuff that we need to take with us and some 
arrangements are also required. A useful list, plan, and tips 
for taking a test at user’s site can be found in [7].   
C. No. of volunteers vs. no. of staffs per one testing session 
Since we have limited number of observers, we have to 
limit the number of volunteers per one testing session for 
effective results. Krug suggested that the ideal number of 
participants in a usability testing session is three people or 
not more than four people because it guarantees that there 
will be more rounds of testing; which gives a possibility in 
detecting more problems [6]. In addition, a researcher will 
spend less time to process the collected data after each 
testing session [6].  
The authors of [7] also indicate that research found four 
to five participants is an effective number. However, they 
feel uncomfortable with small group of participants. 
Therefore, they suggest at least eight people per testing 
session instead. The authors also recommend balancing 
requirements with the practical constraints relative to time 
and resources [7].   
We agree with Krug’s idea about having multiple rounds 
of testing sessions will reveal more problems and it is easier 
to control the flow and make an observation with smaller 
number of participants. However, it is quite difficult to 
follow when we have some limitations. Thus, we combine 
Krug’s suggestion with the criteria given in [7].  
When taking budget; availability of our volunteers, 
resources, 
and 
staffs; 
and 
research 
timeline 
into 
consideration, it turns out that when the number of rounds 
of testing sessions increases, the more money, resources, 
and time are needed. Adding the number of rounds also 
gives an opportunity for a volunteer to select the best 
available date and time within limitation, since the 
availability of the selected location and staffs are also 
counted. 
Another important factor is the timeline of a research. 
When adding more rounds of evaluation, the total length of 
time to be spent on the testing process will be longer; this 
could affect a research’s timeline or extend the finish line of 
a research. 
In conclusion, multiple rounds of testing will be conduct 
and the number of volunteers in one testing session should 
be closest to Krug’s suggested number while respecting the 
availability of the budget, volunteers, resources, and staffs; 
and the research’s timeline. 
D. Data Collection and Protection 
Since we decided to perform one testing session with a 
group of volunteers and staffs, it is important to determine 
on how to collect the data while respecting the privacy of an 
individual; including how to protect those collected 
information.    
In case of our team, it is wise to set up policies and 
explain them clearly along with the ethics considerations 
and protocols to the team members beforehand. It must be 
clear who have/don’t have an authorization to access to the 
data, how to collect the data, how to keep the data safely, 
and how to protect the data from an unauthorized person. 
For example, a person who collects volunteer’s contact 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

information must not copy, reveal, and distribute the 
information for both personal usage and any reason that is 
not related to the research. The volunteer’s identification 
and personal information must be separated from their 
answers.  
Moreover, there should be enough distance among 
volunteers during a testing session. Thus, peeking and 
unauthorized recording will be difficult to be done. In 
addition, there should be some spaces between each 
volunteer and an observer as well. Not only to respect their 
privacy but also create a comfortable atmosphere during a 
testing session. 
All form of collected data must be kept in secured 
places. For hard copies, a locked cabinet or safe is preferred. 
In case of digital records, they must be password protected, 
encrypted, and must not be able to access through an 
unsecured connection.         
E. Other Consideration and Limitations 
The following are the issues and limitations that we have 
not encountered at the time of writing but they could affect 
the testing process of a wellness visualization system. 
1) Testing environment management: performing a 
rehearsal is recommended as to review all relevant 
procedures and activities, and complete the checklist [6-7]. 
This includes making an agreement on the responsibility of 
each staff, verifying that they understand all steps and accept 
the policies, and confirming their availability. During a 
rehearsal, it is important to identify all the problems that we 
might face during a real testing session and what we have 
missed during the planning phase. Then, find the solutions to 
those problems before moving to the further steps. 
Performing more than one round of rehearsal is also an 
advantage.   
2) Time management: time is a limitation that can be 
overcome by effective management and utilization. Timing 
all rounds of rehearsal is recommended. Both volunteers and 
staffs have their own schedule. If we have an approximate 
testing duration, it is easier to create a testing schedule and to 
make an appointment with both volunteers and staffs. 
Moreover, we have to ensure that we spend the testing time 
wisely by getting information as much as possible within a 
shortest period of time. One of the possible solutions is to 
prepare a list of interview questions along with the scripts 
and bring them on the testing day [6-7].        
3) The prototypes: the prototype is tested in the 
laboratory isolated from outside connection during and after 
the implementation process by the researchers. However, it is 
possible that the prototype will not work properly on the 
testing day due to unexpected problems such as hardware 
problems and human errors. Thus, performing a rehearsal 
and having a backup on the testing day is a must.      
4) Ethics and other privacy related issues: it is important 
to have permission before audio taping and video recording. 
When conducting an orientation, other than explaining about 
the research and the testing process, we should clarify what 
we are going to do with the collected data and records and 
how do we secure them before presenting a consent form. 
Also, all relative risks must be explained. Moreover, each 
volunteer has their right to opt out from the testing process 
anytime without any obligation. The data received from the 
withdrawn person must be destroyed immediately.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Currently, our research is at the stage of applying for a 
research ethics approval from the University of Regina’s 
ethics board. While we are waiting for the results, we are 
concurrently preparing for the evaluation process as to start 
the testing sessions right after receiving the approval.  
This paper gives people, who are preparing or conducting 
an evaluation for a wellness visualization system, some ideas 
relative to setting up a testing environment and relevant 
issues from our experiences. We wish that the information 
provided in this paper can give an insight to those who work 
in the same area and people who are interested in this 
research. 
     
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank Thailand’s Office of Educational 
Affairs and Telecommunication Research and Laboratories 
(TRLabs), Regina for giving financial support to this 
research.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Benedicenti and C. Soomlek, An Agent-Based Modeling System 
for Wellness, in Multi-Agent Systems for Healthcare Simulation and 
Modeling: Applications for System Improvement, 1st ed., Medical 
Information Science Reference, IGI Global, 2009, pp. 137-163. 
[2] C. Soomlek and L. Benedicenti, “Operational Wellness Model: A 
Wellness 
Model 
Designed 
for 
an 
Agent-Based 
Wellness 
Visualization System,” the 2nd Int’l Conf. eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine (eTELEMED2010), Feb., 2010, pp. 45-50, 
doi:10.1109/eTELEMED.2010.14. 
[3] C. Soomlek and L. Benedicenti, “Creating a Framework for Testing 
Wellness Visualization Systems,” the 3rd Int’l Conf. eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED2011), Feb., 2011, 
pp. 83-88, ISBN: 978-1-61208-003-1. 
[4] R. S. Pressman, Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach, 
6th ed., McGraw-Hill, 2005. 
[5] N. E. Fenton and S. L. Pfleeger, Software Metrics: A Rigorous and 
Practical Approach, 2nd ed., PWS Publishing Company, 1998. 
[6] S. Krug, Don’t Make Me Think: A Common Sense Approach to Web 
Usability, 2nd ed., New Riders, 2005.   
[7] J. Rubin, D. Chrisnell, and J. Spool, Handbook of Usability Testing: 
How to Plan, Design, and Conduct Effective Tests, 2nd ed., John 
Wiley & Sons, 2008. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

