Telerehabilitation after Total Knee Replacement: 
Business model proposals and insights from Tuscany 
 
Francesco Fusco, Maral Mahdad, Giuseppe Turchetti. 
Institute of Management-Management and Innovation (MAIN) 
Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna 
Pisa, Italy 
e-mail: f.fusco@sssup.it, m.mahdad@sssup.it, g.turchetti@sssup.it  
 
Abstract—In the last years, Total Knee Replacement (TKR) 
has become one of the most performed surgical procedures and 
according to recent forecasts, its incidence is supposed to 
increase further. Rehabilitation after TKR is an effective 
treatment to ensure full recovery after surgery and its 
economic burden in Italy accounts for almost 182 million of 
Euro per year. By considering the impact in other sectors, the 
adoption of Information and Communication Technology was 
welcome as a tool able to reduce costs and preserve the quality 
of care. However, the actual adoption is not as high as it was 
expected. Perhaps it could be the results of a partial 
involvement of the stakeholders included into the telemedicine 
services. Decision makers, physicians, patients and informal 
caregivers, should be involved in business model development 
to elect the best one to satisfy their needs and increase the 
value of the telemedicine service. This article describes the 
preliminary results of the business modelling phase belonging 
to a broader project aiming at involving the whole set of 
stakeholders interested in telerehabilitation after TKR.  
Keywords-Business model; telemedicine; telerehabilitation; 
healthcare management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Total Knee replacement (TKR) showed to be cost-
effective in the last 30 years and it was largely performed in 
Italy (21st most performed procedure in Italy in 2013) [1]-
[3]. According to “Agenzia Nazionale per i servizi Sanitari” 
(Age.na.s.), the trend observed in the last years by “Istituto 
Superiore di Sanità”, from 26’694 TKR performed in 2001, 
to 63’125 in 2011, is going to further increase since the 
reduction in average age of TKR patients and the extension 
of life expectancy [4][5]. Likewise, rehabilitation has a 
pivotal role in patients’ recovery after surgery [6][7]. By 
considering the high incidence of TKR in the last years, the 
related rehabilitation has a considerable socioeconomic 
impact both on Italian National Healthcare Service (Ita-
NHS) and on patients [8]. According to Piscitelli et al., TKR 
patients lose on average 9 working days per year; this value 
increases up to 20 days per patient considering hospital 
length of stay. During 2005, a loss of 368’586 working days 
was estimated for TKR patients younger than 65 years, 
leading to a monetary loss of approximately 24 millions Euro 
(a working day is assumed to last 8 hours; average wage is 
assumed to be 7.73€ per hour) [9]. From Ita-NHS 
perspective, the costs accounted for TKR rehabilitation were 
about 158 million of euro in 2005 (47 million in hospital 
rehabilitation and 111 million in home rehabilitation) [8]. By 
considering the results from the recent report of the “Agenzia 
Nazionale 
per 
i 
servizi 
Sanitari” 
(Age.Na.S.), 
the 
rehabilitation expenditure is expected to increase since the 
number of TKR will grow in the next years [5]. In this 
framework, digitalization seems to be a pivotal milestone to 
reduce costs and ensure at least the same quality of care. 
Many efforts have been made investigating telemedicine 
sustainability and the factors leading to successful business 
models without reaching a definitive conclusion [10][11]. 
Likewise, telerehabilitation after TKR was tested in different 
technical approaches (e.g. videoconferencing CODECs with 
cameras; wireless sensors) and contexts; especially in rural 
areas, were it could be an alternative to home visit and could 
reduce travelling expenses [12][13]. Although the social 
impact of rehabilitation is evident, to date there is little 
knowledge 
on 
the 
drivers 
leading 
to 
successful 
implementation 
of 
knee 
telerehabilitation 
programs. 
According to Osterwald [14], the final aim of a business 
model has to switch from creating value only for the firm, to 
creating value also for the society. Therefore, we believe that 
the approach to involve the most important stakeholders in 
the design of the business model could be a reasonable way 
to detect the best business models, and to assess and promote 
them in order to improve the societal value chain for 
telerehabilitation. 
A. The importance of the stakeholders in healthcare 
Freeman defines stakeholders as “any group or individual 
who can legitimately affect or is affected by the achievement 
of the firm’s objectives” [15]. Every firm or organization has 
different set of stakeholders who can influence the 
performance of the organization directly or indirectly. For 
some type of organizations, different stakeholders should be 
weighted out differently from other stakeholders. Scholars 
introduced the importance of different stakeholders in NHS, 
from low to high [16][17]. Stakeholder’s perspective for 
health care can be different from other type of organizations. 
The role of stakeholders in health care can be underlined 
taking into account the differences between patients and 
customers. In the process of decision making in health care, 
relevant “stakeholders” should be more involved especially 
when introducing a new technology [18]. In terms of 
operationalization of stakeholders' theory, many scholars 
formed various models to show the relationship between 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

stakeholders and organizations. Within the context of the 
NHS, healthcare services have an enormous number of 
potential stakeholders. In 1994, Brown and colleagues 
divided the stakeholders of NHS into three groups, 
professional clinicians, managers and patients [19]. To add 
healthcare policy makers is certainly useful. Adding to these 
three groups the role of policy makers for NHS cannot be 
denied. Scholars introduced the importance of power level of 
different stakeholders in the NHS, from low to high [16][17]. 
According to the literature, in order to design a sustainable 
business model for health care it is necessary to map the 
stakeholders according to their difference in power and 
pursued objectives. The main reason for the un-sustainability 
analysed in the study by Lin and Hsieh is the lack of value 
co-creation 
between 
the 
different 
stakeholders 
who 
participated in the new service development project [20]. 
Although all the stakeholders intended to provide telehealth 
services, in fact, each of them had different objectives. Even 
though some aims overlap, for example both policy makers, 
managers and patients want to improve care and 
simultaneously saving money, sometimes they also have 
specific objectives that may conflict with the other 
stakeholders' ones.. 
B. Economic evaluation in Health care 
The necessity to deliver high quality healthcare to the 
largest amount of people associated with the monetary 
constraints that most countries are experiencing, has 
introduced the need to optimize the allocation of scarce 
resources. 
According 
to 
the 
latest 
guidelines 
for 
Telemedicine released by the Italian Ministry of Healthcare 
[21], telemedicine programs would be implemented and 
bolstered by Ita-NHS if they will show to have a better 
Incremental Cost Effectiveness Ratio (ICER) than the 
current care solutions (i.e., telemedicine programs should 
have a lower cost with at least the same effectiveness; 
likewise, higher costs could be acceptable if the telemedicine 
program shows also a better response in terms of 
effectiveness). In this direction, there are some preliminary 
results showing that telerehabilitation could be a cost-
effective solution, especially if further assumptions are made 
on potential business models [22]. By considering the current 
scenario, an holistic approach merging business modelling, 
stakeholders' objectives and health economic evaluations 
could represent the way for a successful implementation of 
telerehabilitation.  
The paper is organized in 4 sections. The next section, 
Methods (Section II), summarizes the approach used to 
address the research questions; Results (Section III) aims to 
report the preliminary outcomes of our research; Discussion 
(Section IV) addresses future directions and authors' 
remarks, Conclusion (Section V)closes the paper. 
II. 
METHODS 
Taking into account the complex scenario we described 
in Section I, we set up our research within the design science 
research methodology (DSRM) [23]. This five steps method 
is composed of: identification of the problem, definition of 
the objective of a solution, design and development, 
demonstration and finally evaluation. The introduction of the 
current paper has described the problem; the objectives of 
the telerehabilitation service were defined through informal 
communications with a decision maker, 3 physiotherapists, 2 
patients and 2 informal caregivers. The current paper 
addresses the “design” phase, which was developed 
according to visual thinking and scenarios approaches [5]. in 
addition we will highlight the concerns and future directions. 
The methodology of the forthcoming steps will be reported 
into the discussion section. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The first two steps of our research were aimed to deepen 
the knowledge into the rehabilitation area to comprehend the 
real unsolved issues and to identify the relevant stakeholders. 
According to Freeman, organizations are dependent on the 
support of stakeholders to achieve their main goal[15]; 
therefore identifying the main stakeholders in the arena of 
telehealth was the endpoint of the “problem identification” 
phase. Based on prior examination of latest rehabilitation 
guidelines and rehabilitation pathways we ended up 
identifying different groups based on their expectations 
[24][25]. As provided in the framework of Dansky and 
Gamm [26], stakeholders could be categorized into four 
main 
non-exclusive 
domains: 
political, 
commercial, 
community and clinical. Based on this framework we map 
telerehabilitation stakeholders as follows: Policy makers (Ita-
NHS and Ministry of Economy and Finance – MEF, and 
healthcare units managers), Commercials (Telerehabilitation 
providers; sensor providers), Community (patients and 
informal caregivers) and Clinicals (physiotherapists and 
healthcare units managers). 
Once stakeholders were identified, at least one 
stakeholder of each category was informally interviewed to 
preliminary point out their needs. As result of this process, 
we report the current service description and revenues flows 
in usual care in the sub-section named “Business model as 
is”. 
According 
to 
the 
remarks 
of 
stakeholders’ 
communications, we integrated them into the new business 
model design. The results are reported into the “Innovative 
business models for telerehabilitation” section. 
A. Business model as is (Scenario I) 
The informal communications with stakeholders lead to 
define the current business pathway for rehabilitation in 
Azienda Sanitaria Locale 12 (ASL 12) located in Lido di 
Camaiore 
(Viareggio, 
Tuscany 
Region, 
Italy). 
Rehabilitation procedures are provided throughout four 
channels: hospitals, outpatient service, home-based service 
and private care service. For our convenience, we assess the 
first three together as they compose the public health 
scenario; while private care will be addressed separately. All 
the stakeholders areas were covered both for public care and 
for private care. 
1) Public Health 
After TKR, patients have a rehabilitation program 
throughout 2 channels out of 3. Firstly, all patients spend on 
average 14 days in hospital for rehabilitation after surgery. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Secondly, physicians decide if he or she can have outpatient 
rehabilitation or in a home-based program. Almost the 
whole cost, including the transportation with ambulance, are 
sustained by Tuscany Region with funds belonging to 
regional taxations and “intramoenia” activities (i.e., private 
care procedures performed into a public healthcare unit) 
[25][27]. The patients are asked to contribute according to 
their income. If the Tuscany Region is not able to cover the 
entire costs, a national level coverage is provided. A further 
option consists into a mixed private-public outpatient 
treatment. Whereas the patients access to public healthcare 
facilities, the physiotherapy could be delivered in private 
care regimen (the so called “intramoenia” procedures). 
However, part of the physiotherapist revenue will be shared 
with the hospital. The monetary resources flow is 
graphically described in Figure 1 (Section 1). 
 
2) Private Health 
The private physiotherapy could be undertaken generally 
into 3 structures: Private care, public outpatients' department 
(“intramoenia”) and into the private care units partially 
subsidized by Ita-NHS. In all of these cases, the patients can 
access to private care paying the whole service including the 
transportation. The second scenario was described in the 
previous section. The third scenario is meant to have a 
partial co-payment of the Ita-NHS to the private care which 
had a reimbursement agreement. The monetary resources 
flow is graphically described in Figure 1 (Section 1). 
 
B. Interactive business models for telerehabilitation 
Because of the ethical and legal constrains, we believe that 
B2B scenarios are the best approaches in early adoption of 
telerehabilitation. Both from public health and from private 
healthcare perspectives, a partnership with healthcare 
providers is a pivotal point to achieve the maximum 
possible diffusion for telerehabilitation. In other terms, 
telerehabilitation has first to be recognized as at least a non-
inferior mean of care, then its adoption could be discussed 
assessing the economic implications (i.e., cost-effectiveness 
and cost-utility analysis) [21]. However, considering the 
potential resistances of the other stakeholders involved into 
the healthcare service (e.g., patients, informal caregivers, 
physicians), a bottom-up acceptance of the service is also 
necessary. For this reasons, we plan to design different 
innovative business model scenarios that will have to be 
able to involve the whole set of stakeholders and deliver the 
highest possible value for each of them. To date, we 
developed the first two main scenarios, in which we imagine 
all the actors could have a benefit from adopting the 
telerehabilitation service. 
 
1) Public Health (Scenario II) 
A firm who that has a partnership with ASL units in a 
specific Italian region provides the telerehabilitation 
procedure. Adopting the firm perspective, the main revenue 
is coming from the ASL, as they would pay for the service 
(device rental, maintenance, telerehabilitation software and 
internet connection), the rental and maintenance of the 
devices. Likewise, the patients contribute with a fee, which 
has to be shared between the firm and the ASL. We imagine 
two parts composing the patient payment: a fixed and a 
dynamic part. The fixed one relies on income and on 
whether patients hold a high-speed internet connection. The 
dynamic part is determined according to adherence to 
rehabilitation adjusted for socio-demographic and clinical 
features of the patients. Higher is the patients’ effort in 
recovery, lower would be the dynamic part of the fee and 
vice versa. The forgone part of the fee would be paid by the 
Ita-NHS/Ministry of Economics and Finance, which could 
be interested in reducing the productivity loss and improve 
the quality of care. For graphical representation, please see 
Figure 1 (Section 2). 
Critical Business issues: The strength of B2B in 
Healthcare is a top-down approach: to adopt the public 
healthcare provider channel is expected to have a positive 
influence in terms of trust. However, it could not be 
sufficient; by considering the potential barriers in adopting 
new solutions and an incremental cost, patients should 
perceive the new service as an enabler of time saving, 
improve their physical condition, comfort and let them be 
aware to what extent they could be able to influence the 
clinical outcome and costs. If the patients’ performances 
influence their payment, it would make them more involved 
into the healing process, with huge societal implications in 
terms of productivity gain due to faster recovery. On the 
other hand, we do not know to what extent physiotherapists 
could perceive the telerehabilitation to be able to reduce 
their workload and income, leading to reluctance for the 
new procedure. In this case, the healthcare management 
should stress the opportunity forgone while treating one 
patient in usual care scheme, rather than checking 
telerehabilitation 
parameters 
of 
more 
patients 
simultaneously. It could result into a larger acceptance by 
physiotherapists, who are going to earn less for each patient, 
but would follow more patients hopefully increasing their 
overall income. A further implication in reducing the 
number of patients with a favourable prognosis having face-
to-face treatments could be the reduction of waiting lists for 
those patients with a worse prognosis; resulting into an 
optimization of healthcare resources. 
2)  Private care (Scenario III) 
Even in the private care scenario, telerehabilitation should 
access to the market with an initial top-down approach 
exploiting a partnership with a big private care institution 
focused 
on 
orthopaedics 
rehabilitation. 
The 
telerehabilitation provider furnishes a service (device rental, 
maintenance, 
telerehabilitation 
software 
and 
internet 
connection) based on fees to the private care institution, 
which provides the devices to its physiotherapists. In this 
scenario, we identify the highest market access barrier for 
physiotherapists, as telerehabilitation is perceived as a threat 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

for 
their 
income. 
The 
physicians 
providing 
the 
telerehabilitation service to their patients, compete with the 
others physiotherapists inside the private organization. The 
goal is to achieve the best results in terms of recovery for 
patients. Therefore, the patient assessment should notice 
also a minimum clinical outcome to preserve ethics and 
quality of care. In addition, the patients’ score should be 
adjusted on socio-demographic features to ensure a balanced 
competition 
among 
physiotherapists 
(i.e., 
some 
physiotherapists could have patients with a better prognosis 
than the others, influencing the result of the competition).  
Succeeding at the competition, the private care organization 
will ensure a reward to the physiotherapist because of 
encouraging an innovative and cost-saving service for the 
organization. From patients’ perspective, the fee varies 
according to travelling distance from the rehabilitation 
centres; however, it will never exceed the usual care tariff. 
Furthermore, informal caregivers would perceive the 
telerehabilitation as an improvement in their lives. Since the 
patient cannot drive during the rehabilitation period, 
employing a telerehabilitation scheme could half the number 
of travels with a consequential reduction in travelling 
expenses and productivity loss for the informal caregiver 
(please see Figure 1 - Section 3).  
Critical Business issues: Although a bottom-up approach 
enrolling single physiotherapists could be an option, a top-
down approach during the launch of the telerehabilitation 
service would ensure a greater adoption. Once the service 
would reach a sufficient diffusion in private care clinics, a 
B2B at the physiotherapist level could be a rewarding 
strategy. In the private care scenario we detected the most 
important barrier in the physiotherapists which could 
oppose resistance in adopting a service able to reduce their 
income. Telerehabilitation should be perceived from the 
physiotherapists as a tool to increase their income rather 
than a monitoring service able to threat their job. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this article, we provided a preliminary insight about 
how telerehabilitation business model should be conceived. 
It has passed almost ten years since the first performance-
based co-payment system in Italy [28]; the risk sharing 
strategy is aimed to bolster innovative treatments, which 
would be fully reimbursed from Ita-NHS if they are 
clinically effective. On the other hand, the pharmaceutical 
firm is going to cover part of or the whole costs for those 
patients who did not recover using the innovative 
pharmacological treatment. Although it could be right if the 
patients are thought to be a passive stakeholder (i.e., they 
would only receive a treatment and they do not directly 
influence the outcome), the performance based payment 
would be not suitable for rehabilitation at all. In such 
scenario the patients are directly involved into the healing 
process and it has an effect on society; likewise, they should 
be directly involved into the public health scenario as the 
main actor. Likewise, the private care is relying on 
professionals who have a direct relationship with the 
patients. In this case we believe the private physiotherapist to 
have a pivotal role in diffusing the innovative processes. 
Therefore, any of these stakeholders could be excluded in the 
business model design pathway, and the final objective 
should be a model adjustable on their needs and perceptions.  
A. Toward an interactive business model 
After identifying different stakeholders in tele-health 
organizations, the necessity of a sustainable business model 
is showing up. Business models have received much 
attention in literature by focusing on the fact that business 
model innovation is a key success for business [29]-[31]. 
Although according to existing literature there is not a 
single definition for what a business model is, in this paper 
we refer to Chesbrough and Rosenbloom definition: A 
business model is a “focusing device that mediates between 
technology development and economic value creation” by 
emphasizing on the value chain for creating and distributing 
the offering [32]. 
A sustainable business model considers the society as 
key stakeholder [33], which is in line with healthcare 
perspective as long as patients play a key role in value-
creation phase. Zott et al. emphasized on the role of 
customers, shareholders and any single stakeholder who 
capture values lied behind firm’s entity [31]. According to 
Baden-Fuller et al., business models are not only the 
reflections of the firm’s strategy to the logic of the firm but 
also they are the way to show how each firm creates value 
for its stakeholders [34]. Lehoux and his colleagues 
suggested that stakeholders vary in the type or quantity of the 
value that is attached to the characteristics of a given 
technology [35]. There are in fact multiple categories of 
customers in healthcare with various types of benefits (e.g., 
recovery for patients, revenues for physicians, a healthy 
work-force for employers). Therefore, when entrepreneurs 
are designing their business model addressing the value of 
their innovation, they can exploit a large range of dormant 
attributes of their model; nevertheless, it requires attending 
to the various and sometimes conflicting expectations of 
users, purchasers and regulators. Business model motivate 
entrepreneurs to redefine their key stakeholders and different 
attributes because their core business can be considered to be 
sensitive to certain stakeholders and not others especially in 
healthcare [36]. The healthcare industry is facing multiple 
challenges. In order to deal with those new arising problems, 
restructuring by means of industry architecture redesign, as 
well as business model innovations, may be an answer [37]. 
Therefore, in this study we suggested two possible business 
models for telemedicine considering different stakeholders' 
expectations. When it comes to the healthcare industry, the 
definition of business model as an activity system is a useful 
theoretical lens to analyse the latest changes that are why 
involving stakeholders can create a different perspective. 
B. Future directions 
The early stages of the design phase were described in 
this 
article; 
however, 
the 
forthcoming 
steps 
like 
demonstration and evaluation phases will be crucial for 
capturing and comparing the different options. Since the 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

heterogeneity of the stakeholder, of their values and of the 
related goals, a multidisciplinary approach is necessary to 
properly report the final results of the project. As first step 
we 
plan 
to 
employ 
a 
qualitative 
semi-structured 
questionnaire. According to the final aim of the 
demonstration phase, different questionnaires will be 
designed for the different stakeholders to fill the Osterwald’s 
business canvas sections: key activities, key partners, key 
resources, customer relationship, customer segments, value 
proposition, channels, cost structure and revenue stream [14]. 
The demonstration will involve a set of stakeholders who 
will be not involved into the project; secondly, a pilot phase 
will be validated administering the questionnaire to the 
whole group of stakeholders of a specific ASL. Once the 
validation process is completed, the questionnaire will be 
administered to the whole set of stakeholders joining the 
study. The qualitative results will be reported into a matrix 
able to summarize the stakeholders' opinions. In the same 
matrix will be introduced quantitative results obtained from a 
previously developed decision analytic Markov model [22]. 
Here, we provide potential examples of quantitative results 
we wish to include: Clinical and Health Related Quality of 
Life outcomes, Costs per patient at least over 10 years (from 
social and third party payer perspective), Break Even Point 
and Return of Investment.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The current article provided an insight of the third phase of 
a larger project. Our preliminary results stressed what we 
found in the literature. Telemedicine is an innovative topic 
promising to reduce costs and to preserve quality of care. It 
is not still adopted as expected, resulting in an undefined 
market scenario. Proceeding into the study phases we will 
assess whether the proposed approach could fill the gap 
between experimental projects and real services in 
telemedicine. However, we believe an holistic approach, 
merging the best of managerial, social science and health 
economics methodologies could provide a better knowledge 
of the problem.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Authors thank Dr Federico Posteraro for the enlightening 
conversations. We also thank Telecom Italia spa, who funds 
the project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. J. Lavernia, J. F. Guzman, and A. Gachupin-Garcia, “Cost 
Effectiveness and Quality of Life in Knee Arthroplasty,” Clin 
Orthop, Vol. 345,pp.134-139, 1997 . 
[2] M. H. Llang, et al. “Cost Effectiveness of Total Joint 
Arthroplasty in Osteoarthritis,” Arthritis Rheum vol. 29, 
1986, pp.937-943. 
[3] Ministero della Salute. Tavole Rapporto SDO 2012. [Online]. 
Available 
from 
[retrieved: 
January, 
2015]: 
http://www.salute.gov.it/portale/documentazione/p6_2_8_3_1
.jsp?lingua=italiano&id=16 
[4] Istituto Superiore di Sanità. The Italian Arthroplasty Registry 
(RIAP): state of the art. [Online]. Available from [retrieved: 
January,2015]:http://www.iss.it/binary/riap2/cont/2013_GIOT
_39_90_95.pdf 
[5] M. Cerbo, et al. “Report di HTA – Le protesi per la 
sostituzione primaria totale del ginocchio in Italia Roma,” 
Agenzia Nazionale Servizi Sanitari Regionali, jul 2009. 
[6] R. W. Bohannon and J. Cooper, “Total knee arthroplasty: 
evaluation of an acute care rehabilitation program,” Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil, vol. 74, pp. 1091–4, 1993. 
[7] M. M. Dowsey, M. L. Kilgour, N. M. Santamaria, and P. F. 
Choong, “Clinical pathways in hip and knee arthroplasty: a 
prospective randomized controlled study,” Med J Aust, vol. 
170, 1999, pp. 59–62. 
[8] P. Piscitelli, et al., “Socioeconomic burden of total joint 
arthroplasty for symptomatic hip and knee osteoarthritis in the 
Italian population: a 5-year analysis based on hospitalization 
records,” Arthritis Care Res, vol. 64, 2012, pp. 1320-7.  
[9] Istituto nazionale di statistica. Rapporto sulla coesione 
sociale. [Online]. Available from [retrieved: January, 2015]: 
http://www.istat.it/it/files/2013/12/NotastampaCoesione.pdf?t
itle=Rapporto+sulla+coesione+sociale+-
+30%2Fdic%2F2013+-+Nota+per+la+stampa.pdf 
[10] L. Valeri, D. Giesen, P. Jansen, and K. Klokgieters, “Business 
Models for eHealth Final Report,” Final Report Prepared for 
ICT for Health Unit DG Information Society and Media 
European Commission, Feb. 2010. 
[11] H. Mistry, “Systematic review of studies of the cost-
effectiveness of telemedicine and telecare. Changes in the 
economic evidence over twenty years,” J Telemed Telecare, 
vol.18, Jan. 2012, pp.1-6.  
[12] M. Tousignant, H. Moffet, P. Boissy, H. Corriveau, F. 
Cabana, and F. Marquis, “A randomized controlled trial of 
home telerehabilitation for post-knee arthroplasty,” J Telemed 
Telecare, vol.17, Mar. 2012, pp. 195–198. 
[13] M. Piqueras, et al, “Effectiveness of an interactive virtual 
telerehabilitation system in patients after total knee 
arthoplasty: a randomized controlled trial,” J Rehabil Med 
vol.45, Apr. 2013, pp.392–6 . 
[14] A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur, “Business Model Generation: 
A 
Handbook 
for Visionaries, 
Game 
Changers, 
and 
Challengers,” Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, pp.10, 2010. 
[15] R. E. Freeman, “Strategic Management: A Stakeholder 
Approach,” Prentice Hall. 
[16] V. Ambrosini, G. Johnson, and K. Scholes, ”Exploring 
techniques 
of 
analysis 
and 
evaluation 
in 
strategic 
management,” Harlow, UK: Pearson Higher Education. 1998. 
[17] A. Murdock, “Stakeholder theory, partnerships and alliances 
in the health care sector of the UK and Scotland,” Int Public 
Man Rev,vol.5, 2004, pp. 21-39. 
[18] R. L. Sorenson, C. A. Folker, and K. H. Brigham, “The 
collaborative network orientation: achieving business success 
through 
collaborative 
relationships,” Entrep. 
Theory 
Pract, vol.32, 2008, pp. 615-634. 
[19] R. B. Brown, S. McCartney, L. Bell, and S. Scaggs, “Who is 
the NHS for?,”  Journal of management in medicine, 8(4), 
1994, pp. 62-70. 
[20] F. R. Lin and P. S. Hsieh, “Analyzing the sustainability of a 
newly developed service: An activity theory perspective,” 
Technovation, 34(2), 2014, pp. 113-125. 
[21] Ministero della Salute. TELEMEDICINA Linee di indirizzo 
nazionali. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.salute.gov.it/imgs/C_17_pubblicazioni_2129_alle
gato.pdf 
[22] F. Fusco and G. Turchetti, “A cost-effectiveness analysis for 
total knee arthroplasty telerehabilitation: proof of concept of a 
decision model,” (PMS42) Value in Health, Value in Health, 
Nov. 2014, vol.17, pp. A380. 
 
[23] K. Peffers, “A Design Science Research Methodology for 
Information Systems Research,” J Manag Inf Syst vol. 24, pp. 
45–77, 2007. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[24] J. R. Ebert, C. Munsie, and B. Joss, “Guidelines for the early 
restoration of active knee flexion after total knee arthroplasty: 
implications for rehabilitation and early intervention,” Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil, vol. 95, pp.1135–40, 2014. 
[25] Regione Toscana. Delibera Giunta Regionale N° 595 del 
30.5.05. 
[Online]. 
Availabile 
from: 
http://www.uisp.it/firenze/files/areaperlagrandeta/LEGHE%2
0E%20AREE%20ATTIVITA/Area%20Anziani/Documenti/D
eliberaGRn595.pdf 
[26] K. H. Dansky and L. S. Gamm, “Accountability framework 
for managing stakeholders of health programs,” J Health 
Organ Manag, vol.18, 2004, pp. 290-304. 
[27] Regione Toscana. Accordo quadro regione Toscana – 
trasporti 
sanitari.[Online].Available 
from: 
http://www.misericordiaonline.org/servizi/contratti/page/AQR
Toscana.pdf 
[28] Agenzia Italiana del Farmaco. Regime di rimborsabilità e 
prezzo di vendita della specialita’ medicinale Tarceva 
(erlotinib). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://antineoplastici.agenziafarmaco.it/tarceva.pdf 
[29] H. Chesbrough, “Business model innovation: opportunities 
and barriers,” Long range planning, 43(2), 2010, pp. 354-363. 
[30] F. Lüdeke-Freund, “Towards a conceptual framework of 
business models for sustainability,” Proc. Knowledge 
Collaboration & Learning for Sustainable Innovation, 
Harvard Business Review Press 25-29 October 2010, pp. 28. 
[31] C. Zott, R. Amit, and L. Massa, “The business model: recent 
developments 
and 
future 
research,” 
Journal 
of 
management, 37(4), 2011, pp.1019-1042. 
[32] H. Chesbrough and R. S. Rosenbloom, “The role of the 
business model in capturing value from innovation: evidence 
from Xerox Corporation's technology spin‐off companies,” 
Industrial and corporate change, 11(3), 2002, pp. 529-555. 
[33] N. M. P. Bocken, S. W. Short, P. Rana, and S. Evans, “A 
literature and practice review to develop sustainable business 
model archetypes,” J Clean Prod, 65, 2014, pp. 42-56. 
[34] C. Baden-Fuller and M. S. Morgan, “Business models as 
models,” Long Range Planning, 43(2) 2010, pp. 156-171. 
[35] P. Lehoux, G. Daudelin, B. Williams-Jones, J. L. Denis, and 
C. Longo, “How do business model and health technology 
design influence each other? Insights from a longitudinal case 
study of three academic spin-offs,” Proc. Exploring Public 
Sector Strategy. 5th ed., Prentice, Research Policy, 43(6), 
2014, pp. 1025-1038. 
[36] N. Dew and S. D. Sarasvathy, “Innovations, stakeholders & 
entrepreneurship,” Journal of Business Ethics, 74(3), 2007, 
pp. 267-283. 
[37] S. Tersago and I. Visnjic, “Business Model Innovation in 
Healthcare,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cambridgeservicealliance.org/uploads/downloadfi
les/December%202011_Business%20Model%20Innovations
%20in%20Health%20Care.pdf 
 
Figure 1.  Healthcare business models: from traditional (Section 1) to innovative proposals (Section 2 and 3). 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

