Enhancing the Wellbeing at the Workplace
Rainer Planinc and Michael H¨odlmoser
Computer Vision Lab
Vienna University of Technology
Email: rainer.planinc@tuwien.ac.at
Martin Kampel
CogVis GmbH
Email: kampel@cogvis.at
Abstract—Physical and psychological issues are a common prob-
lem for elderly employees. Working in an sitting position with
not ergonomically designed working places, too little exercises in
combination with unhealthy nutrition and stress are the main
causes of the problems. In order to prevent such problems,
we propose to monitor the workplace in an holistic way, thus
detecting unergonomically workplaces, too little exercises, stress
and an unbalanced diet automatically. The proposed system is
able to detect unhealthy behavior by using a 3D sensor in
combination with a camera and speech recognition. The proposed
approach will be evaluated at least at 50 work places in order to
prove its feasibility.
Keywords–workplace; ergonomics; AAL; elderly; physical activ-
ity; stress management; nutritional balance;
I.
INTRODUCTION
A signiﬁcant amount of jobs require employees to sit for
eight hours (or even longer) while performing their tasks
[1]. During younger years, employees are not bothered with
physical problems, but while getting older, more and more
issues due extensive sitting occur. In combination with uner-
gonomically designed working places, malnutrition (nutrition
requirements change during our lifetime) and only little ex-
ercising, severe problem can arise, especially for people in
the age of 50+ [2][3]. Furthermore, the cognitive capability
decreases, whereas (together with many other factors) the
stress level increases. This leads to employees feeling not
very well, which indicates a reduced quality of life due to
physical (e.g., back) and psychological (e.g., stress) problems.
The aim of this paper is not to counteract on physical and
psychological issues, but to prevent them already at an early
stage. The proposed system is suitable for all employees
performing their job in an sitting position, e.g., secretaries,
ofﬁce clerks, technicians, lawyers, etc. at the same level.
Moreover, even employees not performing their jobs using a
desk (e.g., bus driver) beneﬁt from this approach since the
system is ﬂexible enough to be adapted to different needs
easily. The proposed system consists of four different modules,
which
in combination
lead to an enhanced quality of life
of older adults in their working environment, but also to
an increase of the overall wellbeing. The combination of
these modules provides an training program for physical and
psychological exercises and consists of the modules physical
training, workplace ergonomics, nutritional balance and stress
management optimized for the needs and wishes of older
adults. Only by combining physical, ergonomic, nutritional and
cognitive aspects, a holistic approach to enhance the wellbeing
and quality of life of older adults can be developed. The focus
is on providing a well-balanced and holistic system that is
able to meet the end-users needs and offers beneﬁts and an
enhanced quality of life for older adults at the workplace. The
rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides
an overview of the system, its modules are described in detail
in Sections 3-6, a conclusion is drawn in Section 7.
II.
OVERVIEW
The proposed system helps to increase the health of elderly
people at their workspaces, focusing on providing an all-in-
one solution for increasing the wellbeing of older adults at
their workplace. The system focuses on workplaces where
employees are performing their work in a sitting position,
i.e., ofﬁce workers. It can mainly be divided into two parts,
which are the online wellbeing service for processing the data
and generating feedback in real time, for logging, storing and
representing results and a combination of sensors in order
to gather input data (Figure 1). The quality of the physical
training, as well as the performance of the stress management
are handled by a 3D sensor (e.g., Kinect), the ergonomic
workplace is obtained by exploiting a camera in combination
with the 3D sensor, and the nutrition optimization is conducted
by a combination of a camera and speech recognition. The
workﬂow of the proposed approach is illustrated in Figure 2
and illustrates the combination of different sensor types.
However, since employees are monitored at their work-
places, privacy issues need to be addressed. The system is
developed in order to ensure that only the employee is able
to access his or her health data. This is extremely important
since 1) only the person itself is allowed to access the data
and 2) the obtained data is health data and thus need to
be protected. Hence, appropriate measures to ensure privacy
are taken and they include the implementation of proper user
role management and encryption mechanisms. Moreover, the
system needs to be unobtrusive in order to avoid negative
side effects (e.g., employees are concerned of a misuse of
the system). In combination with guidance of the company
medical ofﬁcer of each company, the system is not expected
to trigger negative effects.
All modules, except the one for nutritional balance, are
based on a correct pose estimation of the user. Pose esti-
mation can be done by ﬁrst extracting features in the image
which describe local changes between different poses. After
collecting the images, the system needs to be trained and
novel input poses need to be classiﬁed based on this training
data. Determining the pose of a human is done in 3D space.
To overcome the ill-posed problem of extracting 3D poses
out of 2D images, the RGB images were replaced by depth
images obtained from a 3D sensor. By using depth images,
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 1. Wellbeing platform and modules
Figure 2. Workﬂow of the proposed approach
Fanelli et al. in
[4] use regression in combination with a
random forest is used for determining a human’s head pose.
Similar features are also used by Shotton et al. [5] where
the ﬁrst system for obtaining a human’s pose is described.
Each body part casts votes for a single class. The ﬁnal pose
is estimated by generating conﬁdence-scored 3D proposals of
how the body parts are connected. As a 3D sensor is able to
overcome the ill-posed problem of extracting 3D information
out of 2D images and is proven to be very robust against clutter
and environmental changes, the input for the proposed system
will also be based on this sensor for human pose estimation.
Nevertheless, RGB images provide valueable information nec-
essary to perform other task than 3D pose estimation (e.g.,
detection of a chair or a desk). As this information is also
needed for the proposed framework, RGB images serve as
an additional input source. The aim of speech recognition
is to enable a very natural interaction with the computer by
speaking instead of using traditional input devices and not only
have the machine understand the verbal content, but also more
subtle cues such as affect that any human listener would easily
react to. However, so far real-time emotion recognition has
scarcely been attempted and if so, only in prototypical applica-
tions. Technical challenges that arise when equipping human-
computer interfaces with the ability to recognize the users
vocal emotions are almost endless. Lately, several tentative
studies were published recently on the interpretation of speech
signals in terms of certain application-dependent affective
states [6]. As can be seen, there is a research shift towards the
analysis of spontaneous human behavior [7], which means that
the analysis of acoustic information will not only sufﬁce for
identifying subtle changes in vocal affect expression. There are
two driving trends focusing on (i) audiovisual analysis which
combines linguistic and nonlinguistic analysis and (ii) visual
analysis coming from multiple cues (facial expressions, head
movements, and/or body gestures). This way, great outcomes
are expected when merging both frontline cues into one single
technology.
III.
PHYSICAL TRAINING
Health and well-being oriented companies today offer
their employees either the use of a gym or even provide
the possibilities for other forms of exercising (e.g., aerobics).
However, providing such facilities is very cost intensive and
hence, only a small number of companies offer these activ-
ities to their employees. Nevertheless, companies are getting
aware that many health related issues their older and more
experienced employees are suffering from, could have been
prevented if detected already at an early stage. However,
since aerobics lessons and gyms are expensive, especially in
bigger companies with a high number of employees, other
ways of exercising were found. A common way of motivating
employees to exercise is to provide them information about
small exercises to perform on their own. There are different
ways of presenting these exercises, e.g., in books, videos
or on the Internet. The main problem with these techniques
in comparison to a personal trainer is the lack of feedback
since employees cannot verify if their movement during the
exercise is correct. This issue is tackled by the use of a 3D
sensor, which is able to detect the movement of the person.
Furthermore, together with the proposed framework, wellbeing
is able to provide feedback during the exercises automatically.
The advantages of using this sensor is twofold: on the one
hand, feedback about the accuracy of the movement is gathered
and tips to improve the exercises on an individual level can
be given without having high costs of a personal trainer. On
the other hand, the activity can be logged automatically and
thus can be used to motivate the end-user to exercise more
often if only sporadic use is detected. The exercises itself can
be presented in different ways, e.g., by using the conventional
way where the exercise is shown and explained using a video,
but also more entertaining ways of explanation can be used,
e.g., as mini games, combining physical exercise together with
gaming elements. These mini games are called exergames and
are not simply video games, but are based on fundamental
research by physicians. Hence, this type of games being able
to tackle health related problems in a very entertaining way
will be integrated during the project.
Physical training is based on pose estimation, during the
performance of exercises in front of the system. These ex-
ercises are divided into conventional training and so called
exergames, which should help to motivate the user for the
workout. There is already a variety of different ﬁtness games
on the market, which use 3D information as input for tracking
the user (e.g., Kinect Fitness, Nike+ Kinect Training, Kinect
Sports, Kinect Zumba, etc.). Studies performed at the Univer-
sity of Chester show that the ﬁtness games boosted the heart
rates by up to 194 percent over sedentary games and increase
the energy expenditure by 263 percent over resting values [8].
When having the human pose by using the real-time method
described in [5][9], it is also possible to track body parts over
time. Then, this enables keeping track of certain regions, which
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

are more important than others for playing exergames and
performing conventional training (e.g., arms, legs, head). As
the input coming from the sensors is then sent to an online
service, it is implicitly possible to also play against other
users over the Internet. Having the components of ﬁrst packing
exercises in games and second competing against colleagues
or other persons over the Internet increases the motivation for
the user to perform the workout needed for a healthier working
environment.
IV.
WORKPLACE ERGONOMICS
Work place ergonomics is the key factor of a healthy
work place. Paying attention to ergonomic standards cannot
only prevent back pain or postural deformity, but also vision
problems and tensions. Work place ergonomics consists of
guidelines for ﬁnding optimal distances to e.g., a monitor,
adjusting the height of the chair and table, but also recom-
mends regular breaks for relaxation, e.g., of the eyes. These
rules already exist, but it is often hard to apply them in
practice since you might sit correctly for a speciﬁc time after
reading these rules, but getting lazy and forget them after
a while. Since especially older adults are prone to postural
deformity and vision problems, we propose to detect and track
the position of the employees during their work using the 3D
sensor introduced above and offer possibilities for improving
the actual position. These offers range from reminders for
taking breaks at regular intervals, analysing the sitting position
while performing tasks and reminding the person to correct the
pose (together with tips on how to correct them) and to provide
relaxation exercises for the muscles, as well as the eyes.
Since the system is based on an end-user centred approach,
a non-intrusive system meeting the end-users requirements is
designed. In contrast to regular reminders, the system does
not remind the user at pre-deﬁned intervals but takes the
overall ﬁtness of the user into consideration. The system is
highly customized in order to consider the individual needs of
different users, where one might beneﬁt from more breaks or
others from speciﬁc exercises.
Also for this module, it is necessary to obtain the users 3D
pose ﬁrst by using the 3D sensor. Additionally, objects in the
environment need to be detected (e.g., desk, chair, etc.). As the
3D sensor is not providing any colour or texture information,
an RGB camera is used to extract additional information
necessary in order to assure these object detection tasks.
Conventional object detection is performed by extracting some
features ﬁrst which represent the local structure of a patch. A
classiﬁer (e.g., support vector machine, random forest) is then
used to train the system and to obtain a classiﬁcation scheme.
As in [10] or [11], the system can be trained on a variety
of different objects. Felzenszwalb et al. [10] present a system
for 2D object detection of rigid objects with manually labeled
training images. The object is not detected as a whole but by
using the combination of the parts, which make up the object.
Since the images are labeled manually, the system is also able
to estimate the 3D pose of the object in the scene. Liebelt et al.
[11] provide a different approach, which is based on existing
3D models. Features are extracted from projections of these
rigid models and the system is then able to estimate both the
type of object and its pose in 3D space. These methods need
to be extended in order to handle the type of objects needed
for wellbeing.
V.
NUTRITIONAL BALANCE
According to the WHO many diseases of older adults
and elderly are diet-affected. These diseases are, amongst
others, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease, diabetes,
osteoporosis, and cancer, which are among the most common
diseases affecting older persons. However, the WHO found out
that only increasing the consumption of fruit and vegetables by
one or two servings per day could reduce the cardiovascular
risk by 30%. Since these results are achieved by only very
simple measures, the proposed system aims at even increasing
this percentage by ensuring the nutritional balance in a holistic
way. The integration of this module is strongly motivated by
the fact that older adults often do not have many possibilities
to pay attention to their nutritional balance when they are in
the ofﬁce due to reduced time and resources. Furthermore, old
habits and stress during work even worsens these problems
and thus the consortium focuses on providing information for
enhancing the nutritional balance. This module consists of a
food recognition unit, with which the food can be recognized
by providing a picture and/or spoken information. The food
recognition unit consists of computer vision algorithms in
order to estimate the amount of carbohydrate, protein and
vegetables. These results are enhanced by providing spoken
information, e.g., the approximate weight of meat, the type
of protein/carbohydrate/vegetables. Offering this easy to use
multi-modal interface, an individual nutrition schedule is rec-
ommended and monitored. In addition, information about the
nutrition schedule, as well as unobtrusive reminders (e.g.,
ensuring the intake of the right amount of water) are provided.
Different to all other modules, surveying the nutritional
balance is performed without using the 3D sensor but by
exploiting a RGB camera and a speech recognition module. As
both an RGB image and speech recognition is also available
on a mobile device, this task can also be performed on
such devices. Pouladzadeh et al. [12] use a support vector
machine classiﬁer and feature extraction using colour, texture,
size and shape of the food. Bosch et al. [13] also use food
identiﬁcation for diet measurement. Due to the signiﬁcant
variations in appearance, Yang et.al. introduce an algorithm,
which exploits the spatial relationship between ingredients
[14]. Different to existing approaches, the goal is to gather a
rough idea of the ingredients of the meals and determine e.g.,
how much carbohydrates, fat, or vitamins are present in the
meal. Answering these questions is a different task compared
to state of the art methods, which aim for determining e.g.,
which meat is on the plate. As the complexity of ﬁnding
the ingredients of a meal is much lower compared to the
complexity of a full food recognition system, the proposed
task can be solved much more accurate and more efﬁcient and
is therefore a perfect ﬁt for the needed purpose. To make the
recognition even more robust, the visual detection system is
combined with a speech recognition module, which provides
the possibility to record spoken information about the meal,
e.g., I had smashed potatoes and beef, a cup of peas and a
cup of sauce. After a few weeks of taking pictures of daily
meals, there is already enough data to suggest a perfect food
plan. The user then receives individualized suggestions for
improvements, or recipes. As can be seen, for a full food
recognition system it is necessary to outsource the computation
of segmentation, features and classiﬁcation on an external
server for a fast and reliable recognition. This makes it a
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

perfect ﬁt for the proposed wellbeing system. Image processing
on RGB images in combination with speech recognition are
exploited in order to detect the food on a plate. In order to deal
with non-centred food in the image or cluttered background,
the system has to segment the important parts of the image (the
food) and discard objects in the background. The ﬁnal decision
is passed to the user interface from the computation server. If
the result is incorrect, the user can send the feedback from the
user interface to the server with the correct food information.
VI.
STRESS MANAGEMENT
Job stress is a serious problem among older workers that
leads to physical and psychological health conditions and, in
a mid-term perspective, to early retirement
[15][16]. Stress
at work occurs when occupational demands are higher than
resources (excessive demand), and the mediating variables job
autonomy and social support are low [17]. Our technology
will prevent job stress by a) increasing personal internal
resources (cognitive and physical abilities) and b) increasing
social interaction among the employees by playing exergames
together and in competition among each other. In order to
enhance the communication and exchange between different
employees, the games developed in wellbeing also contains a
social component and can therefore either be played together
in teams or the competition between different players is used
as motivating factor for performing exercises from different
modules. Furthermore, tools for stress management will be
provided. These tools can also be combined with exergames
introduced earlier and thereby these games not only offers
physical training, but also relaxation and fun.
The proposed solution analyses stress related factors in
order to estimate the current stress level. This analysis is
mainly based on physiological factors, caused by stress (e.g.,
more reddish colour of the face). The application then gives
each indicator a certain weight and measures the stress level.
If the stress level exceeds a certain threshold, short exercises
are proposed by the system, e.g., relaxation, acupressure,
breathing-technique or any other slight movement. Similar to
physical training, exergames can also be proposed here which
can be played against other persons. The type and length of an
exercise proposed depends on the level of stress. This diversity
of different types of exercise and stress-reducing measures
increases the motivation of the user. The stress management
system is using the 3D sensor as an input device and the
workﬂow of the module is based on the scientiﬁc background
in the ﬁelds of the analysis of stress related facial signs and
the execution and the impact of stress-reducing exercises.
VII.
CONCLUSION
Monitoring ergonomical aspects at the workplace together
with motivating user to exercise regularly reduces physical
problems. In combination with the monitoring of stress related
factors, as well as the nutrition ensures that employees stay
healthy and ﬁt. The wellbeing platform uses a 3D and color
(RGB) sensor in order to motivate elderly employees to exer-
cise more often by providing exercises on the one hand, and
social exergames on the other hand. Moreover, ergonomical
aspects about the workplace (sitting posture, distance to the
monitor, etc.) are analyzed by the platform and feedback to
correct the position is provided immediately. By analyzing the
employees food and stress level, appropriate interventions can
be suggested at the right time, ensuring a healthy lifestyle.
The system will be evaluated on more than 50 users during
the course of the wellbeing project, testing the system for the
duration of 12 months in order to obtain reliable results.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the European Union under
grant AAL 2013-6-063. The authors want to thank the whole
wellbeing project team.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. McCrady and J. Levine, “Sedentariness at work; how much do we
really sit?” Obesity, vol. 17, no. 11, 2010, pp. 2103–2105.
[2]
R. Castanharo, M. Duarte, and S. McGill, “Corrective sitting strategies:
An examination of muscle activity and spine loading,” Journal of
Electromyography and Kinesiology, vol. 24, no. 1, 2014, pp. 114–119.
[3]
J. P. Caneiro, P. OSullivan, A. Burnett, A. Barach, D. ONeil, O. Tveit,
and K. Olafsdottir, “The inﬂuence of different sitting postures on
head/neck posture and muscle activity,” Manual Therapy, vol. 15, no. 1,
2010, pp. 54–60.
[4]
G. Fanelli, J. Gall, and L. Van Gool, “Real time head pose estimation
with random regression forests,” in Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2011, pp. 617–624.
[5]
J. Shotton, A. Fitzgibbon, M. Cook, T. Sharp, M. Finocchio, R. Moore,
A. Kipman, and A. Blake, “Real-time human pose recognition in parts
from single depth images,” in Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2011, pp. 1297–1304.
[6]
J. B. Hirschberg, S. Benus, J. M. Brenier, F. Enos, S. Friedman,
S. Gilman, C. Girand, M. Graciarena, A. Kathol, L. Michaelis, B. Pel-
lom, A. Stolcke, and E. Shriberg, “Distinguishing deceptive from non-
deceptive speech,” in Proc. of European Conf. Speech Comm. and
Technology, 2005, pp. 1833 – 1836.
[7]
J. Liscombe, J. Hirschberg, and J. Venditti, “Detecting certainness in
spoken tutorials dialogues,” in Proc. European Conf. Speech Comm.
and Technology, 2005, pp. 1837 – 1840.
[8]
A.
Park,
“Xbox
or
Wii:
Which
Is
Better
for
Sedentary
Kids?”
Sep.
2012,
accessed:
2014-12-18.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://healthland.time.com/2012/09/26/xbox-or-wii-a-scientiﬁc-
argument-for-why-xbox-is-better-for-sedentary-kids/
[9]
G. Rogez, J. Rihan, S. Ramalingam, C. Orrite, and P. H. S. Torr, “Ran-
domized trees for human pose detection,” in Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2008, pp. 1–8.
[10]
P. F. Felzenszwalb, R. B. Girshick, D. McAllester, and D. Ramanan,
“Object Detection with Discriminatively Trained Part-Based Models,”
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 32,
no. 9, Sep. 2010, pp. 1627–1645.
[11]
J. Liebelt, C. Schmid, and K. Schertler, “Viewpoint-independent object
class detection using 3D Feature Maps,” in Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, vol. 64.
IEEE, Jun. 2008, pp. 1–8.
[12]
P. Pouladzadeh, G. Villalobos, R. Almaghrabi, and S. Shirmohammadi,
“A novel svm based food recognition method for calorie measurement
applications,” in Proc. of ICME Workshop, 2012, pp. 495 – 498.
[13]
M. Bosch, F. Zhu, N. Khanna, C. Boushey, and E. Delp, “Combining
global and local features for food identiﬁcation in dietary assessment,”
in Proc. of ICIP, 2011, pp. 1789 – 1792.
[14]
S. Yang, M. Chen, D. Pomerleau, and R. Sukthankar, “Food recognition
using statistics of pairwise local features,” in Proc. of CVPR, 2010, pp.
2249 – 2256.
[15]
J. Kulmala, M. von Bonsdorff, S. Stenholm, T. Trmkangas, M. von
Bonsdorff, C. Nygrd, M. Klockars, J. Seitsamo, J. Ilmarinen, and
T. Rantanen, “Perceived stress symptoms in midlife predict disability
in old age: A 28-year prospective cohort study,” The Journals of
Gerontology Series A, vol. 68, no. 8, 2013, pp. 984 – 991.
[16]
M. Marmot, “Whitehall I & II,” accessed: 2014-12-18. [Online].
Available: http://www.ucl.ac.uk/whitehallII
[17]
J. Siegrist, M. Wahrendorf, O. von dem Knesebeck, H. Jrges, and
A. Brsch-Supan, “Quality of work, well-being, and intended early
retirement of older employees baseline results from the share study,”
European Journal of Public Health, vol. 17, no. 1, 2006, pp. 62 – 68.
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

