 
Does Government Own Your Health Data?  
A Case Summary of 2022 Taiwan Constitutional Court Decision 
 
Han-Hsi Indy Liu 
Institute of Public Health, College of Medicine 
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 
Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
e-mail: HL580@georgetown.edu  
 
 
Abstract—We all know personal health data is increasingly 
valuable; however, what is left behind is who can legitimately 
claim the ownership of the data and what rights and interest the 
owner can claim. A Taiwan Constitutional Court decision 
rendered on August 12, 2022 on one of the largest health 
databases in the world – the Taiwan National Health Insurance 
Database – provides us a real case on how the information 
privacy and data ownership issues, such as secondary uses, right 
to opt-out, and good governance mechanisms, can be argued, 
proposed, and regulated.  
Keywords-Health Data; Seconary Ues; Information Privacy; 
Data Governance; Constitutonal Court; Taiwan. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Taiwan National Health Insurance Database (NHID) 
is a centralized and comprehensive database maintained by 
the National Health Insurance Administration (NHIA). The 
database contains a tremendous collection of over 70 billion 
health records from the country’s 23 million population over 
the past 27 years [1].  
While the original intent of creating the database was for 
health 
insurance 
management, 
such 
as 
payment, 
reimbursement, and quality improvement, the ever-lasting 
accumulating datasets, including patient demographics, 
medical diagnoses, treatments, prescriptions, and medical 
images like computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), make secondary uses of the NHID 
incredibly valuable and appealing for both academic and 
commercial purposes. According to an NHIA’s survey, more 
than 8,600 research papers have been published by using data 
from NHID [2].  
The 
COVID-19 
pandemic 
has 
accelerated 
the 
digitalization of health service delivery, and so does the 
commercial use of NHID. A Software Development Kit (SDK) 
program initiated by NHIA in mid-2019, under the My Health 
Bank (MHB) system (See Figure 1), has created a new 
channel for linking people’s health data with mobile apps 
developed by private sectors. In other words, with 
authorization from member users and technical interference 
supported by the SDK, a third-party app developer now can 
combine its own user’s data, such as running tracks or daily 
calorie intakes, with their users’ personal medical records 
under NHID, such as cardiovascular diseases diagnose and 
treatment [1][3]. It certainly opens a route for a wide range of 
commercially secondary use of data on the NHID, such as 
chronic disease management or teleconsultation. 
The paper is structured into three sections. Section I 
explains the NHID database and the secondary uses of the data, 
including commercial purposes, through the My Health Bank 
(MHB) system. Section II describes the legal disputes and 
proceedings of the lawsuit, including the plaintiffs' arguments 
and the defendant's counterarguments. Finally, Section III 
provides an overview of the Taiwan Constitutional Court 
decision on the NHID case, detailing the issues addressed and 
the Court's holdings and prevailing parties. 
 
Figure 1. My Health Bank – Medical Visit Function Overview. 
My Health Bank System is a mobile app developed by the Taiwan NHIA to 
allow people access to their NHI data. [1] 
 
II. LEGAL DISPUTES OF THE SECONDARY USES AND THE 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE LAWSUIT 
Admittedly, despite the secondary use of NHID, such as 
research, policy development, public health surveillance, and 
even commercial innovation is so powerful, its legitimacy has 
been controversial and disputable under Taiwanese laws. In 
the spring of 2012, eight citizens from the Taiwan Association 
for Human Rights sent a cease-and-desist letter to NHIA for 
stopping providing their NHI data to third parties. The opt-out 
request was denied by the NHIA and a 10-year lawsuit from 
the individuals and NGO against the NHIA then began [4]. 
The plaintiffs argued that they had not granted their NHIA 
permission for any secondary uses of their NHI data. In 
addition, based on Taiwan Constitutional Law [5] and 
Personal Data Protection Act of 2012 (PDPA) [6], they had 
information privacy right to “opt-out” from the “unauthorized 
secondary uses”. 
The main counter-arguments from the defendant, NHIA, 
were that, firstly, all NHI data sharing with third parties were 
appropriately encrypted and de-identified, and therefore, there 
is no concern for data privacy or security. According to Article 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
6 of the PDPA, personal [health] data can be processed and 
used without data subjects’ consents, as long as it is for 
“statistics gathering or academic research by a government 
agency or an academic institution for the purpose of 
healthcare, public health, or crime prevention” and “such 
data, as processed by the data provider or as disclosed by the 
data collector, may not lead to the identification of a specific 
data subject” [6].  
NHIA also alleged that, the whole society benefits from 
the academic research based on using NHID, and the plaintiffs’ 
information privacy right could still be limited under certain 
circumstances. This was the case that the public interests of 
academic research and medical development shall trump the 
plaintiffs’ information privacy. 
Courts, both lower and appellate levels, essentially 
supported the NHIA’s arguments, and ruled in favor of the 
government agency. The plaintiffs then had the opportunity to 
appeal the decision in 2017 before the Taiwan Constitutional 
Court to challenge the ruling. 
III. 
TAIWAN CONSTITUTIONAL COURT DECISION: 113-
HSIEN-PAN-TZI NO.13 JUDGMENT 
On August 12, 2022, the Taiwan Constitutional Court held 
a press conference to announce their decision of the NHID 
case, the 113-Hsien-Pan-Tzi No.13 Judgment [7]. In this final 
and landmark verdict, the Grand Justices reversed the earlier 
judgements from the lower courts, and reaffirmed that the 
information privacy right under Taiwan Constitution shall 
include both procedural aspects, like an independent 
supervisory mechanism, as well as substantial aspects, such 
as a right to opt-out (The holdings of the Judgement, See 
Table 1). 
TABLE I.  
THE ISSUES AND HOLDINGS OF THE JUDGEMENT [7] 
Issues 
The Court’s Holdings and 
Prevailing Parties 
Court holdings 
Petit. 
Resp. 
Whether the Article 6 of 
the PDPA is 
unconstitutional? 
No.  
 
V 
Whether the current 
PDPA has no 
independent supervisory 
mechanism is 
unconstitutional? 
Yes. 
Competent Authority is 
obligated to amend the 
law within 3 years.   
V 
 
Whether the current 
rules of NHID’s data 
utilization is 
unconstitutional?  
Yes.  
Competent Authority is 
obligated to amend the 
law within 3 years.  
V 
 
Whether the current 
practice that people can 
not opt-out from 
secondary uses is 
unconstitutional? 
Yes.  
Competent Authority is 
obligated to amend the 
law within 3 years. 
Otherwise, people can 
enforce the right directly.  
V 
 
 
Several impacts on Taiwan’s health data use have emerged 
immediately after the judgment rendered:  
Firstly, it is the first time in Taiwan’s legal history that the 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) of the European 
Union (ER) is cited as a good comparative law model for 
setting up a data protection supervisory body. In the ruling, 
the Grant Justices have imposed the obligation to the 
competent authority for amending the laws within three years. 
Apparently, the EU GDPR model will be the must-seen 
reference for Taiwan’s legislators.  
Furthermore, 
what 
constitutes 
a 
sufficient 
“de-
identification obligation and process” becomes a hot issue 
again. Under the Enforcement Rules of the PDPA, the 
definition of de-identification means “inability to identify 
specific individuals by coding, anonymizing, and hiding part 
of personal data or by other means”. However, no one really 
knows what it is. A set of more precise and practical protocols 
of de-identification, such as the pseudonymization under the 
EU GDPR or the safe harbor method under the US Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
Privacy Rule, shall be created.  
Finally, the judgment affirmed the right to opt-out for 
unwilling or unauthorized secondary use of the data.  Before 
the ruling, it was unclear whether the information privacy 
right under Taiwan Constitution law and judicial 
interpretations could extend to ex-post determination of 
personal data control. It is now clear, nevertheless, that the 
data subject has the final call for its data, not the government. 
In other words, even though the data is collected, processed, 
and used by the government, it is the people have the ultimate 
control over their data.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION: WHAT NEXT STEPS ARE? 
While Taiwanese government, in particular the NHIA, has 
learned its lesson about information privacy and health data 
governance through the case and the ruling, their impacts are 
likely beyond the jurisdiction.  
On the one hand, the Taiwan Grand Justices have pointed 
out, in the ruling, that the EU GDPR model shall be a 
reference for NHIA to amend current regulations and 
practices. Some Taiwanese privacy scholars have also 
proposed comparative law examples for Taiwan’s data 
governance reform, such as the England model under the 
Health and Social Care Act of 2012 [8], or a trustworthy data 
governance mechanism for developing a better framework [9].  
The decision and its further development, on the other 
hand, may also be a good reference for secondary use of health 
databases from around the world, such as MyData in the South 
Korea or Findata in Finland [10][11].  
As health data’s huge potential is emerging every minute, 
how to build up a constitutional and more trustworthy regime 
of health data governance, becomes critical and urgent 
worldwide. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to thank all inspiration and 
encouragement from Professor Hsiu-I Yang and colleagues at 
the Institute of Public Health, College of Medicine, National 
Yang Ming Chiao Tung University. This study is also 
supported by funding from the Taiwan National Science and 
Technology Council (grant MOST 111-2420-H-037-003: The 
implementation of new healthcare models in the post-
pandemic ear in Taiwan: opportunity and challenges).  
REFERENCES 
[1] P. C. Lee, et al., Digital Health Care in Taiwan: Innovation of 
National Health Insurance, Springer Nature, 2022.  
[2] National Health Insurance Adminisration. NHID Journal 
Citation Update. Available from   
https://info.nhi.gov.tw/INAE4000/INAE4010S01 [retrieved: 
March, 2023].  
[3] C. H. Tseng, et al., “Exploring the COVID-19 Pandemic as a 
Catalyst for Behavior Change Among Patient Health Record 
App Users in Taiwan: Development and Usability Study,”  
J Med Internet Res, Vol. 24 (1), pp. 972-988   Jan. 2022,  
doi: 10.2196/33399.  
[4] Taiwan Associaiton for Human Rights. NHID Case. 
Available from: https://www.tahr.org.tw/cases/NHID  
[retrieved: March, 2023]. 
[5] Laws & Regulations Database of Taiwan. Personal Data 
Protection Act. Available from 
https://law.moj.gov.tw/ENG/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?pcode=I
0050021  [retrieved: March, 2023]. 
[6] Laws & Regulations Database of Taiwan. Constitution of the 
Republic of China (Taiwan). Available from 
https://law.moj.gov.tw/ENG/LawClass/LawAll.aspx?pcode=
A0000001  [retrieved: March, 2023]. 
[7] Constitutional Court Taiwan. Jurisdiction & Proceedings. The 
113-Hsien-Pan-Tzi No.13 Judgment. Available from 
https://cons.judicial.gov.tw/docdata.aspx?fid=38&id=309956  
[retrieved: March, 2023]. 
[8] C. H. Ho, “The Intergration, Application and Data 
Governance of Biomedical and Healthcare Data in NHS 
England”, The Taiwan Law Review, vol. 331, pp. 9-23, Dec. 
2022.  
[9] H. H. I. Liu, “Applying Digital Constitutionalism and Digital 
Trust for Taiwan National Health Insurance Database 
Governance,” The Taiwan Law Review, vol. 331, pp. 37-53, 
Dec. 2022.  
[10] MyData Korea. Available from 
https://oldwww.mydata.org/korea/ [retrieved: March, 2023]. 
[11] Findata. Available from https://findata.fi/en/  [retrieved: March, 
2023].  
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

