Development of Educational Medical Equipment Capable of  
Displaying Abnormal Value 
－To Turn Simulated Patient into Real Patient－ 
 
Natsuko Miura, Kazuma Takahashi 
Faculty of Nursing 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-mail: natsuko@iwate-pu.ac.jp, t_kazuma@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Takanori Ito 
Iwate Monozukuri Software Integration Technology  
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan  
e-mail:  itou_t@ipu-office.iwate-pu.ac.jp
 
Abstract— In order to acquire clinical practice capability such 
as nursing, such a learning is required that assumes a situation 
similar to clinical setting. Therefore, simulation education has 
been increasingly performed by using simulator and simulated 
patients. Even though highly functional simulator is capable of 
displaying changes of vital signs on a monitor, any educational 
device to measure biological information, such as blood-
pressure manometer, thermometer and pulse oximeter, has not 
been developed yet. As educational medical equipment capable 
of intentionally displaying abnormal value has been developed 
in the study, we would like to introduce the equipment. 
Keywords-simulation; 
Physical 
Assessment; 
Simulated 
Patient; Clinical reasoning. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
We developed the equipment which could display an 
abnormal value intentionally to practice measurement of 
vital signs, we would like to report on the results. 
Along with a rapid progress of low birth rate and an aging 
population as well as advanced medical treatment in Japan, 
scope and opportunities for nursing students to practice 
nursing techniques by internship at hospital tend to be 
limited due to people’s enhanced consciousness for medical 
care safety [1]. Amid such situation, a nursing education 
based on simulation equipment is going to be disseminated 
widely that allows students to repeatedly experience various 
practical scenes without impairing patients’ safety and 
provides learner-oriented education, and the equipment has 
been introduced to our university [2].  
In section 2, we reported simulation in the nursing 
education, and the problem. In section 3, we explained 
equipment for the education that we developed. 
 
II. 
SIMULATION EDUCATION IMPLEMENTED IN OUR 
UNIVERSITY, AND THE PROBLEM 
There are three types of trainings conducted in the 
simulation education, i.e., task training for acquiring 
techniques, algorithm training like learning of Basic Life 
Support, and situation-based training in which various 
clinical situations are reproduced [3].   
In our university, a skill test of vital signs measurement 
for their first year and the situation-based training is 
performed for their second year for patient assessment using 
simulated patient prior to clinical training. Visiting 
simulated patients to measure their vital signs by using the 
skill learned in the first year, conditions of patients are 
assessed in the training adding information obtained through 
conversation with the patients. In their third year, students 
acquire an observation skill in the area of adult nursing 
science for general condition of patients including their vital 
signs after gastrectomy.   
In a conventional situation-based training, our university 
contrived to present automatic slide show in Power Point for 
reproducing fluctuation in addition to display of a card with 
written numerical values and verbal suggestion by teachers 
(Figure1). However, these efforts had problems to 
discourage students’ concentration and suspend actions due 
to the situation different from reality. 
Education with a highly functional simulator capable of 
controlling vital signs, breath sound and heart sound by a 
computer has been practiced in areas such as intensive care 
[3] and operation room [4].  
In addition, simulated patients who have been trained to 
play patient-specific sentiment and personality not only for 
clinical history and physical findings as much as possible 
have been widely used for medical staff education in 
addition to co-medical students [3]. The highly functional 
Figure 1. Blood-pressure manometer, thermometer and pulse 
oximeter, which we put paper on to reproduce an abnormal value. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

simulator is unable to make conversation, however, it is said 
to have limitation to improve communication capability 
since a person speaks through a microphone in case of a 
scenario that requires conversation [5]. Further, since 
normal values are displayed when vital signs are measured 
because simulated patients are healthy people it is required 
to show abnormal values with a card [6] or verbally at a 
designated timing [2].  
The problem in such setting is that nursing in a course of 
natural flow cannot be reproduced.    
III. 
DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATIONAL VITAL SIGN 
MEASURING EQUIPMENT 
The equipment newly developed this time is possible not 
only to set up numerical values arbitrarily but also to add 
and subtract any numerical value from setup value in order 
to express fluctuation of vital signs (Figure 2). It works in 
such a way that a value near to setup value is displayed for 
each measuring by reducing the range of the addition and 
subtraction and normal value or abnormal value is displayed 
by increasing the range.  
The ability that a student can get with a new equipment; 
 
Ability for assessment of vital signs 
 
Ability for clinical reasoning 
 
Ability to consider for the patients 
 
Ability to cope with abnormal case 
In case of simulation of repeated support for patients 
presenting with fever, for example, range of adjustment is 
set up smaller to show higher value at each measurement of 
body temperature. In case of measuring blood pressure of 
patients with a complaint of nausea, as value to be displayed 
becomes different each time of measurement by setting the 
range of adjustment larger, it may be applied to training of 
clinical inference.      
Further, time required until display may be set up 
arbitrarily by seconds. For example, it is possible to 
reproduce time required until displaying measured value of 
actual and predict types of measurement thermometer with 
different measuring style and it may be also possible either to 
set up the time for actual value of measuring device to be 
displayed or to set up it shorter aiming at reducing the time 
to be taken for the scenario depending on the purpose of 
simulation education. 
Even though the procedures mentioned above are 
performed of course by examination on paper-patient or 
presentation by a card, it is possible to reproduce 
circumstance more similar to clinical front by measuring 
vital signs while making conversation with simulated 
patient. As it is also possible to set up values to be displayed 
and time in a more detailed manner depending on contents 
of the scenario of simulation education, readiness of 
students and capability of teachers, we believe it is useful.      
  Further, the equipment is capable of sending setup data to a 
server by wireless. It is not required to set up each device 
since subsequently multiple devices such as blood-pressure 
manometer, 
thermometer 
and 
pulse 
oximeter 
may 
respectively access to a parameter setting server by an 
interval of three seconds during waiting. It becomes also 
possible to perform simulation with the same content in 
multiple booths at the same time.  
We believe it is useful because it results in saving the 
effort of a person in charge of training preparation. Even 
though it is only at prototype stage as of now, we hear such 
impressions from teachers who have practiced the 
simulation education at our university that they are 
interested and want to use it.  
  In the future, we have planned to clarify the educational 
effect of the newly developed equipment for students by 
comparing simulation education using the new equipment 
with conventional method. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The equipment we developed strengthens the student's 
clinical practice ability. Our problem is downsizing. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, “Investigative 
Commission report regarding enhancement of nursing basic 
education” 
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/shingi/2007/04/dl/s0420-13.pdf, 
[retrieved: February, 2017] 
[2] Y. Endo, N. Miura, H. Chieda, T. Takeda, “A trial of using 
simulation in undergraduate nursing education“，Journal of 
the Faculty of Nursing, Iwate Prefectural University, 16, 
pp.43-46, 2014. 
[3] Y. Abe, “Simulation education in medical care”, Journal of 
the Japanese Society of Intensive Care Medicine, 23，pp.13-
20，2016．. 
[4] R. Takashiki, K. Abe, C. Saito, T. Horiguchi,” Effect of 
simulation education for operation department nurses to cope 
with cases of intubation difficulty”, Journal of Japanese 
Association for Operating Room Technology, 37（2），
pp.39-41, 2016． 
[5] Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, “Investigative 
Commission report regarding contents and methods of 
nursingeducation”, 
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/houdou/2r98520000013l0q-
att/2r98520000013l4m.pdf, [retrieved: February, 2017] 
[6] M. Nogi, “Temperature check simulation to strengthen 
thinking ability of new recruits”, Nursing, pp. 88-92, 2013.
Figure 2. Development of Educational Medical Equipment. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

