Can Increased Patient Involvement Reduce the Number of Surgery Cancellations? 
Lessons learned from a research and development project in Norway 
 
Kari Dyb, Conceição Granja 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
Tromsø, Norway 
e-mail: {kari.dyb, conceicao.granja}@ehealthresearch.no 
 
 
Abstract—Increased patient involvement is the new mantra in 
modern healthcare, indicating that patients can play an 
important role in improving the quality of their health and care 
services. In this paper, we study the reality of increased patient 
involvement within the current organizational structure of 
hospitals by revisiting the findings from a recent research and 
development project at a university hospital in Norway. 
Through the development and implementation of a tool for 
electronic two-way communication between patients and 
hospitals, the overarching goal of the eTeam-Surgery project 
(2013–2019) was to better prepare the hospital and the patient 
for surgical procedures and thereby reduce the number of 
surgery cancellations. To approach this goal, researchers from 
the field of health informatics, medicine and sociology explored 
a quality improvement initiative at the hospital, made field 
observations and interviewed patients and health professionals. 
eTeam-Surgery demonstrated that establishing a tool for active 
involvement of patients in the pre-operative planning process 
was not an easy task. The research revealed (1) diverse reasons 
for surgery cancellations, (2) a lack of uniformity in the pre-
operative workflow and (3) a hospital practice of marking a 
surgery as cancelled when patients tried to rebook for a 
different date. Focusing on increased patient involvement, this 
paper demonstrates how the main reasons for cancellation at the 
hospital and the lack of uniformity of the pre-operative 
workflow both originate from hospital organizational issues 
and, consequently, will not be solved with increased patient 
involvement. On the other hand, increased patient involvement 
can improve the current hospital practice of marking surgeries 
as cancellations when patients are actually trying to rebook. It 
is our conclusion that hospitals have a long way to go before the 
new mantra of active patient involvement can be a reality. 
However, we still believe that active patient involvement can 
positively contribute to the problem of elective surgery 
cancellation. The first step would be for hospitals to offer 
patients the option of choosing their own date of surgery, similar 
to booking an airline ticket online.  
Keywords-elective surgery; e-health; cancellations; planning; 
increased patient involvement. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Increased patient involvement is the new mantra in 
modern health and care services, indicating that patients can 
play an important role in improving the quality of care by 
becoming actively involved in their own health [1]. 
Empowering patients to take an active role in their own health 
has been nationally and internationally identified as a key 
initiative to improve health and care services [2][3]. A number 
of trends and policy shifts can be identified that are promoting 
greater patient involvement in health and care delivery 
through consultations, treatments and continuous care [4]. 
Health Information Technology (health IT) is frequently 
used to increase patient involvement. In Norway, the 
Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services and the 
Directorate of eHealth have defined providing patients’ digital 
access to important health information as one of the three main 
priorities areas for IT development and implementation [5][6]. 
Health IT is seen as an important tool to increase patient 
involvement and improve the quality of health and care 
services.  
In this paper, we will study the reality of increased patient 
involvement in hospitals by answering the following research 
question: 
“Can 
increased 
patient 
involvement 
and 
digitalization reduce the number of elective surgery 
cancellations at the University Hospital in North Norway 
(UNN, from the Norwegian: Universitetssykehuset Nord-
Norge)?” We approach the research question by revisiting the 
findings from a recent research and development project, the 
eTeam-Surgery (2013–2019) [7].  
A. Elective surgery cancellations  
For many patients, undergoing surgery is a major life 
event involving a high level of anxiety before admission to the 
hospital [8]-[11]. Surgery cancellations can be troublesome 
for both patients and their families [12][13]. Patients may also 
suffer psychological stress and/or financial hardships due to 
surgery cancellations [14]. Thus, for patients, cancellations 
are stressful and costly, with a high level of emotional 
involvement before surgery [15]. However, the research 
literature illustrates that surgical patients who adopt a more 
active role have a higher general patient satisfaction compared 
with patients who did not participate in decision making [16], 
including being involved in choosing the date of surgery [17]. 
Furthermore, in most hospitals, surgical departments are 
both a major area of investment and the greatest source of 
revenue [15][18]. Nonetheless, hospitals, in particularly 
public hospitals, regularly cancel elective surgeries, 
evidencing cancellation rates of 10–40% [10][11][15][19]. 
However, it has been shown that 50% of elective surgery 
cancellations might be avoided [14][15][20], and that patients 
can contribute to the reduction [17]. Avoidable cancellations 
include, for instance, cancellations due to lacking information; 
predominantly these were situations in which information 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

existed prior to surgery but was not available when required 
[14][21]-[24].  
At our site of research, UNN, 10% of elective surgeries are 
cancelled on the day of surgery, adding up to a total of 1847 
cancellations per year [25]. In 2008, UNN reported that more 
than 50% of their elective surgery cancellations were related 
to inadequate pre-operative planning and that a substantial 
number of these cancellations could have been avoided [25].  
B. The eTeam-Surgery project 
The eTeam-Surgery project (2013–2019) was a research 
and development project at UNN funded by the Northern 
Norway Regional Health Authorities (Helse Nord). The 
project departed from the internal report and the dominant 
narrative among local health professionals at that time, 
revealing that a considerable number of the elective surgery 
cancellations at the hospital could relate to lacking 
information during the pre-operative planning process.  
The health professionals described the lacking information 
as information that could affect the surgery, for example if the 
patients had a cold or other virus infections, allergies or 
chronic conditions; if they were taking pharmaceuticals; if 
they were prone to anaesthetic reactions; if they had surgery-
related anxiety or distress and other reasons. The common 
reasoning at the hospital was that the patient could provide 
much of this information, and that cancellations could be 
avoided by simply asking the patient these questions. 
By developing and implementing a new tool for electronic 
two-way communication between patients and hospitals, the 
overarching goal of the eTeam-Surgery project was to provide 
the lacking information and thereby better prepare the hospital 
and the patients for surgical procedures, hence reducing the 
number of elective surgery cancellations at the hospital.  
To support the development of a technical prototype of a 
tool for two-way communication between surgical patients 
and health professionals, the project established an 
interdisciplinary research group. The research group consisted 
of a professor of medical informatics and three researchers 
from the field of health informatics, medicine and sociology. 
To determine how part of the pre-operative planning could 
be moved from the hospital to the patient at home, through 
electronic collaboration prior to hospitalization, they studied 
the reported reasons for cancellations and the pre-operative 
planning processes at the hospital from technical, medical and 
organizational perspectives.  
The interdisciplinary research group soon learned that 
creating tools for active patient involvement within the current 
hospital organizational structure for pre-operative planning 
was not an easy task. Therefore, a revisit of the empirical 
complexity and heterogeneity found in the eTeam project 
from an increased patient involvement focus is appropriate.    
In this paper, two of the involved researchers approach the 
potential of increased patient involvement within the current 
organizational structure of hospitals by revisiting the findings 
from the eTeam-Surgery project. 
This paper is divided in four sections. In the first section, 
we present the objective of the study, a brief review of the state 
of the art on elective surgery cancellations and the eTeam-
Surgery project. Data collection methodologies, with which 
the results were obtained, are presented and explained in the 
second section. The results are disclosed and interpreted in 
section three. In the last section, we discuss the results and 
conclusions about the results are drawn, some indicators of 
future work in the area are foreseen. 
II. 
METHODS 
In the methods section, both the methods used in the 
eTeam-Surgery project and the methods used for revisiting 
these findings are described, focusing on the reality of 
increased patient involvement within a hospital context.  
A. Quality improvement initiative 
The management at UNN, our site of research, was 
determined to reduce the cancellation rate at the hospital. 
Therefore, in 2012, they allocated resources to a quality 
improvement initiative—that is, a Lean project for elective 
surgical patient pathways at the Operation and Intensive Care 
Clinic. Lean projects are commonly used to implement 
improvements in patient care in healthcare organizations 
through the development of a quality driven culture [26]. The 
aim of the quality improvement initiative at UNN was to 
determine new and effective surgical pathways by identifying 
and reducing waste in current practices.  
Prior to the start of the eTeam-Surgery project, two 
members of the eTeam-Surgery research team followed the 
quality improvement initiative from the initial group meeting 
in April 2012. One had an active role and contributed as an 
anaesthesiologist in the quality improvement initiative. The 
other participated solely as a researcher by conducting 
observations during project meetings (2014–2015). In total, 
the two researchers observed and participated in more than 20 
meetings.  
One task of the quality improvement initiative was to 
identify the reasons for elective surgery cancellation. From the 
reasons reported in the Electronic Health Record (EHR), they 
identified 17 different reasons for elective surgery 
cancellation at UNN, illustrated in Figure 1 [19].  
The data, as presented by the quality improvement 
initiative, shown in Figure 1, demonstrates 17 different 
reasons for elective surgery cancellations at UNN, and that 
insufficient surgery indication was believed to be the main 
reason for elective surgery cancellation at the hospital. 
In this paper, we performed a thematic analysis of the data 
on the reasons for elective surgery cancellations. Focusing on 
increased patient involvement, we reanalysed, compared and 
translated the 17 different reasons for elective surgery 
cancellation, aiming for a new understanding of the reported 
reasons for surgery cancellations at the hospital. 
B. Fieldwork at the hospital 
In addition to following the quality improvement 
initiative, the eTeam-Surgery research group completed three 
weeks (approximately 100 hours) of fieldwork at UNN, 
mainly at the Operation and Intensive Care Clinic. During the 
fieldwork, the researchers conducted observations and 
unstructured interviews while following an anaesthesiologist 
and an anaesthetist nurse in their daily work. To complement 
the observations, the researchers interviewed 13 physicians, 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

nurses and administrative personnel from four different 
surgical departments. They conducted the interviews at the 
workplace of the informants, and the interviews lasted 
between 30 and 60 minutes each. 
 
 
Figure 1. Reasons for day of surgery cancellations distribution at UNN from January to June 2011 [19]. 
 
The fieldwork demonstrated internal variation between the 
different departments in who plans the surgery and how and 
when the pre-operative planning takes place [27]. 
Additionally, it revealed how the different departments and, 
to some extent, even individual physicians, had developed 
their own local, pre-operative planning practice [28]. In some 
departments, senior surgeons did the pre-operative planning. 
In other departments, interdisciplinary teams involving senior 
and junior physicians, nurses and secretaries did the planning 
together. The data from the fieldwork demonstrated that in 
order to complete the daily schedule, health professionals used 
personal and empirical knowledge. These findings illustrate 
why the eTeam-Surgery research group could not describe a 
standard model of the pre-operative planning process needed 
for establishing two-way electronic communication between 
the hospital and the patient. 
In this paper, we made a qualitative analysis of the 
challenges of the lack of standard pre-operative work 
practices, focusing on how increased patient involvement can 
influence the way that hospitals plan and organize elective 
surgeries. We reanalysed the heterogeneity of the workflow 
models, aiming for new knowledge on the patient role in the 
pre-operative planning process. 
C. Patient interviews 
The “Patient will” and “Patient no-show” categories 
(Figure 1) indicate that the responsibility for a significant 
amount of elective surgery cancellations at the hospital 
resided with the patients. In the Norwegian healthcare system, 
cancellations have consequences for patient priority in 
accessing surgery, hence, to cancel or not showing up for a 
surgery have direct consequences for the patient. Therefore, 
the research group approached the patients’ perspectives on 
elective surgery cancellations. 
To approach patients, a health professional at UNN 
assisted the researchers by identifying the patients who had 
cancelled an elective surgery within the last three weeks. To 
maintain patient anonymity, the health professional mailed 
letters of invitation to the identified patients, requesting their 
participation in the eTeam-Surgery project through qualitative 
telephone interviews.  
Of the 48 letters of invitation, 11 patients stated that they 
were available for an interview. These 11 patients became 
informants in the eTeam-Surgery project. Prior to being 
enrolled as informants, they signed and returned the letter of 
consent and provided a telephone number for the researcher to 
contact them. One of the researchers called all the informants 
to make an appointment for the interview. The informants 
were adults ages 32 to 70 and included six men and five 
women. The phone interviews were structured and lasted 10 
to 60 minutes each. At the beginning of each phone interview, 
the researcher introduced herself as a researcher in the field of 
e-health, with an interest in surgery cancellations. She 
emphasized that all information provided during the interview 
would be anonymized and that participation in the research 
project would not interfere, in any way, with current or future 
treatment at UNN or any other health or care institution.  
After the introduction, the researcher communicated the 
data from UNN stating that the patient had cancelled an 
elective surgery at the hospital. She asked if this information 
was correct. If verified, the researcher asked why the patient 
had cancelled the surgery. If the patient contradicted the 
information, she asked the patient to tell his/her story about 
the situation. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Frequency
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The admittance letter is the first piece of information that 
patients receive from the hospital regarding their surgery, and 
it already has a fixed date for surgery. The interviews revealed 
that these patients had called the hospital to reschedule the 
date of surgery immediately after receiving the admittance 
letter. For the informants, the surgery date provided by the 
hospital was inconvenient and ill-timed for them or their 
families. The data from the patient interviews illustrates that, 
contrary to the hospital’s assumption, these patients wanted 
their surgery. The findings demonstrate that surgeries are 
cancelled when patients try to rebook. This is a situation that 
the patients described as frustrating, outdated and not 
appropriate for the digital era. The eTeam-Surgery project 
revealed that the patient-reported reasons for surgery 
cancellations did not correspond with the hospital’s 
representation of the same problem [29]. 
In this paper, we revisit the findings from the patient 
interviews, by conducting a thematic analysis focusing on the 
patients’ representation of increased patient involvement in 
pre-operative planning at the hospital. We reanalysed the 
patients’ reports to gather new, in-depth knowledge on the 
patients’ expectations to be involved in the decision of the date 
of surgery. 
III. 
RESULTS 
In this section, we present new knowledge on increased 
patient involvement and digitalization. 
A. Quality improvement initiative 
Focusing on the potential of increased patient involvement 
in the pre-operative planning process at UNN, the 17 different 
reasons for elective surgery cancellation were reanalysed, 
compared and translated. This analysis revealed four new 
general categories for the reasons for elective surgery 
cancellations: 
1) Maladjusted resource planning, 67%  
2) Patient will and no-show, 12%  
3) Other, 11% 
4) Medical, 10% 
 
The first category, “Maladjusted resource planning”, 
comprises 11 of the original categories and refers to 
cancellations due to a lack of available nurses or doctors, 
theatres, ward beds or equipment; overbooking; and that the 
provisos surgery had a higher duration than expected, and that 
there were not enough time for the next (longer duration of 
previous surgery). This category presents itself as the main 
reason for elective surgery cancellation (67%) and relates to 
maladjusted resources planning within the hospital.  
The second category, “Patient will and no-show” (12%), 
comprises two of the original categories and refers to surgery 
cancellations due to patient decisions. The category includes, 
inter alia, the surgeries patients cancel themselves, and when 
the patient does not show up for an elective surgery at the 
hospital. 
The quality improvement initiative used the category 
“Unknown/Other” (11%) when the reason for cancellation 
was not documented in the system or not available for 
selection in the system. This category was directly transferred 
into the new categorization. 
The fourth category, “Medical”, constitutes 10% of all 
surgery cancellations. It refers to cancellations due to medical 
issues with the patient such as insufficient surgery indications 
and other acute medical conditions.  
The revisit demonstrates that the main reasons for surgery 
cancellation at UNN is maladjusted resource planning (67%). 
B. Fieldwork at the hospital 
The re-analysis of the workflow models at the hospital 
explored the potential of increased patient involvement in the 
existing pre-operative workflows at the hospital. It exposed a 
very low level of formal structure of the pre-operative 
planning process at UNN, hindering any attempts of re-
engineering the workflow models to include a patient focus. 
Even when attempting to build a workflow model that only 
included activities involving the patient, we still found 
variation and heterogeneity, both at the department and 
individual level. The reality of the situation was illustrated in 
the observations and interviews completed during the 
fieldwork:  
1) the patient data requested by the hospital, prior to 
surgery, differed between departments; 
2) if data were returned by the patients (by the 
postal system) to the hospital, it had different 
meanings 
for 
different 
departments 
and 
individuals; and 
3) different individuals within the same department 
interacted with the patient in different moments 
of the pre-operative planning process. 
 
The revisit revealed that increased patient involvement is 
severally limited by the lack of uniformity of the pre-operative 
planning process at UNN. 
C. Patients interviews 
Revisiting the patient interviews demonstrated that 
patients wanted to be involved in choosing the date of their 
own surgery. The patient reports mentioned that 
1) they were assigned a date of surgery without 
being involved or asked their availability; 
2) the surgery was cancelled when they tried to 
reschedule it to another day (in the Norwegian 
healthcare 
system, 
cancellations 
have 
consequences for patient priority in accessing 
surgery); and 
3) some patients expressed their wish to be digitally 
involved in deciding the date of surgery. 
 
The revisit illustrates that an improved scheduling system 
and increased patient involvement might contribute to the 
surgery cancellation problem at the hospital.   
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
In this section, we will consider the reality of increased 
patient involvement in the current hospital practice of pre-
operative planning at a university hospital in Norway. We 
will do so by answering the following research question: 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

“Can increased patient involvement and digitalization reduce 
the number of elective surgery cancellations at the University 
Hospital in North Norway (UNN)?” 
We have addressed the research question by revisiting the 
findings from a research and innovation project, particularly 
suitable for embracing the complexity of increased patient 
involvement in a hospital context, the eTeam-Surgery project 
(2013–2019). The lesson learned from this project was that 
creating digital tools for two-way electronic communication 
between the hospital and the patient within the current 
hospital organizational structure for pre-operative planning is 
not an easy task. For example, the quality improvement 
initiative at the hospital identified 17 different reasons for 
elective surgery cancellation, the fieldwork at the hospital 
exposed the heterogeneity of the pre-operative planning 
process 
and 
the 
findings 
from 
patient 
interviews 
demonstrated that surgeries were cancelled when the patient 
was actually trying to rebook to a different date.  
By revisiting these findings focusing on the potential of 
increased patient involvement, we demonstrate how 67% of 
elective surgery cancellations at UNN relate to maladjusted 
resource planning. Maladjusted resource planning is a 
reflection of internal hospital organizational issues and is not 
solvable with increased patient involvement.  
The revisit also shows that, in 2016, the hospital had not 
adopted a formal pathway to support the pre-operative 
workflow. To the best of our knowledge, this is still the 
situation in 2019. Lack of a formal pathway of the pre-
operative planning process means that in order to complete 
the daily schedule, health care workers rely on personal and 
empirical knowledge. Lack of structures in everyday 
planning practices relate to internal organizational issues and 
is not an ideal starting point for developing e-health 
interventions for increased patient involvement.  
The patient interviews demonstrated that at UNN, 
elective surgeries were cancelled when patients were trying 
to rebook the date of their surgery. Despite growing 
recognition internationally that patients can help promote 
their own wellbeing, little evidence exists on how willing 
patients are to take on an active role. It is the authors’ 
understanding that these surgical patients wanted increased 
involvement and that the cancellations were due to the 
hospital’s poorly functioning scheduling system or lack of 
knowledge on how to operate the system, not because the 
patient did not want the surgery. The revisit illustrates that an 
improved 
scheduling 
system 
and 
increased 
patient 
involvement might reduce the surgery cancellation problem 
at the hospital.   
Can increased patient involvement contribute to the 
reduction of surgery cancellations? Five years later, after 
revisiting the eTeam-Surgery project, we still believe that 
active patient involvement can help solve the elective surgery 
cancellation problem. However, as this paper demonstrates, in 
2013-2019, the eTeam-Surgery project was ahead of its time. 
We are concerned that similar e-health interventions today 
might suffer from similar prematurity. To achieve patient 
involvement, the first step for hospitals might be to allow 
patients to schedule their own surgery date, in a similar way 
to how they book an airline ticket online.  
It is our conclusion that increased patient involvement is 
wanted and needed, but hospitals, as organizations, are not 
ready for it yet. Hospitals have a long way to go before the 
new mantra of increased patient involvement is a useful asset 
in improving health and care services. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the regional health 
authority Helse Nord for funding the research projects HST 
1119-13 and HST 1125-13. We will also thank the personnel 
and patients at UNN for their participation in the eTeam-
Surgey project, and Professor Gunnar Hartvigsen and MD, 
PhD, Stein Roald Bolle for research collaboration. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. E. Davis, R. Jacklin, N. Sevdalis, and C. A. Vincent, "Patient 
Involvement in Patient Safety: What Factors Influence Patient 
Participation and Engagement?," Health expectations, vol. 10, pp. 259-
267, 2007. 
[2] 
L. T. Kohn, J. M. Corrigan, and M. S. Donaldson, To Err Is Human: 
Building a Safer Health System. Washington (DC): National 
Academies Press (US), 2000. 
[3] 
Department of Health/NHS, "Creating a Patient-Led Nhs – Delivering 
the NHS Improvement Plan," NHS, Available. 
[4] 
A. G. Thompson, "The Meaning of Patient Involvement and 
Participation in Health Care Consultations: A Taxonomy," Social 
science & medicine, vol. 64, pp. 1297-1310, 2007. 
[5] 
Én Innbygger – Én Journal, Ministry of Health and Care Services 
Meld.St. 9 (2012-2013), 2012. 
[6] 
The Coordination Reform: Proper Treatment - at the Right Place and 
Right Time, Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services 
Stortingsmelding 47 (2008- 2009), 2009. 
[7] 
Helse Nord. Moving Pre-Surgical Planning from the Hospital to the 
Patient at Home through Electronic Collaboration (eTeam-Surgery)  
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://forskningsprosjekter.ihelse.net/prosjekt/HST1116-13/ 
2019.09.12. 
[8] 
M. Johnston, "Anxiety in Surgical Patients," Psychological medicine, 
vol. 10, pp. 145-152, 1980. 
[9] 
M. J. Pritchard, "Identifying and Assessing Anxiety in Pre-Operative 
Patients," Nursing standard, vol. 23, p. 35, 2009. 
[10] B. Ivarsson, P. O. Kimblad, T. Sjoberg, and S. Larsson, "Patient 
Reactions to Cancelled or Postponed Heart Operations," J Nurs Manag, 
vol. 10, pp. 75-81, 2002. 
[11] M. J. Lacqua and J. T. Evans, "Cancelled Elective Surgery: An 
Evaluation," The American Surgeon, vol. 60, pp. 809-811, 1994. 
[12] M. Perroca, M. C. Jericó, and S. Facundin, "Surgery Cancelling at a 
Teaching Hospital: Implications for Cost Management," Revista 
latino-americana de enfermagem, vol. 15, p. 1018, 2007. 
[13] A. R. Tait, T. Voepel-Lewis, H. M. Munro, H. B. Gutstein, and P. I. 
Reynolds, "Cancellation of Pediatric Outpatient Surgery: Economic 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and Emotional Implications for Patients and Their Families," Journal 
of clinical anesthesia, vol. 9, pp. 213-219, 1997. 
[14] T. L. Trentman, J. T. Mueller, S. L. Fassett, C. L. Dormer, and K. P. 
Weinmeister, "Day of Surgery Cancellations in a Tertiary Care 
Hospital: A One Year Review," Journal of Anesthesia & Clinical 
Research, vol. 1, 2010. 
[15] W. N. Schofield, G. L. Rubin, M. Piza, Y. Y. Lai, D. Sindhusake, M. 
R. Fearnside, and P. L. Klineberg, "Cancellation of Operations on the 
Day of Intended Surgery at a Major Australian Referral Hospital," 
Medical Journal of Australia, vol. 182, pp. 612-615, 2005. 
[16] A. A. Ashraf, S. Colakoglu, J. T. Nguyen, A. J. Anastasopulos, A. M. 
S. Ibrahim, J. H. Yueh, S. J. Lin, A. M. Tobias, and B. T. Lee, "Patient 
Involvement in the Decision Making Process Improves Satisfaction 
and Quality of Life in Postmastectomy Breast Reconstruction," Journal 
of Surgical Research, vol. 184, pp. 665-670, 2013. 
[17] E. Hovlid, C. von Plessen, K. Haug, A. B. Aslaksen, and O. Bukve, 
"Patient Experiences with Interventions to Reduce Surgery 
Cancellations: A Qualitative Study," BMC surgery, vol. 13, p. 30, 
2013. 
[18] B. Denton, J. Viapiano, and A. Vogl, "Optimization of Surgery 
Sequencing and Scheduling Decisions under Uncertainty," Health care 
management science, vol. 10, pp. 13-24, 2007. 
[19] C. Granja, K. Dyb, S. R. Bolle, and G. Hartvingsen, "Reduced Elective 
Surgery Cancellations through Patient Involvement in Pre-Operative 
Planning in Norway," eTELEMED 2014, The Sixth International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2014, pp. 
164-69. 
[20] P. Sanjay, A. Dodds, E. Miller, P. J. Arumugam, and A. Woodward, 
"Cancelled Elective Operations: An Observational Study from a 
District General Hospital," J Health Organ Manag, vol. 21, pp. 54-58, 
2007. 
[21] M. B. Ferschl, A. Tung, B. Sweitzer, D. Huo, and D. B. Glick, 
"Preoperative Clinic Visits Reduce Operating Room Cancellations and 
Delays," Anesthesiology: The Journal of the American Society of 
Anesthesiologists, vol. 103, pp. 855-859, 2005. 
[22] M. Rai and J. Pandit, "Day of Surgery Cancellations after Nurse‐Led 
Pre‐Assessment in an Elective Surgical Centre: The First 2 Years," 
Anaesthesia, vol. 58, pp. 692-699, 2003. 
[23] A. R. Seim, T. Fagerhaug, S. M. Ryen, P. Curran, O. D. Sæther, H. O. 
Myhre, and W. S. Sandberg, "Causes of Cancellations on the Day of 
Surgery at Two Major University Hospitals," Surgical Innovation, vol. 
16, pp. 173-180, 2009. 
[24] C. Rutten, K. Moons, B. Lo, J. Knape, and D. Grobbee, "Limited Effect 
of Health Council Guideline on Outpatient Preoperative Evaluation 
Clinics in the Netherlands: An Inventory," Nederlands tijdschrift voor 
geneeskunde, vol. 145, pp. 25-29, 2001. 
[25] R. Busund, "Rapport Fra Prosjekt: Optimal Ressursutnyttelse Av 
Opperasjonskapasiteten i Unn," Norway 2008 (in Norwegian). 
[26] R. R. Cima, M. J. Brown, J. R. Hebl, R. Moore, J. C. Rogers, A. 
Kollengode, G. J. Amstutz, C. A. Weisbrod, B. J. Narr, and C. 
Deschamps, "Use of Lean and Six Sigma Methodology to Improve 
Operating Room Efficiency in a High-Volume Tertiary-Care 
Academic Medical Center," Journal of the American College of 
Surgeons, vol. 213, pp. 83-92, 2011. 
[27] C. Granja, K. Dyb, S. R. Bolle, and G. Hartvigsen, "On the 
Development of a Hospital-Patient Web-Based Communication Tool: 
A Case Study from Norway," MedInfo, 2015, pp. 438-442. 
[28] K. Dyb, C. Granja, S. R. Bolle, and G. Hartvigsen, "Digital Users in 
Pre-Digital Hospital Organisations? An Analysis on the Readiness for 
Electronic Communication between a Hospital and Surgical Patients," 
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, vol. 8, pp. 39-49, 
2016. 
[29] K. Dyb, "Patient Reported Reasons for Surgery Cancellations Do Not 
Necessarily Correspond with Hospitals’ Representation of the Same 
Problem," Health Informatics Vision: From Data via Information to 
Knowledge, vol. 262, p. 75, 2019. 
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

