Impact of Robotic Telemedicine in a Remote Community in Canada 
 
Michael Jong  
Discipline of Family Medicine, Memorial University  
Goose Bay, Canada 
mjong@hvgb.net 
 
 
Abstract-Mortality and morbidity is higher for patients living in 
remote Canada. A telerobotic demonstration project was 
conducted in a remote community of 1500 in northern Labrador. 
A wireless, mobile robot allows the physician to be virtually 
present. The physician uses a laptop to move the robot unfettered 
and zoom and pan the camera, while freely interacting with 
patients and nurses. The evaluation focused on: access, quality, 
acceptability and costs as they related to the nurses, attending 
physicians, patients and the healthcare delivery in Nain. The 
number of telerobotics encounters was 157. The evaluation 
findings indicate a positive impact on the health care delivery 
from the perspective of patients, nurses, physicians and health 
care system. The findings of this evaluation indicate that remote 
robotic presence can have a positive impact on health care 
delivery in northern Canada. 
Keywords-robotic, telemedicine 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Travel for health care in northern Canada is expensive. 
In Nunavut, a northern territory in Canada, the cost of 
transportation project for 2011-12 is 22% of the health care 
budget [1]. For patients living in our remote communities 
cost of travel for health care in northern Canada is huge, 
about $1000-$2000 for a return flight and $100-$200 per 
day for accommodation. A routine visit will require 3 days – 
to fly in the day before the appointment and if there is no 
immediate follow-up tests required to return home the 
following day. About one-half of the patients requires 
traveling companion to support the patients for during the 
travel and the clinical encounter. This doubles the cost for 
travel for health care outside the community. 
In Canada, twenty one percent of its population lived in 
rural communities of less than 10,000 population but only 
9.4% of the physicians live and work in these communities. 
The burden of illness is higher in rural versus urban – rural 
Canadians less than 45 years of age have about a 30 percent 
higher mortality rate than urban dwellers of the same age 
[2]. Morbidity and mortality is higher, the further one lives 
away from the city. The highest death rates are in most 
remote communities. The most isolated rural Canadians live 
three years less than their urban counterparts [3]. Life 
expectancy in the Canadian male Inuit is 12.6 years less than 
the general Canadian population, with the greatest disparity 
in the 20-24 years age group [4]. 
Telehealth is one of the tools that improve access to 
health services for patients living in remote communities. 
There have been varying degrees of success in the utility of 
telehealth - from regions where telehealth is not well utilized  
 
[5] to places where video is used for leading of resuscitation 
remotely [6]. 
This project explores the effectiveness of robotic 
telemedicine in a remote community in northern Canada. A 
telerobotic demonstration project was conducted in northern 
Labrador between January 2010 and March 2011 to assess 
the impact on health care delivery in a northern remote fly-in 
community of 1500 residents. Off-site physicians provide 
support for advanced practice nurses in the delivery of 
urgent and emergent care by using a virtual presence robot. 
 
Section II presents the methods used for the study. In 
Section III, we present the results. Conclusion and future 
work is presented in section IV. 
 
 
II. 
METHODS 
In this project the remote presence robot (RP7), which 
was named “Rosie”, connects a remote health center with a 
Regional Health Center. The wireless, mobile robot allows 
the physician to be virtually present. The physician uses a 
laptop to move the robot unfettered and zoom and pan the 
camera, while freely interacting with patients and nurses.  
Training of a physician to use the robot takes about one 
hour. Nurses do not need training. The connection between 
the laptop and robot is through the internet via a full-duplex 
operation. The connection is monitored continuously and 
remote diagnostics are conducted as needed. 
The evaluation focused on: access, quality, acceptability 
and costs as they related to the nurses, attending physicians, 
patients and the healthcare delivery in Nain. The evaluation 
was conducted, using forms that were self-administered by 3 
physicians and 7 nurses, after use of the robot. The 157 
patients also completed patient evaluation forms after the 
use of the robot. A mixed method study was conducted. 
Qualitative interviews were conducted with the providers at 
six months and again at one year (see Appendix 1). 
 
 
III. RESULTS 
The number of telerobotics encounters was 157. The 
evaluation findings indicate a positive impact on the health 
care delivery. 
 
1) Patients 
Patients reported improved access to physician services 
and improved physician services at the community level. 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

They felt they were more involved in their own care and 
received treatment earlier without the need to travel. Patients 
stated they were more willing to access healthcare when they 
knew they could see a physician via Rosie. Patients reported 
more ease and comfort with medical care especially as their 
family members or interpreters could also be present in the 
session. 
Patients felt that being able to access services in their 
community improved communications with the nurses and 
physicians. Patients felt that being able to access services at 
home without the need for travel decreased the disruption to 
their family and job. “Rosie” decreased their family’s 
financial costs for medical care when they did not have to 
travel. Patients were highly satisfied with their telerobotic 
sessions stating they were willing to use Rosie again. 
 
2) Nurses 
Among the key findings for nurses are reports of reduced 
stress due to increased accessibility to the physician. 
Physicians were readily accessed from home, office or 
hospital. Nurses reported this eased their stress, especially 
when faced with an urgent/emergent case that they felt might 
be outside their scope of practice and/or during inclement 
weather. Nurses also reported increased job satisfaction with 
reduced stress of managing urgent or emergent cases. Nurses 
said that having this technology reduced the stress of 
practicing nursing in a remote northern community, and that 
they would consider it a benefit to work in a community 
where such technology was available. 
Nurses felt the partnership between the nurse and the 
physician deepened with physicians gaining a better 
understanding of the nurses’ knowledge and skills. Nurses 
reported feeling more of “being part of a team” and that 
collaboration between the nurse and physician improved 
with the use of the robot. Nurses felt improved satisfaction 
with the quality and timeliness of services they were able to 
provide to the community. They also reported the nurse-
physician collaboration increased the community’s level of 
confidence in the health care delivery team. Nurses reported 
that in 50% of the consultations, using the robot, they 
learned something new. 
Nurses reported that they were able to concentrate their 
efforts on the patient rather than needing to manage the 
telehealth equipment. They were accepting of the new 
technology and felt this was a definitely an upgrade and 
improvement in telehealth equipment. They expressed an 
interest in having additional attachments such as ultrasound, 
otoscope and stethoscope for future applications. Nurses also 
reported it would be useful to leverage the multi-disciplinary 
teams such as chronic care / diabetes team by using this 
technology, to provide the outreach services from Goose 
Bay to Nain. 
 
3) Physicians 
Physicians reported improved access to both the nurses 
and patients. They felt they were better able to assess, 
diagnose, treat and manage patients due to the robot. They 
reported that being able to move independently and manage 
the movement, focus or zoom of the camera enabled better 
assessment on how the urgent or emergent interventions 
were working. Physicians and nurses reported that the 
functionality of camera and audio capabilities allow them to 
work together for improved mental health assessments. The 
physicians felt they were able to lead the triage team in an 
emergency via using the RP7 robot. 
Physicians reported the improved ability to assess, 
diagnose, treat and manage patients without being present in 
the community also decreased their job stress as the 
attending physician practicing in a remote community. They 
felt by being virtually present with the nurses they also 
increased their own confidence in the abilities of their 
nursing colleagues. They reported improved collaboration 
and communications and improved relationships with 
nurses. Physicians reported that personal interactions with 
nurses, patients and family members improved. 
Physicians reported they were better able to supervise 
resident physicians and nurses in performing procedures and 
that their coaching was much safer using the mobile robot 
with advanced camera and audio capabilities. 
The physicians, with the robot software with their 
laptops, could connect to Nain from any internet access 
point at home, office, or hospital. This connectivity using the 
robot gave them less job stress and more job satisfaction, 
especially evident during inclement weather when either 
getting into the community or getting the patient out of the 
community was not an option. On one occasion, during 
inclement weather, the attending physician conducted his 
regularly scheduled clinics via Rosie from Goose Bay.  
All the physician and nurse respondents agree that the 
quality of the interaction with patients is better with 
telerobotics compared with traditional videoconferencing.  
4) Health care system 
The evaluation also identified many benefits to the health 
care system. The improved access to physician services and 
improved access during inclement weather was viewed by 
all as a benefit. The use of the RP7 robot supported 
improvements in the assessment and care of patients and 
their families. It improved the timeliness and quality of 
patient care. 
Both physicians and nurses (100%) strongly agree that 
the  workflow in the clinic improved with telerobotics. The 
use of the robot was reported to have improved the 
workflow of the community health clinic. While the robot 
did not decrease the workload during the project, it was 
suggested that the use of the robot could decrease the 
workload of the physician during his regular scheduled 
visits. The ability for physicians to see patients as needed 
and for follow-ups allowed for less over-booked clinics 
during regular scheduled visits. 
The improved access increased job satisfaction and 
decreased job stress for nurses and physicians practicing in 
the remote community. The ease of transition to this new 
technology and acceptability of the robot was also seen as a 
positive impact on the health care system for nurses, patients 
including small children, and physicians. The community 
members readily accepted the robot as a means of accessing 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the primary physician services and they reported an 
improved confidence in the healthcare delivery team. 
Of the forty-seven (47) patients for which complete data 
is available, twenty-eight (28) patients did not require 
transportation to Goose Bay. Of the nineteen (19) patients 
who required travel, nine (9) of the patients were able to 
travel to Goose Bay on the scheduled hospital flights. More 
than half of the patients avoided medical transportation. The 
increased ability to use scheduled flights as opposed to 
medical evacuation (medevac) also lead to decreased the 
costs for medical transportation. 
The findings indicated the use of “Rosie” the robot 
facilitated: 
• 
Improved access to physicians;  
• 
Improved management of urgent and emergent 
care;  
• 
Improved mental health assessments;  
• 
Improved personal interactions between nurse, 
patient/family and physician;  
• 
Improved collaboration amongst health care team;  
• 
Improved job satisfaction and decrease job stress 
amongst physicians and nurses; and  
• 
Decreased costs of medical transportation.   
 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The findings of this evaluation indicate that remote robotic 
presence can have a positive impact on health care delivery 
in northern Canada. It provides residents living in the 
northern remote community, improved access to medical 
services. It enhances the ability of the physicians to 
collaborate with nurses in the remote community. 
Telerobotics is associated with a reduction in the cost of 
medical transportation.  
 
Following the recommendation from the nurses, we have 
developed a research proposal to evaluate the effectiveness 
of telerobotic versus usual care for chronic disease 
management. Because of the positive impact of “Rosie,” the 
local government has decided to fund the continuation of 
robot telemedicine. “Rosie” is now a permanent member of 
the staff. 
 
REFERENCES 
1. 

7. Would having a resource like ‘Rosie’ be a factor in 
choosing a new position or remaining in Nain? Please 
explain. 
8. What new applications could you foresee using ‘Rosie’ 
for in the future?  
9. Has ‘Rosie’ had any impact on the quality of your work 
life or how you do business? 
• 
Reduce stress?  
• 
Protect professional status in instances where you 
may be required  to work out of scope due to a 
medical emergency? 
10.How would you fix or change the processes or 
equipment 
to 
improve 
your 
experience?
 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

