Emotional Self-Awareness System for Mental Health
(SAMBEDS – Lifestyle management model for depression and anxiety)
Sakirulai Olufemi Isiaq
Department of Computing
Solent University
Southampton, United Kingdom
email: femi.isiaq@solent.ac.uk
Masooma Saeed
Department of Computing
Solent University
Southampton, United Kingdom
email: 4saeem44@solent.ac.uk
Abstract— A considerable proportion of the human population
experience a form of mental health disorder but estimated are
about 350 million people suffering from depression according
to the World Health Organisation. Now considered one of the
leading health conditions, depression contributes significantly
to the recorded health-related work absences in the western
world. Although mental health associated issues exacerbate for
various shortcomings, practitioners and patients have been
exploring different methods to conquer this exacerbating
circumstance. A notable potent strategy in recent times is the
adoption of lifestyle management through emotional self-
awareness. While the concept of emotional self-awareness is
linked to emotional intelligence, accomplishing a hallmark of
realistic self-assessment can be challenging for the potential
difficulty of comprehension (i.e., signs and symptoms may be
ambiguous or incorrectly comprehended), which may cause
misdiagnosis and maltreatment. This work acknowledges the
surge in eHealth and presents SAMBEDS emotional self-aware
model for managing anxiety and depression through lifestyle
management.
Thirty-four
lived
experience
candidates
participated in the co-created emotional self-aware system
prototype, which considers lifestyle factors for managing
depression
and
anxiety.
We
adopted
quantitative
and
qualitative methods (questionnaires, informal and formal
feedback sessions) to co-create the system requirements, design
and evaluation. Besides, the user experience study conducted
appraises the user activities using a 360-degree camera and
eye-tracking device. Although only 50% of the service users
are depression and anxiety diagnosed candidates, 70% of the
overall
participants (including
other types
of
diagnoses)
showed high fulfilment in terms of design, usability and
efficacy of the for managing system mental health conditions.
Keywords-
emotional intelligence; emotional self-awareness;
lifestyle changes; mHeath; Software as a Medical Device
(SaMD); eHealth; mental health systems; diagnosis; prevention;
alleviation; SAMBEDS.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Mental Health is defined as a state of wellbeing by
which an individual can cope with the normal stress of life,
recognises own abilities, work productively and contribute
to own society [1]. While many authors subscribe to
distinctive definitions, the lack of a consensus definition is
attributed to the differences in values, cultural and social
backgrounds among other attributes, although the notion of
mental health not being solely the absence of mental
illnesses is consented by most authors [2]. Therefore, a less-
restrictive or cultural-bound definition that accommodates
emotional state variation and imperfect functioning is
promoted. Consequently, factors including the dynamic
state of internal equilibrium, cognitive and social skills,
empathy,
flexibility
to
cope,
harmonious
body-mind
relationship, and emotional regulation are prescribed [2].
Nowadays, depression increasingly becomes a popular
mental health condition, which about 300 million people
suffer globally [3]. Not only is it considered one of the
leading
condition
responsible
for
health-related
work
absences in the western world, but a UK study also showed
595,000 cases of workers suffered from depression, stress
and anxiety between 2017 and 2018. A recent Labour Force
Survey (LFS) in a similar period revealed 15.4 million
workdays (57.3% of total days lost to ill-health) was lost to
mental health-related issues [4]. Furthermore, 43.4 million
adults (17.9%) were estimated to suffer a form of mental
illness in 2015 in the United States [5].
Although
various
alleviation
procedures
are
being
proposed, a significant proportion of mentally ill candidates
yet lack appropriate interventions or supports. Factors
hindering such support range from a shortage of medical
practitioners particularly, psychiatrists in rural areas [6], the
lack of progress monitoring tools, and deficit in mental
health budgets - for instance, 78.9% of African countries
spend less than 1% and only 54% of European countries
spend over 5% of their health budgets on mental health [7] -
among other factors.
Beyond these limitations, stakeholders are now taking
different turns to improve this escalating health condition.
One of such shifts is alleviation through self-monitoring of
thoughts and behavioural activities to improve depressive
symptoms [8]. Subsequently, self-monitoring is a concept of
self-awareness, which is one of the five major components
(including self-regulation, empathy, motivation, social skill)
of emotional intelligence. Its major hallmark of realistic
self-assessments harmonises the capacity to recognise one’s
moods, emotions, strengths, weaknesses, drives, values, and
goals and their corresponding impacts [9]. A realistic
assessment will not only help understand one’s emotional
state and imperfect functions but can help adopt an
appropriate lifestyle for any realised imperfect functioning.
Nonetheless, achieving a realistic assessment (i.e., the
management of own emotional awareness) can be a
challenge without appropriate support and adequate guiding
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

tools. For instance, without a rigorously tested tool, how do
individuals measure corresponding lifestyle activities in
relations to their emotions? Yet, the advances in technology
incorporate innovations such as automation even with
further investments. For instance, the mHealth industry is
expected to hit a hundred billion dollars by 2025 thus, these
challenges are becoming surmountable. Nowadays, more
individuals own a smartphone and are likely to use
established apps to monitor changes in their lifestyle
activities including physical and diet than those without a
smartphone [10]. In additions, users have been seeking
interventions through apps in recent times. For instance, the
Kooth
counselling
app
-
an
online
counselling
and
wellbeing platform - where many teens turn to seek support
with mental health issues has recorded a surge in recent
years [11]. Considering the increasing access to technology,
which brews the surge in the adoption of Software as a
Medical Device (SaMD) and medical apps, this work
proposes SAMBEDS model, a co-created depression and
anxiety management system based on the Framework for
Lifestyle Management pro Mental Health, FLMMHS [12].
The rest of the paper is structured as follows; Section II
discusses the methodology involving co-creation and data
analysis techniques; Section III describes the development
of SAMBEDS model-based system, an emotional self-
aware system for anxiety and depression; Section IV
presents the evaluation and results of the system, while
conclusions and future work were manifested in Section V.
II.
METHODOLOGY AND DATA ANALYSIS
Taking that a single method may not cover all areas of
research and system development, we adopted
mixed
methods involving techniques of qualitative, quantitative and
engineering approaches. Although the system development
emulates the Framework for Lifestyle Management pro
Mental Health Systems (FLMMHS) [12], which the concept
of
Diagnosis,
Prevention
and
Alleviation
(DPA)
is
preeminent, we utilised a co-creation strategy to develop an
effective emotional self-aware system. Adopting mixed
methods will not only support the understanding of areas
uncovered by a singular method [13], it also allows a
provision of suitable coverage for any discovered aspects.
Therefore, we utilised techniques including questionnaire
surveys,
prototyping
and
interviewing
and
feedback
following a co-creation approach.
A.
Co-creating emotional self-aware elements
Although FLHMMS framework emphasises lifestyle
management approach for mental health oversight, the
procedures of diagnosis, prevention and alleviation adopt
digital tools to manage the associated lifestyle factors of the
intended mental health disorder. Hence, this work utilises a
document analysis technique to establish corresponding
lifestyle elements necessary for emotional self-awareness in
managing depression and anxiety.
B.
SAMBEDS derivation and Document Analysis
Similar to other qualitative methods, document analysis
allows the review of specific field data and perhaps, develop
empirical knowledge from the examined documents or data
[14]. Hence, this work examines published data about
anxiety and depression from different publication platforms
including IEEE Library, NCBI/PubMed (National Center for
Biotechnology Information), American Journal of Psychiatry
and BMC Public Health among others. Then, we utilised the
examined information imperatively for the derivation of the
system knowledge and its design and development. For
instance, monitoring mood changes and its corresponding
symptoms are rarely monitored outside a clinical setting, but
such information could help improve clinical care and
intervention [15]. Also, a study by Robertson et al, indicated
walking can improve symptoms of depression [16], but
Meyer and Broocks concluded that a good amount of
aerobics exercises will improve mood against depression
[17]. In terms of behaviour and thought, not only can note-
taking help to enhance the decluttering of the mind, but
patterns identified through the logs of negative thoughts and
feelings can be enhanced through emotional self-awareness.
Similarly, sleep quality has been highlighted to contribute to
depressive symptoms [18]. While low vitamin D level is
identified to be associated with depression and anxiety [19],
a reduced blood flow of key stress-reducing hormones is also
linked to dehydration [20].
Based on the different established findings, this work
devises a seven lifestyle factors, SAMBEDS to enhance
emotional self-awareness for mental health management.
Highlighted SAMBED factors include “Sleep Pattern”,
“Activity and Social”, “Mood Change”, “Behaviour and
Thought”, “Exercise and Fitness”, “Diet and Hydration”,
and “Spiritual and Meditation”. We further examined these
seven core elements as an area of emotional self-awareness
for mental health in the data collection section.
C.
Data collection
In addition to the document analysis exercise that
establishes relative emotional self-awareness factors of
mental health disorder, the derived survey questions were
also validated by service users in interactive sections. Thirty-
four lived experience candidates were randomly selected and
the nature of their disorders were established based on the
eight-point question survey as shown in Table I.
TABLE I. QUESTIONS TO EVALUATE CANDIDATES’ UNDERSTANDING OF
CURRENT SUPPORT SYSTEM
No
Questions
1
Have you ever been diagnosed with any mental
health conditions?
2
If Yes, what kind of support do you receive?
3
Do you get support immediately available when
you need it?
4
Generally, rank the order of importance of
keeping track and monitoring the following in
relation to mental health: mood, sleep, social
activities,
thought/behavior,
diet,
exercise,
spiritual/meditation.
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

5
Chose the three activities that you consider most
relevant
to
you
(manage
own
life,
seek
professional advice, be in control own life, keep
diary,
prefer
face-2-face
contact,
dislike
discussing own mental health and prefer to find
own solution).
6
Do you feel regular self-monitoring of your
lifestyle will enhance mental health and general
wellbeing?
7
Do you ever or currently use any healthcare
management app or SaMD?
8
What is your opinion on the current mental
health care system?
An indication of mental health cases and corresponding
percentages of service users are as shown in Table II.
TABLE II.
MENTAL HEALTH DISORDER AND CORRESPONDING CASES
Mental Health Disorder
No of
cases
Percentage of
cases (%)
Depression
22
64.7
Anxiety
22
64.7
Substance use Disorder
1
2.9
Stress-related Disorder
6
17.6
Bipolar Disorder
1
2.9
Post-traumatic stress
Disorder
1
2.9
Schizophrenia
1
2.9
Don't want to disclose
1
2.9
Table II reveals that in more than a singular case, a
candidate may have been diagnosed with more than one
disorder. We recorded fifty-five diagnosed disorder cases
from the thirty-four participating service users. Emphatically,
we expect that the survey questions will thoroughly establish
the participants’ perception of the current mental health
system particularly, how the existing mental health system
supports
their
conditions,
i.e.,
in
terms
of
usability,
expectations and efficacy. The survey questions are further
explained
in
the
following
section,
survey
questions
explained.
1)
Survey
questions
explained:
While
the
survey
proposes to validate the defined seven core elements of
emotional self-awareness for mental health management, the
impacts of the questions vary in diverse perspectives. While
the first question aims to establish the candidates’ type of
diagnosis as highlighted in Table I, we establish the nature
of support they received and the immediate frequency of
getting these supports with second and third questions,
respectively.
Although
question
four
confirms
the
significance level of these core elements, question five
identifies the participants’ preferred approach for dealing
with their associated mental health conditions. Questions six
measures the respondents’ perception of the concepts of
emotional self-awareness to manage mental health and
general wellbeing. Subsequently, questions seven and eight
examine the participants’ ability to use health devices and
their opinions on the existing methods of dealing with
mental
health,
respectively.
The
results
of
questions
conjoining with the formal feedback exercise effectively aid
the development of an “emotional-awareness” system for
depression and anxiety. The survey results were further
elaborated in the survey result section as follows.
2)
Survey results explained: Regarding the supports
received by candidates, only about 35% of the participants
responded to this question. While these candidates may have
received
varied
support
types
perhaps,
on
multiple
occasions, at about 75% of these occasions were these
supports provided by families and friends as shown in
Figure 1. Conversely, 41.7% of each occasion were
candidates seeking to manage the situation by themselves or
go for therapy or other medical options. Interestingly, none
of the participants has chosen not to have had any form of
support perhaps, such situations may not have arisen in
cases of mild mental health situations. However, it is
particularly unsurprising that a significant proportion of
candidates do not get immediate support when needed; only
29% of the candidates get immediate support while 71% do
not, hence an explanation the rapid mental health cases
recorded in recent times. Ranking the order of importance of
SAMBEDS elements by the participants reveals behavioural
and thought element as the most important.
Figure 1. Percentage (%) of candidate and types of support received.
Followed in the order of importance are sleep pattern, mood
change,
spiritual/meditation
and
activity/social,
respectively. Bottom ranked elements are diet/hydration and
exercise/fitness with the same rating score. However,
considering that the ranking of these elements is perceptual,
it is interesting to note all elements recorded same overall
rating value (68%) except for sleep pattern (70%) and mood
changes
(84%) which
are
slightly
ranked
higher,
respectively (see Figure 2). Not only does this evidence the
importance of these identified elements in mental health
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

management, but it also exhibits mood changes as a very
important self-aware element in managing depression and
anxiety.
Figure 2. Ranking (n) the importance of emotional self-aware elements.
Not only do the participation of lived-experienced
candidates
better
reflect
the
preferred
approaches
of
managing mental health situations, but also provides a depth
understanding of preeminent options habitually adopted by
mental health candidates. For instance, as shown in Figure 3,
a significant proportion of the candidates prefer to manage
their own life, preferred a face-to-face conversation and
perhaps, be in control of things by themselves. Not only does
this result evidence own freedom characteristics of humans
as a requirement of any mental health management system,
but it also explains the reluctance of mental health candidates
in seeking professional supports.
Figure 3. Participants rating the topmost options in numbers for
managing mental health.
Trailing behind are options of candidates preferring not
to discuss own disorder or conditions but will keep a diary or
prefer finding own solutions. It is bolstering that most
candidates are averse to seeking professional advice, yet this
negatively correlates the reality of candidates’ willing to
manage their own life and being in control of their life.
However, a significant proportion of candidates feel self-
monitoring of their emotions ‘will’ or ‘maybe’ help improve
mental health conditions. Contrary to the 88% who believe
emotional self-monitoring could improve mental health
symptoms (see Figure 4), only 24% have ever used health
apps or any forms of Software as a Medical Device, SaMD.
Figure 4. Rating in percentages (%) of a feel of regular self-monitoring
improves mental health
Finally, participants were able to provide free-text
answers to question 8 by presenting their overall perception
of the current mental health system. Interestingly, some of
the responses include “pills are not the answer”; “dislike
going into therapy”; “more investments in providing therapy
and being able to see doctors within a day instead, of
having 4-8 weeks wait”; “more individual and group
supports”; feeling of therapist not being interested in users'
problems”; “keeping track of thoughts, activities and mood
swings will help to better understanding what bothers
candidates” among other comments. While these comments
provided further justification for the results of the preceding
questions, they also create opportunities to analyse the
limitations of the existing mental health system. Not only do
these results aid the derivation of robust requirements but
also promote an avenue for the co-creation of an effective
SAMBEDS model-based emotional self-awareness system,
as discussed in the development section as follows.
III.
DEVELOPING SAMBEDS BASED SYSTEM TO MANAGE
ANXIETY AND DEPRESSION
While
a
User-Centered-Design,
UCD
approach
is
adopted for the system development, the results derived
from survey aids the specified requirements of SAMBEDS
emotional self-awareness system for mental health. The
system is partitioned into multiple segments to manage
different activities including mood assessment, progress
check, therapist support, general information, exercise, diet,
sleep pattern and journal as shown in Figure 5. It is
important to note that the DPA aspect of FLHMMS
framework is covered in a different partition of the system.
While the diagnosis component is accomplished via the
mood assessment section, i.e., "assess yourself", users are
able to rate their feelings at intervals using a corresponding
smiley (very happy, happy, indifferent, sad and very sad).
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 5. SAMBEDS-based system - Home and About screen.
Furthermore, a PHQ9 instrument was adopted to measure
severity due to its concise diagnostic criteria for depression
[21] and perhaps, its accuracy when compared to the Beck
Depression Inventory, which tends to assign higher scores
for severity [22]. Besides, prevention and
alleviation
processes were based on lifestyle changes with the intention
of mood upliftment through these changes. For instance,
understanding the correlation of recorded sleep patterns with
other lifestyle factors are made easy through suitable life
entities association such as family, health, school and
studies among others via the journal (see Figure 6).
Figure 6. SAMBEDS-based system - Screens for Sleep and Journal
.
In additions are the progress screen, which presents a
graphical representation of individual progress of the
SAMBEDS elements. While the Stats page as shown in
figure 7 provides statistical awareness about the SAMBEDS
elements, the therapist page allows connection with a setup
therapist. Hence, users can easily share their lifestyle
records and in real-time with therapists to get appropriate
advice or treatment (see Figure 7). Not only has the co-
creation approach helps with an understanding of the system
requirements, but it also influences the development of a
usable system for the intended users. The following section
discusses the results of user experience study conducted for
the developed system.
Figure 7. SAMBEDS-based system - Stats and therapist screen.
IV.
RESULTS AND EVALUATION
Besides the survey and interview exercises by lived-
experienced candidates, a usability study was conducted in a
usability lab using the eye-tracking device and a 360-degree
camera to understand the impact of the system in aiding
emotional self-awareness for mental health conditions. We
adopted
a
five-factor
usability
approach
including
learnability, memorability, errors, satisfaction and efficiency
[23] with a rank scale questionnaire. The rank scale ranges
from 1 to 7, with 1 being the lowest and 7 being the highest
rating value. We aggregated and evaluated the users’ results,
laying emphasis on the aforementioned five factors.
TABLE III. LIST
OF
USABILITY
TASKS
WITH
TARGET
TIME
AND
OBJECTIVES
Task
No
Task
Description
No of
Screens
Time
(S)
System
Objective
1
Navigate to
the
registration
page
3
20
Efficiency
2
Take the
assessment,
return score
4
20
Memorability
3
Click mood
and go to
Journal
2
10
Efficiency
4
Go to
2
20
Memorability
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

exercise
screen, click
goal and go
back to
home screen
5
Access
PHQ9 and
return to
information
screen
2
10
Learnability
6
Check
progress
1
10
Learnability
7
Check sleep
hours
2
20
Efficiency
8
Contact
therapist and
read advice
1
10
Efficiency
Figure 8 shows the ease of completing all activities as
highlighted in Table III. Specifically, 50% of the participants
give the highest rate value, 7 for interface simplicity, while
40% rate with value 6, therefore, 90% of participants
consider the interface to be simple enough for emotional
self-awareness.
Figure 8. Perceived simplicity of interface versus ease of completion.
Also, 66.6% of participants rated the ease of completing
as high, i.e., 33.3% rated value 7 and value 6 (33%). While
the ease of completion only recorded an instance (5.6%) of
value 4 with no instance recorded below 4 for simplicity.
Figure 9. The ease of access to information versus learnability.
Additionally, the ease of accessing information and
learnability were evaluated as shown in figure 9. A total of
83% of users rated the high values, i.e., 50% and 33.3% of
users rated the learnability of system 7 and 6, respectively.
Similarly, 77.8% of users rated the access to all information
with the high values within the targeted time (i.e., 38.9%
each rated the values 7 and 6).
Figure 10. Overall users’ satisfaction versus difficulty in navigation.
Besides,
the
difficulty
in
navigation
and
overall
satisfaction evaluated indicated 77.8% of the participants
perceived the difficulty in navigation (values 1 and 2) very
low (as shown in Figure 10), thus, participants find the
system easy to use in accomplishing self-awareness for
mental health. Also, the recorded rating for the overall
satisfaction appears between the values between 5 and 7, i.e.,
all the service users (100%) were highly satisfied with the
system for the accomplishment of emotional self-awareness
for mental health. Finally, the participants’ comments
strengthen the satisfaction recorded on the system. These
comments include “motivating, easy navigation, appealing
layout and interactive mood monitoring”; “the included
PHQ9 is a really good idea”; “icons are very useful and
appealing”; “colour scheme is appealing, gave no eye
strain”; “clear design balanced with image, interface clean,
calming and relaxing”; “sharing progress with a therapist”
among other comments. Not only do these comments
validate the quantitative results, but they open further
research on the efficacy of SAMBEDS as emotion self-
awareness tool for mental health management.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Lifestyle factors including diet and exercise among other
factors have been found to improve the quality of life and
depression particularly, in overweight people. Also, a strong
association has been established between improved mood
and exercising. Similarly, a robust correlation between
exercises and sleep has been noted in lifestyle psychiatry.
This work presents a SAMBEDS model for emotional self-
awareness in depression and anxiety management with seven
core lifestyle elements. While a co-creation of a prototype
system allows a true evaluation of these elements, all
elements were considered equally important except for sleep
patterns and mood changes, elements which are considered
slightly more eminent. Independently, the behavioural and
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

thought element is rated the highest among other SAMBEDS
elements, but adequate management of all elements prove
contributory to emotional self-awareness in relations to
mental health states. While a limitation of the system is the
digital characterisation of most activities, a mitigation
approach is the contraction of users’ interactivity through
automation. Future work must devise automatic means of
extracting these core lifestyle data with minimal or no
hindrance to the users’ daily activities. A further interesting
research
challenge
is
the
development
of
automatic
behavioural and thoughts algorithms that will synchronise
mental health state with mood changes, exercises and sleep
and other SAMBEDS elements.
REFERENCES
[1]
"Promoting mental health: concepts, emerging evidence,
practice",
World
Health
Organization,
2005.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.who.int/mental_health/evidence/MH_Promotion
_Book.pdf. [retrieved: February, 2020].
[2]
S. Galderisi, A. Heinz, M. Kastrup, J. Beezhold and N.
Sartorius, "Toward a new definition of mental health", World
Psychiatry, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 231-233, 2015.
[3]
"World Health Organization WHO (2017). Depression and
Other Common Mental Disorders, Global Health Estimates. -
References - Scientific Research Publishing", Scirp.org, 2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.scirp.org/reference/ReferencesPapers.aspx?Refer
enceID=2360252. [retrieved: January, 2020].
[4]
"Work-related stress, depression or anxiety statistics in Great
Britain", HSE (2018). [online]. Available:
https://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/stress.pdf [retrieved:
February, 2020].
[5]
Samhsa.gov,
2015.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/cbhsq-
reports/NSDUHNationalFindingsReport2018/NSDUHNation
alFindingsReport2018.pdf. [retrieved: January, 2020].
[6]
T. Butryn, L. Bryant, C. Marchionni and F. Sholevar, "The
shortage of psychiatrists and other mental health providers:
Causes, current state, and potential solutions", Ijam-web.org,
2017. vol. 3, pp. 5-9, 2018.
[7]
"WHO | New WHO mental health atlas shows global mental
health resources remain inadequate", Who.int, 2005. [Online].
Available:
https://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/notes/2005/np21/en/.
[retrieved: January, 2020].
[8]
P. Chandrashekar, "Do mental health mobile apps work:
evidence and recommendations for designing high-efficacy
mental health mobile apps", mHealth, vol. 4, pp. 6-6, 2018.
[9]
D. Goleman, Emotional intelligence. New York, NY: Bantam
Books, 2006.
[10] J. Carroll, A. Moorhead, R. Bond, W. LeBlanc, R. Petrella
and K. Fiscella, "Who Uses Mobile Phone Health Apps and
Does
Use
Matter?
A
Secondary
Data
Analytics
Approach", Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 19, no.
4, p. e125, 2017. Available: 10.2196/jmir.5604.
[11] D.Campbell, Mental health - UK teenagers turn to mobile
apps to help with mental ill health, Guardian News and Media
Limited,
2018
[Online]
Available:
https://www.theguardian.com/society/2018/nov/21/uk-
teenagers-turn-to-mobile-apps-to-help-with-mental-ill-health.
[retrieved: February, 2020].
[12] S.
Isiaq,
and
D.
Sobnath.
A
Collective
Intelligence
Framework for Lifestyle and Mental Health Management
Systems (FLiMMS), International Journal on Advances in
Life Sciences, vol, 11 no. 3 and 4 pp. 138-150, 2019.
[13] J. Creswell and V. Plano Clark, Designing and conducting
mixed methods research. Thousand Oaks: Sage, 2009.
[14] R. Service, "Book Review: Corbin, J., and Strauss, A. (2008).
Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures
for Developing Grounded Theory (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage", Organizational Research Methods, vol. 12, no. 3,
pp. 614-617, 2008. Available: 10.1177/1094428108324514.
[15] M. Nahum et al., "Immediate Mood Scaler: Tracking
Symptoms of Depression and Anxiety Using a Novel Mobile
Mood Scale", JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 5, no. 4, p.
e44, 2017. Available: 10.2196/mhealth.6544.
[16] R. Robertson, A. Robertson, R. Jepson and M. Maxwell,
"Walking
for
depression
or
depressive
symptoms:
A
systematic review and meta-analysis", Mental Health and
Physical Activity, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 66-75, 2012.
[17] T. Meyer and A. Broocks, "Therapeutic Impact of Exercise on
Psychiatric Diseases", Sports Medicine, vol. 30, no. 4, pp.
269-279, 2000.
[18] H. Tanaka, Y. Sasazawa, S. Suzuki, M. Nakazawa and H.
Koyama, "Health status and lifestyle factors as predictors of
depression in middle-aged and elderly Japanese adults: a
seven-year follow-up of the Komo-Ise cohort study", BMC
Psychiatry, vol. 11, no. 1, 2011.
[19] P. Bongiorno, "Put Anxiety Behind You eBook by Peter
Bongiorno ND, LAc - 9781609259280 | Rakuten Kobo",
2015.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.kobo.com/us/en/ebook/put-anxiety-behind-you-
2. [Accessed: 21- Feb- 2020].
[20] “Can Anxiety Be Caused by Dehydration?”, Calm Clinic,
2018.
[online]
Available:
https://www.calmclinic.com/anxiety/causes/water-
dehydration, [retrieved: January, 2020].
[21] B. Dear et al., "The Pain Course: 12- and 24-Month Outcomes
From a Randomized Controlled Trial of an Internet-Delivered
Pain Management Program Provided With Different Levels of
Clinician Support", The Journal of Pain, vol. 19, no. 12, pp.
1491-1503, 2018. Available: 10.1016/j.jpain.2018.07.005.
[22] B. Weobong, H. Weiss, I. Cameron, S. Kung, V. Patel and S.
Hollon, "Measuring depression severity in global mental
health: comparing the PHQ-9 and the BDI-II", Wellcome
Open
Research,
vol.
3,
p.
165,
2018.
Available:
10.12688/wellcomeopenres.14978.1.
[23] R. Dermawi, H. Tolle and I. Aknuranda, "Design and
Usability Evaluation of Communication Board for Deaf
People with User-Centered Design Approach", International
Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies (iJIM), vol. 12,
no. 2, p. 197, 2018. Available: 10.3991/ijim.v12i2.810
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

