Web-based Lifestyle Management for Chronic Kidney Disease Patients  
in a Clinical Setting  
Jan M. Nautaa, Paul J.M. van der Boogb, Jacqueline T. Slegtenc, Ruud Janssena, Marike Hettingaa 
a ICT-Innovations in Healthcare, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences, Zwolle, The Netherlands 
b Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands 
c Dialysis centre, Isala klinieken, Zwolle, The Netherlands  
jm.nauta@windesheim.nl, p.j.m.van_der_boog@lumc.nl, j.t.slegten@isala.nl, tjwm.janssen@windesheim.nl, 
m.hettinga@windesheim.nl 
 
 
 
Abstract—Maintaining a proper lifestyle is important for 
chronic kidney disease patients. This study investigates 
whether an online lifestyle diary supplementary to the support 
received in the outpatient clinic can help patients to get to such 
a lifestyle. A total of 33 participants expressed their willingness 
to participate in the study. However, 11 of them did not start 
actually. The remaining 22 participants used an online lifestyle 
diary. They received limited support regarding practical issues 
and feedback on lifestyle issues only when they asked 
explicitly. Questionnaires were used to determine the change in 
self-efficacy and self-management with regard to lifestyle after 
four months. Only five participants used the website 
successfully. They had already developed a good self-efficacy 
and self-management. A disappointingly large group hardly 
used the website. The effectiveness of using the website 
regarding self-efficacy and self-management was therefore 
limited in this particular situation. Insights of the outpatient 
clinic’s caregivers and information from the participants 
partly clarify the factors involved in lifestyle management and 
coaching. Motivation of the participant appears to be an 
important factor as well as setting realistic goals. If a patient 
were to receive feedback on lifestyle issues regularly while 
working with the website, more satisfactory results might be 
obtained. Finally, the participant’s (computer) skills and 
practical support played an important role. Taking these 
factors into account, the already comprehensive task of 
lifestyle coaching would be extended with specific new tasks, 
requiring the necessary skills and motivation of the caregiver.  
Keywords-chronic kidney disease; healthy lifestyle; online 
lifestyle diary; self-efficay; self-management; intervention. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
It has been estimated that among adults the prevalence of 
chronic renal failure, varying from mild renal insufficiency 
to end-stage renal disease, is between ten and eleven percent 
[1]. Since age plays an important role in the development of 
renal insufficiency, with an aging population the prevalence 
of chronic renal disease will only increase.  
It has been recognized that for many patients maintaining 
a proper lifestyle helps to reduce the deterioration of the 
renal function [2, 3]. Besides taking the prescribed 
medication, regular exercise, smoking cessation and 
maintaining a healthy weight, a specific kidney failure diet is 
an important part of the treatment plan [4]. The 
recommended diet may change over time if the kidney 
disease deteriorates. 
The Isala klinieken in Zwolle is one of the Dutch 
hospitals with an outpatient clinic for chronic kidney disease 
(CKD) patients. Often these patients need to adapt their 
lifestyle. A multidisciplinary team which consists of 
nephrologists, dieticians and nurse practitioners supports the 
patient in achieving the necessary behavioural. Interventions 
made by the team aim at increasing the self-efficacy and the 
self-management of the patient. For the caregivers in Zwolle 
motivational interviewing [5] is the preferred conversation 
style when they talk with patients about lifestyle.  
Obviously the treatment varies from patient to patient, as 
does the number of visits to the clinic. Typically a patient 
will have two conversations per year with a nurse 
practitioner about issues concerning lifestyle, self-efficacy 
and self-management beside treatment by a nephrologist and 
advice from a dietician. The nurse practitioners found the 
time between two such conversations too long for their 
patients. Opportunities to support them better between visits 
in the outpatient clinic were therefore investigated. This led 
to the question whether a web-based tool, supplementary to 
the support from the outpatient clinic, could help patients to 
maintain a proper lifestyle [6, 7].  
The results of a randomized controlled trial by Chen et al. 
[8] indicate that a standardized self-management support 
programme may play a significant role in reducing CKD 
progression and morbidity of late-stage CKD patients. 
Jansen et al. present an intervention programme for patients 
with end-stage renal disease and their partners [9]. Their 
findings show that an approach in which cognitive, 
emotional, behavioural, and contextual aspects are integrated 
is promising.  
However, a study by Elzen et al. [10] did not yield any 
evidence for the effectiveness of the well-known Chronic 
Disease Self-Management Program (CDSMP) on self-
efficacy, self-management behaviour or health status of older 
patients in the Netherlands. The authors presume a ceiling 
effect, pointing out that in the Netherlands chronically ill 
patients do not usually only see a physician, but also a 
specialized nurse who gives them a lot of information about 
various aspects of self-management. Blanson Henkemans et 
al. recognize that self-management has become common 
practice [11]. They advocate a longitudinal empirical study 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to investigate whether self-management will lead to labour 
savings.  
Self-management programmes may be complemented by 
web-base lifestyle tools. Wyatt et al. evaluated the 
effectiveness of an Internet-based 12-week programme in 
supporting weight loss [12]. They found that this programme 
could, among others, successfully produce meaningful 
weight loss. Dilorio et al. report the results of a research 
study evaluating a web-based epilepsy self-management 
intervention [13]. The study findings show that this 
programme can be an effective means to encourage self-
management. Araújo et al. compared the feasibility and 
clinical outcomes of a standard paper-based asthma self-
management strategy with web-based strategies [14]. They 
concluded that web-based management was feasible, safe, 
and preferred by patients. They found that short-term 
outcomes were at least as good. Bromberg et al. studied a 
web-based intervention to improve migraine coping and self-
management [15]. They concluded that this intervention may 
be a useful behavioural adjunct to a comprehensive medical 
approach to managing migraine. Blanson Henkemans et al. 
enhanced an online lifestyle diary with a persuasive 
computer assistant (an animated iCat) [16]. They concluded 
that this approach is likely to support motivated overweight 
people and individuals with lifestyle-related diseases to get a 
better insight into their self-management and adhere to it.  
However, some studies report poorer results. Kerr et al. 
studied web-based interventions for heart disease self-
management [17]. This study showed that the intervention 
did not result in a large number or all types of patients with 
coronary heart disease using the intervention for self-
management support. Verheijden et al. investigated rates and 
determinants of repeat participation in a web-based health 
behaviour change programme [18]. They found that 
behavioural intervention programmes may reach those who 
need them the least. Kelders et al. investigated the users and 
effect of a web-based intervention aimed at healthy dietary 
and physical activity behaviour [19]. They found that 
respondents did not use the application as intended and that 
users were healthier and more knowledgeable about healthy 
behaviour than non-users. Nijland et al. explored the factors 
that influence the initial and long-term use of a web-based 
application for supporting the self-care of patients with type 
2 diabetes [20]. This study also mentions a ceiling effect. 
Moreover, usage of the application was hindered by low 
enrolment and increasing non-usage.  
None of these studies deals with web-based lifestyle 
management for chronic kidney disease patients. The present 
paper therefore discusses the introduction of a web-based 
lifestyle diary supplementary to the care CKD patients 
receive in Isala’s outpatient clinic. A pilot was carried out to 
determine the effectiveness with regard to self-efficacy and 
self-management of using an online lifestyle diary. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section II discusses 
the preparatory steps taken before the pilot started, followed 
by a description of the applied method in Section III. Section 
IV gives an overview of the results of the pilot followed by a 
discussion in Section V. Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
PREPARATORY STEPS 
Based on the results of interviews conducted with 
caregivers at Isala’s outpatient clinic, an Internet search was 
carried out in order to select a lifestyle management website 
for CKD patients. Eleven candidate software tools were 
identified. Of these candidates dieetinzicht.nl [16] was 
considered the most promising application.  
To verify whether the selected website was suitable for 
supporting lifestyle management for CKD patients a user 
experiment was conducted involving six participants who all 
had undergone a successful kidney transplant. After a week 
they completed a questionnaire in which their experiences 
were recorded. Further information was collected in a focus-
group meeting.  
The participants held the opinion that the website they 
had used should not be seen as a replacement of the contact 
with caregivers but that the website would contribute to the 
lifestyle management of patients with CKD. Moreover, they 
indicated that patients should be sufficiently skilled in using 
a computer.  
June 2011 Bonstato B.V. launched mijnnierinzicht.nl, a 
new website based on dieetinzicht.nl [21]. This new website 
has been developed with support of the Dutch Kidney 
Foundation (“de Nierstichting”) and augmented the original 
website, among other things, with a communication module 
and the possibility to record data about daily exercise as well 
as smoking habits. The website mijnnierinzicht.nl contained 
all functionality required for the pilot. Moreover, it offers 
extensive support for maintaining a proper diet. By 
accurately entering  data about consumed meals in a diary, 
comprehensive information can be obtained about nutrition 
components such as minerals and vitamins in the CKD 
patient’s diet. For this purpose mijnnierinzicht.nl contains a  
database with information about a large number of products. 
Most of the aforementioned studies did not report such an 
elaborate functionality.  
To check the materials developed for the pilot, such as a 
Quick Start Guide, and the intended procedure, a pre-pilot 
was conducted. For this pre-pilot seven patients were invited 
who had dialysis. They used the website for one to two 
weeks. Five participants completed the pre-pilot, the two 
others stopped due to personal circumstances. The pre-pilot 
only led to minor adjustments in the tested materials. One of 
the participants was particularly confident: “This can hardly 
go wrong, even for the elderly and people who are not used 
to working with a computer the manual is very clear.” Some 
participants were positive about mijnnierinzicht.nl (“a 
beautiful site which certainly has added value”), although 
another participant warns that the site is too time-consuming 
in proportion to the benefits.  
III. 
METHOD 
Participants in the pilot were selected from Isala’s 
outpatient clinic for patients with chronic renal insufficiency. 
None of them had dialysis. Moreover, they should be able to 
use a web browser and e-mail and speak Dutch. Depression 
or cognitive complaints could be a reason for exclusion. 
Patients who were considered to be potentially successful 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

users of the website were invited for the pilot in a telephone 
call some days before their next visit to the clinic. If they 
were willing to participate, they were sent a two-page sheet 
containing information about the pilot.  
At the next visit to the clinic the participants filled in an 
informed consent as well as the first of two questionnaires. 
This questionnaire contained seven questions dealing with 
self-efficacy related to lifestyle. Five questions dealing with 
self-management completed this questionnaire.  
The participants also received a Quick Start Guide, both 
in print and on a USB-stick. This 33-page guide informed 
them how to enter data with respect to diet, activities (sport, 
leisure) and smoking habits. It also showed how users could 
get insight into their lifestyle, using the various tables and 
graphs of mijnnierinzicht.nl. Moreover, a chapter dealing 
with the communication module was added. The participants 
were free to decide how often and when they wanted to use 
the website and for what purposes.  
The participants were asked to use the website for four 
months. After a week they received an e-mail asking them 
whether they had actually started. Help was offered if 
needed. During the pilot, participants were invited to ask for 
assistance or to ask for feedback through the communication 
module of the website. Obviously, if they contacted the 
clinic in the usual way such as by e-mail or telephone, they 
were answered equally. Each month the participants received 
an e-mail in which they were invited to attend an informal 
consultation hour where they could also receive help if they 
encountered any practical difficulties in working with the 
website. In this e-mail participants were asked to report how 
many times they had used the website in the past month. The 
e-mail also contained a newsletter informing the participants 
about the progress of the project. Each newsletter contained 
an interview with somebody who was involved in the 
project.  
Two types of support should be distinguished: help with 
practical issues such as creating an account for the website 
and support regarding lifestyle. As all sorts of tasks are done 
nowadays using the Internet, such as buying books and 
completing tax forms, it was expected that most participants 
would be able to use the online diary independently with the 
help of the Quick Start Guide. Only when the patient took 
the initiative to contact the caregiver, for instance via the 
communication module of the website, lifestyle-related 
advice was given. This study looked into the effects of using 
the website separate from the usual treatment on self-
efficacy, self-management and lifestyle. 
After a period of four months the second of two 
questionnaires was sent to the participants. This second 
questionnaire repeated the questions of the first so that 
changes in self-efficacy and self management could be 
determined. Moreover, questions were added asking whether 
the website had helped to achieve a proper diet, a healthy 
weight, sufficient exercise and smoking cessation. It was also 
asked whether using the website was time-consuming and 
difficult to use. Participants also reported about the added 
value of the website and it’s communication module to the 
visits at the clinic. A question was added asking about the 
frequency of use of the website. The second questionnaire 
allowed the participants to add explanations to their answers.  
If the second questionnaire was not received in due time, 
the participant was contacted by telephone, or e-mail or 
reminded orally at their next visit in the clinic. In order not to 
damage the trust between clinic staff and patients, 
participants had to be treated with gentle insistence.  
Finally, the researchers discussed the results with the 
participating caregivers of the outpatient clinic in a focus 
group meeting. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
 A total of 33 participants expressed their willingness to 
participate in the pilot. However, eleven of them did not 
actually start. They did not hand in an informed consent nor 
the first questionnaire (Group I). From seventeen participants 
an informed consent and a first questionnaire were received, 
but this group hardly used the website (Group II). Five 
participants used the website often enough to be meaningful 
for them, as described below (Group III). Table I 
summarizes the main results of the three groups. Age only 
seems to play a role in actually starting. The numbers for 
self-efficacy and self-management are rated on a scale from 
1 to 5, with 5 representing a high self-efficacy and high self-
management. The figures in Table I should be treated with 
caution because of the small number of participants. The 
table suggests that the participants in Group III had already 
developed a better self-efficacy and self-management than 
the members of Group II. No significant differences were 
found between the first and the second questionnaire with 
respect to self-efficacy. On average, only self-management 
regarding nutrition changed: the five participants on average 
scored 0.8 points higher. Next the response rates of the e-
mails sent to the participants are included in the table. Again, 
Group III shows better results. Finally, the table shows the 
reasons why the participants in Group I and II did not use the 
website successfully. They informed the research team about 
these reasons responding to the monthly e-mails or through 
other contacts such as visits to the clinic. 
TABLE I.  
MAIN RESULTS OF THE PILOT 
Group 
I 
II 
III 
group size 
11 
17 
5 
male / female 
8/3 
13/4 
4/1 
age (av.) 
59.8 
55.2 
55.6 
number of smokers 
N.A. 
2 
0 
self-efficacy (av.) before pilot 
self-efficacy (av.) after pilot 
N.A. 
N.A. 
3.7 
N.A. 
4.5 
4.4 
self-management (av.) before pilot 
self-management (av.) after pilot 
N.A. 
N.A. 
3.4 
N.A. 
4.2 
4.4 
response month 1 
N.A. 
41 % 
60 % 
response month 2 
N.A. 
24 % 
100 % 
response month 3 
N.A. 
29 % 
60 % 
response month 4 
N.A. 
35 % 
80 % 
too busy or lack of motivation 
3 
2 
N.A. 
technical problems 
1 
3 
N.A. 
lack of (computer) skills 
4 
8 
N.A. 
unknown or other reasons 
3 
4 
N.A. 
 
The technical problems mentioned in the table include 
not having Internet at home. Among the reasons referred to 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

in the bottom row of the table there was a case of severe 
illness. To mention another example, one participant refused 
to create an account because of bad experiences with other 
organizations. In more than half of the cases participants 
stopped due to technical problems or lack of skills. 
One of the five participants in Group III had developed 
his own Excel application to store information for lifestyle 
management concentrating on sodium, potassium and 
protein. He has been using it for a long time. He entered data 
in mijnnierinzicht.nl for 25 consecutive days and after that 
with decreasing intensity until he found confirmation from 
the website that his lifestyle was indeed healthy. He felt that 
the website might be difficult to use for elderly patients but 
considered the website very useful for patients who had just 
learned that they suffered from renal insufficiency.  
A second participant used mijnnierinzicht.nl to learn 
about the components in his nutrition, for which he 
considered the website very valuable. Once he had detected a 
recurrent pattern he stopped with the intention to use the 
website again if necessary. At some point the laboratory 
results of this participant showed a high sodium level in his 
urine. The website helped to find out that this was caused by 
the medicines he used and not his diet.  
A third participant of these five used the website to get to 
a proper diet and a healthy weight. Once he had reached his 
goals he decided to use the website less intensively. A fourth 
participant benefitted from the website to reach a healthy 
weight and a sensible diet with respect to potassium and 
sodium. The last of five participants used the website to get 
to a proper diet.  
All five participants reported that they had experienced 
no difficulty using the website. Four of them felt that it took 
little time to enter the necessary data while a fifth participant 
answered neutral. It should be noted that the participants 
filled in the second questionnaire after having spent time 
using the website. A participant who reported that entering 
the data took little time mentioned in an e-mail a few weeks 
after he had started that working with the website was time-
consuming.  
With respect to the question whether the website was 
useful in addition to the conversation in the clinic about 
lifestyle the picture was unclear. The same goes for the 
question whether the communication module of the website 
was helpful in maintaining a healthy lifestyle. Opinions 
among the participants were divided with respect to both 
questions. 
During 
the 
focus-group 
meeting 
the 
caregivers 
recognized the potential value of the website for their 
patients. Moreover, they realized that they could gain more 
detailed information faster. The caregivers discerned a 
number of factors which may influence the successful use of 
an online lifestyle diary. Apart from the patient’s motivation 
and skills and the question whether the patient can spend 
enough time when being introduced to the website is of 
importance. If a patient is just starting to realize the 
consequences of his or her disease, it may be sensible to 
postpone the use of the website for some time. Considering 
the high number of patients who hardly used the website, the 
caregivers discussed the possibility to integrate the online 
lifestyle diary in the existing coaching process. Although 
they expected an improvement of care if feedback was given 
more actively, it remained unclear whether this would lead to 
more efficiency. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The aim of this study was to determine the effectiveness 
with regard to self-efficacy and self-management of using an 
online lifestyle diary. CKD patients were asked to use the 
diary supplementary to the care they received from the 
outpatient clinic. Participants in the study worked with this 
online diary independently, which meant that they did not 
receive active coaching aimed at goal setting when using the 
website, nor did they receive any guidelines regarding the 
duration or frequency of use of the online diary. The help 
offered was mainly concerned with practical use of the 
website. Regarding lifestyle issues the participants were not 
supported actively while working with the website. 
However, they were invited to ask questions about their 
lifestyle, preferably using the communication module of the 
online diary. 
Apparently, for a minority of the participants this was 
sufficient. In view of the results from Table I it is not 
surprising that an overall improvement could hardly be 
observed, comparable to the ceiling effect mentioned before 
[10, 20], with an exception for self-management regarding 
nutrition. These participants were motivated to change their 
lifestyle if necessary and were able to set realistic goals. The 
higher response rate of the monthly e-mails also illustrates 
the motivation of this group.  
Despite their willingness to participate in the present 
study a large majority of the participants did not use the 
website successfully for reasons mentioned in Table I. Such 
results were disappointing. Some of the aforementioned 
studies have reported comparable results [17-20]. 
 Insights of the caregivers, the positive results observed 
and the reasons why participants hardly used the website 
help to understand web-based lifestyle management better. It 
should be noted that the reasons for the poor results are 
multifactorial and that the findings of the present study do 
not clarify the relations between the various factors involved. 
It is possible, however, to mention a number of important 
factors. 
A. Motivation 
Caregivers noticed that patients may wish to carry on 
with their life and be reluctant to spend time on detailed 
lifestyle management tasks, despite their chronic disease. 
Not all patients who want to take up such tasks may find the 
idea of working with a computer very attractive. The routine 
of regularly entering data into the online diary over a 
prolonged period of time requires concentration and time. 
When advising a patient to use an online lifestyle diary, one 
should take into account the patient’s stage of change 
discerned in motivational interviewing and verify whether 
the patient is sufficiently motivated to change their lifestyle 
and use the website, taking into account socially desirable 
responses. Can he or she find the discipline to use the 
website long enough? Internal and external motivation 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

factors should be discerned. Conversations with participants 
suggest that in the present study some of them may have 
been motivated extrinsically because they were prepared to 
help researchers when kindly asked. Obviously this 
motivation differs from an intrinsic motivation to improve 
one’s their lifestyle.  
B. Realistic goals 
Participants using the website successfully did so for a 
specific purpose and during a sufficiently long but limited 
period of time. They tended to use the website when special 
events occurred or when they felt the need to obtain 
conformation about their lifestyle. This shows, in accordance 
with the findings of behavioural psychology [22], the 
importance of setting specific and attainable goals. If the 
caregiver should, contrary to the approach taken in this 
study, choose to coach patients in setting goals for working 
with the website, it might be expected that patients gain more 
from it. In such an integrated approach (i.e. integration of 
using the online lifestyle diary in the existing coaching 
process) the caregiver will discuss goals with the patient, 
taking into account, among other things, the illness 
perception of the patient and the necessary change in 
lifestyle. Moreover, the caregiver will advise about the 
period of time and frequency of using the diary.  
C. Feedback and coaching 
A further step in integrating the usual coaching and the 
online lifestyle diary would be taken if the caregiver should 
look actively into the information entered by the patient in 
order to give feedback. It may be expected that patients will 
be encouraged to improve their lifestyle with the help of the 
website if they receive feedback regularly: Nijland et al. 
remark that in their study personalized feedback appeared to 
be one of the most promising features for long-term usage of 
the application [20]. Initially this feedback can be given 
more often. Later on, as the patient is sufficiently 
empowered, the time between two contacts may be longer. 
To avoid surprises it should be agreed beforehand when 
messages will be received. Depending on the nature of the 
feedback a response may be given in writing, over the 
telephone or face to face.  
D. Skills and practical support 
Obviously, for web-based lifestyle management patients 
should have easy access to a computer and the Internet. 
Moreover, the patient must be sufficiently skilled in using a 
computer. Even with an increasing number of people who 
use a computer regularly this remains an issue as entering 
detailed information in an online diary requires skills that 
differ from ordinary tasks. Help with technical problems and 
training must be separated clearly from feedback on lifestyle 
topics. For example, one of the participants in this study 
faced problems creating an account because he was not 
aware that a username should not contain a space. 
Preferably, such practical problems should not be dealt with 
by caregivers (although they did so in a number of cases) 
but, for instance, by a helpdesk.  
Summarizing, it is clear that web-based lifestyle 
management can be a complicated and elaborate task for 
CKD patients. Advising when and how to use the website 
caregivers should weigh each patient’s unique situation. The 
present study shows, however, that it can be difficult to 
assess 
a 
patient’s 
skills 
and 
motivation 
properly, 
demonstrating the need for improved assessment tools and 
techniques.  
E. Further considerations 
A changed approach to patients who work with the 
website as described above may also affect the daily work of 
caregivers. Apart from logistic matters such as reserving 
time slots to give patients feedback via the communication 
module of the website, the necessary infrastructure must be 
realized. For instance, integration of the data for the online 
diary tool with the patient’s Electronic Health Record is 
expedient. It remains unclear whether the care improved 
through the website will be more time-consuming or not. 
 Some of the factors mentioned above can be found also 
in the usual coaching. The importance of setting realistic 
goals, for instance, is widely accepted. However, web-based 
lifestyle management adds new aspects to the caregiver’s 
already extensive task of lifestyle coaching. Apart from 
assessing the patient’s skills and motivation for online 
lifestyle management, new opportunities and challenges 
emerge when care is given through online feedback. What 
applies to patients equally applies to caregivers: they should 
be sufficiently motivated for online lifestyle coaching and 
may need to acquire new skills for that.  
Moreover, in order to be successful web-based lifestyle 
management needs to be facilitated sufficiently. The user-
friendliness of the online diary should be improved. To 
mention two examples, navigation must be intuitive and the 
database for nutrition products should be as complete as 
possible and more easily accessible. Finally, the website used 
in this study can be used without cost until 2016. However, 
given the tendency in the Netherlands to implement e-health 
only as a substitution of the usual care [23] an extensive 
financial analysis is necessary for online lifestyle coaching.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
In this small-scale qualitative study an online lifestyle 
diary was introduced while participants were helped mainly 
with practical issues only. With this approach only a small 
group of users used the online diary successfully. It follows 
that the effectiveness of using the website with regard to self-
efficacy and self-management was limited in this particular 
situation. Web-based lifestyle management appears to be a 
complicated and elaborate task for patients, requiring 
motivation and skills. Lifestyle coaching with an online 
diary, integrating the website into usual care, likewise 
requires motivation and skills.  
To reach the full potential of web-based lifestyle 
management and coaching a number of issues must be 
addressed. The concept of online lifestyle coaching needs to 
be developed further exploring questions such as how a 
caregiver can appropriately assess a patient’s skills and 
motivation, how to estimate which support will be necessary 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and how the intensity of online lifestyle coaching should 
change over time. Further development of web-based 
lifestyle management and coaching needs to be rooted in 
behavioural theory, applying an adequate psychological 
model, and needs to clarify the relations between the various 
factors involved. Finally, technology can still be improved, 
including usability of the website.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This study is part of the innovation programme for IT-
based services of the Province of Overijssel. We thank Gertie 
Smeets, Hannie Piels, Lammie van den Bosch, Rob 
Hermans, Robbert Menko, Ruben Cijsouw and Saskia 
Meijer for their contributions and cooperation. Above all, we 
wish to express our gratitude to the participants for taking 
part in this study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Tjin a Ton and S. S. Zwart, "Patiënten met 
nierfunctiestoornissen gemakkelijk op te sporen in de 
huisartsenpraktijk," Huisarts en Wetenschap, vol. 9, pp. 
443-447, 2006. 
[2] 
B. Stengel, M. E. Tarver-Carr, N. R. Powe, M. S. 
Eberhardt, and F. L. Brancati, "Lifestyle factors, obesity 
and the risk of chronic kidney disease," Epidemiology, 
vol. 14, pp. 479-487, 2003. 
[3] 
A. L. M. de Francisco, G. F. Fresnedo, R. Palomar, C. 
Pinera, and M. Arias, "The renal benefits of a healthy 
lifestyle," Kidney International, vol. 68, pp. S2-S6, 2005. 
[4] 
"Nutrition and Chronic Kidney Disease," ed: National 
Kidney Foundation, 2006. 
[5] 
J. Hettema, J. Steele, and W. R. Miller, "Motivational 
Interviewing," Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 
vol. 1, pp. 91-111, 2005. 
[6] 
R. Cijsouw, J. Slegten, J. Nauta, R. Knotters, and M. 
Hettinga, "Webbased Lifestyle Self-Management For 
Chronic Kidney Disease Patients," presented at the 
Medicine 2.0 Congress, Maastricht, 2010. 
[7] 
M. Hettinga, J. Slegten, J. Nauta, L. van den Bosch, G. 
Smeets, and H. Piels, "Webbased Lifestyle Self-
Management for Chronic Kidney Disease Patients," 
presented at the Med-e-Tel Conference, Luxembourg, 
2012. 
[8] 
S.-H. Chen, Y.-F. Tsai, C.-Y. Sun, I.-W. Wu, C.-C. Lee, 
and M.-S. Wu, "The impact of self-management support 
on the progression of chronic kidney disease—a 
prospective randomized controlled trial," Nephrology 
Dialysis Transplantation, vol. 26, pp. 3560–3566, 2011. 
[9] 
D. L. Jansen, M. Heijmans, M. Rijken, and A. A. 
Kaptein, "The Development of and First Experiences with 
a Behavioural Self-regulation Intervention for End-stage 
Renal Disease Patients and Their Partners," Journal of 
Health Psychology, vol. 16, pp. 274-283, Mar 2011. 
[10] 
H. Elzen, J. P. J. Slaets, T. A. B. Snijders, and N. 
Steverink, "Evaluation of the chronic disease self-
management program (CDSMP) among chronically ill 
older people in the Netherlands," Social Science & 
Medicine, vol. 64, pp. 1832-1841, May 2007. 
[11] 
O. A. Blanson Henkemans, J. J. W. Molema, E. J. H. 
Franck, 
and 
W. 
Otten, 
"Zelfmanagement 
als 
Arbeidsbesparende Innovatie in de Zorg," TNO Kwaliteit 
van Leven2010. 
[12] 
H. R. Wyatt, L. G. Ogden, K. S. Cassic, E. A. Hoagland, 
T. McKinnon, N. Eich, et al., "Successful Internet-Based 
Lifestyle Change Program on Body Weight and Markers 
of Metabolic Health," Obesity and Weight Management, 
vol. 5, pp. 167-173, 2009. 
[13] 
C. Dilorio, Y. Bamps, E. R. Walker, and C. Escoffery, 
"Results of a research study evaluating WebEase, an 
online epilepsy self-management program," Epilepsy and 
Behavior, vol. 22, pp. 469-474, 2011. 
[14] 
L. Araújo, T. Jacinto, A. Moreira, M. G. Castel-Branco, 
L. Delgado, A. Costa-Pereira, et al., "Clinical efficacy of 
web-based versus standard asthma self-management," 
Journal of investigational allergology & clinical 
immunology : official organ of the International 
Association of Asthmology (INTERASMA) and Sociedad 
Latinoamericana de Alergia e Inmunología, vol. 22, pp. 
28-34, 2012. 
[15] 
J. Bromberg, M. E. Wood, R. A. Black, D. A. Surette, K. 
L. Zacharoff, and E. J. Chiauzzi, "A Randomized Trial of 
a Web-Based Intervention to Improve Migraine Self-
Management and Coping," Headache, vol. 52, pp. 244-
261, Feb 2012. 
[16] 
O. A. Blanson Henkemans, P. J. M. Van Der Boog, J. 
Lindenberg, C. A. P. G. Van Der Mast, M. A. Neerincx, 
and B. J. H. M. Zwetsloot-Schonk, "An online lifestyle 
diary with a persuasive computer assistant providing 
feedback on self-management," Technology and health 
care : official journal of the European Society for 
Engineering and Medicine, vol. 17, p. 253, 2009. 
[17] 
C. Kerr, E. Murray, L. Noble, R. Morris, C. Bottomley, F. 
Stevenson, et al., "The Potential of Web-based 
Interventions for Heart Disease Self-Management: A 
Mixed Methods Investigation," Journal of Medical 
Internet Research, vol. 12, Oct-Dec 2010. 
[18] 
M. W. Verheijden, M. P. Jans, V. H. Hildebrandt, and M. 
Hopman-Rock, "Rates and Determinants of Repeated 
Participation in a Web-Based Behavior Change Program 
for Healthy Body Weight and Healthy Lifestyle," Journal 
of Medical Internet Research, vol. 9, 2007. 
[19] 
S. M. Kelders, J. Van Gemert-Pijnen, A. Werkman, N. 
Nijland, and E. R. Seydel, "Effectiveness of a Web-based 
Intervention Aimed at Healthy Dietary and Physical 
Activity Behavior: A Randomized Controlled Trial About 
Users and Usage," Journal of Medical Internet Research, 
vol. 13, Apr-Jun 2011. 
[20] 
N. Nijland, J. van Gemert-Pijnen, S. M. Kelders, B. J. 
Brandenburg, and E. R. Seydel, "Factors Influencing the 
Use of a Web-Based Application for Supporting the Self-
Care of Patients with Type 2 Diabetes: A Longitudinal 
Study," Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 13, 
Jul-Sep 2011. 
[21] 
M. Dooper, "Meer inzicht met ‘Mijnnierinzicht’," 
Nederlands Tijdschrift voor Nefrologie, vol. 2, pp. 13-15, 
2012. 
[22] 
B. Tiggelaar, Doen! Nieuwe, praktische inzichten voor 
verandering en groei. Utrecht: Het Spectrum, 2003. 
[23] 
"Nationale implementatie agenda (NIA) eHealth," 2012. 
 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

