 
Towards a Unified Framework for Distributing Health Awareness Message Using 
Social Media Platforms 
Elaf Alsisi  
Manufacturing Department 
Cranfield University 
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom 
email:e.alsisi@cranfield.ac.uk 
 Ahmed Al-Ashaab 
Manufacturing Department 
Cranfield University 
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom 
email:a.al-ashaab@cranfield.ac.uk 
Hongmei He 
Manufacturing Department 
Cranfield University 
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom 
email:h.he@cranfield.ac.uk 
Abstract— The use of social media as a platform to increase 
people health awareness has increased considerable in the last 
recent years. Although a growing research has demonstrated the 
tremendous value of using social media for promoting health 
awareness among the public, there is lack of framework that 
guide health organisations to design and deliver effective health 
awareness. The aim of this paper is to firstly assess the current 
process of publishing health awareness messages health 
organisations and subsequently provide a suitable framework 
for disseminating such messages via social media platforms. To 
this end, an initial literature review of the current best practices 
of social media was carried out and then a survey was developed 
and administered to selected health organisations seeking their 
current practices of publishing health awareness message. 
Based on the analysis of their information, a proposed 
framework of publishing health awareness message was 
developed. Initial results show the adaptability and importance 
of a unified social media context-aware framework in 
disseminating health awareness message to public. This paper 
concludes by identifying directions for future research.  
Keywords— Social Media; Health Promotion; Health 
Awareness; E-health, healthcare  
I. INTRODUCTION 
The rapid increase number of people with lifestyle health 
problems and infectious diseases created considerable 
pressure and challenges on national health systems across the 
globe. The reactive strategy of providing more health services 
to treat the increased number of public appears to be less 
effective [1]. This has driven policymakers to search for more 
effective proactive strategies to face this enormous challenge. 
One strategy, inspired by Benjamin Franklin axiom that “an 
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure’’, is public health 
communication – conveying messages to public increase 
health awareness. The importance of this reactive strategy is 
illustrated in the emergence of health communication as a 
scholarly field on it is own that separated itself from 
communication studies, health education and promotion and 
related disciplines [2]. 
One aspect of public health communication which has 
received increasing attention is the channels (media) through 
which health message can be effectively delivered to, and 
reach, a wide range of relevant audience. In this respect, health 
organisations have traditionally focused on the printed media 
(e.g., poster, leaflet, etc.) and traditional media (e.g., SMS, 
phone calls, etc.) as the media through which that transfer their 
health messages.  
With increasing people usability of, and access, to the 
Internet, health organisations have relatively recently turned 
to social media to promote health awareness among the public 
[3]. Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter and Snapchat, etc.) 
have enabled greater space for collaboration and facilitate the 
creation and exchange of information [4]. However, although 
the use of social media to convey health message has been 
hailed as a valuable tool due to several advantages (e.g. cost-
effective) over the conventional media, the use of this new 
form of public health communication pose challenges [5]. The 
increased number in types of social media (e.g., Facebook, 
Twitter) and content of health message in these media create 
unmanageable source of information can create confusion for 
individuals and affect their capacity to obtain, process, and 
understand the basic health information and services needed 
to make appropriate health decisions [5]. However, there is 
limited studies in the current literature. Therefore, there is an 
urgent need for transformative the design (in term of content) 
and media) to reach to a guiding framework to help health 
organisation to effectively deliver health message and fully 
obtain the advantages of social media.  
The aim of this paper is firstly to assess the current process 
of 
publishing 
health 
awareness 
message 
in 
health 
organisations and subsequently to provide a suitable unified 
framework for disseminating such messages via social media 
platforms. To this end, an initial literature review of the 
current best practices of social media was carried out and then 
a survey was developed and administered to selected health 
organisations seeking their current practices of publishing 
health awareness message the survey has been conducted for 
three months. Based on the analysis of their information, a 
proposed unified framework of publishing health awareness 
message was developed. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In the 
next section, a brief review of the literature on health 
communication and social media is provided. Section 3 
analyses the current process of publishing health awareness 
message in health organisations. Section 4 presents a proposed 
framework for publishing health awareness message. The 
paper concludes and provides future research to the public 
directions in Section 5. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
The public health communication has emerged as a 
modern strategy to change public health behaviour by raising 
the awareness of risk diseases. Public health communication 
refers to ‘the scientific development, strategic dissemination, 
and critical evaluation of relevant, accurate, accessible, and 
understandable health information communicated to and from 
intended audiences to advance the health of the public’ [2]. 
Thus, the process of communicating health awareness 
message starts by ensuring an accurate content of the message 
to effectively delivering the message. This involves collecting 
information on health diseases from multiple sources and then 
transform them into an informative message. Having designed 
the content of the message, the next step is to select an 
effective media to deliver it. Health organisations have 
traditionally focused on the printed media and traditional 
media (e.g., SMS, phone calls, etc.) as the media through 
which that transfer their health messages. In addition, mass 
media has been used to expose a high percentage of population 
to health promotion message.  This media involves a variety 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

of form to convey health messages, including television, 
newspaper, radio, booklets, billboards, posters, and leaflets. 
The transformation from Web 1.0 to the second generation 
of the World Wide Web (Web 2.0) facilitates information 
sharing, 
interoperability, 
user-centred 
design 
and 
collaboration [4]. The development of Web 2.0 has led to the 
web applications that generate social interaction and exchange 
of information between individuals. Social media includes 
collaborative projects, blogs, content communities, social 
networking sites, virtual game worlds and virtual social 
worlds are examples of these web applications [6]. Social 
media applied to almost every aspect of people interaction and 
has recently been used in public health communication [5]. 
The development of e-health promotion via social media 
platforms plays a significant role in the contribution to 
reinforcement the public health at the level of individual and 
society [7]. Since the Internet has expanded accessibility to a 
wide range of data, its advancement to Web 2.0 has given a 
contributory place where everyone can create, participate and, 
interact with others [8].  Nowadays, social networking sites 
including Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram, are popular 
online platforms which deployed as a new means for 
delivering health awareness knowledge to the public [5][9]. It 
enables individuals or groups of people to communicate, 
interact with each other, share information, collaborate and 
exchange content [10][11]. It can be categorised into various 
types, including social networking sites (e.g. Facebook and 
LinkedIn), 
blogs 
(e.g., 
WordPress 
and 
Blogger), 
microblogging (e.g., Twitter), media sharing sites (e.g., 
YouTube, Instagram and Flickr) and Wiki (e.g., Wikipedia) 
[11][12]. Twitter allows users to communicate and interact 
with followers in messages called a tweet with a maximum 
length of 280 characters. A tweet can be included with a photo 
or a video and link to the primary source (URL) [13][14]. 
According to global Statics [15], Twitter has an estimated 330 
million active users per month. There are many features that 
reinforce the level of engagement in Twitter, such as retweets, 
likes, mentions and replies [16]. 
III. THE CURRENT PROCESS OF PUBLISHING HEALTH 
AWARENESS MESSAGE 
     The current process of publishing health awareness 
message has been captured at research visits in 10 
participating healthcare organizations located in Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia, namely; Ministry of Health in Riyadh, Ohud 
Hospital in Madinah, King Saud Medical City in Riyadh, King 
Fahad Medical City in Riyadh, King Faisal Specialist Hospital 
& Research Centre in Riyadh, King Fahad Armed Forces 
Hospital in Jeddah, King Abdulaziz Medical City in Jeddah, 
King Fahad Hospital in Madinah, King Fahad Specialist 
Hospital in Dammam, and Saad Specialist Hospital in Khobar. 
Selection of these organizations is primarily due to these 
organizations having a robust organizational culture clearly 
identified by their employees.  Also, these 10 organizations 
possess a highly tested and highly reliable medical 
information database that were collected by health educators 
and physicians. Finally, these organizations utilize a diverse 
means of spreading health awareness messages; hence, an 
added motivation for choosing these 10 organizations. A 
mixed approach was adopted in order to acquire the results of 
the process of publishing such messages. Firstly, structured 
interviews were conducted by the researcher in 10 
organizations 
with 
employees 
working 
in 
different 
departments, namely; Health Education Department, Media 
Administration, and the administration of identity and 
production.  Secondly, a questionnaire was designed based on 
the literature review and distributed by email where different 
types of question/item was included.  Finally, using IBM 
SPSS Statistics 25, data analysis was performed that captured 
the data influence and impact. Typical questions in the 
questionnaire include the following: 1. what are the most 
common diseases that public need to be continuously aware 
of? 2. What are social media platforms that are in use in your 
organization? 3. Who does formulate the models of scientific 
material of the health awareness message? 4. Who is in charge 
of designing the health awareness message after receiving the 
scientific material? 5. Who is in charge of publishing the 
health awareness message after being designed by the 
responsible party? 6. Which of the following do the health 
education specialists use to evaluate the health awareness 
message on targeted people in short term? 7. How important 
and effective are the following activities when assessing the 
impact of the health awareness message in long term? 8. How 
frequent 
and 
effective 
using 
the 
following 
media 
representation in the content of health awareness message? 9. 
How frequent and effective using the following component in 
the content of health awareness message? 
     The process varied in terms of the health problem targeted 
by the awareness message (e.g., diabetes), the media of 
publishing health awareness message (e.g., traditional 
channels, social media, etc.), the writer of the scientific 
material health awareness message, the designer of the health 
awareness message, the publisher of the health awareness 
message, the evaluation of the impact of the health awareness 
message on society in the short and long term, the media 
content of the health awareness message (e.g., text, video, etc.) 
and the content elements of the health awareness message 
(e.g., organization’s badge). 
The health awareness messages designed by the 
participated health organisations targeted various health 
problems (see Figure 1). The most frequent health problems 
covered is obesity (98%) followed by diabetes (94%) and then 
high blood pressure (88%). It is clear that the most frequently 
covered problems represent the most common and life-
threating problems. The least frequent health problems 
depression (64%), liver disease (64%) and eye disease (62%). 
The remaining health problems with their frequencies are 
illustrated in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1. The most common diseases that people need to be aware 
As for the media through which health organisations 
publish their health awareness message, organisations use 
three types of media namely, printed media (e.g., poster, 
94%
78%
88% 86%86%
86%
70%
98%
70% 64%
76%
64% 62%
32%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Percentage of diseases prevalence
Most Common Disease
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

leaflet, etc.), traditional media (e.g., SMS, phone calls, etc.) 
and social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter and Snapchat, etc.). 
Our analysis revealed that the printed media techniques still 
dominated as media to publish health awareness message. 
However, social media platforms are gaining momentum as 
are being, on average, used more than traditional media. The 
participated health organisations reported that a wide range of 
social media platforms are being employed to deliver health 
awareness message to reach a large number of people (refer to 
Figure 2). The most frequently used social media platform is 
Twitter followed by Snapchat and then WhatsApp. On the 
other hand, the most effective platforms are Twitter, 
WhatsApp and Snapchat respectively based on the answers of 
the respondents. Noticeably, although Facebook is more 
effective than YouTube, it is being used less than YouTube. 
The remaining social media platforms and their associated 
frequency of use and effectiveness are presented in the 
diagram. 
 
Figure 2. The frequency and effectiveness of social media 
techniques 
The participated health organizations reported that the 
writer of the scientific material of the health awareness 
message can one from 10 different writers (see Figure 3). The 
most frequently used writer is certified health websites 
followed 
by 
health 
education 
specialist 
and 
then 
doctors/physicians (see blue bars). However, the most 
effective writer according to the sampled organizations is 
doctors/physicians, certified health websites and health 
education specialist, respectively. It can be observed that 
although is one of the most effective writers, the frequency of 
use is relatively low compared with certified health websites 
and health education specialist. The remaining writers with 
their frequency of use and effectiveness are shown in Figure 
3. 
 
 
Figure 3. The writer of the scientific material of the health 
awareness message 
The participated health organizations revealed that the 
design of the health awareness message is managed by  
different parties within and without these organisations (refer 
to Figure 4). The most frequent responsible party being 
adopted for designing the health awareness message is 
graphical designer followed by Health Education Department 
and then Advertising and Design Agency. Concerning their 
effectiveness, the more frequent used parties are the most 
effective parties as clearly depicted in Figure 4.   
 
Figure 4. The designer of the health awareness message 
The participated health organisations indicated that the 
publishing of the health awareness message can be 
accomplished by different parties (see Figure 5). The most 
frequent responsible party who in charge of publishing the 
health awareness message is Public Relation Departments 
followed by Health Education Department and then 
Doctors/Physicians and IT Team. As for the effectiveness of 
publishing through these parties, the results show the same 
pattern of distribution as the most frequently used. In other 
words, the most frequently used parties are the most effective 
parties.    
 
Figure 5. The publisher of the health awareness message 
The participated health organisations use different 
evaluation methods of the impact of the health awareness 
message on society on both the short-term (see Figure 6) and 
long-term. The organisations give high importance to ‘direct 
questions’, ‘immediate evaluation of teaching session’, 
‘teach-back method’ and ‘seek feedback from the patient’, 
respectively, as methods of evaluating the impact of the health 
awareness message on the short-term (see blue bars).  
2.5
3.6
2.8
3
1.9
3.3
3.4
0.8
2.7
3.4
2.9
2.5
2.6
3.4
3.2
0.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
YouTube
LinkedIn
WhatsApp
Snapchat
Others
Mean of Scale
Social media platforms
Effectiveness
Frequences
3.6
4.2
4.1
2.2
2
2.8
3.4
2.5
2.7
0.7
4.3
4.3
4.2
2.7
2.2
2.9
3.4
2.9
3
0.9
0
1
2
3
4
5
Mean of Scale
Writer of a scientific material of health message
Frequency
Effectiveness
3.75
2.375
4
3.5
2.5
1.125
3.875
2.5
4.375
3.875
2.75
0.75
0
1
2
3
4
5
Health
Education
department
IT Team
member
Graphical
Designer
Advertising
and design
agency
Editor
Others
Mean of scale
Designer of the health awareness message
Frequency
Effectiveness
2.5
3.25
3.75
2.625
0.625
2.625
3.375
3.875
2.75
0.625
0
1
2
3
4
5
IT Team
member
Health
Education
department
Public Relation
Departments
(PRDs)
Doctors
/Physicians
Others
Mean of scale
Publisher of health awareness message
Frequency
Effectiveness
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 6. The evaluation methods of the impact of the health 
awareness message on society on the short-term 
With respect to their effectiveness, it is clearly shown that 
‘teach-back method’ and ‘immediate evaluation of teaching 
session’ followed by ‘patient’s comments’ and then ‘direct 
questions’, ‘observations’ and ‘seek feedback from the 
patient’ (see red bars). In general, although ‘objectives 
achieved’ and ‘patient’s comments’ evaluation methods are 
more effective compared to other methods, organizations 
attach less importance to them compared to less effective 
methods. As for the long-term evaluation of the impact of 
health awareness message, organizations use a variety of 
methods. Table 1 shows the importance of each method based 
on its influence on targeted people. The most emphasized 
means reported by the organizations was by checking the 
increased amount of number of people who are doing early 
detection of specific diseases. The remaining methods, such 
as using statistical methods, are relatively equally important 
for these organizations.   
 
Table 1. Methods of evaluating the impact of the health awareness 
message 
Number  
Method  
Importance   
1 
Use one of any statistical methods  
3.5 
2 
The amount of drug consumed are reduced 
2.62 
3 
Severity of disease’s conditions is reduced 
3.25 
4 
Diminishing incidence rates of the disease 
through addressing the risk factors causing 
the disease 
3.62 
5 
Increase the number of people who are 
doing the early detection and of specific 
disease and its complications 
4.12 
6 
Increase the number of people who are 
doing the comprehensive detection 
3.62 
7 
Others 
1.25 
In term of the media content of the health awareness 
message, the participated health organisations use a variety of 
media contents (refer to Figure 7). Including a photo in the 
health awareness message was the most commonly used 
content by the organisations followed by text, cartoon and 
video, based on the mean of frequency (see blue bar). This was 
expected given that these media, in particular, fully capture 
individuals’ attention. This is clearly evidenced when we 
asked about how effective these media contents. The 
respondents indicated that insert text, cartoon, and cartoon 
drawing are the most effective media content with the 
remaining are relatively equally effective (see red bar). 
Surprisingly, although adding a photo to the health message 
was the most frequently used, it was the least effective media 
content. The remaining media contents with their associated 
frequency of use and effectiveness are detailed in Figure 7.   
 
Figure 7. The media content of the health awareness message 
Finally, the involved health organisations in this study 
reported that they use different content elements of the health 
awareness message (refer to Figure 8). Based on the mean of 
the respondents’ answers, the most frequently used element is 
including the organization’s badge and appropriate exercise. 
 
 
Figure 8. The content elements of the health awareness message 
As for effectiveness, inserting an organization’s badge and 
recommended food are the most effective elements according 
to the sampled organisations, while inserting link for the 
organisation’s website is the least effective element. The 
remaining elements and their associated frequency of use and 
effectiveness. 
IV. A PROPOSAL OF USING SOCIAL MEDIA TO SPREAD THE 
HEALTH MESSAGE 
In the previous section, a detailed analysis of the current 
process of publishing health awareness message in 10 
organizations was provided. This analysis is shown as an 
entity of the process that lead to develop a framework of 
distributing the health awareness message (see Figure 9).  The 
analysis highlighted the need for solid and unified framework 
that guides health organizations in publishing health message 
using social media platforms. The analysis revealed that 
organizations often used multiple social platforms and parties 
4.25
4
4.125
4.75
4.5
4.625
4.375
4.5
4.25
4.5
4.25
4.625
4.625
4.25
0
1
2
3
4
5
objectives
achieved
Observation
Patient's
comments
Direct
questions
Teach-Back
method
Immediate
evaluation
of teaching
session
Seek
feedback of
the patient
Mean of scale
Short-term evaluation method
Importance
Effectiveness
4.25
5
3.625
4.25
3.875
3.875
4.25
3.375
2.75
0.625
4.375
0
1
2
3
4
5
Mean of scale
Media type of the health awareness message
Frequency
Effectiveness
4.75
2.125
2.75
2.875
3.25
2.875
4.625
4.125 4.375
4
4.75
0
1
2
3
4
5
Mean of scale
Component of the health awareness message
Frequency
Effectiveness
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to publish health organizations. Although this might provide 
more cover of a wide range of audience, it might generate 
information overload and thus affect the patients’ abilities to 
seek information from the message. Although social media 
have considerable potential as effective platforms for health 
promotion and awareness, these media require careful 
application as may not always achieve their intended 
outcomes 
[17][18][19]. 
Therefore, 
publishing 
health 
awareness message should be a systematic and organized 
process [20][21].   
In this study, an initial framework has been suggested in 
order to distribute the health awareness knowledge to public 
in an effective manner (refer to Figure 10). The framework 
suggests that publishing health awareness message should be 
organized and follow through seven stages with sub stages. In 
the first stage, the health disease or problem that needs health 
awareness message designed for should be determine. The 
determination process is based on health organizations 
awareness priorities set up and highlighted in their health 
communication strategy and plan. Once the health disease or 
issue is specified, the second stage is to collect authentic, 
accurate and relevant material on it. In this stage, information 
and material can be gathered from multiple sources such as 
certified health websites, health education specialist or 
doctors/physicians. In the third stage, the design stage, 
consists of two sub-stages: content design and technical 
design. In the content design, the relevant information on the 
health disease should be only selected and included in the 
message. This can also be accomplished by health education 
specialist or doctors/physicians. In the technical design, media 
content should be selected and included. Content media can 
be text, photo, video, audio, cartoon, and cartoon drawing. 
This should be based on the social media being used. 
However, the most effective media content are text, cartoon 
and cartoon drawings. In this stage, graphical designer or 
specialist can be used. In the fourth stage, the health 
organizations should decide on the responsible for publishing 
the message. IT department, health education department or 
public health department can be responsible for this stage. In 
the fifth stage, organizations can employ a wide range of 
social media platforms to deliver their health messages.  
 
 
Figure 10.  A proposed framework for publishing health awareness 
using social media 
The most effective platforms are Facebook, Twitter, 
WhatsApp and Snapchat. Since Twitter has seen exponential 
growth in the use of health promotion, it is important to find 
out the factors that attribute tweets to be effective and 
impactful in delivering the health awareness message. Twitter 
allows users to communicate and interact with followers in 
messages called a tweet with a maximum length of 280 
characters. A tweet can be included with a photo or a video 
and link to the primary source (URL) [13][14]. According to 
global Statics [15], Twitter has an estimated 330 million active 
users per month. There are many features that reinforce the 
level of engagement in Twitter such as retweets, likes, 
mentions and replies [16]. In the sixth stage, organizations 
evaluate the impact and effectiveness of the health awareness 
message on the short and long-term. On the short-term, 
organizations can use observations, patient’s comment on 
social media or direct questions to assess the impact of health 
  
Determine the health 
problem that needs 
message design for  
Collect material on the health 
problem  
Is the 
message 
effective? 
 
 
Selecting social media platforms  
(Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube)  
Evaluating the health awareness 
message on the short and long-term 
based on defined criteria   
Yes  
No  
Selecting publisher  
(IT dept., Health Education Dept., Public 
Relation Dept.)  
 
Technical design 
(Text, video, audio 
photo)  
Content design 
Health information to be 
included   
Design stage   
Figure 9. The process of developing the framework 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

awareness message. On the long-term, organization can use 
one of any statistical methods, the amount of drug consumed 
is reduced, severity of disease’s conditions is reduced or 
increased the number of people who are doing the early 
detection of specific disease and its complications to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the health awareness message. The results 
of the evaluation process determine the actions of health 
organizations regarding the health message. If the message 
was effective, the organizations can then contain publishing 
the message. However, if the message is ineffective, the 
organizations should go back and improve both the content 
and technical design of the message 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper aims to enhance our understanding of the 
process of publishing health awareness message via social 
media platforms. To this end, a survey was administered to 
selected health organizations to understand the current state 
and practices of publishing health awareness message to the 
public. The analysis of current practices revealed that the 
process lacked a systematic and unified approach to publish 
health message. The health organizations varied considerable 
in terms of the social media platforms used, content writer, 
designer, publisher and content elements. Although the use of 
wide range of social media platforms may enable 
organizations to reach a wide number of audiences, it may 
affect their ability to receive and understand resulted from 
information overload. To address this, this paper developed a 
unified framework for publishing health awareness message.  
The area of social media in health communication is still 
in its infancy [22][23][24]. Future research could explore 
factors influencing individual’s intentions to use social media 
for health information. For example, one could draw on the 
Theory of Planned Behaviours to understand how attitudes, 
social pressure (family and friends) and behavioural control 
variables may influence their intentions to use and look for 
health information on social media platforms. Another 
research opportunity is to investigate, using experiments 
methods, attributes of effective health awareness message 
from the individual’s perspective. This will inform the health 
policymakers and practitioners design of effective health 
message. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. S. Suggs, C. McIntyre, W. Warburton, S. Henderson, and P. Howitt, 
“Communicating health messages: a framework to increase the 
effectiveness of health communication globally,” Report of the WISH 
Communicating Complex, Institute of Global Health Innovation, 
Imperial College London, 2015. 
[2] J. M. Bernhardt, “Communication at the core of effective public 
health,” American Journal of Public Health, vol. 94, no. 12, pp. 2051-
2053, 2004. 
[3] W. Y. S. Chou, Y. M. Hunt, and B. W. Hesse, “S’ocial media use in 
the United States: implications for health communication,” Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, vol. 11, no. 4, 2009. 
[4] M. M. Al-Debei, E. Al-Lozi, and A. Papazafeiropoulou, “Why people 
keep coming back to Facebook: Explaining and predicting continuance 
participation from an extended theory of planned behaviour 
perspective,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 43-54, 
2013. 
[5] S. A. Moorhead et al., “A New Dimension of Health Care : Systematic 
Review of the Uses , Benefits , and Limitations of Social Media for 
Health Communication,” Journal Of Medical Internet Research, vol. 
15, no. 4, pp. 1–16, doi: 10.2196/jmir.1933, 2013. 
[6] A. M. Kaplan, and M. Haenlein, “Users of the world, unite! The 
challenges and opportunities of Social Media,” Business Horizons, vol. 
53, no. 1, pp. 59-68, doi: 10.1016/j.bushor.2009.09.003, 2010. 
[7] Y. Albalawi, and J. Sixsmith, “Identifying Twitter in fl uencer pro fi 
les for health promotion in Saudi Arabia,” Health Promotion 
International, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 456-463, doi: 10.1093/heapro/dav103, 
2015. 
[8] A. Benetoli et al., “Professional Use of Social Media by Pharmacists : 
A Qualitative Study,” Journal Of Medical Internet Research, vol. 18, 
no. 9, doi: 10.2196/jmir.5702, 2016. 
[9] C. Ferguson et al., “Social media : A tool to spread information : A case 
study analysis of Twitter conversation at the Cardiac Society of 
Australia & New Zealand 61st Annual Scientific Meeting 2013,” 
Collegian Journal of the Royal College of Nursing Australia, vol. 21, 
no. 2, pp. 89–93, doi: 10.1016/j.colegn.2014.03.002, 2014. 
[10] E. Brusilovskiy, G. Townley, G. Snethen, and M. S. Salzer, “Social 
media use, community participation and psychological well-being 
among individuals with serious mental illnesses,” Computers in 
Human 
Behavior, 
vol. 
65, 
pp. 
232-240, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.chb.2016.08.036, 2016. 
[11] J. Salem, H. Borgmann, and D. G. Murphy, “Integrating Social Media 
into Urologic Health care: What Can We Learn from Other 
Disciplines?,” Current Urology Reports, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1-7, doi: 
10.1007/s11934-015-0570-2, 2016. 
[12] F. J. Grajales, S. Sheps, K. Ho, H. Novak-Lauscher, and G. Eysenbach, 
“Social media: A review and tutorial of applications in medicine and 
health care,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 16, no. 2, doi: 
10.2196/jmir.2912, 2014. 
[13] K. Wagner, Twitter is testing a big change: Doubling the length of 
tweets from 140 to 280 characters. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.recode.net/2017/9/26/16364002/twitter-longer-tweets-
character-limit-140-280 , 2017. 
[14] G. B. Colbert, J. Topf, and M. A. Sparks, “The Social Media 
Revolution in Nephrology Education,” Kidney International Reports, 
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 519-529, doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2018.02.003, 2018. 
[15] Statista, Most famous social network sites worldwide as of October 
2018, ranked by number of active users (in millions). [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.statista.com/statistics/272014/global-
social-networks-ranked-by-number-of-users/, 2018. 
[16] Y. A. Albalawi, and J. Sixsmith, “Exploring the diffusion of tweets 
designed to raise the road safety agenda in Saudi Arabia,” Global 
Health 
Promotion, 
vol. 
24, 
no. 
4, 
pp. 
5-13, 
doi: 
10.1177/1757975915626111, 2016. 
[17] H. Korda, and Z. Itani, “Harnessing social media for health promotion 
and behavior change,” Health promotion practice, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 
15-23, doi: 10.1177/1524839911405850, 2013. 
[18] C. Hawn, “Take two aspirin and tweet me in the morning: how Twitter, 
Facebook, and other social media are reshaping health care,” Health 
affairs, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 361-368, doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.28.2.361, 2009.  
[19] M. L. Antheunis, K. Tates, and T. E. Nieboer, "Patients’ and health 
professionals’ use of social media in health care: motives, barriers and 
expectations," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 92, no. 3, pp. 
426-431, 2013. 
[20] R. Thackeray, B. L. Neiger, A. K. Smith, and S. B. V. Wagenen, 
“Adoption and use of social media among public health departments,” 
BMC Public Health, vol. 12, no. 242 , 2012. 
[21] A. B. Heldman, J. Schindelar, J. B. Weaver, “Social media engagement 
and public health communication: implications for public health 
organizations being truly “social”,” Public Health Reviews, vol. 35, no. 
13, 2013. 
[22] J. Fisher and M. Clayton, “Who gives a tweet: assessing patients’ 
interest in the use of social media for health care,”  Worldviews on 
Evidence‐Based Nursing, 9(2), 100-108, 2012. 
[23] C. Hanson et al., “Use and acceptance of social media among health 
educators,” American Journal of Health Education, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 
197-204, 2011. 
[24] M. A. Wakefield, B. Loken, and R. C. Hornik, “Use of mass media 
campaigns to change health behaviour,” The Lancet, vol. 376, no. 
9748, pp. 1261-1271, 2010. 
 
 
 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

