Innovative Project For Domomedicine Deployment 
The PiCADo Pilot Project 
 
 
Monique Maurice, 
Francis Lévi 
Rythmes Biologiques et 
Cancers 
UMRS776 INSERM 
Villejuif, France 
firstname.name@inserm.fr 
 
Gabrièle Breda, Nicolas 
Beaumatin 
Altran Research,  Altran  
Vélizy-Villacoublay, France 
firstname.name @altran.com 
Alexandre Duclos 
MADoPA 
Rosières Près Troyes, 
France 
firstname.name@madopa.fr 
 
Aly Chkeir, David 
Hewson, Jacques 
Duchêne 
UMR CNRS 6281 
Université de Technologie 
de Troyes  
Troyes, France 
firstname.name@utt.fr 
 
 
 
Abstract— PiCADo is a pilot project of domomedicine. 
Domomedicine has been defined by the French Academy of 
Technologies as "all procedures and care, sometimes complex, 
given at the patient's home or in his social and professional 
activities, [...] based on modern technologies. It aims at 
facilitating home support and promoting medical progress". 
Domomedicine can be seen as a system coordinating eHealth, 
telemedicine and social medicine. Through the PiCADo 
platform -a multi-user and multi-pathology technological 
platform- the PiCADo project will allow home monitoring of 
patients with cancer or cognitive impairment with loss of 
autonomy, based on the latest medical and scientific advances 
highlighting the importance of biological rhythms in the 
development of such diseases. As a work in progress, the 
technological platform has been developed through a 
collaborative methodology. 
Keywords - Domomedicine; Circadian System; Biological 
Rhythms; Cancer; Cognitive Disorders with Loss of Autonomy; 
chronic diseases. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The development of information and communication 
technologies and their large distribution in the population 
allows considering drastic changes in our health care 
systems. Widespread Internet access and daily use of mobile 
phones or tablets by users of all ages, from all socio-
professional categories, of any culture, and any region, 
makes it possible to access medical information and health 
applications, leading people to contribute more actively to 
decisions regarding their own health. This societal trend of 
“connected 
health” allows 
more patients 
to 
avoid 
hospitalization. Medical care at home ensures safety and 
quality of care at least equivalent to conventional care. 
In the same time, our health care systems must evolve as 
a result of demographic and socio-economic constraints. 
Indeed, incidence of chronic diseases is growing steadily, 
and this is partly related to life expectancy's extension. The 
average life expectancy has been increasing three months per 
year since 1950 in France, where expected years of life once 
at the age of 65 are 23.2 years for females and 18.7 years for 
men. In France, at least one chronic disease affects more than 
60% of people aged over 65 years [1]. Chronic diseases 
disrupt patients’ quality of life and impact the national health 
expenditures. Most chronic diseases need long-term medical 
care and, sometimes, complex care. In France, long term 
diseases affected 8,000,000 patients in 2004, and four groups 
of diseases alone account for almost 80% of long term 
diseases: cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes and 
psychiatric disorders [2]. The increasing incidence of chronic 
diseases, co-morbidities, as well as the length and 
complexity of their medical, therapeutic and social support, 
have created a necessity to develop solutions that enable 
patients and / or elderly people to maintain their autonomy, 
to preserve a good quality of life, in order to prevent further 
health deterioration. The reactive nature of the current 
medical care organization does not appear to be adapted to 
the complex dynamics of chronic diseases, nor to their 
frequent associations, and their long lasting courses. 
Healthcare stakeholders in France consider that necessary 
technologies to an evolution towards a home patient-centered 
health care system are now available. However, their usages 
remain fragmented, dedicated to a single disease or a single 
purpose [3]. Hundreds of experiments have been carried out 
without creating the conditions for the spread of methods and 
results, because of a lack of perspective of evolution towards 
an integrated system of health. However, a number of these 
experiments are considered as real success from the 
perspective of patients and caregivers. In this context, 
various 
French 
institutions 
like 
the 
Academy 
of 
Technologies and the High Authority for Health under the 
leadership of the General Direction of Care Offer analyzed 
the reasons of this limited development. The Academy of 
Technologies has highlighted the need for an integrated 
solution that considers the overall care of the patient at 
home, and, if necessary, hospitalization, without pathology 
segmentation. The Academy has pointed out problems of 
systems' redundancy, limitations due to a limited range of 
devices on the market, and difficulties encountered in these 
experiments to get integrated into the regional health 
information systems. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Hence, to deal with the increasing burden of chronic 
diseases challenging current European healthcare systems on 
the one hand, and to help facilitating the deployment of 
advanced technological solutions, the French Academy of 
Technologies has proposed domomedicine as a new 
integrated patient-centered model of care, adapted for multi-
user, multi-pathologies, hence co-morbidities. The goal is to 
group acts and care in patient's home or in his social and 
professional activities. Those acts should be comparable in 
quantity and quality to those made in the hospital, and 
supported by information and communication systems and 
services [4][5]. This should allow maintaining patients at 
home or in their socio-professional activities with equal or 
better quality of care, while promoting medical progress. 
Indeed, the ultimate purpose of domomedicine is to bring 
medical progress in patients' houses, thanks to scientific and 
technological advances, as well as to the coordination of 
health and social professionals and caregivers made possible 
by the development of information and communication 
technologies. Telemedicine and telehealth consist in the 
transmission of medical data between health professionals or 
between a patient and his doctor. They represent useful tools 
for domomedicine, but they are usually focused on a single 
function or disease and/or do not propose social services 
(e.g., CorBene, Mein Herz, PTP, E-Cardiocare, Patient 
Briefcase) [6]. Domomedicine implies simultaneously 
clinical and social aspects. Domomedecine may be seen as 
the step following the invention and spreading of telecare 
and telehealth devices. It is the technical and social system 
coordinating those technologies, to provide a complete health 
care solution at home. Deployment of domomedicine 
therefore represents a medical, economic and societal issue 
at European and international level. 
In this context, the French domomedicine Consortium 
has been constituted in 2010 as a joint initiative of the 
Academy of Technologies and the Champagne-Ardenne 
region. Its ambition it co concretize domomedicine 
deployment. This led to the creation of the first pilot project 
PiCADo, launched in 2012. This research and development 
project has been labeled by a French innovation cluster, 
Systematic, and is co-funded by an inter-ministerial fund. 
The original PiCADo Consortium is composed of eight 
academic and industrial groups (including INSERM, Troyes 
University of Technology, and Altran as coordinator) who 
have been joined during the project by a number of other 
interested partners (hospitals, device manufacturers, service 
providers, health and training networks and associations, 
mutual insurance company, regional innovation agency) (see 
Figure 1).  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Stakeholders of the PiCADo project 
 
The PiCADo project aims to design, develop, deploy and 
assess a domomedicine platform. This platform will allow 
integrated and personalized home monitoring and care, 
adapted to circadian rhythms, for patients with cancer and 
cognitive impairment with loss of autonomy. Indeed, recent 
chrono-biological research has shown that most of physical, 
physiological, psychological and behavioral parameters, such 
as exercise, rest [7], and body temperature [8][9], are 
regulated cyclically on 24 hours by a network of 15 specific 
genes. This network of molecular clocks is coordinated by a 
pacemaker, the supra-chiasmatic nuclei of the hypothalamus, 
which coordinates the various components of the circadian 
system and adjusts them to environmental cycles. In patients 
with cancer [9][10] and cognitive disorders [11], strong 
perturbations of the circadian rhythm have been shown in 
relationships with quality of life and survival. 
Moreover, these two diseases differ both in their 
temporality (fast evolution for cancer, slow evolution for 
cognitive impairment with loss of autonomy) and 
organization of care (focused on hospital for cancer and on 
home for cognitive impairment with loss of autonomy). 
Those differences make them good candidate models to 
prove that PiCADo actually addresses multi-disease and 
multi-users' issue.  
In Section II, we present the methodology used to 
develop the platform, and Section III describes the developed 
technological platform as preliminary results. To conclude, 
Section IV presents experimentation plans as short term 
perspectives. 
 
II. 
METHODS 
 
Use-case scenarios have first been specified with relevant 
stakeholders (including health professionals, patients and 
engineers) in multidisciplinary workshops, to adapt the 
platform to pathologies and users’ needs. Those scenarios 
have been completed with a qualitative socio-anthropologic 
field analysis of current issues related to care support for 
both pathologies.     
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The platform has then been developed using a 
collaborative knowledge management process to extract 
important multi-dimensional information (technical, but also 
social, organizational, economical, legal aspects, etc.). 
The PiCADo platform will be deployed in two different 
French regions (Ile-de-France and Champagne-Ardenne) 
with two hospitals and one health network, under an 
interregional multicenter clinical study that will cover 
initially 70 patients. 
The methodology of evaluation will take into account 
medical, organizational, human, technical, economic, legal 
and ethical aspects, according to European and French 
guidelines and criteria (GEMSA, MAST). 
III. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS: THE PICADO PLATFORM 
 
The PiCADo technological platform (see Figure 2) is a 
monitoring communicating platform which integrates several 
lightweight and portable technologies made interoperable 
(sensor, collector, geolocation watch, digital tablet, digital 
pen collector, information systems).  
 
 
Figure 2. Architecture of the platform installed at home for patients with 
cancer/ cognitive impairment with loss of autonomy  
The platform allows non-invasive and automatic collection 
of different markers of biological rhythms (activity, position, 
temperature) and health status of the patient (body weight, 
evaluation of the quality of life, geolocation, etc.) at home or 
during his daily activities. Most of the data is sent via 
Bluetooth to a collector box which transmits them via GPRS 
to a management server where they are stored securely in a 
patient's health record. Other devices such as touchpad and 
geolocation device are able to transmit data directly using the 
Internet or the mobile network. Authorized users can access 
record information via a secure web interface, add different 
type of patient information (health, nutrition, psychology, 
etc.) and communicate with other care givers via the same 
interface [12]. Automatic pre-analysis of data is coupled to 
notifications sending to care professionals, which they can 
reset. Tele-monitoring allows early detection of potential 
health deterioration, and consequently better prevention. 
Data analysis also allows professional caregivers a better 
understanding of patients’ rhythms, to adjust treatments and 
to propose adapted dietician or psychological services to 
their patients. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES 
 
The objective of the platform is to minimize impacts of 
chronic disease on patient by acting on several levels: 
prevention of disease progression, centralization of patient 
information, and harmonization of coordination between 
general practice and hospital sectors, formal and informal 
caregivers, resulting in greater efficiency of care. 
 
The deployment phase, planned for 2015, will allow the 
multidimensional assessment of the multi-pathology and 
multi-user values of the PiCADo system for all stakeholders 
(health professionals of general practice and hospital sectors, 
home and nutritional monitoring service providers, patient, 
family and informal care givers, industrials). Adapted 
business model will be designed through a first evaluation of 
the service delivered and through proof of concept of 
domomedicine. This study represents the first step of a 
nationwide and European deployment of domomedicine. 
Furthermore, the clinical study will lead to the 
establishment of an original database on biological rhythms 
and symptoms of patients in their living environment. The 
detection of biological rhythms disturbances are expected to 
anticipate the deterioration in the condition of the patient and 
to avoid emergency hospital admissions. Detailed knowledge 
of the relationship between a patient’s rhythms and his 
pathology evolution should eventually lead to personalized 
treatments. Moreover, the nutritional status monitoring 
should improve the prevention of health deterioration 
through early treatment of malnutrition which is an 
aggravating factor.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the French financial sponsors of the project: 
Champagne-Ardenne region, Ile-de-France region, Mairie de 
Paris, and BPIFrance. We thank French Academy of 
Technologies, Champagne-Ardenne agency for innovation 
(CARINNA), Champagne-Ardenne regional union of liberal 
health professionals (URPSML) for their active support.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. M. Robine and E. Cambois, Life expectancy in good health 
of European people. Populations et Société, INED, 2013. 
[2] A. Weill and N. Vallier, Frequency of 30 long-term 
conditions. Actualité et dossier en santé publique, 59, 2007. 
[3] Haute Autorité de Santé, Efficiency of telemedicine: review 
of international literature and evaluation framework, 2013. 
[4] F. Lévi and C. Saguez, Patient, technologies and ambulatory 
medicine, Académie des Technologies, 2008. 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[5] A. Franco, Report of the French mission - Live at home, 
Ministère du travail de la solidarité et de la fonction publique, 
2010. 
[6] Syntec-Numérique/Snitem, Telemedicine 2020: economic 
models for the remote monitoring of chronic diseases, Livre 
Blanc, 2013. 
[7] E. J. W. Van Someren and R. F. R. Van Der Lek, “Live to the 
rhythm, slave to the rhythm”, Biological Psychiatry. s.l. : 
Elsevier, 2007, Vol. 11, pp. 465–484. 
[8] C. Dibner, U. Schibler, and U. Albrecht, “The Mammalian 
circadian timing system: organization and coordination of 
central and peripheral clocks”, Annu Rev Physiol., 2010, Vol. 
72, pp. 517-549. 
[9] P. F. Innominato, V. Roche, O. G. Palesh, A. Ulusakarya, D. 
Spiegel, and F. Lévi, “The Circadian Timing System in 
Clinical Oncology”, Annals of medicine, 2014, Vol. 46(4), 
pp191-207. 
[10] E. Ortiz-Tudela, A. Mteyrek, A. Ballesta, P. F. Innominato, 
and F. Lévi, “Cancer chronotherapeutics: experimental, 
theoretical, and clinical aspects”, [ed.] Merrow M. KramerA. 
Circadian Clocks - Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology, 
s.l. : Springer, 2013, Vol. 217, pp. 261-288. 
[11] A. N. Coogan, et al., “The Circadian System in Alzheimer’s 
Disease: Disturbances, Mechanisms, and Opportunities”, 
Biological Psychiatry. s.l. : Elsevier Inc, September 1, 2013, 
Vol. 74, 5, pp. 333–339. 
[12] M. Maurice, et al., “Projet Innovant pour le Changement 
d’Ampleur de la Domomédecine (PiCADo)”, colloque 
JETSAN, 
2014.
 
 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

