Intravenous Drip Infusion Monitoring System  
with Body Area Communication Tag 
 
Yoshitoshi Murata, Kazuhiro Yoshida 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp, kyoshida@ipu-office.iwate-pu.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— Intravenous drip infusion is a common method of 
administering medication. However, it is difficult for a nurse to 
continuously monitor the administration since it can take more 
than one hour. It is difficult to instantly detect problems such 
as removal of a drip infusion administration set by a patient or 
an empty bag. We propose an intravenous drip infusion 
monitoring system equipped with body area communication 
tags that can instantly detect such incidents. 
Keywords- 
intravenous 
drip 
infusion; 
body 
area 
communication tag; medication; medical administration 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Intravenous 
drip 
infusion 
is 
widely 
used 
for 
administering medication in hospitals. However, it is 
difficult to continuously monitor administration, since it can 
take more than one hour. Therefore, it is difficult to instantly 
detect incidents. The following incidents should be 
monitored. 
- Infusion rate: Changing of infusion rate causes 
insufficient therapy or serious problems. 
- Empty medication bag: Empty medication bag 
sometimes results in a blocked cannula by blood and 
has to be exchanged with a new one. 
- Remaining quantity of medication fluid in the bag: It is 
possible to estimate changing of infusion rate and 
empty medication from the remaining quantity of 
medication fluid. 
- Getting the drip administration set off the body: Getting 
the drip administration set off results in insufficient 
therapy. In case of administering toxic medication such 
as anticancer drugs, a skin with which toxic medication 
oozing through a cannula is stained sometimes becomes 
necrotic.  
 
Several types of intravenous drip infusion monitoring 
equipment have been developed. Optical devices, such as Ir-
da, are widely used to measure the drip rate [1][2][3][4][5]. 
Ogawa et al. developed a system for measuring the drip rate 
using electrodes instead of optical devices [6]. However, the 
drip rate is not steady, and the size of the drip is not the same 
[7]. Generally, lower the drip rate, smaller the drip size. For 
steady and accurate infusion, it is necessary to equip an 
ordinary administration set with some form of servo-control 
mechanism. Barros and dos Santos proposed not only 
monitoring the drip rate but also controlling it to maintain 
steady and accurate infusion [1]. However, since their system 
estimates the infusion rate from the drip rate and does not 
take into account the change in drip size, it is difficult to 
accurately estimate the infusion rate. On the other hand, 
Wang and Chen estimated the infusion rate instead of the 
drip rate using an ultrasonic transducer [8]. Cataldo et al. 
proposed a measuring scheme to estimate the remaining 
quantity of fluid in a bag. They used the microwave time-
domain reﬂectometry (TDR) to estimate this [9][10]. Their 
system can measure the infusion rate from the remaining 
quantity, not the drip rate. Huang and Lin proposed a 
warning system using Radio Frequency Identification 
(RFID) to detect an empty bag [11]. 
Current systems and tools cannot detect getting the drip 
administration set off the body. Some cognitively impaired 
patients 
consciously 
remove 
their 
drip 
infusion 
administration sets by themselves. Hence, a monitoring 
system that can detect such behavior is needed. We propose 
an intravenous drip infusion monitoring system that can 
detect both an empty bag and removal of a drip infusion 
administration set. We previously presented the results of a 
feasibility study of our proposed system [12]. We use body 
area communication tags called the Touch tag to estimate 
both actions. The Touch tag is developed and supplied by 
Adsol Nissin Corp. [13]. 
After related work is discussed in Section II, we describe 
the basic principle and structure of our proposed system in 
Section III. The basic characteristics of the proposed system 
are presented in Section IV. The experimental parameters of 
the system and evaluations we conducted are described in 
Section V. The key points are summarized and future work is 
mentioned in Sections VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we introduce schemes for detecting the 
remaining fluid in a bag and body area communication tags, 
which are related to our system. 
A. Schemes for detecting remaining fluid in intravenous 
bag 
Cataldo et al. used microwave TDR for a two-strip 
adhesive probe attached to a bag to estimate the remaining 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

quantity of fluid in the bag, as shown in Fig. 1 [9][10]. The 
TRD value varies corresponding to the remaining quantity 
of fluid. The measuring accuracy may be acceptable. 
However, since it requires a TRD measuring instrument, 
such as a network analyzer, and to measure TRD value vs. 
remaining quantity of fluid for kinds of bag or medication. 
Huang and Lin used RFID to detect an empty bag [11]. 
A RFID tag is attached to the bottom of an intravenous bag. 
They argued that a tag reader could read a RFID from a few 
meters during fluid level was under a RFID tag, as shown in 
Fig. 2. However, they did not provide practical experimental 
data on if a tag reader could read RFID. 
 
Figure 1. Scheme for measuring remaining liquid quantity using TDR 
 
 
Figure 2. Scheme for detecting an empty bag using RFID 
B. Body area communication tag 
There are two types of body area communication 
systems [14]. One involves the human body as a data-bus 
between devices attached to the body. The other involves a 
radio system used as a communication system between 
devices attached to the body. The first type was invented by 
T. G. Zimmerman in 1996 [15]. His body area 
communication system used the variable of the electric field 
on the body of which the frequency range was from 0.1 to 1 
MHz. He built a prototype operating at 330 kHz. However, 
since he chose a frequency range from 0.1 to 1.0 MHz to 
suppress electric-field emissions, probably it was difficult to 
achieve stable communication because of the significant 
ambient noise. Ambient noise usually presents itself at 
frequencies below 1 MHz. When the transmission signal is 
strong enough to maintain stable communication, there is no 
difference between his system and existing near-field 
communication systems such as WiFi and Bluetooth. 
Ultimately, Zimmerman stopped developing this technology 
and chose the second scheme. 
Panasonic Electric Works Co. Ltd. developed a touch 
communication system using the variable of the electric 
current in a body instead of the electric field to avoid the 
ambient noise in 2004 [16]. 
Yuichi Kado evolved Zimmerman’s body area 
communication system [17]. He selected the frequency band 
from 5 to 10 MHz to avoid the ambient noise and developed 
a modulation scheme to efficiently modulate the electric 
field near the body and receiver circuits which reduce 
ambient noise such as electrical hum.  
Our partner, Ad-Sol Nissin Corp., introduced a semi-
active scheme to improve the battery life cycle of tags used 
in evolved electric field schemes [13]. It is possible to use a 
tag for a few years without having to replace the battery. We 
chose Ad-Sol Nissin’s Touch tag to develop a medication 
error protection system [18], since it is possible to 
communicate over clothes or shoes and the life cycle of the 
tag is long. The Touch tag was used for verifying the 
relationship among an intravenous bag, patient, and nurse. 
We noticed that the received signal level when the Touch 
tag was touched directly was different from the level when 
the tag was touched through an intravenous bag. 
III. 
BASIC PRINCIPLE AND SYSTEM STRUCTURE 
A. Basic principle 
Our system uses Touch tag features to detect an empty 
intravenous bag and a removal of a drip infusion 
administration set. The Touch tag reader sends a calling 
signal over the electric field for the Touch tag to send a reply 
message. The tag that received the calling signal sends a 
reply message including its ID over the electric field. 
Therefore, the tag reader can read the ID in a tag a few 
centimeters away from it without requiring any media. In 
addition, when there are ionized media, such as isotonic 
sodium chloride solution, in a tube between a reader and tag, 
the distance from where the reader can read the tag becomes 
longer. When a person touches the tube between a reader and 
tag, the communication length becomes very short. The 
reason is that the electric field generates between a tag and 
the ground via a person in addition to a section between a 
reader and tag, and the strength of the electric field between 
a reader and tag weakens.  
It is possible to detect an empty bag by changing from 
able to read a tag to unable to read a tag derived from fluid in 
a tube being empty.  
The removal of a drip infusion administration set is 
detected by changing from unable to read a tag to able to 
read a tag, because of the patient removing the tube and the 
tag together with the cannula. The tube was attached to an 
arm or other body parts of a patient before removing. It is 
difficult to detect if a patient removed only the cannula. 
However, we believe that a cognitively impaired patient may 
remove the tube and tag together with the cannula. 
B. System structure 
The structure of our proposed system is shown in Fig. 3. 
A tag reader is attached to a tube beneath a chamber, Tag1 is 
attached to the tube at longer than the longest position that a 
reader can read a tag’s ID when there is no fluid in the tube 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

(L1), and Tag2 is attached to the tube between the shortest 
position that a reader cannot read a tag’s ID when a person 
touches it (L2) and the longest position that a reader can read 
a tag’s ID when there is fluid in the tube (L3). L1, L2 and L3 
are lengths from a reader. An arm is attached to the tube at a 
position near Tag2. Not reading Tag1 means the amount of 
fluid in the tube is nothing; and reading Tag1 and Tag2 
simultaneously means the tube was removed from an arm. 
When a PC detects no amount of fluid in a bag or a tube has 
been removed, it sends an alert to the nurses’ station. Only 
Tag1 is needed for detecting only an empty bag. On the other 
hand, only Tag2 is needed for detecting a removal of a drip 
infusion administration set. 
One of the advantages of the proposed system is that 
installation is very easy. Attaching an electric-probe or an 
RFID on a bag is not necessary. Installation only involves 
fastening an electrode of a reader and one or two tags to a 
tube. For this research, the electrode of a reader was fastened 
using magic tape and a tag was fastened using a rubber band, 
as shown in Fig. 4. Fastening becomes easier to change them 
to clipping type. 
 
 
Figure 3. System structure 
IV. 
BASIC CHARACTERISTICS 
A.  Humidity 
Since the touch tag is an electric-field-type tag, we 
assumed L1, L2 and L3 would be affected by humidity. We 
measured the relationship between L1, L2, L3 and humidity 
for two tags on three different days, as shown in Fig. 4. This 
photo shows when measuring L2. We used a bag filled with 
an isotonic sodium chloride solution. 
An electrode of the reader was attached to a tube beneath 
a chamber with magic tape. A tube was attached to a 
patient’s arm between an electrode and  a tag with gummed 
tape, and Touch tags were attached to the same tube with a 
rubber band to easily change their positions. Since a reader 
can surely read a tag at less than or equal to L1 or L3, the 
measured data were of the longest length on which a reader 
can read a tag continuously 10 times. The other hand, since a 
reader surely cannot read a tag at longer than or equal to L2, 
the measured data were of the shortest length on which a 
reader cannot read a tag continuously 10 times. 
The measurement data of L1, L2, and L3 are shown in 
Figs. 5, 6 and 7, respectively. We could not find any effects 
of humidity on the readability of touch tags. The reader 
could not read a tag 18 cm away, when there was not fluid in 
a tube, as shown in Fig. 5. Therefore, Tag1 must be attached 
to a tube more than 18 cm from the reader-electrode. The 
reader could not read a tag’s ID more 60 cm away, when 
someone touched the tube, as shown in Fig. 6, but it could 
read the tag within 84 cm, when there was fluid in a tube, as 
shown in Fig. 7. From these experimental data, Tag2 must be 
attached to a tube between 60 and 84 cm from the reader-
electrode. 
 
Figure 4. Photograph of measuring L2 
 
Figure 5. Measurement results of L1 
 
Figure 6. Measurement results of L2 
 
Figure 7. Measurement results of L3 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Angle between reader-electrode and tag 
The electrode of a touch tag reader and a touch tag is 
designed to generate an electric field on the surface of the 
body. Therefore, they have directional characteristics. We 
measured the received signal strength for a tag of which the 
direction increased 15 degrees from 0 to 315 degrees. The 
measurement conditions were as follows; 
- 
There was fluid in the tube, or it was empty. 
- 
Distances between the reader and a tag were 5 and 
10 cm. 
We used an intravenous bag filled with an isotonic sodium 
chloride solution. 
The data were averaged over ten received signals. The 
measurement data are shown in Fig. 8. When there was fluid 
in the tube, the directional pattern was omni-directional. On 
the other hand, when there was not fluid in the tube, the 
received signal strength was stronger in the same or opposite 
direction between the reader-electrode and tag. 
For detecting the 
removal of 
a drip infusion 
administration set, since there was fluid in a tube, a nurse did 
not have to focus on the attaching angle of Tag2. On the 
other hand, L1 has to be considered. However, when we 
measured L1 (Fig. 5), the angle between the reader-electrode 
and tag varied every time. We believe the measurement data 
include this variation. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Directional characteristics of angle between reader-electrode and 
tag 
 
C. Touching tube between reader-electrode and tag 
An electric-field-type body area communication tag and 
reader-electrode generate an electric field between them and 
the earth via the human body when a person touches a tube 
between a reader-electrode and a tag, as shown in Fig. 9. 
Therefore, the received signal strength from a tag to the 
reader weaken when the person touches the tube. We 
measured how much the received signal strength was 
affected when someone touched the tube between the reader-
electrode and tag, as shown in Fig. 9. The length between the 
reader-electrode and tag was 40 cm. There was fluid in the 
tube, which was attached to an arm with gummed tape. We 
used an intravenous bag filled with an isotonic sodium 
chloride solution. The measurement data are shown in Fig. 
10. The received signal strengths for Tag1 and Tag2 were 
roughly the same and always steady when a tube was 
removed from an arm. On the other hand, the received 
signals for Tag1 and Tag2 varied by about 5 dB, when a 
participant touched the tube. There was not big difference 
between values for each tag. There was a 15 – 20 dB 
difference between when a participant touched the tube and 
did not. Since the signal strength at 25 cm for both tags was 
weak and varied like a sine-wave, we estimated there was a 
standing wave on the tube. However, we miss-estimated 
since the frequency of the touch tag was 3.2 MHz . 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Image of electric-field between reader electrode, tag and earth via 
human 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Effect of participant touching tube between reader and tag 
 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

D. Simultaneously reading two tags 
The Touch tag uses the semi-active method. The tag 
responds to a compellation of a reader to suppress electricity 
consumption of the battery in a tag. Therefore, the reader 
sometimes fails to read when two tags send a response at the 
same time. We measured the characteristics for reading two 
tags simultaneously. Tag2 was attached to a tube 80 cm from 
the reader and Lr at which Tag1 was attached changed from 
20 to 70 cm, as shown in Fig. 11. We used an intravenous 
bag filled with an isotonic sodium chloride solution. The 
number of continuous miss-readings for each tag is shown in 
Fig. 12. In this figure, Lr is 20, 50 and 70 cm. The number of 
tag readings was 237 at 20 cm, 171 at 50 cm, and 253 at 70 
cm. The values in Fig. 12 were corrected to normalize 100 
readings.  
A reader could read Tag1 every time from Lr=20 to 40 cm. 
Since there is not a big difference between Lr=20 and 40 cm, 
the figure at 40 cm is not presented. The reason the reader 
could perfectly read Tag1 must be due to the fact that the 
signal strength from Tag1 is much stronger than that from 
Tag2. Hence, when Lr was 70 cm, the number of continuous 
miss-readings for Tag1 was the same as that for Tag2. We 
believe the number of continuous miss-readings for Tag1 and 
Tag2 being completely the same must be a coincidence. 
When a reader does not read Tag1, the tube must be empty, 
or the reader or tag is broken. The proposed system can 
instantly detect when a tube is empty. 
No more than nine miss-readings occurred at every Lr. 
when the drip infusion administration set was removed, our 
system must detect it within at least of ten trying to read a 
tag after removing occurence. It is possible to detect such 
actions within 10 sec., when the reading period is 1 sec.  
 
 
 
Figure.11 Positions at Tag 1 and Tag 2 for measuring characteristics for 
reading two tags simultaneousl 
 
 
(a) Distance from reader Lr=20 cm 
 
(b) Distance from reader Lr=50 cm 
 
(c) Distance from reader Lr=70 cm 
Figure 12. Miss-readings for two tags simultaneously 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 
From the results discussed in Section IV-A, we attached 
Tag1 20 cm from the reader and Tag2 70 cm from the reader, 
as shown in Fig. 3. The proposed system could detect an 
empty intravenous bag and a removal of a drip infusion 
administration set. We used an intravenous bag filled with 
an isotonic sodium chloride solution. The evaluations 
conditions were as follows. 
- When bag was empty: was continuously unable to read 
Tag1 10 times. We decided this condition to get 
certainty. 
- Removal of the drip infusion administration set: 
instantly could read Tag2. The reason we used this 
condition was that the reader may read Tag2 ten times 
to detect if an administration set was removed, 
derived from the results in Fig.12 (a). This means the 
detection speed was very slow.  
In our prototype system, an alert message for each 
incident was presented on a PC display. We determined if 
the bag was empty by pulling a tube off the bag instead of 
running fluid out of the bag. The reasons were that we did 
not have enough bags filled with the isotonic sodium 
chloride solution and it took too much time to measure. We 
did not connect a cannula to the tube. As a matter of course, 
we did not insert a cannula into a participant’s arm. There 
were seven participants.  
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

We measured five times whether the proposed system 
could detect an empty bag and removal of a drip 
administration set or not for each participant. The proposed 
system could perfectly detect both types of incidents.  
From the results in Fig. 12 (a), not being able to read 10 
times is too severe for detecting if a bag is empty. In fact, 
the system presented an alert message for an empty bag 
being just after pulling the tube off the bag during the 
experiments. This judgment condition will have to be 
changed in a commercial system. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We developed an intravenous drip infusion monitoring 
system using the Touch tags, a type of body area 
communication tag. This system can detect an empty 
infusion bag and removal of a drip infusion administration 
set by a patient. Unfortunately, this system cannot detect 
whether a cannula got off from the blood vessel or not, if the 
cannula is on or under the skin, because of the tube attached 
to the skin which prevents a reader to read the Tag2 keeping 
on the skin. 
One of the advantages of the proposed system is that 
installation is very easy. Installation only involves fastening 
an electrode of a reader and one or two tags to a tube. There 
also is no need to change an existing a drip infusion 
administration set. This system is applicable not only for 
standard gravity infusion administration sets but also a 
pump infusion administration sets. 
We have already demonstrated this system at an 
exhibition for medical and welfare appliances and no miss-
readings occurred. Since there is currently no monitoring 
system that can detect if a patient has removed his or her 
drip infusion administration set from his or her arm, our 
system was highly rated by participants such as nurses, 
doctors and medical equipment providers.  
We could not evaluate the proposed system in a real-
world situation for this research. Before evaluating the 
proposed system in such a situation, such as a hospital, we 
would like to change the design of the touch tag and 
electrode of the touch tag reader so that it can be easily 
attached to a tube, and transfer the decision function to a tag 
reader from a PC. We also plan to evaluate it in a real-world 
situation such as in a hospital. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Barros, and M. V. D. dos Santos, “A Safe, Accurate 
Intravenous Infusion Control System,” IEEE Micro, Vol. 18, 
No. 5, Sep./Oct. 1998, pp. 12–21. 
[2] M. Oden, Y. Miraval, M. Epstein, and R. Richard-Kortum, 
“Engaging 
Undergraduates 
to 
Solve 
Global 
Health 
Challenges: A New Approach Based on Bioengineering 
Design,” Annals of Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 38, No. 9, 
September 2010, pp. 3031–3041. 
[3] V. V. Kamble, P. C. Pandey, C. P. Gadgil, and D. S. 
Choudhary, “Monitoring of Intravenous Drip Rate,” Proc. of 
ICBME, December 2001, pp. 21-24. 
[4] Xinling, “Design of Medical Infusion Monitor and Protection 
System On Wireless Communication Technolgy,” IEEE, in 
Proc. Second International Symposium on Intelligent 
Information Technology Application, December 2008. 
[5] Y. S. Yang, H.C. Kim, “Development Of A Miniaturized IV 
Drip Rate Using Optical Sensors And Fuzzy Rule Based 
Detection 
Algorithm,” 
IEEE, 
in 
Proc. 
20th 
Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society, Vol.20, No.4, 1998. 
[6] H. Ogawa, H. Maki, S. Tsukamoto, Y. Yonezawa, H. Amano, 
and W. M. Caldwell, “A new drip infusion solution 
monitoring system with a free-flow detection function,” in 
Proc. 32nd Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE EMBS, Aug./Sep. 2010, pp. 
1214–1217. 
[7] F. C. Flack, and T. D. Whyte, “Behaviour of Standard 
Gravity-fed Administration Sets Used for Intravenous 
Infusion,” British Medical Journal, 17, Aug. 1974. 
[8] M.Wang, and J. Chen, “A high-precision gravity intravenous 
infusion rate meter using CMUT arrays,” in Proc. IEEE Int. 
Ultrason. Symposium, March 2009, pp. 1355–1358. 
[9] A. Cataldo, G. Cannazza, N. Giaquinto, A. Trotta, and G. 
Andria, “Development of a Remote System for Real-Time 
Control of Intravenous Drip Infusion,” IEEE, in Proc. 
Medical Measurements and Applications (MeMeA), May 
2011. 
[10] A. Cataldo, G. Cannazza, N. Giaquinto, A. Trotta and G. 
Andria, “Microwave TDR for Real-Time Control of 
Intravenous 
Drip 
Infusions,” 
IEEE, 
Transaction 
on 
Instrumentation and Measurement, Vol. 61, No.7, July 2012. 
[11] Chi-Fang Huang, and Jen-Hung Lin, “A Warning System 
Based on the RFID Technology for Running-Out of Injection 
Fluid,” IEEE, 33rd Annual International Conference of the 
IEEE EMBS, Aug./Sep. 2011. 
[12] S ． Takii ， Y． Murata， N． Sato ， and T． Takayama, 
“Proposal of Intravenous Drip Infusion Monitoring System 
with Body Area Communication Tags,” IPSJ, Proceedings of 
the 75th National Convention of IPSJ, March, 2013, 4ZG-7. 
(in Japanese) 
[13] Touch Tag, http://www.adniss.jp/en/archives/59, January, 
2014. 
[14] Intrabody communication, Nikkei Electronics, June, 30th, 
2008. (in Japanese) 
[15] T. G. Zimmerman, “Personal Area Networks: Near-field 
intrabody communication,” IBM Systems Journal, Vol.35, 
Nos. 3&4, 1996, pp.609-617. 
[16] Remarkable 
ubiquitous 
technologies: 
Body 
Area 
Communication 
(in 
Japanese), 
http://itpro.nikkeibp.co.jp/prembk/NBY/techsquare/20050304
/157032/, January, 2014. 
[17] Yuichi Kado, and Mitsuru Shinagawa, “RedTacton Near-body 
Electric-field 
Communications 
Technology 
and 
Its 
Applications,” NTT Technical Review, Vol. 8 No. 3 March 
2010. 
[18] Yoshitoshi Murata, Nobuyoshi Sato, Tsuyoshi Takayama, and 
Shuji Ikuta, “Medication Error Protection System with A 
Body Area Communication Tag”, ITU-T, Kaleidoscope 2013, 
April 2013, p.8. 
 
 
 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

