Chronically Ill Citizens and Home Monitoring: “Nothing to talk about”! 
RN, MSN, PhD Jane Clemensen1, MA Mette Atipei Craggs2, RN Jan Petersen2,                                                
MA Casper Dahl Marcussen2, Prof. Dr. Helmut Prior3                                                                                                            
1University of Southern Denmark, Research Unit of Nursing, Institute of Clinical Research, Odense, Denmark                       
2MedCom, Odense, Denmark                                                                                        
3Goethe-Universität, Institut für Psychologie, Frankfurt, Germany                                           
jclemensen@health.sdu.dk, mac@medcom.dk, jap@medcom.dk, cma@medcom.dk, prior@psych.uni-
frankfurt.de 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents local results from a large EU 
research study conducted from 2008-2012 (DREAMING). The 
aim of the study was to evaluate the effects of an ambient 
assisted living protocol, which may extend the independent life 
of chronically ill elderly people. Methods: The local findings 
are based on 10 semi-structured interviews with the involved 
citizens combined with local results of HADS and SF36. 
Results: Three main themes have been identified to have a 
positive influence on quality of life; feeling of safety, 
empowerment, and acceptance. Conclusions: all the citizens 
felt a positive influence on at least one of the mentioned themes 
and thethe technology was well integrated into their daily life. 
 
Keywords: patient empowerment; health IT; telemedicine; 
home monitoring, quality of life  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The current global health care system is under pressure for 
multiple reasons including aging populations, increased 
prevalence of chronic diseases, shortage of clinical personnel 
and increasing expectations from the patients.  
To live up to new patient expectations, the health care 
system must undergo a perceptual change towards increased 
centralization around the individual citizen – not patient.  
Hence, there is a need for a different approach in the way we 
– as a society – think of health care in order to accommodate 
this new role of the citizen. This new notion will require a 
change in culture both from staff in the health care sector and 
from society in general. 
This new culture needs to be established upon a set of 
appropriate values, including respect, solidarity, and 
involvement towards the individual citizen. Doing so will 
allow for high standards as regards both professional and 
organizational quality as well as experienced quality by the 
individual citizen. We must thereby facilitate a paradigm 
change from present paternalistic disease management to a 
more holistic and empathic approach [1]. 
To enable this change, development of technology can be 
an important tool, in particular if the technology is created in 
close cooperation with the users. Experiences show that user-
involvement in technological development processes is an 
effective leverage for organizational and cultural change 
[2][3].  
Part of the challenge associated with the new paradigm 
can be ascribed to the current fragmented nature of the health 
care system. There has been a tendency for individual health 
care providers to focus on isolated optimization of their own 
work flow (cf. the split into primary and secondary 
providers). The challenge becomes how to create a better 
continuity for the citizen in the navigation between the 
separate providers without sacrificing efficiency and 
experience for the individual provider [4].  
Such a vision involves a change of mindset for all 
stakeholders in health care, which makes it a rather all-
encompassing subject. In some aspects, however, local and 
regional 
concrete 
initiatives 
can 
make 
individual 
contributions to the greater, global cause relatively 
independently from each other. In these cases, the question is 
how to incentivize and facilitate such initiatives within an 
overall frame while keeping the main goal in sight.  
   The European Union has a vision about creating a new 
health care model to help accommodating such needed 
changes. The path towards this new model involves 
collaboration between countries, so that countries can work 
for the same goals by cooperating and sharing knowledge. 
For most countries there is a need for a collective change of 
mind-set in creating the new health care model. As a 
consequence of this, the CIP-ICT-PSP program funded the 
EU project DREAMING (elDeRly-friEndly Alarm handling 
and MonitorING) under its objective 2.2 ICT for ageing well 
[5][6]. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
DREAMING was a research project under the auspices 
of the EU testing a range of welfare technology services in 
real life pilots in cooperation with public authorities under a 
randomized control trial. The project tested elderly-friendly 
alarm and monitoring technology in the homes of chronically 
ill citizens. The technology applied in DREAMING 
consisted of medical measuring equipment, environmental 
monitors, and video conferencing.  
With the technology installed in their home, the citizens 
were able to take their own measurements, e.g. blood 
pressure or blood sugar, with the dedicated measuring 
instruments (see Fig. 1). Via Bluetooth, the instruments 
transmitted the measured value to a hub forwarding it to an 
internet based portal accessible to the district nurses. For 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

each citizen, individual thresholds were set for the different 
values of relevance. If the measurements differed greatly 
from this threshold, the nurses received an alarm via SMS or 
email, depending on the severity of the deviation.  
Also connected to the alarm system were the 
environmental monitors, e.g. fire alarm or gas leak sensor. If 
the monitors detected some kind of danger or incident out of 
the ordinary, an alarm was sent to the nurses, who could then 
take the appropriate action. Finally, a videoconferencing 
system was installed on the personal TV set of the citizen. 
This system enabled the citizen to talk to healthcare 
providers, friends, or family face to face on their own TV. 
Fig. 1 shows a model illustrating the technologies applied in 
DREAMING. 
The citizens included were at least 65 years old and 
suffered from diabetes, heart failure, or COPD (Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease). The project was trialed at 
pilot sites in six European countries: Denmark, Sweden, 
Germany, Estonia, Italy, and Spain. A total of 284 citizens 
participated in the trial. Of these 139 were allocated to the 
intervention group (IG) and 145 were allocated to the control 
group (CG). In Denmark, the total number was 51, with 26 
in the IG and 25 in the CG. Due to drop-outs, the number of 
participating citizens had been reduced to 11 in the IG and 
12 in the CG at the end of the project. The Danish trial site 
was the island Langeland characterized by its rapidly aging 
population, remoteness and distances to large hospitals.   
 
 
 
Figure 1. Equipment applied in the DREAMING project. 
 
 
The Danish pilot trial faced a number of technological 
challenges, see Fig. 2, which were initially handled by the 
Danish project manager. However, it became clear that a 
local person from the island with technical knowledge who 
could establish a close cooperation with the citizens and the 
district nurses participating in the project would be needed. 
A retired farmer from the island was hired for this task and 
both his status as a local and as a senior citizen made it easy 
for the citizens to relate to him. The fact that he was always 
available for help and guidance resulted in a smoother trial 
run and helped both citizens and nurses feel safer about the 
technology.    
 
The pilot trial ran from the beginning of May 2008, to the 
end of March 2012. For the purpose of studying health 
related quality of life (QoL) of the citizens, the validated and 
internationally accepted questionnaire SF-36 was used. The 
SF-36 is a multipurpose, short-form health survey consisting 
of 36 questions. It gives an average of the mental health and 
physical health components. The citizens in both the IG and 
the CG filled out the questionnaires at baseline, midpoint, 
and end of the pilot trial. The SF-36 score ranges from 1 to 
100; QoL is deemed higher with increasing score [7]. As a 
supplement to the SF-36 questionnaire survey, the citizens 
were screened for anxiety and depression by means of the 
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS). As this 
questionnaire has been designed to provide a simple yet 
reliable tool for use in medical practice, it was deemed 
appropriate for this study [8]. It was important that the 
questionnaires were easy to fill out for the citizens and that 
the result was relatively easy to analyse. The citizens filled 
out the HADS questionnaires at the same time as the SF-36.     
A.  Litterature review: 
To uncover the existing body of knowledge within the 
theme of acceptance and QoL in relation to chronically ill 
citizens and home monitoring, a literature study was carried 
out. A search on PubMed using the search terms “chronically 
ill”, “citizen”, “empowerment”, “acceptance”, “home 
monitoring”, “technology”, and “quality of life/QoL” in 
different combinations of two – four resulted in 13 relevant 
articles. Despite their relevance, however, none of the found 
articles turned out to give accounts of the citizens’ personal 
experience of living with the technology for a relatively long 
period of time. In the following, the main trends uncovered 
by the study will be described and supported by examples.  
Several of the articles focused on quantitative results 
such as cost-effectiveness [9], clinical outcomes [10][11], or 
both [7]. Others focused on the reliability of the data 
produced by applying home monitoring in the care for 
 Internet access in the homes 
 Compatibility Pairing issues between measuring 
equipment and hub 
 Lack of integration to electronic patient records 
 Organisational changes (workflow) 
 Battery change 
Figure 2. Technological challenges. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

chronically ill citizens [12]. Many discussed how to involve 
and empower patients by employing self-care education 
[13][14] or interactive online environments [15], e.g. for 
self-management and self-monitoring [16][17]. In addition, 
some regarded empowerment as a solution to the problem of 
noncompliance/non-adherence [18]. It was found that even 
though telemedicine interventions can increase the feeling of 
self-efficacy, the citizen’s healthcare providers and others 
related to the intervention play a critical role in engaging 
them in a new intervention, e.g. involving home monitoring 
[19]. In most articles touching upon the notion of QoL, this 
is measured by questionnaire surveys [20]. 
Many of these studies present hypotheses about the 
citizens’ perception of the technology, but do not directly 
include the citizens in the study to determine what they really 
think.  
B. Definitions:  
Home monitoring can be defined as the use of 
information and communication technology in exchange of 
information between the patients’ home and health 
professionals. This allows for the clinical staff to respond 
immediately to alarms from the citizen’s home. Home 
monitoring also empowers citizens to learn and apply expert 
knowledge and thereby become more responsible for their 
own health situation [3][21][22].  
C.  Aim: 
The aim of this paper is to present local results regarding 
acceptance and qualitative of life of the involved citizens 
from the Danish pilot site: Langeland. The overall question is 
“how was it to live and cope with the home monitoring in 
daily life?”. The interviews were conducted in addition to the 
overall design of the project (HADS and SF36) to explore 
how the citizens’ daily life was influenced by the technology. 
 
III. 
METHODS 
Data collection: The interviews were conducted in 
person in the homes of ten citizens who took part in the 
DREAMING project. These interviews were conducted as 
semi-structured research interviews [23]. According to this 
approach, a research interview can be regarded as a 
professional version of an everyday conversation where the 
interaction between the interviewer and interviewee 
contributes to the construction of knowledge. The purpose of 
qualitative research interviews of this kind is to understand 
phenomena from the perspective of the interviewee. In cases 
where a relative was present, this person took part in the 
interview. Data were recorded and transcribed, and then 
content were categorized and analyzed. 
Combined with the interviews, the findings include 
results from two questionnaires: HADS and SF36. The 
questionnaire survey was conducted in all six European 
countries. It was analysed for the overall sample, but also for 
each of the sites separately. In this paper we focus on  the 
Danish results.   
Materials: 10 out of eleven citizens (six women and four 
men) from the rural area in Denmark called Langeland who 
have lived with the technology for more two years. These 
citizens represent all the remaining participants in the IG, the 
CG was not involved in the semi-structures interviews. 
However, one of the citizens in the IG was not capable for an 
interview. The age was between 66-82 years at the beginning 
of the project period. Seven subjects lived alone in their 
homes and three lived with a relative. Nine lived in their own 
homes and one lived in sheltered housing. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Qualitative interviews:  
The interviews revealed three main themes: feeling of 
safety, empowerment, and acceptance. In the following, the 
themes will be defined and supported by concrete findings 
from the study.   
Feeling of safety: This can be defined as a feeling of trust 
and confidence. 
A general perception amongst the citizens was that the 
monitoring equipment increased their feeling of safety. The 
fact that professionals had an eye in the home and reacted to 
alarms from the system had a great impact regarding this 
feeling. As one expressed it: “The best thing is that someone 
is keeping an eye on me. It makes me feel safe”. Another 
subject put it this way: “It’s reassuring, because they call me 
if the measurements are too high”. Only one citizen didn’t 
feel safer: “It doesn’t make me feel safer, I’m safe enough”. 
She was one of the participants who had experienced some 
problems with the equipment. Therefore she did not have a 
lot of trust in it. In one case, there was a positive effect on 
the spouse. The wife of the participant said: “I feel safer 
now, because he doesn’t tell me if his measurements are 
good or bad. But if the phone rings, then I know”.  
Empowerment: In its most general sense, empowerment 
refers to the ability of people to gain understanding and 
control over personal, social, economic, and political forces 
in order to take action to improve their life situations [24]. 
For nine out of ten, the technology empowered the 
citizens to different degrees. In general it gave most of them 
a sense of freedom, because they were less dependent on 
visits from nurses or visits to GPs. Or freedom because they, 
to a further extend, could take the measurements themselves.  
The technology increased their awareness toward issues 
related to the disease: “I’m experiencing that I think more 
about what I’m doing” or as another said: “I’m more aware 
of when I take my measurements and when I should take the 
insulin”. 
The technology was no longer only “a tool to better 
manage my disease”, but for two of the participants they 
found a way of using it for rehabilitation. The video 
conference system was thereby used to link the community 
physiotherapist and the citizen and as one expressed it with a 
smile: 
“I 
have 
started 
using 
videoconference 
for 
physiotherapy – I wouldn’t get it done, if I had to go 
somewhere else”. Both staff and citizens have great 
expectations towards this new way of using it for 
rehabilitation. The same two citizens and a third also played 
with the possibility of using the videoconference for 
communicating with relatives living away: “I want to use 
videoconference for talking to my children who live in 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

different parts of Denmark”. Furthermore one of the two 
frequently used Skype for this type of communication; a 
development that was clearly connected to participating in 
the DREAMING project. 
Acceptance: No sufficient definition of acceptance has 
been found to be available. We define acceptance as 
integrating something new, in this case technology and a 
new way of receiving healthcare services, in your daily life 
and letting it have a positive influence on it without requiring 
too much attention.   
It was obvious that the technology had become a 
naturally integrated part of the citizen’s daily lives: “In the 
beginning we talked about it, now it is just there”, or as 
another expressed it: “It has become a habit” – a habit they 
did not wish to live without: “I wouldn’t mind keeping it 
after the project, because it helps me getting around to 
taking my measurements. As seen from the quotes in Fig. 3: 
the citizens had fully accepted the technology and found it 
better than ordinary care.  
Observations 
from 
the 
researchers: 
having 
the 
opportunity to enter the home of ten citizens, who had lived 
with the technology for a relatively long period of time, we 
were curious about the physical appearance of the 
technology. Most had it out in the open on places of 
convenience for using it, but one had it hidden away – not 
because of the expression of the technology, but to keep it 
safe from the grandchildren. 
 
HADS Depression - all subjects
Start
12 Months
24 Months
Depression score
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Control
Intervention
15
10
11
17
11
10
Subjects with three evaluations
Time
Start
12 Months
24 Months
Depression score
2
4
6
8
10
Control
Intervention
N=8
N=8
 
Figure 4. HADS results 
 
Data from the HADS evaluation are shown in Fig. 4. The 
bar graph shows data for all subjects who took part in any of 
the assessments. The line graph only depicts the scores for 
subjects who continuously contributed to all three 
evaluations. A within subject ANOVA (ANalysis Of 
VAriance) on these data with time as a repeated measure 
revealed a main effect of the intervention condition 
(F(1,15)=3.74; p<0.05, one-tailed). However, while there 
was no difference between controls and subjects in the 
intervention group at the start if all subjects are considered 
(see bar graph), subjects who continuously took part already 
differed in the beginning of the study with lower depression 
scores in the intervention group. This pattern is very similar 
to the overall result from six study sites. It indicates a higher 
dropout rate of subjects with high depression scores in the 
intervention group. In the SF36 there is no group difference 
(p > 0.8) in the physical component score (PCS) which is a 
measure for overall physical health (Fig. 4, bottom). Both 
groups show a similar development over time (F(2,15) = 
9.59, p< 0.001), with a slight decrease over the first year and 
a large increase over the second year. Consistent with this 
pattern, both the linear trend (F=4.92, p<0.05) and the 
quadratic trend (F=13.70, p<0.005) of the within subject 
factor time are significant. 
 
 “There is nothing bad about it” 
 “It has become a daily routine” 
 “Would recommend it to others” 
 “No problem using the technology” 
 “I prefer technology over ordinary care” 
 “It is nothing out of the ordinary” 
 “It has been easy to use” 
 “Wants to keep it! 
 “It has become a habit” 
 “It’s a piece of cake” 
 “I would miss it” 
 “I don’t think it is difficult to handle” 
 “I like having it” 
 “It doesn’t make me nervous or anything” 
 
 “It is nothing to talk about” 
Figure 3. Citizens about technology 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

SF-36 Summary
Time
Start
12 Months
24 Months
Points SF-36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
MCS
PCS
Start
12 Months
24 Months
Points SF-36
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
Control - N=8
Intervention - N=10
PCS
 
Figure 5. SF-36 results 
 
In the mental component score (MCS) there is a 
significant development in the control group (F(2,14)=10.36, 
p<0.005) as well as in the intervention group (F(2,18)=4.04, 
p<0.05), but the group difference is not significant nor is the 
interaction intervention x time.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
 
Before interviewing the citizens, we were prejudiced in 
relation to what we would find. Prejudices like that it was a 
big issue for the citizens to be involved and use the 
technology, that it was a challenge for them to handle the 
technology and that the citizens would discover being a part 
of a modern and cool group living with technology and that 
their surroundings would think the same. However, what we 
found was: “Nothing to talk about”  
But it took some time. One big and maybe crucial 
advantage in the project was the time – all in all four years to 
prepare, test, and educate citizens including two years of 
pilot testing in the home of the citizens. To begin with both 
staff and citizen were hesitant toward this new way of 
working/new way of handling chronic diseases. A lot of 
effort was put into addressing the hesitancy by involving all 
stakeholders in the process. There was time for overcoming 
technically obstacles – for example getting internet 
connections to run in the homes of the citizens and the 
devices to be trustful and functioning. One really important 
issue related to the positive outcomes was hiring the old local 
farmer to support and help with small and big issues arising 
in the process. Speaking the language, being a person the 
citizens knew kicked in doors that might have been far more 
difficult to get access to.  
In the DREAMING project, the citizens gained more 
freedom and empowerment, and the health services were 
provided far more on the terms of the citizens than on those 
of the system. Part of this was the contribution of the 
technology to the empowerment of the citizen indirectly in 
keeping them fit and thereby prevent side effects from the 
disease. Combined with the increased feeling of safety it can 
explain the high acceptance in receiving home monitoring. 
The results from the interviews are supported by the Danish 
results from the questionnaires (HADS and SF36). Citizens 
in the intervention group were less depressed than the control 
group and had a slightly higher quality of life. A review from 
2012 [25] including studies from 2007-2012 – 68 studies in 
all, showed a clear trend towards better behavioral changes 
of the citizens leading to better empowerment and higher 
quality of life.  
It takes time to turn around habits and start a whole new 
culture based on change of mindsets for both staff and citizen 
and maybe many projects do not have the needed time for 
obtaining positive results?  
We are of the conviction that the success experienced in 
the DREAMING project was linked to the long period of 
time to run the pilot – it became a habit – a habit that now 
has turned into daily practice without the citizens’ 
awareness. The involved citizens in DREAMING had a 
chance to develop along with the technology. It will be 
interesting to follow further implementation to the 
community’s other chronically ill citizens where this kind of 
technology and organization is relevant. Will they have to 
start all over or will they be able to gain from the previous 
experiences?  
It would seem that the elderly chronically ill citizens in 
general are not resistant towards technology, maybe because 
the technology has a meaning and a direct purpose (as in the 
DREAMING project). The future citizens will be more and 
more used to having technology as a part of their daily life 
(as using home banking, internet shopping, social media, 
etc.) and then become more familiar using home technology 
for handling and improving health issues.  
In this case, the technology became leverage for this 
change and maybe we have started a small revolution in 
changing a shift in paradigm as addressed in the introduction. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The overall conclusion is that, having lived with home 
monitoring technology for more than a year, they had fully 
accepted it. When interviewing the citizens they looked at 
us as if we asked how it would be to live with your hoover – 
good to have but nothing to talk about! 
 
VII. 
 LIMITATIONS 
Research involving elderly citizens with a chronic disease 
can be a challenge in relation to keeping up the number of 
participants. In the DREAMING project, we began with 
including 51 citizens and ended up with 23 (control and 
intervention). The project lasted four years and the citizens 
were included from the beginning. In such a long period of 
time, this, often frail, group experiences acute worsening of 
their condition, are admitted to hospital – do not full recover 
and some die. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
VIII. PERSPECTIVES 
In Langeland the research has turned into daily practice 
and more communities are on the way of implementing the 
results. The staff, using the technology, finds new areas 
where same technology can be used – for instance for young 
people with diabetes and for rehabilitation. Regarding the 
citizens, 
three 
of 
the 
participants 
were 
already 
experimenting or using the technology for new purposes 
such as rehabilitation or communication with relatives or 
friends (Skype). Another expressed that he would like to use 
technology if he should get another kind of disease.  
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Pharow, B. Blobel, P. Ruotsalainen, F. Petersen, and A. 
Hovsto, “Portable Devices, Sensors and Networks: Wireless 
Personalized eHealth Services,” Medical Informatics in a 
United and Healthy Europe, K.-P. Adlassnig et al. IOS Press, 
2009. European Federation for Medical Informatics. Doi: 
10.3233/978-1-60750-044-5R-1012. 
[2] J. Clemensen, S.B. Larsen, M. Kyng, and M. Kirkevold, 
“Participatory Design in health sciences: Using cooperative-
experimental methods in developing health services and 
computer technology,” Qualitative Health Research, Vol. 17, 
No. 1, pp. 122-30, Jan 2007. 
[3] J. Clemensen, J. Rasmussen, A. Denning, and M. A. Craggs, 
“Patient Empowerment and New Citizen Roles through 
Telehealth Technologies - The Early Stage,” Proc. Third 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social 
Medicine 
2011 
(eTELEMED 
2011), 
Curran 
Associates, Inc., pp. 114-20, Mar 2012.  
[4] J. Segal, “The importance of patient empowerment in health 
system reform,” Health Policy 44. 1998, pp. 31-44, Elsevier 
Science Ireland Ltd.          
[5] http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/apps/projects/factshee
t/index.cfm?project_ref=225023  
[6] http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/ict_psp/inde
x_en.htm 
[7] S.J. Berman,  C. Wada, D. Minatodani, T. Halliday, R. 
Miyamoto, J. Lindo, and P.J. Jordan, “Home-Based 
Preventive Care in High-Risk Dialysis Patients: A Pilot 
Study,” TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH, Mary Ann 
Liebert, Inc., Vol. 17, No. 4, May 2011.  
[8] R.P. Snaith, “The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale,” 
Health and Quality of Life Outcomes, 1:29. 2003. 
[9] R.M. Bendixen, C.E. Levy, E.S. Olive, R.F. Kobb, and W.C. 
Mann, “Cost Effectiveness of a Telerehabilitation Program to 
Support Chronically Ill and Disabled Elders in Their Homes,” 
TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH, Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., 
Vol. 15, No. 1, Jan/Feb 2009.  
[10] G. Wagnild, J.G. MacCart, S. Mitchell, K. Tyabah, C. 
Leenknecht, and J.F. Meszaros, “A Telecommunications 
Intervention 
for 
Frontier 
Patients 
with 
Diabetes,” 
TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH, Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., 
Vol. 14, No. 8, October 2008. 
[11] J. Polisena, K. Tran, K. Cimon, B. Hutton, S. McGill, K. 
Palmer, and R.E. Scott, “Home telehealth for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare. 16:120-127. 
2010. 
[12] S. de Lusignan, A. Althans, S. Wells, P. Johnson, M. 
Vandenburg, 
and 
J. 
Robinson. 
“A 
pilot 
study 
of 
radiotelemetry for continuous cardiopulmonary monitoring of 
patients at home,” Journal of Telemed and Telecare. 6 Suppl 
1:S119-22, 2000. 
[13] P.M. Wilson, S. Kendall, and F. Brooks, “The Expert Patients 
Programme: a paradox of patient empowerment and medical 
dominance,” Health and Social care in the Community, Vol. 
15, No. 5, pp. 426-438, 2007. 
[14] C.V. McIlhenny, B.L. Guzic, D.R. Knee, B.R. Demuth, J.B. 
Roberts. “Using technology to deliver healthcare education to 
rural patients,” Rural and Remote Health 11: 1798, (Online) 
2011. 
[15] K.L. Smarr, D.R. Musser, C.L. Dhiaki, R. Johnson, K.D. 
Hanson, and C. Siva, “Online Self-Management in 
Rheumatoid 
Arthritis: 
A 
Patients-Centered 
Model 
Application,” TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH, Mary Ann 
Liebert, Inc., Vol. 17, No. 2, March 2011. 
[16] R-L. Jan, J-Y. Wang, M-C. Huang, S-M. Tseng, H-J. Su, and 
L-F. Liu, “An Internet-Based Interactive Telemonitoring 
System for Improving Childhood Asthma Outcomes in 
Taiwan,” TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH, Mary Ann 
Liebert, Inc., Vol. 13, No. 3, 2007. 
[17] C.K.L. Or, B-T. Karsh, D.J. Severtson, L.J. Burke, R.L. 
Brown, P.F. Brennan, “Factors affecting home care patients’ 
acceptance of a web-based interactive self-management 
technology,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, 18:51e59, 2011. 
[18] R. Anderson and M. Funnell, “Patient empowerment: 
reflections on the challenge of fostering the adoption of a new 
paradigm,” Patient Education and Counselling, 57, pp. 153-
157, 2005. 
[19] P.M. Trief, J. Sandberg, R. Izquierdo, P. C. Morin, S. Shea, R. 
Brittain, E.B. Feldhausen, and R. Weinstock, “Diabetes 
Management 
Assisted 
by 
Telemedicine: 
Patient 
Perspectives,”  TELEMEDICINE and e-HEALTH, Mary Ann 
Liebert, Inc., Vol. 14, No. 7, Sept 2008. 
[20] M. Zamith, T. Cardoso, I. Matias, G.M.J. Marques, “Home 
telemonitoring of severe chronic respiratory insufficient and 
asthmatic patients,” Revista Portuguesa de Pneumologia. Vol. 
15, No. 3, pp. 385-417, May-June 2009. 
[21] M. Lemire, “What can be expected of information and 
communication 
technologies 
in 
terms 
of 
patient 
empowerment in health?” Journal of Health Organization and 
Management, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2010, pp. 167-181. Emerald 
Group Publishing Limited. ISSN: 1477-7266. 
[22] C. Sicotte, G. Paré, S. Morin, J. Potvin, and M. Moreault, 
“Original Research: Effects of Home Telemonitoring to 
Support Improved Care for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary 
Diseases,” Telemedicine and e-Health, Mary Ann Liebert. 
Inc., Vol. 17, No. 2, March 2011N.  
[23] S. Kvale and S. Brinkmann, “InterView: Introduktion til et  
håndværk,”  Copenhagen, Hans Reitzels Forlag,  2009. 
[24] B.A. Israel, B. Checkoway, A. Schulz, and M. Zimmerman. 
“Health 
education 
and 
community 
empowerment: 
conceptualizing and measuring perceptions of individual, 
organizational, and community control,” Health Educ Q 1994; 
Vol. 21, No. 2, pp. 149 – 70. 
[25] van den Berg, M. Schumann, K. Kraft, and W. Hoffmann, 
“Telemedicine and telecare for older patients – A systematic 
review”, 
Maturitas 
(2012), 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.maturitas.2012.06.010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

