HIV Self-testing Combined with Internet Counselling: A Low Threshold Strategy to 
Increase Diagnoses of HIV-infections 
 
Freke R Zuure, Jannie J van der Helm, Udi Davidovich, Maria Prins 
Department of Research, Infectious Diseases 
Public Health Service of Amsterdam 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands 
fzuure@ggd.amsterdam.nl; udavidovich@ggd.amsterdam.nl; jvdhelm@ggd.amsterdam.nl; mprins@ggd.amsterdam.nl 
 
 
Abstract—The proportion of undiagnosed HIV infections in the 
Netherlands is substantial. Increasing the HIV test uptake is 
important to improve individual health outcomes and reduce 
further spread of HIV. Self-tests for HIV have become 
available. Self-tests allow individuals to test at the privacy of 
their home, without involvement of any health care 
professional or laboratory, and may help to increase HIV test 
uptake. However, there are many concerns with respect to test 
quality, test procedures, and medical follow up. This project 
aims to develop and evaluate a service that offers high quality 
HIV self-tests in combination with internet pre- and post-test 
counseling to individuals at high risk for HIV. The usage of the 
service, its effectiveness in identifying unrecognized HIV 
infections and their follow-up in care, perceived usability and 
acceptability, and cost effectiveness will be evaluated.  
Keywords-HIV; screening;  self-test; online counseling.  
I. 
 BACKGROUND  
HIV infections remain a major public health issue in 
Western countries [1]. The most important risk groups for 
HIV are men who have sex with men (MSM) and migrants 
from HIV-endemic countries [2-5]. Recent estimations 
indicate that 40% of 21,500 HIV-infected individuals in the 
Netherlands do not know their HIV status [6]. Earlier 
diagnosis of these individuals will lead to timely treatment 
which improves the prognosis and assists in controlling the 
HIV epidemic [7,8].  
The need for increasing the uptake of HIV testing did not 
elude commercial medical entrepreneurs in developing self-
test packages for HIV. In recent years the availability of such 
tests has increased. These tests are bought and performed by 
a consumer, usually at home without the involvement of 
medical staff or a laboratory. For some individuals HIV self-
tests appear to be a convenient alternative for testing as they 
enable them to overcome several barriers related to HIV 
testing.  
However, several concerns regarding the quality and 
effect of the self-testing procedures have been raised. The 
accuracy of many of the currently available HIV self-tests is 
not proven, and there are concerns related to the correct 
application of the test, the follow-up trajectory for those who 
test positive, and the loss of counseling opportunities for 
HIV positives and negatives. Further, by choosing to only 
test for one infection (e.g., HIV) one looses the more 
inclusive approach currently used in the Netherlands to 
screen for a broad spectrum of sexually transmitted 
infections (STI) in each screening contact. Therefore, health 
care providers are reluctant to promote the usage of self-tests 
despite the increasing number of outlets offering such tests.  
Nevertheless, the quality and robustness of self-tests for 
HIV are continuously improving. Recently, a highly reliable 
HIV rapid test has become available that uses oral fluid 
instead of blood, making it easier for self-use by consumers. 
In potential, the availability of such a low-threshold testing 
method can help us in the long run in increasing HIV test 
uptake. The proper integration of such self-testing options 
within the health services is certainly worth examining. 
 
II. 
AIM 
The project aims to develop and evaluate a service that 
provides reliable HIV self-tests using oral fluid in 
combination with an Internet counseling strategy to 
individuals at risk for HIV, especially MSM and migrants 
from HIV endemic countries. 
III. 
METHODS 
Following strategies of human-centered design and 
business modeling, a website and logistic infrastructure will 
be developed that inform individuals about HIV self-testing, 
enable individuals to purchase an HIV self-test online, and 
offer user-friendly instructions, pre- and post-test counseling 
and low-threshold contact options with health care 
professionals. The website will contain an online triage 
system using an interactive intake questionnaire and risk 
assessment algorithm that will enable us to distinguish 
between those at risk for HIV and those not at risk for whom 
testing is not necessary.  
Those not at risk for HIV will be discouraged from using 
the self-testing service; those at risk for HIV will be 
encouraged to test for HIV. The STI-clinic and general 
practitioner (GP) will be referred to as the preferred locations 
for testing considering their inclusive testing for multiple 
STIs. Those who indicate that they do not want to involve 
their GP or STI clinic, will have the possibility to order an 
HIV self-test. With the test, they will receive a code to 
access an elaborated pre-test trajectory including step-by-
step instructions and counseling. Interactive movies and 
information modules will be used, and low-threshold contact 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

options with health care professionals will be offered (e.g., 
using Skype, telephone, or web cam). After testing, a post-
test counseling procedure will be offered online for both 
positives and negatives. For individuals who test positive, a 
follow-up procedure will be setup in order to motivate them 
to access regular health care as soon as possible for 
confirmation testing and referral to an HIV outpatient clinic. 
The project will start with a pilot phase of  three months 
in the beginning of 2013 in which the service is offered on a 
relatively small scale (i.e., without campaign activities) to 
identify and solve potential technical or logistical difficulties 
that might arise. Early users of the service will be 
interviewed about their experiences to further improve the 
service. After successfully completing the pilot phase, a 
media campaign targeted at high risk groups for HIV (e.g., 
MSM, migrants) will be launched nationally. A total of 
2,000 tests are estimated to be sold within a 12-month 
period. We aim to reach an HIV prevalence of newly 
diagnosed individuals of 2.5-5% (n=50-100 individuals). 
 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
The evaluation will focus on the following outcome 
measures: 
 - The proportion of individuals at risk for HIV among 
those who completed the intake questionnaire, and their 
characteristics and reasons for preferring to test via an HIV 
self-test. 
- The frequency of use of the website’s features and 
functions (e.g., ordered tests, logins to the website’s 
counseling program), the duration of use (e.g., per web 
session, and online module), the registered number of 
contacts with health care professionals during the project, an 
overview of the feedback of users and stakeholders during 
the project; the feasibility, and perceived usability and 
acceptability of the testing and online counseling procedures 
as measured both qualitatively and quantitatively. 
- The proportion of individuals belonging to the HIV risk 
groups that use an HIV self-test, the HIV prevalence among 
these individuals and their determinants; the number of 
individuals that show up for confirmation testing, the time 
from testing positive via a self-test to confirmation testing, 
the proportion of confirmed positive test results, the number 
of individuals that are referred to the hospital, and the 
moment of diagnosis in their infection (using CD4 cell 
counts and viral load measurements). 
- The cost-effectiveness of the proposed testing strategy.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This project is funded by the Netherlands Organisation 
for Health Research and Development (ZonMw; grant no. 
50-51515-98-176). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M.J. van de Laar. HIV/AIDS and other STI in men who have 
sex with men - a continuous challenge for public health. Euro 
Surveill. 2009;14(47):pii=19423. 
[2] L. Gras, A. van Sighem, C. Smit, S. Zaheri, M. Prins, et al. 
Monitoring of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
infection in the Netherlands. HIV Monitoring Foundation: 
2010. 
[3] European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control/WHO 
Regional Office for Europe. HIV/AIDS surveillance in 
Europe 2009. Stockholm: European Centre for Disease 
Prevention and Control; 2010. 
[4] European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control/WHO 
Regional Office for Europe. Migrant Health: Epidemiology of 
HIV and AIDS in migrant communities and ethnic minorities 
in EU/EEA countries. Stockholm: European Centre for 
Disease Prevention and Control; 2010. 
[5] M. Xiridou, M. van Veen, R. Coutinho, and M. Prins. Can 
migrants from high-endemic countries cause new HIV 
outbreaks among heterosexuals in low-endemic countries? 
AIDS 2010; 24(13), pp. 2081-2088. 
[6] M. van Veen, A.M. Presanis, S. Conti, M. Xiridou, A.R. 
Stengaard, et al. National estimate of HIV prevalence in the 
Netherlands: comparison and applicability of different 
estimation tools. AIDS 2011; 25(2), pp. 229-237. 
[7] M.M. Kitahata, S.J. Gange, A.G. Abraham, B. Merriman, 
M.S. Saag, et al. Effect of early versus deferred antiretroviral 
therapy for HIV on survival. N Engl J Med 2009; 360(18), pp. 
1815-1826. 
[8] J.A. Sterne, M. May, D. Costagliola, F. de Wolf, et al. for the 
When To Start Consortium. Timing of initiation of 
antiretroviral therapy in AIDS-free HIV-1-infected patients: a 
collaborative analysis of 18 HIV cohort studies. Lancet 2009; 
373(9672), pp. 1352-1363. 
 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

