An Introduction to a Transnational Volunteer Notification System Providing 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation for Victims Suffering a Sudden Cardiac Arrest 
 
Jesko Elsner, Marie-Thérèse Schneiders, Max Haberstroh, Daniel Schilberg and Sabina Jeschke 
Institute of Information Management in Mechanical Engineering 
IMA/ZLW & IfU - RWTH Aachen University 
Dennewartstr. 27, 52068 Aachen, Germany 
{ Jesko.Elsner, Marie.Schneiders, Max.Haberstroh, Daniel.Schilberg, Sabina.Jeschke }  
@ima-zlw-ifu.rwth-aachen.de 
 
 
Abstract—While it is always desirable in an emergency to get 
treatment as soon as possible, there are emergencies that need 
immediate treatment. In case of Sudden Cardiac Arrest an 
untreated time interval of only a few minutes usually means 
the victims’ death. Given the delay between an incoming 
emergency call and the arrival of the emergency medical 
services at the scene, it is necessary to find an alternative way 
to provide immediate first aid treatment. One approach for 
this is the implementation of a Volunteer Notification System – 
involving laypersons and medically trained volunteers into the 
emergency medical service, by notifying those potential helpers 
who can arrive at the scene fast enough to provide the urgently 
needed measures. 
Keywords—Volunteer Notification System; First Responder; 
Emergency 
Medical 
Services; 
Sudden 
Cardiac 
Arrest; 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation; Telemedicine 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to the way today’s professional emergency medical 
services (EMS) are organized, victims in need of urgent 
medical care are facing a lethal problem. Depending on the 
type of emergency, the time interval between the incoming 
emergency call and the arrival of the professional helpers at 
the scene is simply too long. In Bavaria (Germany) for 
example, a region with good infrastructure and an advanced 
medical system, reoccurring studies are made every four 
years, in order to analyze the effective time interval local 
EMS need until arriving at the place of incident. The institute 
for emergency medicine in Munich (INM) states in a recent 
study that professional EMS in the area of Bavaria require 
approximately 9 minutes until arriving on scene [2]. 
Furthermore, the study underlines an ongoing increase in this 
deficit due to a diversity of reasons. The severity of the time 
deficit generally correlates with the infrastructure a country 
can provide, resulting in intensification for less advanced 
countries and regions. While most emergencies do not 
involve an immediate life danger for the victim, in case of a 
Sudden Cardiac Arrest (SCA) the first minutes are of utter 
importance. Jan Bahr states that as  little as three minutes is 
most likely enough for victims of SCA to suffer permanent 
brain damage and Karin Grassl describes within her 
dissertation that the survival rate after five minutes without 
treatment is practically zero [6, 7]. Victims suffering SCA 
are in need of urgent medical care that professional EMS 
alone cannot always sufficiently provide. 
A. Structure 
The first chapter of this paper describes the medical 
emergency of a Sudden Cardiac Arrest (SCA) and 
introduces the basic concept of a Volunteer Notification 
System (VNS). Starting by identifying and discussing 
comparable systems, the second chapter focuses on 
analyzing the technological state-of-the-art of mobile 
devices 
and 
data 
communication 
concepts; 
herby 
determining the possibilities and restrictions for a VNS 
approach. The third chapter introduces the current project 
“EMuRgency”. As one focus of the project is the actual 
implementation of a new VNS, the core components and the 
corresponding architectural details are being discussed. The 
fourth and thereby last chapter of this paper introduces the 
conclusion and shortly discusses a potential generic 
approach and some optional features. 
B. Sudden Cardiac Arrest 
The human heart has an electrical conduction system that 
controls the rate and rhythm of the heartbeat. Problems with 
this electrical system can cause irregular heartbeats called 
arrhythmias which can lead to Sudden Cardiac Arrest (SCA) 
- a condition in which the heart suddenly and unexpectedly 
stops beating. The hereby resulting loss of blood flow 
prevents the brain and any other vital organ from getting 
oxygen. Without immediate treatment, the victim dies within 
minutes. It’s a common misconception that SCA is the same 
as a heart attack, while in reality, they are quite different. 
SCA is an “electrical problem” that prevents the heart in its 
whole from functioning, whereas a heart attack occurs when 
part of the heart’s blood supply is reduced or blocked 
causing the heart muscle to become injured or die. [1] 
C. The basic concept of a Volunteer Notification System 
One possible solution for offering faster response 
treatment is the concept of involving volunteers into EMS by 
implementing a Volunteer Notification System (VNS). A 
VNS may be defined as an IT system with the following core 
functionality: by tracking the location of all registered users, 
the system will be able to notify exactly those potential 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

helpers who are, at the time of the incoming emergency call, 
geographically close to the place of incident. 
This concept of a VNS does not interfere with the local 
corresponding emergency standard procedures, but can 
rather be described as an optional add-on to existing EMS; 
the responsible dispatcher takes the decision if to involve this 
optional feature. It is important to understand that the 
potential volunteers are not a replacement for emergency 
physicians or any professional helper that has been alarmed, 
but their main purpose is to arrive at the scene fast enough to 
start Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR). While there is 
no exact definition or specification of a VNS yet, it is part of 
this paper to discuss a potential architecture and distinguish 
between the core and the optional functionalities of such a 
system. The technical implementation of an integrated VNS 
is the focus of the European research project “EMuRgency” 
which will be described in the chapter three. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A. Existing systems with similar functionality 
While a diversity of local approaches to implement 
notification systems exists already, those approaches 
generally do not have an academic motivation or 
background. Therefore, publications on the aspect are still 
rare and the corresponding projects are opening neither their 
expertise nor the source codes to the public. The only 
publically available resources are the corresponding 
application download, some basic usage documentation and 
a reference document for the Advanced Programming 
Interface (API) – which merely offers functionality for 
providing the systems with data [13]. 
Based on reviews and the appearance in media all over 
the USA, the PulsePoint Foundation for example offers one 
of the most advanced software implementations in the field 
of emergency notifications at the moment [15]. Formerly 
known as the “Fire Department App” and developed for iOS 
only, the new version is available under the name 
“PulsePoint” for Android and iOS [14, 13]. Even though this 
application is surely great for offering everyday people a 
possibility 
to 
save 
lives, 
based 
on 
the 
available 
documentation, it is a US-only solution without open 
interfaces. From an academic point of view, it is regrettable 
that the achieved competences are not shared, which in 
combination with non-open source codes makes it is nearly 
impossible to use the project as a base for a scientific work. 
Furthermore, the implementation approach is rather static, 
only allowing two types of mobile devices (Android and 
iOS) as recipients and no other but US specific regulations, 
legal circumstances 
and network 
characteristics 
are 
supported. There are a few smaller projects with less impact 
and publicity, but the problems stay the same.  
Beside the difficulties to communicate and rely on more 
or less closed projects for information flow and depend on 
their goodwill, the available solutions are implemented as 
local solutions that cannot easily be adapted to other 
countries, regions or new legal environments. Fundamental 
changes are needed in order to use these systems with other 
than the original parameters and the underlying model itself 
does not provide a reasonable extension of functionality 
without making changes to the actual source code itself. 
In summary, the currently available systems lack 
essential interfaces, public tools for gathering and extracting 
information, an efficient communication flow and basic 
concepts for extensibility; therefore it seems inevitable to 
provide a new approach to the topic rather than upgrading an 
existing one. 
B. Mobile technologies 
Advances in mobile technologies and the continuous 
growing popularity for portable digital devices with internet 
access in nowadays society offer a great starting point for 
VNS. Without supplying any special devices, a VNS is able 
to communicate with a huge variety of volunteers by simple 
using the existing hardware and infrastructure that people 
own and use anyway. Modern smartphones for example offer 
a diversity of features that may be used to aid potential 
helpers in their mission to arrive on scene as early as 
possible. Some notable built-in features are real time Internet 
connections, notification options with vibration and sound, 
photo and video modes, a variety of sensors to enable 
situation based functionality like a compass, and the fact that 
actually any modern mobile device is running an operation 
system (OS) that supports programmatic solutions for 
individual software.  
Based on the basic definition of a VNS, the core 
functionality of any VNS is the effective localization of the 
volunteers. The actual localization of mobile devices within 
a network is a complex matter, while the reliability of the 
results generally depends on the corresponding network 
provider and its infrastructure [12]. Different companies and 
research groups are working on this topic, offering a variety 
of Advanced Programming Interfaces (API’s) with base 
functionality to access localization data for different types of 
devices. One of the most advanced examples is Android’s 
Location API, which is part of the Android software 
platform, developed by Google in conjunction with the Open 
Handset Alliance (OHA) [11]. 
The OHA is a consortium of 86 companies, working on 
developing and advancing open standards for mobile 
devices. The consortium, led by Google, includes some of 
the biggest mobile operators like Telekom and Vodafone, as 
well as some important manufacturers of mobile devices like 
Samsung and HTC. As an open-source project, the Android 
source code is publicly available and can be accessed freely; 
this reflects in a high user acceptance and fast development 
progress due to contributions from the open source 
community. The comScore Incorporation recently published 
a report on the mobile subscriber market for the second 
quarter of 2012, by which Android is holding an average of 
more than 60% market share within the biggest countries of 
Europe [4]. In a press release from august 2012, the 
International Data Corporation (IDC) identifies the Android 
market share at even 68% worldwide and underlines that 
these numbers are increasing [5]. Both studies are based on 
device sales in the corresponding regions and therefore 
reflect the general tendency within the segment of 
smartphones and other mobile devices with internet access.  
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Even though restricting the notification recipients to 
exclusively smartphones and similar devices running 
Android is questionable, it seems to be a reasonable decision 
for rapid prototype development in order to provide an early 
running system as soon as possible. It must clearly be stated 
that a limitation of this kind can only be temporary and that a 
final model of a state-of-the-art VNS has to provide a generic 
communication approach in order to support a broad variety 
of different devices. A more detailed discussion on the topic 
of a possible generic approach will follow in the upcoming 
sections of this paper. 
C. HTML – the language of the World Wide Web 
The Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) defines the 
core language of the World Wide Web (WWW). With the 
HTML 5 specification becoming the new standard for web 
interactivity, a lot of features are accessible for programmers 
to enable client and server technologies to communicate with 
each other. While a detailed discussion on server push 
technologies and HTTP requests would clearly exceed the 
context of this paper, it is important to note that the HTML 5 
specification includes full support for so-called WebSockets. 
WebSockets specify an API as well as a protocol, while the 
protocol defines the HTTP handshake behavior to switch 
from an existing HTTP connection to a lower level 
connection; a so-called WebSocket connection. While a 
common approach over the last years was to simulate a 
server push channel over HTTP, a WebSocket connection 
enables bidirectional communication natively. Referring to 
the possibilities for the client/server communication within a 
VNS, the WebSocket approach offers a clean and simple 
communication 
concept 
and 
enables 
a 
generic 
implementation for any devices complying with the HTML 5 
specification. [10] 
III. 
THE EMURGENCY PROJECT 
The European research project “EMuRgency” has been 
started in September 2011. Research facilities from 
Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium are working together 
on modeling and implementing an integrated Volunteer 
Notification System (VNS) to gap the time between an 
incoming emergency call and the arrival of professional 
helpers at the scene. The name of the project is a 
composition of the two words “emergency” and “urgent” and 
refers to urgent help that is needed in case of SCA. The three 
upper case letters “EMR” identify the regional base of the 
project; the “Euregio Maas-Rhein” (Eng. “Meuse-Rhine 
Euroregion”). 
A. Definition of the term “volunteers” within a VNS 
Before describing the system, its components and the 
technical details, it needs to be clarified which group of 
people can actually participate as volunteers within a VNS. 
A volunteer can be anyone with basic skills in first aid and 
CPR (Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation) who is willing to help 
in case of an emergency. It is important to differentiate this 
definition from the term “first responder” which was defined 
by 
US 
National 
Highway 
Transportation 
Safety 
Administration as “the first medically trained responder who 
arrives on scene of an emergency” [3]. While the definition 
of a first responder includes groups like police officers, 
firefighters and EMS, it does not include laypersons since 
those generally do not have medical training. Still, 
laypersons might be able to provide the needed measures in 
order to help victims of SCA and thus should be included as 
potential helpers within a VNS. Within the EMuRgency 
project, the term “volunteer” is referring to any potential 
helper, medically trained or not, willing to aid other people 
in an ongoing emergency. 
B. Integration between VNS and professional EMS 
Whenever an incident is reported to an emergency 
dispatch center that might involve SCA, the dispatchers will 
do what they normally do: send professional help - but 
optionally also invoke the VNS. It is important to stress that 
the VNS, at this time of development and based on the way 
EMS is organized today, is a merely optional feature. This 
means that the responsible dispatcher may or may not 
involve the VNS, depending on their analysis of the case and 
personal motivation. In order for the optional integration to 
be achieved, the VNS has to provide a user-interface where 
the dispatcher can initiate a case by forwarding its exact 
location and some optional information to the system. 
During SCA, time is of utter importance, so this user-
interface has to be as simple and efficient as possible.  
Recent interviews were made within the project in order 
to determine the acceptance and motivation of the 
dispatchers to integrate a VNS within the general workflow; 
Even though all the interviewed dispatchers agreed on a 
potential benefit, it became rather clear that the general 
acceptance of new systems seems to directly correlate with 
the extra work that is involved in order to use it. Taking into 
account the discussed optionality and the still early stage of 
development within the project, a manual integration will be 
the starting point towards involving the VNS within the 
professional EMS workflow. The implementation of an 
integrated system that gets activated fully automated during a 
reported emergency is surely desirable, but requires detailed 
collaboration with the corresponding software providers. 
Details on this topic are will be addressed in future papers. 
C. How to determine the relevant volunteers in an ongoing 
emergency 
As soon as the system receives information on a new 
emergency, no matter if automated or manually initialized 
from the dispatcher, the VNS will determine possible 
volunteers in the closer vicinity of the incident and 
immediately inform those in walking distance of the ongoing 
emergency. In order for this to be possible with minimum 
time effort, the system needs to be “aware” of all potential 
volunteer locations at the time of the incoming emergency 
call. This awareness can be achieved by making all 
connected clients publish their locations to the server in pre-
determined time intervals, rather than forcing the server to 
request all client locations at once not until they are actually 
needed.  
Before notifying any potential helper, a reasonable 
maximum distance between a volunteer and the incident has 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to be determined. Only volunteers located within the 
maximum distance will be considered potential helpers in an 
on-going notification. The distance that an individual person 
can travel within - let’s say - five minutes depends on many 
different parameters. An older person, for example, might 
walk slower than a younger person, while some people are 
simply in a better shape than others, no matter the age. Due 
to a great variety of individual parameters influencing a 
proper notification radius, a suitable solution to begin with, 
is creating a personalized profile setting; giving any 
registered volunteer the option to define an individual 
notification distance by configuring the appropriate 
parameter in their user profile. To maintain a realistic range, 
the maximum distance a user can set is limited to 1 km at the 
moment. 
Within 
the 
project, 
this 
functionality 
is 
implemented by using a public accessible browser based 
Web Application; accessing the corresponding URL, new 
users can register and/or edit their profile settings online. 
From the technical point of view, this Web Application is a 
frontend for accessing database functionality on the server.  
D. Webservices 
In order to enable external sources, for example mobile 
clients or applications from project partners, to access 
specific functions on the server, a different approach is 
needed. Specific APIs provide mobile clients the necessary 
functions in order to communicate with the VNS without 
having to access a web browser. The same approach can 
offer project partners an interface for integrating alternative 
ways of volunteer registration into the main system. 
Commonly used solutions for offering a limited scope of 
functionality to external clients are are so called Webservices 
or more specific, REST based Web APIs [9]. By 
implementing Webservices, a predefined set of functions 
will become globally available; different devices will be able 
to communicate with each other over a given network 
infrastructure; like for example, the World Wide Web. 
E. The messaging architecture 
At the time of writing, a running prototype of the VNS is 
available already. The upcoming section will introduce the 
used messaging architecture and describe the essential 
components implemented for the different types of 
communication. 
As long as a client is not involved in an ongoing case, the 
main communication that occurs between the mobile clients 
and the server is a client-to-server location publishing that 
automatically gets invoked in a predefined time interval. 
While a simple implementation approach for this is a 
common HTTP POST method, the push communication 
used to send data from the server to a specific client is an 
entirely different matter. The World Wide Web (WWW) was 
originally 
not 
intended 
to 
support 
bidirectional 
communication and therefore does not include the 
corresponding specifications or protocols. With HTML 5 
introducing the WebSocket JavaScript interface, a native 
solution for bidirectional communication is available. Once a 
WebSocket connection has been established between client 
and server, instant data communication becomes possible 
between both sides without explicitly having to deal with 
technical differences. Based on this kind of real time 
connectivity, a variety of different features can be 
implemented, including chat channels for notified helpers 
and live camera streaming from the place of incident. A short 
discussion on optional features in general will follow in the 
outlook section of this paper.  
Even though real time connectivity with WebSockets is a 
promising 
approach 
for 
implementing 
specific 
functionalities, having hundreds or thousands of idle clients 
permanently connected to the system is definitely not a 
suitable solution. An increased energy consumption of the 
mobile clients and a possible server overload due to an 
increasing number of connected clients are the two main 
reasons for this. Besides, when not involved in an ongoing 
emergency, only two types of messages are actually 
exchanged: firstly the location updates that occur every 
couple of minutes and are sent from client to server, and 
secondly the event data that is sent from server to client in 
order to update the main information view and to display 
upcoming events, training-courses etc. Since HTTP requests 
generally include a response-content, the message flow for 
general information and event data has been implemented as 
a response to an occurred location update and thus does 
neither need any special connectivity nor an additional 
request. It is common practice to restrict HTTP get requests 
to merely read-only operations and implement any request 
that modifies data on the server as HTTP post. The main 
difference between these two types of requests is that within 
an HTTP get request, the key/value pairs are specified in the 
URL, whereas in an HTTP post request, the key/value pairs 
are sent after the headers, as part of the request itself. 
Analyzing the base functionalities, there is one type of 
message that cannot wait for the next “location publish” in 
order to be sent as a reply from server to client, but instead 
needs to be send instantly; a new case notification message. 
This message initiates a new case on the server and alarms 
any potential helper in walking distance to the emergency; 
the message needs to arrive on the client with the smallest 
delay possible. In order to push messages from a server to a 
mobile client, different cloud messaging solutions are 
available but generally represent very individual solutions 
that only work for specific devices or operation systems. The 
Google Cloud Messaging for Android (GCM) for example is 
a specific solution to send data from a server to an Android 
application. 
 
Figure 1: Core components of the EMuRgency VNS 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

To summarize the messaging architecture at this point of 
development, HTTP post requests are implemented for 
client-to-server location updates; the response content of the 
is then processed in order to send event data from the server 
back to the client; new cases are initialized by using device 
specific APIs in order to push notification messages from the 
server to the mobile clients; and a real time WebSocket 
communication gets initialized on a new case event for all 
notified volunteers.  
F. An integrated VNS platform 
As a scientific project with partners from both technical 
and sociological research fields, the project is focusing on 
many more aspects than a simple technical approach for a 
notification system. Users of the system will be informed on 
ongoing events or urgent news and since a common interest 
level of registered people can be implied, communication 
channels for exchanging know-how and general information 
are being implemented. A real-time information flow 
regarding the aspects of first aid and CPR is extending the 
core notification functionality. While also developing 
concepts on raising public awareness on SCA, educational 
content is displayed at frequently used public places; and if 
in digital form, the streamed content will be enriched or 
synchronized with data from the VNS. Furthermore, in order 
to receive substantial scientific results and to determine the 
potential benefit of a VNS, corresponding reporting and 
analyzing features are being designed. Open interfaces will 
supply options for non-project members to change or extend 
functionalities. Although details on the generic approach and 
corresponding concepts for an open architecture are not yet 
fully developed, an integrated VNS platform will combine 
the different research topics with the diversity of 
requirements that are to fulfill. 
G. Regional differences for involving laypersons into 
professional EMS 
It is important to understand the actual role of an 
occurring registration and the resulting implications on the 
system and the user. A newly registered user for example, 
obviously wants to help, but comparing different countries, 
potential differences between the way that laypersons are 
legally allowed to be integrated into EMS, must be 
considered [16]. Some regions for example might not allow 
the integration of laypersons in EMS at all; and is a 
layperson with first aid skills but without corresponding 
certificates still a layperson? While those questions will not 
be discussed further within this paper, expert legal advices 
for different countries are contracted, in order to validate this 
matter. The direct implication concerning the VNS is that a 
new user by default will be “unconfirmed” and will not be 
considered a potential volunteer until “confirmed”; the 
confirmation process on the other hand is implemented in a 
separate administrative component, whereas the final details 
of this component are not yet fully worked out. 
H. An overview of the primary components within a VNS 
Within the past sections of this paper, the core 
components of a VNS have been shortly introduced in their 
corresponding context. Fig. 1 shows an overview of these 
components while the following paragraph will give some 
additional information on how they have been implemented. 
1) User Registration: Implemented as web application, 
this component offers base functionality for new users to 
register to the system; existing profiles can be edited and 
specific settings can be configured by the user – one 
example for a user specific setting is the notification radius. 
2) Case Initializer: This application constitutes the 
actual data provider for new emergencies until more 
automated concepts are available. Intended for dispatchers 
only, this web application provides the possibility to 
manually initiate a new case by providing general 
information 
on 
an 
ongoing 
emergency 
and 
the 
corresponding unique location, as pair of latitude and 
longitude. In order to supply a user friendly interface, the 
location 
itself 
is 
automatically 
calculated 
as 
an 
approximation for a given address. This component 
demonstrates the first approach towards supplying the actual 
notification system with case data and is implemented as a 
JavaScript application embedded within a servlet.. 
3) Server-side applications: This component bundles 
the server-side functionalities of tracking and localizing the 
volunteers. Furthermore, the Case-Initializer is part of this 
component in order to provide fastest response times when 
invoking new emergency events. 
4) Backend: The Backend represents the interface for 
persisting 
data 
and 
provides 
functions 
to 
enable 
communication between the database and other system 
components. Moreover, to ensure a consistent data usage 
within the system, all referenced data models and structures 
are defined within this component. 
5) Webservices: Combining the REST based Web API, 
Websockets and client specific push technologies like 
Google 
Cloud 
Messaging, 
this 
component 
actually 
represents an intermediate communication layer; providing 
predefined functions for external modules and other clients 
to exchange data with the server. 
 
 
Figure 2: The mobile client application (android version) 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
During the project, sociological and technical aspects are 
being combined. Country-specific differences in a variety of 
discussed parameters have been balanced against each other 
and are being implemented into an integrated VNS platform. 
Many fundamental difficulties were identified within the 
past sections of this paper whereas an advanced prototype of 
the software is available already - Fig. 2 shows screenshots 
of the android client application. While this prototype 
implements the essential components introduced in chapter 
three and enables base notification functionality for nearby 
volunteers, there are several potentially valuable features 
being discussed within the project at the moment.  
A. Potential future features 
The integration of chat channel functionality, enabling 
direct communication between the dispatcher and all 
volunteers who accepted a specific case, is one reasonable 
feature. By using the discussed advantages of a platform 
independent WebSocket connection, dispatchers will be able 
to exchange information with volunteers in real-time. 
Furthermore, status updates and newly received case details 
can instantly be broadcasted to all relevant receivers. 
Another feature is the integration of existing applications 
or services that provide information on nearby automated 
external defibrillators (AEDs). Although the time critical 
aspect of CPR is the main concern for the first volunteer 
who arrives on scene, it can prove useful for further helpers, 
to have reliable information on nearby AEDs devices.  
There are multiple scenarios in which the use of game 
design elements (gamification) within a VNS can be used to 
influence the user behavior; the adoption of a score system 
for attended courses or participated cases is one example. 
The general idea of gamification elements is to increase the 
user acceptance and motivation, whereas a sensible 
consideration is needed in order not to distract attention 
from the main topic. 
Since modern smartphones and many other portable 
devices offer build-in functionality for photos and videos, a 
real-time media streaming from the place of incident is 
another possible feature with high benefit. The integration 
of telemedical concepts becomes possible and thereby 
enables an approach of professional helpers using their 
expertise to analyze the streamed data, in order to aid the 
volunteers at the scene with valuable information. 
B. Specification of a VNS and future  development 
Within this paper, the basic concept of a VNS has been 
described and both essential and optional components have 
been discussed. Since many parameters are not yet fully 
determined and legal issues are still being discussed, there is 
no formal specification of a VNS at this stage of 
development. Diverse legal aspects still need to be cleared 
and options for integrating the system into the professional 
EMS workflow are being negotiated. Maintaining a highly 
agile programming approach will assure a continuous 
development and a fast integration of subsystems, 
adjustments and new requirements.  
The research focus for the upcoming two years will be 
the development and implementation of new concepts to 
enable a generic integration of heterogeneous environments 
and devices. Architectural cloud approaches will be 
analyzed and tested, while the integration of the different 
partners and their corresponding research topics will form 
into a complex VNS platform. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is based on work done in the INTERREG IVa 
project EMuRgency (www.emurgency.eu). The project is 
partially 
financed 
through 
the 
European 
Regional 
Development Fund (ERDF) and co-financed by several 
regions of the Meuse-Rhine Euroregion and partners of the 
EMuRgency consortium. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Dennis L. Kasper, Eugene Braunwald, Stephen Hauser, Dan 
Longo, J. Larry Jameson and Anthony S. Fauci, “Harrison's 
principles of internal medicine”, 16th Edition, 2004. 
[2] Studie 
des 
Instituts 
für 
Notfallmedizin 
und 
Medizinmanagement (INM) - Klinikum der Universität 
München, 
“Untersuchung 
zum 
Notarztdienst 
und 
arztbegleitenden Patiententransport in Bayern“, April 2010. 
[3] United States Department of Transportation: National 
Highway 
Transportation 
Safety 
Administration, 
“First 
Responder: National Standard Curriculum", 1995. 
[4] Electronic Publication: comScore Reports July 2012 U.S. 
Mobile Subscriber Market, comScore Incorporation, 2012. 
[5] Electronic Publication: International Data Corporation (IDC) - 
Press Release, “Android and iOS Surge to New Smartphone 
OS Record in Second Quarter”, August 8, 2012. 
[6] J. Bahr, “Lay resuscitation in the German rescue system. 
Some basic information”, Volume 10, Number 3, Notfall 
Rett.Med 2007, pp 197-200, doi:10.1007/s10049-007-0910-y. 
[7] K. 
Grassl, 
“Herzdruckmassage 
im 
Rahmen 
der 
Laienreanimation: Einsatz eines audiovisuellen Echtzeit-
Rückmeldesystems“. Dissertation, LMU München: Faculty of 
Medicine, 2009. 
[8] J. Bahr, H. Klingler, W. Panzer, H. Rode, D. Kettler, "Skills 
of lay people in checking the carotid pulse", Resuscitation 35, 
August 1997. 
[9] L. Richardson, S. Ruby, “RESTful Web Services”, O'Reilly 
Media, 2007. 
[10] P. Lubbers, B. Albers, F. Salim, “Pro HTML5 Programming: 
Powerful APIs for Richer Internet Application Development”, 
Apress, 2010. 
[11] R. 
Meier, 
“Professional 
Android 
4 
Application 
Development”, Wrox Press, May 2012. 
[12] K. Roebuck, “Location-Based Services (LBS): High-impact 
Strategies - What You Need to Know: Definitions, Adoptions, 
Impact, Benefits, Vendors”, Emereo Pty Limited, 2011. 
[13] PulsePoint Foundation, www.pulsepoint.org, downloadable as 
“PulsePoint” App on Google Play and Apple iTunes.  
[14] The 
San 
Ramon 
Valley 
Fire 
Protection 
District, 
www.firedepartment.org, “Fire Department iPhone App”. 
[15] Tracy Rosecrans , “Top 10 Heart Disease Apps of 2012”, 
Healthline article, September 2012. 
[16] Karsten Fehn, Legal Advice for the project “SMS Retter”, pp 
13-20, November 2009, unpublished. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

