Videoconferencing Solution: Through Innovation Extension to Attain and Support
Pre-Alzheimer Patients in Their Daily Activities
Mapundu Zamikhaya
Department of Information Technology
Tshwane University of Technology
Pretoria, South Africa
mapunduz@tut.ac.za
Potjie Van Der Walt
Faculty of ICT
Tshwane University of Technology
Pretoria, South Africa
VanDerWaltJS@tut.ac.za
Simonnet Thierry
Department of Informatics
ESIEE-Paris University
Noisy le Grand Cedec, France
t.simonnet@esiee.fr
Maswikaneng Solly Phatle
Department of Information Technology
Tshwane University of Technology
Pretoria, South Africa
MaswikanengPS@tut.ac.za
Abstract—The main objective of this paper is to come up with a
practical Voice over Internet Protocol approach to support
elderly patients affected by Alzheimer disease in their daily
activities. This is done by enhancing and integrating the
existing
Open
Source
features.
The
whole
development
embroiled the integration possibilities of voice, video and
instant messaging services in order to improve communication
processes between local Session Initial Protocol servers and
clients. Part of the proposed work is the remote control tab
feature that will be used to control the robot machine and the
Living lab framework for knowledge creation and sharing. The
preliminary tests and developments have verified that Ekiga
softphone running on robot machine can accept and direct
orders from Asterisks server in a form of audio and video. The
information was gathered through literature review and this
was conducted through the use of case studies, white papers,
peer-reviewed conference papers and journals.
Keywords-Ekiga; Videoconferencing; Leaving-Lab.
I.
INTRODUCTION
There is a correlation behaviour that elderly patients
leave hospital early because of medical expenses, yet they
still need additional care at their home to recover from their
illness. It is believed that treating a patient at home is less
expensive than treating them in hospitals. In this context,
there is a need for technological tools that will support and
help to deploy the integrated care for elderly and chronic
patients. According to Mapundu and Simonnet [6], there are
widely
acknowledged
imperatives
for
helping
elderly
patients living at home (semi)-independently for as long as
possible. The purpose of this study is to integrate and test
the existing Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) tools that
will help elderly people to have trust relationships and be
able to communicate with their family members and
caregivers as to avoid loneliness.
One of the tools that will be implemented is a good
video quality of Videoconferencing Service that will act as a
main communication channel between elderly people, robot
companion, family caregivers and medical professionals.
An Asterisk Private Branch eXchange (PBX) server solution
is
implemented
and
tested
in
order
to
manage
the
communication process between local SIP servers and SIP
clients. Session Initial Protocol (SIP) is an application layer
signalling protocol for creating, modifying and terminating
multimedia session among one or more participants [10].
This paper addresses Videoconferencing Service through
identifying different problems concerning the existing VoIP
tools and new developments that will be needed, with the
aim to accomplish the following objectives : Analyse
codec’s functions whether problems are resulting from
Session Initial Protocol (SIP) servers (Asterisk/ Kamailio),
Testing and making new working version of Ekiga that
support H261, H263, H263+ and H264, this involves
integration and cross-compilation processes for Microsoft
Operating Systems and Open Source Operating Systems,
Integration possibilities of an Internet Protocol (IP) cameras
that will support Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP)
whereby voice orders can be assigned or dialled to an IP
camera and access it using RTSP services and A proposed
remote control for the robot machine that will use a 3rd
channel support for sending and receiving orders (audio,
video, S-command channels data streams).
The intention was to come up with a practical VoIP
approach which could be accomplished by integrating and
testing the various open source tools that are available as a
way forward to achieve the above objectives. The review of
Research Questions gave us an understanding of the
Research problem as a whole and it gave us a clear
reflection
of
knowing
which
VoIP
tools
should
be
implemented and integrated. The follow section summarises
some research questions that we looked at. Does the
problem of codec’s compression and decompression result
from
softphone
clients,
and
which
tools
must
be
implemented to address such?, Can the IP cameras accept
orders from PBX SIP server in a form of audio and videos
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

using RTSP services, if possible are there any delays?, For
auto-negotiation of 3rd channel support, would it be possible
for robot operator to utilize send and receive data streams
either in a form video, sound, s-command from private,
public SIP servers to the robot machine?, Does Real-time
Transport Protocol (RTP) transmits and encapsulates the
voice data streams between endpoints for more than one call
in a single packet, if possible does it reduce the IP overheard
without increases the latency? Do Session Initial Protocol
(SIP) servers have a commitment to support latest version of
Ekiga clients with modification for Graphical User Interface
(GUI) implementation, if so are there more specific
technical requirements that might be needed?
The content of this work follows a simplified strategic
planning process; it was conducted as a literature review
which starts by introducing the current state of VoIP
technologies and its interconnection based on articles and
continues to research the existing literature in order to
discover theories behind interconnections. The experimental
scientific research approach with VoIP supporting tools
were conducted and applied in order to address the main
objectives. This paper starts by describing the overall
research background, VoIP establishment, and research
results and concludes with some future work.
II.
RESEARCH BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
European Scientists have found three new major genetic
links to pre-Alzheimer, affecting up to 20% of people with
brain-wasting disease. It was the most significant such
discovery in 15 years. Alzheimer disease affects more than
26 million people globally and it has no cure with any good
treatment. The need for effective remedies is pressing on,
with the number of cases estimated to go beyond 100
million by 2050 [5]. According to Matos [11], many
European projects have focused on support of technologies
for elderly are on process, CompanionAble is one of the
projects. In response to the problem, Roceries and Simonnet
[8], developed, operate and
maintain a Telemedicine
platform that offers communication and assistance services
to patients, especially for elderly people. This platform has
two main components, namely a Central Server and Local
Equipment for Domestic Internet Gateway (DIG). Both
these components use a secured Internet Protocol Network
over Internet (Virtual Private Networks). This platform is
easy to deploy because all functions and related virtualized
servers can be held on one physical server [8]. Actually, the
platform is operating at Ecole Supèrieure d'lngènieurs en
Èlectronique et Electrotechnique Paris University but the
aim is to install it in any hospital that might need it. Each
patient at home will have a DIG that provides Internet
service and records operational data such as agendas and
monitor data to mitigate temporary internet access failure.
This platform must integrate the communication process for
elderly patients to keep a strong social link with their
families
or
caregivers
and
doctors,
thus
a
good
videoconferencing services will be implemented to provide
a high quality of video output with low latency and jitter.
Integration and evaluation have to be conducted in
regard to embedded Voice over Internet Protocol solutions
by testing the latest developed codec’s and diagnose the
performance because there are challenges about the quality
of the video output. We need to develop and conduct
preliminary tests to assess the possibilities of adding a new
that will be used to pilot or direct robot machine and it can
be replaced by the joystick in future. The choice of the
softphone and codec’s is critical because the Asterisk does
not allow codec translation. This needs that all clients must
be compatible. An interface is hard to design due to dialling
and meeting process; therefore, it will be difficult to use the
same
communication
channel
[8].
The
integration
procedures on how to stream data (video, audio) in IP
Cameras using RTSP services and this communication
channel will need to support specific delays.
Healthcare systems face a number of challenges in the
coming years. These relate to confidentiality of data,
changing demographics and economics of European society
[3]. Effective delivery of healthcare in the future is therefore
likely to depend on a combination of technological solutions
[7]. Human needs are complex and are not necessarily easily
met through simple technological fixes, provision of human
services (social and health) involving many ingredients, thus
some can be supported by the types of functionality
provided
by
technology.
According
to
European
Commission Final ICT and Ageing Report [12], there is a
risk that too much ‘technology’ push might result in
inappropriate
application
and
negative
outcomes,
to
detriment of those immediately concerned as well as to the
longer-term prospects for the community or market. On the
other hand, application of technology in human service,
delaying or blocking innovations that can provide truly
positive benefits for elderly people and their care-givers.
However, the potential offered by technology also extends
to other domains; this comprises the general social inclusion
of elderly people in everyday social life and support for
ageing in the context of employment or daily activities [12].
Currently
the
European
Commission
is
dedicated
in
providing the health-care support for elderly patients to all
European
citizens.
Not
as
an
advantage,
but
as
a
fundamental right for many citizens who lacks the most
basic services [11]. To accomplish this goal, both private
and
public
health
care
sectors
have
identified
Videoconferencing as a strategic tool to improve the health-
care delivery and instructive services to elderly patients with
the aim of reducing medical care costs. As seen in Figure 1,
this is research work collaboration and the collaboration
involves academics, private and public sectors with the aim
to support elderly patients in their daily activities. Number 8
in Figure 1 is ESIEE Paris University, where the proposed
Videoconference solution is being developed.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 1.
Research Collaboration.
III.
ESTABLISHING VOIP CONNECTION WITH SIP CLIENTS
AND SIP SERVERS
According to Bley [1], the process of compiling and
running Ekiga with its sources normally require tools like a
working of C/ C++ compiling environment and it depends
on three dependencies that are developed together for
compilation process for instance: Ptlib, Opal and Ekiga.
According to Boundy [2], the above dependencies are
attributes that can be defined in the package stanza files.
They
allows
for
defining
hardware
and
software
prerequisites
and
restrictions
to
be
evaluated
when
executing the compiled, remove, and undo commands on
the package [2]. If users want to compile and install a new
working version of Ekiga, they should make sure that they
don’t have dependencies or packages that are already
installed in their machines. We managed to follow the
relevant steps to compile the Ekiga client on Debian and
Ubuntu machine (Open Source OS) and this involve
downloading, save the Ekiga packages and compiled them.
For Windows Operating Systems (OS), currently it is not
possible to build Ekiga for Windows on Windows machine.
The current process to build Ekiga for Windows is to
generate a 32 bit program (win32) through cross-building on
a GNU/Linux system.
The powerful SIP client-server application supports user
mobility with two operating modes: Proxy and Redirect.
Figure 2 shows a SIP Proxy mode, whereby SIP clients send
requests to the proxy server and the proxy server either
handles the requests or forwards them to other SIP servers.
On the other side of users in VoIP network, the signalling
invitations look as if they are coming from the proxy SIP
server [3].
Figure 2.
SIP Architecture [7].
The minimal set of modules needed for various Asterisk
and Kamailio functions was determined based on the
minimum requirements and using the requirements makes it
possible to develop tests for the target functionalities of these
two PBX systems. We managed to configure and install
certain services and modules for SIP servers (Asterisk and
Kamailio). Primary, we took consideration of minimal
requirements thus two sets of requirements, each describing
a set of abilities necessary for the project. The first set of
requirements pertains to support for SIP based phone calls;
we call a minimal Asterisk, Kamailio PBX system meeting
the voice call and video requirements. The next set of
minimum requirements includes some additional support for
voice mail PBX system. Before selecting the packages
required, firstly install a database that will store users and
generally MySQL is recommended for testing procedures.
After the file system has been formatted, the user will be
presented with the option to select packages or to use default
packages and we followed all the relevant installation steps
to configure and setup both Destar Asterisk 1.6.1.0 and
Kamailio 3.0.0. Primary for database creation, inside the file
/etc/kamailio/kamctlrc the following lines were inserted in
the following format:
SIP_DOMAIN=soult.esiee.fr
DBENGINE=MYSQL
DBRWUSER=openser
DBRWPW="openserrw"
DBROUSER=openserro
DBROPW=openserro
DBROOTUSER="root"
One of the objectives was to activate the RTSP services
for an IP camera (SIP client) and Asterisk PBX (SIP server),
whereby a call in a form of video and audio (orders) can be
dialled and accepted to it and this will provide a means for
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

choosing delivery channels such as UDP, TCP, RTP
mechanisms and etcetera. The AXIS 207W was chosen as an
IP camera for this Videoconferencing platform and for
installation purposes, we connected the AXIS207W IP
camera according to the installation guide then configured
the IP address for AXIS 207W camera (the default IP
address for this camera was 192.168.0.90 and the SIP client
machine was set to 192.168.0.1) and again we configured the
Password for AXIS207 camera (when accessing this camera
for the first time, the “Configure Root Password” dialog will
appear, then we entered a password and re-enter it to
confirm. The default user name was ‘root’, thus it cannot be
changed and the password for AXIS 207W camera was set to
‘1E492’. After the process of compiling and making a
working 3.2.6 version of Ekiga, the next step was to modify
the Graphical User Interface (GUI) of Ekiga and all the GUI
test modification were undertaken in Ubuntu Jaunty 9.0.4,
the same machine that Ekiga softphone was compiled.
Preliminary tests were conducted by creating and adding two
Ekiga tabs, namely, First Tab and robot Control Tab using C,
C++ and by editing XML codes with text editor.
IV.
RSEARCH OUTCOMES
A.
SIP Clients Running on Windows and Open Source
Platform
The processing of compiling and making a new working
version of Ekiga running on Linux and Windows platform is
part of our research objectives. The Ekiga softphone was
selected as a SIP client for this project, because it’s an Open
Source application that allows easy modification, unlike
other softphones it supports many audio and video codec’s
selection and is supported both in Open Source & Windows
platform [4]. A number of tests were performed for both
platforms, and, as seen in Figure 3 and Figure 4, are Ekiga
SIP clients that were created.
Figure 3.
Registering Ekiga client to soult.esiee.fr SIP domain.
Figure 4.
Ekiga SIP client with modified tabs.
Mapundu and Simonnet [6], used Glade interface
designer to create the proposed remote control prototype as
seen in Figure 5. The intension was to test the possibilities
of modifying the GUI of Ekiga with the aim of adding the
proposed Remote Control to direct the robot machine and in
future it can be replaced by the joystick.
Command output
Robot Control
via Camera
Call
Volume Adjustment
Dial Pad
ALT Button
(changing function)
Schedule
Emergence Call
Time, Power, Robot
Status Display
Command Line
Figure 5.
Proposed remote control prototype [6].
After successfully integrating the RTSP services for an
IP camera, then the image captured by the camera was
displayed as seen on Figure 6, this is an image that was
captured by AXIS207W (selected IP camera) at ESIEE
Paris test lab environment. Practically you can display the
live view page on separate window by issuing the following
command: FFplay (in the web link) and you should be on
Linux terminal.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 6.
Proposed remote control prototype.
As seen in Figure 7, is DeStar/Asterisk and, in Figure 8,
is Kamailio SIP domain, Mapundu and Simonnet [6],
managed to configure and install both SIP servers. Before
starting Ekiga clients, they need to have a SIP registrar
server for communication connectivity of which in this
scenario we configured: soult.esiee.fr acting as a Registrar
Server and it is possible to issue SIP calls.
Figure 7.
Soult.esiee.fr SIP domain..
Figure 8.
Soult.esiee.fr SIP domain..
After successfully installing the SIP servers, as seen in
Table 1, summaries both Kamailio and Asterisk PBX
comparison findings.
TABLE I.
DESTAR/ASTERISK SIP SERVER VS KAMAILIO SIP SERVER
Function/Specification
Support
Asterisk SIP Server
Supported Status
( Yes or No)
Kamailio SIP Server
Supported Status
(Yes or No)
Modelling and Integration
Yes
Yes
SIP support
Yes
Yes
PSTN function
Yes
Yes
Voicemail
Yes
Not Yet
IVR (interactive Voice
Response)
Yes
Not Yet
Database Support
Yes
Yes
IP authentication and security
Yes
Yes
Presence Message
Not Yet
Yes
Text Message
Yes
Yes
Interface Management
Yes, AGI
Yes, MI
NAT Support
Yes
Yes
Packet Route
Not yet, some challenges
when working with multi-
domains
Yes, more used for load
balancing and multi-
domain support
Multi-domain
Not yet
Yes
V.
FUTURE WORK
According to Conklin et al. [13], the development of
assisted living and Tele-Health applications requires domain
oriented interdisciplinary research as a result there will be a
prerequisite for a Living Lab. A Living Lab is an innovative
approach to deal with community driven in real life
improvement context and it is motivated by knowledge
creation, sharing, collaboration and experimenting in open
real environments [9]. This approach offers its client group
with an opportunity to expand much deeper perceptive of
how various mechanisms in their useful locations function
and interconnect. According to Jacobus and Zaaiman [9]
define living labs as “The Living Lab is a system and
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

environment for building a future economy in which real-life
user centric innovation will be the normal co-creation
technique
for
new products,
services
and
community
infrastructure”. The impression at the starting point of a
Living Lab is to turn clients from being considered as merely
subjects to whom new products or services are simple
proposed into dynamic players contributing to the co-
creation
and
experimentation
of
emerging
ideas,
breakthrough scenarios and innovative concepts [13]. Part of
our recommendation in devising a plan of action for Europe,
is to pursue the development of Tele-health Living Lab
Framework. As seen in Figure 9, this is a Community Living
Lab Factory Framework that is developed by [9] and it can
be utilised for resource sharing as well as creative and
innovation thinking.
Figure 9.
Community Living Lab Framework [9].
In addition to future work in devising action plan for
European Countries is to come up with Knowledge Brokers
(KBs). The implementation of Knowledge Brokers will
promote
mutual
understanding
that
gives
Researchers,
Decision makers and Caregivers a better understanding of
each other’s environments and this will help to spread the
awareness together with adoption of innovations [13]. It
should be noted however that the trade off between audio,
video
quality
and
throughput
performance
of
this
Videoconferencing tool is still ongoing issues.
VI.
CONCLUSION
Integrate and test the existing VoIP tools that will help
elderly people to have trust relationships with their family or
caregivers and one of the tools that was proposed is the
implementation of Videoconferencing service (VoIP Tool)
that will act as a main communication channel between
elderly people, robot Companion, family caregivers and
medical professionals. Both assessments from SIP client and
SIP server side has been conducted successful but there are
still some limitations in regard to some communication
services, hence there are some developments with latest
versions of Ekiga soft phones and Asterisk PBX systems that
are currently examined by VoIP engineers. All this work
should be done through The Living Lab approach umbrella;
this is an approach that will provide its user group
(researchers, community, students, industry, academics and
etcetera) with an opportunity to develop much deeper
understanding of how various components in their functional
environment operate and interrelate [3].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Some research leading to these results has received
funding from European Community’s seventh Framework
Programme
(FP7/2007-2013,
under
grant
agreement
nº216487), French National Research Association through
QuaVADis Project.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Bley, “Integrating service robots into ICT solution for
technology supporting ageing,” FP7 on CompanianAble
Project. France, vol. A247, pp. 183–195, April 2008.
[2]
J. Boundy, “ Telemedicine for elderly patient at home”,
International
conference
on
Smart
Homes
and
Health
Telematics, Germany, pp. 65–80, May 2010.
[3]
C. Callegari and M. Pagano, “Security and delay issues in SIP
systems,”
Wiley
InterScience
International
Journal
on
Communication Systems, London, pp. 1023–1044, July 2009.
[4]
G.
Clinton,
E.
Mativo
and
N.
Thai,
“Robotics-based
curriculum development for an immigration course into
computer
system
engineering,”
In
SpringlerLink
on
Technological Developments in Education and Automation,
pp. 165-171, April 2010.
[5]
A. Coute and T. Simonnet, “Enhanved visiophony to operate
a robot companion,” In SpringlerLink on Computer Science,
Italy, pp. 305-315, May 2009.
[6]
Z. Mapundu and T. Simonnet, “Enhanced VoIP solution for
controlling a robot-companion,” In
IADIS
International
Conference in Aplied Computing, Romania, vol. 2, pp. 237–
245, March 2010.
[7]
Z. Mapundu, T. Simonnet, and JS van der Walt, “A
Videoconfrencing Tool Acting as a Home-Based Healthcare
Monitoring
robot
for
Elderly
Patients,”
In
IOS
Press
International
Global
Tele-health
Conference
in
Aplied
Computing, Sydney, vol. 3, pp. 180–218, November 2012.
[8]
F. Rocaries and T. Simonnet, “Collaborative tools for
telemedicine
platform:
monitoring,
communication
and
storage,” In IADIS International Conference Journal on
Informatics, Brazil, pp. 193-205, July 2009.
[9]
SW. Jacobus and JJ. Zaaiman, , “Community Living Lab as a
Collaborative Innnovation Environment,” Informing Science
Issues in Information Science and Information Technology,
vol. 6, Dec. 2009, pp. 422-435.
[10] L. Madsen and M. Spencer, “Asterisk: The Future of
Telephony,” 2nd ed United States of America, O’Reilly
Media, Inc. ISBN 978-0-596-51048-0. Safari Oreilly.
[11] LM.
Matos,
“TeleCARE:
Collaborative
Virtual
Elderly
Support Communities,” ICEIS Library 1st Workshop on Tele-
Care, Spain, pp. 6-17, April 2004.
[12] European Commision Final ICT and Ageing Report, “ICT
and
Ageing:
European
study
on
users,
markets
and
technologies,” France Portal, pp. 128-145, March 2010.
[13] J. Conklin, E. Lusk, M. Harris, and P. Stolee, “Knowledge
brokerrs in a knowledge network: the case of seniors health
research
transfere network
knolwdge brokers,” BioMed
Central Hournal in Implementation Science, vol.2, Jan. 2013,
pp. 1-10,doi:11.1026/implementationscience.1110476l.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

