Online Patients in an Offline Health Care Sector: 
Are Hospitals Ready for Electronic Communication With Patients? 
 
Kari Dyb 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
kari.dyb@telemed.no 
Conceição Granja 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
conceicao.granja@telemed.no 
Stein Roald Bolle 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
stein.roald.bolle@telemed.no 
 
Gunnar Hartvigsen 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
Department of Computer Science 
UIT – The Arctic University of Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
gunnar.hartvigsen@telemed.no
 
 
Abstract—Surgery cancellations are undesirable in hospital 
settings. In order to reduce elective surgery cancellations at the 
University Hospital of North Norway, the eTeam-Surgery 
project studied the pre-operative planning to determine if part 
of the planning process could be moved from the hospital to the 
patient at home – through electronic collaboration. This paper 
discusses the actual readiness for electronic communication 
between patients and hospitals. In order to approach the 
readiness for electronic communication, the method section is 
divided in two parts. The first part consists of a documentary 
study of the most recent health reform in Norway, focusing on 
the readiness for using IT within the health care sector. In the 
second part, an in-depth empirical study of the pre-operative 
planning process at the hospital, is described. The results are 
reported in three analytical categories, according to the 
findings: a) Norwegian health policy; b) Health care workers at 
the hospital; c) The hospital as an entity. The authors’ 
conclusion is that while Norwegian health policy strongly 
promotes electronic collaboration, and health care workers are 
ready to use new tools, the hospital, as an entity, is not yet ready 
for electronic communication between patients and the hospital. 
Keywords-elective 
surgery 
cancellations; 
pre-operative 
planning; e-readiness; electronic communication; health policy; 
hospitals; health care workers; Norway health care. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In most hospitals, surgical departments are simultaneously 
the major area of investment, and the greatest source of 
revenue [1],[2]. Nonetheless, elective surgeries are regularly 
cancelled; cancellation rates between 10 and 40 % have been 
reported [2]-[5]. In western countries, up to 20 % of elective 
surgeries are cancelled on the day of surgery. However, it is 
also identified that 50 % of these cancellations might be 
avoided [2],[6],[7]. The reasons for elective surgery 
cancellation vary, but evidence points to lack of information 
as being a main cause. These studies refer to information that 
existed prior to the day of surgery, but was not available when 
required [8],[9]. The patient often holds such information. 
The Norwegian population is well prepared and able to use 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT): Patients, 
including elderly or less-educated [10],[11], are using 
electronic health care services [12]. There is also an increasing 
tendency for health care workers to use their personal 
electronic devices to support their clinical work [13],[14]. 
Such trends in the health care sector, often designated as e-
readiness, open new possibilities to approach the elective 
surgery cancellation problem. With e-readiness, we refer to 
the preparedness for using Information and Communications 
Technology in health care.  
In line with the aforementioned literature on elective 
surgery cancellation, in 2008, the University Hospital of 
North Norway (UNN) did identify inadequate planning due to 
lack of information as a main cause for cancellations [15]. The 
aim of the research project, “eTeam-Surgery”, is to reduce the 
number of elective surgery cancellations at UNN, by 
providing the lacking information from the patient to the 
hospital at an earlier stage in the pre-operative planning 
process. The eTeam-Surgery project has studied the pre-
operative planning at UNN to determine if, and how part of 
the process can be moved from the hospital to the patient at 
home, through electronic collaboration.  
To develop a tool for electronic collaboration between the 
patient and the hospital is not an easy, nor a straightforward 
task. A substantial amount of the literature in the field of 
health ICT, reports on unsuccessful implementation projects, 
challenges and unforeseen consequences of ICT in health 
care, particularly in hospitals [16]-[28]. In order to evaluate 
the possibility of using electronic (i.e., web-based) 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

communication between the hospital and the patient prior to 
surgery, this paper focus on what appears to be a paradox in 
the Norwegian health care sector. Despite the reported e-
readiness of the population (patients and health care workers), 
several health ICT projects have failed to fulfil their expected 
outcomes, also in Norway [29]-[31]. While literature 
demonstrates patient’s readiness for using web-based tools, 
knowledge on the political and organizational readiness for 
such communication are scarce. It is our argument that these 
are important actors in the success of health IT. This paper 
addresses the political and organization readiness for health IT 
and ask; is the Norwegian health care sector ready for 
electronic communication during pre-operative planning?  
In order to gain knowledge on the Norwegian 
governmental vision on health ICT, a documentary study of 
the most recent reform in the Norwegian health care sector 
was conducted. The reform is called the; “Coordination 
Reform” [32], and was published by the Ministry of Health 
and Care Services. Thereafter, an empirical study was 
performed at UNN, in order to explore the readiness for 
electronic communication between patients and the hospital 
during pre-operative planning. Both the health care workers 
involved in pre-operative planning at UNN, and the hospital, 
as an entity, in pre-operative planning, were addressed. 
This paper is divided in five sections. In the Section 1, the 
problem with surgical cancellations is introduced, and the aim 
of the study is described. In Section 2, the background of the 
study is presented. It gives a brief introduction to the existing 
knowledge on e-readiness, and on challenges with ICT in 
health care. The data collection methodology is presented and 
explained in Section 3. The results are disclosed and 
interpreted in Section 4. In the last section, discussion and 
conclusions, the authors elaborate on the readiness to use 
electronic communication in health care. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
It is reported that patients from within the Norwegian 
population are well prepared and able to use ICT 
[9],[15],[33],[34]. In addition, health care workers use 
personal electronic devices to support their clinical work 
[13],[14],[24]. Despite this, there is substantial evidence in the 
field of health ICT, on unsuccessful implementation projects 
[16]-[18]. Challenges with implementation, slow diffusion 
and unforeseen consequences of ICT in health care, 
particularly in hospitals, have been reported [16]-[28]. 
Patients already use electronic health care services, and 
health care workers are extensively using their own devices in 
their daily work. However, slow diffusion and failed 
implementation are reported. If patients and health care 
workers are ready, why are the ICT implementations in 
hospitals often failing? 
The eTeam-Surgery project is approaching this paradox. 
In order to go beyond individuals’ readiness, and explore the 
possibility of using electronic communication between the 
hospital and the patient, the need for a new approach was 
identified. In this paper, the authors are considering the recent 
Norwegian health reform and the hospital as entities, while 
focusing in e-readiness in the context of the pre-operative 
planning process at UNN. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
In order to approach the readiness for electronic 
communication in the Norwegian health care sector, multiple 
and diverse methods were needed. Therefore, the method 
section is divided in two parts. The first part has a more 
general motivation, and consists of a documentary study of the 
Coordination Reform, focusing on e-readiness. In the second 
part, in order to approach the e-readiness at UNN, an in-depth, 
empirical study of the pre-operative planning process was 
carried out. 
In the study of the Coordination Reform, the focus was on 
the readiness to use electronic communication within the 
Norwegian health care sector. 
The empirical study consists of three phases. In order to 
keep this paper self-contained, the empirical methodology 
will be described briefly hereafter; for further information 
refer to [35]. 
Stage 1 Gather data on the hospital’s representation of the 
elective surgery cancellation problem; 
Stage 2 Observations and interviews at the hospital, 
related to the pre-operative planning processes at 
department level; 
Stage 3 Individual, 
in-depth 
interviews 
with 
all 
professional groups involved in pre-operative 
planning at a specific hospital department. 
In Stage 1, the aim was to gather knowledge on UNN’s 
understanding of the elective surgical cancellation problem, 
and the hospital representation of the pre-operative planning 
process. One document, containing information on the use of 
resources involved in surgery at the hospital was identified 
and studied [15]. In 2012, UNN initiated a Lean project in 
order to optimize the elective surgical process. Researchers 
from the eTeam-Surgery group followed this project. 
In Stage 2, the pre-operative planning process at different 
departments at UNN was investigated. This comprised three 
weeks of fieldwork at the Surgery and Intensive care clinic, 
doing interviews while following an anesthesiologist and an 
anesthetic nurse. In addition, thirteen interviews with 
physicians, nurses and administrative personnel were 
conducted, at six different departments. The interviews were 
semi-structured, done at the workplace, and lasted between 
thirty minutes to two hours.  
During the first two stages, two departments were 
described to be more efficient. However, these departments 
still evidenced a representative number of cancellations. One 
of the departments was chosen to proceed with an in-depth 
study in Stage 3. The chosen department is not revealed due 
to ethical reasons. In Stage 3, representatives from all the 
professional groups involved in the pre-operative planning 
process at UNN were addressed. At this specific department, 
extensive knowledge on the pre-operative planning process 
was collected. The department-specific interviews were semi-
structured, done at the workplace, and lasted between one to 
two hours. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results section is reported considering the analytic 
categories of the findings. These categories were defined in 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

order to discuss the e-readiness within the health care sector 
in Norway. The categories are:  
a) Norwegian 
health 
policy: 
Readiness 
within 
Norwegian health policy, where the findings from the 
documentary study are reported; 
b) Health care workers at the hospitals: reports from the 
interviews carried out during stages two and three of 
the empirical study; 
c) The hospital as an entity: reports from all three stages 
of the empirical inquiry. 
A. Norwegian health policy 
In the preface of the Coordination Reform, the Minister of 
Health and Care Services stated that: “Norway ranks among 
the highest of all OECD nations – but we have not achieved a 
corresponding high level of health in return” [10]. The 
Minister wanted to change this: “With smart solutions, 
patients will receive proper treatment at the right place and 
at the right time. We will achieve this through the 
Coordination Reform” [10]. A clear goal on the use of ICT in 
the Reform, as stated on page 135, is that “electronic 
communication 
should 
be 
the 
standard 
way 
of 
communicating” [10]. In line with this vision, an extensive 
ICT investment is currently taking place in the northern health 
region of Norway, including at UNN. The Northern Norway 
Regional Health Authority is investing € 62.5 million in the 
FIKS project (from the Norwegian “Felles innføring kliniske 
systemer”) to develop the electronic health record for the 
future – a fundamental tool for high-quality patient treatment 
[33]. This is the largest ICT project in the northern health 
region ever.  
The quotations from the Norwegian health policy, as well 
as the regional health authorities’ heavy investment in new 
electronic tools, demonstrate readiness for health IT, both on 
national and regional policy level.  
B. Health care workers at UNN 
During our observations and interviews at the hospital, we 
did not experience any resistance from the health care workers 
towards electronic communication. On the contrary, most 
health care workers expressed frustration over the cancellation 
situation at the hospital, and stressed the need for new 
communication tools. 
A surgical nurse related the need for new ways of 
communication to the current “quick in-quick out” trend in 
elective surgical procedures. The nurse emphasized that this 
trend requires new ways of communicating with patients prior 
to hospital admission, in order to prepare them for surgery 
while they are still at home. The nurse explained, that before, 
when patients arrived earlier at the hospital, nurses were 
responsible for nursing and preparing them for surgery. Such 
preparation included, e.g., cleaning, shaving, and nail 
trimming according to the hygienic standard required for 
surgery. Today, many patients are responsible for doing these 
tasks themselves. They must follow the hygiene instructions, 
given by the hospital, at home. The nurse’s main concern was 
related to infections. In this context, an electronic 
communication tool between the patient and the hospital was 
suggested to help patients prepare for surgery. 
From our analysis of the interviews with health personnel, 
it is our interpretation that nurses, physicians and 
administrative personnel are ready for new tools for patient-
hospital communication. As an example, different health 
personnel at the hospital have suggested SMS reminders and 
e-mail conversations during surgery scheduling.  
C. UNN as an entity 
During the inquiry of UNN’s representation of the elective 
surgery cancellation problem, one internal report was 
identified and studied [15]. The report acknowledges 
challenges with the continuity of patient care at the hospital, 
and links it to poor interaction between the different 
professional groups involved in surgical practice [15]. This 
study also revealed that in order to optimize the elective 
surgical process at UNN, a Lean project had been initiated at 
the hospital in 2012. The aim of both initiatives was to 
promote continuity of patient care, improve the use of 
resources 
in 
surgery, 
and 
reduce 
elective 
surgery 
cancellations. Electronic collaboration as a mean to improve 
the continuity of care during the pre-operative planning 
process was not suggested in these initiatives. 
The main finding from the empirical fieldwork done in 
stage two, was internal variation between the different 
departments in who plans the surgery and how, and when the 
planning was done. The departments have developed their 
own local practices. At some departments, senior surgeons do 
the pre-operative planning. In other departments, this planning 
is done as teamwork, involving senior and junior physicians, 
nurses, and secretaries. 
Based on the empirical findings, a homogeneous structure 
for the pre-operative planning process at UNN could not be 
identified. In addition to diversity at the department level, the 
fieldwork revealed heterogeneity in how professionals 
described the pre-operative planning within the same 
department. It was not possible to describe a standard pre-
operative planning structure at the selected department. It is 
the authors’ understanding that in order to complete the daily 
schedule, health care workers use personal and empirical 
knowledge. The main finding from the empirical inquiry at 
UNN was heterogeneity in how departments and individual 
professionals carry out the pre-operative planning process. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
Is the Norwegian health care sector ready for electronic 
communication during pre-operative planning? 
Literature argues the patient’s readiness towards 
electronic communication. The eTeam-Surgery project has 
not yet approached empirically the patient readiness; 
therefore, no conclusions will be drawn on this subject. 
However, the Norwegian Government states a strong wish for 
electronic communication in the Coordination Reform. This 
interpretation is in line with Tjora and Melby’s [36] analysis 
of the reform. 
The empirical study at UNN reveals that health care 
workers involved in the pre-operative planning are ready for 
electronic communication. This was clearly illustrated in the 
suggestion made for an electronic communication tool to help 
patients prepare for surgery at home. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Since the Government, the patient and the health care 
workers are willing and ready for electronic communication, 
the next step was to address readiness within the hospital as 
an entity. The main finding from the empirical study of the 
pre-operative planning process at UNN was heterogeneity in 
how departments and individual professionals described and 
carried out this planning process. It is our understanding that 
in order to complete the daily schedule, the hospital is 
dependent on the health care workers’ personal and empirical 
knowledge, and enthusiasm. Since the pre-operative planning 
process at UNN is heterogeneous and dependent on the 
workers’ proactivity, it is our interpretation that the hospital, 
as an entity, at this stage, is not ready for electronic 
communication between patients and the hospital. This 
conclusion is based on the recognition that in order to develop 
and implement 
sustainable 
electronic communication 
systems, computer scientists need to identify standard patterns 
of information and workflow. Such patterns are hard to 
identify in an organization where the pre-operative planning 
process can be described as arbitrary and dependent on the 
individual health care worker preferences. 
Our conclusion is that while Norwegian health policy 
strongly promotes electronic collaboration, and health care 
workers are ready to use new tools, the hospital, as an entity, 
at this stage, is not yet ready for electronic communication 
between patients and the hospital in pre-operative planning. It 
is our understanding that, in order to successfully implement 
electronic communication in pre-operative planning, the 
hospital, as an entity, needs to be analyzed, accounted for and 
prepared for health IT. 
The conclusion is interesting on multiple levels. For the 
eTeam-Surgey project, it has great impact on future work, as 
it raises an important issue on the e-readiness of the 
organization. In an applied context, it has relevance for policy 
makers, managers in the health care sector, and for 
stakeholder in the field of health ICT, e.g., vendors and large 
ICT implementation projects. For the scientific field and the 
debate on e-readiness, it means that the concept of user 
involvement and the definition of who the users are need to be 
revisited. As demonstrated in this paper, the health policy and 
the hospital, as entities, are important non-human actors, 
which need to be studied, analyzed and accounted for in 
relation to the question of readiness for electronic 
communication in the health care sector. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the regional health 
authority Helse-Nord for funding the research project HST 
1119-13 and HST 1125-13.  
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Denton, J. Viapiano, and A. Vogl, "Optimization of surgery 
sequencing and scheduling decisions under uncertainty," 
Health Care Manag Sci, vol. 10, pp. 13-24, 2007. 
[2] W. N. Schofield, G. L. Rubin, M. Piza, Y. Y. Lai, D. 
Sindhusake, M. R. Fearnside, et al., "Cancellation of operations 
on the day of intended surgery at a major Australian referral 
hospital," Medical Journal of Australia, vol. 182, pp. 612-615, 
2005. 
[3] Audit Commission for Local Authorities the National Health 
Service in England Wales, "Operating Theatres: Review of 
National Findings," London, 2003. 
[4] B. Ivarsson, P. O. Kimblad, T. Sjoberg, and S. Larsson, 
"Patient reactions to cancelled or postponed heart operations," 
J Nurs Manag, vol. 10, pp. 75-81, 2002. 
[5] M. J. Lacqua and J. T. Evans, "Cancelled elective surgery: an 
evaluation," The American Surgeon, vol. 60, pp. 809-811, 
1994. 
[6] P. Sanjay, A. Dodds, E. Miller, P. J. Arumugam, and A. 
Woodward, "Cancelled elective operations: an observational 
study from a district general hospital," J Health Organ Manag, 
vol. 21, pp. 54-8, 2007. 
[7] T. L. Trentman, J. T. Mueller, S. L. Fassett, C. L. Dormer, and 
K. P. Weinmeister, "Day of Surgery Cancellations in a Tertiary 
Care Hospital: A One Year Review," Journal of Anesthesia & 
Clinical Research, vol. 1, 2010. 
[8] A. González-Arévalo, J. I. Gómez-Arnau, F. J. DelaCruz, J. M. 
Marzal, S. Ramírez, E. M. Corral, et al., "Causes for 
cancellation of elective surgical procedures in a Spanish 
general hospital," Anaesthesia, vol. 64, pp. 487-493, 2009. 
[9] M. Knox, E. Myers, I. Wilson, and M. Hurley, "The impact of 
pre-operative assessment clinics on elective surgical case 
cancellations," Surgeon-Journal of the Royal Colleges of 
Surgeons of Edinburgh and Ireland, vol. 7, pp. 76-78, 2009. 
[10] P. E. Kummervold, D. Gammon, S. Bergvik, J. A. Johnsen, T. 
Hasvold, and J. H. Rosenvinge, "Social support in a wired 
world: use of online mental health forums in Norway," Nord J 
Psychiatry, vol. 56, pp. 59-65, 2002. 
[11] L. Millsopp, S. Frackleton, D. Lowe, and S. N. Rogers, "A 
feasibility study of computer-assisted health-related quality of 
life data collection in patients with oral and oropharyngeal 
cancer," Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg, vol. 35, pp. 761-4, 2006. 
[12] P. M. Webb, G. D. Zimet, J. D. Fortenberry, and M. J. Blythe, 
"Comparability of a computer-assisted versus written method 
for collecting health behavior information from adolescent 
patients," J Adolesc Health, vol. 24, pp. 383-8, 1999. 
[13] M. N. Boulos, S. Wheeler, C. Tavares, and R. Jones, "How 
smartphones are changing the face of mobile and participatory 
healthcare: an overview, with example from eCAALYX," 
Biomedical engineering online, vol. 10, p. 24, 2011. 
[14] B. Dolan. (2010, October 2014). 72 percent of US physicians 
use 
smartphones. 
Available: 
http://mobihealthnews.com/7505/72-percent-of-us-
physicians-use-smartphones/ 
[15] R. Busund, "Rapport fra prosjekt: Optimal ressursutnyttelse av 
opperasjonskapasiteten i UNN," Norway, 2008. 
[16] J. Starling and S. Foley, "From pilot to permanent service: ten 
years of paediatric telepsychiatry," Journal of Telemedicine 
and Telecare, vol. 12, pp. 80-82, 2006. 
[17] P. Whitten, B. Holtz, and L. Nguyen, "Keys to a successful and 
sustainable telemedicine program," International journal of 
technology assessment in health care, vol. 26, pp. 211-216, 
2010. 
[18] P. Zanaboni and R. Wootton, "Adoption of telemedicine: from 
pilot stage to routine delivery," BMC medical informatics and 
decision making, vol. 12, p. 1, 2012. 
[19] M. Berg, "Implementing information systems in health care 
organizations: myths and challenges," International journal of 
medical informatics, vol. 64, pp. 143-156, 2001. 
[20] R. Heeks, "Health information systems: Failure, success and 
improvisation," International journal of medical informatics, 
vol. 75, pp. 125-137, 2006. 
[21] C. May, M. Mort, F. S. Mair, and T. Finch, Telemedicine and 
the future patient: Risk, Governance and Innovation: Economic 
and Social Research Council, 2005. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[22] C. May and N. T. Ellis, "When protocols fail: technical 
evaluation, biomedical knowledge, and the social production of 
'facts' about a telemedicine clinic," Soc Sci Med, vol. 53, pp. 
989-1002, Oct 2001. 
[23] M. Mort and A. Smith, "Beyond information: Intimate relations 
in sociotechnical practice," Sociology, vol. 43, pp. 215-231, 
2009. 
[24] S. Dünnebeil, A. Sunyaev, I. Blohm, J. M. Leimeister, and H. 
Krcmar, "Determinants of physicians’ technology acceptance 
for e-health in ambulatory care," International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 81, pp. 746-760, 2012. 
[25] KS, "IKT i helse- og omsorg 2008-20012 - strategi- og 
handlingsplan," Oslo2008. 
[26] H. K. Andreassen, "What does an e-mail address add?-Doing 
health and technology at home," Social Science & Medicine, 
vol. 72, pp. 521-528, 2011. 
[27] N. Schreurs. (2012) Fiasko eller fremtid? Computerworld.  
[28] J. C. Wyatt and F. Sullivan, "eHealth and the future: promise 
or peril?," Bmj, vol. 331, pp. 1391-1393, 2005. 
[29] K. Dyb, T. Solvoll, E. Rygh, and T. Sørensen, "Analysing the 
Use of a Telestroke Service," International Journal On 
Advances in Life Sciences, vol. 5, pp. 179-187, 2013. 
[30] K. Dyb and S. Halford, "Placing globalizing technologies: 
telemedicine and the making of difference," Sociology, vol. 43, 
pp. 232-249, 2009. 
[31] A. G. Sandaunet, "The challenge of fitting in: non‐
participation and withdrawal from an online self‐help group 
for breast cancer patients," Sociology of health & illness, vol. 
30, pp. 131-144, 2008. 
[32] Helse-og omsorgsdepartement, "Samhandlingsreformen," ed: 
Det Kongelige helse-og omsorgsdepartement, 2009. 
[33] M. R. Rai and J. J. Pandit, "Day of surgery cancellations after 
nurse-led pre-assessment in an elective surgical centre: the first 
2 years," Anaesthesia, vol. 58, pp. 692-9, 2003. 
[34] A. R. Seim, T. Fagerhaug, S. M. Ryen, P. Curran, O. D. Sæther, 
H. O. Myhre, et al., "Causes of Cancellations on the Day of 
Surgery at Two Major University Hospitals," Surgical 
Innovation, vol. 16, pp. 173-180, 2009. 
[35] C. Granja, K. Dyb, E. Larsen, S. R. Bolle, and G. Hartvigsen, 
"Methodology for Health Care Process Modelling: Bringing 
the Health Care Complexity into Health IT System 
Development," in Scandinavian Conference on Health 
Informatics, Grimstad, 2014, pp. 17-21. 
[36] A. T. Hagen and L. Melby, Samhandling for helse: Kunnskap, 
kommunikasjon og teknologi i helsetjenesten. Oslo: Gyldendal 
Akademisk, 2013. 
 
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

