Establishing Baseline in the Status of E-health Research in Norway 
 
Andrius Budrionis, Karianne Lind, Inger Marie Holm, Omid Saadatfard, Rune Pedersen 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
e-mail: Andrius.Budrionis@ehealthresearch.no 
 
 
Abstract—E-health is a rapidly evolving research field. In 
Norway, it is governed by the National E-health Strategy, 
defining six focus areas to be addressed by both academics and 
industry. The strategy is relatively new and much research in 
the field has been performed before it was developed. Literature 
search and machine learning classification methods were used 
to map scientific publications into the focus areas of the National 
E-health Strategy. Results showed that all strategic areas were 
represented in scientific publications; one focus area, new ways 
to provide healthcare, attracted the most attention from 
research communities. This paper presents a method and 
baseline of e-health research activities in Norway alongside the 
initial results of applying this method to the existing body of 
literature. 
Keywords-e-health strategy; publications; review; machine 
learning; classification; natural language processing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Telemedicine and e-health are priority research areas in 
Norway. Established academic communities have a long 
history of research and development in the field with success 
stories of functional telemedicine services used in clinical 
practice as early as 1991 [1]. Focus on e-health was 
strengthened in 2016 by establishing a dedicated agency under 
the Ministry of Health and Care Services, The Norwegian 
Directorate of E-health, with the goal of establishing and 
managing standards and national e-health solutions that 
contribute to high quality and effective health services.  
Norwegian government and Norwegian Directorate of E-
health are planning a shared national Electronic Health 
Record (EHR) solution for the entire healthcare sector, which 
is in line with the recommendations made in the policy 
document One Citizen – One Health Record [2][3] published 
by the Ministry of Health and Care Services in Norway. This 
policy document outlines an important strategic direction for 
the healthcare sector and recommends close collaboration 
between a number of stakeholders in the Norwegian e-health 
field. 
The National E-health Strategy [4] and action plan 2017-
2022 [5] describes the proposed strategic direction for the goal 
of a digitized and integrated healthcare system that provides a 
simpler, better and more comprehensive experience for the 
service recipients. The strategy is formed around six focus 
areas: 1) digitization of work processes, 2) better continuity of 
care, 3) better use of health data, 4) new ways to provide 
healthcare, 5) common foundation for digital services and 6) 
national e-health management and increased implementation. 
The first four are considered functional areas with direct value 
for healthcare services. The last two are considered 
foundations that are required for the first four to be realized. 
Presenting Norwegian e-health research, categorized into 
these focus areas is helpful for policy makers, such as the 
Norwegian Directorate of E-health, to promote research in 
higher priority areas and coordinate activities in the national 
e-health field. Further, e-health research institutes and e-
health organizations can use this information to search for 
research partners and to build collaboration networks. 
Currently, such information is not available. The objective of 
this study is to address this need by creating a classification of 
e-health research in Norway based on the six focus areas of 
the National E-health Strategy. This paper presents a method 
and baseline measures, scoping the state of e-health research 
activities in Norway based on scientific publications. 
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 
II provides a summary of methods used to produce results, 
which are presented in section III. Section IV discusses the 
key findings and limitations of this work, while section V 
concludes the paper. 
II. 
METHOD 
This project could be divided into three phases: data 
collection, preprocessing and analysis. The reminder of this 
section summarizes the methods used in every phase of the 
project.   
A. Data collection 
To collect data on production of scientific publications 
within e-health, three major research databases (Scopus, Web 
of Science (WoS) and PubMed) were queried. Publications 
dated 01.01.2007 - 01.06.2018 were included. Publication 
search was performed in two phases between May and 
December, 2017: 
1. Phase 1 included keyword-based search (predefined list of 
keywords and relevant MeSH terms) and author-based search 
covering a list of well-known researchers in the field. 
2. Phase 2 was based on an extended author-based search 
including authors from publications identified in Phase 1.  
1) Phase 1 
All three databases (Scopus, Web of Science (WoS) and 
PubMed) were queried in Phase 1. We searched in title, 
abstract and keywords (Scopus and WoS) or in title and 
abstract (PubMed) and coupled the queries with affiliation 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

“Norway”. In the author-based searches, we searched for 
author name combined with affiliation “Norway”.  
Phase 1 combined three approaches:  
• 
MeSH term-based search (MeSH-term for e-health, 
telehealth and mHealth is “telemedicine”). 
• 
Search based on predefined list of e-health terms, 
listed below. 
• 
Search for publications authored by well-known 
researchers in the field: 
o 
Researchers from the Norwegian Centre for 
E-health Research (E-health Research) 
o 
Known researchers within the Norwegian 
e-health field (identified previously) 
Lists of e-health terms, expected to be present in the 
majority of e-health publications, were put together by senior 
researchers at the E-health Research. These terms were also 
combined with more general terms e-health, ehealth, 
telemedicine, telehealth and telecare. 
The following list of e-health terms was used in the 
keyword-based search (? denotes a single random character, * 
denotes multiple random characters): 
General keywords: e-health, ehealth, telemedicine, 
telehealth, telecare 
EHR-related keywords: Electronic* Health Care 
Record, electronic*health record, electronic* healthcare 
record, electronic* medical record, electronic* patient record, 
patient health record, decision support, health information 
system, information infrastructure, information security, 
integration, process support, regionali?ation, semantic 
interoperability, standardi?ation, terminology, usability, 
privacy, archetypes, user interface. 
Health analytics keywords: analy*, health analy*, large 
dataset*, big data, predictive analy*, computational 
epidemiology, health intelligence, artificial intelligence, 
machine learning, natural language processing, text and data 
mining, statistical analy*. 
M-health keywords: Mhealth, m-health, homecare, 
sensor system*, medical app*, health app*, app*, mobile, 
remote monitoring, medical device, usability, information 
security, privacy, health record, self-management, wearable*, 
sensor*, self-generated data, economic impact*, facilitator*, 
mental health, tracking, empowerment, guidelines. 
2) Phase 2 
After phase 1 and deduplication, the dataset consisted of 
approximately 2000 references. Duplicates were removed 
following a simplified version of a method described by 
Bramer et al 2016 [6]. 
A list of the first and second author was compiled from the 
publications identified in Phase 1. Names, which were not 
searched for in Phase 1, were used to query Scopus database.  
After de-duplication of the entire dataset it contained 3028 
references. References were exported to a comma separated 
CSV file, including author, title, year, abstract, keywords, 
URL, DOI, Reference Type and Author Address. 
B. Data preprocessing 
Data analysis was performed in Python 3 environment 
using the latest versions of Natural Language Processing 
Toolkit (NLTK) [7] for free-text processing and scikit-learn 
[8] for analysis. Data analysis focused solely on publication 
title, keywords and abstract fields. Preprocessing included 
removal of stop-words and numeric values. Words in the free-
text fields were stemmed (Snowball stemmer) and processed 
using Term Frequency – Inverse Document Frequency (TF-
IDF) vectorizer. It resulted in a numerical representation of 
importance of n-grams (1 or 2 words in length) in the corpus.  
A random sample of publications (N = 1700) was 
manually labelled assigning them to one of the 6 classes 
originating from the Norwegian National E-health Strategy 
[4]. References unrelated to e-health were also marked. 
Manual labelling was performed by one of 5 independent 
reviewers, who discussed classification criteria beforehand. 
Publications, which could not be classified by a single 
reviewer due to uncertainty regarding the correct class were 
discussed in common meetings where consensus class was 
determined.  
Description of the classes in the strategy was used as 
classification criteria. Typical projects, which fit these classes 
are: 
1) Digitization of work processes – improvement of 
work processes for healthcare professionals.  
2) Better continuity of care – improvement of healthcare 
services for patients.  
3) Better use of health data – health data analytics driven 
projects. 
4) New ways to provide healthcare – novel services in 
healthcare, which were not available before.  
5) Common 
foundation 
for 
digital 
services 
–
infrastructure for large scale digital services. 
6) National e-health management and increased 
implementation – national e-health solutions. 
Labelled data were randomly split into training (80%) and 
testing (20%) data for supervised machine learning analysis.  
C. Data analysis 
Unsupervised machine learning methods were applied to 
cluster the publications and explore the data. In depth analysis 
was performed using supervised machine learning algorithms. 
Classification of publications was performed in two steps: 
binary classification (e-health/not e-health) and multi-class 
classification of e-health publications. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Results from data collection and analysis are presented in 
the reminder of this section.  
A. Data collection 
Data collection was performed in two phases including 
removal of duplicates. It resulted in 3028 publications, which 
were included in data analysis.  
B. Supervised 2-class model 
To clean the dataset from irrelevant publications, four 
binary classifiers (Linear SVC, Naïve Bayes, Logistic 
Regression and K-nearest neighbor) were trained and tested 
using 10-fold cross-validation on the labelled data (e-
health/not 
e-health). 
Logistic 
regression 
classifier 
demonstrated the best performance for this problem and was 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

selected for further analyses. The performance of the 2-class 
classifier is presented in Table 1.  
TABLE I.  
PERFORMANCE OF THE 2-CLASS CLASSIFIER 
  
While interpreting the results, attention was directed 
towards the e-health class. The performance measures listed 
in Table 1 indicate, that the classifier is able to identify 96% 
of the relevant publications in the dataset (recall = 0.96), 
however, it also has a relatively high percentage of false 
positives in the e-health class (precision = 0.72). Regardless 
of the false positives rate, the classifier identifies almost all 
relevant e-health publications required for further analysis. 
The trained classifier was used to classify the unlabeled part 
of the dataset.  
C. Unsupervised model 
Data labelling stage could be perceived as biased due to 
overlap between the classes and human factors involved in the 
process. To adjust for the potential biases, unsupervised 
clustering of e-health publications was performed to check 
whether publication could be automatically assigned to a class 
characterized by content similarity. Principal Component 
Analysis (PCA) and k-means algorithm were fitted to 
visualize the high dimensional data in 3 dimensions (Figure 
1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Clustering of e-health publications 
Cluster analysis (before and after removing not e-health 
publications) identified no clear boundaries between the 
clusters and was not pursued further.  
D. Supervised 6-class model 
The 2-class model cleaned the dataset from the most of 
irrelevant publications (N = 1377). The cleaned dataset (N = 
1651) showed uneven distribution of publication among 
classes with one class being overrepresented. The 
overrepresented class was down sampled in the training data  
TABLE II.  
PERFORMANCE OF THE 6-CLASS CLASSIFIER  
 
Precision 
Recall 
f1-score 
1. Digitization of work 
processes 
0.70 
0.58 
0.63 
 2. Better continuity of 
care    
0.61 
0.62 
0.62 
 3. Better use of health 
data 
0.62 
0.71 
0.67 
 4. New ways to 
provide healthcare 
0.74 
0.77 
0.75 
 5. Common 
foundation for digital 
services 
0.53 
0.62 
0.57 
 6. National e-health 
management and 
increased 
implementation 
0.66 
0.64 
0.65 
 
to ensure that it is not overrepresented in the classification 
model.  Four classifiers (Linear SVC, Naïve Bayes, Logistic 
Regression and K-nearest neighbor) were fitted and tested 
using 10-fold cross-validation, Naive Bayes model showed 
the best performance (Table 2). The trained classifier was 
used to classify the unlabeled e-health publications. Results 
are represented in Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 2.  E-health publications classified according to the National E-
health Strategy [4] 
 
Precision 
Recall 
f1-score 
Not e-health 
0.93 
0.58 
0.71 
E-health 
0.72 
0.96 
0.82 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Top-10 keywords representing each class (sorted by 
importance):  
1) Digitization of work processes: nurse, patient, use, 
care, hospital, electronic, record, health, work, 
support 
2) Better continuity of care: patient, care, inform, health, 
communication, design, nurse, user, service, use 
3) Better use of health data: data, patient, health, record, 
predict, inform, use, electronic, fall, medical 
4) New ways to provide healthcare: diabetes, patient, 
health, use, social, service, care, technology, group, 
design 
5) Common foundation for digital services: secure, 
health, standard, information, develop, service, data, 
ehealth, use, medical 
6) National e-health management and increased 
implementation: telemedicine, health, information, 
implement, studies, infrastructure, technology, use, e-
health, care 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Implications of the findings, methodological limitations 
and future works are discussed in this section.  
A. Interpretation of findings 
This project aimed to shed light on the status of e-health 
research activities in Norway with regards to the strategic 
documents [4][5]. The results of this project provide an 
overview on how the academical effort to bring the e-health 
field forward is reflected in scientific publications, and how 
these publications map to the focus areas defined in the 
National E-health Strategy (Figure 2). Disregarding the 
potential overlap between the focus areas and other 
methodological limitations, the project demonstrates the high 
pace of producing scientific results in the field. The most of 
research effort falls into class 4 (new ways to provide 
healthcare). This may not be a surprising finding, since the 
most of activities in e-health could be categorized as new ways 
to deliver healthcare.  
The other publications distributed more evenly into the 5 
classes. Class 5 (common foundation for digital services) had 
the weakest representation in scientific papers. This may be 
explained by the specifics of the Norwegian healthcare 
system. Norwegian healthcare is publicly owned and funded. 
Class 5 focus on the publications dealing with the 
infrastructure for delivering healthcare services to the citizens. 
Such infrastructure is partly developed from off-the-shelf 
components; procurement procedures are often based on other 
aspects than research (for instance, cost, reliability, flexibility, 
etc.). Space for research in this focus area is limited. 
B. Methodological limitations 
Methods to achieve the aforementioned results could be 
questioned. Level of uncertainty varied throughout the 
project, therefore, results should be interpreted in the context 
of the following limitations. 
Data collection process was not strictly structured, 
therefore some publications may have been left out from 
further analyses. Phase 1 was focused on predefined 
keywords, which may not be completely representative for the 
entire field. Databases used in the search process do not 
include national publication channels, which often publish 
results in Norwegian.   
Phase 2 used a list of the 1st and 2nd authors compiled 
from the publications identified in the Phase 1. All other 
authors were ignored. The search was performed only in 
Scopus database; PubMed and WoS added very few results in 
the previous phase. Data labelling process inherited the 
uncertainty originating from the National E-health Strategy. 
Focus areas are not defined to form mutually exclusive classes 
and there is a clear overlap between some of them. At the same 
time, publications often cover several focus areas and are 
difficult to assign to a single class. It was reflected in data 
labelling process, together with the additional uncertainty 
caused by human factors and background of the labelers. 
During the labelling process a class of e-health publications, 
which did not fit well into any focus areas was identified. Such 
publications deal with medical education, social media use for 
health purposes, reviews of various e-health topics and user 
health data storage solutions. These topics should be better 
addressed in the next versions of the e-health strategy.  
Data analysis had to deal with the uncertainty inherited 
from the previous steps in the process. It may be reflected in 
relatively low precision and recall measures, especially in the 
6-class model (Table 2). It may also be influenced by the false 
positives in 2-class model (precision = 0.72), which left some 
noise in the data filtering process. All the aforementioned 
aspects need to be taken into consideration when interpreting 
the results from this study.  
C. Alternative classification strategies 
The project started out with an idea to classify the 
publications according to the four research arenas at E-health 
Research: citizen services, patient pathways, health data and 
services for health professionals. The purpose was to establish 
a clear link between e-health research production in Norway 
and focus areas at E-health Research, which are logically 
distinct, and thus make classification easier. While the focus 
areas at E-health Research are well-aligned with the National 
E-health Strategy, they do not directly map to one another.   
A decision to classify the identified publications according 
to the focus areas in the National E-health Strategy was a 
consensus reached in the project team. Regardless of the 
importance of measuring e-health research status towards 
national guidelines, focus areas defined in the strategy may 
not the best choice for classifying scientific production in the 
field. The National E-health Strategy is relatively new and 
much development in the field have taken place before it was 
made public. Focus areas are not meant to form mutually 
exclusive 
classes; 
research 
publications 
are 
often 
interdisciplinary and cover several focus areas. This situation 
causes uncertainty in classification, which might be avoided 
by selecting more distinctive classes. However, connection to 
the existing e-health strategy would be lost. One question that 
could be asked is whether the National E-health Strategy 
should be used to classify and potentially influence e-health 
research, or it is e-health research that should influence the e-
health strategy? 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

D. Future work 
This paper aimed to establish a baseline in the status of e-
health research in Norway. Studying the development of the 
field is meant to be a continuous process, which is repeated 
periodically, preferably every third year. Results can be used 
as an input for the policy-makers in organizing, coordinating 
and allocating research funding, strengthening the weak focus 
areas and research institutions. Lessons learned during this 
iteration will contribute to a more structured and easier 
reproducible data collection and analysis process in future 
iterations. Further analyses will focus on classifying the 
publications according to the research institutions, mapping 
the focus areas of the National E-health Strategy to the 
interests of the most important academic actors in the country. 
The project aims to communicate the findings in a visual and 
easily understandable manner, therefore results will be 
represented as an interactive periodically updated map. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presented a method and initial results scoping 
the status of e-health research in Norway based on scientific 
publications from the last decade. It mapped the published 
research results to the focus areas of the National E-health 
Strategy. Findings show that all focus areas are represented in 
the previous and ongoing research activities. Most of the 
publications fell into the focus area dealing with “new ways 
to provide healthcare services”. The focus area “common 
foundation for digital services” had the weakest representation 
in the identified scientific publications.  
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Nordrum et al., “Remote frozen section service: A 
telepathology project in northern Norway,” Human Pathology, 
vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 514–518, Jun. 1991. 
[2] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, “Meld. St. 9 
(2012–2013),” 
Regjeringen.no, 
30-Nov-2012. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.webcitation.org/73nsLIeoU. 
[Accessed: 09-Nov-2018]. 
[3] Norwegian Directorate of E-health, “Utredning av «Én 
innbygger – én journal»,” [Report "One Citizen - One Health 
Record"] 
Dec-2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.webcitation.org/73nstSwCb. [Accessed: 09-Nov-
2018]. 
[4] Norwegian Directorate of E-health “Nasjonal e-helsestrategi 
2017-2022.” [National e-health strategy 2017-2022] [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.webcitation.org/73ntEa1LR. 
[Accessed: 09-Nov-2018]. 
[5] Norwegian Directorate of E-health, “Nasjonal handlingsplan for 
e-helse 2017-2022.” [National action plan for e-health 2017-
2022] 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.webcitation.org/73ntLCceo. [Accessed: 09-Nov-
2018]. 
[6] W. M. Bramer, D. Giustini, G. B. de Jonge, L. Holland, and T. 
Bekhuis, “De-duplication of database search results for 
systematic reviews in EndNote,” J Med Libr Assoc, vol. 104, 
no. 3, pp. 240–243, Jul. 2016. 
[7] S. Bird, E. Klein, and E. Loper, Natural Language Processing 
with Python, 1st ed. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2009. 
[8] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, and B. 
Thirion, “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python,” J. Mach. 
Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, Nov. 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

