Implementation of IoT Data Analysis in Personal Elderly Home Care System 
 
 
Chuan-Zong Huang 
Department of Institute of Mechatronic  
Engineering of NTUT 
Taipei, Taiwan 
Email: t109408005@ntut.edu.tw 
Jung-Tang Huang 
Department of Institute of Mechatronic  
Engineering of NTUT 
Taipei, Taiwan 
Email: jthuang@ntut.edu.tw
 
 
Abstract—At present, the proportion of the elderly population 
in the world is gradually increasing, but the fertility rate is very 
low. In the future, the elderly population will be much larger 
than the young population. More care institutions and systems 
are needed to share the pressure of the young population. This 
is a major issue in the future. However, many studies are now 
on the development of wearable devices and the implementation 
of non-care Internet of Things (IoT). The subjects must wear a 
number of uncomfortable sensors and bulky equipment, which 
is very difficult for the subjects. unfriendly, or developed care-
related IoT systems without effectively utilizing the data 
collected. Therefore, this system combines a complete and novel 
Internet of Things architecture to effectively collect relevant 
physiological information of users through Bluetooth bracelets, 
Bluetooth security charms, depth cameras, and Google Home 
Nest Mini, and integrate these reliable and diverse Data 
processing and storage, detailed analysis of every tiny and 
available information in the data, effective analysis of the 
subjects' life patterns, and establishment of a personalized care 
model. 
Keywords-IoT;Smart Healthcare;Big Data;Wearable;Cloud 
computing;Data Analysis 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The purpose of big data analysis is to analyze large and 
complex data sources and discover trends, patterns, customer 
behaviors and market preferences. With various sensors in the 
Internet of Things and the Internet that plays an important role, 
an Internet of Things architecture is formed, resulting in a 
large number of compound data [2]. Through statistical 
calculation and data analysis, important information was 
previously ignored because only a piece of data can be 
obtained, and from a large amount of composite data and then 
through big data analysis, deep learning to obtain unknown 
related information. This research will focus on data analysis 
of smart home and elderly care applications, focusing on 
providing smart home and elderly living and improving 
services, using the data collected by sensors and Google Cloud 
Services applications to conduct a series of verification, 
processing, classification, storage, calculation, statistics and 
analysis are presented in a visual interface. The analysis 
results of these data can help to observe and adjust the user's 
related activities and formulate plans on dietary health, sleep 
quality, life health management and so on. 
The main purpose of the care IoT application is to provide 
intelligent services. This proposal combines powerful cloud 
services to process a large amount of data to make the care 
environment more comfortable, convenient, and secure. It 
also uses data processing and analysis to achieve a personal 
system. This is the ultimate goal of a smart home for IoT 
applications [1]. Most of the care and medical IoT systems use 
existing data for analysis and machine learning [12], and some 
use simple circuit boards for data collection and focus on 
cloud computing and algorithm optimization [10] [11], or 
collect data through too many sensors and instruments, 
resulting in the burden of action. In this experiment, the 
combination of light and simple Bluetooth devices and cloud 
applications, and data analysis tools are used to complete the 
analysis of physiological information, diet and sleep. 
Today's cloud services are divided into the following three 
categories: Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service 
(PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). This research is 
based on PaaS, establishes a service-oriented cloud computing 
architecture, and provides users with SaaS so that users can 
use our existing services through simple settings, no need to 
consider storage, management, etc., carried out by the cloud 
unified management. 
The purpose of this research is to focus on the data 
collection and analysis of the cloud-based care system of the 
Internet of Things. We used a combination of physiological 
bracelets, wearable amulet, Google Home Nest Mini and other 
various sensors to form a complete care Internet of Things 
(IoT) system. A complete and detailed collection of various 
physiological information, posture behavior and eating habits 
data were collected through the Bluetooth sensor and store it 
in the cloud database. We also stored the collected 
physiological data information, posture changes and design 
life dialogue questions and answers. Finally, we analyzed the 
collected physiological information and compared it with the 
content of the dialogue questionnaire. First, we obtained the 
difference between the user's subjective psychology, 
physiological feelings and physiological information. Further, 
we analyzed the user's living habits, eating habits, sleeping 
habits, etc., Based on it, we gave active suggestions through 
audio, and made daily health reports and weekly report 
analysis, providing doctors to judge the change of user's habits, 
and maximize the analysis. The approach helped the 
utilization of all kinds of big data collected, so as to achieve 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the ultimate goal of personalized care by the application of 
data in the Internet of Things system. Compared with 
reference [4], it can be found that through long-term behavior 
records, it is possible to understand what habits such as bad 
diet, sleep and so on before getting sick, which may lead to 
problems and proactively issue reminders and suggestions. 
Finally, through a stable system and long-term records, 
four characteristics that meet the main points of big data are 
obtained:  
• 
Volume: a lot of data. 
• 
Variety: many different forms of data, unstructured 
and structured. 
• 
Velocity: the frequency of incoming data. 
• 
Veracity: the credibility of the data. 
And analyze it through the following steps: 
• 
Identify analysis goals. 
• 
Data collection. 
• 
Data preprocessing. 
• 
Data analysis. 
• 
Visual representation. 
Through the above processing, we can get the highest 
value analysis results. However, our consideration of data 
collection may not be comprehensive enough, and users may 
use the device incorrectly, which will lead to the risk of data 
abnormality or loss. We need more accurate methods to judge 
the data. And in the case of collecting a large amount of data, 
it may cause the equipment to be overloaded or generate 
redundant data, which will be the goal we need to consider 
and solve.  
Through the above introduction, we clearly understand the 
market demand and the purpose of the experiment, and we 
also discussed the initial system architecture and method. At 
the beginning of the second part, we will start to introduce the 
complete hardware device and system architecture. The third 
part will introduce the architecture of the cloud service and the 
dialogue flow. The fourth part will introduce the experimental 
procedure, data processing and complete data analysis. 
II. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
This section will introduce a flowchart of the IoT system 
architecture, including devices, cloud services, and dialog 
flows. 
A. System Architecture 
The system uses Bluetooth wearable devices, Bluetooth 
sensors, depth cameras, video pens and other Bluetooth 
devices, through the Node Network (the Node Network 
transmission process can perform indoor positioning and 
tracking) to automatically sense the sensors and push the data 
to the terminal through the Bluetooth mesh network 
(Bluetooth Router and IoT Edge Device), then authenticate 
the Bluetooth device through IoT Edge Device and transmit 
the data to the cloud database through W-Fi for processing, 
classification, storage, calculation and statistics, and finally, 
through other visualizations such as web pages interface for 
viewing. 
The overall system architecture is mainly divided into six 
levels, and the architecture diagram is abstracted as shown in 
Figure 1. Each level from top to bottom is: 
• 
Sensor: Responsible for sensing the measured 
information and converting the sensed information 
into specific information output. In this system, new 
Bluetooth devices can be added at any time for data 
collection 
• 
Node network: A mesh network composed of 
Bluetooth is responsible for transmitting sensor 
information to the router through the Bluetooth mesh 
network. 
• 
Bluetooth router: It is responsible for information 
transfer and manages the entire sensor network group, 
which is one of the important roles in the architecture. 
• 
IoT Edge device: It can be said to be a gateway, 
responsible for controlling data flow, and connecting 
directly to the cloud to provide filtering, collecting, 
uploading data and control services. 
• 
Cloud services: Push system services to the world 
through the public cloud. In this system, new cloud 
services can be added at any time for more diverse 
data processing 
• 
User interface: Application(APP) 、 Raspberry Pi, 
Google Home Nest Mini、Web. 
 
 
Figure 1.  System Architecture Diagram. 
B. Bluetooth Device and Sensor 
The sensors used in this system are mainly divided into 3 
major categories: wearable devices, stationary devices, 
Google Home Nest Mini. 
The wearable devices are Bluetooth bracelets, Bluetooth 
amulets and Bluetooth tags, as shown in Figure 2. The 
Bluetooth watch is responsible for detecting physiological 
data, including heart rate per minute, body temperature, steps 
and calories. The Bluetooth amulet is responsible for posture 
monitoring, motion monitoring, height monitoring, and fall 
monitoring. It can clearly determine and record the user's 
current body posture changes and make notifications through 
the speaker and LINE APP in a timely manner. In particular, 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the Bluetooth Safety Amulet uses the 3D printed appearance 
and specially designed "gecko feet" are pasted on the user's 
chest, which can most accurately judge the user's posture 
changes. The Bluetooth tag is responsible for detecting the 
indoor mobile location of the user and its positioning. 
Fixed sensors are touch sensors, and Google Home Nest 
Mini. A touch sensor is a weight machine, which is triggered 
by physical contact. Google Home Nest Mini is triggered by 
the user's voice message. They are all triggered by the same 
user. The difference is in how they are triggered. 
Google Home Nest Mini runs based on Google Cloud 
Platform (GCP)[8] services, helping us create a dialogue 
system to process audio messages, processing flow: Voice 
input, Dialogflow, Agent, Intent, Fulfillment, Intent, Agent, 
Dialogflow, Voice output, can respond to different dialogue 
intentions, events, responses are classified, and their 
classification data are stored. When an abnormal situation 
occurs in the physiological data stored in Firebase Firestore [8] 
(for example, the state changes to a fall or an abnormally high 
heart rate), the speaker will broadcast a critical message in 
real-time, and transmit the information to the administrator 
through LINE. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Bluetooth watch and Bluetooth amulet. 
C. Depth Camera 
The depth camera used in this system is Intel's RealSense 
Depth Camera D435. Compared to the Microsoft Kinect series 
and Leap Motion Controller series, D435 has more detailed 
long-distance depth detection and has strong inter-SDK 
compatibility. As shown in Figure 3, this camera is used to 
take pictures of the user's three meals of food, and use the 
positioning function of the amulets and the attitude change to 
trigger the photo. Learn the types of different foods through 
algorithms, and calculate the volume, calories and nutrients of 
individual foods, record them in the database, and calculate 
the daily nutrient intake. For comparison, if the intake is 
insufficient, dietary advice will be given through the Google 
Home Nest Mini the next day. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Intel’s RealSense Depth Camera D435. 
D. Audio and Video Recording Pen 
The audio and video recording pens used in this system are 
V082S. It has high-quality video and enough memory space, 
and the battery is enough for a full day of use. The main 
function is to capture the users eating status outside the main 
mealtime, and use the RSSI change status to trigger the 
camera to take pictures. Through the algorithm, the type of 
each food can be known, and the individual food can be 
calculated. calorie, and record it in the database, analyze its 
calorie intake throughout the day, and give appropriate 
suggestions through the Google Home Nest Mini. 
E. Bluetooth Mesh Network 
The Bluetooth LAN is mainly composed of two parts: 
bNode and bwRouter, which play two important roles in the 
Bluetooth network, Central (Master) and Peripheral (Slave). 
The main function of the Master is to scan for the broadcast 
channel, the address of the Bluetooth tag can be known 
through the communication protocol defined by this research, 
and the data is transmitted to the slave through UART, and the 
slave plays the role of broadcast, responsible for the 
positioning of the device and the priority of data forwarding 
and continued transmission. Go to the next bNode until the 
Master scans its own return packet (Acknowledgement, Ack) 
and informs the Slave to stop broadcasting. This design can 
also reduce the delay to ensure whether each data reaches the 
next bNode. Figure 4 is a relationship diagram between 
bNodes. 
BwRouter is composed of Bluetooth and Raspberry Pi. It 
is the transmission terminal in the Bluetooth local area 
network. It acts as a transmission bridge between Bluetooth 
and Wi-Fi. BLE transmits data to Raspberry Pi through the 
UART communication interface. Raspberry Pi is filtered, 
sorted and classified. After that, upload it to the cloud for data 
storage and analysis through Wi-Fi. BwRouter can achieve a 
two-way communication transmission system by returning an 
acknowledgment message (Acknowledgement, Ack) or 
issuing commands to the lower-level device of the Bluetooth 
LAN. 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 4.  bNode transfer process diagram. 
F. IOT Edge Device 
The core of an edge computing device is to act as an entry 
point or an exit point and to control the data flow at the 
boundary or periphery between two networks, any hardware 
responsible for processing data, while edge computing is a 
large-scale service that was originally handled entirely by the 
data center. Decompose, cut into smaller and more 
manageable parts, and distribute to edge nodes for computing 
[3]. The main reason for using edge computing is that edge 
computing devices are closer to users than data centers, which 
can speed up data processing, improve response time, and 
improve bandwidth availability. It will be closer to the source 
of the data, so it is more suitable for processing big data and 
analysis. 
G. BLE Initial Setting 
The mobile phone application plays the role of the setting 
terminal in this system, and the mobile phone application is 
used to write the relevant information of bNode and bwRoute, 
so as to make the flooding of the Bluetooth network 
directional (Flooding is used to publish and relay the 
message ), and use the built-in latitude and longitude of 
Google Map to locate the device, so as to know the location 
of bwRouter, distinguish the area of Mesh network and write 
the required information, so that Node can judge the distance 
and have directionality, in addition to setting the latitude and 
longitude In addition to positioning, field division can also be 
performed, such as dining room, toilet, living room, bedroom 
and other areas. As shown in Figure 5. 
 
  
 
Figure 5.  APP interface. 
H. Analyze 
Behavior pattern analysis: Physiological data (heartbeat, 
body temperature, calories, number of steps, posture, 
movements, etc.) can be obtained through the Bluetooth 
wearable device to determine behavior patterns, such as daily 
moving route, which can be used to know whether to go to the 
toilet, The number and time of filling water, eating or 
watching TV, and can analyze whether the number of drinking 
water is insufficient, whether the number of times to go to the 
toilet is abnormal, etc., and give reminders, and rely on the 
heartbeat, posture, height changes and location to determine 
whether it falls or not As well as the location of the fall, it will 
immediately notify other members of the family through the 
Google Home Nest Mini, and make appropriate measures 
immediately. 
Sleep quality analysis: You can know the sleep posture 
change and breathing rate through Bluetooth amulets. 
Combined with the heartbeat and body temperature changes 
of the bracelet, you can simply analyze the sleep quality. If 
there is an abnormal heartbeat change or a large posture 
change Further in-depth analysis can be carried out. 
Combined with the question and answer of the Pittsburgh 
Sleep Quality Scale [6], it can be further confirmed with users, 
and the results can be analyzed by deep learning training. 
Analysis of eating habits: Use the positioning function and 
posture change of the amulet to trigger the depth camera to 
shoot the contents of the three meals, and use the audio and 
video recording pen to capture the eating status outside the 
mealtime, and conduct in-depth training to identify the types 
of food and calculate their calorie and nutrient content. The 
number of weekly exercises, height, weight, age, and gender 
calculates the individual basal metabolic rate (BMR). The 
calorie intake per meal obtained by the depth camera is 
compared with the BMR to determine whether the daily intake 
of sufficient nutrients is sufficient. And analyze the picky 
eating 
behavior, 
and 
suggest 
giving 
reminders 
of 
supplementary nutrients in a timely manner. 
Exercise habit analysis: Through the Bluetooth wearable 
device, you can determine whether you are in a state of 
exercise. If so, record the duration of the exercise and the total 
calories consumed after the exercise, and give suggestions for 
exercise intensity, duration, etc. after each exercise. And 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

record long-term exercise habits. If the habits change or there 
is no exercise habit, exercise suggestions will be given by 
analyzing the data. 
Based on the above four types of analysis results, it is 
found that through long-term observation, users can be very 
familiar with the daily life and various habits of users, even 
those habits that users themselves have not noticed. Take care 
of the big and small things in the user's life to achieve the 
purpose of care and companionship. Finally, the application 
of deep learning can be added to more deeply simulate the 
user's habits and status, and establish a personalized digital 
avatar. 
III. 
CLOUD SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
This research relies on the application of a large number 
of cloud services and uses part of the cloud functions of 
Google's cloud platform GCP to classify, organize, store and 
analyze the data collected by wearable devices, and use the 
development framework of web pages and related tools. 
Combined with the personnel positioning and life data 
collected by the device, it is stored in the object database for 
web page and APP access, and the data regularly output 
statistical reports through Extract-Transform-Load (ETL). 
Then we will analyze the user's behavior, and send it to the 
front-end community and smart speakers through the push 
broadcast platform. The cloud architecture of this system is 
shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Cloud system diagram. 
In this system, we use Google Home Nest Mini to 
communicate with users, such as proactive reminders, 
proactive push messages, and in order to collect useful 
messages through conversations and Q&As with users, we 
have written many functions and designed different 
Conversation flow templates. For example, about the Geriatric 
Depression Scale [6] and the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Scale 
[7], we have a preliminary understanding of their emotions 
and sleep problems, and by analyzing the content of the scales, 
physiological signals and behavior patterns, we can identify 
problem points and improve them. factor. The dialogue flow 
takes the question and answer of the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality 
Scale [7] as an example, as shown in Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Dialogue questions and answer process. 
The cloud services used in this cloud system are described 
as items E-L in Section 3 of [8], respectively using the cloud 
service functions shown in Figure 6 to perform data trigger 
functions, data storage, processing, analysis, visual 
presentation, etc., and through Google's services, such as 
Action on Google, Google Home, etc., to deploy and use 
cloud services. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL STEPS AND DATA ANALYSIS 
This experiment integrates the above-mentioned system 
architecture and cloud system architecture, and then conducts 
experiments and data collection, and finally analyzes and 
validates the data. 
A. Experimental Field Environment 
The experimental field is a 45 x 31 meters area located on 
the 7th floor of the Tzung-He hall, which is in the National 
Taipei University of Technology. The 31 Bluetooth light 
source devices (bNodes) are subordinated as shown in Figure 
8. A one-week (7-day) experiment was conducted from 12:00 
pm to 5:00 pm every day to collect each subject's 
physiological data, posture changes, and daily lunch status, 
and to analyze each person's physiological information, 
behavior patterns, diet records and stored in firebase Firestore. 
Finally, place the Google Home Nest Mini in the center of 
rooms 709-2 and 709-3 for notification of various conditions. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Experimental field and bNode location. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Data and Data Model 
As shown in Figure 9 the following are noun description 
and explanations: 
• 
Personal account: Record user permissions and 
personal related information, user information covers 
individuals and organizations. 
• 
Notify & Alert: Record alert notifications due to 
abnormal user status or behavior. 
• 
People: When the user is an individual, this node 
records all the physiological data information of the 
current user. Its child nodes include: bracelets, 
amulets, diet records, exercise records, respectively 
record 
physiological 
and 
behavioral 
posture 
information, and continue to add diet and exercise 
habits information. 
• 
Location: Record one or more addresses. Its child 
nodes include floor records, inheriting the address 
information of the previous floor, and combining 
multiple floor information, including the latitude and 
longitude of the floor boundary and the floor plan of 
the floor. 
• 
Tags: This is a wearable device. The current wearable 
device of the system is the bracelet and safety charm, 
which records the current address of the wearable 
device, floors, mobile fixed equipment. Its child 
nodes include tags record, which records the 
historical information of the previous wearable device, 
including 
positioning 
latitude 
and 
longitude 
information. 
• 
Equipment: Inherit the information of the previous 
layer and record the real-time status of the fixed 
equipment of this layer. Fixed device information 
includes weight scales, reed switches, etc., as well as 
mobile devices, such as tablets, etc., and its child 
nodes include Device information, the content of 
which is the contact history information of the device. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Data model. 
In this experiment, we obtained a total of 3,344,651 data 
records from the Bluetooth bracelet; 1,528,487 records for 
posture changes of the amulets; 13 records for abnormal data; 
20 records for notifications from Google Home Nest Mini; 
105 records for food Photo records; 210 nutrient records; 
11489 tag records, 10354 equipment records. In this study, we 
analyzed the subjects' physiological conditions, behavioral 
patterns, and eating habits. Due to the limitations of the 
experimental site and experimental time, we could not collect 
relevant data on sleep and exercise habits. The full quantity 
chart is shown in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
10-DAY EXPERIMENT DATA VOLUME 
Data field 
Numbers of row data 
Bluetooth bracelet records 
3344651 
Bluetooth amulet records 
1528487 
Tag-records 
11489 
Device-records 
10354 
Data exception records 
13 
Speaker notification records 
20 
Diet photo records 
105 
Nutrient records 
210 
C. Physiological Status Analysis 
This part focuses on the use and analysis of the data of the 
bracelet. You can view the changes of the subject's 
physiological data and other related information in time 
through the display of the webpage, as shown in Figure 10, or 
you can extract the history stored in the database by extracting. 
The data is analyzed, and a personalized physiological model 
is analyzed for different people so that the data can be 
effectively and correctly processed in the subsequent analysis 
of behavior and sleep. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Web page real-time data update. 
One subject was selected from the experiment for detailed 
analysis, as shown in Figure 11 and Figure 12, which are the 
daily records of heartbeat and body temperature, respectively. 
It can be found that most of the heartbeat and body 
temperature fall within the stable range, but some abnormal 
values can be seen from the figure. When the abnormal value 
occurs, the speaker will broadcast a reminder immediately. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Heart rhythm model diagram1. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 12.  Heart rhythm model diagram2. 
By recording and comparing each person's physiological 
information over a long period of time, a personalized 
physiological information model can be constructed, which 
can be clearly recorded when sleeping, walking, and sitting in 
different situations. Due to the influence of experimental 
environmental factors, the analysis and simulation in sleep 
and other situations cannot be more effectively displayed, 
otherwise, the importance of physiological information in this 
study can be more clearly realized. 
D. Behavior Pattern Analysis 
Through the changes of positioning and posture, it can be 
very accurate to judge where the user is, what to do, and how 
long it takes, and through the daily record, the daily behavior 
of the user can be analyzed, as shown in Figure 13. It is a graph 
of the number of records, the number of experimenters, state 
changes, etc. 
 
 
Figure 13.  Behavior analysis diagram of the experimenter(In the pie chart, 
1 represents sitting, 2 represents standing, and 3 represents walking.). 
In the following, we select the posture changes of 2 
subjects for further analysis and discussion. As shown in 
Figure 14, this is the posture record chart for a week, with 
Person 1 on the left and Person 5 on the right. It can be found 
from the figure, the proportion of 2 subjects sitting is 
extremely high, as high as 85.2 % and 77.9 %, respectively, 
there is a risk of sedentary, and it can be seen that the activity 
ratio of Person 5 is higher than that of Person 1, so they will 
use the speaker when they are sitting for a long time. Proper 
reminders are given to encourage increased activity. 
 
 
 
Figure 14.  Attitude proportion pie chart(Person 1 on the left, Person 5 on 
the right). 
Next, we observed the daily posture change curve of 
Person 5 within a week, and selected the curve changes of Day 
2, Day 3, and Day 6 for discussion, as shown in Figure 15, 
Figure 16, and Figure 17. The vertical axis in the figure is the 
posture, 1 represents sitting, 2 represents standing, 3 
represents walking, and the horizontal axis is the time axis. It 
can be found that the attitude changes models of Person 5 on 
Day 2 and Day 3 of the experiment are very similar, 
representing Person 5 in the week. In the afternoon of some 
days, there are similar itineraries and attitude changes, and 
these attitude models can be effectively recorded. Combined 
with the analysis of the position records, the activity position 
and activity itinerary can be further analyzed. Figure 17 
obviously has a completely different itinerary from the other 
two days, which obviously means a new behavioral attitude 
model, which is completely recorded, which is conducive to 
longer-term experimental behavioral analysis. 
 
Figure 15.  Attitude change model diagram1. 
 
Figure 16.  Attitude change model diagram2. 
 
Figure 17.  Attitude change model diagram3. 
According to the above analysis content, in fact, the 
elderly's habits of getting up, going to the toilet, brushing teeth, 
eating, watching TV, sitting for a long time, standing for a 
long time, etc. can be accurately confirmed, and the behavior 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

model can be recorded, and when abnormal activities occur. 
Notifications are made through speakers or LINE APP. 
Among them, sitting for a long time is a behavior that is easier 
to ignore and more likely to occur. Sedentary is related to 
cancer prevention in the elderly [10]. Therefore, the assistance 
of speakers is more needed to improve the elderly’s health and 
bad habit. 
E. Diet Habit Analysis 
In order to clearly grasp the subjects' eating habits, we 
calculated the volume of food through the depth camera and 
combined deep learning to identify the type of food, and then 
grabbed and calculated the intake of nutrients, conducted a 7-
day experiment, and recorded the daily lunch. Food content, a 
total of 105 records were collected and recorded in the 
database. 
We selected the dietary contents of 2 subjects from the 
experimental data for comparison and analysis, and presented 
the data in the form of a table. We can clearly see the content 
and types of food they eat every day. The dietary contents are 
shown in Figure 18. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 18.  Weekly food content chart(Description of Person 1 and Person 
5). 
Arrange the data into a bar chart, as shown in Figure 19, 
from the figure we can easily observe the food intake and the 
number of items for a week. Person 1 prefers pasta in the 
staple food category, while Person 2 prefers meals. Then it can 
be clearly seen that Person 1 eats less food, most of which are 
about 3, and the intake of vegetables is not enough. On the 
contrary, Person 5 is in the intake of food types is relatively 
sufficient, and the intake of various seafood, vegetables, beans, 
etc., the intake of nutrients is quite sufficient for Person 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 19.  Histogram of weekly food intake. 
Figure 20 shows the nutrient content per 100 grams of 
food, and the content is the type of food contained in Figure 
19. It can be found that the cholesterol content of streamed 
eggs and shrimp is high, and the sodium content of noodles, 
fried rice, and shrimp is high, so you should pay attention to 
the intake of these foods containing higher nutrients. 
 
 
Figure 20.  Histogram of nutrient content per 100 grams. 
As shown in Figure 21, by observing the total nutrient 
intake of Person 1 and Person 5 for one week of lunch, it can 
be found that some situations are that Person 1 consumes too 
much sodium, which is much higher than the sodium intake of 
Person 5, and then uses the daily nutrients provided by [8]. By 
comparison, it can be more accurately found that the sodium 
intake of person 1 at noon is already close to the upper limit 
of the intake of three meals a week, so when the daily intake 
exceeds the standard, an immediate reminder will be given to 
inform you of the lack of those nutrients. 
 
 
Figure 21.  Histogram of total nutrient intake in one week. 
After processing the data in the database and creating a 
data table for Big Query, 2 family doctors assisted in the 
analysis and verification of the data. With the help of doctors, 
we can have more accurate analysis results. Then, the 
analyzed data was discussed with the subjects. The subjects 
reported that there was a lack of dietary content, and when 
communicating with the Google Home Nest Mini, the 
speakers occasionally could not understand the user's words. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

For this, we gave some responses, regarding the food image 
recognition ability, more image recognition is still needed and 
more diverse food models are established. Regarding the 
Google Home Nest Mini, it is necessary to strengthen the 
design of sentences and the use of different languages, and it 
can be modified in the program to match the relevant language 
supported by the speaker. 
Finally, we effectively apply this intra-experimental result 
in real life. By observing the nutrient intake status every day, 
it is possible to immediately suggest the part of the nutrient 
intake that is insufficient on the next day, but the daily 
observation may not be able to understand the number of 
missing nutrients. The nutrients that the elder lack is very 
large, especially in the intake of some vitamins A, D, E, etc., 
it is easy to be ignored, so with the real-time reminder of 
Google Home Nest Mini, and the required food intake. It is 
recommended to gradually improve the user's eating habits, 
and also through the analysis of records, to know the 
relationship between the elderly's eating habits and physical 
conditions, to more effectively improve the elderly's bad 
eating habits, and to build a personalized diet model. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This research is devoted to making a personal 
physiological data analysis system, completing data collection 
through the Internet of Things network combined with simple 
Bluetooth devices and cloud platform applications, and 
establishing a complete data analysis, through Google Home 
Nest Mini has established a good interaction with the elderly. 
Through daily data analysis and active push notifications, the 
elderly can instantly understand their own conditions and 
precautions. Through long-term data analysis, the following 
items can be effectively analyzed: Behavior patterns, eating 
habits, sleep quality, exercise habits, closely record and 
analyze the living conditions of the elderly, and through long-
term analysis and suggestions, effectively improve the 
elderly's bad eating habits, and also use the Bluetooth 
wearable device. And the combination of the questionnaire 
content can more accurately analyze the sleep status and 
exercise habits of the elderly. These analysis contents can 
completely display the daily life pattern of the elderly and 
establish a personal model.  
 
Although we have completely designed the entire care 
system and conducted some experiments and tests, the data 
volume and experimental environment of the experiment are 
still not perfect, and the data analysis can still be improved. In 
the future, we will continue to optimize the system and 
analyze and optimize it, and add the application of deep 
learning, so that the entire system can completely analyze and 
simulate various conditions of the elderly. 
 
It is hoped that in the near future, a perfect personal digital 
avatar will be established through this system. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Gu, Y. Diao, W. Liu and X. Zhang, “The Design of Smart 
Home Platform Based on Cloud Computing”, International 
Conference on Electronic & Mechanical Engineering and 
Information Technology, 2011.  
[2] T. Mondal, S. Jayadeva, R. Pani, M. Subramanian, 
Ashokkumar and B. k. Sumana, “E marketing strategy in health 
care 
using 
IoT 
and 
Machine 
Learning”, 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.matpr.2021.11.417,pp. 2087-2091, 2021. 
[3] D. C. Yacchirema, D. Sarabia-JáCome, C. E. Palau and M. 
Esteve, “A Smart System for Sleep Monitoring by Integrating 
IoT With Big Data Analytics” in IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 
35988-36001, 2018. 
[4] Geriatric Depression Scale, Keelung City Government, 2017. 
[5] Pittsburgh sleep quality index(PSQI), University of Pittsburgh, 
1989. 
[6] O. Dawelbeit and R. McCrindle, “Efficient Dictionary 
Compression for Processing RDF Big Data Using Google 
BigQuery” 2016 IEEE Global Communications Conference 
(GLOBECOM), Washington, DC, 2016, pp. 1-6, doi: 
10.1109/GLCOM.2016.7841775.   
[7] Dietary Reference Intakes(DRIs), Taiwan Health Promotion 
Administration, Ministry of Health and Welfare, 2021   
[8] J. T. Huang, L. Y. Chang and H. C. Lin, “Implementation of 
IoT, wearable devices, Google Assistant and Google Cloud 
Platform for elderly home care system”, in ICT4AWE21-PP-
23, 2021. 
[9] Z. Liu and J. Wang, “Associations of perceived role of exercise 
in cancer prevention with physical activity and sedentary 
behavior in older adults”, in ScienceDirect Geriatric Nursing, 
volume 44, pp. 199-205, March–April 2022. 
[10] M. Islam, A. Rahaman and R. Islam, “Development of Smart 
Healthcare Monitoring System in IoT Environment” , SN 
COMPUT. SCI. 1, 185, 2020. 
[11] A. Goyal, H. S. kanyal, S. K. and R. Khan, “IoT based cloud 
network for smart health care using optimization algorithm” , 
Informatics in Medicine Unlocked, Volume 27, 100792, 2021. 
[12] R. Iqbal, F. Doctor, B. More, S. Mahmud and U. Yousuf, “Big 
data analytics: Computational intelligence techniques and 
application areas” , Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change, Volume 153, 119253, April 2020. 
 
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

