Future Directions of Applying Healthcare Cloud for Home-based Chronic Disease 
Care   
Yan Hu, Sara Eriksén 
Department of Creative Technologies 
Blekinge Institute of Technology 
Karlskrona, Sweden 
e-mail:{yan.hu, sara.eriksen}@bth.se 
Jenny Lundberg 
Department of Media Technology 
Linnaeus University 
Vaxjo, Sweden 
e-mail: jenny.lundberg@lnu.se
 
 
Abstract— The care of chronic disease has become the main 
challenge for healthcare institutions around the world. To meet 
the growing needs of patients, moving the front desk of 
healthcare from hospital to home is essential. Recently, cloud 
computing has been applied to healthcare domain; however, 
adapting to and using this technology effectively for home-based 
care is still in its initial phase. We have proposed a conceptual 
hybrid cloud model for home-based chronic disease care, and 
have evaluated its future feasibility by a case study of diabetes 
care in Blekinge, Sweden. In this paper, we discuss some 
possible future opportunities and challenges to apply this cloud 
model with the huge population for home-based chronic 
diseases care. To apply this model in practice, a professional IT 
healthcare education team is needed for both healthcare 
providers 
and 
healthcare 
recipients. 
For 
home-based 
healthcare, a monitoring system with an automatic alarm to 
healthcare providers is also necessary in some cases. Also, how 
to record and integrate excises data through wearable devices in 
a cloud should be considered. Given the high demand, sharing 
medical images through the cloud should be another research 
focus. 
Keywords-future trends; hybrid cloud; chronic diseases; 
home-based care 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The care of chronic disease has become the main challenge 
for healthcare institutions around the world. According to a 
WHO report in 2014, almost 90% of deaths in Sweden are 
caused by chronic diseases [1]. As the incidence and 
prevalence of chronic diseases continue to increase, traditional 
hospital-based healthcare is less able to meet the requirements 
of patients. To meet the growing needs of patients, moving the 
front desk of healthcare from hospital to home is essential. 
Home-based healthcare could enable the care recipients to live 
independently at home. Healthcare providers could reach the 
patients based on their shared daily health data, and provide 
clinical suggestions. Also, for home-based healthcare, more 
people are encouraged to assist with the care, such as family 
members and other patients with similar symptoms. 
The 
development 
of 
Information 
Communication 
Technology (ICT) has enabled people to enter a modern 
digital society. Our quality of life is promoted by the 
application of ICT in all fields. In the healthcare domain, by 
widely using personal computers, smartphones, and other self-
monitoring devices, ICT has brought healthcare in a new era 
[2]. All of the ICT technologies could help improve the quality 
of home-based healthcare.  
In recent years, cloud computing has been used to support 
healthcare. The obvious advantages of cloud computing, like 
big data storage, pay-as-go online software services, and 
powerful data analysis capacity make it a great benefit to 
apply cloud computing in home-based healthcare [3]. In our 
previous work, we have proposed a conceptual hybrid 
healthcare cloud model for home-based care. Moreover, we 
have tested the feasibility of the model by a case study of 
diabetes care in Blekinge, Sweden [4]. We believe that cloud-
based solution is a future trend of healthcare technology. To 
prefect and realize our hybrid healthcare cloud in large-scale 
population, there are other technologies to be further explored.  
This paper mainly discusses future opportunities and 
challenges of applying cloud model with the huge population 
for home-based chronic diseases care. Section 2 is a brief 
introduction of our research project, while in Section 3, we 
give a brief description on our Swedish case study. Section 4 
lists some opportunities and challenges are discussed in 
Section 5. Conclusion and the suggestions of future work 
conclude the paper. 
II. 
HEALTH IN HAND PROJECT 
The Indo-Swedish R&D project Health in Hand –
Transforming Healthcare Delivery is a project funded by 
VINNOVA (Reg.No.2013-04660) for three years. The main 
objective of the project is to establish long-term Indo-Swedish 
R&D collaboration around leading-edge applied health 
technology, with a focus on mobile health services, namely 
mHealth. mHealth technologies usually mean “medical and 
public health practice supported by mobile devices, such as 
mobile phones, patient monitoring devices, personal digital 
assistants (PDAs), and other wireless devices [5]”. In this 
project, we mainly refer to “mobile services which inform, 
motivate and enable individuals to manage their own health 
information and knowledge sharing, as well as support 
communication and community building among both patient 
and 
caregiver 
communities [6]”. The 
project 
uses 
participatory design as a research approach, to focus on the 
local design of design methods, techniques, and tools that 
promote participatory design for mHealth development [7].  
One of the aims of the project is to discover possible 
solutions to enhance collaboration around the complex 
systems which are the base for innovative mobile technologies 
in healthcare among different healthcare providers and 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

between healthcare providers and recipients. In the final year 
of the project, the study is focusing on concerning up-scaling 
and 
commercialization 
of 
mHealth 
technologies 
in 
collaboration with industry and public sector [6]. In the 
beginning of the project, we tried to develop applications 
based on mHealth technologies. When we had our first 
Swedish case study, we found that there were already a 
number of mobile applications in the market, so we move our 
research focus to how to integrate these mobile applications 
into current healthcare system. 
III. 
A CASE STUDY IN SWEDISH DIABETES CARE 
In our previous work, we have studied on how to adapt 
cloud computing to healthcare domain and have proposed a 
conceptual hybrid cloud model for home-based chronic 
diseases. In this conceptual model, healthcare recipients using 
mHealth 
technologies 
for 
self-recording 
home-based 
healthcare data, and communicating with their healthcare 
providers, is one of the key elements. Within the scope of the 
project, we have conducted a two-step case study in diabetes 
care. The purpose of this case study was to improve the 
conceptual model and test its feasibility on one hand, and to 
explore some possible technical trends for up-scaling and 
commercialization of this model on the other hand [4]. The 
improved model is shown in Figure 1. 
This model is a hybrid cloud model, which contains 
private clouds from the hospital and primary care centers, as 
well as public clouds for home-based self-management data. 
This model is based on that diabetes patients can measure their 
blood glucose and other parameters themselves at home via a 
few devices and upload the values to the app’s public cloud 
automatically. The secure connected public cloud of the app 
not only stores the data, but also deals with the data with the 
help of powerful data processing capacity of cloud computing 
to monitor the threshold values and create different kinds of 
reports. The doctors at the hospital can access the public cloud 
if they have the authorization of their patients. Between the 
hospital’s and primary care centers’ private clouds, there is an 
internal journal system for sharing partly patients’’ data 
sharing. All these ways of sharing data already existed in 
Blekinge, as well as other counties in Sweden. The improved 
communication between patients and primary care providers 
is the most pressing demand of the day. 
This model visualizes the current data sharing of home-
based diabetes care, as well as provide a cloud computing 
solution to enhance collaboration around the healthcare 
systems 
and moblie applications based on mobile 
technologies. For other types of chronic diseases, this model 
could also be used for data sharing. From our interviews with 
both healthcare providers and healthcare recipients, we found 
that it is feasible to apply this hybrid cloud in future home-
based 
healthcare. 
For 
the 
model’s 
up-scaling 
and 
commercialization, there remains future work to be further 
explored. 
 
 
Public Cloud
Hospital’s private cloud 
Primary cares’ private 
cloud
Home-based care
Doctors can 
access the data 
Share some selective 
information from  internal 
journal system
Alarm to the 
care providers
Responses
Access the part of 
patient record 
through 1177 
 
 
Figure 1.  Conceptual hybrid cloud model [4]
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV. 
FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES 
A. Professional healthcare IT education 
From our case study, we found that all eleven participants 
feel ICT technologies have developed very fast, and it is quite 
difficult for them to follow the steps of the development. The 
lack of IT knowledge sometimes reduces the enthusiasm of 
users to try new ICT technologies in healthcare. Especially 
with mobile technologies used for home-based healthcare, 
healthcare recipients thought it was healthcare providers’ 
responsibility to teach them to use the mobile applications or 
self-recording devices. However, most of the healthcare 
providers thought they were not good at technology 
themselves. Although there are use guides from the service or 
device providers, the healthcare recipients still ask lots of 
technically related questions to their healthcare providers. 
From our case study, we were surprised find that healthcare 
providers are less interested in adopting new ICT technologies 
than healthcare recipients. The reason is that they felt their 
main work is diagnosis and treatment, and that using new 
technologies reduced their work efficiency in some way. 
In this situation, building up a professional healthcare IT 
education team is of utmost importance. This education team 
should be built by people who have certificated knowledege 
in healthcare technology. It could be supported by government 
or set up as an independent commercial organization. The 
educational programs provided by this team should address 
both healthcare recipients and healthcare providers. For 
healthcare providers, training on their working systems and 
the communications between these systems could be offered 
frequently, like once a year. Since in chronic diseases care, 
self-management is a key factor [8], the education to help 
healthcare recipients to use different ICT technologies for 
self-management would be the main focus. 
B. Mobile doctor 
Another trend of home-based chronic diseases healthcare 
is the mobile doctor. The mobile doctor here refers to having 
a communication with a primary care doctor through a phone, 
tablet or computer. Healthcare recipients could receive 
primary care at any place of their convenience. In Sweden, 
there are two of this kind of services on the market, KRY [9] 
and Min Doktor [10]. The difference between these two 
services is that KRY provides a booked 15 minutes video 
meeting with doctors while Min Doktor provides the 
communication with the doctors with messages all day round. 
Both these two services are linked with personal ID; 
healthcare recipients must log in with their social security 
number. This will guarantee the healthcare recipients could 
receive the same benefits as they are visiting local primary 
healthcare centers. 
Both these services are still in their beginning phases. In 
the future, we believe more and more chronic disease 
healthcare recipients will choose this type of remote primary 
care to communicate with their healthcare providers. How to 
promote and improve the quality of these mobile doctor 
services should be under discussion.  
C. Real-time monitoring system 
In Sweden, most patients with chronic diseases now 
contact more often with primary a healthcare center than with 
a hospital, which means primary healthcare centers take more 
responsibility for chronic diseases care. However, from our 
case study, we found that the communication between patients 
and primary healthcare centers is still based on regular mail 
and telephones.  
As big data in the cloud brought a revolution in healthcare 
[11], a real-time monitoring system with alarm could be a 
possible mechanism for primary care. The calculated 
threshold values by the big data in the public cloud, together 
with healthcare providers in primary healthcare centers, can 
help the patients to set threshold values for their daily health 
parameters. When a patient’s self-recording data is uploaded 
at home, and the values reach the threshold values, the data 
processing program in the public cloud can send an alarm to 
the responsible primary care center. As soon as the care 
providers see the alarms, they could contact the patients and 
give them some feedback. The design and development of this 
real-time monitoring system could be another future direction 
to apply a healthcare cloud for home-based chronic diseases 
care. 
D. Wearable devices to record excise data 
According to WHO, lack of physical activities is a 
significant risk factor for chronic diseases such as stroke, 
diabetes, and cancer. However, an estimated 23% of adults 
and 81% school-going adolescents are not active enough [12]. 
In most cases of chronic disease care, healthcare providers 
suggest their patients do daily physical excise as the main 
method to control their condition. With the widely use of 
wearable devices, it is possible for people to record their 
excise data[13]. Today most data recorded by the wearable 
devices is stored in device companies’ servers. With the 5G 
network [14] and several sensors that are being introduced 
into the healthcare environment, and which provide even more 
healthcare data. 
In the future, integrating this excise data with other home-
based self-management data from both mobile applications 
and sensors will be an important trend.  
E. Medical images sharing 
The huge data storage capacity in the cloud makes it easier 
to store and process medical images. This will promote 
medical image sharing between healthcare providers and 
recipients. In Blekinge, Sweden, until now, there is no such 
kind of medical image sharing system, but the demands are 
keen according to our case study, especially for aged people 
who live independently. They want to bs able to take photos 
of wounds at home and send them to the healthcare providers 
in wound centers, which would be better than regular visiting. 
Moreover, the healthcare providers in wound centers also 
thought it could save time to treat the wounds. 
A multi-functional medical image sharing mobile 
application could be a future research orientation. For 
example, how to pre-process the wound images before the 
healthcare providers review them, such as wound highlight, 
3D visualization, are worthy of consideration. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

F. Games for health 
Mobile games have a significant influence on people’s 
physical activities, as illustrated by the success of Pokémon 
Go [15]. Games for health are not limited to serious games 
anymore. Designing an entertaining and fun digital game to 
encourage patients with chronic diseases to do more excises 
or an educational mobile game to help the healthcare 
recipients to get more knowledge of their diseases could be a 
new interest for both game and healthcare industry.  
V. 
FUTURE CHALLENGES 
Challenges to future development of healthcare cloud in 
home-based chronic diseases care also need to be carefully 
considered and addressed 
A. User-friendly information system design 
Most patients with chronic diseases are aged people. Thus 
the new information systems designed for home-based 
chronic diseases need to be user-friendly. In additional, smart 
tablets are easier to use for aged people than smartphones 
since the screen is bigger. 
B. Data leakage of public cloud 
In home-based healthcare, most self-recording data from 
home environment is stored in public cloud. Thus, it is a risk 
of data leakage. Access control and data security protection 
are always necessary for healthcare related data.  
C. Reliability of third party healthcare services 
There are a huge amount of healthcare mobile applications 
to support home-based chronic disease care, but not all of 
them are reliable. According to study on medical related 
mobile apps, less than half of the studied apps are reliable[16], 
which means if healthcare recipients use these unreliable apps, 
they may get wrong information and advice about their 
diseases. To overcome this challenge, the companies provided 
healthcare services, responsible government agencies and 
mobile app users should make efforts together.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We found that our cloud model is feasible to be applied in 
home-based chronic disease care in the future. It will help to 
promote patient-centric healthcare in Sweden. In this paper, 
we mainly address the future trends of applying healthcare 
cloud for home-based chronic disease care. To upscale and 
commercialize the healthcare cloud, professional healthcare 
IT education, mobile doctors, real-time monitoring systems, 
wearable devices to record excise data, medical image sharing 
and games for health could be the main future directions. 
User-friendly design, data privacy and security, and reliability 
of services would be challenges to promote healthcare cloud 
development. In the future, we will put the focus on one or 
two above issues in our continued research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly supported by VINNOVA project” 
Health in Hand – Transforming Healthcare Delivery” (Reg. 
No. 2013-04660). 
REFERENCES 
[1] “WHO | Noncommunicable diseases country profiles 2014,” WHO. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/nmh/publications/ncd-profiles-
2014/en/. [Accessed: 02-Feb-2017]. 
[2] S. S. Deo, D. N. Deobagkar, and D. Deobagkar, “Design and 
development of a web-based application for diabetes patient data 
management,” J. Innov. Health Inform., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 35–41, 2005. 
[3] Y. Hu and G. Bai, “A cloud model for interoperable Home-based Chronic 
Diseases Healthcare,” in 2014 World Symposium on Computer Applications 
Research (WSCAR), 2014, pp. 1–6. 
[4] Y. Hu, G. Bai, S. Eriksén, and J. Lundberg, “Hybrid cloud model for 
diabetes some-based care -a case study for perceived feasibility in the 
future.” unpublished. 
[5] “mHealth New horizons for health through mobile technologies.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.who.int/goe/publications/goe_mhealth_web.pdf. [Accessed: 03-
Feb-2017]. 
[6] S. Eriksén, M. Georgsson, M. Hofflander, L. Nilsson, and J. Lundberg, 
“Health in hand: Putting mHealth design in context,” in 2014 IEEE 2nd 
International 
Workshop 
on 
Usability 
and 
Accessibility 
Focused 
Requirements Engineering (UsARE), 2014, pp. 36–39. 
[7] S. Eriksén, J. Lundberg, M. Georgsson, L. Nilsson, M. Hofflander, and 
C. Borg, “Transforming Healthcare Delivery : ICT Design for Self-Care of 
Type 2 Diabetes,” in Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction 
(NordiCHI), in press. 
[8] H. Holman and K. Lorig, “Patient self-management: a key to 
effectiveness and efficiency in care of chronic disease,” Public Health Rep. 
Wash. DC 1974, vol. 119, no. 3, pp. 239–243, Jun. 2004. 
[9] “KRY - meet doctors online,” KRY - meet doctors online. [Online]. 
Available: https://kry.se. [Accessed: 04-Feb-2017]. 
[10] “My Doctor: Meet doctors safely & easily in the app” [Online]. 
Available: https://mindoktor.se/. [Accessed: 04-Feb-2017]. 
[11] B. Kayyali, D. Knott, and S. V. Kuiken, “The big-data revolution in US 
health care: Accelerating value and innovation | McKinsey & Company.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.mckinsey.com/industries/healthcare-
systems-and-services/our-insights/the-big-data-revolution-in-us-health-
care. [Accessed: 04-Feb-2017]. 
[12] “WHO | 10 facts on physical activity.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.who.int/features/factfiles/physical_activity/en/. [Accessed: 02-
Feb-2017]. 
[13] D. Son, J.Lee, S.Qiao, R. Ghaffari, J.Kim, J.Lee et al., “Multifunctional 
wearable devices for diagnosis and therapy of movement disorders,” Nat. 
Nanotechnol., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 397–404, May 2014. 
[14] A. Osseiran, F. Boccardi, V. Braun, K. Kusume, P. Marsch, M. Maternia 
et al., “Scenarios for 5G mobile and wireless communications: the vision of 
the METIS project,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 
26–35, May 2014. 
[15] T. Althoff, R. W. White, and E. Horvitz, “Influence of Pokémon Go on 
Physical Activity: Study and Implications,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 18, 
no. 12, Dec. 2016. 
[16] F. Haffey, R. R. W. Brady, and S. Maxwell, “A Comparison of the 
Reliability of Smartphone Apps for Opioid Conversion,” Drug Saf., vol. 36, 
no. 2, pp. 111–117, Feb. 2013. 
 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

