If They Designed It, Why Don’t They Want It? 
The Lack of Acceptance of an ehealth Data Records System 
 
Anthony P. Glascock 
Department of Culture and Communication 
Drexel University 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 
glascock@drexel.edu
 
 
Abstract—Although the design of an ehealth data records system 
was largely driven by carers themselves, ultimately these same 
carers did not want to use the system once a series of pilot studies 
ended. The reasons for this lack of acceptance of the system by 
carers at seven different care organizations in the United States, 
the United Kingdom and the Netherlands are explored. Four 
reasons are put forward to explain this lack of acceptance: 1) the 
ability of the system to be used to evaluate job performance; 2) 
the pilot study model; 3) reluctance on the part of the carers to 
alter work routine; and 4) the system’s introduction is 
premature.  
 
Keywords—ehealth 
data 
records 
systems; 
mobile 
devices; 
acceptance of innovative technologies 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
The adoption of ehealth records systems has been much 
slower in the United States than anticipated as well as in most 
European countries. This is the case even though the United 
States “government set aside $27 billion for an incentive 
program that encourages hospitals and providers to adopt 
electronic records systems” [1]. Although there is some debate 
over the reliability of ehealth records systems [2], there 
appears to be little doubt that the greater the ease of storage, 
access and cost savings will eventually achieve close to 
universal usage within institutions and among physicians [3, 
4]. If the pace of adoption in hospitals and physician practices 
has been slow, the pace of adoption of ehealth data systems 
for use to chronicle care and services in the home has been 
even slower. There is little debate that the delivery of care and 
services in the home has increased significantly and will 
accelerate at an ever more rapid pace over the coming several 
decades because of two basic factors: demography and cost. 
The demographic trends are well known: dramatic increase in 
the number of elderly, especially the oldest-old; a concomitant 
increase in chronic diseases associated with aging; and a 
decline in the number of informal carers who can provide care. 
Cost projections are similarly daunting: increasing cost for 
care delivery within the institutional setting; insufficient 
number of institutions and insufficient funds to build the large 
number of additional institutions; and prohibitive costs to 
government to provide care and services through current care 
delivery models.  
It is generally agreed that the only way to meet the 
increasing needs brought about by the demographic trends, 
while at the same time not bankrupting national treasuries, is 
to provide more care and services in the home [5]. As more 
care and services are being delivered in the home, several 
issues have emerged that raise serious concerns. In the first 
place, the care being delivered had steadily become more 
extensive. Whereas a decade ago rehabilitation after a serious 
illness or accident would have been undertaken in a 
specialized facility, presently many of these services are being 
provided in the home on an outpatient basis. But rehabilitation 
is just one of an escalating number of care services being 
provided in the home: nutritional counseling; wound care; 
psychological therapy; and medication adherence, to name 
several of the major ones. Additionally, the range of products 
and non-care services supplied to individuals in their own 
homes has increased significantly: oxygen; specialized beds; 
monitoring; meals; housekeeping; shopping; companion 
services. As the care and services have multiplied, so have the 
number 
of 
people 
providing 
the 
services. 
These 
companies/agencies are, of course, in addition to any services 
provided by informal carers. Thus, the need for a means of 
recording and tracking the care and services provided in the 
home are essentially the same as for institutions: increased 
reliability; better coordination; appropriate level of care; and 
cost savings.   
As more care and services are delivered by more people 
representing different companies and agencies, just keeping 
track of who is providing what becomes increasingly difficult, 
especially if the individual receiving the care lives alone in her 
home and is experiencing cognitive decline or other 
impairments. Scheduling of visits and deliveries, ensuring the 
correct product or service, avoiding duplication all become 
difficult if records are scattered among various agencies, 
companies and individuals and are rarely, if ever, shared. It is 
also extremely difficult to evaluate if the care and services are 
having the desired impact on the individual if there is no 
systematic way to track the outcomes of the care and services. 
The lack of systematic and comprehensive records also makes 
it difficult for other care providers to make informed care 
decisions, since the reliance on the patient to remember 
specifics about the care and services in the home has proven to 
be suspect at best. In addition, if ehealth records of care and 
services in the home do not exist, it is obvious that they cannot 
be linked with the records that have been created in the 
hospital and the physician practice. Finally, even though 
delivering care and services in the home is more economical 
than in institutions, it still costs money and someone has to 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

pay for it. As a result, from the point of view of the client 
receiving the care and services, as well as the insurance 
company and the government, there is a discernible need to 
track the care and services to ensure that what is paid for is 
provided and that everyone was paid appropriately. 
This paper reports on the development of a wireless 
ehealth data records system: the Home Care Informatics 
System (HCIS) and the problems associated with acceptance 
and use of it. In the next section, the three stages of the 
development of the HCIS are outlined; in section three the 
reasons for the lack of acceptance on the part of the carers are 
analyzed; in section four a comparison is made with another 
electronic records system that has had similar difficulties with 
acceptance; and in the last section future scenarios for such 
records systems are explored.   
II.     THREE STAGES OF DEVELOPMENT 
It is necessary to briefly explain the rationale for allowing 
the end-users (carers) to play a major role in the design 
process of this particular ehealth data records system. Results 
from a previous innovative ehealth project [6] had indicated 
that if end-users did not “buy-in”, then the new technology 
would not be used. Thus, it was decided that in this project as 
much control, as possible, over the design of the system would 
be ceded to those individuals who were actually going to be 
using the system to aid in care delivery. This approach 
appeared to make sense at the time, but given that even after 
ceding control to the users, there was great reluctance on their 
part to employ the system, questions about the wisdom of this 
decision must be raised.   
 
A.    Stage 1—2006-2007 
 
The first iteration of the system was created to 
systematically collect data generated in one of a series of pilot 
studies to test the effectiveness of a behavioral monitoring 
system [7, 8, 9]. This particular pilot study took place at 
Selfhelp Community Services, Inc. in Queens, New York and 
involved eleven geriatric social workers who provided care 
management services to over 200 residents. Twenty-seven of 
these clients agreed to have the system installed for a six 
month period and to have the social workers use the resultant 
data in care management decisions. The problem was that 
there was no way to systematically collect information on the 
care actions that they took in response to an alert. The 
instrument created was labeled the TAO: Trigger, the 
system’s alert; Action, the care action taken by the social 
worker in response to the alert; and Outcome, the health or 
care outcome brought about by the care action. A brief 
example illustrates the initial design of the TAO:  
 
The system sends an alert to the geriatric social 
worker indicating an increase in overnight toileting 
for a particular client—the Trigger;  
The social worker phones the client to inquire about 
the client’s behavior—the Action;   
Finding out that the client was frequently in the 
bathroom because of a stomach flu, the social worker 
contacts the client’s physician to obtain a prescription 
for medication—the health Outcome.  
 
At first, the social workers filled out a paper form with the 
relevant information, which was then entered into a computer 
data base. The carers viewed the paper version of the TAO as 
time-consuming to fill out and redundant with other forms. In 
response to these criticisms, a computerized web-based 
version of the TAO was created and this new version became 
the first design change driven by its users.  
The Web-TAO form took about five minutes to fill out, 
could be easily shared with others and, most importantly, 
could be updated as more actions and outcomes occurred. In 
the short run, this last feature proved beneficial for the social 
workers as they could quickly and almost effortlessly update 
the Web-TAO records for individual clients. In the long run, 
the need to have an update capability proved essential in the 
development of the HCIS. This is because, although the alert 
is a discrete event, care actions and health outcomes are not 
discrete, but instead roll out over time. The previous example 
of the TAO narrative has all three elements as discrete 
events—one Trigger, one Action, one Outcome—and this 
example corresponds to approximately 40% of the TAOs. 
However, a majority of the TAOs corresponded more to the 
following example: 
 
The system sends an alert to the geriatric social worker 
indicating an increase in overnight toileting for a 
particular client—the Trigger;  
The social worker phones the client to inquire about the 
client’s behavior—the Action;  
Finding out that the client was frequently in the 
bathroom because of a stomach flu, the social worker 
contacts the client’s physician to obtain a prescription 
for medication—the health Outcome;  
The social worker phones the client’s daughter to report 
that her mother has the flu—Second Action;  
Daughter visits her mother the next day finding out that 
her mother is no better—Third Action; 
Daughter phones social worker reporting on mother’s 
condition—Fourth Action;  
Social worker visits client, determines that she is 
dehydrated, phones physician—Fifth Action; 
Physician decides to have client admitted to hospital—
Sixth Action, Second Outcome; 
Client is discharged after two days in hospital—
Seventh Action, Third Outcome. 
 
All of the above actions and outcomes were the result of the 
single alert and could now be entered into the Web TAO as 
the events rolled out in real time. As a record of care provided 
and outcomes generated, the Web-TAO proved extremely 
helpful to the geriatric social workers as they could more 
systematically track the progression of care and outcomes. 
However, the realization of how multiple care actions and 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

outcomes could be gathered together in a single record proved 
invaluable for the future development of the informatics 
system that eventually became the HCIS.  
Once this alteration was made, the carers had other 
suggestions: add auto-populated fields; use check-boxes 
whenever possible; allow for easier follow-up entries; and 
allow access to individual records by other social workers and 
supervisors. At the first care review meeting, after these 
changes were made, two issues that would drive much of the 
development of the TAO surfaced. Since the objective for 
these meetings was to review what had happened to each of 
the clients over the previous month in order to assess how the 
monitoring system had impacted the delivery of care, it was 
not surprising that the TAOs were the focus of the discussions 
but it was surprising how the social workers utilized the 
TAOs. They placed the TAOs for each of the clients together 
and then worked their way chronologically through the TAOs. 
By their actions, the social workers were constructing an on-
going record for each of the clients by putting TAOs for the 
particular client together into a single “pile”. This “piling up” 
was the first care record and would drive much of future 
development of the ehealth system. 
The second issue raised by the geriatric social workers 
concerned the ability of the Web-TAO in the evaluation of 
performance. For the supervisors, the Web-TAO provided an 
objective basis on which to evaluate the work performed by 
the social workers; for the social workers, the Web-TAO 
allowed supervisors to question their actions and professional 
conduct using information that had not been available 
previously. These issues were not resolved before the study 
ended, but, as discussed subsequently, it remained a vexing 
problem for the future development of the ehealth system.  
 
B. Stage 2—2007-2008 
 
As the Selfhelp pilot was ending, the pilot in London 
began. Unlike the Selfhelp study in which all clients lived 
independently and had their care managed by a single care 
organization, the London study involved several residential 
types and more than one care organization. All residents lived 
in Southwark, an area of Central London south of the Thames, 
and were provided services from one of three care 
organizations—Southwark Falls, Oasis and Hyde Housing—
all of which operated under the broad umbrella of the 
Southwark Local Authority. Thus, the work undertaken by 
“carers” in these organizations was much more coordinated 
than would be found in three independent organizations in the 
United States.  However, even though these organizations 
were “independent” and served distinct populations, for this 
discussion it makes sense to view them as a single entity, the 
Southwark Study, and to aggregate their 97 clients.  
Based on the development work undertaken at Selfhelp, 
the Southwark Study began with a fully operational Web-TAO 
that had the ability to easily update a report as care actions and 
outcomes rolled out over time. Within the first six weeks of 
the study, it became apparent from the analysis of the material 
being entered into the Web-TAO that the carers were using the 
system much differently than the social workers at Selfhelp. 
This was primarily due to the fact that the culture at 
Southwark was extremely collaborative and, although 
particular carers had primary responsibility for specific clients, 
all carers engaged with all clients in some fashion, and thus, 
the Web-TAO was conceived as a tool to allow for easier 
sharing of information among all carers rather than just a 
record of responses to triggering alerts. Therefore, the ability 
for all members of the care team to not only view the 
information, but to contribute to the information stream 
became paramount. The cultural imperative to share and 
contribute to the information of clients resulted in a 
modification that allowed for much longer narratives to be 
entered into the system which, as a result, took on the 
appearance of “blogs” in which numerous carers listed their 
actions and the subsequent outcomes for particular clients.  
Fig. 1 is an example of a typical “blog” for a single client. 
 
Fig. 1.     Web-TAO blog narrative 
 
On the surface, this change appeared to be trivial, but in 
actuality it altered much of the design of the structure of the 
Web-TAO going forward. The Web-TAO had already mutated 
from a research tool to a care provision tool that tracked 
responses to the system’s alerts, and now it had transformed 
again from a limited record of what transpired when an alert 
occurred, to a more comprehensive ehealth record of all care 
being delivered to a specific client over time. Fig. 1 not only 
shows the comprehensive nature of the information recorded, 
but also illustrates how many carers became involved in 
contributing care for this client. 
The members of the newly formed Smart Team had other 
suggestions for the Web-TAO. One was to be able to send the 
“blog” to a client’s physician prior to an appointment in order 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

for the physician to have all relevant care information. This 
required the creation of a new security function that limited 
who could send and what could be sent to individuals outside 
the Southwark Smart Team. A second suggestion was to allow 
the “blogs” to be sorted by alert, particular carer, type of care 
actions and date of entry. Although technically not a complex 
undertaking, the challenge was to understand the use to be 
made of such a sorting feature, before creating it. This change 
took time and the requested feature only became fully 
operational near the end of the study. 
 
C.     Stage 3—2008-2012 
 
Work in the Netherlands began in late 2007 as part of a 
demonstration project to evaluate the role of behavioral 
monitoring in the delivery of care in both a residential and 
institutional setting [10]. During the first stage (2007-2008) of 
the project the behavioral monitoring system was installed in 
the residences of 12 individuals living independently and 13 
individuals living within a sheltered housing facility, while in 
the second stage (2008-2012) the system was installed in the 
residences 
of 
an 
additional 
230 
individuals 
living 
independently throughout the largely rural Limburg Region 
served by two care organizations. Similarly to how the three 
London organizations were combined, it makes sense to view 
these two organizations, as well as the demonstration project 
and larger study, as a single entity and to aggregate the 255 
clients into a single Dutch Study.  
Since the demonstration project in the Netherlands began 
as the London Study was winding down, it was possible to 
provide the Dutch with an enhanced Web-TAO which had the 
ability to produce “blogs”, which we renamed the “Client’s 
Journal”. Of course, the content of the Web-TAO, e.g., check-
boxes, auto-populated fields, instructions, had to be translated 
into Dutch. The care delivery model at the two care 
organizations—Proteion and Zorgroep—required that their 
care workers spend a considerable amount of each day 
traveling to and from clients’ residences. Thus, they spent 
little 
time 
at 
the 
two 
organizations’ 
administrative 
headquarters, limiting their ability to both access the Web-
TAO and to enter information on computers. This problem 
was solved by developing the capability for the Web-TAO, 
renamed the Home Care Informatics System (HCIS), to be 
accessed on any smart mobile device. This change in the 
structure of the HCIS to a wireless mobile service raised 
several design challenges. First, everything had to be 
reformatted so that it could fit the small screen of the mobile 
devices. This led to an even greater reliance on check boxes 
and auto-populated features and to the development of more 
efficient scrolling features. Second, there was the challenge of 
making the HCIS display properly on the different smart 
devices used by the care workers.  
Working directly with the carers during the demonstration 
project allowed for a series of other suggestions to be 
incorporated into the HCIS: 1) the Client’s Journal feature 
allowed entries by any authorized personnel; 2) the Journal 
could be sorted by alert, date, care worker, type of care 
delivered and outcome; 3) there was a new feature that 
allowed additions to a previous entry, but not the elimination 
of the original entry; 4) a series of pop-up prompts helped the 
user navigate through functions and avoid common errors; 5) 
additional security features were developed to ensure that only 
authorized individuals could access and contribute to a client’s 
record; and 6) a read-only feature was added. Even with these 
modifications, two issues remained unresolved. The first issue 
concerned how the HCIS was used during care review 
meetings at which time the care delivered to specific clients 
was discussed and decisions on future care made. These 
meetings included both individuals who had knowledge of and 
access to the HCIS and others who had neither. Since the 
client reviews were more thorough when everyone at the 
meeting had access to the information stored in the HCIS 
record, the question arose as to who should have access, how 
should they obtain access and who was in charge of making 
access happen? Although this issue does not directly concern 
the technical development of the HCIS, it certainly impacts 
the implementation of the HCIS and its long term use. The 
second issue concerned whether the information stored in the 
HCIS could be used by supervisors and administrators in the 
evaluation of work performance. On the surface, the concern 
expressed by the care workers in the Netherlands was similar 
to those raised by the social workers at Selfhelp. It was 
believed that these concerns could be fairly easily resolved by 
discussions of interested parties. This was not the case, and 
this issue remained unresolved at the end of the pilot. 
 
D.    Summary of Changes  
 
Below is a summary of the changes made to the HCIS in 
response to the expressed needs of the people using it. A 
review of these changes brings into focus how much the 
TAO/HCIS changed during the six years studies in response to 
the wishes of the users. 
 
Selfhelp  
1. The TAO was put on the web; 
2. A feature that allowed the sharing of TAOs was 
created; 
3. Check-boxes were added; 
4. Auto-populated fields were added; 
5. A feature that allowed the follow-up entries was 
developed. 
 
Southwark 
 
1. Changes made to conform to British English; 
2. Enhanced sharing capabilities developed; 
3. Security features added to allow sharing of data 
beyond the Smart Team; 
4. A blog structure was created that allowed data to 
be entered by multiple carers; 
5. A feature that allowed the sorting of the blogs by 
alert, carer, care action taken, health outcome 
and date. 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The Netherlands 
 
1. It was translated into Dutch; 
2. The blogs became the Clients’ Journals; 
3. The system was made to be operational on any 
mobile device; 
4. A feature that allowed additional carers to enter 
data was developed; 
5. More auto-populated fields and check boxes 
were added; 
6. A feature that allowed entries to be corrected 
without erasing the original was developed; 
7. Additional search features were added to the 
system; 
8. A read-only feature was created.   
III.  
LACK OF ACCEPTANCE  
The most frustrating aspect of the seven pilot studies was 
that even though the vast majority of the modifications made 
to the ehealth data system were in direct response to the 
expressed desires of the carers, ultimately they did not use the 
system. Although perplexing, this result does provide a vivid 
lesson for anyone trying to introduce a “new technology” into 
an existing work culture. In order to assess the reasons for this 
lack of acceptance, questionnaires were administered to all 
eleven social workers at Selfhelp, while individual carers were 
interviewed in the Southwark and Dutch studies. In London, 
70% of the carers were interviewed by phone and in the 
Netherlands approximately a third of the carers were 
interviewed in person. Findings from the questionnaires and 
interviews indicated that there were three reasons for the lack 
of acceptance: 1) fear on the part of the carers that the 
information would be used to evaluate work performance; 2) 
the nature of the pilot study model and its impact on the 
carers’ commitment; and 3) unwillingness of the carers to 
change their work routine. 
 
A.    Evaluation of Performance 
 
 Analysis of the carers’ answers from the seven locations 
showed that the carers in the United States and the 
Netherlands were fearful that the information contained in the 
HCIS would be used by supervisors to evaluate their job 
performance. Two brief examples illustrate this ability of the 
information contained in the HCIS to evaluate the carers’ 
performance. Each alert generated by the monitoring system is 
time stamped, as is every care action taken by a specific carer, 
and as a consequence, there is a concrete record of whether the 
carer responded to the alert and how long it took the carer to 
respond. In addition, the HCIS contains specific information 
on the type of response and the health outcome for each client 
over time, allowing supervisors to compare the work of 
different carers. It is this ability to compare the work of 
different carers which appeared to disturb the carers the most. 
And, it is indisputable that the HCIS allows this type of 
comparison to be made and for performance reviews to be 
based upon the information contained in the system. Not 
surprisingly, supervisors viewed this ability as an advantage 
because it documents performance, whereas, carers viewed it 
as an intrusion into their professional decision making.  
 
B.    Problems with the Pilot Study Model 
 
The deficiencies of the pilot study model employed in the 
testing of the behavioral monitoring system have been detailed 
elsewhere [6], but some of these issues relate directly to the 
lack of acceptance of the HCIS. There appear to be four 
problems with the pilot study model.  First, only a small 
number of carers were involved in the pilots at each of the 
organizations resulting in the studies being marginalized. At 
Selfhelp, only eleven of almost 200 social workers were 
involved in the study; while in London fewer than a dozen 
carers within the entire Southwark Local Authority had any 
role in the study and in the Netherlands, fewer than 5% of 
carers at the two organizations were involved in the study. 
Second, in no case was the HCIS used by the carer for all of 
her clients; instead it was always used for a small fraction of 
clients—on average no more than 20% and in only two cases 
over 50%—meaning that the carer was employing two 
different systems to record care. Third, information derived 
from the questionnaires and interviews showed that, because 
the carers knew when the pilot was to end, many carers put 
little effort into using the HCIS because they knew when it 
would go away. Finally, the HCIS was never part of “normal” 
care, but was always viewed as something that was just being 
“tested”. As a result, the majority of carers responded logically 
by putting less and less effort into its use as the pilot 
progressed. 
 
C.    Unwillingness to Change Routine 
 
Even though information from the questionnaires and 
interviews showed the importance of the previous two factors 
in the lack of acceptance of the HCIS by the carers, an even 
more important reason was their unwillingness to change their 
normal routine that did the most damage. There is no doubt 
that the HCIS required carers, at least initially, to do more 
work and undertake tasks which were unfamiliar. For 
example, in the Netherlands, carers, instead of just writing a 
couple of lines on a piece of paper kept in the client’s 
residence were expected to type in information on their smart 
phones before driving to their next appointment. They were 
also expected to update this information as additional care was 
delivered and even track and record health outcomes over 
time. These tasks were viewed as especially egregious since 
not all of their clients were in the pilot study and, therefore, 
they had to employ two different recording systems. Finally, it 
was difficult for the carers to see the value in this extra effort, 
because the benefits of better and more coordinated care were 
in the future, whereas the extra work had to be done every 
day.   
 
 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

D.    Summary 
 
Yet even with the problems outlined above, initially, in 
each of the care organizations, carers entered usable, and in 
some cases extraordinary, information on the care actions 
undertaken and the resultant health outcomes. This was 
especially true for the London studies, but it also occurred, 
albeit in a minority of cases, in New York and the 
Netherlands. The problem was that within four months the 
information the carers, at each of the organizations, were 
entering was increasingly uninformative and by the end of the 
pilots a majority of the carers had stopped using the HCIS 
altogether. This experience, although frustrating, does provide 
some guidance to anyone trying to introduce a “new 
technology” into an existing organization.   
IV.     DISCUSSION 
The last of the pilot studies ended December 31, 2012 and 
currently the HCIS is not being used within any care 
organization. Thus, it would be fair to conclude that the HCIS 
is a failure, even though the HCIS is very clever and its design 
was driven by the desires and stated needs of its users. If it is 
not being used, there must be something fundamentally wrong 
with the concept and its implementation. However, there is 
one mediating factor that may require reevaluating the 
conclusion that the HCIS is a failure: the HCIS is not the only 
such system that has encountered problems of acceptance. 
There has been a second wireless, ehealth records system 
that was developed and tested in Germany [11]. Even more 
interesting than the fact that two researchers independently 
developed such a system is that the problems of acceptance on 
the part of the users in the German study are parallel. The first 
problem that the carers had with the system was its GPS 
feature, which tracked their every movement. Thus, if a carer 
stopped on the way to a client to pick up her dry cleaning, her 
supervisor would know it. Additionally, with the GPS in 
place, supervisors could determine how long a carer spent in 
the residence of a client and could compare productivity of 
different carers. Even after the GPS feature was turned off, 
carers were concerned about the ability of the system to 
monitor their actions.  
Also similar to the problems that were encountered in the 
seven pilot studies, the carers in the German study complained 
about the amount of time it took to type data into their 
wireless device. Responding to these complaints, the German 
researchers enabled a feature that allowed information to be 
entered by voice. Although this change was a direct response 
to the desires of the carers, the carers were still unhappy with 
the time it took to enter data and the need to check the 
accuracy of the information once entered. Finally, similar to 
my experience there were problems with the sharing of 
information among the various carers and the use of the 
information in the provision of care. Once again, there was a 
disconnect between the work of the carers and the benefits to 
their clients.  
Two studies, however independent in conception and 
parallel in findings, do not necessarily contradict the 
conclusion that the HCIS is a failure, but it does suggest 
though, that it is necessary to rethink why the lack of 
acceptance occurred in such varied locations and what this 
means to the future of this type of wireless ehealth data 
system. It does not appear unreasonable to conclude that the 
main reason for the lack of acceptance is that developers, have 
underestimated the reluctance on the part of carers and their 
supervisors to change the way they do their jobs. In other 
words, it is a cultural and not a technological issue. 
 
V.     CONCLUSION 
 
Two main findings are apparent from the material 
presented above: 1) it is possible to create an ehealth data 
system for home care and that such a system can be used 
effectively to coordinate care and services and contribute to 
the maintenance of independent living; and 2) the success of 
such a system is dependent on issues that do not concern 
design and functionality, but instead on its acceptability by the 
people employing the system. Even when much of the 
system’s design was driven by these users, there was a lack of 
acceptance on the part of these very same people. Three 
reasons were put forward as the main factors for this lack of 
acceptance: the potential use of information in the system for 
the evaluation of job performance; the pilot study model; and 
the unwillingness of the carers to alter their normal routine. 
However, there may be an even more fundamental reason for 
the lack of acceptance of this particular wireless home care 
records system: its introduction is premature. 
Many business experts have argued that new ehealth 
technologies, such as the HCIS, will not be widely adopted 
until the traditional care models can no longer meet the needs 
of the burgeoning elderly population [12]. Then, and only 
then, will administrators at care organizations be forced to 
introduce new technologies and compel their workers to use 
new systems. Until this point is reached, care will continue to 
be provided in the usual way, even as it becomes more 
difficult to achieve the goal of providing cost effective and 
timely care. The behavior of the Dutch carers speaks directly 
to this argument. Even with the HCIS readily available on 
their mobile devices, they preferred to write down their 
actions on pieces of paper that remained in the client’s 
residence, even though the paper record could not be easily 
shared, updated or used in care reviews. Why? Because there 
was no compelling need and administrators deferred rather 
than forced them to use the new technology. Adequate care 
could be delivered without the use of the new system, so why 
change what one normally did, especially if it was only part of 
a pilot study that was going to go away in a few months 
anyway? 
The slow pace of the adoption of electronic medical 
records in hospitals and physician practices provides a 
valuable lesson to those of us who are championing the use of 
ehealth systems. The United States government has 
encouraged the use of electronic medical records and even 
mandated their use wherever possible. Insurance companies 
have wholeheartedly endorsed the use of electronic records 
and have attempted to induce their use through economic 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

incentives. Nevertheless, the pace of adoption has been slow 
as individuals complain about the cost in time and money. 
What is largely left unsaid is that, even with the incentives, 
given a choice, most administrators would not adopt the 
systems because currently there is no compelling need to 
adopt them. Are they more efficient? Probably. Is it worth the 
cost? Probably not. Is it worth the cost given the increasing 
expense and growth of the health care system that will stretch 
the system to the breaking point? Absolutely. But, this 
requires change today in anticipation of a future need and this 
is difficult for people to accept, especially when it disrupts 
their daily routine. This same set of questions can be applied 
to the HCIS and other ehealth data systems and the endpoint 
is, not surprisingly, the same: a demonstrative future need that 
requires change before people are ready to compel such a 
change. When will the dynamics change, two years from now, 
five years from now, a decade from now? It is not possible to 
predict with any certainty the exact date, but there will be a 
time when electronic record systems similar to the HCIS are 
part of the normal care model and people will wonder why 
they weren’t in use earlier. 
  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] B. Shilling, “The federal government has put billions into 
promoting electronic health record use: How is it going?” 
www.commonwealtfund.org, retrieved January, 2014. 
[2] B. Kaplan and K. Harris-Salamone, “Health IT success and 
failure: recommendations for literature and an AMIA 
workshop”, JAMIA, vol 16, no. 3, pp. 291-299, 2009. 
[3] K. Ashish, C. DesRoches, E. Campbell, K. Doneian, S. Rao, and 
T. Ferris, “Use of electronic health records in U.S. hospitals”, 
NEJM, vol. 360, pp. 1628-1638, 2009. 
[4] D. Ludwick and J. Doucette, “Adopting electronic medical 
records in primary care: Lessons learned from health 
information systems implementation experience in seven 
countries”, International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 78, 
pp. 22-31, 2009. 
[5] National Association for Home Care & Hospice, “Basic 
statistics about home care updated 2010”, http://www.nahc.org, 
retrieved January, 2014. 
[6] A. Glascock, “A conflicted view of telehomecare after a 20 year 
journey”,  Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2012. 
[7] A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, “A care informatics approach to 
telehomecare applications”, in The Handbook of Research on IT 
Management and Clinical Data Administration in Healthcare, A. 
Dwivedi, Ed., Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing, 2009, pp. 368-382. 
[8] A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, “The impact of behavioral 
monitoring technology on the provision of health care in the 
home”, JUCS, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 59-79, 2006. 
[9] D. Kutzik and A. Glascock, “An Evidentiary Report of 
QuietCare®: Selfhelp Community Services”, unpublished. 
[10] M. Schapranow, “Personal communication”, during the Fifth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine, Nice, France, February 2013. 
[11] C. Willems, M. Spreeuwenberg, L. van der Heide, A. Glascock, 
D. Kutzik, L. de Witte, and J. Rietman, “Activity monitoring to 
support independent living in Dutch homecare support”, in 
Everyday Technology for Independence and Care, G. 
Gelderblom, M. Soede, L. Adriaens, and K. Miesenberger, Eds., 
Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2011, pp. 145-151. 
[12] A. Gage, “From personal need to business opportunity: the 
pitfalls of being first to market” in Essential Lessons for the 
Success of Telehomecare, A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, Eds, 
Amsterdam, IOS Press, 2012, pp. 99-108. 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

