Proposal of Powered Foot Prosthesis Emulating Motion of Healthy Foot (PEHF)
Yoshitoshi Murata, Haruki Baba
Faculty of Software and Information Science
Iwate Prefectural University
Takizawa, Japan
e-mail: y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp, g031q310@s.iwate-
pu.ac.jp
Yukihide Nishimura
Department of Rehabilitation Medicine,
Iwate Medical University
Morioka, Japan
e-mail: ynishi@iwate-med.ac.jp
Abstract— Several million people around the world live with
limb loss. Foot prosthesis is useful to improve their quality of
life, and powered foot prosthesis enables them to walk
naturally. However, most are too expensive for most amputees
to afford. We propose a novel powered foot prosthesis that
emulates the motion of a healthy foot with a half cycle delay.
When a healthy person is walking, the motions of both feet are
basically the same, with a half cycle difference. On the basis of
this principle, the angle velocity of the foot part of the
proposed prosthesis changes in the same way as the angle
velocity of the healthy foot, with a half cycle delay. After
introducing the measured motion data for both feet, a
prototype of the proposed foot prosthesis is presented. Since
this foot prosthesis adopts an industrial cylinder motor to push
and pull the foot part of prosthesis, its cost would be
dramatically lower than that of existing foot prosthetics.
Keywords-foot
prosthesis;
power
driven;
leg
amputee;
walking gait; Quality of Life, QOL.
I.
INTRODUCTION
There are nearly 2 million people living with limb loss in
the United States [1]. LeBlanc [2] estimated the number of
amputees is the world was approximately 10 million in 2008,
with 30% of them being arm amputees [2]. Therefore, the
number of leg amputees was 7 million. Leg amputees use
foot prosthesis to improve their quality of life. However,
low-priced foot prostheses have rigid ankle parts and no
power drive mechanism, which make it difficult to raise the
heel and swing the toes up. Therefore, most users need more
power to move their foot. Powered foot prostheses enable
users to move their foot easily and walk more naturally.
However, such prostheses are so expensive for most
amputees.
One of the main reasons why the price of introducing an
existing powered prosthesis is too expensive may be that the
prosthetic market is not open. A few manufacturers provide
them as an integrated device, and the components are not
compatible between different manufacturers. Another reason
is the complex structure.
Most existing powered prostheses measure the change of
the ankle angle and torque using sensors mounted on the
prosthesis; then, they estimate the state of gait transition and
speed, and push or pull the foot part or toe part.
Therefore, we propose a foot prosthesis for the leg
amputee whose foot left is healthy. The prosthesis emulates
the motion of a healthy foot. When a healthy person is
walking, the motions of both feet are basically the same, with
a half cycle difference. The basic principle of our prosthesis
is that the angle velocity of the foot part of the proposed
prosthesis changes in the same as the angle velocity of the
healthy foot, with a half cycle delay. The angle velocity of a
healthy foot is measured with a gyro sensor mounted on the
heel part of the shoe worn on the healthy foot. Since the
prosthesis adopts a small industrial cylinder motor that
pushes and pulls the foot part of the prosthesis, the rising and
falling speed of the foot part are determined on the basis of
the pulse speed inputted to a stepping motor. Since the price
of small industrial stepping motors is not high and the
structure of this foot prosthesis is simple, it would not be too
expensive for most amputees to afford.
After introducing existing foot prosthesis in Section II,
we describe basic principles of the proposed prosthesis in
Section III. Changes of angle velocity and angle for both
healthy feet are introduced in Sections IV. A prototype of
proposed foot prosthesis is introduced in Section V. Section
VI concludes with a summary of key points and future works.
II.
EXISTING POWERED FOOT PROSTHETICS
In this section, we introduce existing powered foot
prosthesis. Ottobock in Germany and Ösuur in Iceland
provide
such
prosthesis
to
consumers
and
the
Biomechatronics Group, a research group within MIT
Media Lab., has also developed some models.
The
powered
foot
prosthesis
developed
by
the
Biomechatronics Group, a research group within MIT
Media Lab., is shown in Figure 1 [3]. Its heel part (in-series
spring) is pulled up and down by the ball screw driven by
the motor through the timing belt. In case of this prosthesis,
the gait state transitions are determined using the ankle
torque and ankle angle. These data are measured angle
sensors and strain gauges mounted on the prosthesis [4].
These prostheses are not a commercial product.
Ottobock provides a power-assist foot prosthesis called
“1B1 Meridium [5].” Its mechanism is shown in Figure 2. It
adopts
a
hydraulic
pressure
mechanism,
in
which
a
hydraulic pressure cylinder pushes and pulls a lever on the
toe plate, causing the instep to rise and fall, respectively.
Unfortunately, we could not find practical kinds of sensors
and control method of the toe plate. The control board
would estimate the pushing timing and speed from the angle
between the shank and floor (= ankle angle) from sensors.
Össur provides a power-assist foot prosthetic called
“PROPRIO FOOT® [6]” shown in Figure 3. Due to a lack
of relevant material on the product's operation, we assume
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

from observations that an air cylinder positioned in the area
of the Achilles' tendon raises and lowers the foot part. We
could not find practical kinds of sensors and control method
of the foot plate. Since its appearance resembles to the
appearance
of
the
prosthesis
developed
by
the
Biomechatronics Group, MIT, its control method would be
basically same as Biomechatronics Group’s control method,
its drive system is not different from the Biomechatronics
Group’s one.
Prices of the PROPRIO FOOT® and 1B1 Meridium are
not available to the public, but are assumed to be more than
2 million yen ($18,000) in Japan, which is too expensive for
most amputees.
The main purpose of our research is to provide a low
price powered prosthetic foot based on a module structure
concept.
Figure 1. Power-assist foot prosthetic developed by the
Biomechatronics Group of MIT Media Laboratory.
Figure 2. Mechanism of 1B1 Meridium, Ottobock.
Figure 3. PROPRIO FOOT®, Össur.
III.
BASIC PRINCIPLE
As the result of measuring the differences between
people with a walking disability and healthy people, it was
found that the angle velocity when the heel rises and the toe
angle when the foot swings for those with a walking
disability are lower than healthy people [7]. We are
developing walking assist devices that compensate for the
shortage of heel raising power. In addition, we noticed that a
foot prosthesis was similar to a person whose muscles were
very weak and that the gait motion of both feet for healthy
people was basically the same with a half cycle difference.
Most existing powered prostheses measure the change of
the ankle angle and torque using sensors mounted on the
prosthesis; then, they estimate the state of gait transition and
speed, and push or pull the foot part or toe part.
However, in our proposed prosthesis, the motion of the
foot part of the prosthesis is controlled on the basis of
output from a gyro sensor mounted in the heel part of a shoe
worn on a healthy foot, not sensors mounted in the
prosthesis.
The basic structure of the proposed foot prosthesis is
shown in Figure 4. The prosthesis is comprised of the
following.
-
Socket: a raw lower limb is inserted in a socket.
-
Shin rod: a shin rod joins the socket and ankle joint.
-
Ankle joint: can rotate foot up/down.
-
Foot: one SACH foot is rotated up/down at the
ankle joint part.
-
Motor cylinder: the cylinder pushes/pulls the foot.
-
Link: joins the shin rod to the motor and the motor
to the foot.
-
Gyro sensor: this is mounted into the heel part of
the shoe worn on the healthy foot and the heel
part of the foot prosthesis.
-
Battery: provides electricity to the motor cylinder.
-
Control board: controls the motor cylinder to
emulate the gait motion of a healthy foot on the
basis of output data from the gyro
sensor
mounted in the heel part of the shoe for the
healthy foot.
The motor cylinder is a stepping motor, and the pulse
stream input from the control board is used to change the
pulse speed to emulate the motion of a healthy foot. The
gyro sensor mounted into the heel part of the prosthesis is
used to monitor the motion of the foot prosthesis. The
output of both sensors is sent to the control board via
Bluetooth. Bluetooth devices are mounted on the gyro
sensor and control board.
This dual-link connection was adopted so as to rotate the
foot smoothly.
Figure 4. Basic structure of PEHF.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE RIGHT FOOT AND LEFT
FOOT WHILE WALKING
Our research is based on the principle that the motion of
both feet for healthy people is basically the same and has a
half cycle difference. A change of angle velocity and angle
of both feet were measured. For this measurement, we used
STEVAL-WESU1 by STMicro-electronics (See Figure. 5)
[8]. This wearable unit includes four sensors:
-
3D-accelerometer,
-
3D-gyroscope,
-
3D-magnetometer,
-
MEMS pressure.
This device is 37 x 40 x 8 mm and weighs 9.6 g.
We inserted STEVAL-WESU1 into the heel of a shoe as
shown in Figure. 6.
Figure 5. STEVAL-WESU1 by STMicroelectronics.
Figure 6. Sensor devices embedded into shoes.
A healthy participant walked on a straight line, 2-m-
radius quarter-circle clockwise direction and 2-m-radius
quarter-circle counter-clockwise direction.
The measured angle velocity data are shown in Figures 7,
8, and 9. Figure 7 shows the data for walking on a straight
line, Figure 8 shows that for walking on the 2-m-radius
quarter-circle clockwise direction, and Figure 9 shows that
for the 2-m radius quarter-circle counter-clockwise direction.
(a) in each figure shows the change in pitch rotation, (b)
shows the change in roll rotation, and (c) shows the change
in yaw rotation.
The normal walking gait cycle is divided into four
phases: (1) entire sole touching, (2) swinging backward
(raising heel), (3) swinging forward, and (4) contacting floor.
The acceleration is zero for entire sole touching, for the end
of swing backward, and for the end of swing forward. The
initial entire contact timing, end of the entire contact timing
(initial raising heel), end of swing backward, and end of
swing forward are shown in Figure 10.
Figure 7 shows that the gait motions of both feet of a
healthy person are basically the same and have a half cycle
difference. The shape of the angle velocity curve for one foot
was very similar to that for the other foot. A foot started to
swing forward just after the other foot entirely touched the
floor as shown in Figure 7 (a). In addition, the cycle periods
of both feet were the same. The roll rotation changed
synchronously with the pitch rotation as shown in Figure 7
(a) and (b). However, the ankle joint moved for the pitch
rotation, and the change in roll rotation was caused by the
motion of the knee. There was little change in yaw rotation
because the participant was walking straight.
(a) Pitching rotation
(b) Rolling rotation
(c) Yawing rotation
Figure 7. Walking on a straight line.
(1) initial entirely contact timing, (2) terminal entirely contact timing,
(3) terminal swing backward, and (4) terminal swing forward
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The timings of the gait cycle for walking on the 2-m-
radius quarter-circle were the same as for walking on the
straight line as shown in Figure 7 (a), Figure 8 (a), and
Figure 9 (a).
The cycle period of the left foot was the same as that of
the right foot in Figure 8 (a) and Figure 9 (a). This
characteristic is the same as Figure 7 (a). The yaw rotation
in Figure 8 (c) shifted rightward (upward). The yaw rotation
in Figure 9 (c) shifted leftward (downward).
(a) Pitching rotation
(b) Rolling rotation
(c) Yawing rotation
Figure 8. Walking on 2 m radius quarter circle clockwise direction.
(1) initial entirely contact timing, (2) terminal entirely contact timing,
(3) terminal swing backward, and (4) terminal swing forward
Before measuring the differences between both feet for
gait motion, we assumed that the cycle period for the
outside of the foot would be longer than that of the inside.
However, the measured data shows there was no difference
in cycle period between both feet. The participant in this
case walked on a polygon, not a circle.
(a) Pitching rotation
(b) Rolling rotation
(c) Yawing rotation
Figure 9. walking on 2 m radius quarter circle counter-clockwise direction.
(1) initial entirely contact timing, (2) terminal entirely contact timing,
(3) terminal swing backward, and (4) terminal swing forward
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 10. Normal walking gait cycle (See a right foot).
We would like the proposed prosthesis to be used not
only for walking but also for jogging. Therefore, jogging
motions must be measured to confirm whether there are
differences between both feet.
V.
PROTOTYPE OF PEHF
We developed a prototype of the foot prosthesis as
shown in Figure 11. In case of the powered prosthesis
designed by the Biomechatronics group of MIT Media
Laboratory and PROPRIO by Össur, the heel part is
pushed/pulled in order to rotate the pitch direction of the
foot. However, the front part of the foot is pushed/pulled to
rotate the foot in the prototype prosthesis because an
existing SACH foot is used. A single motor cylinder is
adopted to push/pull the foot. The motor is connected to the
front of the shin and the foot via two links as shown in
Figure 11.
For the single motor cylinder, we used an Oriental
Motor DR series with a 30-mm stroke, 4-kg carrying force,
4-Newton thrust, and a 100-mm/sec maximum stroke speed
[9]. It is a stepping motor that moves 0.001 mm per pulse. A
stream of pulses is input to the motor. The pulse speed and
timing are changed according to the output of the gyro
sensor mounted on the heel part of the shoe worn on the
healthy foot to emulate the motion of the healthy foot.
We examined the characteristics of the prototype when
inputting a pulse stream to the motor. As shown in Figure 5,
the sensor was attached on the heel part of the foot. The
angle velocity and angle data were measured with 30-KHz
and 60-KHz pulses. The measured data are shown in
Figures 12 and 13. The maximum range of the angle of the
prototype was 18 degrees, and the foot rotated 0.0008
degrees per pulse (dpp).
Figure 11. Prototype of PEHF.
The speed of the angle velocity did not stay the same
for 30 and 60 Kpps, and the motor stopped at more than 60
Kpps. The reason is that its thrust was not enough. We have
to solve this problem, which may involve changing the
motor cylinder.
(a) Angle velocity
(b) Angle
Figure 12. Measured angle velocity and angle in 30 KHz pulse.
(a) Angle velocity
(b) Angle
Figure 13. Measured angle velocity and angle in 60 KHz pulse.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
A foot prosthesis that emulates the gait motion of a
healthy foot was proposed. After introducing the basic idea,
we described the differences in motion between the right
and left feet on the basis of the output of gyro sensors
mounted in the heel part of the shoes. Basically, there were
no differences between both feet except for the half cycle
delay. The shape of the curve of angle velocity and the cycle
period of the right foot was very similar to those of the left
foot. This was the case not only when a participant walking
on a straight line but also on a circle line except for the yaw
direction. It was possible to recognize whether a person
walked straight or turned to the right or left from the yaw
data. Thus, it is possible to emulate the motion of a powered
foot prosthesis with the gait motion of a healthy foot. Limb
amputees could walk smoothly like a healthy person.
However, the research we introduced in this paper is the
first step to develop the proposed prosthesis; at least we
should work on the followings in the future;
(1) The introduced single motor cylinder could not
drive a foot part well. We have to look for a suitable
cylinder motor.
(2) Establishing a method for controlling cylinder
motors on the basis of the angle velocity of the gyro
sensor mounted into the heel part of the shoe worn
on the healthy foot.
(3) Examining a prototype with a real limb amputee.
(4) Since the proposed foot prosthesis emulates motion
of a healthy foot, leg amputees who use this
prosthesis and have healthy foot; must start a walk
with their healthy foot. We must investigate whether
they could accept this limitation. If not, we have to
introduce a new method to solve.
ACKNOWLEDGEMNT
The authors extend thanks to Mr. Takashi Ushizaki and
Mr. Kazuhiro Yoshida for the help they provided in
performing this research. This work was supported by JSPS
KAKENHI Grant Number 19K11326.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Ziegler‐Graham, E. J. MacKenzie, P. L. Ephraim, T. G. Travison,
and R. Brookmeyer, "Estimating the Prevalence of Limb Loss in the
United States: 2005 to 2050," Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation 2008, vol. 89 IS. 3, pp. 422-429, 2008.
[2]
M. LeBlanc, ""Give Hope -Give a Hand" The LN-4 Prosthetic Hand",
[Online]
https://web.stanford.edu/class/engr110/2011/LeBlanc-03a.pdf,
[retrieved: February, 2020].
[3]
M. F. Eilenberg, H. Geyer, and H. Herr, “Control of a Powered
Ankle-Foot Prosthesis Based on a Neuromuscular Model,” IEEE
Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 2010, Vol. 18, pp. 164-173, 2010.
[4]
J. Markowitz et al., “Speed adaptation in a powered transtibial
prosthesis controlled with a neuromuscular model,” Philos Trans R
Soc B-Biol Sci 2011, Vo. 366, pp. 1621-1631, 2011.
[5]
Ottobock, 1B1 Meridium, [Online]
https://professionals.ottobock.com.au/Products/Prosthetics/Prosthetics
-Lower-Limb/Feet/1B1-Meridium/p/1B1, [retrieved: February, 2020].
[6]
Össur, PROPRIO FOOT®, [Online]
https://www.ossur.com/prosthetic-solutions/products/dynamic-
solutions/proprio-foot,
[retrieved: February, 2020].
[7]
Y. Murata, S. Yoshida, T. Niinuma, and K. Yoshida, "Comparative
Analysis of Walking Gait Cycle between Healthy People and
Walking Disabilities to Prevent Tripping Using Wearable Device and
KINECT," IARIA, International Journal on Advances in Life
Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, pp. 186-187, 2017.
[8]
STEVAL-WESU1, STMicroelectronics, [Online]
https://www.st.com/en/evaluation-tools/steval-wesu1.html
[retrieved: February, 2020].
[9]
Single motor cylinder, DR series, Oriental Motor Ltd., [Online]
https://www.orientalmotor.co.jp/products/new/1806l134l135dr/
[in Japanese, retrieved: February, 2020].
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

