Towards an Architecture for a Game Achievement Based System to Analyze 
Human Health Comparative Behavior  
Analysis of People’s Behavior Regarding Sharing Their Health Data and Proposing a Health 
Achievement Service Known From Computer Games 
 
René Baranyi, Nadja Lederer, Thomas Grechenig 
Research Group for Industrial Software 
Vienna University of Technology 
Vienna, Austria 
{ rene.baranyi, nadja.lederer, thomas.grechenig }@inso.tuwien.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays a few concepts of games and game design 
are used in different non-entertainment domains (this is also 
called gamification). Part of this gamification is also emerging 
in the health sector. This work-in-progress paper tries to define 
a methodology and an architecture how an achievement based 
service in healthcare can be designed, analyzed and 
implemented. This service uses patient data from different 
sources (e.g., from a patient’s personal health record) to share 
anonymized health related information/achievements with 
other people. Thus, it might build up a comparative behavior 
between patients and motivate them to increase the usage of a 
personal health record.  
Keywords - electronic health record; patient empowerment; 
achievements; medical informatics. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Noncommunicable 
diseases, 
e.g., 
cardiovascular 
diseases, cancer, chronic respiratory diseases, diabetes, are 
leading causes of death and found to be rooted in unhealthy 
behavior [16]. People are facing day-to-day negative stress 
and put themselves at risk largely due to tobacco use, 
alcohol consumption, physical inactivity as well as 
unhealthy diets resulting in overweight and obesity [16]. A 
change of behavior, however necessary, is relatively 
unlikely to occur. While short-term behavioral changes may 
be accomplished rather easily, it is the long-term change 
that is of interest to affect one’s health and well-being. 
Hence, motivational factors are paramount to be proposed 
and further focused on. One way to tackle this problem 
might be gamification of which several definitions are 
available. Deterding et al. [17] declared it as “the use of 
game design elements in non-game contexts.” Gamification 
concepts are on the rise, invading not only the health sector, 
but a magnitude of disciplines and markets [18]. 
While electronic health records (EHR), respectively 
personal health records (PHR), are a much debated issue 
[9][15], their implementation and adoption leverages 
tracking and analysis of continuous patient data, thus, 
treatment progress.  
Nonetheless, as of today, “gamifying” PHRs, in contrast 
to the adoption of rewarding concepts in online social 
networks [6][8][19] or wikis [7], has not been the center of 
attention. 
This work-in-progress paper aims at identifying and 
evaluating 
reasonable 
motivational 
factors 
to 
be 
incorporated into EHRs/PHRs, respectively, health related 
information sharing platforms, in general, and proposes a 
methodology as well as an architecture in an effort to 
introduce change in behavior and mind upon encouraging a 
healthier lifestyle among people by means of an 
achievement based service. 
The basic idea of this is to analyze, design and develop a 
prototype application which allows to gather information 
from different sources (e.g., a PHR) and to change the 
entered values into an achievement which can be displayed 
in a desired social network. An achievement system is a 
reward system, where players can complete goals and earn 
achievements for it, which are visible to others [6]. In case 
of this work those achievements do not contain any personal 
health data, but just display the activity itself. E.g., if 
someone enters the blood pressure, an achievement will be 
generated and displayed which shows that the user entered 
the blood pressure, but does not reveal the specific values. 
This system should then be evaluated to determine if such 
health achievements could be used to increase the usage of 
PHRs and to motivate other people to use it by 
communicating health activities. 
 
The remainder of this work-in-progress paper is 
structured as follows. Section II gives an overview on 
current and related research subject to gamification and the 
health sector. Section III outlines methodology to gather 
information for developing an achievement based service. 
Section IV describes the basic architecture of such a system 
and Section V covers the conclusion and future work. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are a few studies on EHR/PHR, in particular 
aspects like security, privacy and acceptance (like in 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[9][15]). The association thereof, with concepts traditionally 
known from the gaming industry and psychological 
discipline, i.e. social rewards/achievement systems, is 
scarce, if at all present in research. Here, we give an 
overview on what has been the recent center of attention. 
Utilizing EHRs, or at least parts thereof, is subject to a 
certain extent of skepticism. Upon editing or entering data 
into EHRs results to be found were of neither positive nor 
negative connotation [1][15]. 
From a psychological point of view several theories for 
changing human behavior are existent. The Transtheoretical 
Model (TTM), Health Belief Model (HBM), Social 
Cognitive Theory (SCT), and the Theory of Reasoned 
Action/Planned Behavior are among the most common ones 
[23]. 
TTM 
delineates 
six 
stages 
[24], 
namely, 
precontemplation, 
contemplation, 
preparation, 
action, 
maintenance and termination, whereas adherence does not 
occur in a linear fashion [23]. SCT [21], on the other hand, 
relies on a construct called “triadic reciprocity” [23]. The 
individual, one’s environment and one’s behavior are all 
influencing, thus, affecting each other either way. Moreover, 
key concepts associated with this triadic cycle involve – to 
name just a few - behavioral capacity, expectations and 
reinforcement. The latter centers on achieving higher 
motivation to perform or change certain behavior by means 
of rewards and incentives [23]. Adding up further to that 
line, a sole intention is likely not enough to induce behavior 
change [22]. Hence, research on bridging mechanisms like 
certain motivators is yielded necessary. This is where the 
proposed achievement architecture in here comes into play. 
Assuming that people are lacking some sort of 
motivation to update their health status, certain incentives as 
in gamification aspects could play a key role in raising 
people’s interest and awareness. This becomes especially 
important since we put ourselves at risk to various diseases 
by engaging in unhealthy lifestyles. Several frameworks 
have already been established in an effort to empower 
individuals upon recording health activities as well as 
deliver them with an overview on their general lifestyle. 
There are a lot of applications allowing earning some sort of 
reward for reaching a goal, but those applications are not 
connected to each other and the earned goals are not always 
displayed in a social community. Apart from utilizing 
specific software to recover one’s own data [3], approaches 
range from implementing wellness journals promoting 
mobile interaction [4], to the development of hardware 
devices, e.g., heart rate belts, body area networks (BAN), 
aiming at leveraging measurement and sharing of data with 
social networks [12]. 
Initial approaches have been undertaken to become 
familiar with people’s reasoning as to why information and 
communication 
technologies 
and 
designated 
eHealth 
platforms are used in order to introduce behavioral change 
[5]. The underlying model could serve as a basis on 
designing the proposed survey in this paper. 
A community dealing with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS) 
indicated 
that 
patients 
suffering 
from 
this 
neurodegenerative disease are more likely to communicate 
and share their own experience and health related 
information via support of peers [14]. Here, the underlying 
idea was not to hide or disguise one’s health data, but rather, 
be open about it in an effort to share experience and help 
others coping [14]. A study [13] even points out that linking 
PHRs with social networks is increasingly becoming more 
important for patients. Hence, the proposed idea is likely to 
be of benefit to users struggling with one’s health and well-
being.  
Achievements in video games are seen rather critically 
when it comes to user benefits [10]. Needless to say, that 
research solely carried out in theory provides only a limited 
indication for the success of this approach. Therefore, 
putting gamification to practice is favored. By means of 
utilizing WiFi or GPS signals, a client/server software 
architecture succeeded in transforming gamified aspects into 
real-life achievements, such as ‘user has been to Paris once’ 
[2]. 
Comparing the effects of using a photo-sharing 
environment that is associated with an incentive based 
service was the primary intention in [6]. Subject to this 
study, users did not report designated interest regardless of 
whether the achievement service had been provided to them 
or not [6]. A service for a wiki system to reward users with 
a ranking based on wiki-activity proposed several methods 
of bringing achievements to the people [7]. However their 
work was reported to be at an initial stage, still, which is 
why additional research to succeed in raising motivation 
was proposed.  
In a study [20] a mobile application was developed to 
define and enter goals. When those goals are reached users 
are rewarded with trophies and ribbons, which can be 
displayed on facebook. After a test just three people (out of 
23) did find the trophies and ribbons motivating. 
In [8], a movie-rating community gives movie 
recommendations to members based on numerical ratings 
and reviews. Authors designated higher participation within 
the community upon assigning specific goals, whereas 
unspecific goals reflected quite the contrary. Interestingly, 
establishing group goals has shown to be of higher efficacy 
regarding individual movie ratings than no goal assignment 
at all [8].  
Bearing in mind aforementioned research about social 
rewarding, achievement systems and services are suggested 
to succeed in raising awareness as well as motivating people 
towards higher contribution and sharing of health related 
data. 
III. 
METHODS 
The proposed methodology for an achievement based 
service can be found in Figure 1 (the numbers represent the 
order of the methodology, while the arrows indicate the 
dependency) and consists of the following steps. First, a 
literature research is conducted to get an overview of the 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

current state of the art regarding needed topics. Topics 
besides general aspects (user interface design, security, 
software engineering and psychological aspects for behavior 
change) are gamification, eHealth in modern media, mobile 
communication, EHRs, PHRs and theoretical basics about 
interviews and questionnaires. Subsequently, a practical 
evaluation is carried out to compare different gamification 
frameworks which might be used to set up the prototype as 
well as a comparison between different PHRs and social 
networks to include in the prototype setting. This step is 
done to find out if there are services or applications that 
might be usable in the prototype setting. If no satisfactory 
result is found, the needed components will be newly 
implemented. 
To explore people’s visions and desires for such a 
system a few initial interviews will be conducted. In 
combination with brainstorming a mindmap will be drawn. 
Based on this a short questionnaire will be constructed to 
get sociodemographic data and to assign the interview 
partners to gaming categories (e.g., if someone plays games 
and is open to achievements). This should include the 
reference to the Bartle Type of Gamers [11]. Afterwards the 
interviews and the short questionnaire will be conducted and 
the results will be analyzed. As a consequence use cases will 
be drawn which will end up in designing and implementing 
an achievement system prototype (as well as a PHR and 
social 
network 
prototype 
if 
needed). 
After 
the 
implementation of the prototype, a few users (20 to 40 
people) should test the system with the gamification service 
over a given period of time (about 2 months). The users 
should all have a positive attitude towards rewarding 
systems and achievements (which will be determined with 
the interviews and questionnaires) and should be between 
the age of 18 and 40. The users should be split up into two 
groups – for one group achievements will be generated and 
displayed but not for the other group. The reason for doing 
so is to uncover if there is a difference in the usage of such a 
system when a gamification service is present or not (which 
will be concluded in the results and analysis).   
IV. 
RESULTS 
Based on the results from the interviews a final 
architecture will be postulated. However, a few basic 
requirements will be defined before. The architecture should 
be able to handle the definition, display and altering of 
achievements. It should be possible to have different views 
for different user groups (e.g., the administrator has the 
possibility to define new achievements), so each user can 
define where his achievements will be displayed. It should 
also be enabled to define a source for the health related data 
(e.g., PHR) as well as needed authentication to retrieve data 
from there. Moreover, including location based services, e.g., 
to get an achievement for checking in into a fitness center, is 
considered. 
The basic idea of this architecture (see Figure 2) will 
consist of an internal system (the achievement service and all 
required components) and an external system, which will 
include all systems where data will be imported from or 
displayed to externally. The architecture is divided into a 
server and a client part. On the client side a user can access 
the prototype, a web application, with a browser. The data is 
transferred through the Internet with HTTP/REST and stored 
in an SQL Database. In summary the architecture relies on 
the following tiers: 
 
• 
Client: Through the frontend the test users and the 
administrator can access the application with a 
graphical user interface (GUI). It will hold an admin 
area to define and add achievements as well as the 
possibility to display reports (which user has added 
information and which achievements have been 
 
 
Figure 1. Methodology 
 
 
Figure 2. Architecture 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

reached, to use for the final evaluation) and a test 
user area (where the test users can view 
achievements, create and edit their profiles and to 
define 
where 
reached 
achievements 
will 
be 
displayed or posted). 
• 
Application: Holds the application itself and acts as a 
communication layer between the achievement 
system and external systems (PHR, social networks 
and location based services). 
• 
Backend: the backend will consist of the database to 
store the data. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This work presented a novel approach upon delivering 
insights into how and why people share their health related 
data with others. By means of a centralized achievement 
system an architecture and a methodology for the definition, 
development and analysis for such a system was given. 
Currently the evaluation is ongoing as well as the 
implementation of the basic requirements for the prototype 
of the achievement system in order to be tested afterwards. 
Future work besides finalizing and evaluating the system 
includes an integration of such a system into the 
rehabilitation process for stroke patients using a serious 
game. People going through a rehabilitation therapy often 
experience a lack of motivation. By including an 
achievement system into such an online community, patients 
might be motivated and feel connected. That, in turn, might 
help them through their rehabilitation process and to achieve 
better results. Also, an evaluation should be conducted, 
finding out, if this approach might help people with their 
rehabilitation. 
Being in good health and even more preventing illness is 
of utmost importance for each one of us. Hence, researching 
on it and support maintaining our health are worthwhile 
pursuing. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Hoerbst A., Kohl C.D., Knaup P., Ammenwerth E.: Attitudes 
and behaviors related to the introduction of electronic health 
records among Austria and German citizens. International 
Journal of Medical Informatics; 79:81-89, 2010. 
[2] Triebel T., Schnaufer S., Guthier B., Lemelson H., Schiele G., 
Effelsberg W.: REWARD A Real world Achievement and 
record Database. 8th IEEE International Conference on 
Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops 
(PERCOM Workshops); 835 - 837, 2010. 
[3] Mattila E., Kohornen I., Lappalainen R., Ahtinen A., Hopsu 
L., Leino T.: Nuadu Concept for Personal Management of 
Lifestyle Related Health Risks. Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society. EMBS 2008. 30th Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE; 5846 - 5850, 2008. 
[4] Koskinen E., Salminen J.: A customizeable mobile tool for 
supporting health behavior interventions. Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society. EMBS 2007. 29th Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE; 5907 - 5910, 2007. 
[5] Hoyo-Barbolla E. del, Arredono M.T., Ortega-Portillo M., 
Fernández N., Villalba-Mora E.: A new approach to model 
the adoption of e-health. Electrotechnical Conference. 
MELECON 2006. IEEE Mediterranean; 1209 - 1212, 2006. 
[6] Montola M., Nummenmaa T., Lucero A., Boberg M., 
Korhonen H.: Applying Game Achievement systems to 
Enhance User Experience in a Photo Sharing Service. 
Proceedings of the 13th International MindTrek Conference, 
2009. 
[7] Hoisl B., Aigner W., Miksch S.: Social Rewarding in Wiki 
Systems 
– 
Motivating 
the 
Community. 
In: 
Online 
Communities and Social Computing, pp. 362–371. Springer, 
Berlin Heidelberg New York, 2007. 
[8] Beenen G., King K., Wang X., Chang K., Frankowski D., 
Resnick P., Kraut R.E: Using Social Psychology to Motivate 
Contributions to Online Communities. CSCW, 2004. 
[9] Walker J. M., Garayon P., Leveson N., Paulus R.A., Tooker J. 
Chin H., Bothe A. Steward W.: EHR Safety The Way 
Forward to Safe and Effective Systems. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc; 15(3):272-277, 2008. 
[10] Molesworth M., “How many headshots you’ve done”: 
Achievement as discursive practice in videogame play. 
DiGRA Conference, 2009. 
[11] Bartle R.: HEARTS, CLUBS, DIAMONDS, SPADES: 
PLAYERS WHO SUIT MUDS, 1996 (Web. 01 September 
2012) http://www.mud.co.uk/richard/hcds.htm  
[12] Rahman A., Gueaieb W., El Saddik A.: Ubiquitous Social 
Network Stack For e-Health Applications. IEEE International 
Workshop on Medical Measurements and Applications 
Proceedings (MeMeA), 2010.  
[13] Eysenbach 
G.: 
Medicine 
2.0: 
Social 
Networking, 
Collaboration, Participation, Apomediation, and Openness. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research; 10(3): e22, 2008. 
[14] Frost J.: Social Uses of Personal Health Information within 
PatientsLikeMe, an Online Patient Community: what can 
Happen When patients Have Access to One Another´s Data. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research;10(3):e15, 2008. 
[15] Honeyman A., Cox B., Fisher B.: Potential impact of patient 
access to their electronic care records. Informatics in Primary 
Care;13:55-60, 2005. 
[16] WHO: Global status report on noncommunicable diseases 
2010, 2011. (Web. 27 August 2012) 
http://www.who.int/nmh/publications/ncd_report_full_en.pdf. 
[17] Deterding S., Khaled R., Nacke L.E., Dixon D.: Gamification: 
Toward a Definition. CHI 2011 Gamification Workshop 
Proceedings, 2011. 
[18] Groh F.: Gamification: State of the Art Definition and 
Utilization. RTMI, 2012. 
[19] Lin R.J., Zhu X.: Leveraging Social Media for Preventive 
Care – A Gamification System and Insights. Studies in health 
technology and informatics; 180:838–842, 2012. 
[20] Munson S. A. and Consolvo S.: Exploring goal-setting, 
rewards, self-monitoring, and sharing to motivate physical 
activity. 6th International Conference on Pervasive 
Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 
2012. 
[21] Bandura A.: Health Promotion by Social Cognitive Means. 
Health Educ Behav; 31(2):143-164, 2004. 
[22] Allan J. L.: The intention-behaviour gap – its’ all under 
control (executive control). The European Health 
Psychologist; 10(3):62-64, 2008. 
[23] Redding C. A., Rossi J. S., Rossi S. R., Velicer W. F., 
Prochaska J. O.: Health Behavior Models. The International 
Electronic Journal of Health Education; 3(Special Issue):180-
193, 2000. 
[24] Prochaska J. O.: Decision Making in the Transtheoretical 
Model of Behavior Change. Med Decis Making; 28(6):845-
849, 2008. 
 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

