Critical Success Factors for eHealthcare 
 
Udita Taneja 
University School of Management Studies 
GGS Indraprastha University 
New Delhi, India 
udita.taneja@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—As 
healthcare 
enterprises 
move 
towards 
a 
sustainable healthcare delivery model, an ehealthcare strategy 
is being adopted. In this study, the critical success factors for 
an ehealthcare strategy were identified. Their relative 
importance was determined based on increasing access to 
healthcare and reducing its cost. To succeed in ehealthcare 
initiatives the necessary factors are appropriate government 
policies, literacy levels, and telecommunications and power 
infrastructure. The focus should not be on technology; instead, 
factors such as healthcare provider and consumer mindsets 
should be addressed to increase the acceptance of ehealthcare 
services. 
Keywords-ehealthcare; critical success factors; efficiency; 
AHP; ISM. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the developing world, ehealthcare is often proposed as 
a solution to certain healthcare problems – accessing the 
rural population and trying to bridge the huge gap between 
the demand and supply of healthcare services. In the Indian 
context it is important to understand the healthcare and 
demographic scenario. There are huge differences between 
urban and rural India in terms of quality of available 
healthcare. Approximately 70% of the Indian population 
lives in rural areas whereas approximately 90% of the 
secondary and tertiary healthcare services are located in 
urban areas. The primary healthcare facilities in rural areas 
are also inadequate. 
Ehealthcare exists as fragmented efforts by various 
Ministries of the Government of India (GOI) and a few 
corporate hospitals to address the challenge of providing 
healthcare to over 1 billion people. The Department of 
Information Technology (DIT), Ministry of Communication 
and IT (MCIT), GOI has setup about 75 nodes in 
collaboration 
with 
various 
State 
Governments 
for 
applications such as tropical diseases, cancer care and 
consulting specialists from remote areas. Another DIT 
project is the setting up of Common Service Centers (CSC) – 
about 100,000 nodes, in rural areas. These are envisaged as 
serving as a front-end for government services of which 
ehealthcare is one of the services to be provided [9][10]. The 
Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) has an 
ehealthcare network consisting of 225 hospitals – 185 in 
rural areas connected to 40 super specialty hospitals. The 
Village Resource Center (VRC) is a project of ISRO along 
the lines of the CSCs to provide services including 
ehealthcare services. The Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare (MoH&FW), GOI implemented an Integrated 
Disease Surveillance Program that connects district hospitals 
with medical colleges of that state. Tele-opthalmology 
projects and a national cancer network are additional projects 
that have been funded [9][10]. 
Policy initiatives by different ministries of the GOI 
include those by the DIT of the MCIT: standardization of 
ehealthcare systems, hardware, software, security and 
privacy issues to enable planning and implementation of 
ehealthcare networks. A project called the “The Framework 
for Information Technology Infrastructure for Health 
(ITIH)” to address the information needs of various 
stakeholders has been undertaken. A National Task Force on 
Telemedicine was set up in 2005 by the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare (MOH&FW), GOI and a part of their 
mandate is to evaluate all players and projects in ehealthcare 
in India, define standards of electronic medical records, work 
on different modes of ehealthcare networks in the country 
and develop a national policy for ehealthcare for the 11th 
Five Year Plan [9][10].  
A review of literature showed that improvements in 
healthcare delivery are achieved by ehealthcare in terms of 
improved access and quality, and reduced costs [2][3]. The 
challenges to the advancement of ehealth that remain are 
issues relating to confidentiality, reimbursement, and legal 
and ethical considerations. 
When considering costs the literature shows that health 
outcomes improved at lower costs with ehealth as compared 
to traditional home visits by healthcare professionals [4][5]. 
Though there are initial set up costs, studies indicate overall 
lower costs due to better triage as a result of ehealthcare, 
reduced length of hospital stay, and reduced travel costs 
[6][7]. Costs, however, are incurred by the healthcare 
provider whereas savings benefit the payer, so these savings 
need to be realized by both [8]. 
With limited resources it is important to ensure the 
success of new and sustainable ways of healthcare delivery 
[1]. There exist frameworks for the introduction of ehealth 
technologies based on standard models for technology 
development and introduction [19]. Factors that would 
ensure the success of technology innovation and diffusion 
have, however, not been studied in detail, and neither has 
their importance been ranked [18]. 
Based on a literature survey, we identified ten critical 
success factors (CSF) that influence the efficiency of 
ehealthcare in terms of their impact on increasing access and 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

reducing the cost of healthcare delivery. The relative 
importance of these factors was determined as well as the 
relationships among them.  
In the following sections, the critical success factors are 
identified and ranked in their order of importance. No 
evaluation has, however, been done in terms of cost-benefit 
analysis of ehealthcare or its impact on public health.  
 
II. 
METHODS 
A search of peer-reviewed literature databases such as 
MEDLINE, PUBMed, academic journals, conference 
proceedings, and Google Scholar was done. Websites of the 
World Health Organization (WHO) [21] and GOI [22] were 
also 
searched. 
 
Search 
terms 
such 
as 
“ehealth”, 
“ehealthcare”, “telemedicine” and synonyms were used. 
Abstracts of articles were used to identify relevant articles. 
The ‘snowball’ method [23] was used to further identify 
articles from the reference lists of these articles. Ten CSF for 
ehealthcare were identified: 
A. Critical Success Factors 
The ten CSF and their relevance to ehealthcare are listed 
below. 
 
Data warehousing and data mining - appropriate data 
warehousing and data mining techniques are 
important, as online patient record storage and 
retrieval of relevant data for medical decision 
making is an indispensable component of any 
ehealthcare paradigm [9]. Health information needs 
to be integrated with technology, which has been 
done in the West but not in India. 
 
Expert systems - decision support systems for 
diagnoses as well as for demographic analysis for 
public health programs are extensively applied in the 
delivery of ehealthcare [9]. 
 
Data access control - the healthcare sector in the 
West has stringent requirements for data security and 
controlling access to confidential patient data. In the 
United States the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) was passed for 
improved patient privacy and data security. 
Interoperability standards need to be in place along 
with data security [2]. In India, however, laws and 
standards for protecting a patient’s electronic 
healthcare record are still in their infancy. 
 
Biomedical engineering technology - appropriate 
biomedical engineering technology is necessary to 
support ehealthcare applications. Technical support 
is necessary throughout installation and needs to be 
ongoing for all stakeholders along with user-friendly 
technology. Quality of service needs to be ensured, 
e.g., low down-time. Diffusion of ehealthcare 
technology needs initial champions as in the 
introduction of any other technology [2][11]. A 
study on the intention to use wireless technology for 
healthcare in India showed that technology factors 
are important along with financially viability [9][12]. 
 
Telecommunications and power infrastructure - 
reliable networks will be of prime importance as 
ehealthcare activities increase [11]. This is very 
important in India where uninterrupted power supply 
is yet to be realized in most parts of the country. This 
will need to be coupled with a high-bandwidth, zero-
downtime telecommunications network to support 
ehealthcare delivery. A study on the intention to use 
wireless technology for healthcare in India showed 
that communications factors are important [9][12]. 
 
Government policies - international studies have 
shown that policy and legislation are important for 
ehealthcare success [2]. Indian studies also show that 
licensing, ethical, and legal issues need to be 
addressed to promote integration of IT tools to 
facilitate ehealthcare [9][10]. Government policies 
concerning healthcare, education, infrastructure, 
technology, insurance, and legal issues all have a 
bearing on the success of ehealthcare in India. 
 
Healthcare insurance - financing is an important 
factor as insurance companies need to have tariffs in 
place for this new mode of healthcare delivery [2]. 
Health insurance is another sector where the entry of 
third party administrators and private players is set to 
change the way healthcare coverage is provided in 
India. 
 
Literacy levels - a literate population with a 
minimum level of computer awareness is essential 
for the success of ehealthcare. Technology is useless 
when faced with ignorance and an inability to use it 
appropriately and effectively. As of figures reported 
in 2008 only 65.38% of India’s population is literate 
with only 2% being well-versed in English [9].  
 
Consumer mindset - a literature review on the effect 
of ehealthcare on doctor-patient communication 
showed 
that 
ehealthcare 
was 
favored 
in 
approximately 80% of the studies [13]. In India 
some studies show an acceptance of technology as a 
result of reduction in travel costs and time, whereas 
other studies report a lack of confidence on the part 
of patients in ehealthcare [9]. 
 
Healthcare provider mindset - user acceptance is a 
very important factor and the involvement of 
healthcare professionals is essential from the design 
phase itself [2][14]. Ehealthcare facilities need to be 
available in the doctors’ offices, training needs to be 
provided as well as monetary compensation for 
providing ehealthcare services for user acceptance 
[11][15]. Possible reasons for physicians being 
reluctant include being too busy, a perceived loss of 
control, a lack of conviction in its potential, and not 
being conversant with ehealthcare [7][9]. An Indian 
study showed that ehealthcare’s clinical usefulness 
influenced its adoption along with the administrative 
factors involved [12]. To be able to fully utilize the 
potential of ehealthcare, healthcare providers will 
have to be responsive and committed to ehealthcare 
[2][11]. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

As various studies have shown training and 
organizational support is essential for adoption along 
with a change agent who is in a position to affect strategy 
and decision making [16]. Ehealthcare needs to fit into 
existing work protocols and not function as an add-on. 
Effective change management will be necessary to 
overcome resistance to adapting to new ways of 
delivering healthcare.  
The above 10 critical success factors were assessed 
in terms of their impact on increasing access to and 
reducing the cost of healthcare delivery. 
B. Analytic Hierarchy Process 
Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) was used to determine 
the relative importance of the CSF that influences the 
efficiency of ehealthcare [17]. AHP is a multi-criteria 
decision making technique that allows relative ranking of 
both qualitative as well as quantitative information. The 
information is separated into a hierarchy of alternatives and 
criteria. The alternatives, i.e., independent variables, are the 
ten success factors.  The objective, i.e., dependent variable, 
is efficiency of ehealthcare. The criteria, i.e., mediating 
variables, against which the alternatives are ranked are 
increasing access to healthcare services and reducing cost 
associated with healthcare delivery. Based on this objective, 
two criteria and ten alternatives, a vector ranking the ten 
CSF was obtained from a group AHP performed on the 
inputs provided by individual healthcare providers. A 
Microsoft Excel spreadsheet was programmed to compute 
the group AHP rank vector. The ranking in this vector 
denotes the perceived importance of the CSF. 
C. Interpretive Structural Modeling 
Interpretive Structural Modeling (ISM) was used to 
determine the relationships between the CSF that influence 
efficiency of ehealthcare and establish the strategic drivers 
necessary for success (Sage, 1977) [20]. The ten CSF were 
assessed with respect to each factor having an impact on 
another factor. These CSF were used to develop a group 
ISM based on the inputs provided by the same individual 
respondents. To develop a group ISM, the majority answer 
was taken for each question from the individual answers 
provided by the respondents. ISM software was used to 
perform the ISM calculations. The ISM directed graph, or 
digraph, shows whether a factor has an impact on another 
factor and determines the strategic drivers.  
D. Data Collection 
An exploratory study was carried out with data gathered 
using a survey instrument tailored for AHP and ISM and 
consisting of two sets of questionnaires. The questionnaires 
were administered to a convenience sample of thirty-one 
healthcare providers, out of which eighteen responded. 
These respondents were from the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi. Eleven of these respondents were doctors from a 
large government teaching hospital, four were doctors in 
private practice, one was an ehealthcare manager for a large 
private chain of hospitals, and two responses were obtained 
from academics specializing in information technology and 
healthcare management.  
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The results from both AHP and ISM are presented in the 
following sections: 
A. AHP 
An AHP computation was performed on the collective 
set of inputs obtained from all the respondents. The results, 
in terms of ranking of the criteria and the CSF, with their 
relative weights indicating decreasing importance, are given 
in Tables I, II and III.  
 Healthcare providers, as a group, perceived increasing 
access to be more important than reducing cost for 
increasing the efficiency of ehealthcare as shown in Table I. 
Keeping in mind the large population of India that is 
currently under-served in terms of basic healthcare services, 
any initiative that attempts to provide healthcare services 
should increase access to the services.  
Table II shows the ranks of the CSF with respect to the 
two performance assessment criteria – increasing access and 
reducing cost. Healthcare providers rank literacy levels as 
the most important factor influencing access. Consumer and 
healthcare provider mindsets along with telecom and power 
infrastructure follow in close succession as to their 
importance in increasing access. Without a literate 
population it is not possible to fully utilize ehealthcare 
services. The mindsets of people as well as the basic 
infrastructure issues are important for accessing a larger 
number of people. 
With respect to reducing cost, literacy levels are once 
again considered the most important factor, with telecom 
and power infrastructure a close second, and government 
policies in third place. For ehealthcare to service the country 
a literate population is desirable. When dealing with an 
illiterate population greater costs are incurred and this is 
reflected in ranking literacy levels as the number one factor 
affecting the cost of ehealthcare. The infrastructure costs 
also have a bearing on ehealthcare costs and hence they are 
in second place. Government policies, in third place, also 
have an impact on the cost of ehealthcare. 
In the combined ranking shown in Table III, literacy 
levels are considered the most important factor influencing 
the efficiency of ehealthcare. The telecom and power 
infrastructure is ranked second with consumer and 
healthcare provider mindsets a close third and fourth. A 
literate population is a prerequisite for effective ehealthcare 
delivery both in terms of increasing access and reducing 
cost. Without telecom and power any ehealthcare initiative 
will not function properly. The mindsets of both the 
healthcare providers and consumers are also important for 
ehealthcare to gain acceptance as a means of giving and 
receiving healthcare services. The technology aspects of the 
business such as appropriate IT and biomedical engineering 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

technology are ranked the lowest in their impact on 
ehealthcare. 
TABLE I.  
AHP RANKS OF CRITERIA 
Criteria 
Relative 
weights 
Increasing access 
0.5778 
Reducing cost 
0.4222 
 
TABLE II.  
AHP RANKS WITH RESPECT TO CRITERIA 
CSF with respect to 
increasing access 
Relative 
weights 
CSF with respect to 
reducing cost 
Relative 
weights 
Literacy levels 
0.1951 
Literacy levels 
0.1644 
Consumer mindset 
0.1298 
Telecom / power 
infrastructure 
0.1537 
Healthcare provider 
mindset 
0.1274 
Government policies 
0.1337 
Telecom / power 
infrastructure 
0.1262 
Consumer mindset 
0.1070 
Government policies 
0.1042 
Healthcare provider 
mindset 
0.1055 
Expert systems 
0.0703 
Healthcare insurance 
0.0887 
Data access control 
0.0665 
Data warehousing / 
data mining 
0.0877 
Healthcare insurance 
0.0644 
Expert systems 
0.0679 
Data warehousing / 
data mining 
0.0632 
Biomedical 
engineering 
technology 
0.0536 
Biomedical 
engineering 
technology 
0.0531 
Data access control 
0.0378 
 
TABLE III.  
COMBINED AHP RANKS  
CSF 
Relative 
weights 
Literacy levels 
0.1821 
Telecom / power infrastructure 
0.1378 
Consumer mindset 
0.1201 
Healthcare provider mindset 
0.1181 
Government policies 
0.1167 
Healthcare insurance 
0.0747 
Data warehousing / data mining 
0.0736 
Expert systems 
0.0693 
Data access control 
0.0544 
Biomedical engineering technology 
0.0533 
 
B. ISM 
A group ISM was developed from the inputs obtained 
from all the respondents and is shown in Fig. 1. Government 
policies are the most important strategic driver having an 
impact on the other factors as can be seen in Fig. 1. 
Relevant government policies need to be in place to 
accelerate the pace of infrastructure development in the 
country without which ehealthcare cannot hope to achieve 
any measure of success. Government policies also have a 
direct impact on the literacy levels in the country that will, 
in turn, drive changing consumer mindsets. 
The telecom and power infrastructure in the country is 
the second most important strategic driver for ehealthcare 
initiatives. With an adequate infrastructure in place the 
healthcare provider mindset will be influenced positively in 
favor of ehealthcare as a successful delivery mechanism. 
The information and biomedical engineering technologies 
are not as critical in ehealthcare delivery.  
 
The results from both tools show that non-technology 
issues such as government policies, telecom and power 
infrastructure, and literacy levels in the country are more 
important than technology issues. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We sought to evaluate the ten CSF that influence the 
efficiency of ehealthcare delivery. AHP was used to rank the 
CSF and ISM to determine the strategic drivers. Increasing 
access and reducing cost were the criteria used. To succeed 
in ehealthcare initiatives the CSF that need to be in place are 
appropriate government policies, literacy levels, and 
telecommunications and power infrastructure in the country. 
The focus should not be on the IT tools and biomedical 
engineering technology as is most often the case. Instead the 
non-technology factors such as healthcare provider and 
consumer mindsets should be addressed to increase 
acceptance of, and enhance the efficiency of, ehealthcare 
services. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by AICTE grant F.No.: 
8023/BOR/RID/RPS-176. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Wootton and M. A. Hebert, “What constitutes success in 
telehealth?” J Telemed Telecare, 2001, 7(6), Suppl. 2, pp. 3-7. 
[2] T. H. F. Broens, et al., “Determinants of successful 
telemedicine implementations: a literature study,” J Telemed 
Telecare, 2007, 13, pp. 301-309. 
[3] P. A. Jennett, et al., “Policy implications associated with the 
socioeconomic health system impact of telehealth: a case 
study from Canada,” Telemedicine Journal and e-Health, 
2004, 10(1), pp. 77-83. 
[4] S. M. Finkelstein, S. M. Speedie, and S. Potthoff, “Home 
telehealth improves clinical outcomes at lower cost for home 
healthcare,” Telemedicine and e-Health, April 2006, 12(2), 
pp. 128-136, doi:10.1089/tmj.2006.12.128. 
[5] H. C. Noel, D. C. Vogel, J. J. Erdos, D. Cornwall, and F. 
Levin, 
“Home 
telehealth 
reduces 
healthcare 
costs,” 
Telemedicine Journal and e-Health, Summer 2004, 10(2), pp. 
170-183, doi:10.1089/tmj.2004.10.170. 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[6] P. Varkey, K. Schumacher, C. Swanton, B. Timm, and P. T. 
Hagen, “Telemedicine in the worksite: a study of feasibility, 
and patient and provider satisfaction,” J Telemed Telecare, 
2008, 14(6), pp. 322-325, doi:10.1258/jtt.2008.080512. 
[7] R. Wootton, “Telemedicine support for the developing 
world,” J Telemed Telecare, 2008, 14(3), pp. 109-114. 
[8] C. M. Cusack, et al., “The value proposition in the widespread 
use of telehealth,” J Telemed Telecare, 2008, 14, pp. 167-168, 
doi:10.1258/jtt.2007.007043. 
[9] A. Dasgupta and S. Deb, “Telemedicine: a new horizon in 
public health in India,” Indian Journal of Community 
Medicine, 2008, 33(1), pp. 3-8. 
[10] S. K. Mishra, “E-health initiatives in India,” Expert group 
meeting on regional trends in health service, and their impacts 
on health system performance in the Asian and Pacific region, 
Bangkok, October 2007, United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP). 
[11] P. Whitten and I. Adams, “Success and failure: a case study of 
two rural telemedicine projects,” J Telemed Telecare, 2003, 
9(3), pp. 125-129. 
[12] R. Gururajan, “Factors influencing the intention to use 
wireless technology in healthcare: a study in India,” J 
Telemed Telecare, 2007, 13, Supplement 3, pp. 40-41. 
[13] E. 
A. 
Miller, 
“Telemedicine 
and 
doctor-patient 
communication: an analytical survey of the literature,”  J 
Telemed Telecare, 2001, 7(1), pp. 1-17. 
[14] S. Buck, “Nine human factors contributing to the user 
acceptance of telemedicine applications: a cognitive-
emotional approach,” J Telemed Telecare, 2009, 15(2), pp. 
55-58. 
[15] J. T. George, K. S. Rozario, and A. Abraham, “A survey in 
India of doctors‘ knowledge, attitudes and practice regarding 
telemedicine and e-health,” J Telemed Telecare, 2007, 13, pp. 
322. 
[16] M. Tsiknakis and A. Kouroubali, “Organizational factors 
affecting successful adoption of innovative ehealth services: a 
case study employing the FITT framework,” IJMI, 2009, 78, 
pp. 39-52. 
[17] T. L. Saaty, “How to make a decision: The analytic hierarchy 
process,” European Journal of Operational Research, 1990, 
48(1), pp. 9-26. 
[18] U. Taneja and Sushil, “E-healthcare in India: critical success 
factors for sustainable health systems,” MEDINFO 2007, 
Proceedings of the 12th World Congress on Health (Medical) 
Informatics, Eds. K. A. Kuhn, J. R. Warren and T.-Y. Leong, 
IOS Press, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, pp. 257-261. 
[19] J. E. W. C. Van Gemert-Pijnen, et al., “A holistic framework 
to improve the uptake and impact of eHealth technologies,” J 
Med Internet Res, 2011, 13:e111-doi:10.2196/jmir.1672 
pmid: 22155738. 
[20] A. P. Sage, “Methodology for large-scale systems,” New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1977. 
[21] World Health Organization website, www.whoindia.org. 
[22] Government of India website, www.india.gov.in. 
[23] R. Kumar, “Research methodology,” Pearson Education, 2nd 
edition, 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Group ISM digraph 
Expert systems 
Healthcare insurance 
Consumer mindset 
Data warehousing  / 
data mining 
Biomedical engineering 
technology 
Literacy levels 
Telecom / power 
infrastructure 
Government policies 
Healthcare provider 
mindset 
Data access control 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

