Valkyrie: 
A Distributed Service-Oriented Architecture for Coordinated Healthcare 
Services 
 
a Terje Solvoll, b Conceição Granja, c Sonja Cassidy, d Øivind Solvang, e Ove Lintvedt 
 
a,b,e  Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
a,b,c,d,e Faculty of Nursing and Health Sciences  
Nord University   
Bodø, Norway 
c,d Department of Strategic ICT  
    Helse Vest IKT  
    Bergen, Norway
 
e-mail: aterje.solvoll@ehealthresearch.no, bconceicao.granja@ehealthresearch.no, csonja.cassidy@helse-vest-ikt.no, 
doivind.skeidsvoll.solvang@helse-vest-ikt.no, eove.lintvedt@ehealthresearch.no 
 
 
Abstract— The Valkyrie project aims to address the increasing 
number of individuals struggling with mental disorders in 
Norway and the pressure this has placed on the healthcare 
system. The project focuses on the coordination of services and 
the need for information across clinical levels in the healthcare 
system. Valkyrie aims to provide access to quality care and 
reduce the adverse effects of mental disorders. The Valkyrie 
project will contribute to the United Nation sustainable 
development goals and enhance healthcare services in Norway 
by facilitating knowledge transfer, improving interaction across 
care settings, and providing new knowledge on digitalization 
and patient-centric care. The project aligns with the National e-
Health Strategy and supports several priority areas of the e-
Health Plan. 
Keywords-Electronic Health Records; Voice of the Patient 
(VoP);  Coordination; Healthcare; Patient-centric Pathways; 
Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA); Virtual Health Record. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The full coordination of health care services entails that 
the correct data is available to the right person at the right time, 
regardless of where the patient has previously received 
medical care. This concept is a critical objective in the 
Norwegian national strategy of “One citizen – One Journal” 
[1]. From an Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) standpoint, this means connecting multiple Healthcare 
Information Systems (HIS) across multiple healthcare levels. 
The Valkyrie project responds to the challenge and will 
demonstrate its feasibility by making a technological 
prototype. 
A prominent example of a target group in contact with 
multiple healthcare providers across the Norwegian 
healthcare system to complete their care plan is persons with 
mental disorders. The common use that a person with mental 
disorders makes of the Norwegian healthcare system is 
hospitalization, outpatient, and day services in specialist 
healthcare, as well as GP, emergency-, care-, social-, 
rehabilitation-, and day services from the municipality. In the 
current scenario, GPs do not have access to electronic Patient 
Health Data (ePHD) from the municipality services or 
specialist care. Only standardized documents are exchanged, 
which is insufficient for health professionals responsible for 
the patient. A WHO report revealed that persons with mental 
disorders in Nordic countries have a two- to three-times higher 
mortality rate [2]. The risk factors for this excessive mortality 
strongly relate to the service delivery, particularly regarding 
the lack of coordination and management of the health care 
services as the main contributors [2]. Furthermore, medical 
comorbidity is expected in this target group [3], where the 
majority suffers from at least one chronic medical condition 
requiring somatic care [4] in addition to their mental care. This 
target group´s demand for Norwegian healthcare, makes it an 
excellent case study for Valkyrie. 
Norwegian Directorate of Health National Plan for 
Implementation of Patient Pathways [5] has identified 
challenges with the digitalization of the Norwegian healthcare 
sector, recognizing the need for more research to better use of 
ePHD. A need has also been identified for implementing new 
patient pathways for mental health, which improve the 
coordination between primary and specialist care [5][6]. 
However, the challenges of accessing ePHD across multiple 
HIS, and integrating it with patient-centric solutions to form 
complete pathways, threaten the chances of achieving the 
goals for patient pathways. We should clarify that the use of 
data from the patients’ journals to support patient pathways is 
provided by the Norwegian Patient Journal Law Chapter 2 
(§§7-10, 19) [7], as well as on the Patient Records Act and the 
Health Register Act [8] that explicitly points out that business 
boundaries should not hinder the sharing of health 
information. 
It is of significant relevance for the “digital interfaces, 
robotics, and virtual environments” research area to establish 
an open and standard methodology to describe patient-centric 
pathways with a high level of granularity in a form that allows 
ePHD to become ubiquitous by being made available in 
multiple HIS across multiple settings. Thus, establishing the 
foundations for health care services coordination. 
Valkyrie will model patient-centric pathways that guide a 
Virtual Health Record (VHR) outline. The VHR will be made 
available to the providers’ HIS, thus making it possible to, 
when relevant, access a view of ePHD. Hence, all ePHD will 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

become ubiquitous in facilitating health care services 
coordination. This paper will define the process of how to 
solve this in a real-life setting.  
This paper is structured in five sections. Section one, this 
section, presents the introduction of the paper. In section two 
we present the state of the art, followed by a presentation of 
the Valkyrie solution in section three. Section four presents 
the discussion, and we end the paper with a conclusion in 
section five.  
II. STATE OF THE ART 
Research has shown benefits for patient-centric care, such 
as improved quality of life, increased adherence to treatment 
protocols, and reduced morbidity [9]. On the other hand, the 
current HIS are not designed to support integrated care 
delivery that spans multiple providers and settings at any 
health care level. ICT is set to play a signiﬁcant role in 
coordinating healthcare providers who are often separated by 
time and space. However, introducing ICT into healthcare has 
proven challenging owing to the underlying complexity of 
healthcare processes and the number of actors involved in 
those processes [10]. 
A. 
Modelling patient-centric pathways 
According to the Norwegian Directorate of Health [6], a 
pathway is a national standardized patient pathway with the 
aim to contribute to rapid diagnosis and treatment initiation 
without unnecessary waiting time. A patient-centric pathway 
is a structured care plan that combines national guidelines 
with local practices and patients’ wants, needs, and 
preferences. 
Healthcare delivery can be represented as a continuum that 
moves from the micro-level to the macro-level [12]. The 
macro-level represents system-level processes, such as patient 
ﬂows through a hospital, while the micro-level represents 
processes at the individual patient care level. Although they 
are interrelated, the micro- and macro-levels require different 
modeling approaches owing to their different granularity 
levels. 
Business process modeling has been used in healthcare to 
help represent healthcare processes so we can design systems 
to support those processes. Jun et al. [13] point out that a better 
application of process modeling is needed to provide safe, 
effective, timely, and patient-centric healthcare services. 
Process modeling (particularly simulation models) has helped 
evaluating and understanding healthcare processes at the 
macro-level by developing models such as those proposed by 
Granja et al. [14] for resource usage and radiology ﬂows. 
However, micro-level modeling at the patient’s level is far less 
advanced. Micro-level models require explicit details about 
the ePHD and communication ﬂows across processes and 
healthcare providers. An example of micro-level modeling is 
the work of Malholtra et al. [15], who developed a 
comprehensive model of the providers, activities, and ePHD 
ﬂows in the intensive care unit to identify, characterize, and 
reduce medical errors in that unit. Nevertheless, one 
shortcoming with their work is that it was ad hoc and did not 
use a formal modeling language or methodology, not easing 
the identification of speciﬁc indicators or best practices that 
can be considered for implementing such models and ensuring 
their scalability to other health domains. 
B. 
Distributed Service-Oriented Architecture 
When redesigning a healthcare system and design ICT to 
support it, we need to move from delivering individual 
products to delivering integrated services [11]. From the 
perspective of healthcare ICT, this means moving away from 
developing ICT for separate tasks (e.g., decision support, 
order entry) to developing integrated HIS that supports the 
continuity of healthcare delivery over time. The Service-
Oriented Architecture (SOA) paradigm and its ability to 
connect multiple HIS across different settings is a candidate 
for developing integrated HIS to support healthcare services 
coordination across different settings. SOA was introduced in 
healthcare to help break down silos and monoliths by 
separating the interface and services from the content and 
business logic and exposing it as a chain of interrelated 
services, feeding into expectations of better communication 
and interoperability between healthcare organizations and 
patients. 
The adoption of SOA and its healthcare principles is still 
slow when compared to other industries [12]. The reasons for 
this are linked to the also slow adoption of common standards 
and that SOA introduces a new type of complexity − if one 
service goes down, the whole chain of services breaks − which 
has led to more point-to-point integrations instead of using a 
separate process layer (e.g., enterprise service bus). 
Interoperability is still an issue, especially semantic 
interoperability [13], i.e., how to deliver the meaning and 
context together with the ePHD seamlessly across HIS [14]. 
More recently, an adaption of SOA has emerged, known as 
the 
Microservices architecture [15]. 
SOA 
and 
the 
Microservices architecture share the same ideas on exposing 
business processes as services. However, opposite to SOA, the 
Microservices architecture divides a monolithic application 
into multiple atomic services that run independently on 
distributed computing platforms, including distributed data 
stores. 
C. 
Mental health as a case-study 
In Norway, the yearly prevalence of mental illness ranges 
between 16 and 22% of the population [16]. Although most of 
these persons have not been in contact with the healthcare 
services [17], approximately 12.5% of the adult Norwegian 
population has a consultation in primary care related to 
psychological ailments, being that for specialist healthcare, 
the number of consultations is at 15% [16]. The fragmented 
organization of the health and social welfare services in 
Norway 
constitutes 
a 
major 
barrier 
to 
providing 
comprehensive, integrated, and coordinated services for 
persons in the target group. 
Since 1999, the Norwegian healthcare sector has been 
through several reforms that rightly have focused on reducing 
the overall costs of healthcare [18][19], coordinating service 
across the different levels of healthcare [19][20], increasing 
patient engagement [20], and equal access to health care [18]. 
In early 2019, three generic patient pathways for mental health 
and substance abuse were implemented. Later the same year, 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

(HIS) 
the government issued the first four specific clinical pathways 
[5]. Research on the implemented clinical pathways for 
mental health shows that nearly 70% of healthcare 
professionals believe the pathways, to a small extent or not at 
all, have contributed to more coherent and coordinated care, 
and 76% believe pathways, to a small extent or not at all, lead 
to more user participation and user satisfaction [21]. 
III. THE VALKYRIE SOLUTION 
To support collaboration between patients, their relatives, 
and health professionals, patient-centric pathways models are 
to be based on the Voice of the Patient (VoP) and verified 
information from experts explaining decisions or variances in 
the pathway [22]. 
Research has demonstrated the benefits of using ePHD to 
model clinical pathways to ensure it is derived factually and 
objectively from actual occurrences in the patient journey. 
Still, little research considers a combination of patient-centric 
design and data-driven to model patient pathways, and even 
less that approaches it as micro-level modeling. The Valkyrie 
approach to modeling patient-centric pathways draws on the 
Norwegian Directory of Health National Plan for 
Implementation of Patient Pathways [5]. However, it will use 
a combination of a patient-centric design and a data-driven 
approach to ensure the micro-level modeling of the patient-
centric pathway is derived from actual ePHD occurrences 
across multiple healthcare levels. 
A. 
Distributed Service-Oriented Architecture 
The 
Valkyrie 
architecture, 
Figure 
1, 
supports 
patient-centric pathways for mental health by delivering a 
Virtual Health Record (VHR) driven by the requirements of 
the pathway. 
To populate the VHR, each participating HIS pushes a 
token, encrypted using a public key provided by Valkyrie, 
whenever an event is recorded in the system for any patient, 
illustrated in Figure 1.  The token carries the patient identifier 
(unencrypted) and a small set of metadata about the event, 
including an identifier sufficient to locate the event in the 
source HIS, and the clinical coding descriptive of the event. 
The encrypted tokens are transmitted to the Messaging Engine 
(Valkyrie), which filters the tokens based on the directory of 
Legitimate Relationships between Valkyrie and individual 
patients. Tokens for patients without a legitimate relationship 
are immediately discarded; tokens for patients with a 
legitimate relationship are stored in the Encrypted Token 
Store within the Valkyre solution. 
To create the Virtual Record Outline for a specific patient, 
Valkyrie will gather, from the Encrypted Token Store, all 
encrypted tokens for the patient and decrypt them using 
Valkyrie's private key, allowing Valkyrie to form the Virtual 
Record Outline as a timeline of events, some of which may be 
relevant to the patient-centric pathway. Once the relevance of 
the events is confirmed in the Resolver (Valkyrie), the 
Resolver uses the metadata about the event source and locator 
to request the event view through the Pull Interface of the 
relevant HIS. When a new patient is added to Valkyrie, 
messages are sent through the Pull interfaces to each of the 
Figure 1: The Valkyrie solution: a simplified architecture 
(pull/push) 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

participating HIS, requesting the push of a set of encrypted 
tokens for the entire historical record of that patient. 
The Blockchain will store the chain of events and status in 
the patient-centric pathway, together with necessary 
encrypted metadata, to serve the requests from all the actors. 
The Microservices will handle logins and message services 
with push and pull mechanisms through API gateways and 
interfaces, and enable a scalable and flexible architecture for 
new, added services when needed. To ensure the correct and 
relevant presentation of information for each patient and 
healthcare professional, we will develop an ontology-based 
semantic layer. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The number of persons struggling with mental disorders 
who need treatment has increased faster than the Norwegian 
healthcare system was prepared for, putting intense pressure 
on both primary and specialized care, and the number of 
clinicians needed to treat them. There is an urgent need to 
provide this patient group with access to quality care as early 
as possible to reduce the well-documented adverse long-term 
effects of such disorders. These patients are less likely to 
complete their education. They have significant problems 
getting into the labor market, resulting in higher sick leave 
costs, various social security costs, the burden of disease, and 
increased mortality [23]. To complete their care pathway, 
each person in the target group is in contact with multiple 
settings across Norwegian healthcare, inevitably resulting in 
ePHD being distributed in multiple HIS. Valkyrie will enable 
knowledge transfer across business boundaries and levels of 
care and facilitate more effective interaction through the 
patient care pathway. 
Valkyrie shall contribute to attaining the objectives of the 
UN sustainable development goal 3 to ensure healthy lives 
and promote well-being at all ages, and goal 8 to promote 
inclusive and sustainable economic growth, employment, and 
decent work for all. 
The Valkyrie project will also contribute new knowledge 
for the digitalization of the healthcare sector in Norway, 
specifically relating to HIS scalability, integration, and 
semantic interoperability. One can identify critical factors for 
successful implementation by investigating barriers and 
facilitators and how to cope with them. This knowledge can 
be used for further implementation of the model and other 
health interventions; It provides knowledge of the usefulness 
of a government-initiated action aimed at developing new 
ways of organizing integrated services. This knowledge will 
help to enhance healthcare services and improve the quality 
of care. The Valkyrie project will contribute new knowledge 
on how the patient´s view of their care pathway is described 
using standard and open modeling languages and 
methodologies to ensure scalability and inform the 
development of patient-centric pathways. 
Valkyrie supports two of the three main objectives of the 
National e-Health Strategy [6], the National e-Health Action 
Plan 2017-2021 [24], and the strategy of One citizen – One 
journal [1]. Further, Valkyrie will contribute to five of the six 
priority areas of the e-Health Plan 2019-2022 [4], namely, 
tasks 1.1, 2.1, 3.1, 5.1, and 6.1. 
V. CONCLUSION 
With the increasing number of individuals struggling with 
mental disorders and the pressure this puts on the healthcare 
system, the importance of the coordination of services and the 
need for information across clinical levels will become more 
important in the future. Providing access to important patient 
information and thereby quality care, can reduce the adverse 
effects of mental disorders and thereby facilitate knowledge 
transfer, improve interaction across care settings, and provide 
new knowledge on digitalization and patient-centric care.  
The Valkyrie project will contribute new knowledge to the 
digitalization of the healthcare sector in Norway and support 
the objectives of the National e-Health Strategy, the National 
e-Health Action Plan, and the strategy of One citizen – One 
journal. Investigating barriers and facilitators of the project 
will provide valuable insights for further implementation and 
improvement of healthcare services. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Ministry of Health and Care Services, “Whitepaper. no. 9 
(2012-2013):  ́One citizen –one Health Record ́". St.Meld. nr. 
9 (2012–2013)   ́Éninnbygger-énjournal ́. Nov.  27,  2012. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.regjeringen.no/no/dokumenter/meld-st-9-
20122013/id708609/, [retrieved: January , 2023]  
[2] 
T. Dua, S. Saxena, N. Liu, G. Daumit, and N. Chowdhary, 
Meeting report on excess mortality in persons with severe 
mental disorders,  WHO/MSD/MER/16.5, World Health 
Organization, Geneva, 2015. 
[3] 
A. R. Franzcp, “Assertive community treatment-issues from 
scientific and clinical literature with implications for 
practice,” 
Journal 
of 
Rehabilitation 
Research 
and 
Development, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 813, 2007. 
[4] 
Directorateofe-health, "Plan   for   e-health2019–
2022",Direktoratet  for  e-helse, ,  Plan  for  e-helse  2019–
2022, 2019.Online https://www.ehelse.no/publikasjoner/plan-
for-e-helse-2019-2022, [retrieved: January , 2023] 
[5] 
Ministry  of  Health  and  Care  Services, "National  plan  for  
the implementation  of  patient  pathways  for  mental  health  
and substance abuse 2018–2020", "Nasjonal plan for 
implementering av  pakkeforløp  for  psykisk  helse  og  rus,"  
IS-2734, Helsedirektoratet, 2018. 
[6] 
Directorate of e-health, "National e-health strategy 2017-
2022: E-health  strategy  for  the  health  and  care  sector", 
Nasjonal  e-healsestrategi   2017-2022: E-helsestrategi   for   
helse-og omsorgssektoren", 2019.  
[7] 
The  Health  Register  Act, "Act  on  the  processing  of  health 
information  in  connection  with  the  provision  of  health 
insurance", Lov om behandling av helseopplysninger ved 
ytelse av  helsehjelp Helse- og omsorgsdepartementet  
Standard 42, 2014. 
[8] 
The  Patient  Records  Act  ,  "Act  on  the  processing  of  
health 
information 
when 
providing 
health 
care", 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Pasientjournalloven 
og 
helseregisterloven 
Helse-og 
omsorgsdepartementet Standard 42, 2015. 
[9] 
A. E. Bauman, H. J. Fardy, and P. G. Harris, “Getting it right: 
why bother with patient‐centred care?,” Medical Journal of 
Australia, vol. 179, no. 5, pp. 253-256, 2003. 
[10] M. Berg, “The search for synergy: interrelating medical work 
and patient care information systems,” Methods of 
information in medicine, vol. 42, no. 04, pp. 337-344, 2003. 
[11] E. Coiera, and E. S. Hovenga, “Building a sustainable health 
system,” Yearbook of medical informatics, vol. 16, no. 01, pp. 
11-18, 2007. 
[12] S. R. Loya, K. Kawamoto, C. Chatwin, and V. Huser, “Service 
oriented architecture for clinical decision support: A 
systematic review and future directions,” Journal of medical 
systems, vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 140, 2014. 
[13] K. Avila, P. Sanmartin, D. Jabba, and M. Jimeno, 
“Applications Based on Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) 
in the Field of Home Healthcare,” Sensors (Basel, 
Switzerland), vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1703, 2017. 
[14] M. Virtanen, et al., Semantic interoperability for better health 
and safer healthcare: Research and Deployment Roadmap for 
Europe, European Comission, 2009. 
[15] A. Krylovskiy, M. Jahn, and E. Patti, Designing a Smart City 
Internet of Things Platform with Microservice Architecture, 
2015. 
[16] A. Reneflot, et al., Psykisk helse i Norge, vol. 18, 
Folkehelseinstituttet, Oslo, 2018. 
[17] F. A. Torvik, et al., “Diagnostic and genetic overlap of three 
common mental disorders in structured interviews and health 
registries,” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, vol. 137, no. 1, 
pp. 54-64, 2018. 
[18] Ministry  of  Health  and  Care  Services,"National  health  and 
hospital  plan", Nasjonal  helse-og  sykehusplan  (2016–2019) 
Helse- og omsorgsdepartementet, Standard 11 (2015–2016), 
2014. 
[19] Ministry  of Health  and  Care  Services, "The  Coordination 
Reform, Proper treatment –at the right place and right time", 
2009, 
Online 
https://www.regjeringen.no/en/dokumenter/report.no.-47-to-
the-storting-2008-2009/id567201/, [retrieved: January , 2023]  
[20] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, "The 
Norwegian National Action Plan in Mental Health (1999– 
2008)," 2005. 
[21] M. Ådnanes, S. L. Kaspersen, L. Melby, and E. Lassemo, 
Pakkeforløp for psykisk helse og rus - fagfolks erfaringer 
første året.,  2020:00064, SINTEF Digital, 2020. 
[22] J. Finkelstein, et al., “Enabling patient-centered care through 
health information technology,” Evidence report/technology 
assessment, no. 206, pp. 1, 2012. 
[23] T. Olsen, et al., "For that which grows: Mental Health, 
Disability Pensions and Youthin the Nordic Countries," 
Nordens välfärdscenter/Nordic Welfare Centre, 2013. 
[24] Directorate of e-health,"National action plan for e-health 
2017-2022", Nasjonal   handlingsplan   for   e-helse   2017-
2022 Direktoratet for e-helse, 2019. 
 
 
 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

