Improving Diagnosis-related Groups with a Computerized Clinical Coding Tool for 
ICD-9-CM Codification 
Cecília Coimbra, Marisa Esteves, Filipe Miranda, Filipe Portela, Manuel Filipe Santos, José Machado * and 
António Abelha 
Algoritmi Research Centre, 
University of Minho 
Braga, Portugal 
 e-mail: {id6881, id6884, id6883}@alunos.uminho.pt, {cfp,mfs}@dsi.uminho.pt {jmac, abelha}@di.uminho.pt 
* Corresponding author  
 
Abstract—In recent years, in Centro Hospitalar do Porto 
(CHP), a major Portuguese hospital at the North of the country, 
there has been felt an increasing need for a computerized clinical 
coding tool to aid in the codification of the episodes of hospital 
discharges from patients admitted to its healthcare units. The 
process was slow and performed manually by the coding 
professionals, not having a centralization and unification of the 
information and processes associated with the clinical coding of a 
hospital discharge. Hereupon, in the context of this study, the 
aim of the present work was to design and develop a clinical 
coding tool for International Classification of Diseases, Ninth 
Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) to support the 
clinical practice in healthcare units. The coding of hospital 
discharge processes enables the grouping of episodes into 
diagnosis-related groups (DRGs) that correspond to clinically 
coherent and similar groups that are expected to use the same 
level of hospital resources. The main motivation for the 
implementation of this classification system is that it provides a 
financial and patient classification system, trying to contain the 
costs and waste associated with healthcare services. Thereby, a 
single-page application (SPA) for ICD-9-CM was designed in 
order to help health professionals of CHP in their daily work, 
namely the clinical coding of the episodes of hospital discharges. 
The main advantages and contributions of the development and 
use of this Web application are the centralization of information 
and tasks associated with the coding of hospital discharges, the 
increase of productivity and the reduction of wastes of time. 
Consequently, the ambition is sought to mainly improve the 
quantity and the quality of work performed by coding 
professionals. 
 
Keywords—ICD-9-CM; Diagnosis-related Groups; Hospital 
Discharges; Single-page Application; Proof of Concept. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The health sector represents a tricky situation for the people 
and systems responsible for the storage and processing of that 
kind of information. The problem is not in the lack of data but 
in the diversity and complexity of the health field. An hospital 
offers a wide range of services for each patient per clinical 
condition leading to hundreds or even thousands of specific 
and unique situations. It is then of extreme importance to find 
a way to measure the hospital productivity and aggregate the 
multiple activities performed at a healthcare unit. This led to 
the adaptation of the DRGs to this scenario. These kind of 
classification systems rely on a prior coding system that 
translates all the diagnostics, procedures, external causes and 
morphologies into universal codes like ICD-9-CM, increasing 
the semantic interoperability and reducing the ambiguity of a 
discharge report. The introduction of new Web frameworks 
and solutions for Web development resulted in a new wave of 
codification platforms for this kind of code systems. With 
modern layout and intelligent helping tools, it is possible to 
reduce the codification errors dramatically and increasing 
efficiency.  
This paper presents an insight into the development, 
implementation and impact analysis of a Web application 
directed to the ICD-9-CM codification in a major Portuguese 
hospital in the North of the country – CHP. The focus of this 
paper is mainly to highlight the differences between the prior 
method (by hand) and the new one.  
In Section II, the state of the art and similar works are 
briefly described. Thereafter, in Section III, the research 
methodologies adopted are presented. Section IV – “Single-
page Application for ICD-9-CM Codification” – presents the 
work developed and its main results, followed by a brief 
Strengths Weaknesses Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) 
analysis in Section V. In Section VI, the conclusion and future 
work concluded this paper. 
II. STATE OF THE ART 
The present section intends to highlight the main topics 
addressed throughout the work as well as main studies from 
the scientific community regarding medical codification.  
A. Diagnosis-related Groups 
DRGs are a classification system for inpatients at acute 
healthcare units aggregating under the same code cases with 
similar resource consumption and clinical similarities [1][2]. 
Developed at the Yale University (U.S.A) in the 60’s, it is 
used since 1983 by Medicare to calculate the compensation in 
cases of hospitalization [3]. Due to the immense success on 
that field, the system was adopted throughout the world in 
healthcare systems to improve the planning and allocation of 
funds reducing the disparities and the errors.  
The DRG requires a minimal dataset (MDS) in order to 
attribute one of the 25 main diagnosis categories to the 
discharge report [1]. So, the MDS includes, as follows [4]:  
 The main diagnosis responsible for the patient 
admission; 
 Other diagnosis; 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 Procedures performed on the patient during the 
internment; 
 Gender, age and height; 
 Destination after discharge (transferred, death or 
discharged against medical order). 
Each DRG group has an associated relative weight and 
weighting coefficient, as well as an exception threshold for the 
number of hospitalization days that helps convert each case 
into equivalent patients [4].  
Wilm Quentin and colleagues in “Hospital Payment Based 
on Diagnosis-related Groups Differs in Europe and Holds 
Lessons for the United States” highlights the differences 
between the original DRG and the one that countries like 
France, England or even Portugal implement. This adaption is 
the basis of most European countries method to finance 
hospitals proving to be less cost worthy with high quality of 
services [2]. 
Carina Fourie et. all present in “Systematically Evaluating 
the Impact of Diagnosis-related Groups on Healthcare 
Delivery: A Matrix of Ethical Implications” a study of ethical 
implications and importance of the DRGs in diverse Swiss 
hospitals [3]. On other hand, in order to highlight the diversity 
of the subject, Yantao Xin presented a comparison of the 
amount of medical waste generated in major healthcare units 
using as basis the DRGs [5].  
B. ICD-9-CM  
Every time a patient is discharged from a healthcare unit a 
discharge report is issued with daily logs from the physician in 
charge of that patient. The ICD-9-CM is a perfect fit to encode 
diagnostics, 
medical 
procedures, 
external 
causes 
and 
morphologies, consisting in a list of codes recognized 
anywhere in the world. As the name states, it is an adaptation 
of the ICD-9 codification system performed by the U.S. 
Health Department in collaboration with the Medicare and 
Medicaid Service Centres [6]. With more than 13,000 
diagnostics and 3,500 procedures, it is essential to develop 
tools or systems focused on the codification process. Some 
Web applications like “Find-A-Code” or the work of Marisa 
Teresa Chiaravalloti et. all in “A Coding Support System for 
the ICD-9-CM Standard” are examples of systems developed 
for codification purposes [7]. The late one processes text in 
natural language using text mining algorithms, returning a list 
of possible codes for each case.  
After the codification process, every discharge report can 
be read and perfectly understood in every country that adopts 
the same terminology. For the purpose of the present work 
and as stated by international directives, the ICD-9-CM codes 
are the basis of the DRGs decision [2]. 
C. AIDA and AIDA-PCE 
Some Portuguese systems are equipped with a platform 
called AIDA (Agência para Integração, Difusão e Arquivo de 
Informação Médica) that uses intelligent agent systems that 
ensure 
the 
interoperability 
between 
different 
and 
heterogeneous information systems (SAM, SONHO, PCE, 
SAPE, RIS, LIS, among others) [8][9]. The electronic health 
record (EHR) is responsible for the safe and organized storage 
of all the information about a patient, from personal data to 
diagnostics and procedures [10]–[13]. The constant update is 
vital in this scenario, so the same Algoritmi group from 
Minho University that developed AIDA put together the 
AIDA-PCE. Following the Problem Oriented Medical Record 
(POMR), all the patient information like symptoms, medical 
observations, diagnostics and treatment plans are stored inside 
that structure.  
Although using free text and other non-universal 
information the AIDA and AIDA-PCE present innovative and 
novel solutions to accomplish interoperability. On the other 
hand, the incorporation of the ICD-9-CM codes into the EHR 
represents an important feature to accomplish a cross-border 
medical record. The storage of ICD-9-CM coded discharge 
report saves space on AIDA-PCE databases and reduces 
medical errors in near future.  
The next section presents the main research methodologies 
followed to implement this work. 
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGIES 
The realization of any study in the field of Information 
Technologies (ITs) includes the scrutinized research and 
analysis of the set of methodologies and technologies 
available and feasible in the design of the defined IT solutions. 
The choice of the most appropriate methods and tools is 
mostly based on the advantages pointed out, as well as on 
associated limitations and compliance issues with related 
systems. 
Thus, the achievement of the SPA for ICD-9-CM is based 
on the research methodology Design Science Research (DSR), 
mostly used in the construction and evaluation of useful and 
rigorous IT solutions. Each of the design phases presented in 
this study included the choice and use of the most appropriate 
methodologies, technologies and tools for the definition and 
elaboration of the desired solution. Finally, a Proof of Concept 
(PoC) was also carried out corroborating the viability and 
usefulness of the clinical coding tool for ICD-9-CM designed 
and developed, which consisted essentially of a SWOT 
analysis (Section V). 
The next section presents the SPA for ICD-9-CM 
codification developed and implemented. 
IV. SINGLE-PAGE APPLICATION FOR ICD-9-CM CODIFICATION 
The codification of the discharge reports was made 
manually in CHP, making the process too slow and with a 
high error probability. Thus, it emerged the need to create a 
process that would reduce the codification time. Therefore, a 
SPA was developed through which the health professionals 
are capable to perform the codification process, and at the 
same time to consult patients’ data, such as the discharge 
report, the personal information and the hospital services were 
the patient was admitted.  
The purposed layout in this scenario encompasses a 
solution with three main components: the patient information, 
the codification area and the discharge report. The 
codification area presents five frames: diagnosis, external 
causes, procedures, tumor morphology and observations. With 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

exception of the observations board, which is the only one that 
allows free text insertion, all the other boards are composed 
by rows divided mainly in priority, description and code.  
The main characteristic that makes this process faster than 
the already existing is the dynamic and aided search. When a 
word is typed in the description field a list of all the ICD-9-
CM codes is presented, and when the user picks one of them 
on the description the respective code is automatically filled. 
On the other hand, when the user enters the code the 
description is also automatically filled.  
When a codification is finished, the user sends it to an 
evaluator. If the codification fails in this evaluation phase for 
any reason, it is sent again to the list of codifications that 
needs to be done. Thus, the application was developed with 
three different modules. One to be used in the first 
codification, another to be used when a discharge report was 
already codified and for some reason failed in the evaluation 
phase, and one final module to be used when the user only has 
view permissions. In this last module, the users are not able to 
change any field present in the codification. 
The application development leaned on the LAMP 
architecture. It uses Linux as the operative system, Apache as 
the Web server, MySQL as the relational database 
management system (RDBMS) and PHP as the object-
oriented language. 
In order to develop a fluid and dynamic application, the 
AngularJS framework greatly contributed. The modularity and 
extensibility of this JavaScript framework allows the 
development of diverse and futuristic applications.  
 The database storages all the data related to the 
codification codes, the discharge reports, user information, 
and all the information generated by the codification process. 
The RESTful Web service mediates the communication 
between the SPA and the database.  
The next section presents the SWOT analysis of the Web 
application developed. 
V. SWOT ANALYSIS 
To test the viability, the utility, the quality and the 
efficiency of the application a PoC was necessary, in this case, 
a SWOT analysis. This analysis allows to analysis the 
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of the 
application [14].  
 
Strengths: 
 High usability, intuitive and easy to learn (user-friendly); 
 Easy access to the data of patients, as well as the hospital 
services in which the patient was; 
 High scalability; 
 Easy of reissue of coded discharge reports; 
 Decrease of the codification time of the discharge 
reports; 
 Decrease of human error; 
 Easy adaptability to different health institutions. 
  
Weaknesses: 
 Requires internet connection; 
 Use of ICD-9-CM instead of the more current ICD-10-
CM version. 
 
 
Opportunities: 
 Modernization and organizational development; 
 Increasing expectation of the hospital administration to 
obtain methods that facilitate the hospital financing 
calculation; 
 Provide the tool to help in the calculation of the hospital 
financing. 
 
Threats: 
 Lack of acceptance to resort to new technologies by 
health professionals. 
 
The next section presents the conclusion and future work 
of this study. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Finally, the realization of this case study allowed the 
development of a clinical practice tool, namely a user-friendly 
clinical coding tool for ICD-9-CM. The Web application is 
currently implemented in a production machine of CHP, and it 
is currently being used by the coding professionals of the 
hospital in order to perform the clinical coding of the episodes 
of hospital discharges from patients admitted to CHP. This 
will then facilitate the grouping of processes into DRGs, that 
is, a financial system that can manage the costs and waste 
associated with healthcare services. In the coming years, the 
expansion of the Web application is expected. 
Trained professional using the ICD-9-CM clinical coding 
tool reported significant differences in time consumption and 
committed errors when using a computerized system to 
perform their tasks. It represents a valuable an asset to its 
users, since it facilitates the work of health professionals, and 
increases their capacity and speed of work by reducing the 
number of tasks required to perform a certain codification. In 
this way, the development of the clinical tool allows the 
centralization of a set of tasks and information in a SPA, 
greatly benefiting its users. 
Regarding future work, the addition of a Business 
Intelligence (BI) module in the clinical coding tool for ICD-9-
CM is foreseen, that is, the addition of a module with clinical 
and performance indicators [15]. Its principal aim is the 
visualization of indicators that show the association between 
the number of coded processes and each coding professional, 
as well as the temporal evolution of the number of processes 
encoded by each coding professional. Thus, the main 
objective of the insertion of this module is to study and 
analyze the performance of the coding professionals, that is, to 
identify, for example, the coding professionals who codify the 
most and also those who are coding the least. In this way, it is 
tried to encourage even more the increase of the production of 
the health professionals of CHP.  
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Finally, at the end of 2016, we already began the update of 
the system from the ICD-9-CM codification to the newer 
ICD-10-CM version. 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work has been supported by Compete POCI-01-0145-
FEDER-007043 and FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e 
Tecnologia within the Project Scope UID/CEC/00319/2013. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. M. Bellanger, W. Quentin, and S. S. Tan, “Childbirth and 
Diagnosis Related Groups (DRGs): Patient Classification and 
Hospital Reimbursement in 11 European Countries,” Eur. J. 
Obstet. Gynecol. Reprod. Biol., vol. 168, no. 1, pp. 12–19, May 
2013. 
[2] W. Quentin, D. Scheller-Kreinsen, M. Blumel, A. Geissler, and 
R. Busse, “Hospital Payment Based On Diagnosis-Related 
Groups Differs In Europe And Holds Lessons For The United 
States,” Health Aff., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 713–723, Apr. 2013. 
[3] C. Fourie, N. Biller-Andorno, and V. Wild, “Systematically 
Evaluating the Impact of Diagnosis-related Groups (DRGs) on 
Healthcare Delivery: A Matrix of Ethical Implications,” Health 
Policy (New. York)., vol. 115, no. 2–3, pp. 157–164, 2014. 
[4] S. B. Rimler, B. D. Gale, and D. L. Reede, “Diagnosis-related 
Groups and Hospital Inpatient Federal Reimbursement,” 
RadioGraphics, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1825–1834, Oct. 2015. 
[5] Y. Xin, “Comparison of Hospital Medical Waste Generation 
Rate Based on Diagnosis-related Groups,” J. Clean. Prod., vol. 
100, pp. 202–207, 2015. 
[6] M. Rouse and D. Fluckinger, “ICD-9-CM (International 
Classification 
of 
Diseases, 
Ninth 
Revision, 
Clinical 
Modification),” 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://searchhealthit.techtarget.com/definition/ICD-9-CM. 
[Accessed: 31-Jan-2017]. 
[7] M. T. Chiaravalloti, R. Guarasci, V. Lagani, E. Pasceri, and R. 
Trunfio, “A Coding Support System for the ICD-9-CM 
Standard,” Proc. - 2014 IEEE Int. Conf. Healthc. Informatics, 
ICHI 2014, pp. 71–78, 2014. 
[8] H. Peixoto, M. Santos, A. Abelha, and J. Machado, “Intelligence 
in Interoperability with AIDA,” in Foundations of Intelligent 
Systems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 264–273. 
[9] J. Machado, A. Abelha, J. Neves, and M. Santos, “Ambient 
Intelligence in Medicine,” in IEEE Biomedical Circuits and 
Systems Conference, 2006, pp. 94–97. 
[10] M. Salazar et al., “Step towards Paper Free Hospital through 
Electronic Health Record,” in Advances in Information Systems 
and Technologies, Springer International Publishing, 2013, pp. 
685–694. 
[11] J. Duarte et al., “Data Quality Evaluation of Electronic Health 
Records in the Hospital Admission Process,” in EEE/ACIS 9th 
International Conference on Computer and Information Science, 
2010, pp. 201–206. 
[12] J. Duarte, C. F. Portela, A. Abelha, J. Machado, and M. F. 
Santos, “Electronic Health Record in Dermatology Service,” in 
ENTERprise Information Systems, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2011, pp. 156–164. 
[13] F. Portela et al., “Electronic Health Records in the Emergency 
Room,” in IEEE/ACIS 9th International Conference on 
Computer and Information Science, 2010, pp. 195–200. 
[14] R. Pereira, M. Salazar, A. Abelha, and J. Machado, “SWOT 
Analysis of a Portuguese Electronic Health Record,” in 
Collaborative, Trusted and Privacy-Aware e/m-Services, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 169–177. 
[15] A. Brandão et al., “A Benchmarking Analysis of Open-Source 
Business Intelligence Tools in Healthcare Environments,” 
Information, vol. 7, no. 4, p. 57, Oct. 2016. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

