Big Data for Personalized and Persuasive Coaching via Self-monitoring Technology 
 
Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen, Floor Sieverink, Liseth Siemons, Annemarie Braakman-Jansen 
j.vangemert-pijnen@utwente.nl, f.sieverink@utwente.nl, l.siemons@utwente.nl, l.m.a.braakman-jansen@utwente.nl 
Center for eHealth and Wellbeing Research: dept., Psychology, Health and Technology 
University of Twente 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
 
Abstract—Big Data are the key towards personalized 
healthcare. However, this confronts us with new challenges. 
What are the hopes, challenges and dangers for using Big Data 
to develop personalized and persuasive coaching systems? The 
aim of this paper is to prompt a discussion on Big Data to 
personalize healthcare, using views and ideas from experts, 
and to develop an agenda for future research. 
Keywords-big data; self-monitoring; personalized healthcare; 
coaching. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Many different definitions are available for “Big Data”. 
Where Mayer-Schönberger and Cukier [1] focus on the new 
insights and economic value that can be obtained from Big 
Data in contrast to traditional smaller settings, Wang & 
Krishnan [2] refer to Big Data as complex and large data sets 
that can no longer be processed using the traditional 
processing tools and methods. Yet another definition comes 
from Laney [3], who defines Big Data according to 3 assets 
(often referred to as the 3V-model) that require new, cost-
effective forms of information processing to promote insight 
and decision making, including: 1) high-volume (i.e., the 
quantity of data), 2) high-velocity (i.e., the speed of data 
generation and processing), and 3) high-variety (i.e., the 
amount of different data types).  
Marr [4] expanded this 3V model to the 5V model by adding 
2 additional Vs:  veracity (i.e., the accuracy or 
trustworthiness of the data) and maybe the most important 
asset: value (i.e., the ability to turn the data into value). 
Though this is just a grasp out of all the definitions 
available, there is one thing they have in common: The use 
of Big Data for analysis and decision making requires a 
change of thought from knowing “why” to knowing “what”. 
We focused on small, exact datasets and causal connections 
(i.e., knowing “why”) in the past; now we focus on gathering 
or linking a large amount of (noisy) data with which we can 
demonstrate the presence of (unexpected) correlational 
connections (i.e., knowing “what”) [1]. As a result, we will 
obtain (and apply) new insights that we did not have before. 
Insights that can not only be lifesaving, but that can also 
open the door towards more personalized medicine [5-7] to 
tailor medical decisions, medications and/or products to the 
individual’s personal profile instead of to what is best for a 
group of patients. For example, the use of genetic biomarkers 
in pharmacogenetics can be used to determine the best 
medical treatment for a patient [5] or the analysis of data 
from thousands of patients that have been treated in the past 
can be used to determine what treatment best fits the 
individual patient that is under treatment now, e.g., in terms 
of expected treatment effects and the risk for severe side-
effects given the patient’s personal characteristics like age, 
gender, genetic features, etc. This shift towards more 
personalized healthcare is reflected in the change of focus 
from a disease-centered approach towards a patient-centered 
approach, empowering patients to take an active role in the 
decisions about their own health [7]. As a result, an 
increasing number of technologies (e.g., Personal Health 
Records) are being launched by (insurance) companies to 
support chronically ill people in the development of self-
management skills. Furthermore, the past decades have 
shown a rapid growth in the amount of (personal) data that is 
digitally collected by individuals via wearable technologies 
for self-monitoring and that may or may not be stored on 
online platforms for remote control [1],[5-8], and shared via 
other online sources like social media. Social media have 
become socially accepted and used by a growing group of 
people [9]. They use it, for example, to share data collected 
by activity, mood, nutrition and sleep trackers on a variety of 
online platforms (such as Facebook, Twitter, blogs or 
forums). This data provides new opportunities for 
personalizing and improving healthcare [10-12]. Also, the 
data and messages shared via these tools provide insight in 
vast amounts of valuable information for scientific purposes. 
Nagar and colleagues [12], for example, used the data from 
Twitter to predict flu trends and De Choudhury, Counts, and 
Horvitz [13] used social media as a measurement tool for the 
identification of depression. The information gleaned from 
social media has the potential to complement traditional 
survey techniques in its ability to provide more fine-grained 
measurement over time while radically expanding population 
sample sizes [13]. The challenge is how to predict mobility 
(behaviors; infections) in a trustworthy and reliable way? 
Furthermore, the combination of clinical data with 
personal data on, for instance, physical activities, eating and 
sleeping patterns, might be used to tailor the treatment and 
coaching purposes to the needs of patients even better and 
are therefore seen as the key towards a future with optimal 
medical help [5]. However, it also confronts us with new 
technological and societal challenges that require more 
sophisticated data collection and management tools and  
data-analysis techniques. Concerns have been raised about 
security, purpose limitation, liability, safety, profiling, and 
data ownership, to mention just a few [1], [5], [6] but 
perhaps the most well-known concern bears upon our 
privacy [5], [6]. For a great deal, these privacy concerns are 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

associated with potential misuse of data by, for instance, 
insurance companies [5], [8]. If these privacy concerns are 
not dealt with appropriately, the public’s trust in 
technological applications might diminish severely [8]. 
In sum, we face new technological and societal 
challenges using Big Data: 
 
Amount of data is growing explosively. We have to 
create DATA wisdom, to enhance the value of data 
for 
personalized 
healthcare 
at 
individual, 
community and society level. This requires a new 
model for enhancing the value of data (in particular 
the social value of data),  
 
Transparency in decision making using large 
amounts of data from various sources and different 
qualities. How to understand automated decision 
rules (algorithms) to support people in making 
adequate choices?   
 
Trust, will become a key issue in data driven 
healthcare. The ultimate question is not privacy 
and security per se but how to create faith and trust 
in data management and data maintenance? 
Privacy issues become particularly relevant when 
the linkage of anonymous datasets leads to re-
identification. Encryption of the data might prevent 
identification of individuals, but transparency is not 
always possible (e.g., when analyzing query logs 
with search terms). In the end it is all about 
creating trust to overcome uncertainty or anxiety 
for a digital world.  
 
Mobility is growing explosively, and health related 
issues 
threaten 
mobility 
(global 
health; 
infections/resistance; food, water, climate change 
etc. How to ensure a healthy life and to promote 
wellbeing?  
 
Our behavior models might not be up to the task to 
provide just-in-time, interactive and persuasive 
feedback, and to develop intuitive and adaptive 
technologies to improve self-care and to transform 
healthcare. 
 
Our business models should enable production of 
open source solutions in healthcare and technology  
To better understand how Big Data impacts our life and 
healthcare this vision paper aims to generate new ideas and 
thoughts, to set a research agenda to address and solve the 
aforementioned problems. There are three sections. Section I 
describes the background of Big Data in literature. Section II 
describes the procedure of the meetings with experts (Focus 
group; individual meetings). Section III presents topics about 
Big Data that are based on the meetings with experts and 
literature, and Section IV describes the implications for 
research using Big Data in healthcare. 
II. 
METHODS: FOCUS GROUP MEETING  
To gain a more in depth picture about the pros and cons 
of using big data in personalized healthcare, a focus group 
was organized with a multidisciplinary panel consisting of 6 
experts in Big Data research and quantified self-monitoring 
from different scientific disciplines: psychology, philosophy, 
computer science, business administration, law, and data 
science. Individual face to face meetings were conducted to 
validate the focus group results. Participants from the 
University of Twente were selected based on their societal 
impact, expertise and experiences with conducting Big Data 
research.  
Many potential issues regarding the use of Big Data have 
already been mentioned in the literature, newspapers, social 
media, or debates and panel discussion websites. However, 
many of these media sources do not specifically address the 
healthcare setting and only focus on a limited set of issues at 
a time (e.g., the privacy and security issues). With the focus 
group meeting, we therefore aimed to gain more insight into 
the scientific and societal issues that play a role in using and 
managing Big Data to support the growing needs for 
personalized (and cost-effective) healthcare.  
We used literature and information from (social)media to 
prepare the focus group discussions. During the discussion 
experts were asked to write down many issues as possible 
that might become relevant using Big Data for healthcare. 
Flap overs were used to express the issues and experts had to 
categorize these issues into concepts that cover the issues. 
These concepts are presented in this vision  paper. The focus 
group was audio taped and transcripts were made by authors 
of this paper, and discussed with experts individually. 
The intent of the focus group was to understand and go 
in-depth into issues that are related to the use of Big Data in 
healthcare and to provide insights into how these issues are 
approached by different scientific disciplines.  
III. 
TOPICS BIG DATA: RESULTS FOCUS GROUP   
A. Empowerment 
What does it mean when you monitor your activities, 
food intake, or stress 24 hours a day using technologies, like 
smart wearables? What drives us to use these 24 hour 
monitoring devices and what do we need to understand the 
data generated by these systems? Do we understand the 
algorithms that are used to capture our behaviors and moods 
in pictures and graphs? Who owns the data and how to 
control the maintenance of that data? How to avoid a filtered 
scope on our lives ignoring others that are out of our affinity 
groups? The concept of empowerment captures topics as  
autonomy, freedom, having control. 
 
Big data evokes a discussion about freedom and 
autonomy. Autonomy concerns our critical view on how to 
use technology, while freedom is more about our way of 
living and thinking. It might, therefore, be more important to 
focus on freedom instead of autonomy: understanding how 
you are being influenced and taking a stance against that 
instead of trying to keep everything away. The focus group 
made a distinction between positive freedom and negative 
freedom; two common concepts within the field of 
philosophy. Positive freedom is the freedom to do something 
yourself (e.g., to decide for yourself that you want to share 
your data), whilst negative freedom is the freedom to keep 
things away, protecting yourself (e.g., when you do not give 
permission to companies to link your data with other 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

sources). Not losing control, being able to use, share and 
understand your data will be one of the topics to discuss 
freedom, self-efficacy using self-monitoring technologies.  
Empowerment forces us to think about having control, 
who has the power through the use of Big Data? There might 
be just a small elite that understands the algorithms and with 
the increasing complexity, this elite will become even 
smaller in the future. This can create a division between 
people who can access and understand the algorithms and 
people who do not. 
Empowering by personalization is one of the aims of the 
participatory society. Big data can be a leverage to realize 
this by creating a personal profile, providing the right 
information, at right moments to enable just in time 
coaching. Though it can be useful to put people in a profile, 
the danger of profiling is that you can never leave the 
assigned group again; once assigned to a group means 
always assigned to that group. Profiling might be suffocating 
to people because it creates uncertainty about what people 
know about you, what data are being collected, and for what 
purposes. Also, it is often unclear how to determine the 
norm to which people are compared when assigning them to 
a group (i.e., standardization, losing freedom). Furthermore, 
being assigned to a profile might lead to discrimination and 
certain prejudices/biases. Questions that arise are: How can 
profiling be used in a sensible/sound way? And who is 
responsible when mistakes are being made based on a 
certain profile? 
B. Trust 
Trust will become a key concept in a data driven society. 
This concept captures more than privacy and security issues. 
Trust refers to topics as how to create faith in data 
management and data maintenance, and how to make sense 
of these data for humans.   
Privacy issues become particularly relevant when the 
linkage of anonymous datasets leads to re-identification. 
Encryption of the data might prevent identification of 
individuals, but transparency is not always possible (e.g., 
when analyzing query logs with search terms). In the end it is 
all about creating trust to overcome uncertainty or anxiety 
for a digital world.  
People often give consent to institutions to use their data 
for certain purposes in return for the (free) use of the product 
or service. However, data can be (re)used for other purposes 
as well or can be sold to other interested parties, even though 
that is not always allowed. This leads to great concerns: e.g., 
healthcare insurance companies who use treatment data for 
other purposes on a more personal level (for instance, for 
determining a personalized health insurance premium based 
on your personal data about your health and lifestyle). It is 
not that people do not want to share data, they already do this 
using Facebook or Google services, but they want to 
understand what happens with the data, in particularly when 
it concerns the health domain.  
Self-monitoring technologies, with no doctors or nurses 
involved in the caring process, are provided more and more 
by institutions. Smart algorithms can be applied to 
personalize data in such a way so you can manage your 
health and wellbeing yourself. However, these algorithms 
decide what information you get to see, based on information 
about you as a user (e.g., search history, Facebook friends, 
location). This will influence trust in the healthcare system, 
using data from your device compared to personal advices 
given by your doctor or nurse. 
C. Data Wisdom 
There is a rapid growth of self-monitoring technologies, 
but little is known about the reliability and validity of these 
systems. The lack of evidence for causality can lead to 
unreliability as well. Furthermore, how can you tell what you 
are actually measuring? How can we validate the correlations 
that we find? Does it really say what we think it says or are it 
just assumptions? How to match qualitative or experience 
data with quantitative data generated by your device?  
Data wisdom is the concept that captures scientific and 
societal topics.   
Scientific refers to how to create data wisdom, in several 
ways. Those who generate data are not the ones that have the 
knowledge to analyze, those who analyze lack domain 
insight (technologies, behaviors). Different kinds of expertise 
will be needed in the future to deal with Big Data. For 
instance, expertise to analyze Big Data, expertise to develop 
and understand the working of algorithms, or expertise in 
data interpretation and visualizations. The use of data to 
personalize healthcare demands for new knowledge to 
support critical and creative thinking to understand data 
driven decisions and to watch the impact on science, health 
and society. We all know the disaster with google flu trends, 
but we have to learn from these failures to set the agenda for 
future research in using several sources of data (geospatial 
data, medical data, technology device data) to develop 
predictive models about health and wellbeing. We have to 
search for new models, methods to deal with huge datasets, 
search for patterns rather than testing hypotheses based on 
small data. Results are not causal-driven but correlational-
driven. This requires a change in thought. The golden rule 
for Randomized Clinical Trials will no longer be the ultimate 
format for health sciences. New methods are needed to get a 
grip on “big”, how many data (critical mass) is needed and 
how rich and mature should data be to make meaningful 
decisions? How to add qualitative experiences and expertise 
to Big data? Numbers do not tell the whole story, and a 
clinical eye is important to interpret data in the context of 
individual health and wellbeing.   
Societal refers to the implications for healthcare, 
addressing topics as ethics, values for a meaningful life.  
How to avoid a division between people who can access and 
understand the data and analytics that rule the decisions 
about treatments and lifestyle advices? Knowledge and skills 
are needed to empower people, and people should participate 
in debates about the values of data for self-regulations on the 
level of individuals, communities and society. Transparency 
and Trust are the key-topics in that debate. Digging into Data 
starts with a scientific and societal debate on the vales of 
data for a smart and healthy society. 
   
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION    
A. Discussion: Food for Thoughts  
What wisdom is needed to keep control, to enable self-
organization in a Data Driven Society?  
We want to share some food for thoughts, based on the 
focus group results and current debates on digging into 
data.  We think radically new concepts, models (ICT and 
behavior based) and products are needed to promote self-
organization, and persuasive coaching to enable intuitive 
and empathic designs to support decisions without 
nudging people into predefined formats for  improving 
health and wellbeing.  
Redefining environment in research. Radically new 
concepts on technology support: community driven, non-
obtrusive, intelligent and intuitive ICT environments.  
Redefining evidence in research, introducing value 
based health concepts and ecological measurements.  
Redefining the collection and analysis of Big Data 
combining social sciences with geo-health informatics and 
engineering to enable accessing, integrating and analysing 
spatiotemporal data, patient data and behavioural data. 
  
B. Conclusion: Future work  
This vision paper is aimed to discuss Big Data topics 
for personalized healthcare. The topics will be further 
investigated in research to 1) develop new methods, 
models to better measure, aggregate, and make sense of 
previously hard-to-obtain or non-existent behavioral, 
psychosocial, and biometric data, taken into account the 
topics from this introduction paper, 2) to develop an 
agenda for Big Data research to transform and improve 
healthcare.  For example topics below will be explored in 
current and future research projects:  
 
 
Health analytics; advanced methods (machine 
learning) and models to analyze Big Data. 
 
Predictive modelling; to set up smart models to 
predict behaviors, to prevent diseases and to 
personalize healthcare. 
 
Visualization of data; how to present data 
meaningful to support decision making? 
 
Integration of (mobile) tech with data-platforms to 
enable automated services, to tailor feedback. 
 
Disruptive models (new actors, role-players in data 
driven systems). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
There are no parties or institutes involved in this 
publication that require acknowledgements. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] V. Mayer-Schonberger and K. Cukier: Big Data: A Revolution That 
Will Transform How We Live, Work and Think. New York, NY: 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt; 2013. 
[2] W.Wang and E. Krishnan: Big Data and Clinicians: A Review on the 
State 
of 
the 
Science. 
JMIR 
Med 
Inform. 
2014;2(1):e1. doi:10.2196/medinform.2913 
[3] D. Laney: 3D Data Management: Controlling Data Volume, Velocity, 
and Variety. Stamford, CT: META Group Inc.; 2001. 
[4] B. Marr: Big Data: Using SMART Big Data, Analytics and Metrics 
To Make Better Decisions and Improve Performance. John Wiley & 
Sons; 2015. 
[5] S. Klous and N. Wielaard: We are big data. The future of the 
information society [Wij zijn big data. De toekomst van de 
informatiesamenleving]. Amsterdam: Business Contact; 2014. 
[6] T.B. Murdoch and A.S Detsky: The inevitable application of big data 
to health care. JAMA. 2013;309(13):1351-2. 
[7] N.V. Chawla and D.A. Davis: Bringing big data to personalized 
healthcare: a patient-centered framework. J Gen Intern Med. 
2013;28(3):S660-5. 
[8] P. Kamakshi: Survey on big data and related privacy issues. 
International Journal of Research in Engineering and Technology. 
2014;3(12):68-70. 
[9] A.M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein: Users of the world, unite! The 
challenges and opportunities of Social Media. Business Horizons. 
2010;53(1):59-68. 
[10] R. Batool, W.A. Khan, M. Hussain, J. Maqbool, M. Afzal and S. Lee, 
editors: Towards personalized health profiling in social network. 
Information Science and Service Science and Data Mining (ISSDM), 
2012 6th International Conference on New Trends in; 2012: IEEE, 
760-765. 
[11] F. Greaves, D. Ramirez-Cano, C. Millett, A. Darzi and L. Donaldson:  
Harnessing the cloud of patient experience: using social media to 
detect poor quality healthcare. BMJ quality & safety. 2013;22(3):251-
5. 
[12] R. Nagar, Q. Yuan, C.C. Freifeld, M. Santillana, A. Nojima, R. 
Chunara and J.S. Brownstein: A Case Study of the New York City 
2012-2013 Influenza Season With Daily Geocoded Twitter Data 
From Temporal and Spatiotemporal Persppectives. J Med Internet 
Res 2014;16 (10):e236,. doi:10.2196/jmir.3416 
[13] M. De Choudury, S. Counts, E. Horvitz, editors: Social media as a 
measurement tool of depression in populations. Proceedings of the 
5th 
Annual 
ACM 
Web 
Science 
Conference; 
2013:47-56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

