 
 
Effects of a Blended Learning System  
on Improving the Physical Assessment Ability of Nursing Students 
Machiko Saeki Yagi  
School of Nursing  
Jichi Medical University 
Shimotsuke, Japan 
email: mati-s@umin.ac.jp 
 
 
Natsuko Miura  
School of Nursing 
Iwate Prefectural University  
Takizawa, Japan 
email: natsuko@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
 
 
 Shigeki Tsuzuku 
Graduate School of Instructional 
Systems 
Kumamoto University 
Kumamoto, Japan 
email: tsuzuku@kumamoto-u.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—This study assessed the effects of a blended learning 
system—combining e-learning with simulation training—on 
improving the physical assessment ability of nursing students 
in Japan. Specifically, we evaluated how e-learning improved 
physical assessment knowledge and its application in 
simulation training. We also reviewed their evaluations of the 
blended learning system, comprising e-learning and simulation 
training, after they experienced the system and the influence of 
blended learning on their desire to learn. We used an 
interventional study design with a questionnaire survey. The 
results indicated that e-learning improved participants’ ability 
of checking vital signs and information gathering skills. 
However, e-learning as regards conducting auscultation, and 
palpation showed no significant learning effects and simulation 
training helped to do auscultation and palpation. Additionally, 
e-learning helped participants recognize the relevance of 
learning content to their professional practice. In conclusion,   
using e-learning to study some physical assessment skills was 
effective and it’s necessary to combine e-learning and 
simulation to improve physical assessment ability as blended 
learning. 
Keywords-e-learning; nursing students; physical assessment; 
nurse education. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Nurses are increasingly expected to obtain skills related to 
grasping their patients’ situations, particularly the ability to 
provide advanced and accurate physical assessments [1]. 
Thus, nurses must begin physical assessment training that is 
suitably adapted to clinical practice (e.g., simulation 
education) as early as possible, ideally in their basic nursing 
education. As physical assessment relies on nurses 
appropriately integrating knowledge and technique, such as 
conducting an accurate physical examination and judging a 
situation based on available information, learning to perform 
it is challenging [2]. Optimal methods for teaching 
integrative content to large groups of people thereby need to 
be examined to improve physical assessment education. 
One potentially effective method of ensuring optimal 
learning for each individual in group learning situations is e-
learning. In the context of continuing education for 
physicians, e-learning has been demonstrated to be as 
effective as conventional teacher-led education [3]. In other 
words, e-learning appears to be an effective method of 
instruction, as it does not limit the learning environment or 
time for learning, at least for knowledge-level content. In 
recent years, the breadth of the utilization of e-learning in 
medical education has been expanding, marking a shift from 
mere passive knowledge transmission to active, self-
motivated learning [4]. Indeed, self-motivated learning using 
e-learning tools has become a critical feature of nursing 
education. Hence, learning that effectively utilizes ICT needs 
to be implemented from early on in nurses’ education. 
Current students receiving basic nursing education are 
known as “digital natives”; they are from a generation for 
whom the Internet has existed since birth [5], indicating that 
their information literacy is higher than that of past 
generations. Thus, they have a high likelihood of readily 
taking to e-learning methods in their education.  
Although e-learning affords numerous benefits to 
learners, it also presents a number of challenges. First, e-
learning relies on learners’ ability to self-manage their 
learning process, and second, e-learning methods must 
possess features that help maintain the desire to learn [6]. For 
example, massive open online courses (MOOCs) [7] can 
theoretically provide instruction to an extremely large 
number of participants, but they do not allow learners to self-
manage their learning, and students tend to drop out of these 
programs owing to diminished motivation to learn. One 
strategy that has been proposed to resolve these problems in 
MOOCs is “blended learning,” which combines face-to-face 
and e-learning methods. We thus hypothesize that such 
blended learning training may help overcome the challenges 
of e-learning. This study aimed to investigate the effects and 
influence on motivation of a blended learning system to 
improve physical assessment ability. The remainder of this 
paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the 
methods. Section III provides an overview of our results. 
Section IV discusses implications and limitations. Finally, 
conclusions and future work are detailed in Section V. 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Participants and Data Collection Methods 
Of the 82 junior nursing students who had already 
completed physical assessment training at A university, we 
recruited the 34 students who consented to participate (33 
females and 1 male aged 20 to 22 years). A preliminary 
testing of the participants’ computer literacy revealed that 
they were able to connect to the Internet and could 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
effectively use mobile devices (e.g., laptop, smartphones), 
but 
had 
not 
had 
previous 
e-learning 
experience. 
Additionally, they either did not have any experience with 
simulation training or had undergone it once or twice. Data 
collection was conducted through objective assessment (i.e., 
correct answer rate on an e-learning test, and a checklist 
evaluating simulation results) and subjective evaluation of 
the e-learning experience (questionnaire). The investigation 
period was from September to October 2012. 
 
B. Design of the Physical Assessment Training Using E-
learning and Simulation  
1) Learning Objective 
The learning objective of the physical assessment training 
was “able to visit the patient’s bedside and comprehend 
their condition.” Accordingly, we created a checklist of the 
skills that participants should be able to perform at the end 
of the training, including visual inspection, performing a 
medical interview, measurement of vital signs, and 
performing auscultation and palpation. We created a 
simulation scenario wherein they carried out a physical 
assessment of a breast cancer patient during chemotherapy. 
This blended learning was designed to create suitable 
educational materials to help nursing students learn real-
world clinical situations, by using stories to help them better 
anticipate the realities of clinical practice. The characteristic 
points of the materials were the use of Japan’s national 
nursing examination, modified using scenarios and actual 
clinical cases, and story-type e-learning that included 
learning opportunities for assessments, clinical thinking, 
patient safety, and communication. 
 
2) E-learning Design 
     An open-source learning management system, Moodle 
[8], was used to design the e-learning system. Specifically, 
the e-learning system presented patients on a screen, on 
which participants were supposed to perform a physical 
assessment using the displayed data (Fig 1). The system also 
included a test on content related to physical assessment. 
The test was conducted before the simulation training to 
confirm if the participants possessed the knowledge 
necessary to take part in the simulation. As in previous 
research [9], the structure of the e-learning system involved 
solving test problems within the same account as the 
simulation, thus serving as an introduction to the simulation. 
The e-learning covered the period of the student’s entry to 
the hospital room, conduct of the physical assessment, and 
exit from the room. It was configured such that participants 
answered 14 multiple choice questions and 2 short-answer 
questions, for a total of 16 questions.  
 
3) Simulation Design 
     The simulation was conducted in a simulated hospital 
room (Fig 2). An advanced simulator that enables the 
measurement of patients’ blood pressure, pulse, and 
respiratory rate was used. During the simulation, learning 
achievement was evaluated using the simulation checklist 
mentioned previously. In the medical interview, the 
patient’s vocal responses were produced by an instructor 
with a microphone.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Flow of e-learning 
C. Questionnaire Creation 
The questionnaire assessed participants’ opinions of the 
e-learning system (including amount of learning material, 
difficulty of questions, visibility, and ease of operation) and 
its effect on their desire to learn using a five-point Likert 
scale (extremely dissatisfied, slightly unsatisfied, neither 
satisfied nor dissatisfied, slightly satisfied, and extremely 
satisfied) and a free-comment section.   
Desire to learn and the influencing factors for the 
successful implementation of learning were assessed using 
the four-subscale Instructional Materials Motivation Survey 
(IMMS), which was created based on the ARCS model [10]. 
This model contains four components: attention, relevance, 
confidence, and satisfaction. The IMMS, comprising 36 
items, was designed to measure individuals’ reactions to 
self-driven teaching materials, such as e-learning. A five-
point Likert scale was used to rate each item, with higher 
scores indicating a more positive opinion. The IMMS 
includes items expressed negatively, which are reverse 
scored. In other words, before adding these answers to the 
total score, items given a rating of 5 were converted to have 
a rating of 1, with 4 being converted to 2, 3 remaining the 
same, 2 to 4, and 1 to 5. 
After completing the entire training sequence, participants 
who gave their consent were interviewed to explore their 
thoughts on the e-learning and simulation, and to determine 
the influence of the simulation training on learning 
effectiveness and desire to learn. 
 
D. Statistical evaluation 
For the e-learning, test scores, times, and times of 
simulation are expressed as means ± standard deviations. For 
the questionnaire, scores are expressed as means and median 
values (quartile range). The free-response descriptions were 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
listed as written by participants. All statistical analyses were 
performed using IBM SPSS Statistics 22 (IBM Corp., 
Armonk, NY). A significance level of 5% was used in the 
analysis.  
 
E. Ethical Considerations 
This study was conducted with the approval of the 
medical ethics committees of Nagoya University, Japan; the 
survey was approved in June 2013 (No. 2013-0049).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Simulated hospital room: The instructor watches  participants’ 
performance via video to ensure a safe learning environment. 
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Research Participation 
Of the participants, 34 finished the e-learning and 
simulation, whereas 25 completed the questionnaire. 
Interview data were obtained from four participants; most of 
the participants had to attend clinical training. 
B. E-learning 
The correct answer rate on the test was 91.1% ± 8.5%: 
that for the measuring site of temperature and pulse, and the 
side effect of chemotherapy were for each 73.8%, 68.5%, 
73.8%, less than 75%. Regarding the time taken to complete 
the test, the participants had a mean time of 21 min 49 s ± 9 
min 15.  
C. Simulation 
According to the checklist analysis results, all 25 
participants were able to greet the patient upon entering 
room; measure the patient’s pulse, blood pressure, 
respiratory rate, and temperature, and then interpret the 
measured values; and exit the room after a polite goodbye. 
Confirmation of food intake, sleeping condition, excretion 
condition, and side effect of chemotherapy was carried out 
by 28, 21, 25, and 30 individuals, respectively; only two 
participants used information obtained from touching, such 
as auscultation and palpation. The mean completion time of 
the simulation was 10 min 32 s ± 2 min 12. After the 
feedback about simulation from the instructor, all 
participants understand the needs of auscultation and 
palpation and tried to examine by auscultation and palpation 
once again.  
D. Questionnaire and Interview Results 
1) Evaluation of E-learning and Simulation 
The results of the questionnaire assessing the e-learning 
characteristics are shown in Table 1. The participants chose 
item 3 in the scale as their response for all of the 
questionnaire items. From the free-response answers, one 
participant reported that the number of questions and 
difficulty of the e-learning was “exactly the right number 
and difficulty.” Another reported that it was “a little too 
much to do in my spare time.” Regarding visibility and 
operability, which had the most free-response answers, 
participants listed various concrete problems, such as 
“difficult to see,” “difficult to use on a cellphone,” “froze 
mid-answer,” and “difficult to enter sentences on a smart 
phone.” 
 According to the interviews, participants reported the 
following on the simulation: “It was interesting, so I would 
like to use this method in classes as well”; “Because it was 
done in the e-learning, I could imagine it”; and “Because I 
knew what was going to be implemented beforehand [owing 
to the e-learning], I was able to do it.” One participant 
reported, “Although I understood the content, I became 
nervous and forgot it [during the simulation].” Additionally, 
participants reported contrasting views, such as “I was able 
to reconfirm my knowledge with the test” and “It was 
unnecessary because I was able to understand from the 
feedback during the simulation.” 
TABLE I.  THE RESULTS OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE ASSESSING  
     THE E-LEARNING CHARACTERISTICS 
Contents 
 Mean, Median; Quartile range 
Number of questions 
2.9, 3; 3-3 
Time taken 
2.9, 3; 3-3 
Difficulty 
2.8, 3; 3-3 
Readability 
3.3, 3; 3-4 
Character size 
3.4, 3; 3-4 
Screen design 
3.7, 3; 3-3 
Operability 
3.0, 3; 3-3 
 
2)  Influence on Desire to Learn 
Table 2 shows an IMMS item. Items 1 “When I first 
looked at this lesson, I had the impression that it would be 
easy for me” and 9 “There were stories, pictures, or 
examples that showed me how this material could be 
important to some people” (included in the Confidence and 
Relevance subscale), had a low median (3 points). 
According to the free-response answers, a number of 
participants expressed wanting more developmental content 
included in the e-learning. The participants’ comments  
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
TABLE II.  THE RESULTS OF INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS MOTIVATION 
SURVEY 
Items 
Contents 
ARCS 
re
ve
rse 
Mean, 
Median; 
Quartile 
2 
There was something 
interesting at the beginning 
of this lesson that got my 
attention. 
A 
 
3.5, 4; 4-4 
8 
These materials are eye-
catching. 
A 
 
3.7, 3; 3-5 
11 
The quality of the writing 
helped to hold my 
attention. 
A 
 
3.5, 3; 3-4 
12 
This lesson is so abstract 
that it was hard to keep my 
attention on it. 
A 
○ 
4.2, 4; 4-5 
15 
The pages of this lesson 
look dry and unappealing. 
A 
○ 
4.5, 5; 5-5 
17 
The way the information is 
arranged on the pages 
helped keep my attention. 
A 
 
3.7, 3; 3-4 
20 
This lesson has things that 
stimulated my curiosity. 
A 
 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
22 
The amount of repetition in 
this lesson caused me to 
get bored sometimes. 
A 
○ 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
24 
I learned some things that 
were surprising or 
unexpected. 
A 
 
3.6, 4; 4-4 
28 
The variety of reading 
passages, exercises, 
illustrations, etc., helped 
keep my attention on the 
lesson. 
A 
 
3.6, 4; 4-4 
29 
The style of writing is 
boring. 
A 
○ 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
31 
There are so many words 
on each page that it is 
irritating. 
A 
○ 
4.4, 5; 5-5 
6 
It is clear to me how the 
content of this material is 
related to things I already 
know. 
R 
 
3.9, 4; 4-4 
9 
There were stories, 
pictures, or examples that 
showed me how this 
material could be 
important to some people. 
R 
 
2.9, 3; 3-3 
10 
Completing this lesson 
successfully was important 
to me. 
R 
 
4.3, 4; 4-5 
16 
The content of this material 
is relevant to my interests. 
R 
 
4.0, 4; 4-4 
18 
There are explanations or 
examples of how people 
use the knowledge in this 
lesson. 
R 
 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
23 
The content and style of 
writing in this lesson 
convey the impression that 
its content is worth 
knowing. 
R 
 
3.6, 4; 4-4 
26 
This lesson was not 
relevant to my needs 
R 
○ 
4.2, 4; 4-5 
Items 
Contents 
ARCS 
re
ve
rse 
Mean, 
Median; 
Quartile 
because I already knew 
most of it. 
30 
I could relate the content of 
this lesson to things I have 
seen, done, or thought 
about in my own life. 
R 
 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
33 
The content of this lesson 
will be useful to me. 
R 
 
4.6, 5; 5-5 
1 
When I first looked at this 
lesson, I had the 
impression that it would be 
easy for me. 
C 
 
 
2.8, 3; 3-3 
3 
This material was more 
difficult to understand than 
I would like for it to be. 
C 
 
○ 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
4 
After reading the 
introductory information, I 
felt confident that I knew 
what I was supposed to 
learn from this lesson. 
C 
 
3.4, 3; 3-4 
7 
Many of the pages had so 
much information that it 
was hard to pick out and 
remember the important 
points. 
C 
○ 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
13 
As I worked on this lesson, 
I was confident that I could 
learn the content. 
C 
 
3.3, 3; 3-4 
19 
The exercises in this lesson 
were too difficult. 
C 
○ 
3.3, 3; 3-4 
25 
After working on this 
lesson for awhile, I was 
confident that I would be 
able to pass a test on it. 
C 
 
3.3, 3; 3-4 
34 
I could not really 
understand quite a bit of 
the material in this lesson. 
C 
○ 
4.6, 5; 5-5 
35 
The good organization of 
the content helped me be 
confident that I would 
learn this material. 
C 
 
4.0, 4; 4-4 
5 
Completing the exercises 
in this lesson gave me a 
satisfying feeling of 
accomplish¬ment. 
S 
 
 
4.0, 4; 4-4 
14 
I enjoyed this lesson so 
much that I would like to 
know more about this 
topic. 
S 
 
3.8, 4; 4-4 
21 
I really enjoyed studying 
this lesson. 
S 
 
3.9, 4; 4-4 
27 
The wording of feedback 
after the exercises, or of 
other comments in this 
lesson, helped me feel 
rewarded for my effort. 
S 
 
3.9, 4; 4-4 
32 
It felt good to successfully 
complete this lesson. 
S 
○ 
4.0, 4; 4-4 
36 
It was a pleasure to work 
on such a well-designed 
lesson. 
S 
 
4.1, 4; 4-5 
 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
suggested a desire to use the e-learning system in the future, 
such as “In practice, I felt like I would be able to use it”; “I 
want to do normal exercises as well as e-learning and 
simulation”; and “As long as you know how it works, I 
think you could practice simulation similar to this with a 
classmate.” 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Effects of Blended Learning  
Although simulation is an effective learning method and 
typically provides a greater sense of understanding, it often 
causes students to experience significant mental strain, thus 
making them require learning support. We developed a pre-
simulation e-learning system to provide such support. The 
results showed that, after using the e-learning system, all of 
the participants performed the greeting, vitals measurement, 
and complete physical assessment based on the gathered 
measurements, even if it was their first experience with the 
simulation. This success can be attributed to participants’ 
completion of the skill building and mock training exercises 
via e-learning system before the simulation. In other words, 
the e-learning program enabled them to imagine the content 
of the simulation and thus integrate relevant knowledge and 
skills into their simulation experience. 
However, participants did not completely learn to 
perform 
auscultation 
and 
palpation, 
according 
to 
information obtained from medical interviews [11]. 
Therefore, the e-learning items related to this content may 
need to be modified. Specifically, the e-learning system can 
be modified such that, when repeatedly used, items that 
have been completely learned are excluded, thereby 
enabling users to focus on items that were not completely 
learned. Such a modification would allow for the delivery of 
deliberate and effective training aligned with the learning 
objectives of nurse education, referred to as deliberate 
practice [12][13]. 
 Learning self-management has been identified as a key 
factor for continued education via e-learning [6]. To succeed 
in remote self-learning, participants may need to receive 
adequate explanation on the necessity of post-training tests 
in acquiring knowledge related to medical interviews, 
auscultation, and palpation, which were areas that remained 
challenging after the simulation training. 
 
B. Effects of E-learning and Training on Motivation to 
Learn 
The ARCS model is a method of organizing the factors 
that influence motivation to learn [14], described by Suzuki 
as follows: “A) First, attention is captured. ‘This looks 
interesting—there’s something to this.’ R) Next, one 
realizes the relationship to themselves; knowing the learning 
task and realizing that ‘it looks rewarding and it is related to 
my values.’ Not only is the future value of the task 
significant, but also enjoying the learning process is valued. 
However, even if one finds significance in their learning, 
one can lose motivation when one recognizes that there is 
low possibility to accomplish the learning goal. C) On the 
contrary, if one has successful experiences in the first 
learning stages and can associate the experience with the 
endeavor, leading to the perception that ‘I can manage it,’ 
confidence is facilitated. S) If one can feel fulfillment after 
looking 
back 
on 
the 
learning 
process 
and 
its 
accomplishment, it then leads to motivation to learn.” In the 
present study, the participants recognized e-learning as 
“having an important relationship to themselves,” and they 
utilized this recognition as motivation to learn. To improve 
learners’ confidence, we propose the following strategies: 1) 
Share evaluation criteria and allow learners to tackle tasks 
with a prediction of their possibility for success in mind; 2) 
adjust the difficulty of the system so that they can have a 
meaningful and successful experience; and 3) provide 
opportunities and feedback that regulate learning, thus 
encouraging them to be aware that they can achieve their 
goal by themselves [15]. A number of participants 
commented that the training could feasibly be implemented 
as peer training and skill review. Repetitive practice through 
sharing stories with peers and skill review has been shown 
to help learners acquire self-confidence [16]. Further 
consideration of task difficulty 
will also facilitate 
continuous learning in this context. 
 
C. Determinants of Successful E-learning 
As described above, e-learning relies on independent 
learning, which means that it has an inherent risk of dropout. 
We thus set learning objectives to help foster learning 
motivation and created teaching materials relevant to real-
world clinical settings. In this study, the item “The content 
of this lesson will be useful to me” was rated 4.6, 5; 5-5 
point, 
indicating 
that 
blended 
learning 
sustained 
participants’ motivation. Additionally, the item “I could not 
really understand quite a bit of the material in this lesson” 
was reverse scored, also totaling 4.6, 5; 5-5 point. The 
difficulty of blended learning and acquisition of confidence 
through simulation may be factors that influenced their 
motivation. In this respect, the structure of the blended 
learning needs to be improved such that it can help 
participants gain confidence in their ability to perform the 
learning exercises and promote their self-learning through 
repetitive practice and detailed explanations for items 
identified as their weakness. 
Operability is another factor that may have influenced 
participation. We expected this tendency in designing the 
system, and had tested the teaching material on smartphones 
prior to the survey. However, our interview results showed 
that when smartphones were used, the participants reported 
longer working time and poorer operability. This finding 
coincides 
with 
previous 
reports 
that 
the 
physical 
environment for online learning, such as Internet and 
terminal devices, influences compliance with e-learning [17]. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
For example, poor video teaching materials can reduce the 
motivation to learn [18]. Future research is needed to 
investigate additional factors related to operability, the 
differential effects of computers and smartphones, and the 
effects of the tendency to use smartphones for mobile 
learning, which is common among nursing students. 
Recently, an interactive digital simulator for problem 
solving and clinical reasoning, both of which require 
physical assessment skills, was developed in Europe [19]. 
The digital simulator was developed for medical students 
and clinicians and uses virtual patients. Problem solving and 
clinical reasoning are needed in clinical nursing practice 
[20]. Future studies are needed to develop learning materials 
for nurses to acquire these required competencies 
immediately.  
 
V. CONCLUSION 
The results of the present study demonstrate that the e-
learning system we developed was partially effective for 
improving physical assessment ability like checking vital 
signs and information gathering skills. However, our results 
show that e-learning is insufficient for augmenting the 
ability of auscultation and palpation, suggesting that 
teaching materials related to these skills must be improved 
using simulation training. Additionally, e-learning helped 
participants recognize the relevance of learning content to 
their professional practice. In conclusion, it’s necessary to 
combine e-learning and simulation to improve physical 
assessment ability as blended learning. 
The advancement of remote education provides students 
with the opportunity to learn anywhere as opposed to 
strictly in classrooms. E-learning systems allow individuals 
attempting to learn medical practice to learn effectively and 
efficiently in their own environment. Thus, we aim to 
continue improving the current e-learning system, by 
making it more operable, to ensure that it sustains 
motivation to learn, as such, encourages continuous learning.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Part of this research was supported by Grant-in-Aid for 
Young Scientists (B), 25862108, from Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science (JSPS), JAPAN.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. K. Hayden, R. A. Smiley, M. Alexander, S. Kardong-
Edgren, and P. R. Jeffries, “The NCSBN National Simulation 
Study: A longitudinal, randomized, controlled study replacing 
clinical hours with simulation in prelicensure nursing 
education,” J Nurs Regul, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. S1–S64, 2014. 
[2] L. Bickley and P. G. Szilagyi, Bates’ guide to physical 
examination and history-taking. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2012.  
[3] M. Fordis, J. E. King, C. M. Ballantyne, P. H. Jones, K. H. 
Schneider, S. J. Spann, et al., “Comparison of the 
instructional efficacy of Internet-based CME with live 
interactive CME workshops: a randomized controlled trial,” 
JAMA, vol. 294, no. 9, pp. 1043–1051, 2005.  
[4] J. G. Ruiz, M. J. Mintzer, and R. M. Leipzig, “The impact of 
e-learning in medical education,” Acad Med, vol. 81, no. 3, 
pp. 207–212, 2006. 
[5] C. Jones, R. Ramanau, S. Cross, and G. Healing, “Net 
generation or Digital Natives: Is there a distinct new 
generation entering university?,” Comput Educ, vol. 54, no 3, 
pp. 722–732, 2010. 
[6] J. Keller and K. Suzuki, “Learner motivation and e-learning 
design: A multinationally validated process,” J Educ 
Media, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 229–239, 2004. 
[7] J. Daniel, “Making sense of MOOCs: Musings in a maze of 
myth, paradox and possibility,” J Interac Media Educ, vol. 
2012, no. 3, 2012. 
[8] M. Dougiamas and P. Taylor, “Moodle: Using learning 
communities to create an open source course management 
system,” World Conference on Educational Media and 
Technology, vol. 1, pp. 171–178, 2003. 
[9] M. S. Yagi, K. Ikegami, Y. Shibata, S. Shiba, and M. Miyoshi, 
“The design of the story-based learning materials to imagine 
realistic clinical practice using goal-based scenario theory,” 
Japan Journal of Health Professional Development, vol. 3, no. 
2, pp. 69–76, 2015.  
[10] J. M. Keller, Motivational design for learning and  
performance: The  ARCS model approach. New York City: 
Springer Science & Business Media,  2009. 
[11] J. H. Barsuk, W. C.McGaghie, E. R.Cohen, K. J.O’Leary, and 
D. B. Wayne, “Simulation-based mastery learning reduces 
complications during central venous catheter insertion in a 
medical intensive care unit,” Crit Care Med, vol. 37, no. 10, 
pp. 2697–2701, 2009. 
[12] K. A. Ericsson, K. Nandagopal, and R. W. Roring, “Toward a 
science of exceptional achievement,” Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, vol. 1172, no. 1, pp. 199–217, 2009. 
[13] M. H. Oermann, S. Kardong-Edgren, T. Odom-Maryon, B. F 
Hallmark, D. Hurd, N. Rogers, et al., “Deliberate practice of 
motor skills in nursing education: CPR as exemplar,” Nurs 
Educ Perspec, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 311–315, 2011. 
[14] J. M. Keller, Motivational design for learning and 
performance: The ARCS model approach. New York City: 
Springer Science & Business Media,  2009.  
[15] K. Suzuki, “On the Framework of Designing and Developing 
‘appealing instruction’: The ARCS Motivation Model,” The 
Japan Association for Educational Media Study, vol. 1, no. 1, 
pp. 50–61, 1995. 
[16] K. M. Lundberg, “Promoting self-confidence in clinical 
nursing students.” Nurse Educ, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 86–89, 2008. 
[17] C. Power, H. Petrie, V. Sakharov, and D. Swallow, “Virtual 
learning environments: another barrier to blended and e-
learning,” in International Conference on Computers for 
Handicapped Persons, Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 
519–526, 2010. 
[18] M. S. Yagi, N. Kumagai, C. Funakoshi, and M. Masuda, 
“Development of e-learning material for sophomore nursing 
students to simulate clinical practice,” The Association for 
Medical Education in Europe, 270, #4JJ16 (126905), 2016. 
[19] Body Interact. http://bodyinteract.com/ [retrieved: Feburary, 
2017] 
[20] P. E. Benner, P. L. Hooper-Kyriakidis, and D. Stannard,  
Clinical wisdom and interventions in acute and critical care: 
A thinking-in-action approach. New York City: Springer 
Publishing Company, pp. 10–11, 2011. 
 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

