Tele-Rehabilitation Platform for Upper and Lower Limb in Elderly Patients,
the HEAD Project.
Franco Molteni∗, Cristina Gramigna∗, Samuela Canobbio∗, Milena Peverelli∗, Silvia Aggujaro∗,
Mauro Rossini∗, Giovanna Palumbo∗, Giandomenico Caruso†, Mario Covarrubias†, and HEAD consortium
∗Valduce Hospital, Villa Beretta, Rehabilitation Centre, Costa Masnaga, Lecco, Italy.
†Politecnico di Milano, Department of Mechanical Engineering. Via G. la Masa 1, 20156, Milano, Italy
Email: mario.covarrubias@polimi.it
Abstract—Tele-rehabilitation systems have been increasingly stud-
ied, becoming an important complement to traditional therapy
as they can provide high-intensity, repetitive and interactive
treatments of the injured extremities. Several systems have been
developed in research projects and some of these have become
products mainly for being used at hospitals and care centers.
After the initial rehabilitation performed at rehabilitation centers,
patients are obliged to go to the centers, with many consequences,
as costs, loss of time, discomfort and demotivation. However, it has
been demonstrated that patients recovering at home heal faster
because surrounded by the love of their relatives and with the
community support. So, there is a strong need for rehabilitation
systems to use at home. There are already some devices available
on the market for home care: their main weakness is the limited
strategy for motor learning. The ambition of the Human Em-
powerment Aging and Disability (HEAD) project is to combine
assistance with appropriate feedback to close the loop in motor
learning strategy for the home. HEAD platform challenging
objective is to develop a novel tele-rehabilitation system and
related provision services for a holistic rehabilitation aiming at
restoring limb motor functional abilities, and at launching both
system and services at home. The tele-rehabilitation system is
based on the use of low cost sensors, connected with a gaming
module for cognitive-motor rehabilitation, and integrated with an
infrastructure connecting the patient at home with therapists at
hospitals who monitor the rehabilitation exercises.
Keywords–Tele-rehabilitation; Gaming; LeapMotion; Kinect.
I.
INTRODUCTION
According to the World Health Organization (WHO),
within the context of the action plan 2014-2021 entitled ’Better
health for persons with disabilities’, currently there are 150
million adults, i.e., 1 out 7, worldwide who are experiencing
signiﬁcant difﬁculties functioning. Not only, it is foreseen that
the disability prevalence will increase more and more. As
stated by the EC communication on Disability Action Plan
(2006 2007), ageing is strictly interconnected with disability
prevalence. 30% of people aged between 55-64 suffer of some
form of disability, and 63% of the people with special needs
are older than 45. According to the European Disability Forum
(EDF), there are 80 million Europeans with disabilities. This is
over 15% of the whole population. According to the European
DG Health and Consumers, ageing is one of the greatest social
and economic challenges of the 21st century for European
societies. It will affect all EU countries and most policy areas.
Let us consider that according to The World Bank Database,
today the European population aged 65 or over is 18%, (90
M people), and it is expected that by 2025, more than 20% of
Europeans will be 65 or over, with a rapid increase in numbers
of over-80s. Unfortunately, ageing is also related to an increase
of diseases and disabilities. Strictly related to the ageing of the
population, stroke is the most common cause of adult disability
in Europe. Currently, the European incidence is equal to 2
every 1000 persons (that is, around 1M people), but also in
this case, it is foreseen that this number will double in the
next 50 years. Due to the improvement on the medical stroke
treatment, the 75% of people who have been affected by a
stroke can survive, however about the 50% of those survivors
suffer from serious disabilities, thus being not able anymore
to live independently at home. It is, therefore, possible to
state that with a population that more and more gets old, thus
encountering more disabilities, there is the need to ﬁnd new
solutions for improving the quality of life of these people,
by helping them in recovering their motor and cognitive
skills. Today, approximately half of stroke survivors access
some form of rehabilitation on discharge from acute services.
Moreover, it has to be taken into account that the rate of people
with disabilities or long-term health problems all over the
EU Member States is estimated at 15.7% of the working-age
population (around 49 Millions of the EU’s overall working-
age population). Thus, disability is one of the main challenges
to be faced at different levels (EU Communication European
Disability Strategy 2010-2020: A Renewed Commitment to a
Barrier-Free Europe).
In order to improve the quality of life of the people with
special needs, the WHO has drafted some recommendations: -
make health care affordable; - invest in speciﬁc services such
as rehabilitation. Speciﬁcally, the ambition of HEAD Platform
is to strengthen and extend rehabilitation services, includ-
ing community-based rehabilitation, and assistive technology.
Because patients with disabilities have different healthcare
requirements, the HEAD platform will be adapted to patients
needs so as to provide adequate care and remain ﬁnancially
sustainable. There are also reasons related to the social rights,
which urgently require EU to address rehabilitation issues. A
study by the European Foundation for the Improvement of
Living and Working Conditions has highlighted that there are
ten risk factors for social exclusion. Among them we have: the
disability, long-term unemployment, low quality employment
or absence of employment record, health. Moreover, people
with disabilities have often to stay in hospitals or residential
houses, in order to be able to perform the rehabilitation. In
Europe, hundreds of thousands of people with disabilities,
mental health problems, older people live in large institutions.
There they are alone, not connected with the society. And
also, according to the European Disability Forum, more than
200.000 disabled persons in Europe are forced to live in
closed institutions deprived of the most fundamental social
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

rights. The Europe 2020 strategy has set ambitious targets
for inclusive growth requiring action to be taken to promote
integration and adequate livelihood of people with special
needs. The HEAD results will be fundamental to contribute to
the enhancement of the possibilities of people with disability
to do the rehabilitation at home, surrounded by the love of
their relatives, and also with the support of the community
where they live.
A. Main ideas, models and assumptions involved
On the basis of the considerations discussed in the intro-
duction, it follows that the society needs new rehabilitation
systems dedicated to upper and lower limbs with additional
capabilities, features and related services that have a more
holistic approach to rehabilitation:
•
offering a more effective and customized therapy for
the rehabilitation of upper and lower limbs, which
address cognitive and motor deﬁciencies, allowing
for an easy customization and deﬁnition of exercises
tailored on speciﬁc patients and speciﬁc rehabilita-
tion targets, enhancing human-computer interaction
through gaming, and engaging the patients in a more
motivated and long-term rehabilitation program by
focusing on complex, global and rewarding exercises;
•
offering the possibility of performing rehabilitation
programs in autonomy, without the need of the contin-
uous presence of therapists, but under their continuous
monitoring, and which can be performed quietly at
home;
•
allowing therapists to use a complete and rich set
of data recorded from the exercises executed by the
patients to improve knowledge on rehabilitation and
therapies.
B. The innovation potential of HEAD Platform
The innovation potential of the HEAD Platform is:
•
at technological level: novelty of the integration of
low cost tracking devices (kinect, LeapMotion, etc.),
combined with games, in the rehabilitation sector;
•
at rehabilitation therapy level: more effective therapy
that is customised to patients, motivating, rewarding,
monitored, plus a novel knowledge based system for
therapists and physicians;
•
at socio-economic level: better quality of life for
impaired patients and their family, thanks to a better
rehabilitation service, and decrease of social costs of
the rehabilitation practices; better exploitation of ther-
apists skills and time, which also means an increased
number of patients they are able to assist.
The HEAD Platform system features have an innovation
potential on the kind of rehabilitation therapy that it will be
possible to perform. Patients will be able to make the rehabil-
itation at home, on a regular basis, enjoying themselves and
with more motivation and consciousness of the improvements,
and being remotely monitored by the therapists. This will
have an important effect on the patients. It is foreseen that
patients will be able to reacquire the lost motor skills in shorter
time because they can practice more often, for longer time,
executing dedicated and customised exercises. Besides, it is
expected a lower abandonment of the therapy, as it will be
more pleasant and motivating. Extremely important is the fact
that the rehabilitation will be performed in a family context.
It has been demonstrated that patients recovering at home
after a period spent in hospital, being with their loved ones
and with their belongings, heal faster. So, being at home is
very important from the psychological point of view, and this
impacts on the quality and time of the recovery. Therefore,
we can say that the innovation potential of HEAD Platform
will bring beneﬁts for patients, and consequently, there will
be also important effects on society and societal costs. First,
family members won’t be obliged any more to absent work to
accompany the patients to care centers. Then, if the skills will
be reacquired more rapidly and completely (or very close to)
the persons can improve their general quality of life, reacquire
their independence and eventually can be re-integrated in the
workplace.
C. Main outcomes
Therefore, HEAD Platform aims at addressing rehabilita-
tion problems and shortcomings as listed in the Introduction:
1)
Patients will be more motivated to do therapy fol-
lowing the prescription of the therapist thanks to the
playful and entertainment character of the system.
The hospitals participating to the project expect that
along the rehabilitation treatment at least 60% of
patients perform therapy in a more exactly and indi-
vidual adapted way than now (with habitual rehabil-
itation treatment), and also that after the neuromotor
stabilization rehabilitation (when patients usually are
discharged from rehabilitation centers), 70% of pa-
tients will continue rehabilitation activities at home,
on a regular basis. This would be a higher percentage
compared to the present ﬁgure of 10%.
2)
The clinic partners make the assumption that patients
will be more motivated to perform the exercises when
using the HEAD platform, so they are expected to
exercising on a regular basis as prescribed by thera-
pists, and also that the system will allow therapists
to customize exercises to be more focused to the
speciﬁc psycho-motor problems of a single patient.
Consequently, it is expected that the recovery of the
skills that one can get is in a shorter time compared
to those obtained through the rehabilitative practice
currently in use. The estimate is that the time is
shortened by 20%.
3)
As a result of the fact that the patient will be more
relaxed during the sessions of rehabilitation, which
can be made using a modality entertainment and
even at home, the patient’s psychological state and
well-being will certainly increase considerably. In
order to assess if the HEAD platform will deﬁnitively
improve the general well-being of the patients, a set
of ’quality life questionnaire’ will be prepared. It
will be administered to the patients at the beginning
of the rehabilitation treatment, at an intermediate
period (according to the length of the rehabilitation
treatment) and at the end. The questionnaire will be
also administered to the caregivers of the patients, so
as to gather a larger perspective on the issue.
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents
an overview of related about gesture interaction systems.
Section 3 presents the HEAD Platform architecture. Section
4 describes one example of the HEAD rehabilitation exercise.
Section 5 describes user study approach and its preliminary
validation. Finally, Section 6 draws some discussion and
conclusions.
II.
GESTURE INTERACTION
We have developed a visualization and interaction system
integrated with the gaming module that visually renders the
virtual environment for rehabilitation and also the user’s vir-
tual hands and body in real-time. This functionality requires
tracking the user’s hands and body in the physical space.
In order to provide a realistic immersiveness, the tracking
and the representation of the user’s hands and body in the
virtual environment should be accurate and timely. In fact,
some studies have shown that if the users are able to see the
virtual rendering of their hands and legs and their movements
relative to the movements of other objects there is a much
better chance that they will feel that the virtual hands embodies
their intentions and actions [1].
In designing the system, we have considered the new gener-
ation of so-called ‘natural user interfaces’ (NUI) technologies
[2], which track the user’s hands, ﬁngers, or entire body in
3D, without wearing any kind of invasive device. Free-hand
gestures can provide effective and natural methods for 3D
interaction with virtual shapes, which can provide ﬂuidity in
the interaction.
Traditional haptic systems [3][4] and desktop interaction
approaches, typically based on devices, such as keyboard and
mouse and touch pad interfaces, are often designed for 2D
interfaces and consequently are less effective and usable for
3D interaction [5]. In addition, many of the techniques that are
used for 3D interaction require the user to wear or hold 3D
tracking devices and also require several markers attached to
the user’s hand or body. The use of markers can make the sys-
tem more difﬁcult to conﬁgure and is inappropriate for some
scenarios. Reasonably precise 3D sensing techniques, which
can recognize freehand movements, are now available at low
cost (e.g., Microsoft Kinect, Asus Xtion, and Leap Motion).
These types of devices do not require on-body attachments or
hands-on tracked devices, thus enabling very low conﬁguration
interaction. In this way, users can interact with the system
naturally through their hands or body movements, without
using complex commands.
However, simply because the interface is based on ’natural’
gestures, this does not reduce the need for careful interface
design [8].
Gestural interaction techniques have been investigated for
a long time and different gesture types have been designed
and evaluated. For example, for the selection of occluded
targets on small touch screens using a ﬁnger [9]. Gestural
selection has been explored in order to select distant targets on
large displays [10]. Early freehand interaction systems needed
ﬁducial markers on the users or data gloves in order to track
the user’s gestures. For example, the authors in [11] used
the movements of ﬁngers to simulate ”mouse-clicking” and
also to investigate freehand gestural interaction with ambient
displays [12] developing design principles and an interaction
framework for interactive public ambient displays. Bimanual
marking menu selection [13] used a kinect system at clese
range to track the ﬁnger’s pose and movement to select from
a marking menu. However, this method requires setting up
the camera under the desktop at a speciﬁc angle, so losing
the convenience of free hand interaction. In [14] is presented
a Kinect One sensor-based protocol for the evaluation of the
motor-performances of the upper limb of neurological patients
during rehabilitative sessions. Freehand gestural input has also
been explored for virtual object manipulation [15] including
on curved surfaces [16] and projected directly on to everyday
objets [17]. In this research, it is illustrated the importance
and immediacy of freehand gestural interaction in daily life
use cases. Participants felt that freehand pointing is intuitive
but needs more precise operation. There is a lot of previous
research on object and option selection in both 2D and 3D
interfaces, however, most previous research used hand-held
tracked devices or ﬁducial markers to enable camera-based
tracking [5].
III.
THE HEAD PLATFORM
The HEAD platform allows us to implement a set of
exercises for upper-limb and lower-limb rehabilitation. The
interaction with virtual objects is performed through hand and
body movements and gestures. The most innovative aspect of
the platform is that the interaction is performed by using the
LeapMotion and the Kinect sensors in a unique platform. The
following section describes the HEAD platform components
in detail.
A. Hardware components and software modules
The system is easily customizable and provides a simple
environment for project deployment to use with multiple plat-
forms, with no need for additional conﬁguration. The HEAD
platform consists of the following hardware components:
•
a computer;
•
Leap Motion controller, used to track the users’ hand
movements and to detect gestures;
•
Kinect controller, used to track the users’ body move-
ments and to detect gestures;
•
FITBIT bracelet which measures the amount of phys-
ical activity.
•
PC speakers or headphones, used to render sounds.
For what concerns the software modules, after comparing
several gaming engines, Unity3D R5 environment [6] has
been selected for the implementation of the visualization and
interaction. The main reason for selecting Unity3D is that it has
a powerful interface that allows visual object placement and
property modiﬁcation during the interaction. In particular, the
required features of Unity3D for the development of the games
application are as follows: 3D rendering of virtual shapes;
Graphical User Interface (GUI); Physics engine (used for
handling collision detection); Collision detection; Integration
with Leap Motion and KINECT (used for user’s gesture
recognition).
B. Head Platform Architecture
The HEAD platform is used by the patients, by the neurol-
ogist in charge of the patient and by other clinical specialists
(e.g., by the neuropsychologists and physiotherapists). Each
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

of the users has proper functions: the patient can see the
daily exercises therapy, the neurologist can assign, modify or
evaluate the therapeutic plans, the medical personnel can check
how the rehabilitation is going. The main characteristic of the
HEAD platform are related to the possibility for the clinicians
to assign rehabilitation plans to be performed at home, and
the holistic approach to rehabilitation, as the plan includes
physical, cognitive and behavioural therapies/exercises. The
interaction of the different users and the logical architecture
of the platform are showed in Figure 1.
Indoor Unit
Tele-
medicine 
platform
Film,  
Game (Level, 
Repetitions), 
Kinect, 
LeapMotion
Patient 
platform
Neurologist, 
Physiotherapist
Neuropsychologist
Exercise 
list
Internet
Feedback
(Results)
Exercise,
Results
Figure 1. Head Platform Architecture.
The Indoor Unity represents the patient’s interaction with
the platform. The patient might be equipped with different
devices that can be provided with the HEAD platform: a
dedicated PC, used by the patient to see the daily activity ex-
ercises; an activity tracker (FITIBIT c⃝) to measure the amount
of physical activity of the patient. The platform foresees also
other devices, which are used only at the hospital (e.g., an EEG
portable helmet to measure variations in the brain activity of
the patients during speciﬁc cognitive or attentive tests). All
the patients data is stored in a clinical based certiﬁed database
which is managed by TELBIOS [7] a local industrial partner
of the HEAD Project.
IV.
HEAD REHABILITATION EXERCISES
The HEAD exercise database consists of three different
categories which are connected through a ﬁlm database and a
picture database. A ﬁlm is used in order to catch the attention
of the patient.
•
Category 1: Film =⇒ Exercise =⇒ Film: All the
exercises which are inside this category starts with
the visualization of a ﬁlm, after a few seconds the
ﬁlm stops and the rehabilitation exercise starts using
a picture keyframe of the ﬁlm. Once the rehabilitation
exercise has been completed, the ﬁlm is enabled and
the patient can see again the next part of the ﬁlm. After
few seconds the ﬁlm stops again and the rehabilitation
exercise starts again, and so on. This category has been
designed for motor-limb rehabilitation.
•
Category 2: Film =⇒ Exercise: In this category, the
exercises have been designed in order to start with a
ﬁlm without stopping or pausing the ﬁlm visualization.
The rehabilitation exercise starts once the ﬁlm is
completed. This category of exercises allows neuro-
motor rehabilitation.
•
Category 3: Exercise =⇒ Film: This category of
exercises starts directly with the rehabilitation exercise
and the video is seen by the patient only if the exercise
has been completed. The ﬁlm is used as an award.
V.
USERS STUDY
A tele-rehabilitation system should be validated in order to
demonstrate its usefulness. Before a rehabilitation environment
can be used in a rehabilitation protocol it is necessary to
perform several tests and see if the proposed exercises are
usable and potentially effective.
In our research, a user study has been carried out in order
to test the tele-rehabilitation platform initially with healthy
people. In particular, we were interested in checking if any
issues may arise during the use of the HEAD application, in
particular any issues related to gesture interactions.
A. User study with healthy subjects
10 healthy users, 6 female and 4 male, aged between 18
and 23 participated to the preliminary tests. Before the test,
the participants were asked to ﬁll in a pre-test questionnaire
with their data, conﬁdence to use games and also hand gestural
technologies. In addition, we asked the participants to compile
a symptoms check-list related to the sense of sight.
Figure 2-a shows part of the HEAD platform in which the
clinical team is able to select the different parameters for the
rehabilitation exercise. It is possible to select the video, the
level, the device and the arm/hand side which will be involved
in the exercise therapy.
Attività: ABBINA SIMBOLO (1:2)(VIDEO:ANIMAZIONE-7_CALIMERO_3188433, 
DEVICE:LEAP MOTION, LATO: ENTRAMBE LE MANI, LIVELLO:2)
Video
Livello
Device
Lato
a)
PRI
RISULTATI
VALUTAZIONI
OBIETTIVI/TERAPIE GENERICHE
area: Riabilitazione neuro-motoria
Riscaldamento arti superiori
Azione precisa arti superiori
Riscaldamento arti inferiori
Esercizio di memoria
Categorizzazione problem solving; equilibrio
Azione precisa tronco
b)
Figure 2. HEAD Platform for the clinical side.
Figure 2-b shows the general therapy and all the different
rehabilitation areas.
Participants were instructed about the task, and they were
allowed to use the hand gestural approach until they felt
sufﬁciently conﬁdent. The task consisted in using the ‘match
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the symbols’ exercise. Two tests were performed, in different
conditions.
First test. The participants were asked to perform the
‘match the symbols’ exercise and to use the non dominant
hand to interact with the virtual objects. This was made to
introduce in the users some difﬁculties typical of patients with
upper limb disabilities.
Second test. The participants were asked to complete again
the task using the dominant hand.
The two tests lasted approximately 8 minutes (4 minutes
per each test). Figure 3-a shows the HEAD platform once
is started by the patient and after performed the login via
user-name and password. The patient selects the rehabilitation
exercise, in this case the ‘match the symbols’, which consist
in matching the three similar ﬁgures (Figure 3-b). The system
counts as an error if the patient does not match properly the
ﬁgures. If the three ﬁgures are matched accordingly, the main
ﬁgure changes its color to green and the patient is able to grab
the three pictures group in to the blue container (Figure 3-c).
Once all the pictures groups are matched the patient is able to
see the ﬁlm as an award. When the ﬁlm ﬁnished the system
shows the ﬁnal score in form of stars (Figure 3-d). Then, the
results are immediately stored to the collector database.
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 3. ‘Match the symbols exercise’.
After completing the two tests, participants were asked
to ﬁll in a post-test questionnaire aimed at evaluating the
following aspects:
•
general impression of the exercise, including the pro-
posed concept, the system as a whole, the willingness
to use it again, its easiness of use;
•
knowledge acquired in using the scenario, including
the easiness when started using the rehabilitation ex-
ercise, the effectiveness of the information displayed,
and the willingness to use the system again in the
future;
•
evaluation of the system functionalities, including the
quality of the graphic user interface, the perceived
quality of the exercise, and sound feedbacks, and
ﬁnally the ability of the hand/ﬁnger interaction modal-
ity.
The questionnaire was organized in a 6 points Likert-scale,
from 1 (which is the most negative value) to 6 (which is the
most positive value).
B. Analysis of the results
The charts on Figure 4 show the results of the question-
naires.
The HEAD application achieved a high evaluation rate
relatively to the aspects concerning the system in general, a
quite positive evaluation of the easiness in using it as a whole
(chart a in Figure 4).
The knowledge acquisition section of the test intended to
go more in details in understanding and evaluating the system
from the user’s perspective. Chart b in Figure 4 shows the
results. Overall, the collected data show a positive evaluation.
Only one user assigned a very low rate for what concerned
the easiness of using the system the ﬁrst time. But the same
user was convinced that the following time it would have been
easier and more natural to use it.
4,3
5
5,8
5,3
5,5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Your virtual hand moves and
act accordingly to your real
one
Was it easy to use?
If you could, would you use it
again?
Did you like the system?
Did you like the concept?
a) General Impresion
5,8
5,4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Do you think that the next
time will be easier to use the
system?
Did you perceive the
information you expected?
Was it easy to start using the
system?
b) Knowledge acquisition
4
5,2
5,2
5,4
4,8
4,8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
How do you judge the
interaction modality through
LeapMotion?
How do you judge the
interaction modality through
Kinect?
How do you judge the
finger/hand interaction
modality?
How do you judge the sound
feedback?
How do you judge the visual
feedback?
How do you judge the
graphic user interface?
c) Functionalities
Figure 4. Results of tests performed by the healthy subjects.
It is possible to observe from chart c in Figure 4, that
the participants have judged interesting the gesture interaction
modalities proposed (ﬁnger/hand gestures) through the Leap-
Motion and Kinect sensors. A positive evaluation has been
given also to the visual and sound feedbacks which were
coherent with the user’s interaction.
All the objects (images and ﬁlms) in the exercise are clearly
recognised by the participants. All participants agreed to feel
more conﬁdent in using the hand gesture interaction system
towards the end of the test than at the beginning, and they felt
to be able to improve their performance after using it for a
longer period.
Five participants reported some incongruence between their
real hand movements and the virtual hand avatar. This is
due the Leap Motion controller, which sometimes produces
anomaly reading data, such as reporting identical position
although the ﬁnger had moved, or reporting false positions far
away from the actual ﬁngers [18]. These anomalies however,
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

were usually short-termed and did not represent a signiﬁcant
impact in the user’s performance, and in general in the overall
results. Nevertheless, these anomalies were known to happen
[19] and therefore expected. This preliminary study was de-
signed to cope with these issues.
Additionally, in this study we evaluated only the process
of selection of the objects (e.g., images through the gesture
interaction) in the rehabilitation exercise. These two conditions
were performed separately. In general, more sophisticated
actions can be performed while interacting with a different
rehabilitation exercise, such as advanced manipulation (e.g.,
changing position and orientation of virtual objects, activating
some interactions through the pinch gestures), which will be
considered in future works.
VI.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The use of tele-rehabiliattion systems for upper and lower
limb rehabilitation has been demonstrated in literature to be a
valid approach.
In this view, the paper describes a tele-rehabilitation based
on hand and body gesture interaction. We have performed
some preliminary tests in order to prove the HEAD approach.
The preliminary test results reported in the paper are positive
for what concerns the quality of the hand and body gesture
interaction while executing the rehabilitation exercise. On this
basis, we conclude that the gestural interaction system provides
users with an effective and natural method to interact with the
rehabilitation exercises.
The clinical protocol implies that each patient is able to use
the HEAD platform 12 times in the rehabilitation center and
60 times at home. The total patients involved in the HEAD
project are 100. All of them are using the HEAD platform in
the rehabilitation center and at least 30 at home.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been partially developed within the
context of the project HEAD: Human Empowerment Aging
and Disability, Funded by CARIPLO Foundation. The authors
are grateful to the HEAD Consortium for the unconditional
support for the HEAD Project.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Cameron et al. “Hand tracking and visualization in a virtual reality
simulation,” April 2011, pp. 127–132.
[2]
D. Wigdor and D. Wixon, “Brave NUI World: Designing Natural User
Interfaces for Touch and Gesture,” 1st ed.
San Francisco, CA, USA:
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2011.
[3]
M. Covarrubias, M. Rossini, G. Caruso, G. Samali, C. Giovanzana,
F. Molteni, M. Bordegoni, “Sound Feedback Assessment for Upper
Limb Rehabilitation Using a Multimodal Guidance System,” in Inter-
national Conference on Computers Helping People with Special Needs.
ICCHP 2016 - Proceedings, July 2016, pp. 529–536.
[4]
M. Covarrubias, M. Bordegoni, U. Cugini, E. Gatti, “Supporting Un-
skilled People in Manual Tasks through Haptic-Based Guidance, Infor-
mation Systems Research and Exploring Social Artifacts: Approaches
and Methodologies. Edited by IGI Global, 2012. pp. 355–378.
[5]
G. Ren and E. O’Neill, “3d selection with freehand gesture,” Computers
& Graphics, vol. 37, no. 3, 2013, pp. 101 – 120. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0097849312001823
[retrieved: February, 2017]
[6]
[Online]. Available: http://http://unity3d.com [retrieved: February, 2017]
[7]
[Online]. Available: http://www.telbios.com/telbiosconnect/ [retrieved:
February, 2017]
[8]
F. Bacim, M. Nabiyouni, and D. A. Bowman, “Slice-n-swipe: A free-
hand gesture user interface for 3d point cloud annotation,” in 3D User
Interfaces (3DUI), 2014 IEEE Symposium on, March 2014, pp. 185–
186.
[9]
K. Yatani, K. Partridge, M. Bern, and M. Newman, “Escape: A target
selection technique using visually-cued gestures,” in Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings, 2008, pp. 285–
294.
[10]
A. Bragdon and H.-S. Ko, “Gesture select: Acquiring remote targets
on large displays without pointing,” Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems - Proceedings, 2011, pp. 187–196.
[11]
D. Vogel and R. Balakrishnan, “Distant freehand pointing and clicking
on very large, high resolution displays,” UIST: Proceedings of the
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Softaware and Technology,
2005, pp. 33–42.
[12]
R. Balakrishnan and D. Vogel, “Interactive public ambient displays:
Transitioning from implicit to explicit, public to personal, interaction
with multiple users,” UIST: Proceedings of the Annual ACM Sympo-
sium on User Interface Softaware and Technology, 2004, pp. 137–146.
[13]
F. Guimbreti`ere and C. Nguyen, “Bimanual marking menu for near
surface interactions,” Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, 2012, pp. 825–828.
[14]
M. Caimmi, A. Chiavenna, M. Malosio, L.M. Tosatti, “Kinect One-
based biomechanical assessment of upper-limb performance compared
to clinical scales in post-stroke patients,” Proceedings of the Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society, EMBS., 2015. pp. 5720-3.
[15]
P. Song, W. Goh, W. Hutama, C.-W. Fu, and X. Liu, “A handle
bar metaphor for virtual object manipulation with mid-air interaction,”
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2012, pp. 1297–
1306.
[16]
H. Benko, R. Jota, and A. D. Wilson, “Miragetable: freehand interaction
on a projected augmented reality tabletop,” Proc. of CHI’12, 2012, pp.
199–208.
[17]
C. Harrison, H. Benko, and A. Wilson, “Omnitouch: Wearable mul-
titouch interaction everywhere,” UIST’11 - Proceedings of the 24th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
2011, pp. 441–450.
[18]
V. K. Adhikarla, J. Sodnik, P. Szolgay, and G. Jakus, “Exploring direct
3d interaction for full horizontal parallax light ﬁeld displays using leap
motion controller,” Sensors, vol. 15, 2015, pp. 8642–8663.
[19]
J. Guna, G. Jakus, M. Pogacnik, S. Tomazic, and J. Sodnik, “An
analisis of the precision and reliability of the leap motion sensor and
its suitability for static and diynamic tracking,” Sensors, vol. 14, 2014,
pp. 3702–3720.
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

