Collaboration in Surgical Training 
A qualitative study of mentoring laparoscopic surgeons by using videoconference in northern Norway 
 
Line Lundvoll Warth*, Etai M Bogen°, Rolv-Ole Lindsetmo°, Hitendra RH Patel‡ and Knut M Augestad* 
 
*Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway
 
°Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
 
‡Department of Urology &  
Norwegian Centre for Pelvic Dysfunction 
University Hospital of North Norway 
 
line.lundvoll.warth@telemed.no, etai.bogen@unn.no, rolv-ole.lindsetmo@unn.no, hitendra.patel@unn.no, 
knut.magne.augestad@telemed.no 
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes a work in progress, a project 
studying collaboration among laparoscopic surgeons who are 
instructed during their education. Access to expert surgeons is 
a problem at many hospitals. Implementing videoconferencing 
(VC) as a tool for instruction (telestration) and knowledge-
sharing overcomes the distance between mentors and mentees, 
and 
has the 
potential 
to 
improve 
surgical 
training. 
Understanding of VC is limited in surgical practice, and the 
educational and clinical benefits of telementoring should be 
explored. This project will meet this demand by seeking in-
depth understanding of the non-technical aspects or social 
processes of collaboration in surgical training. Over a three-
year period, from 2015 to 2017, this project will examine 
collaboration in surgical training (CoaST). A hospital in 
northern Norway at which surgeons collaborate in surgical 
training to complete their surgical education in general surgery 
will be investigated. This paper discusses how we will collect 
the data. When they start to use VC for mentoring in distance 
surgical training, this will be included. An explorative study 
will be carried out using video-recorded observations of 
interactions. The paper is relevant for the conference focusing 
on the topic of distributed surgery and collaboration between 
professionals creating new telemedicine practices. This paper 
outlines the objectives of the study and the qualitative design; 
the study will explore non-technical aspects or social processes 
of collaboration in surgical training. The paper concludes by 
presenting a design for collecting video recordings to explore 
surgical training. 
Keywords-collaboration; surgical training; telementoring; 
interaction; qualitative methods. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Surgical education in general surgery requires six years 
of education, training and clinical practice. The clinical 
practice involves hands-on training during which the 
surgeons who are being educated (mentees) are instructed 
by expert surgeons (mentors). Access to mentors for 
education is a problem at many hospitals. Improving access 
to mentors in surgical training can be accomplished by 
implementing videoconferencing (VC) as a tool for 
knowledge-sharing 
to 
overcome 
geographic 
distance 
between mentors and mentees and to allow for organization 
and full concentration on training locally and through 
geographic distance.  
In surgical practice, procedures are often challenging as 
unexpected challenges arise and can lead to a point of no 
return where decisions must be made in the moment [1]. The 
skills of a surgeon and the collaborating operating team are a 
prerequisite for a good surgical outcome [2][, 3]. Thus, 
collaboration and training of team performance are important 
in surgical practice. Optimal teamwork is essential when 
mentors and mentees are located in the same room, and if 
they are located over distance. VC for telementoring is well 
suited for collaborating and overcoming distance [4]. 
However, a recent review of surgical telementoring reported 
limited understanding of VC in surgical practice. The review 
concluded that little attention has been paid to the 
educational and clinical benefits of telementoring, and 
instead, focused on piloting the technology [5]. Studies 
report that surgical mentoring by VC provides opportunities 
to alter surgical practice and offers patients the best expertise 
in surgical treatment despite geographic distance [6]. 
However, little in-depth understanding of the non-technical 
aspects or social processes of collaboration in surgical 
training exist.  
During this project, collaboration in surgical training 
(CoaST), we will examine the organization of surgical 
training today and the use of VC, as well as how knowledge 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

is shared and constructed in order to complete surgical 
procedures, that is, the organization of training and practice, 
the team that participates, the knowledge shared, the 
knowledge needed and the use of resources to solve the 
problem. Together, this gives insight into team performance 
and how non-technical aspects or social processes of 
collaboration influence the way surgeons are mentored. 
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the framework for the field, and the need for 
knowledge about collaboration and teamwork in surgical 
training. Section III describes the empirical context. Section 
IV addresses the qualitative design and illustrates how the 
design with video-recorded observations will be used to 
explore the field, connecting practice to the design method in 
Section V. The conclusion is in Section VI. 
II. 
FRAMEWORK 
Research regarding the educational aspects of VC in 
surgery stresses the educational benefits [7] and refers to 
telementoring as effective for the development of surgical 
skills [8], allowing young surgeons to be educated through 
distance learning by an expert surgeon [9]. Past research has 
suggested that VC provides access to the best educational 
resources and experience without the limitations of distance 
and time; thus, VC facilitates learning [7]. For example, 
community surgeons with no formal advanced laparoscopic 
training benefit from expert advice during procedures [10]. 
Students reported that the experience was better than 
conventional procedures because of the enhanced learning, 
better visibility and verbal accuracy in describing the 
procedures, since the instructor was not standing in the way 
[11]. These studies illustrate the outcomes possible with the 
technology, but no studies have explored the social processes 
of collaboration and the knowledge necessary to complete 
the surgery (i.e., the guidance, problem solving and surgical 
process). Neither did these studies explore how learning 
might be an outcome of the collaboration. 
Understanding of the effects of VC on surgical practice is 
limited [5]. A special focus is needed for better 
understanding of the factors that influence surgical 
outcomes, that is, communication and team performance 
[12]. The CoaST project expands upon previous work by 
investigating knowledge-sharing between surgeons and how 
their use of resources affects the treatment outcome. It aims 
to investigate the organization of surgical training today, the 
use of VC, collaboration in practice and the problem-solving 
process. The project also provides insight into how and why 
telementoring can be an important tool for improving 
surgical training. 
III. 
EMPIRICAL CONTEXT 
This study which starts in 2015 aims to investigate 
mentoring among laparoscopic surgeons in northern Norway. 
First, traditional methods of mentoring locally will be 
investigated. When VC for improving surgical training and 
practice is implemented at the hospital (during 2015/2016), 
this use will be included in the study. The empirical context 
will include collaboration between the mentor and mentees 
during surgical training in one hospital in northern Norway 
(Hospital A). The use of VC will include distance surgical 
training between Hospital A and a collaboration hospital 
(Hospital B). 
The surgical training will involve laparoscopic surgery 
and telementoring. Laparoscopic surgery uses several small 
abdominal incisions. At each abdominal incision (i.e., port), 
an instrument is inserted. Telementoring happens by 
connecting the laparoscopic surgery, the surgeon (mentee), 
the expert (mentor) and the technological artifacts, that is, 
robots, monitors and a mobile touch screen device. The 
laparoscopic procedure, which is visual, is transmitted to a 
monitor in the operating theater. The expert can view the 
procedure on a touch screen device in the operating theater, 
when in the operating theater or at a distance. On a mobile 
touch screen device, they draw freehand mark-ups over the 
video (telestration) so that the visuals can supplement the 
verbal instructions. 
Telementoring over distance is possible by using VC 
[13]. VC is when sound and picture are shared in two- or 
multi-channel communication. By connecting the monitor or 
the mobile touch device to an external computer and using 
microphones locally to send the audio to an external 
computer, the local mentee in the operating theater and the 
remote mentor are able to collaborate. The surgical operation 
is viewable on the monitor, transferred to the expert mentor’s 
device. The mentor can be mobile, in the surgical theater and 
at distance while providing full attention to giving the 
required training and instructions to the mentee. Together, 
the visual representation of the picture on the monitor, the 
instructions given and the mentor’s drawing on the device 
can supplement the collaborative work during surgical 
training. 
IV. 
QUALITATIVE DESIGN 
Exploring collaborative processes requires empirical data 
and analysis of the social processes and interactions of those 
who participate. These data and analyses make it possible to 
explore knowledge-sharing among surgeons, mentors and 
mentees who collaborate and use VC in surgical training and 
practice. This research project will use qualitative methods, 
designed as an explorative study of the practices of 
interaction. The knowledge shared and constructed will be 
explored as surgeons with different experience and expertise 
interact and perform surgeries over periods of time. 
Observations will constitute the main source of data. The 
second source of data will be qualitative interviews. 
A. Observations 
The observations are built on interaction analyses—the 
empirical investigation of talk and the use of resources [14]. 
The observations will be undertaken as surgeons collaborate 
in surgical training and practice, guiding and discussing 
treatment using tools such as VC. Observations are well 
suited to exploring team interaction because reconstructing 
the medical language and using artifacts are not possible. To 
intercept the social aspects in the collaborative work 
between the mentors and mentees, the interaction will be 
video-recorded using three sources: (1) output from a 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

laparoscopic camera/monitor, (2) connecting the mobile 
touch screen device to a recording unit and (3) a camera 
recording an overview of the operating room.  
The use of video recordings during the observation 
provides access to complex forms of interaction and to 
collaboration in the visual and spoken data [15-17]. By 
following the language and the use of resources, that is, talk, 
gestures, mobile touch screen, and surgical equipment such 
as knives, scissors and needles, it is possible to see how the 
mentor and mentees organize the instruction and practice, 
how problems and routine practices occur and how the 
surgery (the medical problem) is solved. 
B. Interviews 
To complement the observations, the participating 
surgeons will be interviewed. The purpose of the interviews 
is to enrich the context by giving the participants the 
opportunity to express themselves about the surgical training 
and the use of VC in training, instructions and collaboration. 
It is also essential to discuss themes based on the 
observations. The interviews will be semi-structured [18][, 
19]. They will involve dialogue resulting from a mixture of 
structured questions (from an interview guide) and the 
themes that emerge in the dialogue. Interviews will provide 
insight into mentor and mentee experiences. The interviews 
will be used to validate the interaction analysis. All 
participating surgeons who have been trained using VC will 
be interviewed. 
C. Sampling 
The study follows the traditional education program to 
explore this practice. The observations will continuing until 
there is a thematic saturation, or until the use of VC for 
mentoring phase out. The participants will be recruited 
according to their use of VC for mentoring. When VC is 
used, it will include the interactions that occur during the 
training. The sample encompasses all the VCs held and all 
the cases discussed in two periods until there is 
methodological saturation. The periods and the length of 
observation are defined according to the total activity during 
the education program. Lower frequency of training using 
VC will require longer periods of data collection. Periods are 
defined regarding the education program and are referred to 
as the periods of training. The study will also include 
empirical material from sequences where VC is not used so 
that this expansion can offer a complementary focus on the 
importance of collaborative training in surgery. 
D. Ethical Considerations 
During the surgery, the identification/visibility of the 
patient in the video-recordings is not possible. The patient is 
covered by sheets, and only the part of the body undergoing 
the operation will be visible. The videotapes will be collected 
and handled according to the guidelines set out by the 
Regional Committee for Medical and Health Research Ethics 
(REK). The interviews will be recorded, transcribed and 
handled according to the REK’s code of ethics. 
V. 
CAPTURING SURGICAL PRACTICE 
The monitor, which shows the picture inside the 
abdomen, the same picture the surgeon sees, can record 
within the unit. The mobile touch device represents the 
same picture as the monitor can be drawn on. This device 
has a built-in record unit. These tools record the technical 
aspects of surgical performance. To capture the social 
processes of collaboration, an external camera will be 
located in the room. Figure 1 is an example of how the 
surgical team, the monitors, the mobile touch device and the 
camera might be placed during the treatment of the patient. 
This is an example, since the way the surgical team and 
their tools are organized might differ between procedures.  
The arrows in Figure 1 show the three sources recording 
the surgical practice. The circles in Figure 1 point out the 
resources that will be in focus for in-depth understanding of 
the collaborative work. The green circle illustrates how the 
social 
processes 
of 
collaboration 
are 
an 
overall 
understanding of the whole process of surgical practice: the 
mentor(s), mentee(s), their interaction with each other, the 
monitor and the mobile touch device as they perform 
surgery. When connecting VC, the PC is also included in 
this interaction. The surgical team can see the expert in real 
time on the computer. The expert sees only what happens on 
the mobile touch device. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The organization of the surgical team, their resources and the 
recording units. 
By focusing on what happens in the interaction between 
all elements during surgical training (the green circle), we 
aim to expand the traditional method of focusing on 
technical aspects, by capturing the social processes of 
collaboration among mentors and mentees in surgical 
training. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper describes a work in progress, a project 
studying collaboration among laparoscopic surgeons who are 
Monitor 
Mentor/
mentee 
Monitor 
Camera 
Mentor/
mentee 
Mobile 
touch 
device 
Mentor/
mentee 
PC 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

instructed during education (CoaST). Since there is limited 
understanding of VC in surgical practice, and in-depth 
understanding of the non-technical aspects or social 
processes, this design is outlined to reply to this lack. The 
project strives to capture the interactions that occur in the 
team, and their use of resources when training surgeons. The 
understanding of the social processes can be used to improve 
surgical education and further the surgical team performance 
in everyday practice. 
Capturing several sources of action is a challenge. The 
interaction in the team happens in between them around the 
table, on the monitors that depict the patient’s body and the 
touch device on which to draw. When using VC for 
overcoming distance, the team can see the expert. It is ideal 
to include these resources. This challenge will be answered 
by testing the design and reevaluating it before choosing the 
ideal design for further investigation.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thanks to the Northern Regional Health Authority for 
funding this research project (HST-1181-14), and to all of 
the informants participating in the study.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Jacklin, N. Sevdalis, A. Darzi, C. and Vincent, C, 
Mapping surgical practice decision making: an 
interview study to evaluate decisions in surgical care. 
American journal of surgery, 195(5): 2008, pp. 689-
696. 
[2] B. S. Nedrebo, et al., Survival effect of implementing 
national treatment strategies for curatively resected 
colonic and rectal cancer. The British journal of 
surgery, 2011. 98(5): pp. 716-723. 
[3] N.J. Birkmeyer, et al., Safety culture and complications 
after bariatric surgery. Annals of surgery, 2013. 257(2): 
pp. 260-265. 
[4] R. Latifi, K. Peck, R. Satava and M.R. Anvari, 
Telepresence and telementoring in surgery. Studies in 
health technology and informatics, 2004. 104: pp. 200-
206. 
[5] K.M. Augestad, et al., Surgical telementoring in 
knowledge 
translation- 
Clinical 
outcomes 
and 
educational benefits: A comprehensive review. Surgical 
innovation, 2013. 20(3): pp. 273-281. 
[6] K.M Augestad, and R.O. Lindsetmo, Overcoming 
distance: 
video-conferencing 
as 
a 
clinical 
and 
educational tool among surgeons. World Journal of 
Surgery, 2009. 33(7): pp. 1356-1365. 
[7] Lamba, P., Teleconferencing in medical education: a 
useful tool. The Australasian medical journal, 2011. 
4(8): pp. 442-447. 
[8] L. Panait, et al., Telementoring versus on-site 
mentoring in virtual reality-based surgical training. 
Surgical endoscopy, 2006. 20(1):p p. 113-118. 
[9] G. Midiri, V. Papaspyropoulos and A. Brescia, Remote 
teaching 
in 
surgery: 
Problem-based 
learning, 
telementoring, and evaluation tests. Annali italiani di 
chirurgia, 2001. 72(6): pp. 751-755. 
[10] Sebajang, H., et al., Telementoring: an important 
enabling tool for the community surgeon. Surgical 
innovation, 2005. 12(4): p. 327-331. 
[11] C. Kaufmann, P. Rhee, and D. Burris, Telepresence 
surgery system enhances medical student surgery 
training. Studies in health technology and informatics, 
1999. 62: pp. 174-178. 
[12] C. Vincent, K. Moorthy, S. Sarker, A. Chang and A. 
Darzi W, Systems approaches to surgical quality and 
safety. From concept to measurement. Annals of 
surgery, 2004. 239(4): pp. 475-482. 
[13] T.A Ponsky, M. Schwachter, J. Parry, S. Rothenberg 
and K.M. Augestad, Telementoring: The Surgical Tool 
of the Future. Eur J Pediatr Surg, 2014; 24;4, pp. 287-
294. 
[14] B. Jordan, and K. Henderson, Interaction analysis: 
Foundation and practice. The Journal of the Learning 
Sciences, 1995. 4 (1): pp. 39-103. 
[15] D. Silverman, Interpreting Qualitative Data. Methods 
for Analysing Talk, Text and Interaction. 2001, 
London: Sage Publications. 
[16] C. Heath, P. Luff, and M.S. Svensson, Video and 
qualitative research: analysing medical practice and 
interaction. Medical Education, 2007. 41: pp. 109-116. 
[17] B. Sutter, Instruction at heart. Activity- Theoretical 
studies of learning and development in coronary clinical 
work, in Department of Human Work Science and 
Media Technology. 2001, Blekinge Institute of 
Technology: Karlskrona, Sweden. p. 276. 
[18] S. Kvale, Det kvalitative forskningsintervju [The 
qualitative research interview] 1997, Oslo: Ad Notam 
Gyldendal. 
[19] K. Malterud, Kvalitative metoder i medisinsk forskning. 
En innføring. [Qualitative methods in medical research. 
An introduction]. 1996, Aurskog: Tano Aschehoug. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

