A Social Media-based Participatory Epidemiology Approach  
for Vector-borne Disease Prevention (VBDP) in South Asia  
Santosh Vijaykumar, May O. Lwin, Yin-Leng Theng, Schubert S. Foo, Siew Ann Cheong, Gentatsu Lim  
Center of Social Media Innovations for Communities (COSMIC) 
Nanyang Technological University 
Singapore 
14 Nanyang Drive, HSS-06-15, S 598669 e-mail: santoshv@ntu.edu.sg  
 
 
Abstract— Every year millions of people in south Asia and 
other tropical regions face the threat of vector-borne infectious 
diseases (VBD) such as Malaria and Dengue. Existing 
prevention strategies use principles of epidemiology and health 
communication 
separately, 
despite 
the 
fact 
that 
new 
technological capabilities may enable us to integrate the two 
disciplines. This paper describes an ongoing effort in 
Singapore that plans to integrate hotspot mapping, civic 
engagement and health communication to extend the 
boundaries of participatory epidemiology in VBD prevention. 
We chronicle the research that informed our approach, 
present the conceptual underpinnings from a participatory 
epidemiological lens, and describe the challenges and 
opportunities encountered. It is our hope that, when 
actualized, this trans-disciplinary model integrating insights 
from public health, communication and sociology will provide 
a holistic solution for policymakers and health prevention 
agencies tackling VBD threats in south Asia.  
Keywords- 
Malaria/Dengue; 
mHealth; 
Participatory 
epidemiology; social media 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Despite vastly improved medical and public health 
services, vector-borne diseases (VBDs) such as malaria and 
dengue present a serious challenge to public health 
authorities in many developing countries. In countries like 
India and Vietnam, malaria threatens the lives of no less than 
1,322 million people in the south-east Asian (SEA) region 
[1]. In Singapore, Dengue remains a threat despite a steady 
drop in infections since 2005’s dramatic outbreak of nearly 
14,000 cases [2]. As public health authorities work towards 
solutions to efficiently manage the VBD scenario, it is 
remarkable that social media is used to a bare minimum in a 
region known for its technological prowess. For instance, in 
India, health authorities initiate preventive action (like 
fumigation) in a reactive manner after receiving on-the-
ground information of incidences by their cadre of health 
personnel.  
 
On the health education side, Indian health authorities 
use traditional media such as TV, radio, newspapers and 
pamphlets while the country continues to boast amongst the 
fastest rates of mobile phone adoption. In Singapore too, 
health authorities predominantly use traditional media 
although there have been recent attempts by the National 
Environmental Authority (NEA) to use digital media for 
hotspot 
mapping 
and 
health 
education 
through 
a 
collaboration with an initiative called X-Dengue [3]. The 
magnitude of the vector-borne disease burden in these 
regions demands the enhancement of existing reactive 
unilateral mechanisms with proactive, dynamic, and nimble 
solutions that are as useful to the general public as they are to 
health authorities.  
 
We propose an emerging and virgin approach called 
participatory epidemiology (PE) that can guide future 
solutions to Malaria/Dengue prevention in Southeast Asia. 
We present a brief background and organizing principles of 
PE. Later, we present ongoing work in Singapore that is 
anchored in PE approaches to develop a tripartite interactive 
system called MoBuzz. We conclude by presenting 
challenges and future plans for implementation and scale-up.  
 
II. 
ICTS & PARTICIPATORY EPIDEMIOLOGY FOR VBDPS 
The use of information and communication technologies 
(ICTs) in public health has rapidly proliferated over the last 
two decades given the deep penetration of the internet and 
mobile phones in both developed and developing countries. 
The nature of use, however, has differed depending on the 
region and problem context. In developed countries such as 
the US, where the burden of chronic diseases such as obesity 
and cancer is high, ICTs have been used for designing and 
testing educational and behavioral interventions and 
delivering remote care through telemedicine [4].  
 
At a systemic level, ICTs have been deployed in the 
design of health information management systems giving 
rise to the study of disciplines such as clinical informatics 
and patient informatics. Developing regions such as Africa 
and Asia are rife with infectious and communicable diseases, 
and issues related to maternal and child health. In these 
resource-limited settings, ICTs (mainly mobile phones) have 
been used largely for the purposes of data collection, 
surveillance and mobile-based telemedicine [5]. However, 
their 
application 
in 
behavioral 
and/or 
educational 
interventions has been largely limited. Interventions that 
straddle the individual, community and system levels are rare 
despite the numerous affordances of mobile phones and 
social media. 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Vector-borne 
infectious 
diseases 
present 
us 
an 
opportunity to creatively address this gap because of the 
nature of their transmission and the preventive strategies that 
are required for their management and control. Let us take 
the case of malaria. Malaria is a preventable, life-threatening 
disease caused by parasites (called Plasmodium) that are 
transmitted to people through bites of infected mosquitoes 
(called Anopheles). It is known that Anopheles mosquitoes 
usually bite at night, and transmission is closely related to 
climatic conditions such as rainfall, temperature, and 
humidity. Anopheles breeding sites can range from pots and 
vessels, small puddles of water to large construction sites. 
We also know that malarial symptoms, such as fever, 
headache, chills and vomiting, usually surface 10-15 days 
after the infective mosquito bite. The best treatment upon 
malarial diagnosis is Artimesinin-based Combination 
Therapy (ACT), although evidence of resistance have been 
reported. Such a scenario presents core needs for the two 
main stakeholder groups – public health authorities and the 
general public. Public health authorities need a system that: 
a) empowers them with a priori outbreak information 
to facilitate early preparedness for preventive 
actions; 
b) receives ongoing/dynamic information so as to 
monitor the disease spread in real-time; and 
c) allows them to educate citizens, promote practice of 
preventive behaviors and, respond to specific 
informational requests from the general public. 
 
The general public needs a system that:   
a) alerts them about potential outbreaks in their 
area/vicinity;  
b) allows them to interact with authorities and share 
information about any outbreak-related issue;  
c) provides authentic information from authorities 
about what preventive actions to take; and  
d) allows them to share information with members in 
their informal social networks. 
 
At a basic level, PE denotes the use of local, on-ground 
intelligence to gather information and track the spread, 
causes, and effects of diseases. The PE concept was 
popularized by Catley and Mariner’s work in East Africa 
where 
they 
employed 
qualitative 
community-based 
approaches to derive animal health status from local farmers 
[6]. However, the rapid proliferation of the internet and 
mobile phones has transformed the PE landscape in recent 
years. As is shown by initiatives such as FrontlineSMS and 
Ushahidi [7], disease surveillance, health monitoring, and 
information sharing can now be digitally integrated and used 
to link disparate stakeholders such as health authorities, 
health providers and the general public. Chunara et al. [8] 
tested an online initiative where respondents reported their 
experiences with malaria, and concluded that “micro-
monitoring and online reporting are a rapid way to solicit 
malaria, and potentially other public health information”.  
The Program for Monitoring Emerging Diseases [9] provides 
an 
online 
reporting 
system 
and 
rapid 
information 
dissemination related to infectious disease outbreaks. In this 
sense, participatory epidemiology also denotes employing 
participatory methods – those nestled in, and involving 
communities – to collect epidemiological data. The other key 
principle includes the use of participatory mapping 
techniques in order to inform prevention activities.  
III. MOBUZZ – EXTENDING THE PE CONCEPT 
We propose that the conceptual capabilities of PE can be 
extended to provide holistic preventive solutions for 
Malaria/Dengue if mobile phones and social media were to 
be integrated into the conceptual matrix. We propose 
MoBuzz, an integrated mobile and desktop-based health risk 
communication system that is built upon PE principles. 
MoBuzz extends its reach to provide an interface between 
citizens and health authorities, and customized health 
messages to enhance preventive behaviors and health 
awareness. Our system comprises three main components: 
predictive surveillance; civic engagement and health 
communication. Our preventive e-health system provides 
support for disease prevention among health individuals. 
We demonstrate how data aggregation and visualization 
technologies can be used for population health reporting.  
 
A. Predictive Surveillance 
Let us take Singapore as an example of a city plagued by 
Dengue. The intention is to develop a color-coded early 
warning system that displays Dengue hotspots by generating 
predictive maps (Fig. 2) made available to both health 
authorities and the public on mobile devices. Raw weather-
related information such as rain, temperature and humidity 
is processed using predictive disease modeling that feeds 
into an automated system which generates predictive maps 
of Dengue hotspots.What distinguishes this project from 
other similar crowd sourcing and crowd informatics 
platforms is the integration of a disease modeling and 
simulation component. Here, we build a hierarchy of spatio-
temporal epidemic models. 
 
 
Figure 1. Prototype display of Dengue hotspots in Singapore 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
In the simplest of these models, we have a human 
population density that is averaged over time but not space, 
and a dynamic mosquito population, i.e. mosquitoes move 
around in the spatial grid. Susceptible humans (S(x, y, t)) 
can be infected by infected mosquitoes (i(x, y, t)), while 
susceptible mosquitoes (s(x, y, t)) can then be infected by 
infected humans (I(x, y, t)). Humans who recover from the 
infection (R(x, y, t)) then become immune to further 
infection. Infected mosquitoes do not recover, and die at the 
same rate as uninfected mosquitoes. These are replaced by 
new mosquitoes that are susceptible. In our simulations, we 
can control how fast the mosquitoes move, how easy it is for 
mosquitoes to infect humans, and how easy it is for humans 
to infect mosquitoes. We then measure the spatial extent of 
infected mosquitoes. This defines the human population that 
is at risk of infection, which provides more policy-relevant 
information than the actual incidences of infected humans. 
As more data become available, either through public health 
agencies or crowd sourcing, we will refine the epidemic 
model to incorporate influences from meteorological factors 
like temperature and rainfall, as well as anthropogenic 
factors like changes in demographics and land use. For 
policy makers and crowd sensing participants, the most 
attractive prospects of having such a component are the 
short-term forecasts in infection and at-risk patterns that can 
be generated. 
 
B. Civic Engagement 
This component provides the cutting-edge addition to 
existing PE efforts. The key idea here is to encourage the 
general public to contribute to surveillance efforts in the 
event of disease outbreaks. In this instance, citizens can 
report breeding sites, mosquito bites, and Dengue symptoms 
using their smart phones in image (Fig. 3), text (Fig. 4) or 
video formats. These inputs are automatically reflected in 
the hotspot maps and can be accessed by health authorities 
for responding to citizen concerns and for initiating 
preventive actions in specific communities. The process is 
facilitated rapidly because of two reasons: a) mobile phone-
based inputs from citizens are geo-tagged; and b) the 
MoBuzz system captures geo-spatial coordinates, time and 
date, and phone number of the contributor. 
 
C. Dynamic Health Communication & Alerts 
The repository of outbreak information based on weather 
and citizen data is used to disseminate health messages to 
both individuals and communities. At the individual level, 
citizens receive tailored messages based on their input to the 
system. For instance, a citizen reporting malarial symptoms 
to MoBuzz will instantly receive a complete information 
guide on Dengue symptoms, and cues to various preventive 
actions. At the community level, the system will 
automatically 
send 
health 
education 
messages 
to 
communities/zones (Fig. 5) that are highlighted on the maps 
as possible hotspots. Public health surveillance efforts are  
 
Figure 2.Citizens images of breeding sites reflected on maps 
 
 
Figure 3.Risk information sent by citizens through Twitter feeds are 
displayed on the maps 
 
     
 
Figure 4.MoBuzz issues automated alerts and health messages using 
website and mobile apps 
 
 
thus used to generate and deliver health communication 
messages. Fundamentally, the system acts as a link between 
the citizen and the public health system where the 
contributions of each benefit the other. Overall, the intention 
is to use MoBuzz for efficient and effective risk prevention 
and outbreak management. In addition to communication 
modules, the system is capable of sending alerts to citizens 
living in areas identified as potential hotspots. 
D. Scenario  
Fig. 5 shows a possible scenario for the use of MoBuzz. 
The meteorological department (from left) feeds weather 
data to the system that is used to generate hotspot maps. 
Concurrently, a vigilant citizen, John reports a possible 
breeding site by sending a picture to MoBuzz. In response, 
the system sends him preventive information that he can 
send to his family/friends that can further disseminate it to 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 5.System flow depicting interaction between stakeholders and 
system 
  
other actors in their social network. The messages contain 
information about the MoBuzz website/mobile app. This 
activates the vulnerable actors to register on the MoBuzz 
website (or download the app), allowing them to receive 
future alerts automatically. The information continues to go 
viral as the vulnerable individuals continue to send it to 
other members in their respective social networks. These 
individuals follow a similar protocol for registration and can 
potentially request MoBuzz for specific kinds of 
information based on their issues of concern. In the 
meantime, the dynamic maps displayed on the website and 
available on the mobile app can be used by community 
organizations and civic agencies to strategize preventive 
efforts. The innovation in MoBuzz lies in integrating the 
disparate fields of epidemiology, civic engagement and 
health communication using social media.  
E. Content Validation 
One of the major challenges of a technology-driven 
participatory health system enterprise is validating the 
quality of informational inputs from citizens. Our validation 
process is consistent in keeping with the core idea of using 
participatory media and crowd sourcing technologies. We 
use people (individuals and health systems personnel) as 
validation experts. For instance, when MoBuzz receives a 
breeding site alert from Zone X, the system will send a 
validation request to all its registered users and health 
personnel in that zone. These individuals can visit the site 
and use mobile-based reporting to revert to MoBuzz on the 
authenticity of this input.  
 
IV. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 
One of the key questions we encountered in the process 
of conceptual ideation and prototype design was: how do we 
get people to participate? In response, we propose an 
incentive-based system that offers, say, 5-minutes of free 
talk time for inputs and an equal number for validation. 
Such incentives will involve a partnership with multiple 
stakeholders including telecom companies, civic agencies 
and health authorities. We recognize that offering an easy-
to-use, simple and attractive interface design will add to the 
adoption and usability MoBuzz and its various affordances.  
Moving forward, we plan to test the three main components 
among various audience groups using experimental 
techniques and assess their responses to the system in terms 
of media, messaging, design and interface.  We are working 
with collaborators in Sri Lanka and Malaysia to scale-up 
and test our system. We propose that our system can be 
replicated to address gaps in the prevention and 
management of a number of infectious disease outbreaks 
such as SARS and H1N1. Conceptually, our idea broadens 
the current understanding of participatory epidemiology and 
highlights future opportunities for epidemiologists and 
health communication experts to integrate their expertise.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
World Health Organization. (2012, October 16). 
Malaria: 
Disease 
Burden 
in 
SEA 
Region. 
Available: http://www.searo.who.int/en/Section10/S
ection21/Section340_4018.htm 
[2] 
B. K. Koh, L. C. Ng, Y. Kita, C. S. Tang, L. W. 
Ang, K. Y. Wong, L. James, and K. T. Goh, "The 
2005 dengue epidemic in Singapore: epidemiology, 
prevention and control," Annals of the Academy of 
Medicine, Singapore, vol. 37, pp. 538-45, Jul 2008. 
[3] 
http://www.x-dengue.com. 
[4] 
A. G. Ekeland, A. Bowes, and S. Flottorp, 
"Effectiveness of telemedicine: A systematic review 
of reviews," International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, vol. 79, pp. 736-771, 2010. 
[5] 
P. N. Mechael, "The Case for mHealth in 
Developing Countries," Innovations: Technology, 
Governance, Globalization, vol. 4, pp. 103-118, 
2009/01/01 2009. 
[6] 
A. Catley, "Use of participatory epidemiology to 
compare the clinical veterinary knowledge of 
pastoralists and veterinarians in East Africa," 
Tropical Animal Health and Production, vol. 38, 
pp. 171-184, 2006/04/01 2006. 
[7] 
C. C. Freifeld, R. Chunara, S. R. Mekaru, E. H. 
Chan, T. Kass-Hout, A. Ayala Iacucci, and J. S. 
Brownstein, "Participatory Epidemiology: Use of 
Mobile Phones for Community-Based Health 
Reporting," PLoS Med, vol. 7, p. e1000376, 2010. 
[8] 
R. Chunara, V. Chhaya, S. Bane, S. R. Mekaru, E. 
H. Chan, C. C. Freifeld, and J. S. Brownstein, 
"Online reporting for malaria surveillance using 
micro-monetary incentives, in urban India 2010-
2011," Malaria journal, vol. 11, p. 43, 2012. 
[9] 
http://www.promedmail.org. 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

