Prescient Profiling – AI driven Volunteer Selection within a Volunteer Notification 
System 
 
Jesko Elsner, Philipp Meisen, Daniel Ewert, Daniel Schilberg and Sabina Jeschke 
Institute of Information Management in Mechanical Engineering 
IMA/ZLW & IfU - RWTH Aachen University 
Dennewartstr. 27, 52068 Aachen, Germany 
{ Jesko.Elsner, Philipp.Meisen, Daniel.Ewert, Daniel.Schilberg, Sabina.Jeschke }  
@ima-zlw-ifu.rwth-aachen.de 
 
 
Abstract—A Volunteer Notification System (VNS) is a 
promising approach to integrate laypersons into emergency 
medical services (EMS). In case of a medical emergency, a VNS 
will alarm those potential helpers who can arrive on scene fast 
enough to provide the most urgent measures until the 
professional helpers arrive at the victim. Whereas the basic 
requirements and criteria of a VNS have been discussed in 
recent publications, this paper will focus on the actual 
volunteer selection process and the underlying concept of 
Prescient Profiling. By using concepts of artificial intelligence, 
the available data is processed in order to generate an abstract 
digital representation of a volunteer and further enhanced to 
produce individual user profiles. These profiles will enable 
predictions on future decisions and the identification of 
behavioral patterns within the pool of volunteers. The goal is to 
provide an efficient algorithm for determining a highly 
sophisticated set of relevant volunteers for an ongoing medical 
emergency. 
Keywords-Volunteer Notification System; First Responder; 
Emergency Medical Services; Profiling; Artificial Intelligence 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As stated within a recent study by the clinical center of 
the university Munich [1], the average arrival time for 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) on scene in Germany is 
about nine minutes. Whereas most medical emergencies do 
not involve an immediate life danger for the victim, during a 
Sudden Cardiac Arrest (SCA) the first minutes are of utter 
importance. The probability of permanent brain damage 
increases with every minute and a time interval of more than 
five minutes without treatment will most likely result in the 
death of the victim [2][3]. The severity of the time deficit 
generally correlates with the infrastructure a country can 
provide, resulting in intensification for less advanced 
countries.  
One possible approach to provide the most urgent 
medical measures before the professional EMS arrive on 
scene is the implementation of a Volunteer Notification 
System (VNS) as discussed in [4]. The basic concept of a 
VNS is the integration of laymen and medical trained 
volunteers into the EMS by notifying those potential helpers 
who are, at the time of incident, “close” to the victim. 
Whereas the term “close” is suitable for describing the 
general idea, the actual process of selecting the relevant 
volunteers within an ongoing medical emergency requires, 
due to possible obstacles as e.g., rivers, traffic jams, or 
alternative transportation means, a sophisticated algorithm in 
order to ensure the best possible set of potential volunteers at 
any given time. Artificial intelligence (AI) offers a variety of 
methods in the area of problem solving [5] and for 
implementing self-learning systems [6] aiming to increase 
the quality of decisions by adaption over time. The 
possibilities of AI driven system within the scope of a VNS 
will be introduced within this paper. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The 
difference between a simple and an intelligent volunteer 
selection will be discussed in Section II, whereas Section III 
will highlight the necessity of an intelligent approach by 
describing some non-trivial decision scenarios in which 
simple selection algorithms will provide flawed or inaccurate 
results. Section IV will therefor introduce the basic concept 
of (prescient) profiling within this domain as a suitable 
approach to enable an AI driven volunteer selection. Further 
research perspectives are discussed in Section V. 
II. 
VOLUNTEER SELECTION 
In case of an incoming emergency call, the responsible 
dispatcher will alert the professional EMS and – in case a 
cardiac arrest or any type of emergency that requires 
immediate treatment is suspected – trigger the forwarding of 
the information into the notification system [4]. The VNS 
will now decide which volunteers are to be alarmed. In order 
to prevent unnecessary notifications – hence, notifications 
that will immediately appear irrelevant to its recipient or 
notifications alarming volunteers without any plausible 
chance of reaching the victim in time – an efficient selection 
algorithm is required [7]. This algorithm has to forecast the 
approximate arrival time of an individual volunteer at the 
scene of the incident. 
A. Simple Volunteer Selection 
A simple solution for selecting volunteers is the 
implementation of a notification radius, defining a maximum 
distance around the place of incident and alarming those 
volunteers who are within this radius. This approach will 
provide a set of helpers who are geographically close to the 
victim, but will they also arrive on scene faster than potential 
helpers outside the notification radius? To forecast an 
individual arrival time, more information is required on both, 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the volunteer and the environmental details affecting her at 
the moment.  
B. Intelligent Volunteer Selection 
Whilst the actual distance is an important parameter to be 
considered when deciding if a volunteer should be notified or 
not, it does not necessarily determine the volunteers’ time of 
arrival at the scene. Due to impassable obstacles (e.g., 
highways or rivers), the beeline calculation does not offer a 
suitable background for estimating the arrival time, but even 
the consideration of up to date map material – like so 
enabling a shortest way calculation – will not provide 
sufficient information without additional assumptions.  
Thus, the type of movement, the physical performance of 
a volunteer and the current traffic situation, all have a direct 
influence on the approximate traveling time and thereby on 
the time of arrival. Furthermore, limiting the relevant 
decision parameters to merely distance or traveling time 
appears inadequate and secondary criteria apply; e.g., the 
potential volunteers’ medical expertise, her individual 
knowledge of the area and the current situation this volunteer 
is involved in. An efficient algorithm hence has to consider a 
broad variety of available information on each individual 
volunteer in order to generate a reliable set of potential 
helpers [7][8]. 
III. 
SCENARIOS 
The necessity of an intelligent volunteer selection is 
demonstrated by multiple non-trivial decision scenarios, as 
illustrated in Fig. 1. The place of incident is close to a 
railway station (the red bar located on the railway tracks). 
Leaving heuristics aside, implying to have only five 
volunteers in total, the most promising of these are to be 
notified. The use of a simple volunteer selection – as 
introduced in Section II – will result in the following set of 
volunteers (as marked within the red area) that will be 
alarmed: 
 
the pedestrian just north of the incident, 
 
the volunteer in the car (on the highway), and 
 
the pedestrian in the park (close to the river). 
An intelligent volunteer selection will demand further 
information on each potential candidate than just her current 
location. The following section gives a short discussion on 
each single volunteer and the required additional information 
to decide reliable if the volunteer should be notified or not: 
1) The pedestrian just north of the incident is 
geographically the closest volunteer. A straight road 
connection and no obvious obstacles result in minimal 
requirements on travel speed or physical performance. This 
candidate appears a solid choice no matter further 
assumptions, but eventual circumstances could prevent her 
from arriving in time, e.g. she might be traveling with her 
children which she picked up a few minutes ago; just like 
she does every day at this hour. 
2) The volunteer in the car is the second closest, but 
should she be alarmed? Depending on the direction the car 
is driving and the distance to the next highway exit, this 
volunteer will most likely have no option to arrive on scene 
in time. 
3) The pedestrian in the park is blocked by a river. This 
volunteer will only arrive in time when the next bridge is 
within reach. Furthermore, with the park being a green zone 
with limited map material available, it might only have a 
single exit that is far away. 
4) The volunteer riding the bicycle is outside the 
notification radius, but due to traveling speed and possible 
short-cuts, she might arrive on scene fast. Parameters like 
one-way roads or uphill/downhill will influence the arrival 
time but generally she appears a good choice for notification 
and compared to a car with the same distance, she will not 
require a parking place and isn’t slowed down by high 
traffic (which occurs more often around stations).  
5) The last volunteer (in the train) appears to be far 
away, but assuming that the train rides in the right direction 
and will also stop at the next railway station, she might 
arrive on scene earlier than any of the other volunteers. 
Within the illustrated scenarios, the notification radius 
resulted in a set of three volunteers, from which probably 
only one has a realistic chance to arrive at the victim in time. 
Moreover, potentially highly valuable volunteers have not 
been considered for notification. The given examples are just 
a small selection of possible scenarios in which no simple 
answer on if to alarm a specific volunteer exists. 
In order to determine the best possible set of volunteers 
for an ongoing medical emergency, an efficient selection 
algorithm is required which postulates the availability of a 
complex knowledge base. A variety of parameters is to be 
collected, processed and evaluated, forming the digital 
profile of an individual volunteer.  
IV. 
PROFILING 
The term profiling has been frequently used over the last 
years in different research areas. Within the field of 
information and computer science it is mainly used in 
conjunction with the terms: program behavior [9][10], (web) 
user [11][12], network [13], or social media [14]. 
Figure 1: Non-trivial volunteer selection 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
A. General usage 
Generally, profiling is defined as “the act or process of 
learning information about someone based on what is 
already known” [15]. This definition is vague concerning the 
act or process used to obtain information and does neither 
define the kind of information retrieved nor its origin. Due to 
this lack of an exact definition, an appropriate assignment of 
methods, techniques or technologies regarding profiling is 
not possible without clearly distinguishing between the 
various implementations and their individual context.   
In order to specifically define the process of profiling that 
will be introduced within this paper, it is necessary to 
present a definition of what profiling describes within the 
scope of an intelligent volunteer selection in correspondence 
to 
aspects 
of 
information 
and 
computer 
science. 
Furthermore, the requirements and outputs that are to be 
expected by the application of profiling have to be defined. 
The term profiling is hereby not to be confused with a 
profile. A profile is commonly defined as “a brief written 
description that provides information about someone or 
something” whereas the verb to profile is defined as the 
action “to give a brief description […]” [15]. This definition 
defines a profile as the result of a process generated to 
describe 
someone 
or 
something, 
i.e., 
an 
abstract 
representation of the profiled subject. 
B. Definition 
Profiling describes the process of generating profiles from 
obtained data, associated to one or multiple subjects. A 
profile itself is a non-empty, finite, ordered tuple with a 
positive number of elements. Each of these elements consists 
of a finite number of values corresponding to its individual 
domain. The process of profiling is divided in multiple sub-
processes, which are illustrated in Fig. 2. The various terms 
describing these sub-processes and the different artifacts 
which are their results, are shortly described as follows: 
1) Subject: A subject describes “what” is actually being 
profiled. Within the VNS, the subject will be a registered 
user (a human being) but in general, anything can be 
profiled; e.g., a life-form, medical symptoms or an abstract 
stream of data. This definition stays in correspondance to 
the term subject as reffered to in [16]. 
2) Archetype Allocation: Due to the generic background 
of the profiled subjects, the system needs an approximate 
“idea” of what kind of subject it will deal with. The 
archetype allocation describes the process of mapping a 
subject to a specific archetype. 
3) Archetype: 
The 
archetype 
is 
an 
abstract 
representation of anything that can possibly be profiled. It 
defines the maximum set of properties that are available on 
a specific subject. Archetypes can consist of other 
archetypes as elements; e.g., a human can have a car or 
children as elements in the archetype, whereas children are 
themselves represented as humans within this set. 
4) Property Selection: After a subject has been mapped 
to an archetype (or a combination of archtypes), it has to be 
decided which of the available properties are of importance 
for the profiling process. While it is theoretically useful to 
support algorithmic selection and re-adjustments in this 
selection process by implementing a suitable learning 
strategy, a simplified approach will only process the 
property selection once, i.e., the properties representing the 
subject are not modified during the profiling process. 
5) Subset Archetype: After the relevant properties have 
been selected from the archetype, the structure of the digital 
representation of the profiled subject is determined. This 
artifact is referred to as subset archetype and constitutes the 
base of the following data representation. 
Figure 2: Sub-processes of Profiling 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

6) Property 
Extraction: 
The 
property 
extraction 
describes the process of collecting the data (e.g., trough 
available sensors or automated systems). The selected 
properties of the subset archetype will be filled with values. 
This process will result in the creation of the data 
representative.  
7) Data 
Representative: 
The 
data 
representative 
conforms to the abstracted, digitalized description of a 
subject. It  consists of the selected properties of its subset 
archetype and holds the raw data from occurred property 
extractions. This term is not the same as a data subject 
introduced in [16] but instead differentiates due to its raw 
data characteristic. 
8) Application: This process is defined by the 
application of different models, processing the data 
representative . The processing will lead to a profile of the 
data representative. Possible models are introduced in the 
upcoming section. 
9) Profile: A profile is a generalized representation of 
the data representative. The degree and direction of the 
generalization is defined by the context of the profiling 
process, i.e. the applied models. 
10) Post-Processing: This step describes the generic 
approach of applying various methods to the existing 
profiles. Examples are clustering, association analyzes, or 
the identification of relations between profiles. 
11) Relation/ Aggregation/ Generalisation: This artifact 
describes the result of the post-processing. Examples for this 
category are sets of profiles which are aggregated by 
associations or relations between them, or group profiles 
representing identified group properties. 
C. Application models 
In the context of behavioral predication, application 
models are generally based on theoretical rational behavior 
[17], bounded rationality (i.e., psychological models) [18], 
or on models that are based on observations which are 
characterized by methods of machine learning algorithms 
[19]. Beside the sole implementation of a single approach, a 
combinatorial aggregation of different types of models is 
possible. Recent research states that especially the use of 
hybrid models which are based on machine learning, but 
add features from psychological models, performed 
significantly better in various domains [20]. An alternative 
process is the sequential application of different models to a 
single data representative in order to retrieve specific 
properties of that profile. 
D. Prescient Profiling 
With the data representative uniting the digitalized 
properties of a subject that were collected over time, a base 
for further processing is available. Applying different models 
(as discussed above) will result in individual profiles that 
enable various operations; e.g., clustering and the evaluation 
regarding specific criteria. This process conforms to the 
definition of profiling as given in Section IV, while prescient 
profiling may be considered “the next step” on top of this 
basic definition, using the profile(s) to generate new insights 
and therefore enable enhanced capabilities. 
Implying a learning system approach, thus, a system that 
uses methods of AI to learn from past observations and 
thereby identifies trends and patterns, will not be limited to 
analyzing the historical values but instead will have the 
ability to make predictions. This states an enhanced 
definition of profiling. The term “Prescient Profiling” 
therefor refers to this special type of profiling, aiming to 
make reliable predictions on both, the value of individual 
properties and on a profile itself. 
E. Profiling within the VNS 
In the context of a VNS, the subject of profiling will be 
the volunteer (i.e., the registered user). The corresponding 
archetype is human with the following, exemplary 
properties to select from: gender, height, weight, age, 
location, number of children, type of car. Within the 
property selection, only the location is selected as property 
that is filled with data during the property extraction 
process. This extraction will occur automatically, i.e., the 
mobile phone will continuously push updated information 
on the volunteer’s location to the VNS server. All incoming 
location updates are stored in the data representative of this 
volunteer and applying specific models will generate 
different types of profiles. One suitable approach is the 
generation of a so called heat map [21] as part of the 
resulting profile. This location heat map, as illustrated in 
Fig. 3, describes the current whereabouts of the volunteer to 
be profiled as probabilities, rather than a single valid 
location; the calculation is based on the available location 
data from within the data representative (i.e., the purple 
dots).  
By generating profiles of different volunteers and 
applying post-processing methods, e.g., clustering or pattern 
recognition, 
aggregated 
profiles 
are 
being 
created, 
representing the relation between different volunteers and 
their corresponding heat maps. In addition, trends and 
progresses in the development of individual heat maps can 
Figure 3: Location heat map 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

be analyzed in order to create group profiles or enable 
various predications. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
Whereas a basic VNS implementation is able to notify 
volunteers in the closer vicinity by using simple selection 
algorithms, various scenarios have been discussed in which 
an efficient volunteer selection will require the consideration 
of additional factors. The concept of profiling has been 
introduced as a suitable solution within this context, aiming 
to generate profiles of individual volunteers. This is achieved 
by creating a data representation of the profiled subject, 
based on specific parameters that are selected from an 
archetype definition within the property selection and filled 
with data during the property extraction process. The 
application of different types of models, integrating various 
concepts of pattern recognition and machine learning in 
order to identify behavioral patterns and coherences between 
volunteers and individual properties, describes an enhanced 
process of profiling that has been introduced as “Prescient 
Profiling”, utilizing the various profiles to enable predictions 
on individual subjects or groups. 
The research focus of the near future will be the actual 
implementation of the machine learning approach and the 
development of corresponding models. The explicit 
application of Prescient Profiling within the context of the 
VNS needs to be analyzed, developed and evaluated. With 
an integration of the VNS system into the emergency 
workflow of regional EMS partners planned for the 
beginning of 2014, promising possibilities for an efficient 
data assessment are being created; enabling benchmarks and 
comparisons of various selection models in different 
emergency scenarios and thereby producing academic results 
on the efficiency of an AI approach for volunteer selection in 
medical emergencies.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is based on work done in the INTERREG IVa 
project EMuRgency (www.emurgency.eu). The project is 
partially 
financed 
through 
the 
European 
Regional 
Development Fund (ERDF) and co-financed by several 
regions of the Meuse-Rhine Euroregion and partners of the 
EMuRgency consortium. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Study of the Institute of Emergency Medical Care and 
Medical Management (INM) in Munich, “Untersuchung zum 
Notarztdienst und arztbegleitenden Patiententransport in 
Bayern“, Published by the clinical center of the university 
Munich, April 2010. 
[2] J. Bahr, “Lay resuscitation in the German rescue system. 
Some basic information”, volume 10, issue 3, Notfall Rett. 
Med. 2007, doi:10.1007/s10049-007-0910-y, pp 197-200. 
[3] K. 
Grassl, 
“Herzdruckmassage 
im 
Rahmen 
der 
Laienreanimation: Einsatz eines audiovisuellen Echtzeit-
Rückmeldesystems“. Dissertation, LMU Munich: Faculty of 
Medicine, 2009. 
[4] J. Elsner, M.-T. Schneiders, M. Haberstroh, D. Schilberg, and 
S. Jeschke, “An Introduction to a Transnational Volunteer 
Notification 
System 
Providing 
Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation for Victims Suffering a Sudden Cardiac Arrest”, 
In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on 
eHealth. IARIA, Nice (France) 2013, pp. 59-64. 
[5] S. Russel, P. Norvig, “Artificial Intelligence: A Modern 
Approach”, Third Edition, Prentice Hall Series in Artificial 
Intelligence, Pearson Education 2010. 
[6] C. M. Bishop, “Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning 
(Information Science and Statistics)”, Second Edition, 
Springer Science 2007. 
[7] J. Elsner, M.-T. Schneiders, D. Schilberg, and S. Jeschke, 
“Determination of Relevant First Aiders within a Volunteer 
Notification System“, In: Proceedings of the International 
eHealth, 
Telemedicine 
and 
Health 
ICT 
Forum 
for 
Educational, Networking and Business (Med@Tel 2013). 
Med@Tel, Luxembourg 2013, pp. 245-249. 
[8] J. Elsner, P. Meisen, S. Thelen, D. Schilberg, and S. Jeschke, 
“EMuRgency – A Basic Concept for an AI Driven Volunteer 
Notification 
System 
for 
Integrating 
Laypersons 
into 
Emergency Medical Services”, unpublished.. 
[9] D. W. Wall, "Predicting program behavior using real or 
estimated profiles", In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 
1991 conference on Programming language design and 
implementation, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, ACM, 1991, pp. 
59-70. 
[10] T. Ball, J. R. Larus, "Optimally Profiling and Tracing 
Programs", ACM Transactions on Programming Languages 
and Systems, volume 16, 1994, pp. 59-70. 
[11] P. K. Chan, "A non-invasive learning approach to building 
web user profiles", In: WEBKDD'99, Workshop on Web 
Usage Analysis and User Profiling, San Diego, CA, USA, 
1999.  
[12] M. Pazzani, D. Billsus, "Learning and Revising User Profiles: 
The Identification of Interesting Web Sites", Machine 
Learning, volume 27, issue 3, June 1997, p. 313–331.  
[13] K. Xu, Z.-l. Zhang, and S. Bhattacharyya, "Profiling internet 
backbone traffic: Behavior models and applications", In: 
Proceedings of SIGCOMM 2005, conference on Applications, 
technologies, architectures, and protocols for computer 
communications, volume 35, issue 4, 2005, pp. 169-180.  
[14] R. Li, S. Wang, and K. C.-C. Chang, "Multiple Location 
Profiling for Users and Relationships from Social Network 
and Content", In: Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 
(PVLDB), volume 5, issue 11, 2012, pp. 1603-1614. 
[15] www.merriam-webster.com, Online dictionary, Keywords: 
profiling / profile, Available at: http://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/ [Accessed:  08. October 2013]. 
[16] M. Hildebrandt, S. Gutwirth (Eds.), “Profiling the European 
Citizen: Cross-disciplinary perspectives”, Springer Science 
2008. 
[17] N. Giocoli, “Modeling Rational Agents: From Interwar 
Economics to Early Modern Game Theory”, Edward Elgar 
Pub 2003. 
[18] R. Lin, S. Kraus, J. Wilkenfeld, and J. Barry, “Negotiating 
with bounded rational agents in environments with 
incomplete information using an automated agent.”, In: 
Articial Intelligence, volume 172, issues 6-7, April 2008, pp. 
823-851. 
[19] K. P. Murphy, “The Machine Learning: A Probabilistic 
Perspective”, MIT Press 2012. 
[20] A. Rosenfeld, I. Zuckerman, A. Azaria, and S. Kraus, 
“Combining Psychological Models with Machine Learning to 
Better Predict People's Decisions”, In: Synthese, volume 189 
issue 1 supplement, Springer Science 2012, pp. 81-93. 
[21] L. Wilkinson, M. Friendly, “The History of the Cluster Heat 
Map”, The American Statistician 2009, volume 63, issue 2, 
pp. 179-184. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

