Exploring the Use of Context-Awareness in Scheduling Methods to 
Approach the Patient Planning Problem 
Conceição Granja and Terje Solvoll 
Norwegian Centre for e-Health Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway  
e-mail: {conceicao.granja; terje.solvoll}@ehealthresearch.no 
 
 
Abstract—Lately, in literature, a few papers have been 
published on methods for solving patient planning problems 
involving uncertainty. Most authors consider very simple 
recourse actions, typically only counting the extra overtime 
resulting from unexpected delays. This is not very realistic in a 
real world setting, since one in practice wants to dynamically 
reschedule as unexpected events occur. To be able to perform as 
such, a scheduling system must address three main challenges: 
(1) enlarge its scope; (2) plan for uncertainty; and (3) solutions 
approach. In this paper, is discussed how the context-aware 
methodology can contribute as a solution to this problem, by 
enabling process support. 
Keywords-scheduling; context-aware; healthcare; workflow 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The majority of the hospitals use a so-called block-
booking system when planning surgeries. In this system, a 
medical specialty is assigned to blocks denoting a specific 
amount of time, e.g., a day, in one Operating Room (OR). 
These blocks can be combined into cyclical Master Surgery 
Schedules (MSS), where every block is repeated after a fixed 
cycle. At the strategic level of block-booking system, the 
number of blocks assigned to the specialties and emergencies 
during a MSS cycle is determined. At the tactical level, OR-
days are allocated to specialties in an MSS, such that the 
strategic allocation is met. 
In recent years, approaches to solve MSS have become 
more complex, in the sense that they started to consider 
multiple resources and tackle uncertainty more accurately.  
Uncertainties might come from different sources, such as 
processing times, demand/patient arrivals, no-show ups, 
personnel availability, etc. 
Clearly, MSS affects the patient flow to downstream 
inpatient care units. Surgeries performed in each block of the 
MSS create a flow of patients through the Intensive Care Unit 
(ICU) to the ward, or directly from the OR to the wards, be-
fore they leave the hospital. The post-anesthesia care unit 
might be part or not of the OR department.  
The development of an MSS module must address three 
main challenges: 
1) Enlarging the scope of the MSS: MSS approaches 
embedded in commercial software consider only the impact 
of the MSS on operating theatre and operating staff; the goal 
here is to enlarge the scope to down-stream resources, such 
as the intensive care unit ICU and the general wards required 
by the patients. The solution module should be flexible 
enough to cope with different features that appear in different 
hospitals that interfere with the planning activities. 
2) Planning with uncertainty: Surgical management 
processes are subject to high variability resulting in 
significant 
deviations 
between 
intended 
and 
actual 
performance of surgical plans. For instance, when surgeries 
take longer than predicted or emergency patients arrive, it 
often results in overtime and possible cancellation of 
surgeries. When planning at an aggregate level, uncertainties 
are usually neglected. The challenge is to anticipate the 
uncertainties and incorporate them during the MSS decision-
making. 
3) Solution approaches: The problem cannot be totally 
described in mathematical programming terms. The volatility 
of information (see previous point) makes it difficult to 
incorporate all uncertainty in a single solid deterministic 
model. 
To tackle such challenges, a MMS module has to enable a 
fast and automated, fully context dependent, scheduling. In 
such scenario, context-aware systems present themselves as a 
promising approach. 
This paper is divided in four section. In Section I, are 
presented the major challenges regarding scheduling in 
healthcare environments. In Section II, is presented a brief 
literature review on evidence that some of the health IT, 
currently implemented in clinical practice, lacks process 
support. In Section III, is presented the context-aware 
methodology, and, in Section IV, is discussed how this 
methodology can contribute to process support, and 
improvement of operational management. Section V 
concludes the article providing some ideas for future work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A few papers have lately been published on methods for 
solving patient planning problems involving uncertainty. 
Significant improvements can be attained by doing this [1]-
[4]. Exact methods, such as stochastic programming [1][2], or 
robust optimization [2] seem unable to solve problems of a 
realistic size within reasonable time. For this reason, some 
authors apply a "Sample Average Approximation" (SAA) 
approach, to speed up the calculation of recourse costs (i.e., 
the cost of handling unforeseen changes in the scheduling 
problem) [3][5]-[7]. Even more pragmatic approaches use 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Column generation [6], simple heuristics [2], local search [8], 
or meta-heuristics like Simulated Annealing [5][8] or Tabu 
search [5]. These can be applied either to the original problem, 
to the SAA simplified problem, or to a modified problem 
including hedging on resource demand or availability [8].  
Most authors consider very simple recourse actions, 
typically only counting the extra overtime resulting from 
unexpected delays. This is not very realistic in a real world 
setting, since one in practice wants to dynamically re-schedule 
as unexpected events occur. Only very few authors consider 
more advanced recourse actions [4][9].  
Very little work has been done for integrated planning and 
scheduling under uncertainty for planning that covers more 
than a week into the future. The vast majority of hospitals do 
not consider data uncertainty at the planning level. However, 
such an approach can have substantial negative impact at the 
operational level and result in a suboptimal use of OR's.  
For obtaining robust schedules, that will anticipate 
possible disruptions, OR's planning should consider 
uncertainty. Bruni et al. [4] use stochastic programming to 
model uncertainty associated with arrival of emergency 
patients and duration of surgery. The authors also presented 
some recourse strategies that model reactive scheduling 
policies. 
The problem of optimizing the assignment of surgeries 
and sufficient planned slacks to the operating days such that 
the risk of working overtime is minimized, no surgeries are 
cancelled and operating room utilization is improved is 
addressed by [8]. The problem is solved by Local Search and 
improvement heuristics. 
Other models, that create MSSs with levelled bed 
occupancy in downstream units, are presented in [10][11]. 
Both the number of patients and the length of stay in the 
hospital are assumed to be stochastic. Beliën and 
Demeulemeester [10] aim to minimize the expected bed 
shortage. The problem is solved by mixed-integer 
programming and Simulated Annealing. Fügener et al. [11], 
concentrate on inpatient flow and define a model to calculate, 
for a given MSS, the expected distributions of recovering 
patients in the downstream units. Based on this, it is proposed 
an approach for planning the MSS with the objective to 
minimize downstream costs by levelling bed demand and 
reducing weekend bed requests. The main distinction between 
the two papers is that [10] only allows one downstream 
resource, while [11] models multiple downstream units. 
A multistage stochastic mixed-integer programming 
formulation for the assignment of surgeries to operating 
rooms over a finite planning horizon is proposed in [12]. 
Demand for and the duration of surgery are random variables 
and the objective is to minimize expected cost of surgery 
cancellations, patient waiting time, and operating room 
overtime.  
It should be emphasized again, that the master surgery 
schedules are usually performed manually at the hospitals, 
without any type of systems to support the decision making. 
It should be performed with a given periodicity. The 
underlying method to generate MSS that levels the workload 
and increases the efficiency of the surgical nursing wards, 
without deteriorating the OR department’s efficiency, is based 
on simulation-optimization. 
The above-described work identifies common signs that 
the implemented technology lacks process support. To 
complete care processes, health personnel work as a team, 
performing high risk tasks under uncertainty, and time 
pressure, dependent on a wide and reliable communication 
infrastructure for exchanging different kinds of data, such as 
patient reports, lab tests and working shifts, together with text, 
voice and alarm services. The management of this information 
is difficult and requires considering a wide variety of 
problems that should be avoided in order to properly meet the 
needs of hospital professionals. Context-awareness can 
provide the necessary knowledge for health IT to reduce 
inefficiencies and manage complexity. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Let us start by defining “context”. To define “context”, 
some of the definitions given by the research community [13]-
[17] over the years were investigated, and it is concluded that 
the most suitable definition for our research is [18]:  
“Context is any information that can be used to 
characterize the situation of an entity. An entity is a person, 
place, or object that is considered relevant for the interaction 
between a user and an application, including the user and 
applications themselves.” 
This definition shows the importance of which 
information is relevant or not in a context-sensitive system. A 
context-sensitive system could, therefore, be defined as a 
system allowing interactions between multiple entities using 
relevant information. Abowd et al. [18], state that: “A system 
is context-aware if it uses context to provide relevant 
information and/or services to the user, where relevancy 
depends on the user's task”. This definition shows that a 
context-sensitive system can change its behavior and send 
some relevant information according to the context, which 
reflects our view. 
The trend in the health IT field has been to push as much 
information as possible to the users, in order to provide more 
sophisticated and useful services while, at the same time, 
making users more available. During a preliminary research 
study on the AwareMedia system [19], a classification that 
splits the above listed information along three main axes is 
suggested: 
 
Social awareness: `where a person is', `activity in 
which a person is engaged in', `self-reported status'; 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1. Illustration of context-aware systems’ basic architecture. 
 
Spatial awareness: 'what kind of operation is taking 
place in a ward', 'level of activity', 'status of operation 
and people present in the room'; 
 
Temporal awareness: 'past activities', 'present and 
future activities' that is significant for a person. 
A context-aware system, as shown in Figure 1, comprises 
two main modules: 
 
Context engine: This module interfaces with other 
information systems and devices to collect raw data. 
These are then fed to an analyzer to classify raw data 
and generate context data. 
 
Rules engine: This module acts as filter between the 
data and the user. By applying a set of pre-defined 
conditions that define what, when, and to who the 
information must be presented. Such rules can be 
defined manual or automatically. 
The adoption of context-aware systems based on these 
definitions is growing in a variety of domains, such as smart 
homes, airports, travel/entertainment/shopping, museum, and 
offices, as mentioned in [20]. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
Health IT usability, and adoption in daily practice is 
closely related to the systems’ semantic and technological 
interoperability. This requires the systems to provide a 
comprehensive platform for process support. On the other 
hand, to provide this platform, structured knowledge that is 
not currently available in the Electronic Health Record (EHR) 
systems in use in most Norwegian hospitals would be 
required. 
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
Technological interoperability can be achieved by 
describing clinical guidelines using standardized languages. 
The context-aware methodology described Section III can 
support both the knowledge and technological interoperability 
required. 
A context-aware system can collect data not only from the 
EHR, but also from the other IT implemented at the hospital. 
Such data can then be made available in different patient 
settings, and processed according to rules, to generate new 
knowledge. A context-aware system can also learn from the 
user interaction with the system to automatically improve 
his/her experience. In this manner, a context-aware system is 
able to provide process support by analyzing process related 
data of two categories: (1) “what is done”; (2) “how it is 
done”. 
The progression of a patient in a clinical process is 
determined by the completion of the tasks that compose the 
same process. However, EHR systems are not always updated 
on the tasks’ completion as different individuals evidence 
different work patterns. If technology is able to separate the 
process related data as described above, then it becomes 
possible to achieve adaptive workflows. 
Context-Aware system 
Context engine 
Rules engine 
Devices 
Information 
Systems 
Collector 
Analyser 
Context data 
Rules data 
Reasoning 
Output data 
User 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 2. Illustration of the proposed context-aware based health IT system architecture. 
 
“What is done” can be described by translating clinical 
guidelines using a standardize language like OpenEHR 
archetypes. 
“How it is done” can be achieved by using machine-
learning techniques, fed with context data, to adjust the 
clinical guideline to the individual user work pattern. The 
semantic interoperability is achieve through the definition of 
the data required to support workflow on the individual level 
to bring both concepts together using OpenEHR archetypes. 
An illustration of the system architecture is presented in 
Figure 2. 
Context-awareness allows health IT to provide process 
support by managing the complexity inherent to clinical 
processes while supplying the technology with the process 
standards required to ensure usability. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the regional health authority 
Helse-Nord for funding the research project HST 1304-16. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Batun, B. T. Denton, T. R. Huschka, and A. J. Schaefer, "Operating 
Room Pooling and Parallel Surgery Processing under Uncertainty," 
INFORMS journal on Computing, vol. 23, pp. 220-237, 2011. 
[2] 
B. T. Denton, A. J. Miller, H. J. Balasubramanian, and T. R. Huschka, 
"Optimal Allocation of Surgery Blocks to Operating Rooms under 
Uncertainty," Operations research, vol. 58, pp. 802-816, 2010. 
[3] 
M. Lamiri, X. Xie, A. Dolgui, and F. Grimaud, "A Stochastic Model 
for Operating Room Planning with Elective and Emergency Demand 
for Surgery," European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 185, pp. 
1026-1037, 2008. 
[4] 
M. Bruni, P. Beraldi, and D. Conforti, "A Stochastic Programming 
Approach for Operating Theatre Scheduling under Uncertainty," IMA 
Journal of Management Mathematics, vol. 26, pp. 99-119, 2015. 
[5] 
M. Lamiri, F. Grimaud, and X. Xie, "Optimization Methods for a 
Stochastic Surgery Planning Problem," International Journal of 
Production Economics, vol. 120, pp. 400-410, 2009. 
[6] 
M. Lamiri, J. Dreo, and X. Xie, "Operating Room Planning with 
Random Surgery Times," Automation Science and Engineering, 2007 
CASE 2007 IEEE International Conference on, IEEE, 2007, pp. 521-
526. 
[7] 
D. Min and Y. Yih, "Scheduling Elective Surgery under Uncertainty 
and Downstream Capacity Constraints," European Journal of 
Operational Research, vol. 206, pp. 642-652, 2010. 
[8] 
E. Hans, G. Wullink, M. van Houdenhoven, and G. Kazemier, "Robust 
Surgery Loading," European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 
185, pp. 1038-1050, 2008. 
[9] 
M. Heydari and A. Soudi, "Predictive/Reactive Planning and 
Scheduling of a Surgical Suite with Emergency Patient Arrival," 
Journal of medical systems, vol. 40, pp. 1-9, 2016. 
[10] J. Beliën and E. Demeulemeester, "Building Cyclic Master Surgery 
Schedules with Leveled Resulting Bed Occupancy," European Journal 
of Operational Research, vol. 176, pp. 1185-1204, 2007. 
[11] A. Fügener, E. W. Hans, R. Kolisch, N. Kortbeek, and P. T. Vanberkel, 
"Master Surgery Scheduling with Consideration of Multiple 
Downstream Units," European journal of operational research, vol. 
239, pp. 227-236, 2014. 
[12] S. Gul, B. T. Denton, and J. W. Fowler, "A Progressive Hedging 
Approach for Surgery Planning under Uncertainty," INFORMS 
Journal on Computing, vol. 27, pp. 755-772, 2015. 
[13] J. J. Bisgaard, M. Heise, and C. Steffensen, "How Is Context and 
Context-Awareness Defined and Applied? A Survey of Context-
Awareness," Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, 
pp. 31-40, 2004. 
[14] H. Lieberman and T. Selker, "Out of Context: Computer Systems That 
Adapt to, and Learn from, Context " IBM Systems Journal, vol. 39, pp. 
617 - 632, 2000. 
[15] B. Schilit, N. Adams, and R. Want, "Context-Aware Computing 
Applications," Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 1994 
Proceedings, Workshop on, 1994, pp. 85-90. 
[16] A. K. Dey, "Understanding and Using Context," Personal and 
ubiquitous computing, vol. 5, pp. 4-7, 2001. 
[17] P. Dourish, "What We Talk About When We Talk About Context," 
Personal and ubiquitous computing, vol. 8, pp. 19-30, 2004. 
[18] G. D. Abowd, A. K. Dey, P. J. Brown, N. Davies, M. Smith, and P. 
Steggles, "Towards a Better Understanding of Context and Context-
Awareness," Proceedings of the 1st international symposium on 
Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing, Springer-Verlag, 1999, pp. 304-
307. 
[19] J. E. Bardram, T. R. Hansen, and M. Soegaard, "Awaremedia: A 
Shared Interactive Display Supporting Social, Temporal, and Spatial 
Awareness in Surgery," Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary 
conference on Computer supported cooperative work, ACM, 2006, pp. 
109-118. 
[20] A. Hristova, "Conceptualization and Design of a Context-Aware 
Platform for User Centric Applications," Master of Science in 
Communication Technology Master, Department of Telematics, 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, 2008. 
 
EHR 
Context-Aware system 
Clinical 
Guidelines 
Adaptive 
Workflow 
Models 
Health IT 
Required Data 
Generated Data 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

