Barriers to Deploying Diabetes Self-management mHealth Services in the Chinese 
Market 
 
Ying Li  
Key Laboratory of Biorcheological Science and 
Technology 
Bioengineering College, Chongqing University 
 Chongqing, China 
e-mail: liyingberry@hotmail.com 
Xiaolian  Duan  
Chongqing Academy of  Science and Technology 
 Chongqing, China 
e-mail: dxl@cast.gov.cn 
Daidi Zhong 
Key Laboratory of Biorcheological Science and 
Technology 
 Bioengineering College, Chongqing University 
Chongqing, China 
e-mail: daidi.zhong@cqu.edu.cn 
Jianning Qu 
the Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University 
Chongqing, China 
e-mail: 360113522@qq.com
 
 
Abstract—Recently, a large number of mobile applications 
have been developed to address the needs of patients for 
diabetes self-management mobile health (mHealth) services. 
Given the explosion of mHealth technology enablers, 
increasing investment, and more favorable government policies, 
diabetes self-management mHealth services are generally seen 
as a promising domain by Chinese investors. However, the 
meta-analysis described here showed that even large numbers 
of cases and environmental factors did not result in a massive 
adoption or deep market penetration. The root causes of this 
were analyzed and there were five barriers, i.e., human 
resources, trust from clinical service providers, policies, 
functionality, and business models, preventing the adoption of 
this technology.  This finding may serve as a reference for 
future 
decision-making 
with 
regard 
to 
the 
research, 
development, use, and policy-making related to mobile health 
services. 
Keywords-mHealth; 
diabetes; 
self-management; 
mobile 
applications. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Diabetes mellitus is one of the most common chronic 
disorders in the world, and insufficient self-management can 
involve both considerable personal suffering and enormous 
costs. In 2013, diabetes caused 114 million deaths in the 
adult population of China. The estimated cost of managing 
people diagnosed with diabetes in 2014 was $612 billion [1]. 
Improving self-management is an important part of 
improving cost-effective patient-centered care and dealing 
with the growing health care challenge posed by diabetes 
[2][3]. 
Self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) has been 
shown to be a useful tool in improving glycemic control in 
type 2 diabetes, helping patients make informed decisions in 
managing blood glucose [4].  Mobile health (mHealth) 
technology renders SMBG more flexible and efficient for the 
treatment of patients. Figure 1 presents a general architecture 
of such mHealth-based SMBG system. 
 
Figure 1. SMBG system
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

When practicing SMBG, patients normally monitor and 
manage their glucose level by themselves at home. Such 
activity may benefit from a SMBG system, which allows 
patients transmitting their data to service provider via an 
end-to-end data channel. Such a system is often constituted 
with one or more measuring instruments (e.g., a glucose 
meter), a gateway device (e.g., a mobile device) and a remote 
server. Patients can collect their glucose measurements and 
other context health data with glucose meter and other 
instruments. The common devices employed here are blood 
glucose monitor (BGM) and continuous glucose monitor 
(CGM). The remote server contains Personal Health Record 
(PHR) and other related services.  
The 
established 
connectivity 
between 
measuring 
instruments 
and personal 
health 
gateway, 
and 
the 
connectivity between gateways to remote server, together 
populate an end-to-end data channel. Via this channel, the 
collected data can be transmitted from patients to service 
providers via uplink, and the instructions from service 
providers can be sent to patients via downlink. This allows 
patients and service providers to access the health data at any 
time. Service providers can further give appropriate 
interventions to patients based on certain data-driven strategy. 
Moreover, the external partners contain the Hospital 
Information System (HIS), the Social Network Site (SNS), 
etc. 
The study [5] about the SMBG applications in EU 
(European Union)  or foreign countries shows that (1) 
perceived barriers to use or continuous use, (2) perceived 
benefits of desired features of diabetes self-management, (3) 
facilitators to motivate use, and (4) information sharing with 
family, friends, and health professionals. The result shows 
that there is a problem about the usage of the SMBG 
applications in EU or foreign countries. 
In recent years, the government of China has issued 
several 
policies 
that 
affect 
mHealth 
[6]–[8]. 
Top 
policymakers are targeting the development of portable 
health data collection devices, integration with the Internet 
and mobile Internet, and improvement of the level of 
automatic and intelligent health information services. 
Under the support of government policy and the catalysis 
of the market demand, more and more companies and 
investment organizations have swarmed into the diabetes 
self- management application market. Such stakeholders are 
the key actors of the operation of online diabetes self- 
management. 
In order to assess the status of adoption of diabetes self- 
management mHealth services in China, we conducted a 
meta-analysis [9], the meta-analysis was about the diabetes 
self-management related applications in China, and some 
aspects 
are 
compared, 
including 
the 
innovative 
functionalities, defects, prospects, conformance of standards, 
etc. And the following facts were observed: (1) the number 
of SMBG applications in China is low; there are only 78; (2) 
there is only 1 application whose download count exceeds 
5000, and only 3 iOS applications have been scored by users; 
(3) the most common features of applications that have been 
studied include recording of blood health data, notification, 
and decision support. Obviously, the rate of adoption of 
diabetes self-management tools in the market is low, which 
seems to be contradicting to the continuously increasing 
investment interest in this domain. 
In order to fully understand the root causes of this 
paradox, as well as the gains and gaps of the current Chinese 
mHealth-based SMBG industry, a thorough analysis was 
provided in Section 2, with regards to the barriers of its 
development and deployment. 
II. 
BARRIERS TO THE DEVELOPMENT AND 
DEPLOYMENT OF DIABETES SELF-MANAGEMENT 
APPLICATIONS 
A. Lack  of  human  resources  to  support  diabetes  self- 
management 
A sufficient number of service providers is needed to 
provide remote diabetes management services.  This is a 
prerequisite to any good deployment of diabetes self- 
management applications. However, China lacks proper 
human resources for such purposes. This country is 
especially short of primary care service providers (e.g. GP, 
family doctors, family nurses). It has been reported that the 
amount of community-level service providers in 2010 was 
only 4.04% of the total amount of healthcare service 
professionals [10][11]. The same statistic in America, Britain, 
and Canada is 30–50%. There are 2.466 million registered 
primary care providers in China, which translates to 1.82 
providers per thousand civilians. This ratio places China 80th 
among 193 countries, according the WHO. Until 2011, there 
were no dedicated personnel training system or official 
promotion channels for this group of providers. To solve this 
issue, the State Council issued guidance to improve the 
training of general practitioners (GP) [12]. It sets the goal of 
establishing a rigorous training system by 2020 to satisfy 
people’s basic health service needs. It will be a long time 
before any substantial change will become observable. 
Another reason for the shortage of service providers is 
that the current management policy for clinical practice does 
not fully allow clinicians to practice at multiple sites. In 1995, 
the Chinese government enforced the law establishing the 
national clinician registration system [13][14]. According to 
that law, clinicians can only practice at the point-of-care to 
which they were originally registered, and practicing at any 
other location is considered illegal. This situation is now 
changing because the State Council has recently issued a 
policy promoting multiple-site practicing [15][16]. However, 
the mobile Internet, where diabetes self-management 
applications are used, has not yet been acknowledged by this 
guideline as a permissible place to practice medicine. For 
this reason, further extensions to this policy are expected. 
B. Lack of trust from service providers 
The level of support from professional service providers 
is critical to accelerating the massive adoption of diabetes 
self-management mHealth services. When providing SMBG- 
related services, the service providers have to base their 
interventions on existing clinical guidelines [17][18]. These 
are generally considered the best practices in the field. 
However, the fact is that the currently available clinical 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

guidelines were established mainly based on the medical 
studies conducted over controlled data within controlled 
environment, which is quite different from patients’ self- 
generated data from ambient environments (including home 
and traveling). Those guidelines describe a SMBG process 
that is driven and managed solely by service providers 
(although the patient is the main actor); this is somewhat 
different from purely patient-dominant activities. 
Theories underlying evidence-based medicine must be 
established based on clinical evidence. However, due to the 
lack of interoperability, regulation, and business impetus, no 
large-scale patient-oriented SMBG system has been 
established or used in the field. For this reason, the clinical 
researchers have no way to acquire useful research data, 
generated from patients’ personal health devices in their 
personal environments in sufficient quality and quantity. 
Correspondingly, there has been no foundation upon which 
to create any clinical guidelines for SMBG activities. 
Without such guidelines, the service providers have 
generally hesitated to enter this market or to provide 
meaningful support for these SMBG-practicing patients. This 
can be seen as a classic chicken-egg puzzle: No deployment 
means no data, which means no research, no trust, no service, 
and no deployment. Solving this puzzle has become a core 
topic in today’s SMBG industry. 
Also, many users have the interest to use the apps, they 
said that “the app has made the SMBG more efficiently, it 
pontificated me to have medicine and record the glucose 
data”. 
There has recently been a rapidly increase in interest and 
investment in the Chinese mHealth market. Some personal 
connected health platforms are being established and 
deployed in many Chinese cities [19][20]. Many of them are 
designed for general health management services, but some 
of them do have the capability to support SMBG services. 
Domestic investors fully understand that mHealth is an 
emerging market, so they are patient enough to tolerate long 
revenue turn-around. Given the large population of China, 
this may provide the industry with an opportunity to collect 
enough data and to conduct proper medical studies before the 
true clinical efficiency of these applications can be proven 
and the dedicated best practices can be established. 
Hopefully, the puzzle will be solved in a few years. 
C. Domestic regulatory policy regarding to the use of 
diabetes self-management applications 
The diabetes self-management applications fall into a 
multidisciplinary domain between medical device and IT 
industry. The Food and Drug Administration of China 
(CFDA) and the Ministry of Industry and Information 
Technology (MIIT) are the corresponding regulatory bodies. 
However, none of them has published regulation policy 
dedicatedly 
for 
this 
multidisciplinary 
domain. 
The 
regulations issued by CFDA only cover situations inside 
hospitals, and they do not include the diabetes self-
management applications outside hospitals. The regulations 
issued by MIIT only address Internet-based information 
services and promotes the development of the IT industry. 
None of them address the specific needs of the remote clinics 
and Personal Health Record (PHR) data utilization, which 
can be seen as another gap of this industry. 
Currently, there is no clear legal definition of diabetes 
self-management applications. When using them, patients 
are unable to protect their rights in cases in which anything 
goes wrong (e.g., receiving the wrong prescription). 
Furthermore, due to the legal requirement that clinicians 
register at a certain physical point-of-care for all clinical 
work, the legal status of medical care provided online (such 
as via diabetes self- management applications) has remained 
murky. There is a true need to develop a proper regulatory 
policy for this type of technology and service, and there are 
currently no such policies in China. 
The U.S. diabetes management platform developed by 
WellDoc [21] received FDA clearance. It is the first 
application approved by the FDA for the optimization of 
doctors’ prescriptions. Unlike the U.S. FDA, the CFDA has 
not issued any dedicated regulation guidelines for mHealth. 
However, this does not necessarily mean there is no chance 
that it will get approval. A glucose meter device, Dnurse and 
its associated Internet-based service, both of which were 
developed by Beijing Dnurse Technology Ltd. [22], did get 
clearance from the CFDA. It operates in manner similar to 
WellDoc. 
D. Functionality of diabetes self-management applications 
in China 
In applications related to the diabetes self-management, 
most functionalities have conformed to those listed in the 
international standards and clinical guidelines. However, for 
some other types of functionalities, the situation is different. 
The missing key functionalities may lead to the low rate 
adoption. 
Most applications provide no connectivity to measuring 
instruments. One possible reason for this is the obsolete 
mindset of domestic application developers and instrument 
manufacturers. When building their own products, their 
design logic is purely application-centric or device-centric 
rather 
than 
a 
holistic 
vision 
established 
over 
an 
interconnected infrastructure. In contrast, the leading tech 
company Google recently released Google Fit and Apple 
released Health Kit. Both of these applications leverage 
modern connectivity technologies to simplify or automate 
the heath data collection process. A similar trend is likely to 
appear in China in the future. It is only a question of when 
and how. 
Despite of the benefits of PHR synchronization reported 
in some studies [23][24], the rate of adoption of such 
applications has small, partially because of end-to-end 
usability issues. Our interpretation of the possible reason is: 
gateway device vendors are quite dominant in current 
Chinese mHealth market (including the ecosystem of 
diabetes self- management mHealth services), the vendors 
have focused mainly on data synchronization with gateway 
devices, rather than on the cloud platform. Improving the 
aforementioned usability issue will require joint effort from 
all the stakeholders (operators, integrators, medical device 
manufacturers, application developers, healthcare providers, 
etc.) to establish a data synchronization channel. 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

E. Business 
models 
of 
diabetes 
self-management 
applications in China 
According to the results of our meta-analysis, the 
business models of diabetes self-management applications in 
China were found to be less diverse. We have observed three 
categories of business models in China: (1) Consumers as 
payers; (2) device vendor providers as the payers; (3) service 
providers as payers. 
In contrast, the variety of business models in developed 
countries is much better. For example, the Zocdoc [25] is 
free to patients but not to doctors. The Welldoc [21] charges 
insurance companies and cooperates with pharmaceutical 
companies in the sale of applications to hospitals. Vocera [26] 
charges hospitals. 
The current business models in China have not 
incorporated 
hospitals, 
pharmaceutical 
companies, 
commercial insurance companies, and doctors. The current 
business models have not fully engaged all the stakeholders 
of the ecosystem of the diabetes self-management mHealth 
services. No operational infrastructure for diabetes self- 
management mHealth services has yet been established. All 
of the observed business models are purely technology-
driven or product-driven, rather than built from the 
perspective of the stakeholders. Correspondingly, such 
business models cannot properly satisfy the needs of all 
potential stakeholders, thus cannot adapt to the quickly 
evolving business environment. There is an immediate need 
in the Chinese market for business models with enough 
comprehensiveness and sustainability for diabetes self-
management applications. It is not practical to directly copy 
business models from developed countries. A local process 
must be developed to suit the actual situation in the domestic 
market. One of the future trends is to acquire large quantities 
of user data and to trigger innovative business projects based 
on this big data. 
 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
We observed that the low adoption rate of the diabetes 
self-management mHealth services was not consistent with 
the high level of interest in the domain. In this paper, a root 
cause analysis is performed to investigate barriers to 
technology adoption. As a result, five barriers to the 
development and deploying of applications in China have 
been identified and elaborated. There is a shortage of 
primary care service providers and those who are available 
are not allowed to practice at multiple sites. This leaves 
diabetes self- management applications without the support 
of doctors. The lack of validation from clinical data and 
large-scale data support leaves doctors reluctant to 
recommend diabetes self- management applications to 
patients. Without the protection of relevant regulations, 
patients cannot protect their rights in cases of harmful error 
(e.g., receiving the wrong prescription). Undeveloped 
functionalities leave doctors and patients unable to use the 
applications or realize actual diabetes self- management. The 
current business models are not diverse enough and do not 
incorporate 
hospitals, 
pharmaceutical 
companies, 
commercial insurance companies, and the doctors, leaving 
patients and doctors unable to reap the benefits of the system. 
These findings may serve as a reference for future 
decision-making regarding the research, development, 
deployment, and policy-making related to these applications. 
Stakeholders may take action to reduce barriers to the 
development and deployment of diabetes self-management 
applications for public consumption. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Partial funding was provided by Chongqing University 
(Project No. CSTC2013JCSF10034 and No. 2015BAI01 
B00). As the sponsor of this research, Chongqing University 
was not involved in the review or approval of the manuscript 
for publication. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] IDF. 
http://www.idf.org/worlddiabetesday/toolkit/gp/facts-
figures. [retrieved: 2.2016] 
[2] S Norris, M Engelgau, and K Narayan. “Effectiveness of 
Self-Management Training in Type 2 Diabetes A 
systematic review of randomized controlled trials”. 
Diabetes Care, vol. 24, no. 3, 2001, pp. 561-587. 
[3] S.L. Norris, J Lau, S.J. Smith, C.H. Schmid, and M.M. 
Engelgau. “Self- management education for adults with 
type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of the effect on 
glycemic control”. Diabetes Care, vol. 25, no. 7, 2002, 
pp. 1159-1171. 
[4] J Tran, R Tran, and J.R. White. “Smartphone-Based 
Glucose Monitors and Applications in the Management 
of Diabetes: An Overview of 10 Salient "Apps" and a 
Novel Smartphone-Connected Blood Glucose Monitor”. 
Clinical Diabetes, 2012. 
[5] W Peng, S.P. Yuan, and B.E. Holtz. “Exploring the 
Challenges and Opportunities of Health Mobile Apps 
for Individuals with Type 2 Diabetes Living in Rural 
Communities. 
Telemedicine 
and 
e-Health. 
doi:10.1089/tmj.2015.0180. 
[6] The State Council. “"Twelfth Five (2011-2015)" 
National Strategic Emerging Industry Development 
Plan” .http://www.gov.cn/xxgk/pub/govpublic/mrlm/20
1207/t20120720_65368.html. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[7] The State Council. “The Issuance of Biomedical 
Development 
Plan”. 
http://www.gov.cn/zwgk/2013-
01/06/content_2305639.htm. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[8] The State Council. “Opinions on Promoting the 
Development 
of 
Health 
Services 
Industry”. 
http://www.gov.cn/zwgk/2013-
0/14/content_2506399.htm. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[9] Y Li, J Tan, B.Z. Shi, D.D. Zhong, X.L. Duan, X.L. Li, 
and J.N. Qu. “A Study of ICT-Powered Diabetes Self-
management Systems in China”. JMIR Diabetes 
(forthcoming).doi:10.2196/diabetes.4475 (in press) 
[10] Chinese Ministry of Health. “2011 China Health 
Statistics 
Yearbook”. 
http://www.moh.gov.cn/htmlfiles/zwgkzt/ptjnj/year2011
/index2011.html. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[11] Chinese Ministry of Health. “2011 Statistical Bulletin of 
health 
development”. 
http://www.moh.gov.cn/zwgkzt/pnb/201204/54532.shtm
l. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

[12] The State Council. “Guidance on the Establishment of 
General 
Practitioner 
System”. 
http://www.gov.cn/zwgk/2011-
7/07/content_1901099.htm.[retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[13] The State Council. “The Medical Practitioners Law in 
China” (in Chinese) .http://www.gov.cn/banshi/2005-
05/25/content_973.htm. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[14] Chinese Ministry of Health. “The Interim doctors 
practicing 
registered 
Measures” 
(in 
Chinese) 
.http://www.gov.cn/banshi/2005- 
08/02/content_19342.htm. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[15] The State Council. “The Focused Task in Deepening 
Health 
System 
Reform 
in 
2014”.  
http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2014-
05/28/content_8832.htm. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[16] The Ministry of Public Health of China. “The notice on 
expanding 
the 
scope 
of 
practicing 
pilot” 
(in 
Chinese).http://www.moh.gov.cn/mohyzs/s3578/201107
/52434.shtml. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[17] W.P. Jia. “Chinese Glucose Monitoring Clinical 
Guideline (2011 edition)” (in Chinese). Chinese Journal 
of the Frontiers of Medical Science (Electronic Version), 
vol. 04, 2011, pp. 62-72. 
[18] W.P. Jia. “Chinese Continuous Glucose Monitoring 
Clinical Guideline (2012 edition)” (in Chinese) Chinese 
Journal of Diabetes, vol. 4, no.10, 2012, pp. 582-590. 
[19] Baidu Jiankang. http://jiankang.baidu.com/. [retrieved: 
2.2016]. 
[20] Ali Jiankang. http://www.alijk.com/. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[21] WellDoc. http://www.welldoc.com/. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[22] Dnurse. http://www.dnurse.com/. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[23] D Wiljer, S Urowitz, E Apatu, C DeLenardo, G 
Eysenbach, and T Harth. “Canadian Committee for 
Patient Accessible Health Records. Patient accessible 
electronic health records: exploring recommendations 
for successful implementation strategies”. J Med 
Internet Res vol. 10, no. 4, 2008, pp. e34. 
[24] C.P. Tang, et al. “Personal health records: definitions, 
benefits, and strategies for overcoming barriers to 
adoption”. Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol. 13, no. 2, 2006, pp. 121-126. 
[25] Zocdoc. https://www.zocdoc.com/. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
[26] Vocera. http://www.vocera.com/. [retrieved: 2.2016]. 
 
 
 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

