Developing an Interactive Web Tool, the DecideGuide, to Facilitate Shared Decision 
Making in Dementia Care Networks: Lessons Learned 
Marijke Span, Carolien Smits, Leontine Groen-van de 
Ven, Jan Jukema, Marike Hettinga 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
m.span@windesheim.nl, chm.smits@windesheim.nl, 
lm.groen-vande.ven@windesheim.nl, 
js.jukema@windesheim.nl, m.hettinga@windesheim.nl 
 
 
Myrra Vernooij-Dassen  
 IQHealth Care and Department of Primary Care, Kalorama 
Foundation, Radboud Alzheimer Centre 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands  
myrra.vernooij-dassen@radboudumc.nl 
 
Jan Eefsting 
EMGO+ Free University Medical Centre of Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands 
j.eefsting@zgijv.nl 
 
Abstract—An interactive web tool, the DecideGuide, is 
developed to support case managers in facilitating shared 
decision making in care networks of people with dementia. The 
DecideGuide is developed in collaboration with the end users: 
people with dementia, informal caregivers, and case managers. 
The development consisted of five sub studies. In retrospection, 
reflections are made on these sub studies. Lessons learned 
concerned: the importance and value of involving people with 
dementia in the development of assistive technology such as the 
DecideGuide, the importance of involving people with 
dementia from the start, the importance of taking time for 
people with dementia, and the importance of being aware 
about the role of end users from the very beginning. Moreover, 
developing an interactive tool for end users with different 
capacities and interests requires attuning to the most 
vulnerable end user group of people with dementia; just ask 
them rather than decide for them. This paper provides an 
overview of the lessons learned in the development of the 
DecideGuide. 
Keywords- dementia; decision making; assistive technology; 
participatory design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The voice of people with dementia is often ignored 
[1][2]. Relatives and professionals tend to shield people with 
dementia because of the cognitive decline. This is often done 
with the best intentions. As a consequence of this shielding 
attitude, people with dementia are not always involved in 
decision-making about their own situation [3][4]. When the 
experiences and wishes of people with dementia are not 
taken into account, it is difficult to make decisions that are 
attuned to their needs. Although relatives tend to decide for 
people with dementia rather than with them, the research 
shows that people with dementia can express their needs and 
experiences, even in an advanced stage of dementia [3][5].  
Decision-making in dementia is complex because of the 
multiple participants involved who have different capacities 
and interests and the progressive cognitive decline that 
adheres to the disease dementia [6]. Well-known decreasing 
abilities address memory, route planning, behavior change, 
and orientation. As we all get older, the chance that dementia 
will affect us increases. Predictions about this increase of 
dementia worldwide range from 66 million in 2013 to 114 
million in 2050 [7][8]. Life expectation of people with 
dementia after diagnosis runs between 6-10 years. During 
this period people with dementia and their relatives have to 
face many problems and decisions [9][10][11] 
Shared decision making (SDM) has its roots in the 
clinical encounter. It is an approach that involves patients in 
making medical decisions in collaboration with their 
professionals [12]. Moreover, shared decision making results 
in increased autonomy [4] and well-being [13] of both the 
person with dementia and the informal caregiver. It gives a 
voice to people with dementia. Shared decision making is 
often supported by paper or web based tools.  
This paper concerns the development of an interactive 
web tool to facilitate shared decision making in dementia 
care networks, called the DecideGuide. The DecideGuide 
and its development is a part of a major research program on 
shared decision making in care networks of people with 
dementia aiming to improve professional care and thus 
contributing to dementia care practice. Besides developing 
an interactive web tool, the research program focuses on 
developing theory building and competency descriptions for 
case managers [14]. 
This study has an iterative participatory design process. 
We involved end users and particular people with dementia 
[15] in developing a user-friendly and usable IT application. 
Involving people with dementia in the development of 
supportive IT applications results in better and user-friendlier 
applications [15][16]. Involvement of people with dementia 
is necessary; it enables researchers to gain insight into views, 
needs, 
and 
experiences 
of 
people 
with 
dementia 
[3][4][17][18]. 
In this paper, we aim to gain insight into the development 
of the DecideGuide, which is an interactive web tool to 
facilitate shared decision making in dementia by looking 
back on the development process. Our research question is: 
what lessons can be learned of the design and development 
process, and the involvement of people with dementia?  
The outline of the paper is as follows: Section II explains 
the DecideGuide, Section III describes the methods used in 
the sub studies, in Section IV the results of the different 
development phases are briefly presented, Section V 
describes the lessons learned, and Section VI ends with the 
conclusion.  
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Final layout of three pillars of the DecideGuide (screen view for the person with dementia). Clockwise starting top left: chat function (belonging to 
the first pillar), deciding together (second pillar), individual opinion “How are you right now?” and individual opinion in questionnaire with examples (both 
belonging to the third pillar) [21] 
II. THE DECIDEGUIDE 
We developed the DecideGuide, which is an interactive 
web tool facilitating shared decision making in care networks 
of people with dementia. People with dementia, informal 
caregivers and case managers communicate in this tool with 
each other in making shared decisions.  
The DecideGuide has three functions: 1) a chat function 
where network members can communicate with each other, 
2) a deciding together part that supports step by step 
decision-making, and 3) an individual views part, where 
network members can give their individual opinion about 
eight dementia related themes (Fig. 1). All participants have 
an individual login and attend the tool on their own or after 
an alert of the case manager. The DecideGuide is a safe and 
shielded web tool that is accessible via tablet, a laptop or a 
computer.  
III. METHODS 
In this paper we look back on the development trajectory 
of the DecideGuide with a bird’s-eye view.  We look back at 
the development process and the involvement of people with 
dementia. The development consisted of five sub studies: (1) 
a systematic review of literature about involvement of people 
with dementia in the development of supportive IT  
applications, (2) identifying user requirements based on 
needs and wishes of end users, (3) determining the design 
reflected on (5) the participation of people with dementia in 
developing the DecideGuide. Table I provides a brief 
overview of the methods of the sub studies. 
We used the Center for eHealth Research and Disease 
Management (CeHRes) roadmap for the development of the 
DecideGuide, because this approach connects a Human 
Centered Design with eHealth Business Modeling and 
emphasizes the importance of involving all stakeholders to 
develop sustainable innovations [19]. The CeHRes roadmap 
offers a holistic framework consisting of five phases:  
contextual inquiry phase, value specification phase, design 
phase, operationalization phase, and summative evaluation 
phase. 
IV. RESULTS  
Consecutively, we will present the general study findings, 
and conclusions and reflection of the four steps of the 
development briefly per study. Then, findings addressing the 
participation of people with dementia will be presented and 
discussed.  
A. Systematic literature review 
1) General findings [15]: From a list of 893 relevant 
citations, 26 publications could be included. The findings 
suggest that most researchers acknowledge the importance of 
involvement of people with dementia in the development but 
they differed in how they involved people with dementia. 
Most people with dementia were mainly involved in the first 
phases of the development process, the explorative and
	  
	  
 
 
	  
	  
 
 
 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I. CHARACTERISTICS OF METHODS OF SUB STUDIES OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE DECIDEGUIDE 
 
 
Development process of the DecideGuide: sub studies 
 
1. Systematic review  
2. Identifying user 
requirements 
3. Determining the 
design 
4.  A 5-month field 
study 
5. Participation of 
people with dementia: 
case study  
Research 
questions 
How are people with 
dementia involved in the 
development of 
supportive IT 
applications? 
1) What topics can be 
identified for an interactive 
web tool facilitating shared 
decision-making in 
dementia?  
2. What additional needs 
and preferences regarding 
an interactive web tool 
facilitating shared decision 
making in dementia can be 
identified? 
1) What design issues 
can be identified for a 
user-friendly interactive 
web tool that helps 
people with dementia 
with shared decision 
making?  
2) What is the unique 
contribution of people 
with dementia to the 
design?  
1) How do end users 
value the user 
friendliness, and the 
user acceptance and 
satisfaction of the tool, 
and 2) how do end 
users value the 
DecideGuide as tool in 
decision-making 
processes? 
How participated 
people with dementia 
(phaese, role, and 
impact) during the 
design and 
development of the 
DecideGuide?  
Participants 
 
People with dementia 
(n=19), informal caregivers 
(n=31), case managers 
(n=24), and experts (n=14). 
People with dementia 
(n= 12), informal 
caregivers (n= 8), older 
adults (n=3), case 
managers (n= 7) and 
experts (n=3). 
Four dementia care 
networks (n = 20) 
consisting of people 
with dementia (n=4), 
informal caregivers 
(n=13), and their case 
managers (n=3). 
People with dementia 
who participated in the 
sub studies 1-4 (n=48) 
Data 
collection 
A systematic search was 
conducted using Cochrane 
Library, PubMED, 
PsychInfo, EMBASE, and 
CINAHL,  concerning the 
involvement of people 
with dementia in the 
development of 
supportive IT 
applications.  
50 semi structured 
interviews with end users 
Eight separate focus group 
interviews with end user 
groups 
Expert consultation 
Two multi-disciplinary 
workshops 
 
Two focus group 
sessions with mock-ups 
with all end user groups. 
Cognitive walkthrough 
with experts. 
Individual usability tests 
with three indiviudals of 
all end user groups 
Structured interviews 
at t0,t1, t2 
Observations of case 
managers’ home visits  
Log files in tool 
Log book 
Use of data gathered in 
sub studies 1-4: 
Semi structured 
interviews (n=23) 
Four focus groups (n= 
18) 
Usability tests (n=3) 
Pilot study (n=4) 
Log book 
Analysis 
Content analysis focused 
on involvement 
characteristics: phase of 
involvement, methods 
used to involve, role, and 
impact of involvement.  
Content analyis was 
applied to the data 
addressing the research 
questions. 
The five steps of 
framework analysis 
were used. 
Analysis focused on the 
three levels of the 
CeHRes assessment of 
design quality: system, 
content, and service 
quality. 
Content analysis was 
applied to the data and 
focused on: 1) how the 
end users valued the 
user friendliness, and 
user acceptance and 
satisfaction, and 2) 
how end users valued 
the DecideGuide as 
tool in decision-
making processes. 
Seondary analysis, 
using the patient 
participation ladder of 
Abma and the phases 
of the CeHRes 
roadmap.  
 
technical development phases. People with dementia played 
mainly the role of study objects and informants (n = 24) 
rather than being co-designer (n=2). 
2) Conclusions and reflections: People with dementia 
can participate in the development of supportive IT 
applications and they provide useful feedback that leads to 
more user friendly and usable IT applications. The findings 
of the review confirmed our intention to involve people with 
dementia in all phases of the development, despite their 
declining capacities and despite the opinions of informal 
caregivers and professionals. In order to know what is 
important to people with dementia, we have to involve them 
unless they refuse to participate.  
B. Identifying user requirements  
1) General findings [20]: Two sets of user requirements 
were identified. The first set was based on experienced 
problems and decisions of people with dementia, informal 
care givers, and case managers addressing: social contacts, 
daily activities, mobility and transport, safety, living, future, 
care, and finances. The second set of user requirements was 
based on additional needs and preferences of participants 
addressing: participation of the person with dementia in the 
decision-making, 
insight 
into 
the 
decision 
history, 
anticipation of possible future problems and decisions, and 
the degree of self-management and autonomy preservation 
of the person with dementia. 
2) 
Conclusions 
and 
reflections: 
The 
iterative 
participatory approach – individual interviews followed by 
two sequential focus groups per target group – helped us to 
identify two sets of user requirements. Decision making in 
dementia care networks concerns mainly problems of the 
well-being of people with dementia and their informal 
caregivers rather than more care related problems. The 
views of all people involved were of importance to achieve 
a well-funded set of user requirements. We invested much 
time 
in 
individual 
interviews 
with 
people 
with
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

dementia, informal caregivers, and case managers and 
separate focus groups per target group to enable participants 
to speak freely. This provided us with useful feedback. 
People with dementia mentioned fewer problems than the 
other participants but they described values that were 
important to them, e.g., independency and social contacts. 
This could be due to a possible fear that reporting problems 
may have undesirable consequences with respect to their 
autonomy.  
All participants found it hard to describe requirements for 
a supportive SDM tool. They could not imagine how such a 
tool should look like. Beforehand, we expected this for 
people with dementia, but it proved also to be difficult for 
both informal caregivers and case managers. Discussing 
requirements for a supportive tool to facilitate SDM seemed 
to be too abstract for participants. 
 
C. Determining the design of an interactive web tool, the 
DecideGuide 
1) General findings [21]: The design of the interactive 
web tool, the DecideGuide, arose from four iterations. These 
iterations were based on feedback of all end users groups. 
The different participants experienced weaknesses that 
addressed mainly the system quality: user-friendliness of the 
tool (e.g., too many screens and too much information per 
screen, operating a touch screen, unclear interface, meaning 
of buttons), unclearness of navigation (in screens and 
between screens) and persuasiveness of the design 
(presentation of information, use of icons, size of 
icons/smiley’s). Weaknesses addressing the content quality 
concerned the accuracy of wording and relevance of the 
content. Experienced strengths concerned the possible future 
extensions, monitoring caregivers’ well-being, use of 
smileys and the green interface color. Disagreements of 
participants regarding design issues addressed the number of 
screens and examples, use of smileys, and the design 
rationale of open communication and transparency. 
People with dementia provided us with detailed and 
unique feedback about their focus on the present, the ‘here 
and now’ of their time perception; a careful use of language; 
and a pleasant graphical layout. 
2) Conclusions and reflections: Designing an interactive 
web tool for people with different capacities and interests is 
challenging but possible. All perspectives were included 
with special attention for the most vulnerable target group of 
people with dementia. The specific and detailed feedback of 
people with dementia was very valuable and made their 
contribution unique. However, other participants doubted 
whether the tool would be useful and usable for people with 
dementia.   
From the start informal caregivers and case managers 
emphasized their concerns about the participation of people 
with dementia regardless of the phase of the study. They 
thought that participation would be too difficult and intrusive 
for people with dementia. Besides their concerns, we asked 
people with dementia themselves about their willingness to 
participate. We wanted to ask them instead of deciding for 
them. People with dementia were open to participate. They 
mentioned no objections and showed no signs of distress. 
Paper prototyping (mock-ups) was difficult for them and 
confirmed findings of other researchers [22]. We chose a 
fictive person with dementia for this session because we 
thought that it would be less intrusive for them. But they 
commented that they found the session difficult because they 
could only speak and decide for themselves, rather than for 
the fictive person presented on paper. It confused them. The 
fictive person was not a problem for informal caregivers and 
case managers. Nevertheless, the paper prototype session 
proved also to be difficult for them. They found it hard to 
imagine from paper how such an interactive web tool could 
look like. 
 
D. Field study: using the DecideGuide in daily life 
1) General findings: Preliminary findings of the field 
study show that the user-friendliness of the DecideGuide 
needs improvement, in particular for older adults (70+) 
including people with dementia. The deciding together part 
provided insufficient guidance and the navigation in the user 
interface needs further simplification. The user acceptance 
and satisfaction were sufficient: all participants appreciated 
the easy way of communicating in the chat function, and the 
option to express individual views. Participants felt more 
involved and shared more information with each other about 
daily life issues. Informal caregivers and case managers 
appreciated the DecideGuide as tool in decision-making: it 
structured their thoughts and provided a structure for 
making decisions. 
2) Conclusions and reflections: The use of the 
DecideGuide is feasible in dementia care practice but the 
navigation needs further refinement. The DecideGuide has 
meaningful impact on its users: it stimulates people with 
dementia and their care networks in communicating more 
frequently with each other, opens difficult issues to 
discussion, takes into account all perspectives, and leads to 
more involvement of informal caregivers and case managers 
in the daily lives of people with dementia. 
The current generation of older adults of whom most are 
not familiar with computers needs support to use IT 
applications. Including personalized ‘nice to haves’ like an 
agenda, photo gallery, or daily paper to the tablet can help to 
make the use of a tablet more attractive for this target group. 
Also the participation of more (younger) people in the 
network stimulates the interaction in the network and 
therefore the activities of the older participants. We did not 
expect the ‘chat function’ to be such a success as network 
members experienced it. This way of communicating with 
each other and sharing daily life issues/information within 
the network was less common than we expected. It proved to 
be of great value for participants, in particular for informal 
caregivers and case managers.  
 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

E. Participation of people with dementia in developing the 
DecideGuide 
1) General findings: People with dementia participated 
in most phases of the CeHRes roadmap [19] and in different 
roles of Abma’s patient participation ladder [23]: during the 
contextual inquiry phase in the role of research object, 
during the value specification phase as information 
provider, and during the design and operationalization phase 
as advisor. Their participation resulted in unique feedback 
leading to a more attuned version of the DecideGuide.  
The impact of participation of people with dementia on 
themselves as persons addressed their intrinsic motivation to 
participate in the development; their enjoyment in learning 
new skills, their wish to be of use for research activities as 
long as possible, and their wish to contribute to a better 
quality of life for future dementia patients. 
We invested much effort in involving people with 
dementia in the development. Taking time is a key for 
meaningful inclusion of people with dementia e.g., taking 
time for small talk before research activities, taking time to 
get to know them better, taking time during research 
activities, and taking time for an ongoing consent to be sure 
about their voluntary participation [24]. Besides, a safe 
environment is important e.g., their home or the day care 
center they are attending.  
2) Conclusions and reflections: We involved people 
with dementia in the same phases of the development as 
informal caregivers and case managers and we listened 
carefully to them. We involved people with dementia 
mainly as information providers and advisors. We chose for 
this place on the participation ladder because we wanted to 
gain experience in involving a vulnerable target group like 
people with dementia. A lower place on the participation 
ladder would have resulted in less useful feedback. In a 
subsequent study, we might aim for involving people with 
dementia as co-designers. But a higher place on the 
participation ladder does not automatically lead to more 
participation. More researchers stress the importance of a 
horizontal participation ladder rather than a vertical one: 
availability of different roles dependent on which role is 
suitable for the situation is more important than reaching 
higher levels on the participation ladder [25][26]. 
However, as participation of people with dementia is not 
self-evident, we challenged ourselves, all participants and in 
particular people with dementia, to participate meaningfully 
in the development of an interactive web tool that facilitates 
shared decision making for people with different capacities 
and interests. In our research the role of advisor was a 
suitable and valuable role and resulted in meaningful 
participation of people with dementia. 
Nowadays, many research proposals are assessed on 
participation of patients. Participation of patients is time 
consuming and in particular participation of vulnerable 
patient groups. Time is scarce in research and might lead to 
patient participation on paper, and thus becoming a sham. 
Participation of people with dementia in research is 
important to attune to their needs and to give them a say, but 
investing in meaningful inclusion of people with dementia 
might do more justice to this target group than reaching for 
higher steps on the patient participation ladder. 
 
V. LESSONS LEARNED 
• 
The CeHRes roadmap helped is in offering a structured 
way to develop the DecideGuide. It provided us with 
criteria to assess the activities in the different phases. 
• 
Informal caregivers and case managers do not always 
have a good view of people with dementia’s 
preferences. 
• 
People with dementia can give unique and valuable 
feedback that differs from the feedback of other 
participants.  
• 
Spending time with people with dementia and taking 
time for small talk supports them in expressing 
themselves. 
• 
Asking people with dementia what they like, what they 
want, and if they want to participate and how sounds 
plausible, 
but 
requires 
attentiveness, 
time, 
and 
dedication of researchers. Deciding for people with 
dementia is a pitfall despite good intentions (e.g., we 
thought a fictive person in the mock-ups would be less 
intrusive, but we were wrong). 
• 
A meaningful participation of people with dementia 
requires involving them in a very early phase in research 
activities so they really have a say in what will be 
investigated and which role they will play. 
• 
Older adults (70+) need more support in order to get 
familiar with a tablet and the DecideGuide. 
• 
More participation does not automatically lead to better 
participation. 
• 
Aiming for meaningful inclusion of people with 
dementia in research might do more justice to people 
with dementia than trying to achieve a higher step on the 
participation ladder. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
An interactive web tool for people with dementia, their 
informal caregivers, and case managers was developed to 
facilitate shared decision making in dementia care networks. 
Developing an interactive web tool, for participants with 
different capacities and interests is challenging. It requires 
open communication and attuning to the most vulnerable end 
user group of people with dementia because they are easily 
overruled.  This includes balancing between the benefits of 
people with dementia’s contribution and the impact on their 
well-being.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Wilkinson, “Including people with dementia in research: 
methods and motivations”. In: The perspectives of people 
with dementia, research methods and motivation. London: 
Jessica Kingsley, 2002. 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[2] N. Savitch and P. Zaphiris, "Accessible websites for People 
with Dementia: a Preliminary Investigation into Information 
Architecture," in ICCHP, 2006, p. 8. 
[3] M. von Kutzleben, W. Schmid, M. Halek, B. Holle, and S. 
Bartholomeyczik, 
"Community-dwelling 
persons 
with 
dementia: What do they need? What do they demand? What 
do they do? A systematic review on the subjective 
experiences of persons with dementia," Aging & Mental 
Health, vol. 16, April 2012, pp. 378-390. 
[4] S. L. Dupuis, J. Gillies, J. Carson, and C. Whyte, "Moving 
beyond patient and client approaches: Mobilizing ‘authentic 
partnerships’ in dementia care, support and services," 
Dementia, vol. 11, 2011, pp. 427-452.  
[5] J. Whitlatch and H. Menne, "Don’t forget about me. Decision 
making by people with dementia," Journal of the American 
Society on Aging, vol. 33, 2009, pp. 66-71. 
[6] R. 
M. 
Epstein 
and 
R. 
L. 
Street, 
"Shared 
Mind: 
Communication, Decision Making, and Autonomy in Serious 
Illness," The Annals of Family Medicine, vol. 9, September 1, 
2011, pp. 454-461. 
[7] M. Prince, R. Bryce, and C. Ferri, "World Alzheimer Report 
2011,” 
2011. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.alz.co.uk/research/WorldAlzheimerReport2011.p
df. Last access date 10-12-2014. 
[8] C. Ferri et al., "Global prevalence of dementia: a Delphi 
consensus study," Lancet, vol. 366, 2005, pp. 2112-2117. 
[9] G. Livingston et al., "Making decisions for people with 
dementia who lack capacity: qualitative study of family carers 
in UK," BMJ, vol. 341, (Aug 18 1)c4184), 2010. 
[10] M. Zwaanswijk, A. P. A. v. Beek, J. Peeters, J. Meerveld, A. 
L. Francke, and S. Van Beek, "Problems and needs of 
informal caregivers of persons with dementia: a comparison 
between the initial stage and subsequent stages of the illness 
process.” [“Problemen en wensen van mantelzorgers van 
mensen met dementie: een vergelijking tussen de beginfase en 
latere fasen van het ziekteproces”], Tijdschrift voor 
Gerontologie en Geriatrie, vol. 41, 2010, pp. 162-171. 
[11] G. van der Roest et al., "What do community-dwelling people 
with dementia need? A survey of those who are known to care 
and welfare services," International Psychogeriatrics, vol. 21,  
2009, pp. 949-965.  
[12] G. Elwyn, A. Edwards, and P. Kinnersley, "Shared decision-
making in primary care: the neglected second half of the 
consultation.," British Journal of General Practice, vol. 49, 
1999, pp. 477-482.  
[13] H. L. Menne, S. S. Tucke, C. J. Whitlatch, and L. F. Feinberg, 
"Decision-Making Involvement Scale for Individuals With 
Dementia and Family Caregivers," American Journal of 
Alzheimer’s Disease & Other Dementias, vol. 23, 2008, pp. 
23-29. 
[14] C. Smits and J. Jukema, "Shared decision making in care 
networks of older adults with dementia. A research program 
to professional support of shared decision making in care 
networks of older adults with dementia", 2010. 
[15] M. Span, M. Hettinga, M. J. F. J. Vernooij-Dassen, J. 
Eefsting, and C. Smits, "Involving People with Dementia in 
the Development of Supportive IT Applications: a Systematic 
Review," Ageing Research Reviews  vol. 12, 2013, pp. 535-
551. 
[16] F. J. M. Meiland et al., "Participation of end users in the 
design of assistive technology for people with mild to severe 
cognitive 
problems; 
the 
European 
Rosetta 
project," 
International Psychogeriatrics, vol. 26, 2014., pp. 769-779.  
[17] K. Cubit, "Informed consent for research involving people 
with dementia: A grey area," Contemporary Nurse, vol. 34, 
2010, pp. 230-236. 
[18] L. Nygärd, "How can we get access to the experiences of 
people with dementia? Suggestions and reflections.," 
Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy, vol. 13, 2006, 
pp. 101-112. 
[19] J. E. W. C. Van Gemert-Pijnen et al., "Introducing a holistic 
framework for eHealth technologies," Journal of Medical 
Internet Research, vol. 13 (4):e111, 2011. 
[20] M. Span et al., "Towards an Interactive Web Tool that 
Supports Shared Decision Making in Dementia: Identifying 
User Requirements," International Journal On Advances in 
Life Sciences, 2014, no 3&4, in press. 
[21] M. Span et al., “An interactive web tool to facilitate shared 
decision making in dementia: design issues perceived by 
caregivers and patients”. International Journal On Advances 
in Life Sciences,  2014 no 3&4, in press. 
[22] M. Span et al., "Developing a Supportive Tool to Facilitate 
Shared Decision Making in Dementia. Involvement of End 
Users in the Design Phase," The Sixth International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine 
(eTELEMED 2014) IARIA, March 2014, pp. 253-256. ISBN: 
978-1-61208-327-8 
[23] P. Riley, N. Alm, and A. Newell, "An interactive tool to 
promote musical creativity in people with dementia," 
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 25, May 2009, pp. 599-
608. 
[24] T. A. Abma, C. A. C. M. Pittens, M. Visse, J. E. Elberse, and 
J. E. W. Broerse, "Patient involvement in research 
programming and implementation," Health Expectations, 
2014. doi: 10.1111/hex.12213 
[25] K. Murphy, F. Jordan, A. Hunter, A. Cooney, and D. Casey, 
"Articulating the strategies for maximising the inclusion of 
people with dementia in qualitative research studies," 
Dementia, January 8, 2014. 
[26] J. Q. Tritter and A. McCallum, "The snakes and ladders of 
user involvement: Moving beyond Arnstein," Health Policy, 
vol. 76, 2006, pp. 156-168.  
[27] C. Smit, T. van der Valk, and K. Wever, "Fundamental 
research and patient organizations: a surprising combination! 
[Fundamenteel onderzoek en patiëntenorganisaties: een 
verrassende combinatie!]," Badhoevedorp 2011. 
 
 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

