Automated Assessment of Nonverbal Behavior of the Patient 
during Conversation with the Healthcare Worker Using a Remote Camera 
 
Takashi Imabuchi, Oky Dicky Ardiansyah Prima, Hisayoshi Ito 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Iwate, Japan 
e-mail: g236o001@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp, {prima, hito}@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—The importance of nonverbal behavior between the 
healthcare worker and the patient has led many studies to focus 
on quantitatively evaluating this behavior. Those existing 
studies utilize the Kinect 3D sensor to visualize the nonverbal 
behaviors for a range of healthcare applications. In this study, 
we propose a framework to automatically assess the nonverbal 
behavior of the patient during conversation with the healthcare 
worker. Instead of using the Kinect, we detect the skeleton 
information of the targeted body from a single camera using an 
advanced computer vision approach. The proposed framework 
collects data consisting of facial expression, eye movement, and 
head nodding and analyzes this data to assess the quality of the 
nonverbal communication.  
Keywords-Nonverbal communication; Eye tracking; Facial 
expression; Pose estimation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
     In the health sector, good communication between 
healthcare workers and patients is important to improve the 
quality of care and to promote patient-centered healthcare. 
These communications are effective to improve the patient 
satisfaction [1]. Assessing the quality of communication in a 
healthcare setting is a difficult task in today’s hospitals. The 
assessment 
includes 
both 
verbal 
and 
nonverbal 
communications [2]. While the verbal communication 
directly conveys the patient’s needs, the nonverbal 
communication represents communicative acts which may be 
even more important than the matter under verbal discussion.  
The nonverbal communication consists of a variety of non-
words information such as gestures, physical features and 
paralanguages. The nonverbal interaction in the healthcare 
sector may represent as much as 65 percent of the hidden 
thoughts and emotions of the patient [3]. To establish a good 
relationship of trust with a patient, the healthcare worker is 
required to pay close attention to this interaction. This skill 
would be essential for all healthcare workers.  
     There are basically five types of nonverbal behaviors (body 
language) related to movement of the body [4]: emblems, 
regulators, illustrators, affective display and adaptors. During 
a communication with patients, skilled healthcare workers 
(health professionals) use four elements of the body language: 
body posture, eye contact, facial expression, and gesture. 
Hence, the quality of communication can be observed from 
the appearances of the visual components of their faces in 
accordance with the movements of other parts of their bodies.  
Information and Communications Technologies (ICTs) 
play an important role to automatically assess the nonverbal 
communication. 
Depth 
camera 
sensing 
enables 
the 
observation of human pose in three dimensions. The Kinect 
3D sensor shows adequate performance for a range of 
healthcare imaging applications [5]. It provides not only the 
changes of the body posture, but also the pose (skeleton) 
information of the targeted body, which can be used to 
estimate gestures. Facial image processing enables the 
detection of head movements and the subtle changes of facial 
expression. Using Internet-of-Things (IoT) [6], these tasks can 
be processed with a low investment cost. 
The major challenge of implementing camera sensing into 
the healthcare sector is determining where to place the camera 
so that it can capture both the healthcare worker and the 
patient at the same time, with adequate image resolution. 
Since the camera’s existence must not disturb the process of 
care, it should be placed around corners or on the ceiling in 
the hospital room. However, placing the camera far away from 
the target will decrease its ability to reveal the detail structures 
of the target’s body. An attempt using a combination of 
multiple cameras, depth sensing, and fiducial markers has 
been conducted to measure hand movements of the healthcare 
worker with respect to the patient’s bed [7]. While this 
approach enables to estimate the potential hand movements at 
the bedside, the overall system is complicated for a practical 
use in a hospital. 
Recent computer vision applications enable the detection 
of 2D human poses from a single image [8]. Furthermore, the 
3D human pose can be estimated by using human pose 
libraries taken from motion capture devices as a reference [9]. 
Unlike the Kinect which needs a proper distance setting to the 
targets, these approaches are more flexible. The skeleton 
information can be derived for the targeted bodies located 
more than 5m away from the camera. Based on this 
information, the detection of the head and the visual 
components of the face can be analyzed easier without 
requiring face detections as in the conventional image 
processing [10].  
In this study, we propose a framework to automatically 
assess the nonverbal behavior of the patient during 
conversation with the healthcare worker from a single camera. 
The proposed framework starts analysis at the time it detects 
a skeleton other than that of the patient. Using the part of the 
skeleton that consists of the bones of the head (axial skeleton), 
the face area of the patient is determined and up-sampled to 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

observe the facial information in detail. Information 
consisting of facial expression, eye movement, and head 
nodding is statistically analyzed against the pre-calculated 
learning data to show how well the nonverbal communication 
is being constructed. For further application, we also discuss 
other possibilities on the uses of skeleton information to 
improve the quality of healthcare service.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
related works in healthcare sector. Section III introduces our 
approach to assess nonverbal behavior using a remote camera. 
Section IV describes our experimental setting and its results. 
Finally, Section V presents our conclusions and future works. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Traditional methods to measure nonverbal behavior rely 
on manual coding system. This measurement involves the 
duration, the response latency, and the inter-response time 
during a behavior [11]. Since there are a lot of ambiguities on 
judging a particular behavior, many observers tend to perform 
in an inconsistent manner, thus degrading the quality of the 
measurements. Some studies have developed automated 
detection of the nonverbal behavior based on velocities 
changes derived from gyroscopes [12], video-based motion 
analyses, and a multi-modal sensor consisting of red, green 
and blue (RGB), depth, and audio data. For a more complex 
and dynamic behavior, high-level sensing is required to assess 
[13]. 
In the health sector, many studies have been conducted to 
assess the nonverbal behavior between the healthcare worker 
and the patient. These assessments covered conversational 
agents, securities, healthcare settings and medical acts in the 
hospital room. The Kinect 3D sensor has been used to extract 
and analyze head pose and hand gestures of the healthcare 
worker. The typical hand gestures can be classified using 
machine learning algorithm [14]. The depth sensing in the 
Kinect is also shown to be adequate to monitor the respiratory 
rate of the patient [15].  
Although the Kinect 3D sensor provides pose information 
to measure the high-level behavior, it has drawbacks for a 
practical use in a hospital. The measurement of nonverbal 
behavior in the hospital setting requires a sensor to capture a 
wider area where the healthcare worker and the patient are 
located. Moreover, operating the Kinect and its processing 
computer will incur a high investment cost. 
The advances brought about by machine learning and 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) have contributed to solve the 
problem on localizing anatomical key points to find body parts 
inside an image. The “OpenPose” library enables realtime 
multi-person 2D pose estimation from a single camera [8]. 
This library applies a bottom-up approach by encoding the 
location and rotation of limbs over the image domain to allow 
a greedy parse to connect the detected body parts. Thus, the 
library can detect human pose not only from the front but also 
from the back. Martinez et al. [16] used deep neural networks 
to map between 2D and 3D poses. The standard protocol of 
Human3.6M was used to normalize the pose data [17]. Human 
pose estimation from a single camera has become a potential 
alternative to the Kinect.  
III. 
AUTOMATED ASSESSMENT OF NONVERBAL 
BEHAVIOR 
A. Nonverbal Behavior Measurement 
     Here, we assume a situation in a hospital where the 
nonverbal communication between the healthcare worker and 
the patient mostly occurs. Figure 1 shows three steps for our 
proposed method to assess the nonverbal behavior. A single 
camera is located facing the patient’s bed. For each step, we 
use the “OpenPose” library to detect human pose found in the 
camera image. A pre-defined region of interest (ROI) is 
applied to the image to assign the location of the bed.  
 
Figure 1. The proposed framework to assess nonverbal behaviors from a single camera. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Step 1: Detecting the presence of the healthcare worker 
     When the healthcare worker is heading towards the 
patient’s bed, his posture will be detected by the time he 
stands in front of the bed. “OpenPose” detects the 
existence of human pose inside ROI. It enables to 
distinguish the basic body postures: standing, sitting 
(reclining), and laying. The patient is recognized to have 
laying or reclining postures while the health worker to 
have a standing posture. Once the healthcare worker is 
detected when he enters the ROI, he will be tracked until 
he leaves the area. 
Step 2: Extracting nonverbal behavior during conversation 
     Nonverbal behaviors of the patient during speaking and 
listening are extracted separately. The periods of speaking 
and listening are defined by utterances, occurrences of 
changes in shapes of the patient’s mouth detected from the 
camera image [18]. To calculate the facial shape, 68 facial 
landmarks are estimated using “Dlib” library [10]. The 
extracted nonverbal behaviors include head nod, eye blink, 
eye movement, and facial expressions. While the 
calculations of head nod, eye blink, and eye movement 
make use of facial landmarks, the facial expression is 
estimated using “Affectiva” library, a state-of-the-art 
emotion recognition using Deep Learning [6]. 
Step 3: Detecting the end of conversation 
     The observation will finish when the healthcare worker 
leaves the room as detected by the absence of his posture 
in the camera image. 
     The details of methods for detecting utterances, head nod, 
eye blink, eye movement, and facial expressions are as 
follows. 
1) Utterance: Utterance is measured by detecting the 
relative location changes of the boundary of the mouth 
represented by 12 landmarks. These changes are observed as 
the standard deviation of those landmarks within a duration. 
Utterance is quantized by  
𝑈𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 = 1
𝑛 *+
1
𝑚 *-𝐿/0(2,4) − 𝐿/
7778
9
:
0;<
/
=;<
, 
(1) 
where, n is the number of image frames, m is the number of 
landmarks, and Lnj is j-th landmark point (x, y) at n-th frame.  
2) Head nod: Head nod is calculated by detecting the 
changes of head-pose in pitch angle. This calculation is done 
by fitting six 3D anthropometric points to the associated 
facial landmarks. The changes of pitch angles are calculated 
by 
𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑑 𝑛𝑜𝑑 = +1
𝑛 *(𝜑/ − 𝜑7)9
/
=;<
, 
(2) 
where, n is the number of image frames and 𝜑/ is the pitch 
angle at n-th frame.  
3) Eye blink: The eye blink is considered as the degree of 
eye openness which can be measured from the relative 
ordinate changes of the midpoints of upper and lower eyelids 
represented by previously calculated landmarks by 
𝐸𝑦𝑒 𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑠𝑠 = G(𝑈𝑙I − 𝐿𝑙I)9, 
(3) 
where, ULy and Uly are ordinates of midpoints of upper and 
lower eyelids, respectively.  
4) Eye movement: We measure the eye movement by 
tracking the iris inside the region of eye in the image. The 
region of eye is extracted from the area of image surrounded 
by eye landmarks. The tracking method is based on eye 
tracking from visible-spectrum camera [19]. This method 
calculates the gaze direction with head pose compensation. 
Let (𝑥, 𝑦) the coordinate of the iris center, horizontal and 
vertical eye movements (𝐸KL,𝐸KI) in n-number of frames are 
calculated by 
𝐸KL = +1
𝑛 *(𝑒𝑥= − 𝑒̅)9
/
=;<
    , 
𝐸KI = +1
𝑛 *(𝑒𝑥= − 𝑒̅)9
/
=;<
. (4) 
5) Facial expression: The “Affectiva” library estimates 
six fundamental expressions: joy, fear, disgust, sadness, 
anger, and surprise from the patient face in the image. The 
occurrence of each expression is represented as a 
probabilistic value. Among these expressions, we use only 
the accumulated occurrence of “joy” for our purpose, as 
described later on this paper. 
B. Assessment of nonverbal behaviors 
     Our strategy to assess nonverbal behaviors is to create two 
scenarios of communication scenes between the healthcare 
worker and the patient. The first scenario is “high trust” where 
a good quality relationship between the healthcare worker and 
the patient has been established. Contrary, the second is “low 
trust” scenario. While the “high trust” will lead to greater 
emotional stability that facilitates acceptance and openness of 
expression, “low trust” will result in less accurate 
communication. We believe that these differences can be 
revealed from the nonverbal behaviors extracted in this study. 
     Figure 2 shows our preliminary results of nonverbal 
behaviors of the two scenarios. Both manual and automatic 
coding of utterances are provided to show our utterance 
detection is effective to define the cognitive tasks: listening 
and speaking. Nonverbal behaviors for each scenario are 
assessed as follows. 
1) Repetition of head nod, eye blink, and eye movement: 
Here, to distinguish communicative from noncommunicative 
types head nod, eye blink, and eye movement, we count the 
repetition for those behaviors in a duration of time and in each 
cognitive task: listening or speaking. The number of 
repetitions is computed by counting the number of values 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

above a given threshold in (1), (2), (3), and (4). Different 
patterns for head nod, eye blink, and eye movement during 
listening and speaking can be observed, as shown in the filled 
and unfilled area in Figure 2. 
2) Accumulated occurrences of facial expressions: Since 
facial expression will have a range of amplitude, occurrence 
and duration, we calculate the probability accumulation for 
each facial expression in each cognitive task. Figure 2 shows 
different patterns of six fundamental expressions during 
speaking and listening. Since the fluctuations of “joy” show 
high responses, for further analyzes, only “joy” will be 
calculated to represent the facial expression changes in this 
study. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
     Experiments were conducted by an experimenter and 
three participants as patients to communicate in “high and 
low trust” scenarios. Both scenarios were conducted for a 
duration of 40 seconds. The experimenter talked with the 
participant, in the way to cause the participants to alter their 
behavior to match each scenario. All scenes were recorded 
using a 60fps single camera with 1280×720 pixels resolution.  
 
Figure 2. Preliminary results of nonverbal behaviors of the two scenarios. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

     Table I shows frequencies of head nod, eye blink, and eye 
movement of the participants detected in two scenarios. 
Nodding frequency does not show significant patterns. 
Although patterns of nodding frequency are expected to 
change as the communication proceeds from “low trust” to 
the “high trust”, we consider that the communication duration 
is too short to create emphatic responses of the participants.  
For further observation, it is necessary to break down the 
communication of each scenario into stages (initial stage, 
exploration stage, struggling stage, and closing stage). The 
frequency of eye blink shows a significant increase from “low 
trust” to the “high trust” during speaking. Conversely, it 
shows a significant decrease during listening. This result is 
consistent with the previous research where during tasks 
requiring higher cognitive load, subjects’ blink rate tends to 
decrease [20]. The frequency of eye movement shows a 
significant increase in the vertical direction regardless of the 
scenarios. This behavior is highly affected by the 
experimental setting, where the participants’ heads were in 
lower position than the experimenter. Therefore, when the 
participants tried to maintain eye contact with the 
experimenter, the vertical gaze movements were remarkable 
than the horizontal. 
Figure 3 shows the accumulated occurrences of facial 
expression “joy” in two scenarios. The expression of “joy” 
increases from the “low trust” to the “high trust” scenarios in 
both speaking and listening behaviors. This result represents 
the feeling of being nervous or uncomfortable of the 
participant during communication in the “low trust” scenario.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have demonstrated our framework to assess the 
nonverbal behavior of the patient from a single camera. With 
its ability to detect human pose information and facial 
landmarks, the presence of the healthcare worker can be 
detected to start analyzing the nonverbal behavior of the 
patient automatically. The proposed framework will also 
eliminate the need for a number of sensor devices such as 
gyroscopes and eye trackers, to analyze the nonverbal 
behavior. 
The proposed framework can be extended to monitor the 
activity of the patients. For example, by using the detected 
pose information, the patient body movements such as sitting 
posture, posture of turning over in bed, and posture of getting 
down from the bed can be monitored and characterized for 
each patient. This information will lead to an improvement of 
TABLE I.  
FREQUENCIES OF HEAD NOD, EYE BLINK, AND EYE MOVEMENT IN TWO SCENARIOS 
Nonverbal 
Behaviors 
Speaking [Hz] 
Listening [Hz] 
Subject #1 
Subject #2 
Subject #3 
Subject #1 
Subject #2 
Subject #3 
LT 
HT 
LT 
HT 
LT 
HT 
LT 
HT 
LT 
HT 
LT 
HT 
Head nod 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
0.1 
0.6 
0.5 
0.2 
0.4 
0.1 
0.3 
0.3 
0.1 
Eye blink 
0.5 
0.6 
0.2 
0.5 
0.6 
1.1 
0.7 
0.4 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
Eye movement: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Horizontal (x) 
1.1 
1.0 
0.6 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
0.9 
0.4 
0.3 
0.7 
0.9 
0.8 
-Vertical (y) 
1.3 
1.1 
1.4 
1.3 
1.8 
1.3 
0.9 
1.2 
0.5 
0.9 
1.2 
0.8 
LT: “Low trust”, HT: “High trust” 
 
 
(a) 
Speaking 
(b) 
Listening 
Figure 3. Accumulated occurrences of facial expression “joy” in two scenarios. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1
2
Accumulated occurrence [%]
"Low trust"               "High trust"
Subject #1
Subject #2
Subject #3
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
1
2
Accumulated occurrence [%]
"Low trust"               "High trust"
Subject #1
Subject #2
Subject #3
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the healthcare service. Figure 4 shows four different postures 
of a user detected by our framework. 
We will continue to conduct more experiments with 
various settings to confirm the robustness of our framework 
and to increase its functionality in order to improve the 
communication between the healthcare worker and the patient 
in particular and the healthcare service in general. By building 
a private cloud environment, data derived by our framework 
can be stored as big data to analyze possible efforts to increase 
patient satisfaction. Authorized persons can access the results 
by using cloud applications on hand-held devices. As a result, 
any issues related to the communication between the 
healthcare worker and the patient can be found at the early 
stage. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. G. Northouse and L. L. Northouse, Health Communication: 
Strategies for Health Professionals, second ed., Northouse,  
1992. 
[2] L. S. Pettegrew, Some boundaries and assumptions in helthcare 
communication, Explorations in provider and patient 
interaction, Louisvillem KY:Humana, 1982. 
[3] A. J. Davis, Listening and Responding : Cornerstone of 
Helping, Elsevier Health Sciences, 1984. 
[4] P. Ekaman and W. V. Friesen, “The repertoire or nonverbal 
behavior: categories, rigins, usage, and coding,” Semiotica, vol. 
1, pp. 49–98, 1969. 
[5] S. T. L. Pohlmann, E. F. Harkness, C. J. Taylor, and S. M. 
Astley, Evaluation of Kinect 3D Sensor for Healthcare Imaging, 
Journal of Medical and Biological Engineering, vol. 36, pp. 
857–870, 2016. 
[6] S. Thibaud, M. Daniel, and K. Rana, “Facial Action Unit 
Detection Using Active Learning and an Efficient Non-linear 
Kernel Approximation,”  2015 IEEE International Conference 
on  Computer Vision Workshop (ICCVW), 2015. 
[7] J. Chen, J. F. Cremer, K. Zarei, A. M. Segre, and P. M. 
Polgreen, “Using Computer Vision and Depth Sensing to  
Measure Healthcare Worker-Patient Contacts and Personal 
Protective Equipment Adherence Within Hospital Rooms,” 
Open Forum Infect Dis, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 200–206, Feb. 2016. 
[8] Z. Cao, T. Simon, S. E. Wei, and Y. Sheikh, “Realtime multi-
person2D pose estimation using part affinity fields,” Computer 
Vision andPattern Recognition, 2017. 
[9] H. C. Chen and D. Ramanan, “3D Human Pose Estimation = 
2D Pose Estimation + Matching,” arXiv:1612.06524v2 
[cs.CV], pp. 1–9, 2017. 
[10] V. Kazemi and J. Sullivan, “One millisecond face alignment 
with an ensemble of regression trees,” Proceedings of the IEEE 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 
(CVPR 2014), pp. 1867–1874, 2014. 
[11] J. O. Cooper, T. E. Heron, and W. L. Heward, Applied 
Behavior Analysis 2nd ed., Pearson, (2007). 
[12] M. Inoue, T. Irino, N. Furuyama, R. Hanada, T. Ichinomiya, 
and H. Masaki, “Manual and accelerometer analysis of head 
nodding patterns in goal-oriented dialogues,” Interaction 
Techniques and Environments - 14th International Conference, 
HCI International 2011, Orlando, FL, pp. 9–14, 2011. 
[13] P. Turaga, R. Chellappa, V. S. Subrahmanian, and O. Udrea, 
“Machine Recognition of Human Activities: A Survey,” IEEE 
Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 1473–
1488, 2008. 
[14] A. S. Won, J. N. Bailenson, S. C. Stathatos, and W. Dai, 
“Automatically 
Detected 
Nonverbal 
Behavior Predicts 
Creativity in Collaborating Dyads,” Journal Nonverbal 
Behavior, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 389–408, 2014. 
[15] N. Burba, M. Bolas, and D. M. Krum, “Unobtrusive 
measurement of subtle nonverbal behaviors with the Microsoft 
Kinect,” Proceeding VR '12 Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE 
Virtual Reality, pp. 1–4, 2012. 
[16] J. Martinez, R. Hossain, J. Romero, and J.J. Little, “A simple 
yet effective baseline for 3d human pose estimation,” 
arXiv:1705.03098 [cs.CV], pp. 1–10, 2017. 
[17] C. Ionescu, D. Papava, V. Olaru, and C. Sminchisescu, 
“Human3.6M: Large Scale Datasets and Predictive Methods 
for 3D Human Sensing in Natural Environments,” IEEE 
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 
36, no. 7,  pp. 1325 1339, 2014. 
[18] Y. Jaana, O. D. A. Prima, T. Imabuchi, H. Ito, and K. Hosogoe, 
“The development of automated behavior analysis Software,” 
Proc. SPIE 9443, Sixth International Conference on Graphic 
and Image Processing (ICGIP), 2014. 
[19] T. Imabuchi, O. D. A. Prima, and H. Ito, “Visible Spectrum 
Eye Tracking for Safety Driving Assistance,” in Trends in 
Applied Knowledge-Based Systems and Data Science, vol. 
9799, no. 4, pp. 428–434, 2016. 
[20] L. Vincze and I. Poggi, Communicative Functions of Eye 
Closing Behaviours, Analysis of Verbal and Nonverbal 
Communication and Enactment. The Processing Issues Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6800, 2011.
    
 
 
 
 
(a) 
Sitting posture 
(b) 
Reclining posture 
(c) 
Posture of turning over in bed 
(d) 
Posture of getting down from 
the bed 
Figure 4. Using pose information to detect patient’s body movements. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

