Promoting Patient Voices on the Internet 
Ethical considerations about web-based dissemination of research on patient narratives 
Marianne V. Trondsen1, Line Lundvoll Warth2, Kari Dyb3, Torsten Risør4, Hege K. Andreassen5 
 
1, 2, 3, 5Norwegian Center for E-health Research 
Tromsø, Norway 
 
 
 
4Faculty of Health Sciences 
UiT - The Arctic University of Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
 
E-mail: marianne.trondsen@telemed.no; line.lundvoll.warth@telemed.no; kari.dyb@telemed.no; torsten.risor@uit.no; 
hege.andreassen@telemed.no 
Abstract—Web-based promotion of qualitative research has a 
potential to reform traditional scientific dissemination, as well 
as it challenges ethical norms of research participation and 
anonymity. In this poster, we discuss ethical considerations of 
web-based dissemination of qualitative research on patient 
narratives through video recordings. Including subjective un-
anonymized patient stories in research dissemination to inform 
and support, might have benefits for the field of science, 
patients, health professionals and the general population. 
However, ethical norms and guidelines for anonymity needs to 
be considered with care when promoting patient voices on the 
Internet. 
Keywords-ethics; patient narratives; qualitative methods; 
video recordings; Internet. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There is a growing body of qualitative research aimed to 
explore in depth how people experience and manage their 
illness or health challenges [1][2]. The Internet provides new 
opportunities for dissemination of such research, within not 
only the established field of science, but also to lay people, 
health professionals and the general population. However, 
ethical norms and guidelines for anonymity needs to be 
considered with care when promoting patient voices on the 
Internet.  
The traditional way of disseminating research has been 
through academic channels, such as conferences and 
scientific journals. In line with ethical norms and guidelines 
for scientific practice, the voice and the story of the 
informant usually is anonymized in written publications, 
striving for anonymity and the protection of privacy. Internet 
opens a new avenue of public dissemination for qualitative 
researchers, challenging the established ethical norms and 
guidelines. 
In Norway, all health research projects involving patient 
and health information need to be evaluated by the regional 
committees for medical and health research ethics, who 
assess whether the project plan include a detailed strategy for 
handling data and ethical reflections with regard to patient 
involvement.  
In this poster, we will exemplify some of the ethical 
considerations with regard to web dissemination of patient 
narratives using our project “Helsesnakk.no” (“Health talk 
Norway”) as case. In this project to begin in 2016, we will 
develop a Norwegian website, to disseminate qualitative 
research on peoples’ experiences of health and illness, 
through use of video- or audio-recorded in-depth interviews 
with patients and family carers [3]. The purpose is to share 
information based on qualitative research to inform and 
support people who suffer from similar illnesses or health 
challenges, as well for the benefit for caregivers, health 
professionals, students and the public. In “Health talk 
Norway”, researchers interviewing people about their health 
experiences, analyze the interviews using thorough scientific 
methodology, and select and distribute short extracts from 
the results on the website. The extracts may appear on the 
website as videos with texts (transcripts), as audio with text, 
or as anonymous text. In the following, we concentrate on 
the video clips since they are most sensitive regarding 
patients anonymity in research. The aim of this poster is to 
discuss ethical consideration of web-based dissemination of 
qualitative research on patient narratives through such un-
anonymized video clips.  
The poster is organized as follows; Section II describes 
the various methods of web-based dissemination of the 
research. Section III discusses ethical considerations of 
dissemination of patients’ narratives using video recordings. 
The conclusions are presented in Section IV, and the 
acknowledgement closes the poster. 
II. 
VIDEO-RECORDED NARRATIVES ON THE 
WEBSITE 
The informants are recruited based on their diagnosis or 
medical condition. Before the interview, they receive written 
information about the study. Moreover, they must sign an 
agreement selecting which of the following forms they agree 
to be interviewed for dissemination on the website: video-
recorded with picture, sound and written text; audio-recorded 
with sound and texts; or audio-recorded for dissemination 
only in anonymously text. 
The interviews are transcribed, and the informants have 
the opportunity to read the transcripts and remove parts or 
sections. A process of analyzing the data material follows, 
and the researchers carefully select illustrative video clips for 
the website according to the informants’ consent. Video clips 
are uploaded using the Vimeo service, with settings blocking 
all access to the videos except when played through the 
domain “Helsesnakk.no.” The process follows standard 
research norms. The informant may withdraw his or her 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

consent and have the extracts published on the website 
removed at any time. However, it may not be possible to 
remove all existing copies from circulation. 
III. 
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS OF PATIENT VOICES 
Traditionally, in qualitative research researchers are 
striving for anonymity. Dissemination of video clips from 
the interviews at the website implies that the informants’ 
names will not appear, but because we can see their faces, 
these stories cannot be anonymized. Such a break with the 
traditional way of disseminating research prompts the need 
to pay extra attention to the ethical considerations. 
Thorough information about the study and the web 
dissemination is important. Hence, we must be sure that the 
informant gives written consent and is clearly capable of 
giving consent. As researchers, we need to be “objective” 
with respect to patient involvement, introducing the 
opportunity to participate in the research without pushing. 
Our experience is that recruitment for video-recorded 
interviews is more difficult than for audio-recorded 
interviews. Informants who sign up for the website might 
take on a whole range of attitudes from skepticism to total 
openheartedness as they tell their stories. 
Published materials on websites will be visible to the 
public, family and friends for years. Young people grow up, 
and their attitude toward being on the website might change. 
Their stories might affect how people evaluate them, i.e. 
some are at the beginning of their work careers. The 
researcher must pay attention to factors such as age, how 
people talk about others (relatives, health professionals), and 
whether they are too openhearted in telling their stories. 
Should we limit these stories or should we let them speak? 
What is the most “correct” consideration to ensure ethics? 
The website aims to communicate a maximum variation 
of health experiences. This means that we might receive 
stories from informants who want to be a public voice for 
tabooed, shamed, or sensitive themes. They might be eager 
to use their stories to inform or help others, to break taboos 
in society, or to promote voices we are seldom able to hear. 
In 
the 
methodological 
literature 
addressing 
ethical 
considerations, it is an ongoing discussion of the dilemma 
between the benefit and the risk associated with research 
participation about sensitive issues or for vulnerable 
populations [4][5]. Instead of causing distress for the 
informants, a growing body of research have point out that 
research participation might be educational, enriching, 
therapeutic or empowering for vulnerable populations [4]. 
Nevertheless, research addressing health and illness 
experiences, potential sensitive topics, and to select clips to 
be published on a website requires particular awareness. This 
will imply a researchers’ good judgement about people’s 
capabilities, their basis for consent, and how thorough the 
information given about the study. Does the researcher need 
to protect some voices? Will it be ethically correct to 
publish, or unethical not to publish the stories, since the 
informants have shared their stories for the purposed of 
being published on the website? Not being identified as the 
data source or given opportunity to face a distinctive health 
condition can also cause disadvantages for a person or a 
group for example by maintaining of taboos or “invisibility” 
[6]. It is argued that in some cases the default of 
anonymization might be replaced by a careful liberation, 
together with the informants, of how to handle the issues of 
identification and confidentiality [6].      
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The Internet holds a potential to reform traditional 
research dissemination. The expansion of the Internet allows 
us to reach out broader and faster, not only to the scientific 
community, but also to the general population. For 
qualitative researchers, interested in peoples’ health 
experiences, the use of the Internet as dissemination channel 
impose some new ethical considerations. Whilst the 
researchers’ obligation to ensure informant anonymity has 
previously been the accepted norm, new technology is now 
challenging this ideal. When establishing a web site for 
disseminating insights based in research on patient 
narratives, anonymizing the individual stories will not 
always be the ethical thing to do. Rather one can claim that 
anonymizing the informant in this kind of research 
dissemination will contribute to silence and hide the patient 
voice from scientific, as well as public discourse, and thus be 
un-ethical. Including subjective un-anonymized stories in 
research dissemination must however be handled with care. 
Hence, informed consent and the right to withdraw at any 
time are fundamental. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The study is supported by grants from Northern Norway 
Regional Health Authority; project number HST 1270-15. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Ridge and S. Ziebland, “Understanding depression through 
a ‘coming out’ framework,” Sociology of Health & Illness, 
34(5), 2012, pp. 730-745. 
[2] I. Grønning, G. Scambler, and A. Tjora, “From fatness to 
badness: The modern morality of obesity”, Health, 17(3), 
2013, pp. 266-283. 
[3] H. K. Andreassen, K. Dyb, M. V. Trondsen, and L. Lundvoll 
Warth, “Study protocol: Health talk Norway”, Proceedings of 
the 13th Scandinavian Conference on Health Informatics, 
2015, pp. 63-65. 
[4] K. Dyregrov, “Bereaved parents’ experience of research 
participation”, Social Science & Medicine, 58(2), 2004, pp. 
391-400. 
[5] M. M. Stevens, B. A. Lord, M.-T. Proctor, S. Nagy, and E. 
O’Riordan, “Research With Vulnerable Families Caring for 
Children With Life-Limiting Conditions”, Qualitative Health 
Research, 20(4), 2010, pp. 496-505. 
[6] A.-L. Svalastog and S. Eriksson, “You can use my name; you 
don’t have to steal my story – a critique of anonymity in 
indigenous studies”, Developing World Bioethics, 10(2), 
2010, pp. 104-110. 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

