Attribute-Based Authenticated Access for Secure Sharing of Healthcare Records in
Collaborative Environments
Mohamed Abomhara and Huihui Yang
Department of Information and Communication Technology
University of Agder, Grimsatd, Norway
Email: {mohamed.abomhara, huihui.yang }@uia.no
Abstract—This study highlights authorization matters in cooper-
ative engagements with complex scenarios in the collaborative
healthcare domain. Focus is mainly on collaborative activities
that are best accomplished by organized groups of healthcare
practitioners within or among healthcare organizations with the
objective of accomplishing a speciﬁc task (a case of patient
treatment). In this study, an authorization schema is proposed
that is suitable for collaborative healthcare systems to address
the issue of information sharing and information security. The
proposed scheme is based on attribute-based authentication
(ABA), which is a way to authenticate users by attributes or
their properties. The main goal is to provide an authorization
model that strikes a balance between collaboration, ﬂexible
access to patient information and safeguarding sensitive patient
information.
Keywords–Electronic health records; Authorization; Authenti-
cation; Data security and privacy; Attribute-based authentication;
Collaboration.
I.
INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Electronic health records (EHRs) are widely adopted by
healthcare providers and patients to efﬁciently and effectively
create, manage and access patient healthcare information [1],
[2], [3]. Integrated use of EHRs seem promising in enhancing
healthcare services due to a number of attractive features, such
as improving the quality and delivery of health services by
giving healthcare providers access to information they require
to provide rapid patient care [1]. In addition, reducing the cost
of care by facilitating easy collaborative support from multiple
parties to fulﬁll the information requirements of daily clinical
care [4], [5].
Typically, rapid patient care requires the collaborative
support of different parties including primary care physicians,
specialists, medical laboratory technicians, radiology techni-
cians and many other medical practitioners [6], [7]. Moreover,
collaboration among healthcare organizations is required for
patients being transferred from one healthcare provider to
another for specialized treatment [8]. However, security control
over information ﬂow is a key aspect of such collaboration
where sensitive information is shared among a group of people
within or across organizations. In this study, focus is mainly on
authorization issues when EHRs are shared among healthcare
providers in collaborative environments with the objective of
accomplishing a speciﬁc task.
A. Problem Deﬁnition
EHRs system is considered in this study. Multiple owners
(referring to patients who have full control of their EHRs) and
healthcare providers, such as physicians, nurses, family, and
relatives, among others, who require access to these EHRs
to perform a task. Healthcare providers can only access and
perform actions (e.g., read and/or write) to patients’ EHRs,
for which they are responsible. For example, doctors have
access to their own patients’ data, but not the data of another
doctor’s patients, while nurses or personal assistants have
access to the information of the patients for whom they are
responsible [9]. On the one hand, healthcare services need the
collaborative support of multiple healthcare professionals and
administrators in order to deliver rapid patient care. Therefore,
multiple healthcare providers (e.g., doctors and nurses) may
require access to patient information to perform tasks. On
the other hand, EHRs contain sensitive information about
patients, including demographic information, medical history,
laboratory tests and radiologic images that call for appropriate
authorization mechanisms in place to ensure that information
is accessible only to those authorized to have access [10].
The main concern with EHRs sharing during collaborative
support is having an authorization mechanism with ﬂexibility
to allow access to a wide variety of authorized healthcare
providers while preventing unauthorized access. Since health-
care services necessitate collaborative support from multiple
parties and healthcare teamwork occurs within a dynamic
group, dynamic authorization is required to allow team mem-
bers to access classiﬁed EHRs.
B. Study Objective
The main objectives of this work is to design an attribute-
based group authorization model that is suitable for collabora-
tive healthcare systems to address the concern with information
sharing and information access. The proposed model ensures
that access rights are dynamically adapted to the actual needs
of healthcare providers. Healthcare providers can access the
resources associated with a work task, but only while the work
task is active. Once the task is completed, access rights should
be invalidated.
C. Structure of the Study
The remaining parts of this study are organized as follows.
In Section II, a brief description of the EHRs system, the usage
scenario and security requirements are provided. Proposed
scheme and security analysis are presented in Section III.
Finally, conclusions and aspects for future work are given in
Section IV.
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Attribute Authority 
Access Control Policy 
Engine
Compliance 
Management
Hospital B
(2)
(1)
Patient
 Healthcare Practitioners 
Nurse
Doctors 
Team
Admin
Emergency 
Staff
(3)
(6)
(1)(2)
Hospital A
(2)
(1)
Patient
Doctor
Nurse
Doctors 
Team
Admin
Emergency 
Staff
(3)
(1)
(2)
(7)
(7)
(7)
System Setup 
Key Generation 
Revocation 
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(8)
Emergency 
Department
Emergency 
Department
(1): Obtain the attribute 
 (5): Provider read key
(2): Provide access key    
 (6): Information flow 
(3): Delegate     
  (7): Read Data 
(4): Revocation     
 (8):Write Data 
Doctor
Figure 1. Reference system architecture overview
II.
EHR SYSTEM
In this section, relevant work underlying the current study
is discussed. First, the system architecture is brieﬂy introduced,
followed by the usage scenario and an overview of security
requirements.
A. Systems architecture
In Figure. 1, the architecture of the reference system is
illustrated. The reference system includes the following main
domains:
1)
EHRs: The medical records are collected, stored and
provisioned by the electronic health records system
to achieve the features of low cost operation, collab-
orative support and ubiquitous services. The EHRs
can reside in a centralized or distributed systems
depending on the deployment needs [11]. Authorized
healthcare providers, including hospitals and health-
care practitioners can access EHRs through different
services such as web portals and health apps [12].
The access to medical ﬁles is controlled via the
requirements of attributes. For each medical ﬁle,
the access policy is represented by a combination
of attributes. When a user (patients and healthcare
providers) requires to access (read, write, etc) the
ﬁle, it should show an evidence that it satisﬁes the
required attributes. Only if the evidence is valid that
the user’s access requirement can be granted. This
process will be implemented by an attribute-based
authentication (ABA) scheme presented in Section
III-A.
2)
Trusted authority: A fully trusted authority such as
the Ministry of Health is responsible for key genera-
tion, distribution and management of users’ keys. The
main responsibilities of the trusted authority include
the following:
a)
Generate the main system public and private
keys.
b)
Generate user keys for each user.
c)
Generate public and attribute keys for each
attribute in the system.
d)
Generate attribute keys for attributes pos-
sessed by each user.
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

As for implementation, it is possible to have different
authorities perform these responsibilities separately,
such that the compromise of one authority will not
lead to the compromise of the whole system. More
speciﬁcally, healthcare delivery organizations (e.g.,
hospitals) perform as a registration center with a
certain qualiﬁcation certiﬁed by the trusted authority.
Healthcare delivery organizations are responsible for
checking their healthcare practitioners’ professional
expertise and send their attributes to the trusted
authority to issue the corresponding attribute-based
credentials.
3)
Healthcare providers: Healthcare providers from
various domains, such as doctors, nurses, radiology
technicians and pharmacists, to name a few, require
access to patients’ records to perform a task. Once
a new healthcare practitioner join a system, the
healthcare delivery organization must send healthcare
practitioner’ attributes to the trusted authority to
obtain attributes based credentials. Healthcare practi-
tioners apply their authentication credentials obtained
from the trusted authority to access classiﬁed EHRs
through authorization mechanisms in the EHR aggre-
gator. In case of group collaboration, multiple EHRs
have to be shared with various healthcare providers
and practitioners. A group manager is responsible for
registering healthcare practitioners to form a group.
The hospital’s (registration center) responsibility is to
verify the authenticity of each healthcare practitioners
in the group based on the professional expertise and
required access, and send it to the trusted authority
to issue the corresponding group credentials for the
group.
B. Usage scenario of work-based authentication
In this Section, a typical use case scenario adopted from
[4] is presented. As shown in Figure. 2 , a patient named Alice
is recently diagnosed with gastric cancer. Surgical removal of
the stomach (gastrectomy) is the only curative treatment. For
many patients, chemotherapy and radiation therapy are given
after surgery to improve the chances of curing. Alice entered a
cancer-treatment center at her chosen hospital (e.g., hospital A
in Figure.1). Alice has a general practitioner (Dean) who she
regularly visits. Upon entering the hospital, Alice also sees an
attending doctor (Bob) from the hospital. Alice’s health con-
dition has caused some complications, so her attending doctor
would like to seek expert opinions and consultation regarding
Alice’s treatment from different hospitals (e.g., hospital B in
Figure.1), including Alice’s speciﬁc general practitioner who
is fully informed about Alice’s medical history. Note that the
invited practitioners are specialized in different areas, where
some are specialists and others are general practitioners. In
such group consultation, every participant needs to obtain the
medical records they request based on the health insurance
portability and accountability act (HIPAA) [13] minimal dis-
closure principle.
Furthermore, the consultation results, such as diagnosis and
treatment suggestions, should be signed and certiﬁed by this
group of specialists and practitioners. The medical certiﬁcate
with their signatures is sent to Alice.
In this case, the act of managing the collaborative work
Trusted Authority 
Group manager 
(Dean)
Group of Doctors 
Setup and revoke 
group work
Patient (Alice)
Singed medical 
certifcate 
 ..    ..
Classified EHRs
Access to various 
EHRs
1
2
n
Get access token via the 
registration center at healthcare 
delivery organizations  
Patient (Alice)
Bob
Alex
Cara
Figure 2. An EHRs usage scenario
must be clearly deﬁned. By default, only the main practitioner
(Dean) should be aware of the patient’s personal information.
The three other medical practitioners with supporting roles are
given information based on their contributing roles (need-to-
know principle) [14]. For instance, if the supporting party
is included solely for consultation purposes concerning the
disease, only information essential for diagnosis is provided.
It is not necessary to allow perusal of personal information
related to the patient. In this way, improper access to the
patient’s sensitive information can be prevented.
Hospital personnel roles are often simplistically split into
medical practitioners, nurses and administrators [15], [16].
However, in [17] (paper by one of us), we further categorized
personnel roles into a total of nine roles per group, which are
classiﬁed into main, action, strategic and management roles,
as shown in Figure. 3.
Dean 
Bob
Cara
Alex
Main
Action
Strategic
Management
Practitioners 
Team Role
Personnel
Work
Resource
Patient
Alice
 resource1
 ...
 ...
resource n
Medical 
Information 
Personal 
information
Figure 3. EHRs usage scenario
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

The workﬂow of every healthcare practitioner is as follows:
1)
The general practitioner (Dean) serves as the group
manager. He is responsible for initiating the work
(treatment of Alice’s case) and choosing the prac-
titioners (group of doctors) who may be required to
attend Alice’s consultation and treatment. Moreover,
the general practitioner must revoke the group upon
completion of the patient’s diagnosis consultation.
2)
Bob helps Dean with the operational part of the case.
Operation refers to a series of responsibilities that
entail interaction with the patient. Bob needs to see
Alice on a face-to-face basis to perform various tasks
that are related to her recovery. In this respect, there
is a need for Bob to know personal and medical in-
formation about Alice to perform his duty effectively.
3)
Cara has more of a strategy role. She is responsible
for helping Dean solve the medical case. There is no
need for Cara to meet Alice personally on a day-to-
day basis. In fact, Cara is only required to analyze
the medical situation and suggest a possible solution.
Cara’s strategic role within the team implies a rather
clear indication of the access that she needs. Since
Cara is predominantly preoccupied with diagnosing
the disease, there is no urgent need for her to know
the patient’s personal information. As such, she is
only given access to the patient’s medical information
as per her strategic team role.
4)
With the increasing number of physicians working
on Alice’s case, their interaction can become more
complex. For instance, if there exists a competition
between conﬂicting diagnoses given by Bob and
Cara, which would gain priority? This is where Alex
comes in. He contributes to the team by coordinating
the interaction of the other members by taking on
the team management role. To work effectively, Alex
does not really need to know the patient’s personal
information. However, he must be aware of the pa-
tient’s medical information to enable coordination.
In addition, Alice may have some historical health infor-
mation (e.g., mental illness or sexual issues, etc.), to which the
group (or some of the group) of specialists and practitioners do
not have to have access. We assume that each resource (EHR
ﬁles) in the system are divided into type, mainly shareable and
non-shareable during the collaborative work. The collaborative
resources required for work are enumerated in table form as
proposed by Abomhara in [17]. Each shared resource is tied
to the set of collaborative roles or team roles that can access
it. In effect, the selected roles will determine the extent of
collaborative access.
C. Security requirements
Some of the requirements of a well-designed attribute-
based authentication system were presented by Yang [18], [19].
According to our usage scenario, the system should fulﬁll the
following requirements:
•
Conﬁdentiality: Unauthorized users who do not pos-
sess enough attribute satisfying the authorization pol-
icy should be prevented from reading EHR documents.
•
Minimum attributes leakage: To be authenticated,
healthcare provider only need to provide required
attributes rather than the whole package of attributes
it possesses.
•
Signature: The ﬁnal medical report of Alice’s treat-
ment should be signed by appropriate practitioners
using digital signatures.
Alice should be able to verify the authenticity of the
consultation results through the practitioner’s digital
signature. Note that the practitioner’s digital signa-
ture can be opened (reveal the practitioner’s identity)
depending on the requirements. In some cases, prac-
titioners do not want to reveal their identities when
participating in group treatment.
•
Unforgeability: An adversary who does not belong
to the group should not be able to impersonate a
group member and forge a valid signature to get
authenticated.
•
Coalition resistance: Group members should not be
able to pile up their attributes to forge a signature to
help a member to get authenticated.
III.
PROPOSED SCHEME
In this section, the system setup and security analysis are
presented.
A. System setup
System setup, including key generation, distribution and
revocation are explained in this subsection. As mentioned
before (Section II-A), the trusted authority is responsible for
users’ key and attribute key generation. For each user in the
system, the trusted authority will generate a unique user key
that represents the user’s identity information and will be used
to trace users’ identities if necessary. The proposed scheme is
based on bilinear mapping [20], [21].
Deﬁnition 1: [Bilinear Mapping] [22] Let G1, G2 and G3
be cyclic groups of prime order p, with g1 ∈ G1 and g2 ∈ G2
as the generators. e is an efﬁcient bilinear map if the following
two properties hold.
1)
Bi-linearity: equation e(ga
1, gb
2) = e(g1, g2)ab holds
for any a, b ∈ Z∗
p.
2)
Non-degenerate: e(g1, g2) ̸= 1G3, where 1G3 is the
unit of G3.
Firstly, the proposed ABA scheme needs to set up the
system, which is considered as a preparation for the phase of
signature generation, veriﬁcation and opening. During system
setup, the system main parameters, such as main public and
private keys set will be generated by the trusted authority.
Based on the main private and public keys set, the trust
authority will generate system attribute keys and users’ keys.
More importantly, the trusted authority will authorize Dean the
power to generate attribute keys for group members. This is
how Dean gains the control over the group.
Assume k0 is the system security parameter. G1, G2 are
two multiplicative groups of prime order p with g1 ∈ G1 and
g2 ∈ G2 as their generators. Let e : G1 × G1 → G2 be
a bilinear mapping. Select h ∈ G1, ξ1, ξ2 ∈ Z∗
p, where Z∗
p =
{a ∈ Zp|gcd(a, p) = 1} is a multiplicative group modulo a big
prime number p. Set u, v ∈ G1 such that uξ1 = vξ2 = h. Select
x0, β0 ∈ Z∗
p as the top secret and compute w0 = gx0
1 , f0 =
g1/β0
1
and h0 = gβ0
1 . The public key set of the trusted authority
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

is denoted by MPK =< G1, G2, g1, g2, h, u, v, f0, h0, w0 >
and the private key set is MSK =< x0, β0, ξ1, ξ2 >, where
the pair < ξ1, ξ2 > is handed to the opener as its tracing key
tk.
Then the system setup proceeds as follows.
1)
Dean authorization: Dean described in our usage
scenario can be considered as an attribute domain
authority in the scheme proposed in [23]. To authorize
Dean, ﬁrst, the trusted authority selects a secret xd ∈
Z∗
p and computes Ad = g(x0+xd)/β0
1
and wd = gxd.
The pair DSK =< Ad, xd > is the Dean’s private
key and Ad should be registered in the opener’s
database for identity tracing. DPK =< wd > as
the Dean’s public key.
2)
User key generation: All users in the system should
register themselves and obtain their users’ key from
the trusted authority. Assume there are N users in
the EHRs usage case. To generate the secret key of
user Ui (1 ≤ i ≤ N), the trusted authority randomly
selects xi ∈ Z∗
p and computes Ai = g(x0+xi)/β0
1
.
bski =< Ai, xi > is Ui’s secret key base and Ai
should be handed to the opener.
3)
Attribute key generation: Assume the attribute set
owned by all members in the EHRs usage case is
denoted by Ψ = {att1, · · · , attNa} (Na = |Ψ|). To
generate a pair of private and public attribute key for
an attribute attj ∈ Ψ (1 ≤ j ≤ Na), the trusted
randomly selects tj ∈ Z∗
p as its private attribute key
and computes apkj = g1tj as its public attribute key.
4)
Attribute key authorization: The trusted authority
authorize attribute keys to Dean. For attribute attj,
the trusted authority selects rj ∈ Z∗
p and computes
Td,j = g(x0+xd)/β0
1
H(attj)tj+rj and apkdj = grj
1 as
Dean’s private and public attribute keys for attribute
attj respectively.
5)
User attribute key generation: To be active in
the EHRs usage case described above, each member
should gain their attribute keys from Dean. Assume
the attribute set possessed by user Ui is denoted by
Ψi = {atti1, · · · , attiNi}. Assume attribute attik
(1 ≤ k ≤ Ni) corresponds to attj
∈ Ψ. For
simplicity, we will use attj to represent attik instead.
To generate a private attribute key of attj (1 ≤ k ≤
Ni) for Ui, Dean interacts with Ui and computes
Ti,k = f xi
0 Td,j = g(x0+xd+xi)/β0
1
H(attj)tj+rj as
Ui’s private attribute key for attribute attj.
All these attribute keys are only active during the period
of a speciﬁc workload. When this workload is ﬁnished, all
attribute keys of users in this group should be revoked. This
requirement can be realized by combining these attribute keys
with a timing token. Thus, these attribute keys are only valid
during this ﬁxed time period.
B. Signature generation, veriﬁcation and opening
After the system setup, all entities in the group of the
EHRs usage case have obtained their users’ keys and attribute
keys for authentication. As described before, each medical ﬁle
is bound with access policies represented by a combination
of attributes. More specially, this combination of attributes is
represented by an attribute tree [18]. An attribute tree is a tree
structure that represents the logical relations among required
attributes, based on which a user generates a signature as a
proof of possessing the required attributes.
The user can only be authenticated when the signature is
valid. However, it is also possible that the user’s access request
is reject even though the signature is valid because of other
factors, such as system time, locations and so on.
Assume that Ui is a user to the authenticated, V
is
the veriﬁer and f is the ﬁle that Ui wants to access. The
veriﬁer here can be the access system or another entity that is
responsible for users’ authentication. It depends on the speciﬁc
enforcement of the system. The authentication phase proceeds
as follows:
1)
(Ui) access request sending: Ui sends a request to
the veriﬁer V wants to access ﬁle f.
2)
(V ) attribute requirement embedding: In this step,
the veriﬁer embeds a secret key Ks and the attribute
requirements in an attribute tree and sends related
parameters to Ui. The details are as follows:
Once V receives the access request, it retrieves the
access policy related to the requested access and ﬁle
f. Next, V will generate an attribute tree Γ with root
value αr ∈ Z∗
p for root r to represent the access
requirement as described in [18]. The same as in [23],
we use qNode() to denote the polynomial bound to an
interior node Node. For a leaf node y whose parent is
interior node Node, qy(0) is computed by qNode(0).
Thereafter, the veriﬁer computes
Ks = (e(f0, w0)e(g1, wd))αr
= e(g1, g1)(x0+xd)αr/β0.
Let L(Γ) be the leaf node set of the attribute tree
Γ. V
computes ∀y
∈
L(Γ), Cy
=
gqy(0)
1
and
C′
y = H(y)qy(0) and sends {Γ, gαr
1 , ∀y ∈ Leaf(Γ) :
Cy, C′
y} to Ui.
3)
(Ui) signature generation: In this step, Ui recovers
the embedded secret key Ks as Kv ﬁrst if it owns all
the required attributes. Next it generates a signature
as a proof that it possesses the required attributes and
to provide traceability, which means that an opener
can trace the identity information of Ui given this
signature.
The details are as follows. Assume Ui possesses all
the required attributes represented by attribute tree
Γ and attik owned by Ui is the attribute related to
leaf node y in attribute tree Γ. After Ui receives the
message from V , it computes
DecryptNode(Ti,k, Cy, C′
y, y)
=
e(Ti,k, Cy)
e(apkjapkdj, C′y)
= e(g1, g1)(x0+xd+uk)qy(0)/β0.
If x is an interior node, DecryptNode(Tk,j, Cy, C′
y,
y) proceeds as follows: for all x’ children z,
DecryptNode(Tk,j, Cy, C′
y, y) is called and the out-
put is stored as Fz. Assume Sx is the subset of all
x’s children z and ind(x) is the index of node x. We
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

deﬁne
∆Sx,ind(z) =
Y
l∈{Sx−ind(x)}
l
ind(z) − l.
Then we have
Fx =
Y
z∈Sx
F
qz(0)∆Sx,ind(z)
z
=
Y
z∈Sx
(e(g1, g1)(x0+xd+xi)qz(0)/β0)∆Sx,ind(z)
=
Y
z∈Sx
(e(g1, g1)(x0+xd+xi)qpar(z)(ind(z))/β0)∆Sx,ind(z)
=e(g1, g1)(x0+xd+xi)qx(0)/β0.
Ui calls DecryptNode(Ti,k, Cy, C′
y, y) for the root
and gets the result
Fr = e(g1, g1)(x0+xd+xi)αr/β0.
Next Ui computes
Ks = Fr/e(gxi
1 , gαr
1 ) = e(g1, g1)(x0+xd)αr/β0 = Kv.
Until here, Ui has successfully recovered the em-
bedded secret key Ks as Kv. In the following, Ui
generate a signature to provide traceability.
The signer randomly selects ζ, α, β, rζ, rα, rβ, rx,
rδ1, rδ2 ∈ Z∗
p and calculates
C1 = uζ, C2 = vβ, C3 = Aihζ+β,
δ1 = xiζ, δ2 = xiβ,
R1 = urζ, R2 = vrβ, R4 = Crx
1 u−rδ1 , R5 = Crx
2 v−rδ2 ,
R3 = e(C3, g1)rxe(h, wd)−rζ−rβe(h, g1)−rδ1−rδ2 ,
c = HKs(M, C1, C2, C3, R1, R2, R3, R4, R5) ∈ Z∗
p
sζ = rζ + cζ, sβ = rβ + cβ, sα = rα + cα,
sx = rx + cxi, sδ1 = rδ1 + cδ1, sδ2 = rδ2 + cδ2.
Finally, the signer sends the signature σ
=<
M, C1, C2, C3, c, sζ, sβ, sα, sδ1, sδ2 > to the veriﬁer.
4)
(V ) signature veriﬁcation: V computes
R′
1 =usζC−c
1 , R′
2 = vsβC−c
2 , R′
4 = u−sδ1 Csx
1 , R′
5 = v−sδ2 Csx
2 ,
R′
3 =e(C3, g1)sxe(h, wd)−sζ−sβe(h, g1)−sδ1−sδ2 (e(C3, wd)
e(g1, g1) )c
and c′ = HKv(M, C1, C2, C3, R′
1, R′
2, R′
3, R′
4, R′
5).
If c′ equals to c that V has received from Ui, V
believes that Ui owns the required attributes and the
authentication succeeds.
5)
(The opener) signature opening: The opener com-
putes Ai = C3/(Cε1
1 Cε2
2 ), where Ai was registered
in the opener’s database as Ui’s identity information
during system setup.
C. Group operations
As described in Section II-B, Bob needs to read patients’
personal and medical information, but Cara only needs to have
access to patients’ medical records. To achieve this goal, we
ﬁrst express these access policies based on attributes. When
group members want to access the documents, they generate a
signature based on the required attributes deﬁned in the access
policies. If their signature is valid, we believe that they satisfy
the access policies and will be granted with the required access.
In addition, Dean needs to revoke this temporary group and
the privileges granted to group members during this workload.
There are two possible solutions. The ﬁrst solution is to
combine all keys generated for this temporary workload with a
time token, but it requires a precise estimation about the time
period how long this task will last. If the time period is too
short, all keys will be revoked before the task is ﬁnished and
the system has to be set up again. To the contrary, if the time
period is too long, group members will still be able to access
to patients’ documents after the task is completed, which may
cause security and privacy problems. The second solution is
too add the temporary attribute public keys in a revocation list.
Before signature veriﬁcation, the veriﬁer ﬁrsts check whether
the related attribute public keys are valid. If not, the veriﬁer
will abort the signature veriﬁcation, and group members will
not gain additional access privileges when the temporary task
ﬁnishes.
D. Security requirement analysis
Since our proposed model is a speciﬁc application of the
general attribute-based HABA scheme from [23], it follows the
same correctness and security requirements of the attribute-
based HABA scheme. Hence we can draw the conclusion
that the ABGA scheme proposed in this paper is correct.
Meanwhile, it also provides anonymity and traceability. From
the description from [23], we know that once an ABA scheme
is fully anonymous and traceable, it also provides the secu-
rity requirement of unlinkability, unforgeability and coalition
resistance. These three security requirements are provided by
the ABA scheme proposed in Section III.
•
Unlinkability: Only the group manager (Dean) has
the capability of revoking and discover the signers
identity. This ensures that an adversary can not trace
any member of the team because he or she unable to
establish linkage between identities and attribute sets.
•
Unforgeability: To get an access to EHRs, any mem-
ber of the team must gain an attribute key from the
team manger. Without this key, he or she will not be
able to access EHRs. Therefore, an adversary cannot
impersonate a group member unless he or she was
assigned by the group manager.
•
Coalition resistance: As mentioned earlier, users in
the group cannot pile up their attributes to generate a
signature. Therefore, they cannot conclude and cheat
the system to get authenticated if a single user does
not possess the required attributes.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK
In this work, an authorization scheme was proposed for
collaborative healthcare system to address the problem of
information sharing and information security. The proposed
scheme provides an efﬁcient solution to security challenges
related to authorization. The security analysis has showed that
our proposed scheme is unforgeable, coalition resistant, and
traceable.
In the future, the plan is to develop and prototype the func-
tionality to be implemented as well as evaluate the validity of
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

the scheme based on its efﬁciency and practicality. Efﬁciency is
the scheme’s performance in terms of resource consumption,
e.g., time and computational capability. Practicality denotes
the possible difﬁculties in managing the model during actual
implementation. The motivation behind studying the issue of
efﬁciency and practicality is to simplify decentralized admin-
istrative tasks, and enhance the practicability of authorization
in dynamic collaboration environments. It is very important
to design system to not only ensure shared information con-
ﬁdentiality but also to avoid administration and management
complexity.
EU countries are seeking new ways to modernize and
transform their healthcare systems using information and
communications technology in order to provide EU citizens
(patients) with safe and high quality treatment in any European
Union country [24], [25] (EU directive 2011/24/EU framework
on cross-border health care collaboration in the EU [26],
[27], [28]). The proposed scheme will be further investigated
towards cross-border healthcare collaboration. The plan is to
evaluate the validity of the scheme to provide solutions to
improve healthcare quality, provide access to a high-quality
healthcare system to all EU citizens around Europe, and
support close cooperation between healthcare professionals
and care providers from different organization.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Geir M. Køien for the
support in investigating and writing this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Menachemi and T. H. Collum, “Beneﬁts and drawbacks of electronic
health record systems,” Risk management and healthcare policy, vol. 4,
2011, p. 47.
[2]
M.-H. Kuo, “Opportunities and challenges of cloud computing to
improve health care services,” Journal of medical Internet research,
vol. 13, no. 3, 2011, p. e67.
[3]
R. Wu, G.-J. Ahn, and H. Hu, “Secure sharing of electronic health
records in clouds,” in Collaborative Computing: Networking, Appli-
cations and Worksharing (CollaborateCom), 2012 8th International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 711–718.
[4]
R. Zhang and L. Liu, “Security models and requirements for healthcare
application clouds,” in Cloud Computing (CLOUD), 2010 IEEE 3rd
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 268–275.
[5]
S. Silow-Carroll, J. N. Edwards, and D. Rodin, “Using electronic health
records to improve quality and efﬁciency: the experiences of leading
hospitals,” Issue Brief (Commonw Fund), vol. 17, 2012, pp. 1–40.
[6]
B. Fabian, T. Ermakova, and P. Junghanns, “Collaborative and se-
cure sharing of healthcare data in multi-clouds,” Information Systems,
vol. 48, 2015, pp. 132–150.
[7]
M. Li, S. Yu, Y. Zheng, K. Ren, and W. Lou, “Scalable and secure
sharing of personal health records in cloud computing using attribute-
based encryption,” Parallel and Distributed Systems, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 24, no. 1, 2013, pp. 131–143.
[8]
O. Moonian, S. Cheerkoot-Jalim, S. D. Nagowah, K. K. Khedo,
R. Doomun, and Z. Cadersaib, “Hcrbac–an access control system for
collaborative context-aware healthcare services in mauritius,” Journal
of Health Informatics in Developing Countries, vol. 2, no. 2, 2008.
[9]
M. Abomhara, M. Gerdes, and G. M. Køien, “A stride-based threat
model for telehealth systems,” Norsk informasjonssikkerhetskonferanse
(NISK), vol. 8, no. 1, 2015, pp. 82–96.
[10]
K. T. Win, “A review of security of electronic health records,” Health
Information Management, vol. 34, no. 1, 2005, pp. 13–18.
[11]
D. Patra, S. Ray, J. Mukhopadhyay, B. Majumdar, and A. Majumdar,
“Achieving e-health care in a distributed ehr system,” in e-Health
Networking, Applications and Services, 2009. Healthcom 2009. 11th
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 101–107.
[12]
S. de Lusignan, F. Mold, A. Sheikh, A. Majeed, J. C. Wyatt, T. Quinn,
M. Cavill, T. A. Gronlund, C. Franco, U. Chauhan et al., “Patients online
access to their electronic health records and linked online services: a
systematic interpretative review,” BMJ open, vol. 4, no. 9, 2014, p.
e006021.
[13]
S. J. Dwyer III, A. C. Weaver, and K. K. Hughes, “Health insurance
portability and accountability act,” Security Issues in the Digital Med-
ical Enterprise, vol. 72, no. 2, 2004, pp. 9–18.
[14]
R. S. Sandhu and P. Samarati, “Access control: principle and practice,”
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 32, no. 9, 1994, pp. 40–48.
[15]
M. A. Valentine and A. C. Edmondson, “Team scaffolds: How
mesolevel structures enable role-based coordination in temporary
groups,” Organization Science, vol. 26, no. 2, 2015, pp. 405–422.
[16]
N. Meslec and P. L. Curs¸eu, “Are balanced groups better? belbin roles
in collaborative learning groups,” Learning and Individual Differences,
vol. 39, 2015, pp. 81–88.
[17]
M. Abomhara and G. M. Køien, “Towards an access control model
for collaborative healthcare systems,” in proceedings of the 9th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and
Technologies (BIOSTEC 2016), vol. 5, 2016, pp. 213–222.
[18]
H. Yang and V. A. Oleshchuk, “A dynamic attribute-based authen-
tication scheme,” in Codes, Cryptology, and Information Security.
Springer, 2015, pp. 106–118.
[19]
——, “An efﬁcient traceable attribute-based authentication scheme with
one-time attribute trees,” in Secure IT Systems.
Springer, 2015, pp.
123–135.
[20]
T. Okamoto, “Cryptography based on bilinear maps,” in Applied Al-
gebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error-Correcting Codes, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, vol.
3857, pp. 35–50.
[21]
R. Sahu and S. Padhye, “Efﬁcient ID-based signature scheme from
bilinear map,” in Advances in Parallel Distributed Computing, ser.
Communications in Computer and Information Science.
Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 203, pp. 301–306.
[22]
Y. Qin, D. Feng, and X. Zhen, “An anonymous property-based attesta-
tion protocol from bilinear maps,” in 2009 International Conference on
Computational Science and Engineering (CSE ’09), vol. 2, Aug 2009,
pp. 732–738.
[23]
H. Yang and V. A. Oleshchuk, “Traceable hierarchical attribute-based
authentication for the cloud,” in Communications and Network Security
(CNS), 2015 IEEE Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 685–689.
[24]
D. Byrne, Enabling Good Health for All : A Reﬂection Process for a
New EU Health Strategy.
Commission of the European Communities,
2004.
[25]
M. Wismar, W. Palm, J. Figueras, K. Ernst, E. Van Ginneken et al.,
“Cross-border health care in the european union: mapping and analysing
practices and policies.” Cross-border health care in the European Union:
mapping and analysing practices and policies, 2011.
[26]
E.
Commission,
“Expert
panel
on
effective
ways
of
investing
in
health:
Cross-border
cooperation,”
2015.
[Online].
Available:
http://ec.europa.eu/health/expert panel/opinions/docs/009
crossborder cooperation en.pdf
[27]
——, “Overview of the national laws on electronic health records
in the eu member states and their interaction with the provision of
cross-border ehealth services,” EU Health Programme (2008-2013),
2013. [Online]. Available: http://ec.europa.eu/health/ehealth/docs/laws
report recommendations en.pdf
[28]
I.
Passarani,
“Patient
access
to
electronic
health
records,”
Report
of
the
eHealth
Stakeholder
Group,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://ec.europa.eu/health/expert panel/opinions/docs/009
crossborder cooperation en.pdf
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

