Enabling Employee Co-Creation in eHealth 
Propositions for a Methodology 
 
Migle Helmersen 
Society dept. 
NORCE research 
Kristiansand, Norway 
e-mail: mihe@norceresearch.no 
Tom Roar Eikebrokk 
Dept. of Information Systems 
University of Agder 
Kristiansand, Norway 
e-mail: tom.eikebrokk@uia.no
Niels F. Garmann-Johnsen 
Society dept. 
NORCE research 
Kristiansand, Norway 
e-mail: ngar@norceresearch.com
 
Abstract—This article is a reflection by a team of researchers. 
After visiting and doing action and evaluation research in a 
municipal eHealth Living Lab project, the authors find that 
there is a need for a more formalized approach to the social 
aspect and fundaments for employee driven innovation. We 
find a need for combining the fields of organizational learning 
and technology innovation. Based on our research, we propose 
a model for value creation based on new eHealth technology 
where employee co-creation is stimulated as a resource for the 
learning organization. Here, employees evaluate existing 
services as the basis for both designing totally new services and 
evaluate proposed new solutions. This basis in employee co-
creation creates a broad basis for implementing changes that 
will benefit service users through increased ability and speed of 
organizational change in such innovation ecosystems. In 
addition, to the usual agile implementation phase, we induct 
the need for prior employee-involving mobilization and 
ideation phases. 
Keywords- 
eHealth; 
employee; 
co-creation; 
Design 
Thinking; LEAN; Agile, learning organization; innovation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Healthcare is a labor-intensive profession and is likely to 
remain so in any foreseeable future. At the same time, 
productivity in this sector needs to grow with radical rates 
each year to meet future demands, due to an aging 
population in Norway and many other industrialized 
countries. eHealth – using Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) in healthcare - is expected to be an 
important factor in achieving needed value innovation. The 
simultaneous reduction of cost or use of scarce resources, 
and increased productivity and quality [1]. 
Balancing life-critical operations and the introduction of 
new technologies requires a sound fundament of continuous 
improvement of work, high involvement by all concerned 
employees in the innovation and information system design 
processes, learning and developing new clinical practices, 
and a culture for sharing knowledge and experience [2]. This 
article will refer to this fundament as the learning 
organization. 
Innovation is by nature experimental and requires risk 
willingness to find a better next practice. Innovation is a 
concept for change and is first used when the solution in the 
form of new services and products is put into use or 
implemented. The process from the ideas to implementation 
is a resource-intensive and risky process and means that the 
organization is in a continuous change. How does the 
organization master this? 
Ergonomics (of Latin ergon, work, and nomos, law) is 
defined as the science of adaptation between the working 
environment, technique and human beings so that work can 
be done as effectively as possible, and without any adverse 
impact on health [3]. But whether the results of this science 
are practiced is often a matter of, inter alia, politics and 
economy in the organization. To avoid illness and strain 
injuries, both employer and employee must consider what is 
good ergonomics. Good ergonomics also mean that work 
processes are adapted to the employees' requirements and 
ambitions. Therefore, ergonomics also has psychological and 
social aspects and is closely related to how the work is 
organized [4]. Modern ergonomics are extended to the 
overall adaptation of human beings to work processes, the 
working environment and changes in society at large. 
Neubauer and Stary [5] describe ergonomics as a 
recognition of the role of employees in innovation, leading to 
both improvements and economic benefits through human-
centered design. Human-centered design for interactive 
systems is something that promotes the following main 
principles [5]: 
• The design is based on an explicit understanding of 
users [also read employees], tasks and environments 
• Users are involved through all parts of design and 
development (not just testing – authors red). 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

• The design is driven and refined by user-centered 
evaluation 
• The process is iterative - it is repeated as many times as 
necessary 
• The design addresses the entire user experience (the 
"travel trip") 
• The design team includes interdisciplinary skills and 
perspectives (authors´ translation). 
 
To promote a strategy (organizational policy) that can 
improve this, López-Gómez et al. [6] suggest that one 
should:  
• Access highly qualified personnel to develop new 
concepts and service innovations internally 
• Develop training methods for personnel to adapt 
innovations, innovative ideas, sourced from external sources 
• Develop better adapted schemes in education and 
training to fit the requirements of a service-economy 
• Recognizing the value of informal learning to increase 
the attractiveness of continuous training for employees  
• Promote modern innovation management approaches 
that better support creativity and autonomy of service-
executing staff (authors translation). 
 
Innovation management is crucial for creating an 
innovation culture. The research shows that the top 
management's conscious role in the organization is crucial, 
as both banner bearers for new ideas and for their 
development, where follow-up through systematic work with 
innovation and innovation management is important [7]. 
Salaman and his colleagues have defined criteria for 
innovation management: focus on networking, developing 
the creative talent, promoting learning, and mobilizing 
through a clear vision of the target image, and creating 
innovative processes [8]. The ideal leader has thus a direct 
impact on the development of employee competencies, 
create space for participation, and helps to make the business 
more innovative. Such management will not only be able to 
reduce resistance to new solutions and changed work 
routines but will influence employees to learn to design new 
solutions continuously and create arenas for dialogue [9]. 
This process creates a continuous learning and self-
improving organization. The material on this is based on 
Argyris and others’ research on learning, organization and 
action research [10]. 
What happens if the process described above is not 
prioritized in the organization? What are the consequences 
for 
employees' 
working 
environment 
and 
health? 
Frameworks for employees for doing a good job in the 
learning organization include that they interact with actors 
from different levels. These actors can act as support or 
provide resistance: in management, among product and 
service 
users, 
suppliers, 
and 
the 
media. 
Incorrect 
organization of ICT, resistance among employees in the 
introduction of new ways of working, and resistance to ICT 
in general, can be decisive in how companies tackle 
development processes.  
Positive results have been achieved for physical work 
environments in many places, by introducing robots and 
similar ICT-supported technology that helps in physically 
demanding tasks. In this way, musculoskeletal disorders can 
be prevented. But the use of ICT can also be seen more often 
in connection with the influence on mental health. Through 
several research studies, it was defined how the 
implementation of welfare technology, in general in the 
market and use in everyday life, influenced employee 
attitudes and health. When introducing new ICT tools and 
innovation processes in companies, several factors were 
reported which had a negative impact on mental health.  
It was found that the requirements for accessibility, 
communication, control, and repetitive technical errors, 
employee monitoring, unmet need for increased training, 
expectation 
of 
increased 
productivity, 
increased 
responsibilities and workload were associated with work 
pressure, stress and burnout [11][12]. Only two facets of the 
welfare technology introduction were perceived positively: 
individual assistance and customer guidance. In a study 
among 
nurses, 
it 
has 
emerged 
that 
the 
fear 
of 
"dehumanizing" of human care was dominating [13]. 
It appears that health personnel are initially concerned 
that basic values in care can be lost by "technologizing" 
relationships between people. Care represents for us 
closeness, while the technology appears to be cold and 
insensitive [14]. This leads us up to the research problem in 
this study: What are the necessary conditions for enabling 
employee co-creation in eHealth? How do we build up the 
learning organization, and what are the benefits of doing so? 
The rest of this article is laid out as follows: In the 
Section 2 we go through our method and present an action 
and evaluation study into an eHealth Living Lab. Then in 
section 3 we disseminate the recommendations given to the 
principal behind the action research mission after the case-
study. Finally, in section 4 we generalize these findings by 
questioning whether they represent a more structured and 
formalized approach to the social aspect and fundaments for 
employee driven innovation. 
II. 
METHOD 
 During 2017 and 2018 a joint research team did a study 
of eHealth Living Lab [15]. The project was initiated by the 
city of Grimstad in Norway, as the municipality hosting the 
living lab. 
Agder Living Lab (ALL) is a collaborative project. The 
Norwegian Directorate of Health has provided The Centre 
for Development of Institutional and Home Care Services 
(USHT) in Aust Agder with a contribution to the 
development of a Living Lab methodology in the welfare 
technology field. USHT in Grimstad Municipality is 
supposed to function as a living test laboratory. Here are 
nurses, patients and relatives involved in finding tomorrow's 
welfare technology. The University of Agder is a main 
partner. In addition, the Norwegian Housing Bank has 
contributed to dissemination. 
The methodology for Agder Living Lab was given by the 
project as a progressive, step model illustrated in Figure 1: 
1. 
Define user demands 
2. 
Regulatory compliance testing 
3. 
Lab-testing of usability 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

4. 
Testing in living environment 
5. 
Piloting improved services 
These steps belong to the pre-procurement phase, a 
matter that raises questions regarding transparency in public 
procurement. The model basically describes a classic agile 
information systems development plan. What criteria should 
be followed and who should govern what technology, and 
which vendor to invite to participate in this development 
(and gain potential lock-in advantages in the pursuing 
procurement phase)? If there is a lack of transparency, this 
may arguably also lead to added stress for all employees, 
conflicts and potentially political issues, as healthcare is a 
matter of great public concern. The authors make it clear that 
this comment is general and does not apply to the 
municipality named in Section 2. 
The project plan for the ALL project states that ALL will 
contribute to demand-driven innovation and development of 
health and care services. Needs-driven innovation is about 
understanding the user's existing and future needs to ensure 
the development of solutions that are rooted in real needs. 
The sampling methodology is important in the development 
and implementation of welfare technology and is also central 
to this project. 
Users are the best experts on their own, and all their 
knowledge is very valuable in an innovation process. 
Information from the user should therefore be used 
systematically for the development of the rich solutions. 
Innovation and development through Living Lab must be 
based on five key principles: 
• Value for the users 
• User involvement (how can users influence the process) 
• Quality with robust, durable solutions that meet 
tomorrow's needs 
• Openness and accessibility 
• Real life situations. 
 
ALL, according to the client, has a two-sided purpose: 
ALL must both be a venue for suppliers testing new eHealth 
solutions. At the same time, municipalities like Grimstad 
have a great need to move forward with service innovation in 
eHealth, to meet future needs. 
The assignment that the research team received from 
Grimstad municipality was as follows: 
“Through the follow-up research we (ALL, clients) want 
to answer how we can best achieve the ALL project goals. 
1. We want answers to how we can best cooperate with 
the supplier industry. Several technology vendors believe 
that they have the solution-but this may not be the need the 
service and users experience. 
2. How can Living Lab methodology ensure good 
solutions and meet user needs? The user is very central in the 
living lab methodology. How can we best get users to test 
and develop new solutions? 
3. We want the method we work out in the project to be 
easily transferred to other municipalities and interested 
parties. What is needed to ensure spread? (Citations from the 
tender, translated) [15]” 
The way the following results were achieved, were 
through discussions in workshops with participants from the 
Agder Living Labs project group, addressing these 
challenges. As background for these workshops, the action 
research team’s members had performed independent 
literature reviews searching for state of art knowledge in the 
field. 
III. 
RESULTS 
In this section the authors disseminate the findings from 
the case-study. Basically, the research team advocates the 
need for an ideation phase (combining the methodologies of 
Design Thinking and LEAN) [16] before entering into the 
implementation phase of eHealth development. 
In conclusion in the case-study report, the short answers 
to the questions listed in the previous section were found to 
be as follows: The following quotation is from project-report 
from the Agder Living Lab follow-up-research and translated 
by the authors (Norwegian) [15]. 
 
“1. The research team generally do not recommend the 
municipalities to start here. In the short term, ALL has 
focused on a combined product and user focus, and that must 
be respected based on the framework ALL has had as a 
project. It also has its advantages. Having the focus on 
concrete product solutions, according to a project manager in 
ALL, has been necessary as a starting point. It must be 
concrete, credible and recognizable to be clear to employees. 
There must be a delineation around the work. 
The research team looked the most at the conceptual 
model, as depicted in Figure 1, the future and how to scale 
up ALL from serving one municipality to becoming a 
National or at least important regional center for eHealth 
innovation. Although not all the ideas we contribute from the 
follow-up research team in retrospect proved to be equally 
good, it can form a starting point for further work with 
frameworks and methodology. 
We therefore believe that in the future and in the long 
run, it is most appropriate to start with users and their needs - 
not the technology. We encourage municipalities to keep up 
to date with changes in the technical possibilities room, and 
we like to see the municipalities participate in technology 
and eHealth fairs and other venues for professional refills. 
But start with a service design process instead” [15]. 
Why should you start according to the model for service 
design, "Double Diamond" [17]; user, needs and problem 
solving (also called the “Ideation” phase), before going into 
solution exploration (the Implementation phase)? 
• It creates commitment and mobilizes all system service 
users (Internal; employees, and external service users; 
patients and next-of-kin, relatives, or partners). 
• It provides a better offer to ICT providers; offers an 
open innovation [18] knowledge capital around needs. It 
focuses the efforts smarter. 
• It saves a long time in solution exploration; towards 
comprehensive 
digital 
(computer-driven) 
management, 
smarter health systems, with more accurate priorities and 
decisions. 
• You also save time, money and human resources in 
solution research (which becomes more "LEAN") at all 
stages of the supply chain [16]. Innovation processes are also 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

a cost carrier, which should be affected in a value innovation 
perspective [1]. 
• It all becomes a more open and transparent process 
(contributing to solving the transparency issue, touched 
above). Service design explorations, where the results are 
published, in front of technical (trial) acquisitions places 
potential suppliers on a more similar line. 
• It reduces the inherent risks of technical procurement 
and the entire innovation process. 
• Service design methods [16] helps identify drivers for 
desired changes. It can provide input to a quality and goal 
management 
system 
(Performance 
Indicators, 
Key 
Objectives), which can be followed up throughout the entire 
process of innovation. Thus, ALL, in the future, can offer 
better services to all the stakeholders, including the ICT 
providers. 
 
2. The research team recommend it would be best to start 
by ensuring good solutions through understanding and 
covering the needs of the user. The ALL methodology has 
elements of this in the use of the user panel [15][19], but has 
lacked a description of the steps needed to arrive at the 
correct problem definition: 
“As follow-up researches, our role is to give constructive 
criticism to what we observe. We have sought to remedy 
shortcomings and advise on possible improvements through 
our follow-up research project. We recommend that a future 
ALL concept starts with users, both residents and employees, 
and their needs, before defining today's and tomorrow's 
services. Only then will you see what is missing from 
technology and how this should be specified to new ICT 
suppliers and other stakeholders. ALL will then also be able 
to add value to the supplier by providing them with 
knowledge of the really rooted needs for new solutions and 
the requirements for these. We come in this report with 
suggestions that fill the gaps in the methodology, based on, 
among other things, the International Design Thinking [20] 
methodology (…)” [15] (translated). 
 
3. The research team outline and discuss different 
strategic scenarios for how ALL can be scaled up and 
become a CenterPoint of a vivid eHealth innovation 
ecosystem and what conditions needs to be met for it to 
succeed. Generally, these advises are also disseminated in 
discussion and conclusion in this article. 
 
The municipality of Grimstad has done a pioneering 
work that potentially has an interest far beyond its own 
municipal boundary. Those involved have learned a lot of 
the process so that they are geared better for new rounds 
later. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
Based on the literature and workshops we have held 
together with ALL's project group and the glimpses we have 
received in ALL as a project, we have launched the 
following ideas about what we believe may be necessary if 
ALL will become a central focal point for "eHealth-
Norway": 
The methodology must be further developed and 
expanded, especially "backwards" so that skills mapping and 
involvement of employees and service users have been 
stepped up for problem definition and not just afterwards. 
Figure 2 seeks to illustrate the missing "steps”. Before you 
can define user needs you need to work on: 
• 
On-boarding employees 
• 
Joint challenges and desired values 
• 
Discovering Service user demands 
• 
Analyzing and designing user journeys 
 
An innovation culture must be created, and new 
knowledge will be built in the municipalities that will play an 
active role in a Living Lab concept like ALL.  
Becoming "The learning organization" should be the goal 
of all municipalities and other healthcare organizations. Such 
learning takes place through active involvement and 
participation from the planning phase of change processes, 
transformation management and prioritization and choice of 
measures. It is this management work that can be 
systematized, with an overall process management and 
quality assurance system. It also contributes to an easier 
"rollout" later. Are everyone on board in the beginning, 
everyone is included in the scaling too. Here, we answer the 
questions raised in the introduction: “What are the necessary 
conditions for enabling employee co-creation in eHealth? 
How do we build up the learning organization, and what are 
the benefits of doing so?”. Not only do we need an ideation 
phase, the first diamond in the “Double diamond-model [17], 
we may also need a “point zero” diamond to mobilize the 
workforce and achieve all desired benefits and value 
innovation performance [1]. 
Involvement of all participant groups in the early stages 
of the processes can help prevent work conflicts and provide 
a background for a health-promoting, productive and long-
term working method, which should lead to efficient 
innovation of new processes. The most important group to 
anchor a new service in, besides the patients themselves, 
contains the employees in the municipality. In particular, the 
employees represent the first line; those with whom the 
patients always interact. They constitute the most important 
persons since they are resources in connection with the 
introduction of a new eHealth technology-supported service. 
Organizational development often lacks focus on welfare 
technology development. An innovation process in an 
enduring 
organization, 
for 
example 
within 
a 
care 
organization that introduce welfare technology, is also a 
learning process that includes the entire organization. A 
managerial 
responsibility 
here 
is 
to 
provide 
good 
frameworks for organizational learning. 
Organizational learning is something else and more than 
individual-oriented learning. Individual-oriented learning can 
be both positive and negative for the whole. As individuals, 
we can add both good and bad habits and attitudes, based on 
our own experiences.  
To see past experiences and to see the whole picture, 
effective mechanisms and processes are needed to share 
information and knowledge in an organization. It again 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

requires a plan. It is only when people learn effectively that 
the organization can change. 
The development towards the learning organization is 
about exceeding the habit of thinking and opposition to 
thinking new and openly. There are individuals who trade 
and learn, but the organization provides a framework that can 
support or inhibit the interaction between individual and 
organizational learning.  
Getting real changes to existing work processes is a 
complex process. Cooperation on the development and 
testing of new welfare technology in practice means 
collaboration on smarter work processes and managerial 
arrangements related to these, thus it entails both individual 
and 
organizational 
learning. 
Collaboration 
provides 
experience and expertise on how to work together across 
user groups for continuous improvement in the company, 
and externally between partners in a value chain.  
In this way, motors for mobilizing for development and 
change (see Figure 3.) are created. Training should be 
perceived as an aid and not as yet an additional burden. The 
management and the employees get concrete experiences 
about the importance of participation and arenas for 
dialogue. Although, we have shown a need for combining 
the fields of organizational learning and technology 
innovation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. C. Kim and R. Mauborgne, Blue ocean strategy, expanded 
edition: How to create uncontested market space and make 
the competition irrelevant: Harvard business review Press; 
2014. 
[2] P. R. Oeij, S. Dhondt, R. Žiauberytė-Jakštienė, A. Corral and 
P. Totterdill, “Workplace innovation as social innovation in 
European companies,” Paper for The ISPIM Innovation 
Summit, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia on, pp. 4-7, 2016. 
[3] C. Adams, An Introduction to Ergonomics ThougtCo.2019 
[accessed 
2019 
Jan.]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.thoughtco.com/what-is-ergonomics-1206379. 
[4] T. Vavik and T. A. Øritsland, Mennesklige aspekter i design 
(Human aspects in design). Tapir Uttrykk, NTNU, Norway. 
1999. 
[5] M. Neubauer and C. Stary, S-BPM in the Production Industry: 
Springer; 2017. 
[6] C. López-Gómez, D. Leal-Ayala, M. Palladino and E. 
O’Sullivan, 
“Emerging 
trends 
in 
global 
advanced 
manufacturing,” Policy links: University of Cambridge; 2013. 
[7] R. D. Fitjar, M. Gjelsvik and A. Rodríguez-Pose, “The 
combined impact of managerial and relational capabilities on 
innovation 
in 
firms,” 
Entrepreneurship 
& 
Regional 
Development, vol. 25, no. 5-6, pp. 500-520, 2013. 
[8] G. Salaman, J. Storey and J. Billsberry, Strategic human 
resource management: Theory and practice: Sage; 2005. 
[9] H. Enehaug, M. Helmersen and S-E. Mamelund, Individual 
and organizational well-being when workplace conflicts are 
on the agenda. A mixed methods study. Nordic journal of 
working life studies, Vol 6, No 1, pp. 83-104, 2016. 
[10] C. Argyris, “Action science and organizational learning,” 
Journal of managerial psychology, vol 10, no. 6, pp. 20-26, 
1995. 
[11] A. Day, S. Paquet, N. Scott and L. Hambley, “Perceived 
information and communication technology [ICT] demands 
on 
employee 
outcomes: 
The 
moderating 
effect 
of 
organizational ICT support,” Journal of Occupational Health 
Psychology, vol. 17, no. 4, p. 473, 2012. 
[12] K. Ninaus, S. Diehl, R. Terlutter, K. Chan and A. Huang, 
“Benefits and stressors–Perceived effects of ICT use on 
employee health and work stress: An exploratory study from 
Austria and Hong Kong,” International journal of qualitative 
studies on health and well-being, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 288-380, 
2015. 
[13] L. A. Huryk, “Factors influencing nurses’ attitudes towards 
healthcare information technology,” Journal of Nursing 
Management, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 606-612, 2010. 
[14] H. Hoen and U. Tangen, Velferdsteknologiundersøkelse (A 
survey of welfare technology). KS Innovasjon og utvikling 
Oslo. 2011. 
[15] N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, T. R. Eikebrokk, M. Helmersen and 
K. Lindland, Agder Living Lab - Hvordan lykkes med 
tjenesteinnovasjon i eHelse (How to succeed with service 
Innovation in eHealth?), Agderforskning.no; 2018. 
[16] S. K. Chokshi, D. M. Mann, “Innovating From Within: A 
Process Model for User-Centered Digital Development in 
Academic Medical Centers,” JMIR human factors, vol. 5, no. 
4, 2018. 
[17] The British Design-Council, The Design Process: What is the 
Double Diamond? https://www.designcouncil.org.uk2018/ 
[Accessed 2019 Jan.]. 
[18] H. W. Chesbrough, Open innovation: The new imperative for 
creating and profiting from technology: Harvard Business 
Press; 2006. 
[19] N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, M. Helmersen and T. R. Eikebrokk, 
“Digital Transformation in Healthcare: Enabling Employee 
Co-Creation through Web 2.0”, AMCIS 2018 proceedings. 
2018. 
[20] K. Dorst, The core of ‘design thinking’and its application. 
Design studies, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 521-532, 2011. 
[21] N. F. Garmann-Johnsen and T. R. Eikebrokk, “Critical 
Success 
Factors 
for 
Inter-Organizational 
Process 
Collaboration in Ehealth,” eTELEMED 2014 proceedings. 
2014. 
[22] D. J. Teece, G. Pisano and A. Shuen, “Dynamic capabilities 
and strategic management,” Strategic management journal, 
vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 509-533, 1997. 
 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1.  ALL Process model Ex Ante [15]. We find that ideation; the discovery and needs analysis and definition phase, is missing. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The “steps” model [bottom] expanded backwards, and compared with the “Double Diamond” pattern (top). 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 3.  "Service Innovation House" - or "The Learning Organization" - A Model of Continuous Process Change and Improvement [21][22] with Design 
Thinking [20] as “guiding light”.  
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

