Intended and Unintended Consequences of Implementing a Nursing App 
Gro-Hilde Severinsen 
Norwegian centre for E-health research, 
 University hospital North Norway,  
Tromsø, Norway 
Email: Gro-Hilde.Severinsen@ehealthresearch.no 
Line Silsand
Norwegian centre for E-health research  
University hospital North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
Email: Line.Silsand@ehealthresearch.no 
Kristian Malm-Nicolaisen 
Norwegian centre for E-healht research 
University hospital North Norway 
Tromsø,Norway
Email: Kristian.Nicolaisen@ehealthresearch.no 
Rune Pedersen 
Norwegian centre for E-health research,  
University hospital North Norway 
2UiT Arctic university Tromsø 
Tromsø, Norway 
Email: Rune.Pedersen@ehealthresearch.no 
Beate Sørslett 
Nordlandssykehuset 
Bodø, Norway 
Email: Beate.Sorslett@nlsh.no 
Gunnar Ellingsen  
Norwegian centre for E-health research, 
University hospital North Norway 
2UiT Arctic University Tromsø 
Tromsø, Norway 
Email: Gunnar.Ellingsen@uit.no
Abstract - The paper addresses socio-technical consequences 
from implementing a nursing app in a North Norwegian 
health trust. We used the NASSS-CAT (Non-adoption or 
abandonment of technology by individuals and difficulties 
achieving Scale-up, spread and sustainability) framework 
for evaluating the app implementation. The paper is relevant 
to the Nurse team application track, presenting nurses 
experience with adoption and use of a nursing app for 
monitoring progression or deterioration trough measuring 
vital signs. In this paper, the focus is on emerging 
downstream values for both the healthcare workers and the 
organization, since these factors are well suited to indicate 
whether the implementation is a success or not. From the 
analysis, both intended and unintended consequences of the 
implementation are outlined. The unintended consequences 
illustrated how extensive repercussions implementing a 
simple nursing app can have for the workflow of both 
nurses, doctors and leaders, as well as the communication at 
different healthcare levels. In addition, implementing an app 
for clinical practice generated improvement in the digital 
competence for both healthcare personnel and the 
organization.  
Keywords 
- 
Intende 
 
consequences; 
unintended 
consequences; nursing app; implementation; qualitative 
evaluation. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Documentation of and actions taken related to 
patients’ vital signs are of fundamental importance for 
clinical outcomes [1]. The paper is relevant to the Nurse 
team application track since it presents nurses experience 
with adoption and use of a nursing app for monitoring 
progression or deterioration trough measuring vital signs. 
In most Northern European countries, for instance in 
Norway and the UK, monitoring patients’ clinical status is 
guided by protocols based on Early Warning Scores 
(NEWS). NEWS includes vital signs like blood pressure, 
heart rate, respiration rate and oxygen saturation [1][2]. 
These are key indicators of a patient’s physiological 
status. Based on the vital parameters, NEWS allows 
clinicians to produce a score ranging from 0 to 20, where 
a higher score indicates greater clinical risk. A 
deterioration in a patient’s condition is often detected by 
abnormalities in vital signs, and failure to detect 
deterioration at an early stage is associated with worsened 
patient outcomes and a contributing factor for avoidable 
deaths [1][3]. Therefore, nurses measure vital signs 
regularly, especially for acutely unwell patients [2][3], In 
general, patients with a low NEWS score are monitored 
every 6-12 hours, increasing to hourly for patients with a 
score above 6 [4]. This results in healthcare professionals 
conducting an extensive number of time-consuming 
NEWS scores [5][6]. Nurses often report challenges with 
maintaining essential patient surveillance due to high 
workload e.g., one study found that around 35% of the 
vital sign assessments scheduled according to an early 
warning score-based protocol were delayed or missed.  
Today, measuring the vital signs is mainly a paper-
based procedure where the score is registered on paper, 
and the paper forms are scanned into the Electronic 
Health Record (EHR) system. However, even if NEWS is 
implemented as part of clinical practice, previous research 
has shown that transferring the information from one 
medium to another has been challenging, in addition, 
nurses often write vital signs onto interim paper notes 
prior to documenting them in the EHR, resulting in 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

double registration practices. Transferring information 
implies not only time delays, but also an increased 
number of transcription errors, which could lead to 
inappropriate treatment and affect patient outcome [2]. It 
is important that the early warning score is evaluated in 
line with the overall condition of the patient [2], and that 
nurses communicate vital signs information as fast and 
efficiently as possible. Removing the barriers to more 
direct vital sign documentation can reduce these 
challenges and facilitate more accurate and timely 
documentation procedures, contributing to safer patient 
care [1][5]. Understanding todays nursing workflows and 
their’ view of clinical and documentation processes can 
help optimize recording of point of-care vital signs 
documentation. 
Hence, 
electronic 
support 
tools 
facilitating timelier and safer recording of vital signs at 
the point-of-care are important to explore [1][2]. 
However, the mechanisms involved in implementing and 
using digital tools for NEWS registration is mainly 
unvisited both in the healthcare practice and the literature 
To that end, the aim of the paper is to present and 
discuss empirical findings from the implementation of a 
nursing app. The app is used for registering vital signs and 
calculating NEWS score at the point-of-care in a Health 
Trust (HT1) in Norway. In this paper, we outline 
consequences generated by the implementation. Hence our 
research question is: What are the intended and 
unintended socio technical consequences of implementing 
a nursing app?
Our empirical site is HT1in the North Norwegian 
health region. Employing 4000 healthcare professionals, 
HT1 encompasses 4 hospitals and provide services for 
136000 patients [7]. In 2020, HT1 implemented an app 
for registering vital signs and NEWS score at the patient’s 
bedside. The overall aim of the implementation was to 
improve the nurses’ workflow and patient safety, in 
addition to improving the digital competence of the users 
as well as the organization. There is a globally shared 
concern related to health personnel’s digital competence, 
and skills required for adopting new digital services [8]. 
In the paper a qualitative evaluation approach is used 
mainly based on semi-structured interviews with different 
actors involved in the implementation and use of the app. 
The evaluation is analysed using the NASSS-CAT (Non-
adoption or abandonment of technology by individuals 
and 
difficulties 
achieving 
Scale-up, 
spread 
and 
sustainability) framework designed by Trisha Greenhalg 
et al [9].  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II 
describes the empirical project and the background for the 
implementation. Section III present our qualitative 
evaluation approach including the data collection and the 
NASSS-CAT framework focusing on the category value 
proposition to discuss the socio technical consequences of 
the implementation. In Section IV, the results of the study 
are presented, including the intended and unintended 
consequences of implementing the nursing app. In section 
V, the success of the app implementation is discussed, 
including the importance of digital maturity. Section VI 
outlines the conclusion and the implications from the 
study. 
II. BACKGROUND
HT1 had priorly implemented a procedure for 
registering NEWS on all patients both in somatic and 
psychiatric care. This implied that the nurses had to 
observe and measure the patient’s vital signs at the 
bedside and write the results of the measures on a paper 
note. Back in the ward office, they transferred the vital 
signs into a paper form and calculated the NEWS for each 
patient. The nurses then plotted every single score into the 
patients’ paper-based Medical Charting Schema (MCS). 
Hence, calculating NEWS implied double and triple 
registration of vital signs. The procedure of registering 
NEWS was conducted every morning before the medical 
doctor’s ward round, and the doctors had to go to the 
ward and search for the paper form to find updated 
NEWS scores for each patient. If a patient’s condition 
was severe or worsened during the shift, NEWS was 
recorded more frequently to monitor the patient’s 
situation closely. In addition, the nurses had to manually 
coordinate the work with NEWS score. This included 
checking with each other before conducting a NEWS 
score, to avoid measuring the vital signs twice because 
another nurse already had the results on a note in her 
pocket.  Accordingly, it was a time-consuming process for 
the nurses, with an extensive risk of errors due to the 
complex transmissions of the data. 
One of the health trusts in the North Norwegian health 
region (HT1), had for years been looking for a digital tool 
to improve the workflow and procedure of registering 
vital signs and calculating NEWS, in addition to an 
overall aim of removing paper forms and increasing data 
accessibility for both nurses and doctors. This required an 
app that was sufficiently user friendly and intuitive to use 
in a busy clinical setting. In addition, it was necessary that 
the app could be integrated with the existing IT 
infrastructure and automatically transfer data to the EHR 
system.  It was important to find a solution that did not 
delay the work with complicated processes for logging in 
and registration of vital signs. The digital solution had to 
be more efficient than the existing paper-based routines to 
be of value for the organization. 
HT1 was introduced for several vendors of digital 
NEWS score tools without finding anyone fit to fulfil 
their requirements. However, in 2019 HT1 was presented 
for a nursing app by a Finnish vendor, which had 
implemented their solution in several Finnish and 
Swedish hospitals as well as nursing homes.  The Finnish 
vendor also had established a business collaboration with 
the EHR vendor in the North Norwegian health region. 
The app had the potential to integrate with several type of 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

standards to exchange data with and reuse the data from 
the EHR system. However, at HT1 the EHR system was 
not able to receive or reuse standardized data elements, so 
the solution was to generate PDF files to be exported from 
the app to the EHR. There is a plan to include structured 
data in the EHR further on, then the app will be integrated 
more seamless with the system.  
In short, HT1 found the app to comply with their 
needs, and came to an agreement with the Finnish Vendor 
and the hospital’s EHR vendor. HT1 started the 
implementation of the app as a pilot project in an internal 
medicine department in March 2020. The pilot project 
was a success, and scaling of the implementation 
followed a snowballing effect where both medical, 
surgical, 
and 
mental 
health 
wards 
subsequently 
implemented the app.  In autumn 2021, 26 wards at HT1 
used the app, pertaining over 1000 users. 
III. METHOD
The paper is based on a qualitative inductive 
evaluation study conducted in close collaboration with 
HT1.  
A.
Data Collection 
In the study, 22 semi-structured interviews were 
conducted with healthcare personnel and other actors 
involved in the implementation and use of the app (see 
Table I)  
TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF THE DATA COLLECTION
Data source 
Nr 
Interviews: 
Healthcare personnel 
26 
Managers at different levels of HT1  
6 
The EHR vendor 
3 
The app vendor 
4 
Regional implementation program 
1 
Regional ICT 
2 
Total 
22 
Observations:  
Observation at the pilot department at HT1 
3 hours 
Participation in meetings, workshops, and discussions. 
20 hours 
The data collection started a year after the initial 
implementation process and were conducted between 
June and October 2021. Most of the interviews with 
healthcare personnel were focus group interviews to avoid 
taking up too much of their time. With the other actors a 
mix of focus groups and single person interviews were 
done. The interviews lasted between 20 and 60 minutes. 
All interviews, except from one, were done on a distance, 
using Microsoft Teams for communisation. All interviews 
were recorded with a separate voice recorder and 
transcribed verbatim.  
B.
The NASSS-CAT Framework 
For evaluating the empirical implementation process, 
the NASSS-CAT framework was used as the basis for the 
interview guides and the analysis. Separate interview 
guides were designed for nurses, doctors, leaders, and 
IT/vendors to allow for domain-specific probing [9]. The 
NASSS-CAT framework is set to guide and evaluate the 
success or failure of technology deployments in 
organizations, as well as assessing complexity related to 
the implementation process [9][10].  Using the framework 
can help to predict and change directions during an 
implementation process to stimulate the success of an 
intervention [10][11]. The framework includes seven 
domains identified through systematic literature reviews 
and refined through empirical case studies of technology 
implementations [10][11][12]. 
Figure 1. The NASSS-CAT framework 
The seven domains are: I) the illness/condition, II) the 
technology, III) the value proposition, IV) the adopter 
system, V) the organizations, VI) the wider context, VII)  
embedding and adaption over time (see figure 1). The 
NASSS-CAT framework is set to guide and evaluate the 
success or failure of technology deployments in 
organizations, as well as assessing complexity related to 
the implementation process [9][10].  Using the framework 
can help to predict and change directions during an 
implementation process to stimulate the success of an 
intervention [10)[11]. The framework includes seven 
domains identified through systematic literature reviews 
and refined through empirical case studies of technology 
implementations [10][11][12]. 
By definition, the value proposition category addresses 
the actual value of an innovation and for whom it 
generates value. It questions whether a technology is 
worth developing in the first place and includes both the 
upstream values that follows the supply side logic of 
financial markets and investments decisions, including 
whether there is a straightforward and uncontested 
business case for generating revenue for the developer. It 
also addresses the downstream values that follow the 
demand-side logic of health technology appraisal, 
reimbursement, and whether there is strong and 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

uncontested evidence that the technology is desirable for 
patients, effective, safe and cost-effective [12]. In 
accordance with the research question, which gives 
direction for the analysis of data we focus on the 
downstream values to answer our research question by 
addressing the values for the users and the organization. 
Further descriptions of the domains can be found in 
Greenhalgh et al. (2020) [12]. The value category 
therefore 
includes 
the 
consequences 
of 
the 
implementation, both intended and unintended ones. 
C.
Analysis 
The first step of the analysis was systematic reading 
and thematically coding of the interviews in line with the 
NASSS-CAT framework’s seven domains. During this 
process, the content of the different domains was 
discussed and how they should be separate, since some of 
the findings related to more than one domain. For this 
paper, data representing consequences for the healthcare 
personnel and actors involved was of particular interest 
and thematically categorized in the “value proposition”. 
However, consequences can also be understood as a 
secondary value or repercussions of the implementation 
and have a link to other domains as well. For this study, 
we divided the values proposition into 1) expected values 
(consequences) traced back to the HT1 list of outcomes, 
and 2) unexpected values (consequence) including the 
different repercussions. Both the expected and unexpected 
values were divided into categories represented by the 
different informants.  
The next step was to produce narrative summaries for 
both the expected and unexpected values for all the 
groups of informants. During the analysis, there were 
three meetings with representatives from HT1 discussing 
both the definitions of NASS-CAT domains, the division 
of the value proposition, and the narrative summaries. The 
final step of the analysis was to merge the narrative 
summaries into overall themes to give insight into 
expected and unintended socio-technical values of 
implementing an app to support healthcare personnel’s’ 
point-of-care registrations of vital signs.  
TABLE II. OVERVIEW OF OVERALL THEMES
A.The expected values of implementing the nursing app
B. Digitalising more paper-based processes
C. Improving the workpractice for doctors
D. Providing better overview for leaders, increased use of patient 
whiteboards
E. Improved communication between professions and organizations
The themes are presented in Table II and elaborated on in 
the results part. 
IV. RESULTS
The focus of the paper is to outline intended and 
unintended consequences for the nurses by evaluating the 
implementation of an app for registering vital signs and 
NEWS score at the point-of-care. The aim is to generate 
an understanding of the repercussions the implementation 
generated both for healthcare personnel and the 
organization. In the results part the overall themes that 
emerged from the analysis are presented.   
A.
Intended Consequences of Implementing the 
Nursing App 
When deciding to implement the nursing app 
(illustrated in Figure 2), the management and the IT 
department 
defined 
some 
overall 
goals 
for 
the 
implementation. 
Figure 2. Illustration of the nursing app 
These included improving the nurses’ workflow and 
patient safety real-time registration, the possibility to 
share and reuse information electronically between 
different systems simultaneously, decision support for 
nurses, reducing paper-based processes and scanning of 
forms into the EHR. In addition, outlining and improving 
the digital competence for healthcare personnel by using 
mobile phones for clinical registration was important. 
There is a globally shared concern related to health 
personnel’s digital competence, and skills are required in 
adopting new digital services [8]. 
When deploying the app, the IT department 
introduced it and demonstrated the use. The nurses 
instantly found it user-friendly, intuitive to learn and easy 
to use, due to the similarity between the app’s interface 
and the existing paper form. The nurses particularly liked 
that the app automatically calculated the NEWS score at 
the point-of-care after filling in the vital signs. In 
addition, the app provided point-of-care decision support 
by suggesting which actions to take in accordance with 
the patient’s updated NEWS score. Compared to before 
the implementation, the app provided the nurses an 
overview of all the patients’ NEWS scores in the ward. 
Now, the nurses could check in the app, at the-point-of-
care, if someone else had measured the vital signs 
recently, and check the patients previous score, instead of 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

having to run around coordinating the work with each 
other. This vastly improved organizing v the workflow.  
Due to the integration between the app and the 
existing IT infrastructure, the vital signs and NEWS Score 
were automatically transferred to the EHR system and the 
electronic patient whiteboards (Electronic whiteboards 
used in ward offices for coordination and overview of 
patients’ conditions) at the wards, eliminating the need for 
double registration  
Overall, the nurses found the app very useful, one of 
them stated: “The Medanets app has only generated 
benefits for us. If a patient becomes ill, we can check the 
previous status on the phone, without having to search for 
the paper form. In addition, we don’t have to double 
registrate or calculate NEWS anymore.”  
Even if the app implementation fulfilled the intended 
consequences, some challenges were detected. First, for 
some nurses it was challenging to start using the mobile 
phone as a tool for registering vital signs. They needed 
extensive training in using the mobile phone as a clinical 
tool, before including the app in their daily practices. 
Some were concerned to make errors, or not be able to log 
onto the app. Second, some nurses reported that they 
experienced a barrier in using the mobile phone in front of 
patients. They described it as uncomfortable to use the 
mobile phone at the patient’s bedside and worried that the 
patient found it impersonal and that it would hamper the 
communication with patients. They also worried that the 
focus on the digital work tool could risk lowering the 
focus on assessing the patient as a unique person. One of 
them said: “There is a risk that especially young 
unexperienced nurses focus more on the digital results 
than the overall patient status.” Consequently, some 
nurses still noted the vital signs on paper and registered 
them in the app after leaving the patient room.  
Another challenge was the mobile network at HT1.  
For instance, the Wi-Fi signal at parts of the hospital was 
very poor, especially at some of the wards. This resulted 
in instability in exporting data to the EHR and the 
electronic patient whiteboards. It was important to test 
and improve the mobile network in line with clinicians 
using the phone as a work tool Still, it was possible to 
register data offline in the app and exporting it whenever 
the WI-FI signal was back on. Sometimes, it was trouble 
with the mobile phones which made it impossible to log 
into the app. Occasionally, this led to going back to use 
the paper forms.   
None of the nurses reported that using the app made 
them save time on measuring and filling in the vital signs 
at the point-of-care. However, in addition to the intended 
consequences summarised which the management and the 
IT 
department 
had 
defined 
as 
goals 
for 
the 
implementation the app generated several unintended 
consequences as well these are outlined in the following 
sub-sections. 
B.
Digitalising More Paper-based Processes 
From using the app for digital registration of vital 
signs, the nurses increasingly started to see the potential 
of digitalizing other paper-based processes as well to 
improve their workflow. In most wards, nurses reported 
that it was easy to propose new parameters or forms to 
integrate with the app.  Healthcare personnel suggested 
improvements to their department leaders, which brought 
them further to the IT department. The IT department 
discussed the ideas and brought the doable ones to the app 
vendor.  
The first new forms suggested by the nurses were the 
risk assessment forms related to the national “patient 
safety campaign” calculating risk for falling, bedsore, and 
nutrition screening. In addition, other parameters like 
weight, hight, and pain were included in the app. There 
was also an ongoing work on designing digital admission 
and submission forms for the app. Every time a new 
parameter or form was digitalized and included in the app, 
it increased the awareness amongst the nurse resulting in 
more systematic follow-up. 
In the somatic department measuring vital parameters 
and calculating the NEWS score were well established 
routines. However, in some of the psychiatric and 
substance abuse wards they had just started using the 
NEWS procedure. Using the app became a means to 
increase awareness and more systematic registrations of 
NEWS. The implementation of the app also brought forth 
suggestions of other paper forms they found appropriate 
to digitalize, e.g., the violence measurement, symptoms 
and detoxication checklists. However, some of our 
informants outlined the importance of not digitalizing all 
forms. One of the doctors said: “I don’t feel the need to 
use such app for the scores we use in the IR, it would just 
generate a lot of clicking and extra time use for us.” This 
illustrates that not all work processes will be improved by 
digitalization.  
During the first year of using the app, the IT 
department outlined that 100-150 changes were made to 
the app.  They emphasized the importance of the app 
being flexible and adjustable in line with the general 
development of nurses’ work practices.  
C.
Improving the Workpractice for Doctors 
The nursing app was not used directly by the doctors. 
However, it had an extensive impact on their workflow 
since the vital signs and NEWS scores were for the first 
time automatically exported from the app to the EHR 
system. The doctors could log in to the EHR and view 
results for patients assigned to them, which was of great 
importance when it came to following-up the patients 
with unstable medical conditions. The instant update in 
the EHR were also included in an overview of previous 
scores at different time intervals. Before the app was 
implemented the doctors had to walk to the ward and 
search for the medical chart in the ward office to get an 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

overview of all the patients’ NEWS scores. If they wanted 
to look at trends over time, they had to look through a pile 
of forms and compare the values manually. When they 
were busy and did not have time to search for the chart, 
they sometimes assessed the patient based on the 
approximate value based on their memory.  One doctor 
stated that “it improves the patient safety to be able to 
always have the updated NEWS value at hand.”
Before the morning rounds, the doctors had a meeting 
to assess all their patients and discuss further treatment. 
The quality of these meetings was improved from having 
updated NEWS scores at hand. Also following-up patients 
with unexpected NEWS values were much easier. Now 
they could look at the patients NEWS overview to assess 
if the current score was normal for this particular patient 
or if it was necessary to take further action. This was an 
asset to prioritising the right patients to focus on, resulting 
in more efficient patient treatment.  
In addition, when the doctors were on call, they did 
“medical supervision” on patients at other wards.  Now 
they were able to check the NEWS scores on these 
patients beforehand, enabling a more accurate assessment 
of patients they did not have the overall responsibility for 
and did not know so well. One doctor said: “This is 2021 
and it is natural that the information can be registered 
and read digitally, the world is moving forward, and we 
are all happy about that.” The managers at HT1 outlined 
that they did not expect the implementation of the app to 
have such extensive impact on the doctors’ workflow.  
D.
Providing Better Overview for Leaders – 
Increased use of the Patient Whiteboards. 
Besides being automatically exported to the EHR, the 
NEWS scores from the app were exported to the 
electronic patient whiteboards that all departments at the 
hospitals had in their ward offices (illustrated in Figure 3).  
Figure 3.The patient whiteboard 
The patient whiteboards presented the NEWS score as 
well as the values from the parameters in the “patient 
safety campaign” for each patient. One of the leaders said 
that they had not used the patient whiteboard actively for 
a while due to limited usefulness. However, after NEWS 
and vital parameters were included and systematically 
updated, they used it much more. The NEWS score for 
each patient came up with a colure code related to 
severity, and a countdown for when the patient needed the 
next score done.  
Now the department leader could use the patient 
whiteboard to get an overview of the status of all their 
patients to plan the workday for the staff. If one nursing 
group had many patients with high NEWS scores 
demanding extra follow-up. Then, the leader could re-
arrange the personnel in the different groups and transfer 
extra personnel for the group with patients that needed 
closely monitoring for that day.  The leaders could use the 
patient whiteboard also to find out if some of the NEWS 
scores or other scores were not done or delayed and 
remind the nurses to do them. One department leader said: 
“To have the NEWS score at the patient whiteboards 
improves our workday. We gather around the patient 
whiteboard every morning to plan the day and follow-up 
on scores that have not been conducted in time.” Some of 
the leaders expressed that it was challenging to get the 
nurses to use the patient whiteboards systematically since 
they already used the nursing app and the EHR system. 
However, these are important overview tools since 
everybody can access the same information whether it is 
the medical director, IT department, nurses, or doctors. 
The psychiatric and substance related department leaders 
stated that they did not use the patient whiteboards more 
after implementing the nursing app, since they did not 
have that many NEWS scores to conduct. The other 
parameters at the whiteboard were too oriented on 
somatic care to be of significant value for them. 
E.
Improved Communication Between Professions 
and Organizations 
Improved communication was another important 
unintended consequence from using the nursing app. 
Since all vital parameters were registered at the patient’s 
bedside, and the NEWS score automatically calculated, it 
was 
much 
easier 
to 
use 
the 
actual 
score 
in 
communications at different healthcare levels. 
The communication between nurses and doctors 
improved from using the app because the nurses could use 
an updated NEWS score as an argument for following-up 
a patient, instead of using unspecific terms like “the 
patient looked a bit shabby, sickly, limp, pale.” They felt 
more confident using the NEWS score when the app had 
calculated it automatically at the patient’s bedside, than 
when they had to do it themselves. It was both more 
efficient and more accurate.  One of the doctors said: “it 
is much better to use objective parameters like NEWS 
score as the starting point for discussing the patient.”
However, the doctors and nurses underlined that it is most 
important to look at the patient as a whole and not be 
blinded by the NEWS score. For some patients NEWS 8 
might be normal and for some NEWS 0 could be 
dangerous. This depends on the total clinical picture and 
the dialogue between doctors and nurses for each patient. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Still, the main rule was to call the doctor when NEWS 
was above 5 to discuss the overall risk for the patient. One 
doctor said: “Now we have the NEWS score instantly and 
can communicate using the same language.” This was 
assuring especially for unexperienced nurses and health 
workers that before may have observed that something 
was wrong with the patient without being able to confirm 
it, but now the changing NEWS score made it easier to 
explain the shift in the patient status. After NEWS was 
adopted, at first the doctors received a lot of extra calls 
related to the patient status, however now a year later the 
nurses used the app more as a supplement to the overall 
clinical assessment  
In one of the psychiatric wards, they stated that using 
the app resulted in more systematic registration of NEWS, 
which in turn led to improved communication with the 
somatic department, in terms of increased focus on 
somatic deterioration in their patients. One nurse from the 
psychiatric department said: “we have a common 
language now, when we talk about a NEWS score, the 
somatic doctors understands that this is something they 
have to follow-up on.”
Another communication improved was between the 
central hospital and the smaller district hospitals. One 
department leader at the district hospital said that earlier 
they had to argue a lot to get the patients transferred to the 
central hospital when their condition worsened. Now they 
could use a NEWS score value, e.g. of 9 or 10 and an 
overview of the patient’s trends as an description of 
clinical deterioration and an argument for transferring a 
patient to the central hospital.  
Consequently, the nurses found that using the NEWS 
score procedure systematically contributed to improve the 
quality of a patient’s treatment and care in the different 
steps of the healthcare chain. 
V. DISCUSSION
In the result section we presented the intended and 
unintended 
consequences 
that 
emerged 
from 
the 
implementation of the nursing app for registering NEWS 
in a hospital encompassing both somatic and mental 
health departments (see Table III).  
TABLE III. AN OVERVIEW OF EXPECTED AND UNINTENDED VALUES FROM 
IMPLEMENTING THE NURSING APP. 
Overview of consequences 
Intended 
consequences 
Unintended 
consequences 
Challenges 
Intuitive and easy 
to use 
Better overview for 
leaders through the 
patient whiteboard 
Difficult to use for 
nurses with low 
digital competence 
No doble 
registration 
Better communication at 
different healthcare 
levels 
Impersonal to use the 
phone at patient 
bedside 
Improved 
workflow related 
to 
overview 
of 
NEWS 
Increased digital focus – 
suggestions for more 
digital forms 
Some still registered 
on paper first 
Automatic 
calculation of 
score 
Improved workflow for 
doctors 
Less focus on overall 
assessment 
Instant export of 
NEWS to EHR 
and patient 
whiteboard 
Problems with the 
phones and the 
network 
Less paper-based 
work 
Not very time saving 
The intended consequences were in line with the overall 
aim of implementing the app in clinical practices. The 
study demonstrates that the implementation of the app 
was interpreted as a success by the nurses despite that 
some worry that using technology at the patient bedside 
shifts the focus from the patient to, in this case, the phone. 
Healthcare personnel experienced it as useful and 
intuitive. The app improved their workflow and to the 
end, it improved the treatment and care of patients also. 
The app fulfilled the expectations of fast and efficient 
communication of vital signs that increase accurate and 
timely documentation of vital signs, which in turn leading 
to safe patient treatment and care. In addition, the app 
gave the nurses clinical decision support at the point-of-
care that improved their clinical confidence and improved 
the communication about the patient’s situations with the 
doctors [1][2][5]. 
Defining an implementation of a digital solution for 
healthcare a success is in itself a very rare and important 
finding. Often such implementation demands for 
comprehensive training before using the solution, and 
resource-intensive adaptation of both technology and 
workflow to make the technology work optimally. In 
addition, technology often demands for workarounds and 
fulfils 
only 
parts 
of 
healthcare 
organizations’ 
requirements. To solve several requirements for a 
heterogeneous group of different healthcare personnel, the 
system implemented is often a large, complex digital 
solution, like an EHR system, which takes time to adapt 
to clinical practice.  
However, this app is the opposite, it is a simple app 
designed to solve a clearly defined work task for one 
specific group of healthcare personnel. The digital form in 
the app is identical to the paper-based form, hence the 
workflow of measuring the vital signs is the same, only 
the registration process has changed. As a result, the 
nurses stated that they did not find it time saving to use 
the app for registration of vital signs. This is in line with 
previous studies, for example Dall’Ora et al. [2] argues 
that there is no evidence that nurses save time when using 
electronic vital signs recording. Our study did not 
measure time related to using the app for recording and 
calculating NEWS score. However, this study identifies 
other values generated by the app. It increases the quality 
and security of the work processes by offering decision 
support based on NEWS values, automatically calculating 
the score, instantly exporting the results to the EHR, and 
erasing the double registration and the risk of 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

misunderstanding bad handwriting.    The app also 
improves the work processes surrounding the actual 
registration. This includes the collaboration amongst 
nurses, the need for less resources to scan the paper forms 
and the possibility of reusing NEWS to the EHR and the 
patient electronic whiteboards. The managers at HT1 
were aware of the risk of not making measuring vital 
parameters more efficient, however, the surrounding 
values were extensive enough for the process to be 
defined as successful. 
One of the challenges of implementing new 
technology reflects the diversity of digital competence 
among nurses [8]. The management at HT1 saw the 
implementation of the app as a possibility to get an 
overview of the digital competence amongst their 
workers. and how they experienced using handheld 
devices at the point-point-of care. Kaihlanen, et al. [8] 
outlines the overall concern related to nurses’ digital 
competence since nurse’s informatics competence affects 
the quality of healthcare [8]. 
It is important to raise the digital competence of the 
nurses without compromising the clinical assessment. 
More and more of the digital solutions implemented in 
healthcare includes digital solutions for registering data. 
The EHR vendor for instance has worked for years to 
develop mobile solutions for accessing the EHR and 
registering data. Other vendors also want to transfer 
functionality to mobile solutions, and there is a wave of 
apps entering the healthcare. However, using all kinds of 
digital solutions, replacing the overall assessment is 
impossible, the experienced nurses said that this was 
important to remember in a busy workday.  To enable 
more digital solutions for healthcare personnel it was 
important for the management to to get an overview of the 
capacity for the mobile network at the health trust. Within 
the group of  
 Still, increasing the digital competence of the users 
and expanding the use of digital solutions demands for an 
up-to-date mobile infrastructure to make sure that the 
phones always are available at all locations. If using the 
phone is too cumbersome, in terms of e.g., no network, 
out of battery, or delays related to logging in, there is a 
risk that the nurses will stop using the mobile solution and 
go back to their old paper-based routines. In this case, the 
importance of the nursing app to be more efficient and 
easier to use than paper was outlined as a precondition to 
use it in the first place. However, the regional IT 
department ran the IT network, and scaling up the mobile 
use to clinical use for an entire health trust was new for 
them and required some improvement and optimizing of 
their mobile infrastructure.  
The implementation of the app implied unintended 
consequences. These are of particular interest to discuss 
for understanding the socio technical consequences the 
implementation of the app brought about. First, the app 
generated new practises and workflows both for leaders 
and doctors, who did not fuse the app, but who were 
influences by receiving data from the app in other 
systems. Both groups report that improved overview and 
patient safety were important values generated by the app.  
In relation to the increased use of the patient electronic 
whiteboards, the results underscore the importance of 
engaged and digitally mature leaders. In departments with 
such leaders, the patient electronic whiteboards went from 
being a rather passive and random used work tool, to an 
important means for coordinating work practice and 
resource allocation at the ward.  
Existing research points out a lack in standardized 
clinical processes for measuring vital signs, and 
inadequate description of the vital signs’ observation 
methods used [2].  HT1 had standardized the process of 
measuring vital signs by using the NEWS Score years 
before implementing the app. However, this study also 
showed how a systematically and standardized procedure 
for measuring and registration of vital signs and NEWS 
Score improved the communication between different 
healthcare professions, healthcare specialities, and the 
hospital’s clinical departments. A standardized language 
for communication (NEWS), generated more confidence 
amongst the nurses when reporting the results to the 
doctors. In addition, the doctors could evaluate the patient 
not just by the status today, but also the overview from 
several days resulting in improved patient safety.  
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Implementing the nursing app at HT 1 was an overall 
success 
both 
for 
healthcare 
personnel 
and 
the 
organization, due to the instant usefulness for nurses as 
well as the repercussions including positive consequences 
for doctors, leaders and the improved communication 
across healthcare. 
To define healthcare technology implementations as a 
success, analysis framework like NASSS-CAT is very 
useful for to make it clearer what are the intended and the 
unintended consequences, and how are they fulfilled in 
the process. Using the framework, revealed that the app 
generated several intended and unintended consequences 
that were important to exploit further to understand the 
repercussions this simple app implementation generated. 
Lessons learned from the study: 

The app did not generate extensive time saving for 
nurses, however other important consequences made 
the implementation a success. 

Implementing a simple app can generate several 
unintended values with just as much benefit for the 
users and the organization as the intended ones. It is 
important that the organization can rapidly adjust to, 
and embrace, the unintended values. 

Implementing such simple app and increasing the 
digital competence and digital interaction between 
the systems in their IT ecosystem, made the 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

organization and the healthcare personnel better 
prepared for forthcoming more complex digital 
solution and the possibility for exploiting the digital 
possibilities for optimizing healthcare increased 
extensively. 
When implementing digital solutions in healthcare it can 
be difficult to measure cause/effect values related to time 
saving and reduced costs during the implementation 
process. 
However, 
conducting 
evaluation 
research 
generates an increased long-term learning effect for 
organizations as well as for knowledge production.  
Future work will include the relation between the app 
and the EHR system in related to how large EHR system 
can keep up with the fast-evolving apps and the 
interrelation between those different technologies in the 
IT infrastructure. This will demand for an extensive 
understanding 
of 
the 
IT 
infrastructure 
and 
the 
organization at HT1. It is also important to not include to 
much functionality in the app, to avoid for it to become 
too complex. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Yeung, S. E. Lapinsky, J. T. Granton, D. M Doran, J. A Cafazzo,
“Examining nursing vital signs documentation workflow: barriers 
and opportunities in general internal medicine units.” Journal of 
clinical nursing, vol. 21, no. 7‐8, pp. 975-982, 2012. 
[2] C. Dall'Ora,  et al., “How long do nursing staff take to measure and 
record patients’ vital signs observations in hospital? A time-and-
motion study.” International journal of nursing studies, vol. 118, pp. 
103921, 2021. 
[3] M. Churpek, R. Adhikari, and D. Edelson, “The value of vital sign 
trends for detecting clinical deterioration on the wards.” 
Resuscitation, vol.102: p. 1-5, 2016. 
[4] Royal college of Physicians, National Early Warning Score 
(NEWS) 2. 2022. 
[5] O. C. Redfern, P. Griffiths, A. Maruotti, A. R. Saucedo, and G. B 
Smith, “The association between nurse staffing levels and the 
timeliness of vital signs monitoring: a retrospective observational 
study in the UK.” BMJ open, vol. 9, no. 9, e. 032157, 2019. 
[6] J .E. Ball, T. Murrells, A. M. Rafferty,  E. Morrow, and P. Griffiths, 
“Care left undone’during nursing shifts: associations with workload 
and perceived quality of care.” BMJ quality & safety, vol. 23, no. 2,  
pp. 116-125, 2014. 
[7] Nordlandssykehuset. Mer om Nordlandssykehuset. In english: More 
about Nordlandssykehuset 2020, [retrieved: January 2022],  
Available 
from: 
https://nordlandssykehuset.no/om-oss/om-oss-
#mer-om-nordlandssykehuset. 
[8] A. M. Kaihlanen et al., “Nursing informatics competences of 
Finnish registered nurses after national educational initiatives: A 
cross-sectional study.” Nurse Education Today, vol. 106, pp. 
105060, 2021. 
[9] T. Greenhalgh, et al., “Beyond adoption: a new framework for 
theorizing 
and 
evaluating 
nonadoption, 
abandonment, 
and 
challenges to the scale-up, spread, and sustainability of health and 
care technologies.” Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 19, no. 
11, pp. e8775, 2017. 
[10] T. Greenhalgh, H. Maylor, S. Shaw, J. Wherton, C. Papoutsi, V. 
Betton, N. Nelissen, A. Gremyr, A. Rushforth, M. Koshkouei, and J. 
Taylor, “The NASSS-CAT tools for understanding, guiding, 
monitoring, and researching technology implementation projects in 
health and social care: protocol for an evaluation study in real-world 
settings.” JMIR research protocols, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. e16861, 2020 
[11].S. Abimbola, B. Patel, D. Peiris, A. Patel, M. Harris, T. Usherwood, 
and T. Greenhalgh, “The NASSS framework for ex post 
theorisation of technology-supported change in healthcare: worked 
example of the TORPEDO programme.” BMC medicine, vol. 17, 
no. 1, pp. 1-17, 2019. 
[12] T.  Greenhalgh, and C. Papoutsi, “Studying complexity in health 
services research: desperately seeking an overdue paradigm shift..” 
Springer, pp. 1-6, 2018. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

