Technology for Transition 
Needs and preferences of young patients 
 
Margaret Machniak Sommervold and Maja van der Velden 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
margarma@ifi.uio.no and majava@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a study of the technology needs 
of young patients with Irritable Bowel Disease, who are in the 
process of transitioning from pediatrics to adult-centered 
healthcare. The study is part of a Participatory Design process 
and is based on the assumption that information and 
communications technologies can potentially support young 
patients in achieving increasing independence from parental 
support and in engaging with their own healthcare. We argue 
in favor of designing for context-awareness and appropriation 
in technologies for young patients in transition. 
Keywords-  Participatory Design; IBD;  ICT needs; context-
aware; appropriation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today, more than 90 % of children born with chronic or 
disabling conditions will survive well beyond their 20th 
birthday due to the advancements in medicine and treatment 
[1]. As they mature, young patients’ personal and medical 
needs change and in their late teens they transition to the 
adult clinic or ward in order to receive age-appropriate care 
[2]. Transition in healthcare is being defined as “the 
purposeful, planned movement of adolescents and young 
adults with chronic physical and medical conditions from 
child-centered to adult-oriented healthcare systems” [3] and 
is triggered by the age of the patient. Before the actual 
transition, “adolescents are prepared to assume responsibility 
for their care” [4] because there are important changes in the 
way care is provided [5]. While pediatric providers rely on 
input from the young patient’s family and have a more 
holistic approach to care, adult-centered healthcare providers 
communicate exclusively with the adult patient and present a 
more fragmented healthcare system. Applebaum et al. [6] 
argue that a seamless transition process is critical to the 
future health of the young patients; flaws in this process may 
lead to worse health outcomes. Adolescents with medical 
needs seldom make a smooth transition to adult healthcare 
[1]. Hence, transition has gained much needed attention 
during the past decade and has been described as “one of the 
greatest challenges facing peadiatricians” [7]. 
In a period already characterized by major physical, 
psychosocial, and social changes, young patients face 
additional challenges having to deal with changes in the way 
healthcare is provided [5] and “loose respected and loved 
carers and are forced to trust new and unknown ones” [8].  
Because of their vulnerable position, young patients face 
a greater risk of dropping out of the healthcare system, which 
may have adverse health consequences. As a major life 
stressor, transition may also have direct negative health 
outcomes 
especially 
in 
case 
of 
diagnoses 
where 
psychological stress can increase the likelihood of relapse, 
such as Inflammatory Bowel Disease (hereafter, IBD) [2]. 
A growing body of evidence suggests that information 
and communication technology (hereafter, ICT) and 
technology-mediated methods hold the potential to improve 
outcomes for people with chronic conditions [9]. ICTs are 
especially promising in case of young patients who tend to 
be technology savvy and enjoy using new technologies. In 
terms of altering behavior, it is especially important to target 
this population, as it is during adolescence that adult 
behaviors are established and hence represent an opportunity 
to promote health oriented behavior and influence the 
healthcare needs of tomorrow’s adults. 
As we will discuss later in this paper, downloading a 
mobile application is not equivalent to using it. While not 
problematic in the context of regular apps, this issue presents 
a considerable challenge in health-oriented solutions, where 
positive health outcomes are dependent on consistent use.  
This paper presents research on mHealth use and 
preferences for transition-oriented ICTs among a group of 
young people with IBD. The aim of the paper is to explore 
young patients’ perspectives on what, when, and how 
technology can play a supporting role in transition. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
the next section, we briefly present the existing trends in 
improving the transition process. Section III describes our 
methodology, methods, and population sample used to obtain 
the results, which we present in Section IV. In Section V, the 
main part of this paper, we discuss our results and the 
implications they might have for the design of technology for 
transition by using the concepts of context-awareness and 
appropriation. Finally, in Section V, we present some 
concluding remarks and opportunities for future work.  
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Existing initiatives surrounding transition can be divided 
into three categories: i) guidelines and recommendations, ii) 
paper- and form-based tools, and iii) mHealth and eHealth 
initiatives. Guidelines form a large body of literature, 
257
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

proposing ways to help patients gain the necessary 
knowledge and skills to become competent in adult services 
and make decisions about their care. Important elements of 
successful transitions are a) cooperation between pediatrics 
and adult medicine, b) enabling the young patient to be part 
of the decision-making and management of their healthcare 
as early as possible, c) balancing parental support with the 
need for independence, d) continuity of care, and e) health 
education [6].  
The recommendations stress that the barriers to achieving 
good transitions are not adolescents but the limitations of the 
healthcare itself. Acknowledging transition as a process 
rather than a singular event or transfer, Blum [3] was one of 
the first to suggest that the process should be initiated when 
the patient is 13 years old. Aiding the patient in planning and 
initiating the work towards independency in adult medicine, 
a range of paper-based tools has been developed. A transition 
checklist has been designed and implemented by The Royal 
Children's Hospital Melbourne and has been adapted by 
several Norwegian hospitals. Similar tools, such as health 
passes and 3 questions (Hospital for Sick Children, 
SickKids, Toronto) encourage young patients to learn more 
about their conditions and prepare for doctor’s appointments.  
There is a unified consensus that transition is an 
important challenge for both pediatrics and adult medicine. 
However, 
little 
has been done 
to 
implement 
the 
abovementioned guidelines and recommendations for 
transition. The growing demands are met with scarce 
resources in capacity, budgets, and healthcare professionals. 
This has contributed to the recent growth in the number of 
mHealth initiatives or healthcare supported by mobile 
technologies. Teens and young adults are an especially 
relevant group of potential users as they are tech savvy and 
enjoy using mobile technologies, making mHealth suitable 
and 
promising 
in 
terms 
of 
improving 
healthcare. 
TransitionMate which offers reminders, self-assessment of 
health and emotional state, and suggestions for health 
promoting activities [10], and Healthy Transitions which 
consists of video training sessions and quizzes [11] are two 
mobile applications targeting medical transition. As part of 
their ongoing research, [12] have presented various platform-
based considerations for designing a transition app. There is 
a considerable number of ICTs focusing on IBD. Among 
these we find myIBD, developed specifically for young 
patients by SickKids, which focuses on logging and 
managing symptoms.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
Young patients, especially during their teenage years, 
tend to separate their identity as a patient from their identity 
as a teenager [13]. In order to meet them in a context where 
they felt comfortable to talk from a patient perspective, we 
conducted our research while they received treatment at the 
Children and Youth Clinic of Akershus University Hospital 
(AHUS) and the Medical Gastroenterology Clinic of the 
Central Hospital in Vestfold (SiV), respectively. The focus 
of the study was to understand transition from a patient’s 
perspective and investigate whether, where, and when 
technology could play a supporting role in this process. 
A. Participatory Design 
There exists a lack of understanding of the teenage 
agenda and the challenges they face in transition – both as 
patients and adolescents [1], [14]. This study has therefore 
taken a Participatory Design (hereafter, PD) approach as it 
“takes into consideration the needs, interests and abilities of 
the youngsters, but also includes a more profound interest in 
their hopes, fears dreams, and opportunities to express 
themselves as someone of importance” [15]. With a focus on 
understanding knowledge by doing, the study was based 
upon PD’s principles of having a say, mutual learning 
between the participants and researchers, and situated action 
[16]. 
B. Methods 
For the purpose of this study, we used a closed sort [17], 
card-based method that we have described extensively in 
[18]. The method, called Transition Cards (TCs), is a 
qualitative card sorting method that enables participants to 
express their expectations and experiences surrounding 
transition. The TCs were used during individual interviews, 
in which we asked the participants to sort 70 cards 
representing people, things, skills, and feelings into 
categories representing pediatric ward (‘BUK’), adult ward 
(‘Voksen’), and both (‘Begge’), which represented things 
relevant across these wards (see Figure 1). The cards referred 
both to the participants’ identity as a patient, as well as to 
their life outside the hospital, thus providing a holistic 
approach to understanding transition [18].  
 
 
Figure 1.  A participant’s use of the Transition Cards representing things. 
C. Recruitment and participants 
Recruitment of the participants was undertaken by the 
head of research at AHUS and by the staff at the Medical 
Gastroenterology Clinic at SiV. The participants were 
recruited while receiving treatment at the clinic and the 
medical staff decided whether the patients were well enough 
to participate. The patients received an information sheet, as 
well as a consent form, which they read before meeting the 
258
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

researcher. Once they agreed to participate, the researcher 
would meet them and both the researcher and the participant 
signed the forms. In the case of patients under the age of 16, 
a legal guardian also had to sign the consent form. 
The research was registered and approved by the ethical 
board at both hospitals, and the Norwegian Social Science 
Data Services (NSD).  
D. Sample 
Participatory Design calls for involvement of future users 
based on the motivation that they are the sole experts on their 
needs and practices that the design should support. However, 
designing for a process that the future users have not 
undergone yet or know much about, required the 
involvement of patients who had transitioned. Therefore, the 
sample consisted of pre- and post transition patients.  
An acceptable sample size in qualitative research studies 
involving 
participants 
with 
impairments 
or 
other 
vulnerabilities is between 5 and 10 [19]. In this study, fifteen 
young patients participated in this study – 8 pre-transition 
(ages 13-17) and 7 post-transition (ages 18-25) out of whom 
six were male and 9 female.   
IV. 
RESULTS 
The interviews provided important information for 
mapping the young patients’ expectations and experiences 
with transition and the role of ICTs in supporting them in 
any of the challenges that they presented and discussed using 
the Transition Cards. It was also important to understand 
which technologies they were using the most and what they 
used them for. We therefore started all interviews with 
asking whether the participants had access to mobile phones, 
computers/laptops, and tablets. All of the interviewed 
patients owned smart phones and only one out of fifteen did 
not own a computer. Majority of the participants had access 
to tablets, but reported on using mostly laptops and mobile 
phones. The participants reported that they used their phones 
for social media, such as Instagram, Facebook, Snapchat, 
Vine, and mobile applications offering instant messaging. 
The participants used their computers for schoolwork, 
gaming, and social media.  
When mapping their use of health applications, several 
participants conveyed that they were advised by their doctors 
to download the ‘IBD app’ developed by a Norwegian 
company. Once downloaded, few of them tried to use the 
app but stopped due to the problem of too many notifications 
and reminders to log their symptoms or to enter a symptom-
free period. Other health apps used by the participants were 
Endomondo and other training apps, and menstrual 
calendars. One of the participants reported on using an app to 
log migraine episodes and headaches.  
In addition to ideas for more youth-friendly adult wards, 
the participants also proposed several areas where they 
thought that new technology could play a supporting role in 
their transition and life as a patient. These areas and needs 
can be categorized as information, medical dictionary, 
reminders, and health rights and financial support.  
A. Paperless Information 
Only seven of the patients received information about 
transition at least a year prior to their transfer. Two of the 
interviewed teens received the paper-based checklists during 
what was their last visit at the Child and Youth clinic. 
Majority of the interviewed patients suggested sites or apps 
presenting information about the new ward and an 
explanation of the differences in routines and practices of 
their old clinic and the new ward. Getting information about 
what they could expect at the adult wards, such as different 
specializations, having to engage with different doctors as 
opposed to their own pediatrician at the pediatric wards, 
could reduce some of the uncertainty. The pre-transition 
patients, who were informed about transition, were told that 
the adult health services were managed by the nurses and not 
by the doctors. They mentioned that they did not fully 
comprehend what it meant.  
The patients suggested that the information about the 
adult wards should not only inform the patients about what 
would be different with regards to the above-mentioned 
changes, but also with regards to the changes in routines 
specific to their diagnosis. Conditions related to the digestive 
system often require endoscopic examinations, which in 
pediatric wards are performed under anesthesia. Anesthesia 
is not offered to adult patients, but they can receive 
temporary sedatives. The participants felt that they should be 
informed about this prior to the transfer in order to avoid 
stress and fear. The expressed need for diagnosis-specific 
information on transition is not the same as need for 
information about the diagnosis, and in particular the 
outlooks and life expectancy. Two of the participants 
expressed that it was too scary to think about the severity of 
their diagnosis, and that they did not read about the diagnosis 
online to avoid confrontation with information on this 
matter. 
In addition to information about the different practices, 
the patients wished to be able to see the wards – ideally in 
person and accompanied by the personnel from the pediatric 
ward, but pictures or videos were considered helpful as well. 
Because the treatment and examinations were offered at 
different wards and clinics, the patients also thought that a 
map they could have on their mobile phones would help 
them in finding their way around the hospital. 
We asked the patients about how they wanted to be 
informed about new health-oriented ICTs. Posters in the 
pediatric and adult medicine wards were suggested as a good 
way of spreading the initiatives. Another important factor 
was confirmation of the legitimacy and origin of the 
technology by the healthcare professionals. 
B. Medical Dictionary-app 
Two of the younger participants suggested medical 
dictionaries containing explanations for difficult words, 
acronyms, and treatments. When asked whether they would 
like to learn difficult terms through games, quizzes or textual 
explanations over time, the patients expressed that they 
needed information when difficult terms came up during 
their consultations and stay at the hospital, indicating that the 
information should be easy to find – even without knowing 
259
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

the correct spelling and be short enough so they could deal 
with the information also during the consultations with the 
medical staff.   
 One of 
the post-transition 
patients 
shared 
her 
experiences with not understanding what a stoma bag was, 
which affected her treatment decisions. She discussed a 
possibility of offering images or videos of treatments to 
show patients what they really looked like in order to reduce 
fear and uncertainty. As one of the younger participants 
explained, When they call it ‘blah blah’, you don’t get any of 
it. It sounds like gibberish or turns out to be something else 
than you thought. (…) So that it said what it was. It would be 
easier to understand what they put in your body. (…) I think 
it’s weird that you get stuff put in your body that you don’t 
know what it is (girl 13). 
C. Reminders for mobile devices 
A large part of becoming an adult and being responsible 
for one’s own healthcare is taking charge of appointments 
and medications. Today, Norwegian hospitals routinely send 
out text messages reminding the patients about their 
appointments at the hospital in addition to a letter. 
Remembering appointments with general practitioners are 
still the patients’ responsibility. Several of the participants 
suggested reminders as desired functions on their mobile 
devices. The reminders would help them to remember their 
appointments and to take their medications. Reminders 
during the holidays and while travelling were highlighted as 
especially useful as different routines and time zones would 
often cause the participants to forget their medications 
especially if they had to be taken at specific times of the day. 
D. Information on Health Rights and Financial Support 
 
The Norwegian healthcare system offers free healthcare 
to persons under the age of 16. Upon turning 16, patients 
start to pay a deductible when receiving healthcare services, 
have the right to confidentiality, and can make decisions 
surrounding their treatment. When patients turn 18, they 
lose their right to free appointments with a child and youth 
psychologist. On the other hand, the Norwegian Welfare 
system offers benefits and financial subsidy for adults with 
chronic conditions.  
 
Two the interviewed patients voiced a need for ICTs 
offering information on health rights targeting pre-transition 
youth. In addition, several post-transition patients reported 
on suddenly having to learn about health rights during the 
course of their transition.  
E. Platforms 
Both websites and apps were suggested as good 
platforms for information. One of the participants explained 
that: You can take an app or cell anywhere, but a website is 
better for information. So both are important (boy 17). The 
choice of platforms for the suggested tools was closely 
coupled with the purpose and context of use. While websites 
were explained as great for learning and reading up on 
things, apps were preferred where information was supposed 
to be offered immediately - without the need of internet 
connection. The participants suggesting the medical 
dictionary as a technology for transition argued that it would 
have to necessarily be an app so that they wouldn’t have to 
rely on an Internet connection, which was often scarce at the 
hospital.  Only one of the participants suggested paper-based 
brochures containing information, and none of the 
participants perceived the checklists offered at the hospital as 
helpful. One of the participants explained: “it sucks more 
when it’s on paper. I don’t know why but I feel that it more 
serious and stuff like that when it’s on paper, that you have 
to read through everything that will happen. It’s certainly 
easier on a website” (boy, 17). 
F. Social networking 
To our surprise, none of the participating patients 
suggested a patient-social network or other means of 
connecting with other patients in a similar life situation. 
However, they proposed that especially information sites 
should have comment fields so that others could discuss the 
topics or share their experiences. Several participants 
reported on reading blogs by other patients, but shared their 
concern about the reliability of the information, and 
relevance for their own situation – especially in cases of rare 
or multiple diagnoses, the participants were not able to relate 
or gain new knowledge from experience-based information 
found online.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Transition is situated between the different contexts and 
stages in life of adolescents. The process involves changes in 
how healthcare services are provided, different legal rights, 
and growing economic responsibilities. It also involves 
responsibilities related to growing up and becoming an adult 
and, above all – being a young person – not a patient. [20] 
argues that despite the dominant role of their condition, they 
do not see themselves as patients. When designing and 
implementing measures to aid them in aspects connected to 
their patient identity, it is important to understand their daily 
life and how technology can fit there. 
Powell et al. [21] imagine medical practitioners 
prescribing apps alongside medications. The patients 
interviewed in this study reported on their doctors 
recommending them to download and use the “IBD-app” 
developed by a Norwegian company. The “IBD-app” can 
remind the patients to take their medications and recommend 
booking appointments on the basis of their logged 
symptoms. The participants downloaded the app, but 
reported that they didn’t use it because the app sent out too 
many notifications and urged them to log their symptoms 
when they were in a symptom-free period. Although they 
expressed the need for a reminder app, the IBD-app required 
them to log their symptoms in order to access the rest of the 
functionalities. The youth participating in this study did not 
adopt and use the IBD-app over time and hence did not 
experience the full functionality and benefits of the app. This 
stands in contrast to the research suggesting that combination 
of tracking tools, with mobile technologies makes it easier 
for users to keep track of the different aspects of their health. 
Based on the participants’ explanations, the prescribed app 
260
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

did not offer them the experience they were looking for and 
became intrusive in periods when they did not have the need 
for its functionality. In other words, the app did not react to 
the patients’ dynamic life-situation and lost its instrumental 
value when interfering with their non-patient identity. Dey 
[22] argues that today’s technologies lack the ability to use 
and adapt to the situational information, or context, in the 
same way humans do. Context is defined as “any 
information that can be used to characterize the situation of 
an entity” [22, pp.5]. Further, [22] argues that having the 
ability to access and adapt to context will lead to better 
usability and usefulness of ICTs. In relation to technologies 
for transition and managing one’s health, the understanding 
of context may help in determining what, when, and how we 
want to support. 
A. When to support 
The timing, or chronological age context, for introducing 
different ICTs and functions is crucial for adoption. The 
majority of patients suggested the timing for introduction of 
the information regarding transition to be close to the 
transfer. This is in contrast with what is suggested in the 
literature, which proposes the introduction of information 
between the ages of 12 and 14. As one of the teens 
explained: When you’re 14, it’s still four years until you’ll 
move, so it’s not so important to know so much about it then 
(girl, 17).  
This aversion toward planning and preferences toward 
instantaneous and relevant ITs can be explained from a 
biological perspective. The ongoing re-structuring of the 
brain and development of cognitive abilities is not completed 
before reaching the mid-twenties, causes notable differences 
between adults and adolescents in their ability to control 
impulses, make rational decisions, and affects long-term 
planning [23]. This bio-developmental perspective combined 
with the findings in this study affects the overarching context 
of technologies for transition and indicate a need for 
technologies that are either context-aware, as defined by 
[22], and provide relevant information based on for example 
the user’s age, location, and condition; or technologies 
developed specially for a relevant period during transition, 
which excludes the possibility and motivation for persistent 
use. Developing multiple technologies specifically for 
relevant periods of transition poses challenges with regards 
to sustainability and maintenance of these technologies and 
adds to the already high number of available apps and sites, 
making the task to find legitimate and relevant technologies 
harder for the users. 
B. How to support 
Another approach to this issue is to focus on 
appropriation. Within the field of PD, appropriation is being 
described as “the way that users ‘take possession’ of a 
technology innovation over time” [24]. As PD is concerned 
with giving users a say, appropriation becomes a way for 
users to “control and shape technologies to their own ends” 
[25]. Appropriation becomes especially relevant in the 
context of ICTs directed toward promoting health and 
supporting patients in managing their condition and care. 
This is due to the claim that appropriation involves mutual 
adaptation [14], where the users shape technologies and 
technology shapes the users’ practices. We propose that the 
process of adaptation holds the potential to produce context-
aware technologies through users directly shaping and 
controlling the technology to fit with their current context, 
whether it is chronological age, physical and emotional 
condition, or physical or social environment. The majority of 
the health-oriented ICTs focus on the condition of the 
patient. However, when focusing on the context, our design 
interest should shift towards inclusion of health and 
wellbeing alongside the chronic condition. When meeting a 
healthy person, humans don’t tend to inquire about their 
symptoms – doing so would be unnatural. Similarly, context-
aware technologies should be designed to stop collecting 
data when patients are symptom-free or are within physical 
or social contexts where they are detached from their identity 
and responsibilities as a patient.  
One of the patients used an app to log migraine episodes 
and headaches. She reported that she found the app very 
useful to make sense of what triggered her migraines. Why 
did then the “IBD-app”, which was recommended by the 
doctors - a source preferred by the participants, not receive 
the same response? We believe that the motivation for 
adaptation and the perceived usefulness affected the non-
adaptation of the IBD-app. Combined with the intrusive 
reminders to log their symptoms, the IBD-app was not 
perceived as useful even though it offered reminders, which 
the patients interviewed in this study showed an interest for.  
C. What to support 
The spaces for initiatives and designs proposed by our 
participants – the medical dictionary, information on 
transition and their legal rights, signaled that there is a need 
for information on the practicalities of transition on mobile 
and web platforms. When trying to support the informational 
needs of patients, we need to balance our literature-based 
knowledge on transition, which focuses on transition as a 
continuous process [6], with the patients’ perspective on 
transition as a series of fragmented events with specific and 
practical implications – such as turning 16 and having to pay 
a deductible. An example of practical information could be 
to (One could) write what the routines were in relation to 
meals and visiting hours (girl 21).  
Based on our results, we need to support the information 
needs of the patients aware of the context in which they want 
to acquire this information. Turning toward the patients’ 
perspective allows us to discover that there is also a need to 
inform young patients about the benefits of transitioning; 
Treatment is more efficient here (boy, 21). Actually I think 
that the whole arrangement was more complicated when I 
was downstairs at the children’s ward because there were so 
many people around me that I had to deal with – here things 
are a bit simpler (girl 22). 
The requirement for contextual and developmental 
awareness needs to be balanced with the requirement for 
privacy. The interviewed patients, as well as the findings 
from our earlier studies [13], suggest that young patients 
value their privacy and any technology aimed at health or 
261
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

extending the reach of healthcare institutions needs to be 
based on the values of confidentiality, privacy, and patient-
centeredness. 
VI. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
There are no diagnoses with the exact same course for all 
patients – all diseases affect unique bodies at different points 
in life, and are triggered by different events in patients’ lives. 
There is therefore a need for technologies that are aware of 
and will adapt to these lives and contexts. By designing for 
appropriation, the technologies may achieve context-
awareness and hopefully shape the practices of the users by 
themselves allowing to be shaped.  
In our future research, we aim to work towards 
understanding how we can implement context-awareness and 
facilitate appropriation in already existing technologies, as 
well as in the transition app, which we are currently 
developing in our ongoing research. We hope that this study 
will inspire designers, as well as healthcare professionals to 
work toward understanding the needs and context of young 
patients and design solutions that support them on their way 
toward independency.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the Children and Youth Clinic of Akershus 
University Hospital and the Medical Gastroenterology Clinic 
of the Central Hospital in Vestfold for their support and 
cooperation during the planning and implementation of the 
study and their staff for facilitating the interviews. Our 
warmest thanks go out to all the participants for their 
willingness to share their knowledge and experiences. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. L. Patterson and C. Lanier, “Adolescent health transitions: 
focus group study of teens and young adults with special 
health care needs,” Fam. Community Health, vol. 22, no. 2, 
1999, pp. 43–58. 
[2] R. Baldassano, G. Ferry, A. Griffiths, D. Mack, J. Markowitz, 
and H. Winter, “Transition of the Patient With Inflammatory 
Bowel 
Disease 
From 
Pediatric 
to 
Adult 
Care: 
Recommendations of the North American Society for 
Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition,” J. 
Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr., vol. 34, no. 3, 2002, pp. 245-
248. 
[3] R. W. Blum, D. Garell, C. H. Hodgman, T. W. Jorissen, N. A. 
Okinow, D. P. Orr, and G. B. Slap, “Transition from child-
centered to adult health-care systems for adolescents with 
chronic conditions: A position paper of the Society for 
Adolescent Medicine,” J. Adolesc. Health, vol. 14, no. 7, 
Nov. 1993, pp. 570–576. 
[4] M. E. Bowen, J. A. Henske, and A. Potter, “Health Care 
Transition in Adolescents and Young Adults With Diabetes,” 
Clin. Diabetes, vol. 28, no. 3, Jul. 2010, pp. 99–106. 
[5] F. Campbell, P. M. O’Neill, A. While, and J. McDonagh, 
“Interventions to improve transition of care for adolescents 
from paediatric services to adult services,” in Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 
1996. 
[6] M. A. Applebaum, E. F. Lawson, and E. von Scheven, 
“Perception of transition readiness and preferences for use of 
technology in transition programs: teens’ ideas for the future,” 
Int. J. Adolesc. Med. Health, vol. 25, no. 2, Jan. 2013, pp. 
119–125. 
[7] R. Remorino and J. Taylor, “Smoothing things over: the 
transition from pediatric to adult care for kidney transplant 
recipients,” Prog. Transplant., vol. 16, no. 4, Dec. 2006, pp. 
303–308. 
[8] R. Viner, “Transition from paediatric to adult care. Bridging 
the gaps or passing the buck?,” Arch. Dis. Child., vol. 81, no. 
3, 1999, pp. 271–275. 
[9] S. M. Sawyer, S. Drew, M. S. Yeo, and M. T. Britto, 
“Adolescents with a chronic condition: challenges living, 
challenges treating,” Lancet, vol. 369, no. 9571, pp. 1481–
1489, 2007. 
[10] R. A. Calvo, A. Pardo, Y. Zhao, E. Klineberg, M. Lam, and 
K. Steinbeck, “TransitionMate: a mobile application for 
chronic illness transition support,” in OzCHI 2013, Adelaide, 
Australia, 2013, pp. 1–4. 
[11] “Healthy Transitions”, App Store. [Online]. Available from: 
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/healthy-
transitions/id953246958?mt=8 [Retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[12] J. Dixon, J. Dehlinger, and S. D. Dixon, “Designing, 
Implementing and Testing a Mobile Application to Assist 
with Pediatric-to-Adult Health Care Transition,” in Human-
Computer Interaction. Applications and Services, M. Kurosu, 
Ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 66–75. 
[13] M. van der Velden and K. El Emam, “‘Not all my friends 
need to know’: a qualitative study of teenage patients, 
privacy, and social media,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 
JAMIA, vol. 20, no. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 16–24. 
[14] L. Jacobson, G. Richardson, N. Parry-Langdon, and C. 
Donovan, “How do teenagers and primary healthcare 
providers view each other? An overview of key themes.,” Br. 
J. Gen. Pract., vol. 51, no. 471, Oct. 2001, pp. 811–816. 
[15] O. S. Iversen and R. C. Smith, “Scandinavian Participatory 
Design: Dialogic Curation with Teenagers,” in Proceedings of 
the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and 
Children, New York, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 106–115. 
[16] F. Kensing and J. Blomberg, “Participatory Design: Issues 
and Concerns,” Comput. Support. Coop. Work CSCW, vol. 7, 
no. 3–4, Sep. 1998, pp. 167–185. 
[17] J. Brucker, “Playing with a Bad Deck: The Caveats of Card 
Sorting as a Web Site Redesign Tool,” J. Hosp. Librariansh., 
vol. 10, no. 1, Jan. 2010, pp. 41–53. 
[18] M. M. Sommervold and M. van der Velden, “Transition 
Cards: Designing a method with and for young patients,” 
IADIS Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst., vol. 10, no. 2, 2015, pp. 
79–94. 
[19] D. J. Lazar, D. J. H. Feng, and D. H. Hochheiser, Research 
Methods in Human-Computer Interaction. John Wiley & 
Sons, 2010. 
[20] P. Jones, Design for Care: Innovating Healthcare Experience. 
New York, NY, USA: Rosenfeld, 2013. 
[21] Powell AC, Landman AB, and Bates DW, “In search of a few 
good apps,” JAMA, vol. 311, no. 18, , May 2014, pp. 1851–
1852. 
[22] A. K. Dey, “Understanding and using context,” Pers. 
Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 5, no. 1, 2001, pp. 4–7. 
[23] B. Bower, “Teen Brains on Trial,” Sci. News, vol. 165, no. 
19, 2004, pp. 299–301. 
[24] J. Carroll, “Completing design in use: closing the 
appropriation cycle,” ECIS 2004 Proc., 2004, pp. 44. 
[25] L. J. Bannon and P. Ehn, “Design matters in participatory 
design,” Routledge Int. Handb. Particip. Des., 2012, pp. 37. 
 
262
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

