Investigations on the Impact of Anthropomorphism and Gamiﬁcation
on Breast Cancer Survivors’ Expressed Preferences
in a Physical Activity Promotion Intervention
Jo˜ao P. Monteiro*
Carolina T. Lopes
Nuno C. Duarte
INESC TEC / Faculdade de Engenharia
Universidade do Porto
Rua Dr. Roberto Frias s/n
4200-465 Porto, Portugal
*Email: jpsm@ieee.org
Andr´e T. Magalh˜aes
Servic¸o de Cirurgia Geral
Centro Hospitalar de S˜ao Jo˜ao
Alameda Prof. Hernani Monteiro
4200-319 Porto, Portugal
H´elder P. Oliveira
INESC TEC / Faculdade de Ciˆencias
Universidade do Porto
Rua Campo Alegre 1021/1055
4169-007 Porto, Portugal
Abstract—Among the most common breast cancer treatment-
associated effects, it is possible to recognize a high prevalence
of arm/shoulder restricted mobility and arm swelling that de-
teriorate the upper-body function and may lead to chronic
lymphedema. Within such a perspective, the need has been
identiﬁed for breast cancer survivors to sustain a constant and
speciﬁc physical activity. For that, homebased programs are being
presented as a desirable path to be followed. Concurrently, an
emergence of new technologies has led to major changes in society.
For instance, technology from the video games industry has been
used with emphasis in the recovery, and follow-up stages, to
evaluate and motivate the patient after treatment. The present
work aims to evaluate a set of contextual interfaces that use data
acquired with a colour and depth sensor to monitor, and provide
real-time feedback to, a given user. Furthermore, fundamental
design guidelines from serious games are explored within the
context of developing a system aid for physical follow-up care in
the form of a set of exercises selected by the medical community.
The proposed interfaces were evaluated in a clinical setting with
a group of breast cancer survivors.
Keywords–Patient-empowerment services; Preventive Systems;
Self-management systems; Monitoring systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
While contributing for improved overall survivorship, con-
temporary breast cancer treatment techniques may result in
several impairments in women’s upper-body function and,
consequently, contribute to a decreased quality of life [1]. As
Breast Cancer Survivors (BCS) are living longer, the adverse
effects resulting from the cancer treatment are more frequent.
Upper body morbidity (e.g., decreased range of motion, muscle
strength, pain and lymphedema) are among the most prevalent
side effects. Regarding lymphedema alone, a swelling condi-
tion resulting from lymphatic ablation commonly associated
with breast cancer treatment, it has been estimated that over 1
million BCS in the US and 10 million women worldwide may
meet the criteria for breast cancer-related lymphedema [1].
While the assessment of the oncological outcome of
the cancer treatment can be easily objectively quantiﬁed by
disease-free and overall survival rates, the same does not
hold for functional aspects closely related to quality of life.
Assessment of BCS symptoms and health-related quality of
life outcomes are usually made using Patient Reported Out-
come (PRO) questionnaires that quantify signiﬁcant outcome
variables from the patient’s perspective [1].
A prospective surveillance model for BCS has been pro-
posed, highlighting the importance of monitoring for func-
tional and physical impairment commonly associated with
treatment [2]. Notwithstanding, and though some methods for
monitoring and assessing do exist, an integrated approach able
to achieve early detection, promote risk-reduction and self-
management, while engaging the user in an appropriate follow-
up strategy, is still being reported as missing [3].
In Section II, an outline of topics related to the application
of typical elements of game playing is presented in order to
contextualize the proposed methodology, that is presented in
Section III. The paper concludes with a discussion of results in
Section IV, regarding key questions relating to the application
of strategies of anthropomorphization and gamiﬁcation as
means to promote engagement to particular physical activities
within the context of patient empowerment systems.
II.
RELATED WORK
Engaging patients in their healthcare can be recognized as
a paramount topic that has evolved through time also as a
reﬂection of speciﬁc technological and societal contexts [4].
In this sense, growing trends of the quantiﬁed-self movement,
personal health records tools dissemination and interactive
video games that combine physical exercise with game-play
and have a primary purpose other than entertainment present
themselves as currently active research lines.
A. Gamiﬁcation
Physical activity promotion programmes tested in patients
with disabilities and impairment problems demonstrate that
patients’ functionality can improve with an intensive training
split that is contextualised and oriented as a pursuit in the
achievement of a well deﬁned goal. However, this task division
is prone to present a major set-back, which is the lack of
interest of the patient in performing repetitive tasks [5].
On the other hand, it is possible to note that a game,
overall, aims to offer the player a challenge of a physical or/and
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

mental nature that can be completed using a set of rules, being
able to install feelings of amusement or entertainment in the
participant while returning feedback in a form of grades or
scores, while possibly unlocking new challenges based on the
feedback received. Video games have the same goals, only a
computer is used as an intermediary [6].
The concept of serious games is one that is hard to deﬁne,
but it usually refers to games used for training, advertising,
simulation or education. A particular example of such a
gamiﬁed approach, commonly referred to as exergaming or
exergames, can be described as a type of video game, or
multimedia interaction that requires the player to physically
move in order to play [7]. With the evolution of video game
acceptance by the general public, serious games have begun
to surge, spreading into healthcare where they can eventually
provide a more personalized experience to users, improving not
just physical, but also mental aspects of care. This surge, and
the evolution of visual computing, seems to enable the devel-
opment of personalized home systems, which could objectively
evaluate the patient’s state, while motivating for continued
physical activity. Speciﬁcally for rehabilitation, research has
been done, where small game prototypes were tested for
speciﬁc circumstances, such as upper limb rehabilitation. [8].
B. Anthropomorphism
Different elements can be considered to be included in
serious games as strategies to promote improved adherence [9].
Of those, it is possible to highlight virtual representations of
the self, through which players are presented to the possibility
of assuming the role of a character in the game [10]. On
the topic of player controlled game characters, the Illusion of
Virtual Body Ownership (IVBO) considers the effect of game
players experiencing a sense of artiﬁcial body parts to be their
own, within the context of an Virtual Reality (VR) setting [11].
Previous research [11] tends to suggest that the IVBO may
result from an interaction of both synchronous visual, motor
and tactile sensory inputs, as well as pre-existing visual and
proprioceptive body representation factors. Included in the
group of the latter factors, is the virtual body realism in terms
of visual human resemblance, or anthropomorphism [12]. On
a related note, the Uncanny Valley appertains to a theorized
relationship between humans and robots [13] (e.g., Fig. 1).
Figure 1. Example assessment of the strength of the IVBO in relation to the
degree of anthropomorphism of an user controlled avatar, and the
hypothesized uncanny valley effect [13], adapted from [11].
The hypothesis is that there should exist a positive relation-
ship between how human a robot looks, and how comfortable
people are with its appearance, up to the moment a robot would
get too close to being human in appearance, without being
fully human, at which point human reaction would became
negative [13]. Its impact in game design has been evaluated
although there seems to not exist absolute evidence to support,
or disprove it [12].
III.
PROPOSED RESEARCH APPROACH
While there are several games that include serious topics,
the inclusion of serious game elements is not yet enough
to induce learning or real-world action [14]. Overall, despite
engagement being considered a valuable resource, research on
patient engagement technologies regarding impact on health
outcomes has been limited [15]. Given this, this work’s main
goal is to develop and assess a game to promote an adequate
exercise routine for BCS, to be used independently, as a
self-management system to support breast cancer survivorship
while monitoring one’s physical status. The overall architecture
of the proposed system is outlined in Fig. 2.
Figure 2. Overall architecture of the proposed system, comprising the use of
colour and depth data to monitor, and provide real-time feedback to, a user
in the context of a physical activity promotion for breast cancer survivors.
We consider the Microsoft Kinect as an easily accessi-
ble, Color and Depth (RGB-D) sensor-device that enables to
monitor a user’s movement and provide feedback through the
usage of an avatar, so that the user is aware of the performed
movement, aiming at promoting adherence to exercise [16].
Both versions of the Kinect range sensor, i.e., the KinectSL,
which is based on the Structured Light principle, and the Time-
of-Flight variant KinectToF, were considered [17]. To create the
game environment, Unity was selected as the game engine,
given its accessibility and widespread use.
In this paper, we pursue the following main topics:
1)
anthropomorphism as a strategy to engage, and
2)
gamiﬁcation as a mean to promote physical activity,
about which we present a body of exploratory work.
A. Exercise programme selection
A standardized exercise programme consisting of shoulder
ﬂexion, abduction, and horizontal adduction was selected in
accordance to the National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (NICE) guidelines [18]. The individual exercises
comprised in the programme are illustrated in Fig. 3.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3. Illustration of the elements of the exercise programme considered
for BCS physical activity promotion intervention, consisting of shoulder
ﬂexion (a), abduction (b) and horizontal abduction (c). Adapted from [18].
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The exercise routine is composed of three sets, each com-
prising ten repetitions of one of the three exercises included
in the programme, and small breaks between sets.
B. Expressed acceptance assessment
Analysis of engagement can be considered valuable in
providing insights into game mechanisms that can then be
applied to games for learning, or physical activity promo-
tion [19], although not trivial to measure. In order to assess the
acceptance of particular contexts of a given physical activity
promotion intervention, a criteria set, based on [20], was used
as basis for user expressed acceptance assessment. The criteria
comprised the following aspects of testing:
c1)
suitability for the task,
c2)
information accessibility,
c3)
continuity correction,
c4)
visual pleasingness,
c5)
self-descriptiveness,
c6)
adequacy of user workload.
Based on that criteria, a questionnaire composed of six
questions was formulated in Portuguese, and a ﬁve point scale,
ranging from strong disagreement (1) to strong agreement (5),
considered for range of response options.
C. Study on anthropomorphism
1) Participants and design: Seventy-two adults (mean age
of the cohort was 57.79 ± 11.16 years, all female) participated.
They were recruited via personal invitation from surgeon-led
follow-up consultations of BCS. Written informed consent was
obtained from all participants. All participants were ﬂuent in
Portuguese and did not get paid for their participation.
2) Procedure and materials: Participants were invited to
participate in this study via personal invitation at the end of
a follow up consultation at the Breast Center of S˜ao Jo˜ao
Hospital during the period from the end of October until the
beginning of December, 2016. Participants were informed that
the study was part of the development of an aid designed to
promote physical activity recommend for BCS. The recruited
participants were prompted to use the system, in an adjacent
room to the consultation room (as illustrated in Fig. 4).
(a) Experimental set-up
(b) Perspective of the user
Figure 4. Acquisition environment for the study on anthropomorphism and
the tested system comprising a KinectSL, laptop and additional screen.
The architecture illustrated in Fig. 2 was adapted so that
it would entail a Non-Player Character (NPC) in the form
of a virtual assistant that exempliﬁed the movements to be
performed according to the established exercise programme
while the user was exercising. The same programme would
be repeated four times, considering additional breaks between
routines, one for each of the considered levels of the user
controlled avatar anthropomorphism (illustrated in Fig. 5).
Levels of user
controlled avatar
anthropomorphism
(while exercising)
no visual feedback
skeleton
a1)
humanoid avatar
a2)
mirror
a1)
a2)
Figure 5. Illustration of the user controlled character: avatar based characters
animated with the user’s tracked movement with different levels of
anthropomorphism a1) and a2).
After using the system, each patient was inquired of its
satisfaction level of the usage of the system through a question-
naire that required the user to rate each of the tested interfaces
according to a ﬁve point scale ranging from least preferred (1)
to most preferred (5). Each session took approximately 30
minutes, comprising the usage of the system for the proposed
exercise programme and the ﬁlling of the questionnaire.
3) Results: Each of the four interfaces were evaluated using
the aforementioned score in a ﬁve point scale after the user
completed the exercise programme using all of the proposed
interfaces. Table I presents the mean expressed preferences for
the user controlled character variations.
TABLE I. AVERAGE AND STANDARD DEVIATION (SD) OF
EXPRESSED PREFERENCES OVER THE INTERFACES COMPRISING
VARIATIONS FOR THE USER CONTROLLED CHARACTER TESTED
BY SEVENTY-TWO BCS IN A CLINICAL SETTING.
avatar
no visual feedback
skeleton
humanoid
mirror
Average
4.10
4.22
4.22
4.19
SD
0.77
0.88
0.77
0.82
Although it seems to not exist an abrupt drop on the col-
lected expressed preference between evaluated interfaces with
different levels of user controlled avatar anthropomorphism,
both skeleton and humanoid examples seem to be preferred
over the alternatives with either no visual feedback, or mirror-
based feedback.
D. Study on gamiﬁcation
1) Participants and design: Sixty-eight adults (mean age
of the cohort was 59.09 ± 10.92 years, all female) partici-
pated. The same recruitment method mentioned in Subsection
III-C (Study on anthropomorphism) was used. A sub group of
22% of participants (15 out of 68) were randomly assigned to
receive printed information resources, in form of a pamphlet
produced at the Breast Center of S˜ao Jo˜ao Hospital.
2) Procedure and materials: As in the study on anthro-
pomorphism, participants were invited to participate after a
surgeon-led follow-up consultation at the Breast Center of S˜ao
Jo˜ao Hospital. The recruitment took place from the beginning
of November until the end of December, 2017. Participants
were informed about the study being part of the development
of an aid to promote physical activity recommend for BCS, and
prompted to use the system, in an adjacent to the consultation
room (as illustrated in Fig. 6).
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

(a) Experimental set-up
(b) Printed pamphlet
Figure 6. Side-by-side illustration of: a) Acquisition environment for the
study on gamiﬁcation for the tested system comprising a KinectToF, laptop
and additional screen; b) Printed pamphlet produced at the Breast Center of
S˜ao Jo˜ao Hospital and distributed to BCS.
The architecture used for the study on anthropomorphism,
was considered, and kept the NPC virtual assistant exempli-
fying the exercise programme. To provide real-time feedback
of the user’s own movement only a human avatar was used.
Differently from the previous study, the user controlled avatar
was animated with the human pose provided by a KinectToF.
Another novelty introduced by the Kinect version (and corre-
sponding SDK and respective tools) is the gesture builder tool,
which allows the creation of a database containing movements,
which allows to perceive to which degree of completion is a
given movement being performed. After building a library of
the selected exercises, this was used to score the performance
of the user. The normal scoring of the game attributed 1 point
for every 1% of progress in each repetition, and a ﬁnal score
was presented as a percentage of the routine completed (the
complete routine corresponds to 3000 points).
After the usage of the system, each patient was inquired to
express level of acceptance that required the user to rate each of
the previously identiﬁed criteria according to a ﬁve point scale
ranging from strong disagreement (1) to strong agreement (5).
Each session took approximately 10 minutes, which comprised
the usage of the interface for the proposed exercise programme
by the user and the ﬁlling of the questionnaire.
3) Results: Table II presents the mean expressed accep-
tance for the proposed Gamiﬁed Aid for Monitoring Exer-
cise (GAME) with a humanoid player controlled character
and an NPC virtual assistant, against an informative printed
pamphlet. Of the total cohort of sixty-eight BCS, ﬁfty-three
were randomly assigned to use the GAME and ﬁfteen assigned
for being shown the printed pamphlet.
TABLE II. AVERAGE AND STANDARD DEVIATION (SD) OF
EXPRESSED ACCEPTANCE FOR BOTH THE PROPOSED GAME, AND
A PRINTED PAMPHLET CONTAINING INFORMATION ABOUT THE
SELECTED EXERCISE PROGRAMME.
GAME
pamphlet
Criteria
Average
SD
Average
SD
c1)
4.60
0.74
4.00
1.11
c2)
4.72
0.50
4.08
1.27
c3)
4.92
0.32
5.00
0.00
c4)
4.88
0.29
4.60
0.84
c5)
4.96
0.19
4.60
0.84
c6)
4.88
0.39
4.00
1.11
In the context of the evaluation, it seems to exist a
stronger agreement, across considered criterion, for the pro-
posed GAME being a preferred medium over printed materials.
IV.
CONCLUSION
The present work investigates the impact of providing real-
time feedback to BCS within the context of a physical activity
promotion intervention. A system comprised of a RGB-D
sensor with a processing pipeline to monitor the user, and in
that way animate a user controlled avatar, was considered.
In the ﬁrst exploratory study, the effect of different levels
of anthropomorphism of the user controlled avatar was investi-
gated. Seventy-two BCS participated in the cohort. The results
seem to agree with the hypothesised Uncanny Valley effect,
in the sense that a more anthropomorphised representation of
the self (a mirror), seems not to be the preferred interface.
Although not possible to assess from the presented results,
but also supported considering previous research, i.e., [11],
subjectively constructed proprioceptive body representations of
the self, seems to be an apparently worth considering factor
in the context of BCS, with potential impact to adherence to
systems using anthropomorphised avatars.
In the second study, a gamiﬁed approach considering an
humanoid avatar and an NPC assistant was evaluated against
a printed pamphlet. From a total of sixty-eight participants,
a subgroup of 15 was randomly assigned to be shown the
pamphlet containing information about appropriate care fol-
lowing breast cancer treatment, including the recommendation
to perform simple exercises to be repeated throughout sur-
vivorship. The remaining participants played a game where
an NPC assistant would exemplify the recommend exercise
programme, while a humanoid avatar would replicate the user’s
movements, and in real-time provide feedback of the exercise
being executed. Overall, the collected expressed acceptance
suggests that the proposed gamiﬁed aid for monitoring exercise
seems suitable for the task, informative, visual pleasing, self-
descriptive, and providing an adequate workload to the user.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the direction, members,
and users of the Breast Center of S˜ao Jo˜ao Hospital, that,
valuably, supported and participated in the research.
This work is ﬁnanced by the ERDF - European Regional
Development Fund through the Operational Programme for
Competitiveness and Internationalisation - COMPETE 2020
Programme within project POCI-01-0145-FEDER-006961,
and by National Funds through the Portuguese funding agency,
FCT - Fundac¸˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia as part of
project UID/EEA/50014/2013; and also by FCT within the
Ph.D. grant number SFRH/BD/138823/2018.
REFERENCES
[1]
V. M. Boquiren, T. F. Hack, R. L. Thomas, A. Towers, W. B. Kwan,
A. Tilley, E. Quinlan, and B. Miedema, “A longitudinal analysis of
chronic arm morbidity following breast cancer surgery,” Breast Cancer
Research and Treatment, vol. 157, no. 3, 2016, pp. 413–425.
[2]
N. L. Stout, J. M. Binkley, K. H. Schmitz, K. Andrews, S. C. Hayes,
K. L. Campbell, M. L. McNeely, P. W. Soballe, A. M. Berger, A. L.
Cheville, C. Fabian, L. H. Gerber, S. R. Harris, K. Johansson, A. L.
Pusic, R. G. Prosnitz, and R. A. Smith, “A prospective surveillance
model for rehabilitation for women with breast cancer,” Cancer, vol.
118, no. S8, 2012, pp. 2191–2200.
[3]
L. Lai, J. Binkley, V. Jones, S. Kirkpatrick, C. Furbish, P. Stratford,
W. Thompson, A. Sidhu, C. Farley, J. Okoli, D. Beech, and S. Gabram,
“Implementing the prospective surveillance model (PSM) of rehabili-
tation for breast cancer patients with 1-year postoperative follow-up, a
prospective, observational study,” Annals of Surgical Oncology, vol. 23,
no. 10, 2016, pp. 3379–3384.
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[4]
W. Tauxe, “A tumour through time,” Nature, vol. 527, no. 7578, 2015,
pp. S102–S103.
[5]
M. Simon, “Gamiﬁcation and serious games for personalized health,”
Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, vol. 177, 2012, p. 8596.
[6]
F. Laamarti, M. Eid, and A. E. Saddik, “An overview of serious games,”
Int. Journal of Computer Games Technology, vol. 2014, 2014, pp. 1–15.
[7]
S. West, N. A. Borghese, M. Pirovano, R. Mainetti, R. van de Langen-
berg, and E. D. de Bruin, “Usability and effects of an exergame-based
balance training program,” Games for Health Journal, vol. 3, no. 2,
2014, pp. 106–114.
[8]
B. Lange, S. Koenig, E. McConnell, C.-Y. Chang, R. Juang, E. Suma,
M. Bolas, and A. Rizzo, “Interactive game-based rehabilitation using
the microsoft kinect,” in 2012 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR). IEEE, 2012.
[9]
D. Thompson, “Designing serious video games for health behavior
change: Current status and future directions,” Journal of Diabetes
Science and Technology, vol. 6, no. 4, 2012, pp. 807–811.
[10]
M. Rice, R. Koh, Q. Lui, Q. He, M. Wan, V. Yeo, J. Ng, and W. P. Tan,
“Comparing avatar game representation preferences across three age
groups,” in CHI 13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems on - CHI EA 13.
ACM Press, 2013.
[11]
J. Lugrin, J. Latt, and M. E. Latoschik, “Avatar anthropomorphism and
illusion of body ownership in vr,” in 2015 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR),
2015, pp. 229–230.
[12]
T. Waltemate, D. Gall, D. Roth, M. Botsch, and M. E. Latoschik, “The
impact of avatar personalization and immersion on virtual body owner-
ship, presence, and emotional response,” IEEE Trans. on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, vol. 24, no. 4, 2018, pp. 1643–1652.
[13]
M. Mori, K. MacDorman, and N. Kageki, “The uncanny valley [from
the ﬁeld],” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 19, no. 2,
2012, pp. 98–100.
[14]
K. Starks, “Cognitive behavioral game design: a uniﬁed model for
designing serious games,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 5, 2014, p. 28.
[15]
J. E. Prey, J. Woollen, L. Wilcox, A. D. Sackeim, G. Hripcsak,
S. Bakken, S. Restaino, S. Feiner, and D. K. Vawdrey, “Patient engage-
ment in the inpatient setting: a systematic review,” J Am Med Inform
Assn, vol. 21, no. 4, 2014, pp. 742–750.
[16]
J. Han, L. Shao, D. Xu, and J. Shotton, “Enhanced computer vision with
microsoft kinect sensor: A review,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics,
vol. 43, no. 5, oct 2013, pp. 1318–1334.
[17]
H. Sarbolandi, D. Leﬂoch, and A. Kolb, “Kinect range sensing:
Structured-light versus time-of-ﬂight kinect,” Computer Vision and
Image Understanding, vol. 139, oct 2015, pp. 1–20.
[18]
J. Yarnold, “Early and locally advanced breast cancer: Diagnosis and
treatment national institute for health and clinical excellence guideline
2009,” Clinical Oncology, vol. 21, no. 3, 2009, pp. 159–160.
[19]
E. A. Boyle, T. Hainey, T. M. Connolly, G. Gray, J. Earp, M. Ott, T. Lim,
M. Ninaus, C. Ribeiro, and J. Pereira, “An update to the systematic
literature review of empirical evidence of the impacts and outcomes of
computer games and serious games,” Computers & Education, vol. 94,
2016, pp. 178–192.
[20]
K. S. Park and C. H. Lim, “A structured methodology for comparative
evaluation of user interface designs using usability criteria and mea-
sures,” International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, vol. 23, no. 5-6,
1999, pp. 379–389.
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

