Patient Privacy Preservation: P-RBAC vs OrBAC in Patient Controlled Records
Type of Centralized Healthcare Information System.
Case study of Walloon Healthcare Network, Belgium
Annanda Thavymony Rath
Faculty of Computer Science
University of Namur, Namur, belgium
Email: rta@info.fundp.ac.be
Jean-No¨el Colin
Faculty of Computer Science
University of Namur, Namur, belgium
Email: jnc@info.fundp.ac.be
Abstract—This paper addresses the issue of access control
to sensitive data in the health sector. Our work aims to
identify a suitable access control model based on speciﬁc
access requirements and constraints for Patient Controlled
Records type of Centralized Healthcare Information System,
particularly, Walloon Healthcare Network. Two prominent
access control models are considered, Privacy-aware Role
Based Access Control and Organization-based Access Control.
In this paper, we outline the access control requirements and
based on those requirements, we apply, compare, and point
out the advantages and disadvantages of the two models.
Keywords-Access Control; Privacy Preservation; e-health; P-
RBAC; OrBAC; Patient controlled record.
I. INTRODUCTION
E-Health provides signiﬁcant opportunities for healthcare
institutions to deliver technologically effective services to
their patients. With the online availability of health record,
healthcare professionals can make use of it in health ser-
vice, for instance, an emergency situation where health
record history is required in order to provide a safe and
effective treatment. However, the major concern in e-health
is security; as data is available online, it is vulnerable to
attacks. Failing to secure this type of information can lead
to huge ﬁnes, lawsuits, or long-term loss of patients’ trust.
Yet to provide adequate security, in a manner that is not
burdensome to patient can be a major challenge.
Many researches [1][4][5][6][7][9][12] have been con-
ducted in the aspect of privacy preservation in e-health,
particularly, access and usage control. In general, access
control refers to the cautious actions/measures that need to
be taken before data is liberated while usage control refers
to the actions/measures taken after data is granted access. In
the data protection point of view, specially, privacy-related
environment, the enforcement of the two controlling steps
is necessary. Concerning to access control, many models
are available [3][13], however only a few of them are
proposed so far in e-health literatures such as RBAC [3],
P-RBAC (Privacy-aware Role-based Access Control) [7],
OrBAC [2] and the workﬂow-based [4]. Every model has its
own strengths and weaknesses and it suits to different access
requirements and constraints. Thus, it is important, when
building an e-health system, to identify and study different
access control models before adopting it.
This paper provides a study of two prominent access
control models P-RBAC and OrBAC. Our main goal is to
identify an appropriate access control model that can be
adopted to preserve and protect patient’s health record in
patient controlled health records type of centralized health-
care information system(PCRCHIS), particularly, Walloon
Healthcare Network(WHN) [1][10]. The complexity of pol-
icy expression, evaluation, and the ability to fulﬁll the system
requirements are our main comparison parameters. The rest
of this paper is organized as following.
Section II is an introduction to Walloon Healthcare Net-
work and its access requirements and constraints. Section
III talks about some standard access control models. Section
IV introduces the P-RBAC and OrBAC models. Section V
is about applying P-RBAC and OrBAC in WHN. Section
VI talks about the advantages and disadvantages of the two
models, and Section VII is the conclusion and future work.
II.
WALLOON HEALTHCARE NETWORK
Walloon refers to the French speaking region in Belgium.
Walloon Healthcare Network (WHN) [1] is a project aiming
to provide an electronic healthcare facility to patients in Wal-
loon region by joining together all healthcare institutions,
clinics, and also physicians and allow exchanging patient’s
record when needed.
A. System Architecture
As illustrated in Figure 1, WHN is a network of health
institutions such as hospitals, and clinics, but also of physi-
cians that aims at supporting the exchange of patient’s data
between healthcare professionals, in a timely and secure
way. WHN is organized as a hub that interconnects all
entities, and provides central storage. Two types of data are
actually stored centrally:
• pointers to EHR(Electronic Health Record) stored in
institutions.
• SumEHR(Summarized
Electronic
Health
Record)
which
is
a
summary
record
maintained
by
the
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

physicians.
Thus, WHN provides indexes to data that resides in network
nodes (healthcare institutions), but does not store that data
itself. In addition, WHN also manages in a central way the
access permissions that apply to various pieces of data it
manages (indexed data as well as SumEHR). WHN central
server is in charge of the overall authorization process; it
receives requests from the nodes, checks them against the
applicable access policy, and returns the requested informa-
tion. For more details, refer to [1].
WHN adopts the PCRCHIS like architecture, which refers
to a system where management and control of access rights
are performed by patient or trusted person. It has two
important aspects. First, patient controlled record [8] refers
to a system where management and control of access are
performed by patient or patient’s trusted-person. In this
system, patient can grant access to anyone they wish and
role of healthcare institution in controlling patient’s record
is minor and their responsibility is only to secure the storage
of patient’s health record. Second, centralized system [8]
refers to a large network of healthcare institutions such
as hospitals or clinics join together locally or regionally
with one central point of access control. Thus, the access
requirements in PCRCHIS are not as simple as that of
the standalone system(system used particularly in a speciﬁc
healthcare institution). The main issues in this system are:
1) Interoperability: How to ensure that the policies/rules
deﬁned in one healthcare institution are understood by
other in the network.
2) Access and Usage: How to protect patient’s record
when it is shared across different healthcare institu-
tions. In this system, data is exchangeable between
different institutions. Thus, we need a proper mech-
anism to ensure that the same level of protection is
assured while it is at the destination or moved out.
3) Patient’s knowledge and policy management: In this
system, patient has the pivotal rights to grant access
and manage the access policies over their health
records. It is understood that, not all users have the re-
quired computer skills, it is really hard to assume that
user has the sufﬁcient knowledge to administrate the
access policy by themselves. In this case, the careful
design of policy administration point is an important
task in order to response to or cope with the errors
made by patient. In addition, the rule validation and
conﬂict resolution should be also carefully addressed.
B. Access Requirements and Constraints
This section presents the requirements and constraints
needed to access patient record in WHN. Through WHN’s
speciﬁcation [1], we can identify the requirements as fol-
lowing:
1) In this system, patient’s record can be accessible
by ﬁve types of user:s Users in role generalist-
Figure 1.
Simpliﬁed Schema of Walloon Healthcare Network
doctor, specialist-doctor, emergency-doctor, guardian,
and trusted-person. Guardian, a person closed to pa-
tient who can represents patient in case he/she can not
exercise his/her rights, for instance, parents can be a
child’s guardian if child’s age is below 18. Trusted-
person is a user or group of users, assigned by patient,
who can decide instead of patient when patient is in
situation where he/she can not exercise his/her rights
physically or morally. In general, trusted-person can
be patient’s wife, husband, or parents.
2) Requester has the therapeutic relationship with patient.
This relationship is deﬁned by patient. Therapeutic
relationship is an indication of the relation between
requester and patient.
3) Accessing patient’s record is subjected to patient’s
consent. And consent can be revoked any time.
4) Patient can grant access to his/her record and the rights
assignment can be done by patient or through the
support of the guardian, trusted-person, or healthcare
professional. In any case, the assignment requires
patient’s consent. It is important to note that patient
can also transfer the rights to guardian or trusted-
person in case patient can not exercise his/her rights.
For example, in case patient becomes mentally disable.
5) Every access to patient’s record, requester needs to
notify, this is considered as an obligation.
6) Access to patient’s record is allowed for a speciﬁc
purpose. There are three types of purpose. Personal
archive: It is generally related to patient. It is allowed
in case he/she wants to consult his/her health record.
Normal: it is granted to doctor for normal health
examination. Emergency: It is granted only to doctor
in emergency situation. It is important to note that
patient needs to deﬁne in advance the access policy
in case of emergency situation. Patient can allow the
selected groups of doctor or all doctors to access
his/her health record.
With the above requirements, we can identify the general
rules to access patient’s record as following. Requester is
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

granted access to patient’s record if:
• Rule-1: Requester is in one of the ﬁve user groups as
mentioned above.
• Rule-2: Requester has therapeutic relationship with
patient and patient’s consent .
• Rule-3: Requester fulﬁlled their duty or obligation such
as notifying system for traceability.
• Rule-4: Access purpose falls into three types of purpose
mentioned above.
III. STANDARD ACCESS CONTROL MODELS
In this section, we outline some standard access control
models such as DAC, MAC, and RBAC. And based on the
requirements in Section II, we point out why they are not
suitable for the proposed system.
Discretionary Access Control (DAC) [3][13] is an access
control model where restriction of access to objects is
done based on the identity of subjects. The controls are
discretionary in the sense that a subject with certain access
permission is capable of passing that permission on to any
other subjects. For example, an access control to ﬁles and
folders in Unix system where user can deﬁne permission for
other users to access their ﬁle or folder is a clear example
of DAC. One implementation of DAC is the access control
list that has been used widely in operating, networking, and
database management system.
Although the ability of passing access permission on to
any other subjects seems to match with the requirements in
PCRCHIS, DAC fails to fulﬁll other important requirements
such as the ability to express complex permission assignment
that involves purposes, obligations and conditions, which
are the most important elements for expressing the privacy-
related policy. Moreover, DAC can not support data and role
hierarchy expression which is required in PCRCHIS for data
as well as user management. For example, the classiﬁcation
of generalist-doctor to many sub-groups according to their
speciality/skill such as a doctor specializing in liver, nose,
heart, and so on. This proves the necessity of role hierar-
chy. In addition, DAC has the problem of controlling the
permission transfer and policy change, which are required
in the proposed system (Section II(B) requirement 4), for
instance in case of guardian or trusted-person. In order for
the guardian or trusted-person to be able to represent a
patient, a patient needs to deﬁne the permission transfer,
which is considered as the legal binding document. Another
draw back of DAC is the ability to express the separation
of duties.
Mandatory Access Control(MAC) [3][13] is used widely
in the operating system, databases, and networking system.
MAC refers to a type of access control model by which
the system constrains the ability of a subject or requester
to access or perform some sort of operation or action to
an object or resource. In practice, the subject refers to an
entity that can be a user or application; object refers to the
ﬁles, directories, ports (in networking), or databases (tables
or attributes in database management system). In MAC,
subjects and objects each have a set of security attributes
and when a subject makes an attempt to access an object,
an authorization rule enforced by the system examines these
security attributes and then the decision can be made whether
the access can take place. To determine if the operation on
the object by a subject is allowed or not, those parameters
will be tested against the set of the authorization rules
made by the policy maker or administrator of the system.
MAC provides the central control of the security. User or
subject does not have the rights to assign or override the
policy unlike ACL, which allows subject to make decision
or override the access policy. MAC provides more control
level compared to ACL as both subject and object carry
the secured attributes that need to be checked or tested by
system for every access attempt.
The disadvantage of MAC lies in the complexity of the
conﬁguration, since for each resource (application, data)
and subjects (user) must be determined, which access au-
thorizations are necessary. This tends to be very difﬁcult
for the system that works with the large number of users
and resources, particularly, in system like PCRCHIS(refer
to its deﬁnition in Section II). Another down part is that
MAC is not designed to enforce privacy policies and barely
meet privacy protection requirements, particularly, purpose
binding (i.e. data collected for one purpose should not be
used for another purpose without user consent), conditions
and obligations. The purposes and obligations are a part of
the requirements in PCRCHIS. Purposes are not only used
to sharpen the access control but also to enforce the security
protection in case of emergency situation. Additionally,
MAC can unnecessarily over-classify data through the high-
water mark principle and hurt productivity by limiting the
ability to transfer labeled information between systems. This
would be a great disadvantage for PCRCHIS.
Role-Based Access Control(RBAC) has been introduced
in many research literatures [3][5][7][8]. The authors address
the issue of protecting patient record by restricting access
based on user’s role and in this model, users who are in
the same role can exercise the same level of rights. With
this classiﬁcation, access control on patient’s record can
be realized only with the simple access policy as access
permission depends strongly on the role. However, it is
hard to realize a complex and ﬁne-grain access policy,
particularly, in the contextual environment. For example,
system that needs to differentiate access levels in the same
role (requirement number 2 in Section II(B)), and most
importantly, system that needs to express obligations or pur-
poses (the requirements number 5 and 6 in Section II(B)). To
complement this weakness, a context-awareness and privacy-
awareness have been proposed [7]. In accordance with the
spirit of the RBAC model, context-awareness or privacy-
awareness RBAC(P-RBAC), access permission is granted to
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

user based not only on user role but also on the result of
the occurrence events in the system or purpose of access.
The context can be anything ranging from spatial, temporal
to user pre-deﬁned context. This new approach offers rich,
ﬁne-grain and ﬂexible way to express the privacy-related
policies, particularly, in the proposed system.
The authors realize the privacy-awareness by adding other
entities to the core RBAC model such as conditions, obli-
gations, and purposes of access. It is important to note that
although standard RBAC can not express the obligations,
purposes, and conditions, it has the ability to provide many
features that are necessary for expressing access policy in
WHN such as the ability to express data and role hierarchy,
permission transfer as well as separation of duties. More
details can be found in Section IV.
In June 2003, Abou and Baida proposed OrBAC [2]
for healthcare application domain. With OrBAC, the access
permission is granted to user under a speciﬁc role in par-
ticular organization and contexts. A user in one healthcare
institution can access data to another institution if and
only if the permission is granted by those institutions. This
provides data integrity and conﬁdentiality. OrBAC supports
the control of data as well as user in system like organization
structure and access permission is granted based on user
role in an organization. In addition, it can also express the
access permission in contextual environment, role and data
hierarchy, separation of duties as well as permission transfer,
which perfectly matches in WHN’s requirements. Based on
the requirements in Section II. We ﬁnd that among the
ﬁve models, OrBAC and P-RBAC are the most appropriate
models. More discussion can be found in Section VI.
IV. P-RBAC AND ORBAC
This section presents a brief introduction to P-RBAC and
OrBAC to provide the fundamental knowledge for model
expression that is required in the next section.
A. Privacy-Aware Role-Based Access Control Model
P-RBAC [7] is an extension of the model RBAC [3],
which provides complete support for expressing highly
complex privacy-related policies. Its focus is to protect
personally identiﬁable information and as such privacy-
sensitive, taking into account characteristics such as goals
(purposes), conditions, and obligations. P-RBAC extends the
classical RBAC by adding three more privacy-related entities
such as purposes, conditions, and obligations.
As shown in Figure 2, P-RBAC consists of the following
entities: Users represent human or the interactive entity.
Roles represent a function or job title within the organization
with some associated semantics regarding the authority and
responsibility conferred on a member’s role. Data refers
to all resources related to an organization or individual
identiﬁed or identiﬁable. Actions are the operations on re-
sources; action varies depending on the content and format.
Purposes, in P-RBAC, permissions are assigned to roles and
users for a speciﬁc purpose. Conditions are the mechanisms
to precisely deﬁne the authority over resources to a speciﬁc
role; using condition, we can express different access rights
for user in the same role. Obligations are the necessary
actions to be made before the actions on content can be
exercised.
Figure 2.
P-RBAC Entities Model
1) P-RBAC deﬁnition and rule formulation
• U is a set of users (u); D is a set of data (d); A is a
set of actions (a); Pu is a set of purposes (pu); Ob is a
set of obligations (ob); R is a set of roles (r)
• LC: condition language; PA: permission assignment
• Data Permission (DP): DP = {(a,d) | a ∈ A, d ∈ D}
• Privacy-sensitive Data Permission (PDP): PDP = {(dp,
pu, c, ob) | dp ∈ DP, pu ∈ Pu, c is a expression of LC,
ob ∈ Ob}.
• PA on a role is deﬁned as: PA: (r, ((a,d), pu, c, ob)))
• User Assignment UA ⊆ U × R (many to many rela-
tions)
• Privacy-sensitive Data Permission Assignment PDPA ⊆
R × PDP
2) The Basic Condition Language
Core P-RBAC [7] includes a simple language for express-
ing conditions; they are expressed using contextual variables.
Such variables record privacy-related information that is to
be taken into account when enforcing privacy permissions.
Contexts range from temporal, spatial to the pre-deﬁned
context by user. It is important to note that the condition
expression here is deﬁned in such a way so that it can be
served to model several conditions usually found in privacy
permission. The conditions that can be expressed by LC are
deﬁned in what follows.
Deﬁnition: Let X be a set of contextual variables(CV);
each variable x ∈ X has a ﬁnite domain of possible values,
denoted as Dx; every domain is equipped with a pair of
corresponding relational operators {=, ≤,≥, ̸=, ∋ }. An
atomic condition ac deﬁned over X has the form (x opr
v) where x ∈ X, v ∈ Dx, opr ∈ {=, ≤,≥, ̸=, ∋ }. The
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

conditions of LC (over X) are deﬁned as follows:
• An atomic condition is a condition of LC.
• Let ci and cj be conditions of LC; then ci ∧ cj is a
condition of LC.
3) The Basic Obligation Model
An obligation is the duty for subject to fulﬁll before access
is granted. An obligation may be different depending on
context and system environment. For example, a system that
serves online song or music, obligation may be a payment
while in healthcare information system, obligation can be
a notiﬁcation of access to patient for traceability purpose.
To simplify the problem we focus on one typical example
of obligation, which is notiﬁcation to data owner after each
access to his/her sensitive data. we formalize our obligation
as a ”notify” function . The function takes an email address
of content owner and acknowledgement message as the
inputs and returns ”yes or no” statement as an output in case
of success to notify and fail to notify respectively. Thus, our
obligation function can be written: notify(patient’s email,
notiﬁed message).
B. Organization-Based Access Control Model (OrBAC)
OrBAC [2] allows expressing a variety of security poli-
cies based on the concept of organization. The main goal
of OrBAC is to allow the policy designer to deﬁne a
security policy independently from the deployment. The
chosen method to fulﬁll this goal is the introduction of an
abstract level in the model. OrBAC model is based on three
principles: organization, concrete and abstract level, and
context. Organization is an entity that each security policy
is deﬁned for. Like other models, concrete authorization in
OrBAC relies on three entities, which are subject, action, and
object. Subject is an interactive entity, user or application
that requests access on the organization’s object. Action is
an operation on object. Object is a resource requested by
subject. In OrBAC, a concrete authorization is derived from
abstract permission, which consists of three entities such as
role, activity, and view. Role represents a function or job
title within the organization with some associated semantics
regarding the authority and responsibility conferred on a
member’s role. Activity groups actions into an abstract set
and view is a set of abstract objects.
Typically, as presented in Figure 3, a subject in concrete
level is mapped to a role in abstract level where an action
is mapped to an activity and an object is mapped to a
view. OrBAC has many advantages, in addition to its ability
to express the permission; it can also express a mixed
policy with permissions, prohibitions, and obligations. With
OrBAC, security policies could take into account delegation,
hierarchy, and context [11]. There are ﬁve categories of
context: temporal, spacial, context declared by the user,
prerequisite Context, and provisional context.
Figure 3.
OrBAC Entities Relationship Schema
1) OrBAC deﬁnition and rule formulation
In this section, we present a mean of representation and
reasoning about the permission, prohibition, and obligation
in given of the entities, Subject, Action, Object, Role,
Activity, and View.
1. Abstract expression (Permission, Prohibition, or Obli-
gation) indicates an authorization, prohibition, or obligation
of an organization allowing user under a speciﬁc role to
perform an activity on a view that is considered by and
used in an organization. This authorization is constraint
with a speciﬁc contextual attributes if presented . They are
expressed as following:
• Permission(Organization,Role,Activity,View,context)
• Prohibition(Organization,Role,Activity,View,context)
• Obligation(Organization,Role,Activity,View,context)
2. Concrete expression (Permission, Prohibition, or Obli-
gation) indicates an authorization, prohibition, or obligation
of an organization for a speciﬁc user to perform a requested
action on requested object. It is important to note that
concrete permission, prohibition, or obligation is derived
from the abstract level expression and can be expressed as
following:
• Is permitted(Subject, Action, Object)
• Is prohibited(Subject, Action, Object)
• Is obliged(Subject, Action, Object)
3. Deriving concrete permission: It is important to note
that in order to get the concrete permission from abstract
level, we have to pass a few veriﬁcation processes such as
to verify if subject is in role, action is in activity, and object
is in view, which are allowed in abstract permission. The
expressions can be written as following.
• Empower (Organization, Subject, Role): Organization
assigns a role to subject(user).
• Use (Organization, Object, View): Organization uses an
object in a view.
• Consider(Organization, Action, Activity): Organization
considers an action in an activity.
In case contexts are represented, the concrete permission
can be achieved if and only if all contextual attributes are
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

checked and they hold together subject, action and object.
• Hold(Organization, Subject, Action, Object, Context)
V. APPLYING P-RBAC AND ORBAC
In this section, we express the access rules applied in
WHN by using P-RBAC and OrBAC based on an access
scenario below. It is important to note that in order to avoid
confusion when comparing the policies expression of the
two models. We term them as following: Rule1P −RBAC is
used for P-RBAC to express the access rule ”1” in P-RBAC
and Rule1OrBAC is used for OrBAC to express the access
rule 1 in OrBAC. We deﬁne variables, values, and functions
used in P-RBAC and OrBAC as following:
1) P-RBAC: Roles (R)= { Specialist-Doctor}; Objets
(O) = {Liver report}; Actions (a)= {read}; Purposes
(PU)= { Norma, Emergency}; OB={Notity}; N/A=
not available;
2) OrBAC: Orgs = { CSL, CHN } Where CSL=
Clinic
Saint
Luc,
CHN
=
Central
Hospital
of Namur; Users(U)(Subjects) = {Alice, Charlie,
Pierre}; Roles (R)= {Specialist-Doctor}; Objets (O)
= {Liver report}; Activities (av)= {Consult, No-
tify}; Actions (a)= {read, send}; Views = {Health
records}; Purposes (PU)= { Normal, Emergency};
OB={Notity}; ANY org= represents any organiza-
tion.
Supposing that an object as data and object as person are
merged into a single entity called ”object”. Then we are
able to refer object.role to identify the role of data owner in
this case patient; object.ehr for health record; object.consent
refers to a list of consented users; object.email refers to email
address of patient; object.therapeutic
relationship refers to
list of users who have the relationship with patient; object.ar
refers to access record. Supposing that subject is a user
who initiates request then subject.id is user identiﬁcation;
subject.role is role of requester(subject); subject.pu refers to
purpose of access; subject.in refers to institution that subject
belongs to.
A. Scenarios Description
Supposing that there are two institutions joining WHN,
one is CSL and other is CHN. Charlie is a specialist doctor
at CSL and CHN while Pierre is a specialist doctor at CHN
only. Alice has registered as a patient in WHN. Alice has
declared her Liver report in WHN. Alice assigned Charlie
and Pierre as her ”Specialist-Doctor”. Alice would like to
set the access rights on her dossier as following:
• Rule 1: User in role Specialist-Doctor can read Alice’s
Liver report if: Data being requested is belong to Alice;
and user has therapeutic relationship with Alice; and
user has Alice’s consent; and purpose of access is for
emergency situation; and the notiﬁcation of access is
fulﬁlled.
• Rule 2: Alice would like to give consultation(read)
permission to Specialist-Doctor on her Liver report
only when requester is working under institution dif-
ferent from CSL for the purpose of normal treatment,
but every accesses, he/she has to notify system. It is
important to note that Rule 1 is included in Rule 2.
The differences between rule 1 and 2 are purpose and
the introduction of another access requirement which
is the location(institution) from which the request is
initiated.
B.
Apply P-RBAC
Rule1P −RBAC: (Specialist-Doctor,((Read, object.Liver
report), subject.pu=Emergency, object.role=patient ∧ object.
therapeutic relationship ∋ subject.id ∧ object.consent ∋
subject.id, notify(object.email, notify message)=yes))
Rule2P −RBAC: (Specialist-Doctor,((Read, object.Liver
report), subject.pu= Normal, object.role = patient ∧ ob-
ject.therapeutic relationship ∋subject.id ∧ object.consent
∋ subject.id ∧ subject.in̸=”CSL”, notify(object.email, no-
tify message)=yes)))
C.
Apply OrBAC
Rule1OrBAC: abstract permission and obligation
Permission(ANY org,Specialist-Doctor,Consult,object.
Liver report,object.role=patient
∧
object.
therapeu-
tic relationship ∋ subject.id ∧ object.consent ∋ subject.id
∧ subject.pu = Emergency).
Obligation(ANY org, Specialist-Doctor, Notify, object.ar,
object.role
=
patient
∧
object.therapeutic relationship
∋subject.id ∧ object.consent∋subject.id ∧ subject.pu =
Emergency).
Rule2OrBAC: abstract permission, obligation, and
prohibition
Permission(ANY org,Specialist-Doctor,Consult,object.
Liver report,
object.role=patient
∧
object.therapeutic
relationship∋ subject.id ∧ object.consent∋ subject.id ∧
subject.pu= Normal)
Obligation(ANY org, Specialist Doctor, Notify, object.ar,
object.role=patient
∧
object.therapeutic relationship∋
subject.id
∧
object.consent∋
subject.id
∧
subject.pu=
Normal)
Prohibition(CSL,Specialist-Doctor,Consult,object.
Liver report,
object.role=patient
∧
object.therapeutic
relationship∋ subject.id ∧ object.consent∋ subject.id ∧
subject.pu= Normal)
VI. DISCUSSION
In WHN, access permission to medical record is based on
requester role, relationship between requester and patient,
patient’s consent, purpose of access, and obligation. In
addition, patient can also restrict access by using spatial or
temporal context such what has been illustrated in rule 2
Section V (B,C). Based on the illustration in Section V, we
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

ﬁnd that OrBAC can be used but not really appropriate for
this system.
First, in WHN, the entity organization(institution) does
not play an important role in access policy, it is required
only in the indexing process and later it is considered as the
link to content. The impertinent role of entity organization
can be seen clearly in the scenario where patient grants
access to guardian or trusted-person(they, as presented in
Section II, are not necessary the users under any institutions).
This access scenario shows that the organization entity does
not play an important role at all in access policy. The
organization may be of course used to restrict access, but
in this case it can be considered as a conditional attribute as
illustrated in P-RBAC (Section V(B), Rule2P −RBAC).
Second, as illustrated in Section V, we found that using
OrBAC in the scope of WHN is more complex than using P-
RBAC. Let compare rule Rule2P −RBAC and Rule2OrBAC
in Section V(B) and V(C) respectively: Using P-RBAC,
as illustrated in rule Rule2P −RBAC, we can express the
access rights in a single rule where the organization entity
(considered in OrBAC) becomes simply as a conditional
attribute (subject.in). Rule2P −RBAC expresses the rights
for all users in role Specialist-Doctor, but it restricts access
from a particular IN (Institution), CSL as an example. in
OrBAC with the same scenario, we need to have three rules.
One applied to permission while other applied to obligation
and prohibition. In the data processing point of view, time
required to process or evaluate Rule2OrBAC is more than
that of Rule2P −RBAC.
To make it clear for the second remark, let us take a
scenario (rule 2) where Alice sets a new policy in which
she prohibits users from two particular institutions, this time
CSL and CHN, to access her Liver report. In this case, if
we express it by using P-RBAC, we still use one rule by
having one more condition on institution (subject.in̸=”CSL”
∧ subject.in̸=”CSL”) while with OrBAC we need four rules,
one for permission, one for obligation and other two for
prohibition(CSL and CHN). Although concept of grouping
for organization entity can be used in OrBAC, in case of
prohibition, it consumes time in policy evaluation process.
In WHN, obligation and purpose of access are required,
both models can provide these features. In P-RBAC, both
obligation and purpose can be expressed in the permission
assignment. In OrBAC, obligation is expressed in the sepa-
rate rule(Section V (C)) while purpose can be considered
as the contextual attribute as illustrated in Section V(C)
(rule Rule1OrBAC). For prohibition, in OrBAC, it can be
expressed by using a separate rule(Rule2OrBAC) while in
P-RBAC it can be expressed in condition or using a negative
permission expression [7].
In either way, expressing access policy by using OrBAC in
the scope of WHN is seen as less suitable and more time-
consuming in policy evaluation process as compared with
P-RBAC, especially when obligation and prohibition are
involved. Based on above explanation, we can say that the
two models can be adopted in WHN but the most appropriate
one is P-RBAC. This conclusion is done based on four
important points:
• In WHN or patient controlled records healthcare infor-
mation system, in general, the entity organization does
not play a signiﬁcant role in the access policy, in some
access scenarios(guardian and trusted-person), patient
can grant access to anyone he/she wishes regardless of
the institution they belong to. This proves the imperti-
nent of entity organization in access policy.
• OrBAC is an organization based access control model
where user must be strictly attached to organization.
This does not ﬁt well for the roles legal representa-
tive(guardian) and trusted-person(refer to Section II)
because the two roles can be an independent role in
the system and not under any institution where patient’s
record is stored.
• OrBAC is not speciﬁcally designed for privacy-aware.
It is created for expressing access policy to control the
resource in the system that adopts user management
pattern like organization structure while P-RBAC is
proposed for privacy-aware that ﬁts well with the
requirements in healthcare information system such as
the WHN.
• Referring to the examples in Section V(B) and V(C),
we found that expressing access policy by using P-
RBAC can have a better response time(the proof of
policy complexity can be seen by the number of at-
tributes and operations in rules and the rules in policy)
as compared with OrBAC, in other words, less time-
consuming in evaluation process. This is because P-
RBAC’s policy contents less rules as compared with
that of OrBAC.
VII. DISCUSSION ON SOME SECURITY ISSUES
In this section, we discus about three security issues: rule
validation, rule conﬂict detection and resolution, and security
in case of emergency situation(breakglass).
A. Rule validation
In system where access control is based on rule, it is
required for rule(access rule or policy) administrator to have
the knowledge on how rule works and to be beware of what
they are doing and the consequence of doing it. Under the
scope of WHN or PCRCHIS in general, it is understood that
it is not possible to make an assumption that all patients have
sufﬁcient computer skill or knowledge and can operate or
set rule by themselves. Thus, to solve this problem, under
the scope of WHN, the rule validation can be done by three
groups of user:
1) Patient(record owner): Patient can set up the rule
through policy administration point by themself with-
out the support from healthcare professional or other
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

people such as their trusted-person or guardian(refer
to its deﬁnition in Section II(B)), but if the problem
occurs, for instance, patient mistakenly deﬁnes a rule
that is not like what he/she wishes, it is the responsi-
bility of patient themself.
2) Patient’s trusted-person and guardian: In WHN, it is
required for a patient to assign her trusted-person
and/or guardian to represent them in case patient can
not exercise his/her rights. Those person can help
patient in setting up and validating the rule if patient
wishes to do so.
3) Healthcare professional: In WHN, healthcare profes-
sional can also help patient to set the rule on their be-
half, but patient’s consent written in paper is required
in this case.
B. Rule conﬂict detection and resolution
In P-RBAC, conﬂicting rules can be detected automat-
ically by using conﬂict detection algorithms proposed by
Qun Ni and Bertino in [7]. The conﬂict detection algorithms
allows user to detect the conﬂict between rules(P-RBAC
rules) and provides an alert to user for correction.
C. The security issue in case of emergency situation
In e-health, emergency access to patient’s record in case
of critical event such as emergency treatment is a major
concern. The trade off between security and safety of patient
must be carefully balanced. In WHN, we use a predeﬁned
rule in case of emergency situation. Patient needs to decide
by themself about the access rights in case of emergency.
He/she can allow user in role ”emergency-doctor”(refer
to Section II) to access their record for the ﬁxed pur-
pose(emergency). However, every access user needs to notify
patient for traceability purpose. Note that in emergency
situation, normal rules applied to required patient record are
revoked and rule in case of emergency is applied.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we identiﬁed the access constraints and re-
quirements for WHN based on the speciﬁcation and privacy
regulation of WHN. We also present two prominent access
control models, P-RBAC and OrBAC. An access scenario
with multiple rules is used to illustrate the performance of
both models. Based on the discussion in Section VI, we con-
clude that in e-health system where role of organization is
less important, for example, PCRCHIS. P-RBAC is the best
candidate to be used if the complexity of policy expression
and evaluation are the major concerns. It is important to
note that although this paper is primarily the result from the
study of WHN, we can also apply it in other systems having
similar requirements and system architecture to WHN. Our
future work includes the design of a platform based on P-
RBAC allowing to create and to evaluate the rules/policies
in PCRCHIS by taking WHN as the real case study. ODRL
will be used as the default rights expression language.
REFERENCES
[1] Espace
d´evelopeur
de
RSW
(Development
of
WHN):
https://www.reseausantewallon.be/developpement/default.aspx,
latest access: July 2011.
[2] A.Bou, R. Baida, P.Balbiani, S.Benferhat, F.cuppens, and
Y.Deswarte. Organization Based Access Control Model. 4th
IEEE International Workshop on Policies for Distributed Sys-
tems and Networks, June, 2003.
[3] D.F.Ferraiolo,
R.Sandhu,
S.Gavrila,
D.R.Kuhn,
and
R.Chandramouli. Proposed NIST Standard for Role-Based
Access Control. ACM Transactions on Information and
System Security, August 2001, pp.4(3):222-274.
[4] Giovanni Russello, Changyu Dong, and Naranker Dulay. A
Workﬂow-Based Access Control Framework for e-Health Ap-
plications. Advanced Information Networking and Applica-
tions Workshops, 2008, pp.111-120.
[5] Hung, Patrick C. K, and Zheng Yi. Privacy Access Control
Model for Aggregated e-Health Services. Proceedings of the
2007 Eleventh International IEEE EDOC Conference Work-
shop. IEEE Computer Society, pp.12-19.
[6] Lorenzo D. Martin, Qun Ni, Dan Lin, and Elisa Bertin. Multi-
domain and Privacy-aware Role Based Access Control in e-
Health. Second IEEE International Conference on Pervasive
Computing Technologies for Healthcare, Jan-Feb 2008, pp.
131-134.
[7] Qun Ni, Bertino, Elisa, Lobo, Jorge, Brodie, Carolyn, Karat,
Clare-Marie, Karat, John, Trombeta, and Alberto. Privacy-
aware Role-Based Access Control. ACM Transaction Infor-
mation and System Security, July, 2010, pp.24-3.
[8] Rostad and Lillian. An Initial Model and a Discussion of Ac-
cess Control in Patient Controlled Health Records. Proceedings
of the 2008 Third International Conference on Availability,
Reliability and Security, IEEE Computer Society, pp. 935-942.
[9] Al-Neyadi, Fahed, Abawajy, and Jemal H. Context-Based E-
Health System Access Control Mechanism. Advances Informa-
tion Security and Its Application, Communications in Com-
puter and Information Science, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2009, pp.68-77.
[10] R`eglement relatif `a la protection de la vie priv´ee (Regulations
for the Protection of User Privacy), Version 06h100809.
https://www.reseausantewallon.be/Documents%20partages/
R%C3%A8glement%20Vie%20Priv
%C3%A9e.pdf,
2009,
latest access: July 2011.
[11] Fr´ed´eric C and Nora.C. Modeling Contextual Security Poli-
cies in OrBAC. International Journal of Information Security
(IJIS), August, 2008, pp. 285-305.
[12] Suzanne Gonzales-Webb and Craig M. Winter. HL7 Role-
Based Access Control (RBAC) Role Engineering Process. HL7
Security Technical Committee, September 2007.
[13] Vincent C. Hu, David F. Ferraiolo, and D. Rick Kuhn.
Assessment of Access Control System. National Institute of
Standards and Technology, September 2006.
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

