The Eve of 3D Printing in Telemedicine: State of the
Art and Future Challenges
Piero Giacomelli
IT Department
Spac S.p.A.
36071 Arzignano Italy
Email: giacomellip@spac-spa.it
˚Asa Smedberg
The Department of Computer and Systems Sciences
Stockholm University
Kista, Sweden
Email: asasmed@dsv.su.se
Abstract—3D printing has raised a lot of attention from ﬁelds
outside the manufacturing one in the last years. In this paper, we
will illustrate some recent advances of 3D printing technology,
applied to the ﬁeld of telemedicine and remote patient care.
The potentiality of this technology will be detailed without lab
examples. Some crucial aspect such as the regulation of these
devices and the need of some standards will also be discussed.
The purpose of this paper is to present some of the most promising
applications of such technology.
Keywords—
3D printing; telemedicine; manufacturing indus-
try; surgery.
I.
INTRODUCTION
3D printing technology is changing manufacturing models
so fast that traditional industrial processes are chasing this new
wave in a way very similar to the paradox described by the
”Red Queen effect” [1]. The ﬁrst 3D printer was designed as
early as in 1984 by Charles W. Hull (see Fig. 1).
Fig. 1: Early version of a 3D printer
However, it is only in the last ten years that the use of 3D
printing technology outside the traditional manufacturing en-
vironment has started to revolutionize the way we traditionally
turn raw materials into functional devices. The growing wave
of 3D printing technology has been possible because of two
important factors:
•
3D printing technology raised the critical mass that
was needed to make manufacturers willing to sell
their product to individuals and not solely to private
companies.
•
the technology started to become available on the
World Wide Web making it possible for users to share
with one another their recipes to build 3D printings.
Obviously, the two factors are strictly connected in a
closed loop: the more new users share their knowledge on
building and using 3D printers, the more 3D printers’ price will
decrease of a magnitude’s order. The phenomenon can be seen
right now. Following the historical trend, nowadays the mean
cost for a home 3D printer is around 3,500 USD while the ﬁrst
ones were of one or two order of magnitude more expensive.
Originally built for the manufacturing industry, 3D printers
are raising attention also in the biomedical ﬁeld as a tool for
producing biomedical membranes, pills and surgery devices
remotely. In particular, the application of such technology
is forcing new ways to approach the treatment of a patient
both in hospitalization contexts in a laboratory as in home
caring. In these notes, we will survey the currently most
promising applications of 3D printers with an eye focused
on the potentiality of these technologies for the telemedicine
applications. The paper is organized as follows: Section II is
dedicated to a brief description on how a 3D printer works.
Section III will describe some of the most promising use of
the 3D printers in the medical ﬁeld. Section IV will brieﬂy
describe the 3D printers communities. The last section will
describe some barriers that need to be addressed before a large
acceptance of 3D printers in telemedicine could become reality.
Some issues related to regulation will be addressed as well.
II.
HOW 3D PRINTER WORKS
It is not easy to collect in one single deﬁnition all of the
technologies involved in the so called 3D print wave. Probably
the largest part of the commercial 3D printers can be described
as black-box home devices able to create solid objects made
from powderer material. The sufﬁx ”printers” in ”3D printers”
relies on the fact that, from the user interface perspective,
such devices work as common printers in a normal ofﬁce.
The device is connected (using USB) to a PC that codes a
design into a series of processes that are sent to the device that
outputs the object. The main types of 3D printing processes
can be summarized as follows:
1)
Extrusion: uses plastic segment of a metal wire that
is wound on a coil and unreeled to supply material
to an extrusion nozzle.
2)
Granular: uses selective fusion of materials in a
granular bed. The granules are fused layer by layer
until the object is built.
3)
Laminated: Laminates objects using layers of thin
plastic, paper or metal sheets
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

4)
Light polymerized: Vat of liquid polymer is repeat-
edly exposed to light. The exposed liquid polymer
hardens in small increments until the model has been
built. The remaining liquid polymer is drained from
the vat, leaving the solid model. Another system
sprays photopolymer materials in ultra-thin layers
until the model is completed.
Nevertheless, considering the application ﬁled, this is a
very poor deﬁnition. Recently, 3D printing was applied to
produce highly specialized electronic [2], microﬂuidic [3] and
pneumatic devices [4], [5]. But these are still manufacturing
related use of 3D printing technology, where the process
involved is basically of physical type meaning that physical
know processes are wired into a home usable device. Some
major breakthroughs have been presented with the seminal
paper by Symes et al. [6] that use a 3D printer for controlling
chemical synthesis. They use the Rhino3D package and a low-
cost (200 USD) Fab@home robocasting platform to create
and control the synthesises and crystallization of two different
polyoxometalates using a camera to control the reaction. The
most common 3D printers are the ones that use extrusion to
create plastic manufactured objects.
III.
USE OF 3D PRINTERS IN TELEMEDICINE:RECENT
TRENDS
Probably the most interesting use of classical 3D printer
in telemedicine application has been enlightened in a recent
study [7] presented in the New England Journal of Medicine.
This study is particularly interesting because it was the ﬁrst
out-of-the-lab use of a 3D printer in a surgical context. A
newborn was diagnosed with Tracheobronchomalacia [8]
which is hard to treat and rapidly conduce to airway collapse
and respiratory insufﬁciency. At the age of 20 weeks the
baby’s trachea was patched with a trachea splint, to allow
normal ﬂow ventilation. The splint was created from a
biopolymer called polycaprolactone using a 3D printer. The
device was created directly from a CT scan of the baby’s
trachea/bronchus, integrating an image-based computer model
with laser-based 3D printing to produce the splint (see Fig 2).
Fig. 2: Tracheal splint and the patched trachea [7] (p. 2044)
This ﬁrst remote surgery splint creation using 3D printer
can be seen as an astonishing potentially new use of 3D
printers particularly in development countries where due to
the lack of infrastructure for delivery medical prosthesis it
is sometime more easy to have Global System for Mobile
Communications
(GSM)
networks
availability
than
fast
medical device deliveries. For a strange paradox there are
for example African countries where the mobile availability
is
greater
than
the
available
driveways
[9],
and
even
countries where telemedicine applications have been delivered
successfully, for example in malaria monitoring [10].
One of the most interesting cases has been described by
Tam et al. [11]. The surgery involved a 6 year-old girl with
a large scapular osteochondroma complicating congenital
diaphyseal aclasia. Osteochondroma is a type of benign
tumor that consists of cartilage and bone. It is a benign
cartilage-capped outgrowth, connected to bone by a stalk. It is
the most frequently observed neoplasm of the skeleton. They
generally occur at the end of the growth plates of long bones,
often at joints. They most commonly form at the shoulder or
the knee but have been known to occur in the long bones of
the forearm (i.e. the radius and ulna). In this case, the girl
had also a congenital diaphyseal aclasia that is a relatively
rare abnormal condition that affects the skeletal system.
Characterized by multiple exostoses or bony protrusions, it is
inherited as a dominant trait. To help clinician visualize a 3D
model of the tumor before going in vivo with the patient, a
3D model of the scapula was created by post-processing the
Digital Imaging and COmmunications in Medicine (DICOM)
image [11]. Nowadays, DICOM ﬁles are a well established
standard way of manipulating high resolution images of the
human body as output of computed tomography or computed
radiography [12]. In this case, the 3D printer was used to
create a 1:1 3D model of the girl’s tumor to help the clinician
visualize it and test the procedure to adopt before entering
into the operating room (see Fig 3.).
Fig. 3: 3D model of scapula [11] (p. 35)
This ﬁrst step clearly leads to the other still promising
use of this technology, that is, the 3D printing of human
tissue for implantation purpose. A living organ, such as a liver
or the heart itself, is too complex to reproduce as a single
piece outside its connection to the other organs. However, one
promising line for 3D printing is the production of human
bones [13]. Even if the human bones are a living structure,
the fact that some bones replacements like hip replacement are
becoming part of the standard surgery methodology for well
known clinical protocols in ageing related pathologies [14] has
driven research in the area of 3D printers.
In 2011, Anthony Atala [15] took to the stage at the
Technology, Entertainment, Design (TED) conference [16] and
showed the world a 3D printed kidney. Atala’s original 3D
printed kidneys were made with a bio-ink that perfectly repli-
cated kidney tissues, the problem was that these tissues were
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

not vital (living). Without entering too much into details, the
process involved stem cells that have the ability to transform
themselves into other cells like nephrons, neurons and cardio
muscles’ cells. This pluri-potential cells are cultivated in a
solution with a structure as support to allow them to aggregate
in a structured way. As done in other contexts, the cells were
forced to mutate to the desired ones and forced to aggregate
in a structured way. The networking relations that exist in a
human living kidney were lost. Without the ability to create
living organs, 3D printed transplants would remain impossible,
even if this step was a great breakthrough, for the potential
implications of this technology in everyday life. Even more
surprisingly, in 2013 Manoor et al. [17] uses a 3D print to
aggregate cells over the geometry of a human ear. The result
is quite impressive (see Fig 4.).
Fig. 4: 3D printed bionic ear [17] (p. 7)
So, even if creating from scratch a fully functional living
organ to be used for transplantation purpose is far away from
being realized, this ﬁrst step is quite astonishing. Outside the
lab, a goal easier to reach would be the remote creation of
prosthesis made by atossic polymer material. Last but not least,
another promising approach to the use of 3D printer technology
remotely involves the ﬁeld of pharmacy production. With
his seminal paper [6] professor Leroy Cronin demonstrates
the possibility to create complex chemical reactions using a
modiﬁed 3D printer. It was one of the ﬁrst tries to initiate
chemical reactions by printing (i.e. producing) the reagents
directly into a 3D reactionwave matrix. Using this approach it
is possible to control, with a software, the reactionware design,
construction and operation. Another interesting fact is that the
whole proof of concept was created using a low-cost 3D printer
(approx. 2,000 USD) and open-source design software (see Fig
5).
IV.
ONLINE 3D PRINTERS COMMUNITY
In the last section, we have seen some of the recent trends
in using advanced 3D printing techniques. Obviously, some of
them are too complicated and they build materials so difﬁcult
to manage that it is not possible to think of them outside
a controlled lab environment. Despite this, standardized 3D
printing methods using granular plastic material and estrusors
to create plastic manufactured object are right now a reality.
This technology is so well established that entire web sites
like Thinkverse [18] have been created to share the design
for the objects to be printed. So, one user can download
the design schema for a speciﬁc model of 3D printer to
build a plastic made object. The community itself in this
case follows up the line of the open-source so that every
member of the community is supported to share his/her own
design with the other community members. Every member
Fig. 5: Open-source design 3D printer
can upload the instruction and design to be downloaded by
other users who want to build the object. The revenue for
this process is based on the fact that every new recipe and
built object is immediately shared between site surfers without
any need of registration. This means that every newcomer can
build objects without the need of a registration; this step is
required only if he/she has new/modiﬁed recipes to share.
Such communities themselves are now starting to be the object
of research [19]. The interaction on these communities is
driven in some ways by a hacking spirit.The next step in
the area of 3D printer communities will be to go from the
pure technical issues to applications in the medical area. These
communities will attract researchers, designers and clinicians
who want to exchange ideas and experiences from their
everyday situations. It becomes clear from the development
of 3D printing in the health care that it is vital to keep a
viable conversation about hygiene factors, including critical
thinking of existing processes, how to handle materials, and so
on. Online communities-of-practice for collaborative learning
could be about how to produce 3D objects in a safe and
hygienic way, according to standardized routines.
V.
FUTURE POSSIBILITIES AND THE REGULATION
As usual, when technology is running so fast in a way
that has been deﬁned as garage-science, the legislature is
in trouble chasing the different fast changes. If one may
dream, for example, of a 3D printer for building prothesis for
human livings, according to most strict interpretation of the
international law, we need not only to guarantee the safeness
of the whole production process, but also to ensure sanitary
standards that we normally ﬁnd in hospitals and biomedical
manufacturing environments. In the case presented by Zopf et
al. [7], we notice also that, before doing the surgery, the clini-
cians need to have an emergency clearance from the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA), being that the polycaprolactone
biopolymer does not have consensus to be used by the FDA.
The production of medical device inside the US is strictly
regulated by the FDA. So, before entering the marketing stage,
one medical device needs to be certiﬁed by the FDA. However,
for a medical device that does not appear in the FDA medical
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

device database [20] the use is possible in particular situations
[21]. In one case, even though the procedure and the material
was not intended to be used on human being, the surgery could
take place because it was considered as compassionate cure.
Outside this context that is somehow a life risk situation, in
normal medical device manufacturing there is both in EU and
US a strict regulation that assures the safeness of the product
itself both for the patient and for the clinician. In the particular
cited case the problem was somehow bypassed by the fact
that the nursing process took place in the US territory under
the auspices of the same agreed regulation. This leads to a
potential interesting law problem, as usual when dealing with
remote assistance. If we imagine a remote extrusion 3D printer
that uses a polymer to build a splint in a region outside the US,
what should be the best way to assure the patient the safeness
of the process and to reduce at minimum the risk of rejection
by the patient? And upon this, in case something goes wrong,
who is the actor being responsible and for what is he/she
responsible? As in most of the latest technology breakthroughs,
for the moment, the technology wave innovation is leading us
to new and unseen possibilities, and not only for the western
countries. Once the tide will lower a little, a regulation should
be introduced to manage the issues arising from the adoption
of this new technology. The time is approaching, because in
February 2014, key patents that currently prevent competition
in the market for the most advanced and functional 3D printers
will expire. When this will happen, when the key patents
on 3D printing via laser sintering will expire, we will most
likely see a huge drop in the price of these devices. This just
happened, when the key patents expired on a more primitive
form of 3D printing, known as fused deposition modelling
(FDM). The result was an explosion of open-source FDM
printers that eventually led to iconic home and hobbyist 3D
printer manufacturers. When the medical use of 3D printers
becomes widely spread, it is time to initiate conversations
about the practitioner’s work with 3D printers. Also, systematic
evaluations of the use of 3D printers will be beneﬁcial to the
area.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The ﬁrst author would like to thank Giuseppe Dalla Motta
for his precious discussions on the chemical tasks involved in
the industrial 3D printing process.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. J. Robson, “Complex evolutionary systems and the red queen*,” The
Economic Journal, vol. 115, no. 504, pp. F211–F224, 2005.
[2]
B. Y. Ahn, E. B. Duoss, M. J. Motala, X. Guo, S.-I. Park, Y. Xiong,
J. Yoon, R. G. Nuzzo, J. A. Rogers, and J. A. Lewis, “Omnidirectional
printing of ﬂexible, stretchable, and spanning silver microelectrodes,”
Science, vol. 323, no. 5921, pp. 1590–1593, 2009.
[3]
D. Therriault, S. R. White, and J. A. Lewis, “Chaotic mixing in
three-dimensional microvascular networks fabricated by direct-write
assembly,” Nature Materials, vol. 2, pp. 265–271, 2003.
[4]
F. Ilievski, A. D. Mazzeo, R. F. Shepherd, X. Chen, and G. M. White-
sides, “Soft robotics for chemists,” Angewandte Chemie International
Edition, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1890–1895, 2011.
[5]
T. Hasegawa, K. Nakashima, F. Omatsu, and K. Ikuta, “Multi-
directional micro-switching valve chip with rotary mechanism,” Sensors
and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 143, no. 2, pp. 390 – 398, 2008.
[6]
M. Symes, P. Kitson, J. Yan, C. Richmond, G. Cooper, R. Bowman,
T. Vilbrandt, and L. Cronin, “Integrated 3d-printed reactionware for
chemical synthesis and analysis,” Nature Chemistry, vol. 4, pp. 349–
354, 2012.
[7]
D. A. Zopf, S. J. Hollister, M. E. Nelson, R. G. Ohye, and G. E. Green,
“Bioresorbable airway splint created with a three-dimensional printer,”
New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 368, no. 21, pp. 2043–2045,
2013.
[8]
K. A. Carden, P. M. Boiselle, D. A. Waltz, and A. Ernst, “Tracheo-
malacia and tracheobronchomalacia in children and adultsan in-depth
review,” CHEST Journal, vol. 127, no. 3, pp. 984–1005, 2005.
[9]
P. Buys, S. Dasgupta, T. S. Thomas, and D. Wheeler, “Determinants of
a digital divide in sub-saharan africa: A spatial econometric analysis of
cell phone coverage,” World Development, vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1494 –
1505, 2009.
[10]
D. Zurovac, A. Talisuna, and R. Snow, “Mobile Phone Text Messaging:
Tool for Malaria Control in Africa,” vol. 9, no. 2, 2012. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001176
[11]
M. Tam, S. Laycock, D. Bell, and A. Chojnowski, “3-d printout of a
dicom ﬁle to aid surgical planning in a 6 year old patient with a large
scapular osteochondroma complicating congenital diaphyseal aclasia,”
Journal of Radiology Case Reports, vol. 6, no. 1, 2012.
[12]
W. D. Bidgood, S. C. Horii, F. W. Prior, and D. E. Van Syckle,
“Understanding and Using DICOM, the Data Interchange Standard for
Biomedical Imaging,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 199–212, May 1997.
[13]
N. E. Fedorovich, J. Alblas, W. E. Hennink, F. C. ner, and W. J.
Dhert, “Organ printing: the future of bone regeneration?” Trends in
Biotechnology, vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 601 – 606, 2011.
[14]
A. F. Brooker, J. W. Bowerman, R. A. Robinson, and L. h. Rileyjr.,
“Ectopic ossiﬁcation following total hip replacement incidence and
a method of classiﬁcation,” The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery,
vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 1629–1632, 1973.
[15]
G. Orlando, P. Baptista, M. Birchall, P. De Coppi, A. Farney, N. K.
Guimaraes-Souza, E. Opara, J. Rogers, D. Seliktar, K. Shapira-
Schweitzer, R. J. Stratta, A. Atala, K. J. Wood, and S. Soker, “Re-
generative medicine as applied to solid organ transplantation: current
status and future challenges,” Transplant International, vol. 24, no. 3,
pp. 223–232, 2011.
[16]
TED. (2012, Nov.) Tedtalks ofﬁcial web site. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ted.com/
[17]
M. S. Mannoor, Z. Jiang, T. James, Y. L. Kong, K. A. Malatesta, W. O.
Soboyejo, N. Verma, D. H. Gracias, and M. C. McAlpine, “3d printed
bionic ears,” Nano Letters, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 2634–2639, 2013.
[18]
thingiverse.
(2013,
Oct.)
Thingiverse
ofﬁcial
web-site.
[Online].
Available: http://www.thingiverse.com/
[19]
C. Mota, “The rise of personal fabrication,” in Proceedings of the 8th
ACM conference on Creativity and cognition, ser. C&C ’11.
ACM,
2011, pp. 279–288.
[20]
FDA. (2013, Sep.) Fda medical device database. [Online]. Available:
http://goo.gl/wmEMxH
[21]
——. (2013, Aug.) Fda compassionate and emergency use. [Online].
Available: http://www.fda.gov/Training/CDRHLearn/ucm180876.htm
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

