EMG-Controlled Robotic Prosthetic Arm With Neural Network Training
Javier Civit-Masot, Alfonso P´erez-Rodr´ıguez, Francisco Luna-Perej´on, Luis Mu˜noz-Saavedra,
Manuel Dom´ınguez-Morales and Anton Civit
Robotics and Computer Technology Lab
Avda. Reina Mercedes s/n, E.T.S. Ingenier´ıa Inform´atica, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain
Email: {jcivit, fralunper, luimunsaa, mdominguez, civit}@atc.us.es
Abstract—The project consists of the creation of a robotic
arm controlled remotely through a brace developed by Thalmic
Labs, able to read the limb muscles’ biopotentials. This project
aims to create an economic alternative to non-invasive active
prostheses that exist today. Our prosthesis can perform the same
functions but at a so much affordable price. In order to perform
all the functions of a normal joint, the arm has several elements.
Strings that simulate tendons and allow the movement of the
ﬁngers, gears that allow the rotation of the wrist and motors,
which can generate movement based on the data extracted
from the bracelet. The bracelet is responsible for transmitting
information from the hand to the robotic arm through a wireless
module that connects it with the computer, where the signal that
extracts the bracelet goes through a ﬁltering process to keep the
information that interests us and Transmit it through the USB
port to a microcontroller, which will be in charge of moving
the engines according to the signals received. To avoid errors in
the measurement of the sensors, the information received from
the bracelet is trained in the computer using a Neural Network
architecture before sending the information to the robotic arm.
Keywords—Machine learning, neural network, exoskeleton,
prosthetics, EMG.
I. INTRODUCTION
The evolution of prosthetics is long and full of stories, from
its primitive beginnings, through the sophisticated present, to
the incredible visions of the future. As in the development of
any other ﬁeld, some ideas and inventions have worked and
have been explored in more detail, such as the ﬁxed-position
foot, while others have been left out or have become obsolete,
such as the use of iron in prostheses [1]. The long and complex
road to the computerized arm began around 1500 BC and has
been in constant evolution ever since. There have been many
reﬁnements since the ﬁrst wooden legs and hand hooks, and
the result has been the highly customized ﬁxation and molding
found in today’s devices [2].
Today, bionics is the application of biological solutions
to systems technologies in architecture, design, engineering
and modern technology [3]. There is also bionic engineering
that covers several disciplines with the aim of concatenating
(making biological and electronic systems work together), for
example, to create prostheses activated by robots controlled
by a biological signal or also to create artiﬁcial models of
things that only exist in nature, for example, artiﬁcial vision
and artiﬁcial intelligence also called cybernetics [4]. One could
say, bionics is that branch of cybernetics that tries to simulate
the behavior of living beings by making them better in almost
all branches by means of mechanical instruments.
Bionics has had a great development in countries like Ger-
many that has courses qualiﬁed in the same way in different
schools, Japan that has a great development in Bio robots,
United States and United Kingdom. In Latin America and
Spain there are also developments of this type. In Mexico, the
career of Bionic Engineering was founded at the UPIITA (Pro-
fessional Interdisciplinary Unit in Engineering and Advanced
Technologies) of the IPN (National Polytechnic Institute) in
1996 [5], which has yielded results in the creation of bionic
devices [6].
In the United States, 82% of amputations are due to vascular
disease, 22% are due to trauma, 4% are congenital, and
4% are tumorous. Approximately 1.6 million people in the
United States live with an amputation. 1.5 amputees per 1,000
population in the US and Canada According to the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), about 113,000
lower extremity amputations are performed each year [7].
There is a 3:1 ratio between men and women (73.6% vs.
26.4%). Amputations occur predominantly in the lower limbs
at 84%, compared to 16% in the upper limbs.
• In the upper limbs the cause is predominantly traumatic
with 70.4% followed by congenital cause with 18%.
• In lower limbs the predominant cause is vascular with
69.5% followed by traumatic with 22.5%.
Therefore we are going to try to put a cheap alternative
to a big problem that affects millions of people in the world
(extrapolating the ﬁgures previously seen only in USA and
Canada).
The main objective of this work is the creation of cheap non-
invasive active prosthesis. Its user will be able to use it thanks
to a bracelet, which has several integrated sensors (gyroscope,
accelerometer and EMG (electromyographic signal sensors)).
This bracelet will be placed on the user’s arm and will read the
parameters of the resident muscular terminations of the user’s
residual limb, transmitting them to a microprocessor that will
move the speciﬁc motor in the prosthesis.
To achieve this purpose, the ”Divide and Win” technique
has been followed: the main aim of this work has been split
into smaller objectives, which can be carried out individually,
to ﬁnally bring them together and obtain the ﬁnal goal.
The rest of the manuscript is divided as follows:
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
The system is divided into three parts: the Myo bracelet
(green), the computer (blue) and the microcontroller and
arm (red). The ﬁrst communication (between the bracelet
and the computer) is done via a wireless connection and
the second communication (between the computer and the
microcontroller) is done via a USB port communication. The
full system diagram can be observed in Figure 1.
Fig. 1. System block diagram.
The information obtained from the sensors is sent from the
bracelet to the computer. In the computer, a signal ﬁltering
application is executed to keep the data we are interested in
for the arm movement. Once the signal has been ﬁltered and
we have the data we want, we transmit the control signal to
the microcontroller, which takes care of the movement of the
servomotors and therefore the movement of the robotic arm.
The sensors in the wristband encompass the technologies
used to measure the different values of the arm:
• Electromyography sensors: These are the sensors placed
in each module of the bracelet, they are in charge of
measuring the biopotentials of the arm muscles.
• Accelerometer: It is the sensor in charge of taking mea-
surements of arm and wrist accelerations.
• Gyroscope: This is the sensor in charge of taking mea-
surements of changes in position and rotation of the wrist
and arm.
In the data transmission of the read values, a USB module
is used which provides the bracelet. The device allows data to
be sent through it wirelessly. In our case, it is connected to
the computer and the bracelet sends the data via Bluetooth.
The computer runs an application created in Visual Studio in
C programming language, in which the data from the bracelet
is received and training is carried out via a neural network in
Fig. 2. System block diagram.
order to be able to discretize the information to be given to
the arm; in this way the system requires a previous training
process, as well as a large amount of data to be trained before
starting to give an output from the system.
The result of the neural network is transformed into pro-
grammed movements that are sent to the microcontroller to
control the reception of data. On the board, which controls
the entire arm, are the necessary connections for the operation
of the various devices.
The robotic arm is in charge of imitating the movements that
we exercise in the arm that we have placed the bracelet. Servo
motors are used on the arm motors. This type of motor is the
best alternative for the application that the arm will perform
since we can control the movement of the ﬁngers and the
rotation of the hand. The servomotors are connected to the
microcontroller through the PWM pins on the plate. In this
case, the devices are not powered from the microcontroller.
An external power supply is used to power the servomotors.
III. RESULTS
Below, we can see the block diagram of the operation of
the electromyogram:
The analogical signal is received from the electrodes placed
in the bracelet, then the 8 bits analogical digital converter that
the bracelet has, converts the analogical signal in a digital
range from 0 to 255 bits, if the movements are not calibrated,
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

all the movements are calibrated ﬁrst, after having all the
sensors perfectly calibrated, we make the calibration samples
to be trained by the neural network system that we have put
in the code so that the program is able to distinguish well the
movements automatically. Finally, once the system is trained,
the signals are sent to the arm so that it moves the way we
send it through the electrical biopotentials of the muscles.
On one hand, the system’s neural network structure is
composed of an input layer, an output layer and a hidden
layer. The entire structure can then be observed:
On the other hand, the application developed, which is in
charge of communication and training, can be seen below:
Fig. 3. System block diagram.
As for the tests, three different types were carried out:
ﬁrstly, system integration tests were carried out to check the
correct functioning of all the developed parts; then, for the
system training, the success rates were obtained for several
subjects and on multiple occasions (the training results did not
fall below 85% in any case); and ﬁnally, usability tests were
carried out with the patients who had served as test subjects
for the neural network.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Once the project is fully completed, the project objectives
have been fully met. A system based on the movement of
a robotic arm through the reading of EMG sensors from a
bracelet and the training of the information received by the
pc through neural networks has been designed, integrated and
tested.
The success rate after training and testing with 8 subjects did
not decrease in any case from 85%; being the average above
90% of success in the classiﬁcation of the neuronal system.
The results are satisfactory and users have shown interest in
the subject.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been developed and funded by the research
group TEP-108: Robotics and Computer Technology fron the
University of Seville.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Norton, “A brief history of prosthetics,” InMotion, vol. 17, no. 7, pp.
11–3, 2007.
[2] C. Lake and J. M. Miguelez, “Evolution of microprocessor based control
systems in upper extremity prosthetics,” Technology and Disability,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 63–71, 2003.
[3] M. H. Dickinson, “Bionics: Biological insight into mechanical design,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 96, no. 25, pp.
14 208–14 209, 1999.
[4] K. Krippendorff, “The cybernetics of design and the design of cybernet-
ics,” in Design Cybernetics.
Springer, 2019, pp. 119–136.
[5] Z. Lovtchikova Khavrachenko, “M´etodos de aprendizaje para los alumnos
de ingenier´ıa bi´onica,” 2009.
[6] C. D. Rico Mandujano, “An´alisis estructural de una pr´otesis bi´onica de
brazo para miembro superior,” Ph.D. dissertation, 2011.
[7] D. J. Margolis and et al., “Prevalence of diabetes, diabetic foot ulcer, and
lower extremity amputation among medicare beneﬁciaries, 2006 to 2008,”
in Data Points Publication Series [Internet].
Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality (US), 2011.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

