A Maturity Model for Telemedicine Implementation 
Liezl van Dyk 
Department of Industrial Engineering 
Stellenbosch University 
Stellenbosch, South Africa 
lvd@sun.ac.za 
Corne Schutte 
Department of Industrial Engineering 
Stellenbosch University 
Stellenbosch, South Africa 
corne@sun.ac.za
Jill Fortuin 
Division for Telemedicine and mHealth 
Medical Research Council of South Africa 
Jill.fortuin@mrc.ac.za 
 
 
Abstract— The South African National Department of 
Health (DoH) has, for more than a decade, recognized the 
potential benefit of information and communication 
technology (ICT) in the delivery of healthcare to rural 
areas. However, despite generous funding and proven 
technology, not many telemedicine systems have lasted 
beyond the pilot phase. The purpose of this paper is to 
propose a maturity model, which can be used to measure 
and manage the capability of a health system. Its aim 
would be to sustain health care delivery, after the pilot 
phase of a telemedicine project. This maturity model 
comprises of five existing frameworks, namely the Health 
Readiness Instrument for developing countries, the 
Layered Telemedicine Implementation Model, the PACS 
Maturity Model, the Telemedicine Process Model and the 
NHS Maturity model. The validity of this maturity model 
is tested by means of a focus group discussion that 
occurred during a workshop for provincial representatives 
from three South African provincial DoHs.  
Telemedicine; Maturity Model; eReadiness; South Africa 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The first phase of telemedicine implementation in 
South Africa began in 1999. This was guided by the 
National Strategy for Telemedicine. The objectives of 
the strategy focused on providing high-quality, cost-
effective 
health 
care 
and 
education; 
improved 
recruitment and retention of health professionals; 
delivery of long-distance health care, and improvement 
in the accessibility of specialist health care. 
By definition, telemedicine refers to the delivery of 
healthcare services (“medicine”) where distance (“tele”) 
is involved. For the purposes of this article, the more 
specific definition, given by Sood et al. is used, since it 
encapsulates and addresses the issue of the uneven 
distribution of health resources, specifically in South 
Africa’s public health sector: 
“Telemedicine being a subset of telehealth, uses 
communications networks for delivery of healthcare 
services and medical education from one geographical 
location to another, primarily to address challenges like 
uneven distribution and shortage of infrastructural and 
human resources.” 
South Africa has a population of 48 million people, 
half of whom reside in rural areas. Despite being one of 
the largest economies in Africa, South Africa has a rural 
community which is characterized by very high poverty 
rates [1].  As a result, the first telemedicine strategy, 
published by the South African government in 1999, 
was recognized as a strategic tool to overcome the 
unequal distribution of healthcare resources. 
 Since then, many telemedicine projects have been 
launched, of which, few have survived past the pilot 
phase. Apart from the obvious waste of equipment and 
human resources, Yellowlees [2] considers the damage 
to the reputation of telemedicine as an even greater cost. 
The South African public health sector is already 
paying this price: in 2010, the Department of Health 
placed a moratorium on the launching of any new 
telemedicine projects until a strategy is in place to 
increase the success rate of such projects. 
II. 
PURPOSE AND METHODOLOGY 
In this paper, a telemedicine maturity model is 
proposed. This model can be used to measure, manage 
and optimize all the components of a telemedicine 
system, as well as the health system within which it is 
implemented. A maturity model enables   the capability 
maturity of a specific domain to be measured. In 
addition, it facilitates an improvement process that is 
best suited to an enterprise and which is in accordance 
with the prescribed best practices of the domain  [3]. 
An overview of the content of this paper is given in 
Figure 1, where literature, concerning five related 
theoretical frameworks, is presented. Using these 
frameworks as a base, a concept maturity model for 
telemedicine implementation is proposed. This maturity 
model is then refined and validated during workshops 
with four provincial departments of health (DoHs). A 
conclusion follows, which describes firstly, the extent to 
which this maturity model enables the measurement of 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

maturity and secondly, its contribution to sustained 
telemedicine implementation. 
 
 
Figure 1: Research Methodology 
III. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
There are many frameworks, models, checklists, 
taxonomies, et cetera, that can be useful as input in such 
a model – all with their own strengths and weaknesses. 
However, of these, the five frameworks listed in Figure 
1, were identified as having the most to contribute to 
such a maturity model for telemedicine. These are 
discussed in more detail in the following section. 
A. eHealth Readiness Instruments 
eHealth readiness is defined as the "degree to which 
users, healthcare institutions and the healthcare system 
itself, are prepared to participate and succeed with 
implementation." Jennett et al. [4] specifically refer to 
eHealth readiness when they argue that time, money and 
energy, can be saved if the status quo of an 
eHealth/telemedicine system context is determined 
before implementation.  
Legare et al. [5] have identified six different 
assessment tools, which can be used to measure e-
readiness within a health context. However, information 
concerning the internal validity and reliability of these 
measuring devices is only available for two of the six 
tools. Of these, Khoja’s E-health Readiness Assessment 
Tool [6] was selected for the purposes of this paper, 
because it is specifically directed towards developing 
countries. This instrument covers five categories: 
 
Core readiness (planning and integration) 
 
Technological readiness (availability, reliability, 
affordability and ICT, and related infrastructure) 
 
Learning readiness (resources to provide training 
using the technology) 
 
Societal 
readiness 
(interaction 
between 
the 
institution and other institutions)  
 
Policy readiness (policies at government and 
institutional level to address common issues such as 
licensing, liability and reimbursement) 
 
The first objective of a maturity model is to establish 
the capability maturity of an organization in terms of a 
specific domain of practice. The strength of this eHealth 
readiness instrument lies in the fact that it provides us 
with a set of statements, which can be used as a 
yardstick to measure the eHealth readiness of an 
organization. The validity and reliability of this 
measuring instrument is determined through various 
studies [7] and can thus provide us with a set of 
statements, which can be used with confidence to 
establish, to a certain extent, the capability maturity. 
The drawback of eHealth readiness tools lies in the 
fact that they do not accommodate the second purpose of 
a maturity model, namely to describe the best practices 
of the domain. Nor do they facilitate the process of 
moving that enterprise towards those best practices [3]. 
Molla and Licker [8] identified a similar drawback in 
developing a model and instrument for eCommerce 
adoption in South Africa, which led to their developing a 
maturity model for e-commerce. 
B. The Layered Telemedicine Implementation Model 
This progression towards maturity is recognized by 
Broens et al. [12] who explain that maturity is gained as 
one moves from one implementation layer to another. 
South Africa is not the only country where telemedicine 
projects have a significantly high failure rate. Broens et 
al. [12], in a systematic literature review, confirmed 
that, after the prototype phase, telemedicine projects are 
more likely to fail than succeed. They also looked to the 
literature to answer the question: “why is it so difficult 
[to implement telemedicine] and what goes wrong?” In 
this study, the theoretical model of Tanriverdi and 
Iacono [13] was used as a point of departure in the 
identification of the so-called determinants for the 
successful implementation of telemedicine. 
Broens 
et 
al. 
[12] 
postulate 
that 
different 
determinants become applicable as telemedicine 
implementation maturity is gained. The Layered 
Implementation Model was developed accordingly. The 
relation between each implementation layer (and their 
associated determinants in brackets) are shown in Figure 
2. 
 
Figure 2: Layered Implementation Model [12] 
 
Literature  
Study   
  
Maturity  
Model   
  
Refine  &   
Validate   
  
Conclusion   
eHealth Readiness  
Instrument for  
  
Developing  
Countries   
  
3 Dimensions   
1.   
Success factors  
of telemedicine  
implementation   
2.   
The  
telemedicine  
process   
3.   
Maturity levels  
for  
telemedicine  
projects 
  
  
Eastern  
Cape DoH   
  
Measures  
organizati onal  
maturity of  
telemedicine project 
  
Layered  
Tel emedicine  
Implementation  
Model   
  
  
Northern  
Cape DoH   
  
PACS Maturity  
Model    
  
  
North  
Western  
Province  
DoH   
  
Manages and  
optimizes  
organizational  
maturity to improve  
effectiveness of  
telemedicine  
initiatives   
Telemedicine  
Process Map   
  
  
  
NHS Maturity   
Model   
  
  
Free State  
DoH   
  
  
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. The NHS Infrastructure Maturity Model (NIMM) 
NIMM is an IT infrastructure maturity model that 
was developed by the NHS Technology Office, together 
with a number of different NHS IT Organizations in the 
United Kingdom [9]. During its development, the NHS 
team worked closely with Atos Healthcare, a consultant 
company, helping to define and develop the NIMM [10].  
D. The PACS Maturity Model 
Around the time when the NIMM was being 
developed, Van Wetering et al. [11] recognized the 
potential benefit of maturity models for healthcare 
services. They specifically considered teleradiology and 
developed 
a 
PACS 
(Picture 
Archiving 
and 
Communication System) model. 
E. The Telemedicine Process Map 
Telemedicine, by definition, is the delivery of 
healthcare services (“medicine”) over a distance. For a 
successful telemedicine process [14] to take place,  
irrespective of the context or required technology,  
each step of the Telemedicine Process (Figure 3) needs 
to be successfully executed.  
 
 
Figure 3: The Telemedicine Process Map [14] 
 
IV. 
TOWARD A MATURITY MODEL FOR 
TELEMEDICINE IMPLEMENTATION 
These frameworks can be used individually to 
support telemedicine implementation. However, no one 
framework offers a comprehensive maturity model for 
telemedicine implementation.  
In the following section, these five frameworks are 
combined to develop a three dimensional framework 
(Figure 4). This can be used to measure, manage and 
optimize all the components of a telemedicine system, as 
well as the health system within which it is 
implemented. The three dimensions of this model are: 
 
eReadiness Categories 
 
Telemedicine Process Steps 
 
Maturity Levels 
 
     These three dimensions are discussed in the 
following section.  
 
 
 
Figure 4: A maturity model for telemedicine implementation 
 
A. eReadiness Categories 
Khoja’s [6] eHealth readiness categories are aligned 
with the determinants, proposed by Broens et al. [12], 
for the successful implementation of telemedicine. Both 
Khoja and Broens et al. recognize technology and 
policy 
as 
determinants 
for 
the 
successful 
implementation of telemedicine. Technology is also one 
of the so-called submodels of the NHS Infrastructure 
Maturity Model [10]. Governance – which can be 
translated here as policy, is one of the classes within the 
business submodel. 
Core readiness, learning readiness and societal 
readiness are additional eHealth readiness categories 
and Broens et al. have added user acceptance, finance 
and organization (internal and external) to their 
determinants. The NHS Infrastructure Maturity Model 
[10] includes procurement, financial management, 
business alignment, people and skills as well as 
standards & procedures. 
Frameworks [6], [10] and [12] are used as a point of 
departure in order to define, in consultation with 
representatives from the DoH, the following categories 
of an axis of the maturity model. 
For the purposes of the framework presented in this 
paper, the success determinants are organized as 
follows: 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Technology and maintenance: ICT availability, 
reliability, training, usability  
 
Policy 
and 
legislation: 
Governmental 
and 
institutional 
policies 
and 
procedures, 
standardization and security 
 
Individual users: Trust and willingness of users and 
decision makers, producing evidence, change in 
way of doing 
 
Organizational 
processes: 
Decision 
making 
processes, work procedures 
 
Planning and financial sustainability: Business 
models which will ensure continuation of the 
telemedicine endeavor 
 
Interaction/involvement 
with 
community: 
Interaction with society and other institutions 
 
B. Maturity Levels 
In a maturity model, the current maturity level is 
measured, in the first instance, by how many other levels 
serve as a guide to system maturity. Most maturity 
models show five maturity levels [3]. These generic 
levels correspond with the levels of the NIMM [10], as 
well as the PACS Maturity Model [11], and were 
adopted for the purpose of this study. The NIMM level 
descriptors appear in brackets:  
 
 
Level 1: Initial, ad hoc process (Basic) 
 
Level 2: Managed, stable process (Controlled) 
 
Level 3: Defined, standard process (Standardised) 
 
Level 4: Measured process (Optimised) 
 
Level 5: Optimizing (Innovative) 
C. The telemedicine process 
The steps involved in the telemedicine process can 
be compared to the links of a chain. If one of these steps 
is not executed properly, no telemedicine service, of any 
sort, can be delivered [14]. It is therefore important that 
the maturity is measured and managed with respect to 
each of these steps. The telemedicine process is included 
in its entirety, as the third dimension of the proposed 
maturity model. 
The 10th step was added as a recommendation by 
representatives from the department of health: “Archive 
all data for future retrieval and meta-analysis”. 
D. Involving the users of the model 
The purpose of this maturity model is to assist those 
who are responsible for the implementation of 
telemedicine projects in South Africa. Its aim is to 
enable them to manage their health system and to 
ensure the successful and sustained implementation of 
telemedicine. Although both the public and the private 
health care sectors are included, for the purposes of this 
paper, only health care workers from the public health 
sector, were involved in the refining and validating of 
this framework.  
Three telemedicine training workshops were held on 
14 June, 4 August, and 31 August, 2011, respectively.  
These involved four of the nine provincial Departments 
of Health (DoHs) in South Africa. Major changes were 
made to the maturity model based on the conclusions 
which emanated from the first workshop (14 June, 
2011).  The most significant of these changes was the 
inclusion 
of 
the 
telemedicine 
process. 
Further 
proceedings from this workshop are reported on in 
another paper (15).  The descriptors of the framework 
were refined during the second workshop (4 August, 
2011). Validation? 
The remainder of this paper is devoted to an 
analysis of the outcomes/results of the third workshop 
(31 August, 2011) as a means of validating this 
framework. This workshop involved 25 delegates from 
two of the largest and most rural provinces. The 25 
people who attended this final workshop (31 August, 
2011) included: 
 
13 medical practitioners,   
 
10 ICT Technicians and 
 
2 
delegates 
responsible 
for 
e-learning 
and 
administration.  
10 of the delegates (5 from each province) were either 
radiographers, radiologists or radiographic technicians.  
E. Methodology 
The delegates were briefed about the frameworks 
presented in this paper and the 25 attendees were 
purposely allocated to a specific group. Each group was 
then provided with a 10 x 6 matrix, based on the first 
two dimensions of the 
maturity 
model (“The 
Telemedicine Process” and “E-Readiness Categories”). 
Finally, the groups were asked to reach consensus about 
the level of maturity present in each of the 60 blocks of 
the matrix.  
F. Results 
The maturity maps from each of the respective 
groups are shown in Figures 5, 6, 7 and 8 (the colour-
coded scale has been converted to gray-scale for the 
purposes of this paper.) 
 
Radiology from province A (Figure 5) 
 
Radiology from province B (Figure 6) 
 
Doctors (general practitioners) from both provinces 
(Figure 7) 
 
ICTechnologists from both provinces (Figure 8)  
 
The remaining delegates consisted of managers and 
training co-ordinators. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

One of the groups, involved in the workshop, did 
not reach consensus on the maturity levels of the 
telemedicine projects involved. Their maturity map is 
therefore, not included in this paper. This inability to 
reach consensus can probably be attributed to the 
diversity within this group, in terms of their exposure 
to, and perspective on, telemedicine. 
G. Discussion 
All the delegates participated in a discussion to reflect 
on the significance of the results of the workshop. 
These are summarized as follows: 
There was a significant difference in the maturity 
maps provided by the various groups. It is also not 
surprising that the two maps that showed the greatest 
degree of similarity, were the two maps produced by the 
groups who belonged to the same area of telemedicine 
specialization, namely radiology. (Figures 5 and 6).  
Furthermore, 
the 
perceived 
maturity 
for 
teleradiology was higher than the perceived maturity for 
telemedicine, as expressed by the general practitioners 
(Figure 7), which is in line with a general tendency for 
teleradiology technology and infrastructure to be more 
mature than the other telemedicine specializations.    
The maturity map, produced by the practicing 
doctors (Figure 7), clearly shows their frustration with 
the lack of connectivity, which they felt prevented the 
telemedicine process from being completed to its full 
extent.  
It is also interesting to note that the doctors (Figure 
7) tended to allocate the same maturity level to a certain 
step of the telemedicine process, irrespective of the 
eReadiness category under consideration. In contrast,   
the other groups tended to allocate similar maturity 
levels to eReadiness categories, irrespective of the 
telemedicine process. In future, the construct of the 
framework should be reconsidered to avoid such 
generalizations across categories.  
The maturity map of the ICT Technicians (Figure 8) 
received much critique from the other delegates. Based 
on the discussion that followed, the conclusion they 
arrived at was that there is a distinct difference between 
ICT Technicians’, and health practitioners’, perceptions 
of telemedicine maturity. 
General feedback, regarding the use of the model to 
measure maturity, included a proposal to divide some of 
the eReadiness categories into more specific categories. 
For example, there could be different maturity levels 
associated with “decision making processes” and “work 
procedures” but in this model they are both grouped 
under “organizational processes. 
Workshop delegates expressed a need for more 
specific maturity level indicators, both to avoid 
subjectivity, and as an indication of the direction to take 
to facilitate improvement.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Change management was identified, in the literature 
[2], [16] as well as by the DoH representatives, as the 
key to the successful implementation of telemedicine. A 
maturity model for telemedicine implementation could 
thus be instrumental in managing this change.  
 Delegates reached consensus that the value of this 
workshop did not lie in the actual measureable 
outcomes, but in the fact that different role players, with 
diverse viewpoints, communicated their opinions based 
on a common holistic framework. Despite the fact that 
it is simple and intuitive to use (which is one of the 
design features of a maturity model [10]), it provides 
users with a tool to assess the entire context of their 
telemedicine initiatives.  
Initiatives in the future should firstly, focus on the 
refinement of the construct of this model, in order to 
avoid ambiguity and subjectivity.  Secondly, more 
research is required to determine if and how this model 
can be used as a tool to manage and optimize 
organizational maturity and, in so doing, improve the 
effectiveness of telemedicine initiatives. 
  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Medical Research Council of South Africa (MRC) 
REFERENCES 
[1] Sorensen T., Rivett U. and Fortuin J. A review of ICT 
systems 
for 
HIV/AIDS 
and 
anti-retroviral 
treatment 
management 
in 
South 
Africa. 
J 
Telemed 
Telecare 
2008;14(1):37.  
[2] Yellowlees P.M., Successfully developing a telemedicine 
system. J Telemed Telecare 2005;11(7):331.  
[3] Essmann H.E., Toward innovation capability maturity. 
2009.  
[4] Jennett P., Yeo M., Pauls M. and Graham J. 
Organizational readiness for telemedicine: implications for 
success and failure. J Telemed Telecare 2003;9(2):pp. 27-29.  
[5] Legare E., Vincent C., Lehoux P., Anderson D., Kairy D. 
and Gagnon M.P. et al. Telehealth readiness assessment tools. 
J Telemed Telecare 2010;16(3):107.  
[6] Khoja S., Scott R.E., Casebeer A.L., Mohsin M., Ishaq A. 
and Gilani S. E-health readiness assessment tools for 
healthcare institutions in developing countries. Telemedicine 
and e-Health 2007;13(4): pp. 425-432.  
[7] Khoja S., Casebeer A., Scott R. and Gilani S. Validating e-
Health readiness assessment tools by using qualitative 
research methods. eHealth International Journal 2007;3(1).  
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[8] Molla A. and Licker P.S. eCommerce adoption in 
developing countries: a model and instrument. Information & 
Management 2005;42(6):pp. 877-899.  
[9] Haris, F. IT Infrastructure Maturity Model (ITI-MM): A 
Roadmap to Agile IT InfrastructureUniversity of Twente; 
2010.  
[10] Savvidas A. Your guide to the NHS Infrastructure 
Maturity Model. 2009.  
[11] Van de Wetering R. and Batenburg R. A PACS maturity 
model: A systematic meta-analytic review on maturation and 
evolvability of PACS in the hospital enterprise. Int J Med Inf 
2009;78(2):pp. 127-140.  
[12] Broens T.H.F. Determinants of successful telemedicine 
implementations: a literature study. J Telemed Telecare 
2007;13(6):303.  
[13] Tanrevdi, H. and Iacono, I. Knowledge barriers to 
diffusion of telemedicine. Proceedings of the international 
conference 
on 
Information 
systems: 
Association 
for 
Information Systems Atlanta, GA, USA; 1998.  
[14] Wynchank S. and Van Dyk L., editors. A decision 
support tool for telemedicine project management. "Prove 
your Hypothesis": Telemedicine and eHealth in South Africa; 
13-15 September 2011; ; 2011.  
[15] Van Dyk, L., Schutte, C.S.L. and Fortuin, J., A Systems 
Engineering 
Approach 
to 
Telemedicine 
System 
Implementation in South Africa. ISEM 2011; pp. 107-113.  
[16] Bashshur R., Shannon G., Sapci H. Telemedicine 
evaluation. Telemedicine Journal & e-Health 2005;11(3): pp. 
296-316.  
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

