Denk je zèlf! Developing a Personalised Virtual Coach  
for Emotional Eaters using Personas  
 
Aranka Dol1, Olga Kulyk2, Hugo Velthuijsen1, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen2, Tatjana van Strien3 
1Institute for Communication, Media & IT, Hanzehogeschool UAS, Groningen 
2Department of Psychology, Health and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede 
3Behavioural Science Institute and Institute for Gender Studies, Radboud University, Nijmegen 
3Department of Health Sciences and the EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University, Amsterdam 
e-mail: 1{a.dol, h.velthuijsen}@pl.hanze.nl, 2{o.a.kulyk, j.vangemert-pijnen}@utwente.nl, 3t.vanstrien@psych.ru.nl 
 
Abstract — Obesity is a fast growing societal threat, causing 
chronic conditions, physical and psychological health problems, 
as well as absenteeism and large healthcare costs. Despite 
numerous attempts to promote physical activity and healthy 
diet, existing interventions do not focus on often occurring 
emotional causes of obesity. There is a need for self-management 
support of this vulnerable target group: emotional eaters. This 
paper presents the results of the design case study focusing on a 
holistic development of a personalised virtual mHealth coach 
that provides self-management training ‘Denk je zèlf!’ (Dutch 
for ‘Develop a wise mind and counsel yourself’). Target group 
are young adults with emotional eating disorder and obesity. 
The contextual inquiry study was conducted to get insights into 
the needs and experiences of the target users, including 
interviews and questionnaires with emotional eaters, obesity 
treatment patients and healthcare practitioners. Personas and 
user stories were derived from these results and translated into 
a new ‘Denk je zèlf!’ virtual coach, based on Dialectical 
Behaviour Therapy and experience sampling measures to 
capture user experience and emotional state. This paper makes 
two main contributions: (a) combining holistic design with 
behaviour therapy in one virtual mHealth coaching application 
for emotional eaters; (b) applying Personas to guide the design. 
Preliminary results suggest that an online self-management 
training might be useful for the target group. Future research 
will be aimed at iterative evaluation and further development of 
the dialectical dialogues for the virtual coach and content for the 
education and instruction modules.           
Keywords-obesity; emotional eating; Dialectical Behaviour 
Therapy; personalised care; virtual coach.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The fast growth of obesity is a threat for humanity. Obesity 
is defined as an abnormal or excessive fat accumulation that 
may impair health and is classified as such with a Body Mass 
Index (BMI) of 30 kg/m2 or higher [1]. Obese patients often 
suffer 
from 
physical, 
metabolic, 
or 
psychological 
comorbidities, such as cardiovascular conditions, diabetes II, 
depression, etc. [2].  The number of years spent in relative 
unhealthiness (suffering from illnesses, disabilities) has 
impact on societal costs due to incapacity for work, 
absenteeism and large costs for healthcare [3]-[5]. Nearly 
50% of the Dutch population suffer from being overweight or 
obese [2]. 
     Obesity is associated with low socioeconomic background, 
unhealthy family lifestyle, bad eating habits and lack of 
physical activity. Increasing physical activity and reducing 
food intake (dieting) are considered cornerstones in the 
prevention and treatment of obesity. Though many of existing 
interventions are successful and make patients losing weight 
in the short run, long term randomised studies demonstrate 
that diets are not the answer [6]. Existing interventions (the 
Big Two – eat less, exercise more, such as Weight Watchers 
[7], My Diet coach [8] and Lose it! [9] (online weight loss 
programs) do not offer the ultimate solution in the long run, 
since people are not able to maintain their bodyweight over a 
longer period of time.  
A. Emotional eaters and obesity  
Recent studies show that a certain group (40%) of the 
obese population overeat due to negative emotions [10]. 
Emotional eating (EE) is an atypical stress reaction. A normal 
reaction to stress and negative emotions would be loss of 
appetite. Emotional eaters show this atypical behaviour 
because they confuse negative emotions with hunger. They 
have a narrow view on what happens in their body (poor 
interoceptive awareness) and they are having difficulties 
identifying and describing emotions and feelings (high 
alexithymia). Emotional eaters are having problems with 
emotion regulation - the ability to keep one’s emotional 
system in a healthy condition [11].  
     Diets and behaviour therapies do not help people with 
high degrees of emotional eating as they do not treat the 
emotions resulting in the problem of emotional eating. Most 
treatment programs for obesity do not focus on emotion 
regulation [12][13].  
B. Emotional eaters and eHealth 
The majority of emotional eaters have a long history of 
dieting, followed by the inevitable overeating and starting 
dieting again. They gain weight because of poor emotion 
regulation, not just due to bad eating habits and/or due to an 
insufficient level of physical activity [14]. For numerous 
times, they have tried to loose weight and when the 
emotional eating behaviour kicked in again, they gained 
more weight than when they started their previous dieting 
episode. This is an example of the so-called ‘yo-yo effect’ in 
health behaviour [15][16]. It is highly imaginable that this is 
ground for an accumulation of disappointments and a 
growing disbelief one will ever succeed.  
Evidence indicates that eHealth therapy can be just as 
effective as the face-to-face treatments. Evidence-based 
therapeutic procedures could be delivered online [17]. 
eHealth interventions allow for an effective therapeutic 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

relationship. In addition, this special target group needs 
personalised anonymous support that is always available. 
Not only emotional eaters need the moral support, a 
personalised self-management intervention could also clear 
away obstacles that hold emotional eaters from face-to-face 
contact with a therapist.  
Obese emotional eaters form a very vulnerable group of 
people. To avoid further setbacks, they need support they 
can rely on, one that is trustworthy and auspicious, but 
realistic, in compliance with their needs. Such support needs 
to be accessible and comfortable so that one feels safe and 
secure. There is a need for supportive training programs for 
this specific target group of emotional eaters. This paper 
presents the design case study aiming at the development of 
a virtual mHealth coach application for self-management of 
young emotional eaters with obesity.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section 
II, related work is discussed on (online) eHealth 
interventions for emotional eaters and obesity. After that, in 
section III the approach and methods are presented for 
developing Personas and applying them to guide the design 
process. In section IV, the results are presented including the 
Personas and the first prototype of a virtual coach. Finally, 
conclusion and discussion are presented in section V. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. Dialectical Behaviour Therapy  
Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT) is relatively new 
in treating emotional eating behaviour. DBT was originally 
designed to help people that are suffering from Borderline 
Disorder [18]. The therapy focuses on the process of 
‘reduction of ineffective action tendencies linked with 
dysregulated 
emotions’ 
[19]. 
Recent 
research 
on 
deployment of Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT) shows 
positive results in weight loss management and weight 
maintenance in obese emotional eaters [20]-[23]. DBT 
might be successful in patients where insufficient effect was 
achieved with Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) [12] 
[24][25].  
 
B. The dialectical focus 
One of the most powerful ‘mechanisms of change’ or 
mediators in DBT is the dialectical focus. Since an 
invalidating environment plays an important role in the life 
of emotional eaters, it is important that they are treated with 
a well-balanced mix of being validated in their perception of 
negative emotions and being confronted with a practical 
focus on changing problem behaviour. “Based in the 
biosocial theory, DBT has a unique approach to targeting 
behavioural dysfunction that is not typically seen among 
other cognitive-behavioural treatments; one key difference 
is the emphasis placed on emotions and emotion 
dysregulation.” [19]. 
C. DBT and eHealth  
There is a broad variety of (blended) eHealth self-
management treatments available but the majority of them 
is focused on weight loss and behaviour change. The 
discussion on the effectiveness of such interventions inches 
along [26]-[32].  Little knowledge in the field of eHealth 
treatment using Dialectical Behaviour Therapy or even 
emotion regulation is acquired so far, let alone emotion 
regulation focused on emotional eating behaviour.  
Results of one quasi-experimental study on the 
effectiveness of the mobile “DBT Coach”, that focused only 
on one particular skill in DBT (Opposite Action),  showed 
that emotion intensity decreased within each coaching 
session in participants with Borderline Personality Disorder 
[33][34]. The target group uses the DBT Coach when it is 
needed most for them – after getting engaged in 
dysfunctional behaviour. One publication discusses the lack 
of user-friendliness of a DBT self-management mHealth 
application [35].  
A small number of self-management mHealth apps can 
be found at the Play Store (Android) and at the App Store 
(iOS, Apple). However, they lack scientific grounding, user 
involvement in the design process, psychological aspects 
and personalization.  
 
III. 
APPROACH AND METHODS 
The objective of this research is to develop a personalised 
self-management 
intervention 
based 
on 
Dialectical 
Behaviour Therapy for young emotional eaters with obesity. 
Development is guided by the CeHRes roadmap (Center for 
eHealth Research, at the University Twente) – a holistic 
eHealth framework for developing eHealth interventions 
based on a participatory design process and persuasive 
design approach to maximize the impact of the intervention 
[36]. This study focused on the contextual inquiry and early 
design phases.  
First, the contextual inquiry phase was carried out. In order 
to get familiar with what kind of support emotional eaters 
really need, it is important to understand the target group [36]. 
Even though interventions can be evaluated as positive 
according to effectiveness, as long as the target group will not 
be captivated by its design and functionalities, they are not 
going to use it.  
The employment of user profiles and Personas as a tool 
to inform design is still rare in social sciences [36]. We 
followed the LeRouge classification model [37] and Van 
Velsen’s additions to it [38] as a guideline to develop two 
Personas to guide the design of a virtual mHealth coaching 
intervention. Personas contain information on their Internet 
skills and smart phone use, demographic facts and 
healthcare specifics such as current practices in managing 
own healthcare, support network, information seeking 
attitude etc.  
To gather input for user profiles and Personas, 
questionnaires were circulated via social media and the 
network of contacts. The target group to be reached for was 
“young adults, 18-44 years of age” and self-declared 
emotional eaters. Examples of questionnaire questions: “For 
what purposes do you use your smartphone? (social media, 
news gathering, mail, gaming)”, “At what specific moment in 
time would you like to/are you in need to get in contact with a 
help system?”,  “What kind of support do you expect from a 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

smartphone 
application?” 
We 
approached 
healthcare 
practitioners for expert interviews. In the next sections, we 
present the results of this design case study, including 
Personas, user stories, architecture and design of the new 
‘Denk je zèlf!’ virtual coach. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Questionnaires and interviews 
In total, 321 responses were collected with the 
questionnaires and thirteen interviews with healthcare 
practitioners 
(dieticians, 
physical 
therapists 
and 
psychologists) were conducted. The interviews were 
transcribed and coded. We used a free coding style not to lose 
the richness of the data. In addition, six obesity therapy 
patients were interviewed to get insight into the daily needs 
and experiences of the emotional eaters.  
Data extraction from the questionnaires was processed 
according to the method of LeRouge [37] for creating user 
profiles and Personas - (a) personal and demographic 
information; (b) technical capabilities and limitations; (c) 
needs and desires concerning support and care. Data derived 
from the interviews with experts and patients learned about 
eating styles and the problems emotional eaters run into.    
B. Personas and user stories 
Two Personas were derived from the questionnaires data: 
Lisanne (25 years) and Anita (46 years). Figure 1 shows their 
personal profiles. Lisanne is a highly educated young woman. 
She is an obese emotional eater. Her eating behaviour is 
caused by a negative self image. Eating gives her a feeling of 
comfort as long as the eating lasts. Afterwards she feels guilty 
and depressed. Anita is a 46 years old mother of two. She is 
worrying about the family’s financial situation and overeats  
in stressful situations. Anita left school at an early age. She is 
from a low socio-economic background.  
What we learned by creating the Personas is that we got a 
better understanding about the specific needs of the target 
group. We obtained a better comprehension of the moments 
and situations that cause emotional eating behaviour and the  
kind of interference that might be helpful to them. While in 
the design process you can ask questions such as: “What 
would Lisanne think of this? Would she like it? Would she 
consider this as useful?” 
To illustrate how Lisanne will benefit from the application 
we created a scenario (Figure 2) in which she is about to give 
in to emotional eating. Use-case scenarios [39][40] were 
derived from Personas, interviews and questionnaire results 
by describing the user goals, motivations, actions and 
reactions while using the new virtual mHealth coaching 
application.  
 
C. eHealth Intervention Architecture 
The first prototype of the smartphone application ‘Denk je 
zèlf!’ personalised virtual coach is developed within the pre-
design phase. 
 
 
 
Personal profiles emotional eaters 
Lisanne, 25 years, highly educated 
Anita, 46 years, limited education  
 
 
“I wish that I was more confident 
about myself ….” 
“When I am stressed out I start 
snatching the cookie tin” 
Background 
Lives alone, single / High school 
graduate / Suffers from obesity / 
Co-morbidity unknown / l. 1.62 
mtr., w. 91 kgs.  
Lives with husband and two sons / 
low SES / Suffers from obesity / Co-
morbidity unknown / l. 1.65 mtr., w. 
85 kgs.  
Attributes 
Feels insecure about her body / Is 
not able to sense the difference 
between hunger, appetite or 
emotion / Fears  to experience 
what she really feels. 
Is worried about putting on more 
weight / Suffers from stress and 
finds comfort in food / Has a sweet 
tooth / Hates to be patronized 
(authorities). 
User needs 
Education on eating behaviour /  
Self-confidence / Help to set 
realistic goals / Support from 
peers. 
Stop gaining more weight / 
Education on healthy food / 
Getting support from her family / 
Stop harassing thoughts. 
Figure 1.  Key Personas Lisanne and Anita 
Scenario Lisanne and the e-DBT ‘Denk je zèlf!’ virtual coach 
Lisanne comes home after a busy and frantic day at the real estate 
agent’s office. It has been a turbulent day and it felt like a lot of her 
colleagues were hot-tempered, judging by their blunt manners. Due to 
lack of time Lisanne skipped lunch. She satisfied her appetite with 
unhealthy snacks and cookies. 
At home she should start cooking her dinner but she is too worn out 
and totally not inspired. Her stomach is rumbling and she takes a quick 
glance at the store cupboard. She notices butter biscuits and potato 
chips. She feels tempted to rip open the bag of potato chips and 
plunge into it,  grabbing chips by the handfull at the same time. Binge 
eating lies in ambush for attack and she senses a crying need for some 
kind of support, for someone who could provide her with advice to pull 
her through this situation.  
She reaches for her phone and activates the ‘Denk je zèlf!’ app. The 
virtual coach welcomes her with: Hi Lisanne, how can I help you? 
Lisanne starts typing:  
-When I come home from work I start craving for snacks and 
chocolate… I just can’t resist them… 
-Hi Lisanne, the greater part of emotional eating occurs at night, due to 
feelings of loneliness or experiencing stress, but it can also happen 
because of irregular eating behaviour. Shall we give it a try to 
investigate this?  
The virtual coach refers Lisanne to the behaviour chain analysis. 
Lisanne finds comfort in the reassuring words of the virtual coach and 
starts with the behaviour chain exercise.  
Figure 2.  Scenario Lisanne. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

The training consists of a series of education and 
instructions modules on emotional eating behaviour and 
emotion regulation. A personalised virtual coach will guide 
the user through four different modules. First an ‘intake 
procedure’ will take place: the user will be invited to make a 
commitment never to lose oneself in emotional eating 
behaviour again, followed by educational modules on 
mindfulness, emotion regulation and stress tolerance (Figure 
4). The training offers exercises based on practical experience 
in daily life. Modules are replaceable – they can be 
substituted by modules with content that is focused on users  
with low socialeconomic status. 
Figure 3.  Behaviour chain analysis model by Linehan [17] 
Users are invited to fill in their behaviour chain analysis 
(Figure 3) and emotion diary on a daily basis. Reminders to  
do so are sent out on fixed moments (by agreement with the 
user).  Both components are considered indispensable in the 
face-to-face training being daily ‘homework’ for the 
participants. The behaviour chain analysis is to be performed 
at the moment a participant has given into cravings and bad 
eating behaviour or is just about to do so.  
The behavioural chain analysis is utilised to analyse 
problem behaviour and determine prompting events and 
vulnerability factors. People can also fill in new skillful 
solutions and ways to prevent prompting events and think of 
solutions to reduce vulnerability in the future.  
D. ‘Denk je zèlf!’ Personalised Virtual Coach 
The virtual coach was invented to meet the needs of the 
user  for immediate support. Every time a user is experiencing 
negative emotions he can connect to the virtual coach and ask 
questions and start a dialogue. The virtual coach is the very 
heart of the e-DBT ‘Denk je zèlf!’ training. It supplies the user 
with so called dialectical dialogues – providing them with 
answers to their need for change and to their need for 
acceptance. According to Lynch et al. [19], dialectical theory 
is defined as: “The thesis (behaviour change) brought forth the 
antithesis (the need for acceptance), and both acceptance and 
change-based strategies were integrated into the treatment 
package 
(synthesis). 
Dialectical 
theory 
provides 
the 
theoretical undercurrent needed to balance and synthesise 
these strategies. Core acceptance-based strategies derive from 
client-centered approaches and Zen practice and these involve 
mindfulness skills, validation, and radical acceptance.” [19, 
pp.463].  The goal of the training is to teach people developing 
their own wise mind and to learn making decisions that have 
consequences for the quality of life. By providing dialectical 
dialogues the virtual coach helps the user practicing this 
process of decision-making by identifying the possible 
consequences of choosing either one of them. The output of 
the virtual coach is personalised by data derived from the 
behavioural chain analysis and the emotion diary. The virtual 
coach is a self-learning system. Ecological momentary 
assessment (EMA), often called as experience sampling 
measures (ESM), is applied within virtual mHealth coaching 
application to assess behavioural aspects [41][42], for instance 
by assessing subjective momentary states several times a day 
via a user-experience diary integrated in a virtual mHealth 
coach application. 
Figure 4.   
Schematic drawing of ‘Denk je zèlf!’ mHealth intervention 
In order to develop the virtual coach, including the two vital 
parts of the coach - the behaviour chain-analysis and the 
emotion diary - Personas and use-case scenarios were 
translated into user stories. Next, user stories are translated 
into a prototype of the virtual coach. Java-based virtual 
assistant (developed on the Play framework) makes use of an 
open-source natural language parser named Alpino. This 
Dutch linguistic language analyser [43] is self-learning and 
produces ‘tree diagram’ data in XML format.  The output is 
stored in a graph database (NEO4J). 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
In the process of developing a self-management 
intervention for a vulnerable group of obese emotional eaters, 
it is essential that the design and application meets the needs 
and expectations of the target users. By questioning the target 
group and mapping out their needs and wishes, user profiles 
were defined and two Personas Lisanne and Anita were 
formulated. Personas provided the needed guidance to define 
user stories that were translated into a first prototype of the 
personalized virtual coach ‘Denk je zèlf!’. This new 
interactive prototype will be iteratively evaluated together 
with users and healthcare practitioners.  
The next step is to conduct a field test with members of the 
target group on the usability and the content of the virtual 
coach. The content – dialectical dialogues - is collected from 
handbooks for therapists and derived from online user groups. 
The users will be given small assignments such as navigating 
to the virtual coach and starting a conversation. We ask them 
 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

to judge the replies of the coach by their faithfulness and 
truthfulness. The output will not only benefit the quality of the 
interaction with the virtual coach but the information will also 
be used to enrich the characters of the two Personas.     
Lisanne and Anita served as a starting point for a concept 
design (Figure 5) and they will guide further development of 
the user interface and content of ‘Denk je zèlf!’ modules 
intake, mindfulness, emotion regulation and stress tolerance.  
Figure 5. Concept design of the virtual coach  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the students of the minor Healthy Ageing and 
Applied Psychology at Hanzehogeschool for collecting data 
and supporting this study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
World HO. WHO | Obesity and Overweight. January 2015; Available 
at: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/ [retrieved: 
March 4, 2016] 
[2] 
Statistics Netherlands (Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek). 
Webmagazine, 
Available 
at: 
http://www.cbs.nl/nl-
NL/menu/themas/gezondheid-
welzijn/publicaties/artikelen/archief/2014/2014-3939-
wm.htm?RefererType=RSSItem [retrieved: March 4, 2016] 
[3] 
National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM). 
Available 
at: 
https://www.volksgezondheidenzorg.info/onderwerp/overgewicht/cijf
ers-context/gezondheidsgevolgen#node-maatschappelijke-gevolgen 
05-01-2016 [retrieved: March 4, 2016] 
[4] 
L. Kristén, A. Ivarsson, J. Parker, and K. Ziegert,  “Future challenges 
for intervention research in health and lifestyle research  - A systematic 
meta-literature review. International,” Journal of Qualitative Studies 
on Health and Well-Being, v. 10, 2015. 
[5] 
T.I. Van den Berg, S.M. Alavinia, F.J. Bredt,  D. Lindeboom, L.A.  
Elders, and A. Burdorf, “The influence of psychosocial factors at work 
and life style on health and work ability among professional workers,” 
Int Arch Occup Environ Health, 81(8), 2008, pp. 1029-1036. 
[6] 
T. Mann, A.J. Tomiyama, E. Westling, A. Lew, B. Samuels, and J. 
Chatman, “Medicare's search for effective obesity treatments: Diets are 
not the answer,” Am Psychol,  04;62(3), 2007, pp. 220-233. 
[7] 
Weight Watchers. Available at https://www.weightwatchers.com/us/ 
[retrieved April 13, 2016]. 
[8] 
My Diet Coach. Available at http://www.mydietcoachapp.com 
[retrieved April 13, 2016].  
[9] 
Lose It! Available at https://www.loseit.com [retrieved April 13, 
2016].  
[10] T. Van Strien, A. Cebolla, E. Etchemendy, J. Gutiérrez-Maldonado, M. 
Ferrer-García, C. Botella, and R. Baños, “Emotional eating and food 
intake after sadness and joy,” Appetite, 7/1;66, 2013, pp. 20-25. 
[11] T. Van Strien, C.P. Herman, and M.W. Verheijden, “Eating style, 
overeating and weight gain. A prospective 2-year follow-up study in a 
representative Dutch sample,” Appetite, 12;59(3), 2012, pp. 782-789. 
[12] M.A. Roosen, D. Safer, S. Adler, A. Cebolla, and T. van Strien,  
“Group dialectical behavior therapy adapted for obese emotional 
eaters; a pilot study,” Nutr Hosp,  07/20;27(4), 2012, pp. 1141-1147.  
[13] Z. Cooper et al. “Testing a new cognitive behavioural treatment for 
obesity: A randomized controlled trial with three-year follow-up,” 
Behav Res Ther, 8;48(8), 2010, pp. 706-713. 
[14] P.G. Koenders and T. van Strien, “Emotional eating, rather than 
lifestyle behavior, drives weight gain in a prospective study in 1562 
employees,” Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine,  
11;53(11), 2011, pp. 1287-1293. 
[15] A.I. Concepción, “Effects of diets and their role in weight control,” 
Psychol Health Med, 05;12(3), 2007, 321-327. 
[16] A.J. Blair, V.J. Lewis, and D.A. Booth, “Does emotional eating 
interfere with success in attempts at weight control?” Appetite, 
10;15(2), 1990, 151-157. 
[17] J. Ruwaard, “The efficacy and effectiveness of online CBT,” 
Department op Clinical Psychology, University of Amsterdam, 2012. 
[18] M.M. Linehan, “Skills training manual for treating borderline 
personality disorder,” New York, NY US: Guilford Press, 1993. 
[19] T.R. Lynch, A.L. Chapman, M.Z. Rosenthal, J.R. Kuo, and M.M. 
Linehan, “Mechanisms of change in dialectical behavior therapy: 
Theoretical and empirical observations,” J Clin Psychol, 04;62(4), 
2006, pp. 459-480. 
[20] D.L. Safer, C.F. Telch, and E.Y. Chen, “Dialectical Behaviour Therapy 
for Binge Eating and Bulimia,” New York: The Guilford Press, 2009.  
[21] D.L. Safer, A.H. Robinson, and B. Jo, “Outcome from a randomized 
controlled trial of group therapy for binge eating disorder: Comparing 
dialectical behavior therapy adapted for binge eating to an active 
comparison group therapy,” Behavior Therapy, 03;41(1), 2010, pp. 
106-120. 
[22] C.F. Telch, W.S. Agras, and M.M. Linehan, “Dialectical behavior 
therapy for binge eating disorder,” J Consult Clin Psychol, 12;69(6), 
2001, pp. 1061-1065. 
[23] E.Y. Chen, L. Matthews, C. Allen, J.R. Kuo, and M.M. Linehan, 
“Dialectical behavior therapy for clients with binge-eating disorder or 
bulimia nervosa and borderline personality disorder,” Int J Eat Disord, 
41(6), 2008, pp. 505-512. 
[24] A.H. Robinson and D.L. Safer, “Moderators of dialectical behavior 
therapy for binge eating disorder: Results from a randomized 
controlled trial,” Int J Eat Disord, 05;45(4), 2012, pp. 597-602. 
[25] P. Daansen, “Eetbuien en affectregulatie: het gebruik van dialectisch-
gedragstherapeutische 
principes 
bij 
de 
behandeling 
van 
eetstoornissen,” Directieve Therapie, 26, 2006, pp. 79-89. 
[26] M. Bardus, J. Smith, and C. Abraham, “Are eHealth interventions for 
obesity prevention effective? A systematic review of reviews,” The 
European Journal of Public Health, v. 25 (suppl 3), 2015.  
[27] B. Khokhar et al. “Effectiveness of mobile electronic devices in weight 
loss among overweight and obese populations: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis,” BMC Obesity, 2014, 1:22. 
[28] M. De Zwaan et al. “INTERBED: internet-based guided self-help for 
overweight and obese patients with full or subsyndromal binge eating 
disorder. A multicenter randomized controlled trial,” Trials, 11/21;13, 
2012, pp. 220-220. 
[29] J. Harvey-Berino et al. “Internet delivered behavioral obesity 
treatment,” Prev Med, 08;51(2), 2010, pp. 123-128. 
[30] M.J. Hutchesson et al. “eHealth interventions for the prevention and 
treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: a systematic review with 
meta-analysis,” Obesity Reviews, 16, 5, 2015, pp. 376-392. 
[31] G.M. Manzoni, F. Pagnini, S. Corti, E. Molinari, and G. Castelnuovo, 
“Internet-based behavioral interventions for obesity: An updated 
systematic review,” Clinical Practice and Epidemiology in Mental 
Health, 2011, 7, pp. 19-28. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

[32] M. Svensson et al. “The Change in Eating Behaviors in a Web-Based 
Weight Loss Program: A Longitudinal Analysis of Study Completers,” 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 11;16(11), 2014, 1-1. 
[33] L.A. Dimeff, S.L. Rizvi, I.S. Contreras, J.M. Skutch, and D. Carroll, 
“The mobile revolution and the DBT Coach,” the Behavior Therapist, 
09;34(6), 2011, pp. 104-110. 
[34] S.L. Rizvi, L.A. Dimeff, J. Skutch, D. Carroll, and M.M. Linehan, ”A 
Pilot Study of the DBT Coach: An Interactive Mobile Phone 
Application for Individuals with Borderline Personality Disorder and 
Substance Use Disorder,” Behavior Therapy, 12/01;42(4), 2011, pp. 
589-600. 
[35] M. Washburn and D.E. Parrish, “DBT Self-Help Application for 
Mobile Devices,” Journal of Technology in Human Services; 31(2), 
2013, pp. 175-183. 
[36] E.J. Van Gemert-Pijnen et al. “A holistic framework to improve the 
uptake and impact of ehealth technologies,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 
13, no. 4, 2011, p. e111.  
[37] C. LeRouge, J. Ma, S. Sneha, and K. Tolle, “User profiles and personas 
in the design and development of consumer health technologies,” Int J 
Med Inf, 82(11), 2013, pp. 251-268. 
[38] L. Van Velsen, L. Van Gemert-Pijnen, N. Nijland, D. Beaujean, and J. 
Van Steenbergen, “Personas: The linking pin in holistic design for 
eHealth,” The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2012), IARIA, pp. 
128 – 133, ISSN: 2308-4359, ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3. 
[39] J.M. Carroll, “Five reasons for scenario-based design,” Interacting with 
Computers, 13(1), 2000, pp. 43-60. 
[40] A. Pommeranz, W-P. Brinkman, P. Wiggers, J. Broekens, and C.M. 
Jonker, “Design Guidelines for Negotiation Support Systems: An 
Expert Perspective Using Scenarios,” VTT symposium, 258, 2009, pp. 
323-330. 
[41] S. Shiffman, A.A. Stone, and M.R. Hufford, “Ecological momentary 
assessment,” Annu Rev Clin Psychol, 2008, 4:1–3.6.  
[42] I. Myin-Germeys et al. “Experience sampling research in 
psychopathology: opening the black box of daily life,” Psychol. Med. 
39, 2009, pp. 1533–1547. 
[43] University of Groningen, “PIONIER Project,” Available at 
http://www.let.rug.nl/vannoord/alp/Alpino/  [retrieved: March 4, 
2016]. 
 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

