New Generation Advanced Analytics Tools in Medical Systems 
Vesselin Evgueniev Gueorguiev 
Ivan Evgeniev Ivanov 
Technical University Sofia, TUS 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: veg@tu-sofia.bg, iei@tu-sofia.bg  
Desislava Valentinova Georgieva 
New Bulgarian University, NBU 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: dvelcheva@nbu.bg
 
 
Abstract—Research on the opportunities to create tools for a 
new generation of advanced analysis is considered to be the 
most promising direction for investigation, which will enable 
the successful functioning of healthcare, for better treatment of 
patients at lower cost. So, today these tools are in the priority 
group. The paper presents a new project for defining a new 
generation 
of 
advanced 
analytics 
tools 
requirements, 
constraints, and tasks in medical systems. 
Keywords-e-Health; advanced analyses in medical systems; 
medical informatics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since 2005, there has been an explosion of e-Health 
scientific publications and new surveys and new strategies 
funded by governments, as well as expansion of the themes 
within the framework of the European Union at the national 
and multinational level. At the same time the number of 
healthcare topics funded by the European Union has grown 
rapidly. 
According to the European Commission e-Health 
Taskforce report 2007 [6], by the end of 2007, over 10% of 
jobs in Europe were in the healthcare sector and this sector 
generated over 9% of the EU gross revenue. According to 
COCIR, in 2010, the gross income of the companies of the 
e-Health sector amounted to € 2.5 billion and until the end 
of 2015, it is expected to rise to € 2.7 billion [8]. 
In the initial period (2007-2013), the e-Health 
researches were focused on a wide range of topics: from 
medical sensors and safety of the technologies to the legal 
aspects of the protection of medical data and information. 
The reason for this was the imbalance between the available 
IT infrastructure and its application - in 2005 Véronique 
Lessens [9] showed that only 2.3% of the hospitals had 
decision-making systems and only 18.7% had sustaining 
banks of clinical results and prescriptions. At the end of 
2010, the cost of healthcare services increased and the main 
reason was the increase of prices for personnel and the 
increase of use of these services without substantial increase 
in the quality and accessibility of healthcare. This has set the 
objective to overcome the obstacles and after 2012 the 
European Commission [7] set new tasks and activities for 
research, development and deployment of a next-generation 
advanced analytics tools in medical systems. These will 
assist both the processes of administrative management of 
medical activities and the existing clinical practices.  
The necessity and usefulness of the research for a new 
generation of advanced analytics tools in medical systems 
has been discussed at length in the last 2-3 years. Very 
indicative of this are the analyses of the IBM Institute for 
Business Value [1], Deloitte [2], McKinsey & Company 
[3][4], and Markets and Markets [5]. Other analyses are 
presented in the works of Nikolova at al. [10] and 
Tcharaktchiev at al. [11]. Some of these analyses together 
with the research of the archetypes applications for medical 
purposes [12] have led to the present research. 
This paper presents the objectives of a new project, 
oriented to advanced analytics in medical systems. The aim 
of the project is to conduct an extensive research in the field 
of e-Health: a comprehensive study of the concepts and 
methods for a new generation of advanced analytics in 
medical systems. Research on the opportunities to create 
tools for a new generation of advanced analytics is 
considered to be the most promising direction of 
investigation, which will enable the successful functioning 
of healthcare, for better treatment of patients at lower cost. 
So, today they are in the priority objectives group. 
According to the available data bases, the first medical areas 
to 
be 
targeted 
are 
endocrinology 
(diabetes) 
and 
pulmonology (COPD). 
The project objectives include: a research of the 
sources of medical and biological data; a research of the 
possibility to use information/knowledge about illnesses and 
their treatment in patients with similar symptoms; 
structuring the medical data and information following 
requirements for the methods of advanced analyses. 
To achieve the objectives we will conduct research, 
develop and evaluate architectures of medical systems; new 
methods for processing, storage and modification over time 
of medical and biological data / information / knowledge 
will be developed; changes in the ways of gathering and 
integration of information in real time will be effected; 
applicability of mobile agents for semantic search across 
heterogeneous and distributed sources will be studied and 
developed; automatic and semi-automatic methods for 
imaging data structuring will be introduced. 
The present paper is structured as follows: Section II 
presents the scientific objectives of the project; Section III 
presents the available current results; and Section IV is the 
conclusion.   
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
THE SCIENTIFIC OBJECTIVESOF THE  PROJECT 
The analyses of the development of the Healthcare 
Industry show the expectations of the society for higher 
service quality, better results and lower cost. This poses a 
number of serious challenges to this sector, since increasing 
expectations contrast with the evident critical shortage of 
resources. Considering the ongoing ageing of 
the 
population, each year the use of these resources increases on 
a daily basis. At the same time there is an increase of the 
number of chronically sick people, thus additionally limiting 
the available healthcare resources. Those challenges have 
led to the development of various approaches and solutions 
during recent years, the most widely spread being e-Health 
and Telemedicine. In the early phases of integration of those 
systems into the existing medical information systems the 
results have shown improvements in the performance 
indicators of the health system. These advantages have 
reduced significantly with the development of medical 
hardware/apparatus and the appearance of new approaches 
for patient treatment and tracking. This brings the issue of 
new paradigms for work with medical information. One of 
the most promising sphere of research is considered to be 
the exploration of the possibilities to create a new 
generation of advanced analytics tools which will allow 
healthcare to function successfully – the expectations are to 
improve the balance between the demands and expectations 
of patients and society, to optimize the use of existing 
resources, and to increase the ability to respond adequately 
to changes in medical systems and practices. In order to 
achieve this, the tools for advanced analytics have to be able 
to use the increasingly broadening range of information 
about the patient, thus allowing a much earlier medical and 
administrative intervention.  
The existing academic studies focus only on individual 
aspects of the problem and most often they only cover a 
narrowly 
defined 
field 
of 
application. 
Corporate 
developments are oriented towards the possibility of renewal 
and development of old company systems, through 
integrating new approaches to collection, unification, search 
and processing of data, information retrieval and generation 
of knowledge. The most frequently reported result [2] is the 
identified impossibility to introduce substantially new tools 
for advanced analytics due to outdated design of systems of 
older generations. 
The attempt for integration of databases in widely 
different medical fields, having different requirements for the 
examination and accompanying the patients, is also an 
uncommented element of such classes of systems and will 
represent an innovation.  
A. Heterogeneity, distribution, variability and 
interoperability of the data issue 
The existence of multiple databases, storing a variety of 
information, 
raises 
the 
issues 
of 
heterogeneity, 
interoperability, complex data structures, and integration.  
The data are derived from various sources: internal 
(electronic health records, clinical systems for decision 
making, etc.) and external (laboratories, pharmacies, 
insurance companies, etc.). The data are in multiple formats 
(flat files, relational tables, text files, etc.) and they come 
from various geographical locations. Nowadays data sources 
include: data from websites and dedicated servers, social 
networking and blogs; remote sensors and measuring 
devices; invoices related to health care (both in unstructured 
or semi-structured formats); biometric data (medical images, 
blood pressure, etc.), unstructured and semi-structured data 
such as electronic health records, annotations, medical 
prescriptions, e-mails and paper documents. These are data 
with an extremely high degree of heterogeneity in respect to 
the type of the used data model, as well as the incompatible 
formats and nomenclatures of the values. 
At the same time the data are highly decentralized, with 
a high degree of terminological variations, records specifics, 
data presentation formats and applications. This in turn is 
associated with problems when conducting manual search 
for specific data or information.  
B. The retrieval of semantic information from textual 
medical data 
Semantics is a science which studies the meaning or 
relationship of words, phrases or symbols. This determines 
the priority research on its use in the modern information 
systems, designed to work with large amounts of medical or 
biological data. This includes a research on the possibilities 
for access, capture, storage, search, sharing, transfer, 
analysis, and visualization of data, according to their size, 
velocity, variety and value. 
The current systems work with very different medical 
or biological data. From the semantic point of view the most 
common operations are search and interpretation of big data. 
This is the lowest level of use of the semantic systems, 
leading to retrieval of information from data. The main 
problem is that the information is not generated to be 
appropriate for its end-user (the problems identified by the 
user's 
cognitive 
psychology 
are 
not 
taken 
into 
consideration). We must explore the possibilities to move to 
a new level, at which the information is used for retrieval of 
knowledge. When handling patient data, or studying the 
characteristics of diseases this will allow systems operations 
to be influenced by the specifics of the end-user. The 
expected result is that future medical systems using 
advanced analytics will be able to derive knowledge about 
successful approaches for treating a particular patient. They 
will be based on analysis of the decisions made by other 
physicians in similar cases. 
The purpose of our work is to explore the possibilities 
of semantic retrieval of information and knowledge from 
textual sources (medical records, annotations, emails, blogs, 
social networks, etc.). 
C. Information extraction from unstructured data  
Modern non-invasive medical imaging techniques 
allow a generation of highly detailed anatomical and 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

physiological information about the human body to be 
easily accessible. This information is usually represented by 
a sequence of high-quality medical images (slices) stored in 
specialized and non-standardized formats. In general, this 
information is two-dimensional (static images, such as chest 
X-rays), three-dimensional (3D reconstruction of bodies 
from a set of slices) and four-dimensional (information 
about changes of 3D structures in time, e.g., the fetus 
movies). In addition, a pseudo-colour may also be used as 
an additional procedure in order to extract specific 
information about the patient. All these data are 
unstructured. 
An additional problem of the use of medical images as 
an information source is that often the images are subject to 
linear or non-linear distortions, shifts, rotations, scaling, etc. 
This determines the ineffectiveness of many of the existing 
algorithms.  
All these problems reduce the possibilities to structure 
the imaging data. This is the base for improving the 
efficiency of the information retrieval process. 
D. The use and analysis of biological data. 
Bioinformatics is one of the fastest growing sciences 
in the 21st century and belongs to the so called “life 
sciences”, covering the studies of the living organisms such 
as plants, animals and human beings. Prior to the era of 
bioinformatics there were only two types of biological 
experiments: in a living organism (in vivo) or in an artificial 
environment (in vitro). It is commonly assumed that  
bioinformatics is “in silico” biology, i.e., the biological 
experiments 
are 
realized 
through 
computer 
models 
simulated on silicon chips. 
The potential of bioinformatics to identify useful 
genes resulted in studies of the changes of the normal cell 
activities in various disease conditions. It also let to the 
creation of new gene products like drugs and vaccines. All 
this has led to a paradigm shift in biology and in 
biotechnology. The existing science paradigms have 
changed and now the genome science research provides an 
opportunity to carry out scientific experiments using 
computer modeling and simulations in such areas as drugs 
and vaccines synthesis, genomics, gene therapy, the study of 
the evolution, etc. 
A major challenge in the analysis of biological data is 
to offer an integrated and contemporary access to 
exponentially growing amounts of data in multiple formats, 
as well as efficient algorithms for their processing.  
The purpose of the study is to investigate how to 
retrieve and how to integrate biological data and biological 
information in on-line medical systems and services. 
E. Possibilities for integration of medical information 
Organization, storage and maintenance of a huge 
diversity of medical and biological data remains a challenge 
due to the following factors: 
 
The volume of the data has been increasing almost 
exponentially in the last decade. 
 
New data types are emerging and new medical and 
biological concepts are being developed. 
 
There is no standardization in the nomenclature of 
the data. 
 
The data is most often stored in flat files and 
relational databases: about 70% of the data is stored 
in text format or as static images; the remaining 30% 
of data is stored in different types of databases, 
organized in indexed files or in specialized relational 
databases. 
The strong decentralization of the medical and 
biological data, the considerable differences in terminology 
and the peculiarities of the generic data sources description, 
as well as the difference in format of data search queries 
requires automated procedures for databases integration to 
be developed. The aim is to achieve more than just 
retrieving and modifying of data because nowadays the 
professional performance in any field is increasingly 
dependent on accessing the proper data and information. 
This requires surveys which are comprehensive, easy to use 
and linked to the other databases so that they will provide 
the necessary data resources. The heterogeneity and 
decentralization require suitable methods to provide access 
to the actual data associated with a specific disease or a 
specific medical problem. This involves the integration of 
large and diverse databases / information / knowledge 
associated with different levels of performance. 
The goal here is to investigate the platforms of 
advanced analytics, the input data formats and the systems 
analysis of big datasets and to propose a conceptual 
architecture for an advanced analytics system of a new 
generation in medical practice. The proposed architecture 
must provide an opportunity for design of an integrated and 
modern access to the exponentially growing amounts of data 
in multiple formats. The further exploration includes 
providing an access to a constantly updated representation 
of the accumulated knowledge in the medical field. 
III. 
CURRENT RESULTS 
At present, the project is in its first stage. This 
decreases the amount of current result. Nevertheless, some 
of the obtained data and achieved results can be 
summarized.  
One of the main project goals is to propose 
requirements for the logical design of the new generation of 
tools for advanced analytics in medical systems, as well as 
recommendations for the limitations and capacities for 
generating new approaches for this category of tasks. To 
achieve this goal, our investigation starts from determining 
input/output data streams to/from hospital and hospital 
networking. As a generic source of raw data we use data 
streams in Sofia Medical University hospitals complex - the 
biggest Bulgarian hospitals complex. 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The study of the hospital information systems and their 
networking 
determines 
the 
following 
data/information/knowledge 
sources: 
medical 
staff 
computers, clinical workstations, microbiology, radiology, 
clinical 
laboratories, 
pharmacy, 
clinical 
databases 
(electronic medical records), patient computers, financial 
systems (billing, cost accounting), material management, 
administrative systems, research databases, library system, 
and educational resources. 
The study of the input/output data streams has 
determined the following sources and consumers of 
data/information/knowledge: patients (home workstations), 
other hospital systems, other physicians, government 
healthcare systems (e.g., electronic medical records), 
pharmaceuticals regulators, insurance agencies, medical 
research groups/institutions, the Internet, other information 
resources/libraries/databases, vendors and providers of 
various types, and medical education centers (e.g., medical 
schools). 
The heterogeneity and the distribution of data at this 
stage show that the main problems of multiple data sources 
are the following: 
 
Heterogeneity of names – different databases store 
the same values, but the names of the attributes 
given are different. 
 
Heterogeneity 
of 
relational 
structure 
– 
the 
composition of attributes in a complex structure is 
varies, but the stored values are identical. 
 
Heterogeneity 
of 
values 
– 
the 
method of 
presentation of values differs in different data 
sources. 
 
Semantic heterogeneity – according to the type of 
storage, different assumptions can be made about 
the data relevance, reliability and usefulness. 
 
Heterogeneity of the models of data storage – this 
raises the issue of transformation between models. 
 
Heterogeneity by time – different data are obtained 
at different times. 
The reduction in number of all of these kinds of 
heterogeneity is important for investigation and evaluation 
of data variability and interoperability. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS  
 
The accumulation of large amounts of data in the 
process of examination of certain types of patients 
(especially those with chronic diseases) raises the problem 
of how to catalogue the obtained (often heterogeneous and 
dispersed) information, its machine processing in order to 
facilitate its understanding, as well as the ability to perform 
comparable and traceable measurements, especially in 
image (photographic) data. This calls for new research in 
the field of: 
 
analyses of medical images; 
 
text analyses based on given semantic criteria (most 
often for the purpose of real time processing); 
 
analysis of diverse types of clinical information to 
support the clinical decision making; 
 
comparative 
studies on 
the 
effectiveness of 
approaches and medical practices; 
 
predictive analysis, quality analysis of medical data 
and many others.  
It follows from the above that the most important task 
for the creation of a new generation of tools for extended 
analyses is to analyse the modality of the various data, 
which in turn would allow the retrieval of information for 
specific diseases and the development of spatio-temporal 
descriptions for comparing the data and their modality. This 
would allow the development of new approaches which will 
facilitate the decision making process based on similarity 
between patients' data. Merging this information based on 
certain semantic features and generating new ideas for good 
medical practices will open up new vistas for patient 
treatment. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. W. Cortada, D. Gordon, and B. Lenihan, , “The value of 
analytics in healthcare: From insights to outcomes”, 
Executive report, IBM Institute for Business Value,  April 
2012. 
[2] Deloitte, “2014 Global health care outlook: Shared 
challenges, shared opportunities”, 2014,  url:  
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Docu
ments/Life-Sciences-Health-Care/dttl-lshc-2014-global-
health-care-sector-report.pdf  [last accesed: 05.Jan.2015] 
[3] J. Cattell, S. Chilukuri, and M. Levy, “How big data can 
revolutionize pharmaceutical R&D”, Article, McKinsey& 
Company,  April 2013, url: http://www.mckinsey.com/ 
insights/health_systems_and_services/how_big_data_can_rev
olutionize_pharmaceutical_r_and_d 
[last 
accesed: 
05.Jan.2015] 
[4] B. Kayyali, D. Knott, and S. Van Kuiken, “The big-data 
revolution in US health care: Accelerating value and 
innovation”, Article, McKinsey&Company, April 2013 ,  url: 
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/health_systems_and_servi
ces/the_big-data_revolution_in_us_health_care [last accesed: 
05.Jan.2015] 
[5] MarketsandMarkets, “Healthcare Analytics/Medical Analytics 
Market by Application (Clinical, Financial, & Operational), 
Type (Predictive, & Prescriptive), End-user (Payer, Provider, 
HIE, ACO), Delivery Mode (On-premise, Web, & Cloud) - 
Trends & Global Forecasts to 2020”, report, Markets 
andMarket, Dec. 2013, url: http://www.marketsandmarkets. 
com/Market-Reports/healthcare-data-analytics-market-
905.html [last accesed: 05.Jan.2015] 
[6] European Commission, “Accelerating the Development of the 
e-Health Market in Europe, e-Health Taskforce report 2007”, 
ISBN-13-978-92-79-07288-8,Brussels, url: http://ec.europa.eu 
/information_sociaty/ehealth [last accesed: 05.Jan.2015] 
[7] European Commission, “e-Health Action Plan 2012-2020: 
Innovative healthcare for the 21st century”, Brussels, Dec. 
1012, url: http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/ 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

cf/document.cfm?action=display&doc_id=4188 [last accesed: 
05.Jan.2015] 
[8] COCIR eHEALTH Market Intelligence Center, Market 
Information, 
April 
2013, 
url:http://www.cocir.org/site/ 
fileadmin/Publications_2013/April_2013_COCIR_eHealth_M
arket_Intelligence_Center.pdf [last accesed: 05.Jan.2015] 
[9] V. Lessens, "Are Europe's Hospitals Ready for eHealth?", 
Outsourcing, 2005, issue 4, vol. 7, period 9-10, pp. 14-15 
[10] I. Nikolova, G. Angelova, D. Tcharaktchiev, and S. 
Boytcheva. Medical Archetypes and Information Extraction 
Templates in Automatic Processing of Clinical Narratives. In 
Proceedings of ICCS 2013, 10-12 January, Mumbai, Indiа, 
Conceptual Structures for STEM Research and Education, 
Springer, Lecture Notes in Computer Science Volume 7735, 
2013, pp 106-120 
[11] D. Tcharaktchiev, G. Angelova, S. Boytcheva, Z. Angelov, 
and S. Zacharieva. Completion of Structured Patient 
Descriptions by Semantic Mining. In: Koutkias, V., J. Niès, S. 
Jensen, N. Maglaveras, and R. Beuscart (Eds.), Patient Safety 
Informatics - Adverse Drug Events, Human Factors and IT 
Tools for Patient Medication Safety, IOS Press, Studies in 
Health Technology and Informatics series, Volume 166, 2011, 
pp. 260 – 269 
[12] D. Tcharaktchiev, V. Gueorguiev, and I. E. Ivanov, Standards 
for Medical Information Interchange and Design of Modern 
Mobile Devices and Solutions, GlobalHealth 2014 “The Third 
International Conference on Global Health Challenges”, 
Rome, Italy, 2014, pp. 134-139, ISBN: 978-1-61208-359-9 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

