Co-creating with Stakeholders: Ideating eHealth Applications to Support Antibiotic
Stewardship in Hospitals
M. van Limburg, H.C. Ossebaard, M.J. Wentzel, J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen
Center for eHealth Research, Department of Psychology, Health and Technology, Faculty of Behavioral, Management and
Social sciences, University of Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands
a.h.m.vanlimburg@utwente.nl; h.c.ossebaard@utwente.nl; m.j.wentzel@utwente.nl; j.e.w.c.vangemert-pijnen@utwente.nl
Abstract— Inappropriate prescription of antibiotics can lead to
complications
with
hospital
infections
and
increased
antimicrobial
resistance. Antibiotic stewardship programs
have been developed to influence antibiotic prescription
behavior
in
hospitals
at
a
multidisciplinary
level.
Infectionmanager.com is part of such a program. It is an online
platform for stakeholders in the antibiotic therapy process that
provides eHealth applications tailored to their roles and needs.
This paper focuses on the process of stakeholder involvement
to
design
an
implementation
strategy
for
our
infectionmanager.com. We used business modeling tools in a
focus group and in individual interviews. By analyzing the
antibiotic therapy process with a value-driven dialogue with all
stakeholders, we ideated possible eHealth technologies based
on what stakeholders find valuable in their daily practices. We
also conclude an implementation strategy as a basis for
human-centered design to develop these eHealth technologies
with end-users that can be used as a basis to sustainably
implement the platform in its intended setting.
eHealth
technology;
implementation;
stakeholder
co-
creation; business modeling; antibiotic prescription.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Increasingly antimicrobial resistance threatens the health
and safety of patients and citizens and is, therefore, a major
concern for public health authorities [1]. Hospital-acquired
infections resistant to antibiotics yearly cause an estimated 4
million infections in Europe, resulting in around 37,000
deaths per year [2]. A change in prescription behavior is
imperative since up to 50% of all prescribed antibiotics is
reported inappropriately prescribed, avoidable or affects the
effectiveness of these antibiotics [3]. Infection control
experts have developed antibiotic stewardship programs
(ASP) or antimicrobial stewardship interventions (AMS) to
ensure prudent use of antibiotics for better patient outcomes,
lower
risk
of
adverse
effects,
promotion
of
cost-
effectiveness and reduction of resistance levels [4].
As part of EurSafety Health-net project we co-created
with relevant stakeholders, an online infection control
platform called infectionmanager.com. Stakeholders are
defined as all people or organizations that are influenced by
or influence the eHealth technology used to reinforce
antibiotic stewardship [5]. Its purpose is to provide a
platform with several eHealth technologies that support
ASP
and
implementation
advice
for
all
stakeholders
involved
with
infection
prevention
and
control
and
antibiotic therapy. We focus on a bottom-up approach,
where stakeholders are actively involved to determine what
eHealth technologies are deemed valuable for ASP.
Many eHealth technologies floundered because they
failed to involve the intended users [6]. To be successful,
implementation research for eHealth should start involving
stakeholders [7]. They need to be involved ab initio in
designing
eHealth
technology
and
participate
in
its
implementation [6, 7]. Stakeholder interaction, stakeholder
relationships and added value(s) offered through the eHealth
technology need to be understood for determining a fitting
implementation.
We
had
the
following
research
objectives:
1)
Understanding
the
antibiotic
therapy
process
from
stakeholder-perspective and identifying the stakeholders; 2)
Understanding problems that stakeholders encounter in the
antibiotic
therapy
process;
3)
Identifying
which
improvements and opportunities stakeholders see in this
process; 4) Ideating what eHealth applications are required;
5) Designing an implementation strategy for a platform with
eHealth applications to support ASP.
Section II introduces the methods used to involve
stakeholders in our business modeling research, using focus
groups and interviews. In section III, we provide the
business modeling results of our process and problem
analysis (objectives 1 to 3) as well as ideated eHealth
opportunities and implementation strategy inferred from
values found in co-creation research with stakeholders
(objectives 4 and 5) [8]. In sections IV and V, we discuss
and conclude that stakeholder involvement and business
modeling adds to the existing ASP guidelines, as it helps to
understand problems with antibiotic therapy from a bottom-
up perspective.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

II.
METHODS
A.
CeHRes Roadmap
Central to our research is the Center for eHealth research
(CeHRes) roadmap. It supports researchers to develop,
design and implement eHealth technologies using a holistic
approach that combines human-centered design principles
and business modeling principles [6]. In this paper, we
focus primarily on its business modeling research activities.
Our method of business modeling is all about determining
what the added-value of the eHealth technology should be
together with the stakeholders. Subsequently, this co-created
added-value
is
the
foundation
for
an
implementation
strategy for the technology. By arranging value-driven
dialogues with stakeholders, researchers can discuss and
understand value needs [8]. We define a value as any ideal
or interest a stakeholder aspires with regard to an eHealth
technology [9]. In this paper, we used business modeling
tools that are part of the CeHRes roadmap, to co-create and
ideate possible interventions based on value needs of
stakeholders.
In short, a problem analysis (applied in the form of a
focus group) was used to understand the antibiotic therapy
process from a stakeholder’s perspective and to understand
which stakeholders are most influential in the antibiotic
therapy process. This problem analysis was also used to
analyze problems that stakeholders face in the antibiotic
therapy process. These problems and bottlenecks were the
starting point for value-driven dialogues. We used follow-up
interviews to discuss improvements and opportunities and
possible eHealth applications to support ASP and the value
needs and to organize these needs in an implementation
strategy.
B.
Focus group with scenarios
We organized a focus group with stakeholders in a pilot
hospital participating in the EurSafety Health-net project
[10].
Based
on
a
literature
scan
and
expert
recommendations,
we selected
healthcare professionals
from the pulmonary ward: clinical microbiologist, clinical
pharmacist (2x), chest physician (2x), residents (2x), nurse,
ward manager, nurse manager and quality manager. We
prepared a complex scenario, known as scenario-based
testing [10], with a fictive patient to invoke discussion over
the exact choice of antibiotic therapy. With the scenario, we
discussed the roles of stakeholders, which communication
and information needs are present and critical issues. The
focus group was recorded and transcribed in Excel for
analysis.
C.
In-depth interviews
We organized semi-structured one-on-one interviews of
one hour with a resident, a clinical microbiologist, a nurse
manager and two ASP experts to further specify their views
on the added-value of ASP with eHealth. As we focus on
implementation, we addressed the following topics to
discuss possible value needs: what should the added value
of the interventions be? Who need ASP and how can they be
involved? What is required in terms of infrastructure and
resources? Who pay for ASP and what are its benefits? We
discussed value needs and organized these in a possible
business model for ASP with the interviewed stakeholders.
The interviews were recorded and transcribed in Excel for
analysis.
III.
RESULTS
A.
Understanding the antibiotic therapy process and
identifying the stakeholders
The focus group concluded the primary stakeholders in
every form of therapy are physician, patient and nurse. A
physician
prescribes
medication
and
a
nurse
usually
administers all medication. In the case of prescribing
antibiotics, a clinical microbiologist may be consulted by a
physician or resident for interpreting laboratory results or
advice
with
non-routine
antibiotic
therapy.
Clinical
pharmacists check all prescribed medications, including
antibiotics. They also occasionally give extra advice to
physicians or nurses or provide background information on
medication. Nurses use this information regularly when
administering antibiotics. This list of key stakeholders is
comparable with the ASP stakeholders suggested by experts
in available literature [4, 11] Other stakeholders in the focus
group stated they play a more facilitating role and do not
directly
influence
antibiotic
therapy.
They,
however,
facilitate the other stakeholders in terms of organizational
aspects, resources and support with protocols.
B.
Understanding problems that stakeholders face in the
antibiotic therapy process
We report the results of the problem analysis in three
topics:
communication,
information/documentation
and
critical moments/bottlenecks in the process:
Communication: Stakeholders expressed two important
moments of communication that are vital in antibiotic
therapy: 1) Physicians need information from the clinical
microbiologist or clinical pharmacist usually communicated
over phone. Contact with a microbiologist or pharmacist
should be 24/7 possible; 2) Nurses take daily care of
patients and frequently need patient-specific instructions
from
a
physician
and
occasionally
need
additional
information concerning intravenous delivery from protocols,
a physician or a resident (face-to-face), or a clinical
pharmacist (phone). A common communication problem
expressed by the focus group is that communication by
phone that information gets ‘lost in translation’ as the
clinical view is explained from the perspective of the
physician.
Information/documentation: All stakeholders required
information
sources
and
documents.
They
reported
information comes in mixed forms, either digitally in
intranet information systems or hardcopy in folders or
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

pocket
cards.
A
few
common
complications
were
mentioned:
1)
Finding
the
right
information
can
be
problematic due to multiple and different information
sources and require research; 2) The patient information
system is not directly accessible by the microbiologists thus
they rely on patient information shared verbally by the
physician; 3) Culture exchange and laboratory results on the
cultures is prone to delays. The faster this information is
available; the faster antibiotics can be adjusted.
Critical
moments/bottlenecks:
The
most
important
critical moments regarding patients’ health are reported to
be in the therapy process itself (diagnostics, prescription,
administration), in the communication of laboratory results
(correctness and timeliness) and the physical responses of
the patient on the therapy (timely adjustment of medication).
Stakeholders also expressed critical issues apart from
patient-related ones: 1) Antibiotics should be stocked; 2)
(Too) many diverse information sources for protocols,
information, etc.; 3) Delays in sending cultures and
communication
of
laboratory
results
cause
prolonged
antibiotic therapy that may be unnecessary; 4) Laboratory
results are sent to the physician/resident who requested
them, which is not ideal when physicians/residents share the
care of patients and the one who requested the results is not
available or present. 5) There is a focus on efficiency; which
means available resources, time and personnel are limited
and a balance has to be found in improving quality with
ASP and efficiency; 6) Communication per phone can have
a negative effect on quality of antibiotic therapy if not all
information is shared. The more informed the decision
making for therapy is, the better.
C.
Identifying which improvements and opportunities
stakeholders see in this process
Stakeholders mentioned the following improvements
and opportunities how the antibiotic therapy process can be
improved: 1) A bed-side audit consisting of a physician and
microbiologist
would
improve
clinical
assessment
for
appropriate antibiotic therapy (apps #4, #5, #6, see D).
Clinical pharmacists would also benefit from joining this
bed-side audit to assist with prescription details. A bed-side
audit is not needed at every prescription, yet with complex
treatments it might be beneficial to visit the patient as a
team; 2) Looking for uniformity in protocols and provided
information can also be beneficial for antibiotic therapy
(apps #1, #2, #3, see D). In fact, a resident stated many
available protocols could be replaced with a solid uniform
one; 3) Education to disseminate new protocols, changes in
protocols or generally news regarding antibiotics could
improve knowledge and awareness of ASP (app #7, see D).
Two desired improvements were also mentioned that are
outside the scope of an antibiotic stewardship program as
they are hospital-wide issues that would be beyond our
ability to change: 1) Improvement in timely logistics with
the microbiology laboratory, by adequately sending cultures
to the laboratory and getting timely results might be needed;
2) Current IT systems require better data connectivity and
information sharing.
D.
Ideating what eHealth applications are required
Based on the antibiotic therapy process and problem
analysis, we ideated the following eHealth opportunities for
the
infectionmanager.com
with
stakeholders,
available
guidelines and literature and expert opinions. The following
paragraphs provide an overview of opportunities for eHealth
applications based on what stakeholders deem helpful in the
antibiotic therapy process translated into a short, general
description of each eHealth application.
1)
App #1: Antibiotic prescription information
An important step is the start of this therapy, known as
empiric therapy. For common infections or antibiotics, the
physician can rely on his/her experience, yet for certain
infections or antibiotics, extra information is needed to
verify the right antibiotic, dose and duration. Physicians and
residents usually use an antibiotic formulary that contains
most of this information. Additionally, there are national
guidelines and local guidelines and protocols that can be
used
as
well.
An
antibiotic
prescription
information
application can bring all these sources of information
together in one place so that physicians have to search less.
Another strong point of this application is that it can fulfill
the need for uniformity in protocols and information if
content of the application has a consistent presentation.
2)
App #2: Antibiotic prescription decision support
In the pilot hospital, another intervention was recently
implemented called ‘Surviving sepsis’. This is a little pocket
card to help physicians and residents signal life-threatening
infections by scoring a few parameters in a checklist. A
possibility for an ASP application is to replicate this pocket
card with an antibiotic prescription decision support that can
make
this
checklist
go
more
in-depth
towards,
e.g.,
suggesting possible infections and possible therapies. This
application
can
be
an
expansion
of
the
antibiotic
prescription information application.
3)
App #3: Antibiotic administration information
Nurses administer antibiotics to patients. With common
antibiotics, the delivery is done on experience, yet for
uncommon antibiotics, information is needed regarding the
delivery. For example, the exact flow rate of an intravenous
antibiotic or if an antibiotic has to be given before or after
dinner. Nurses - and occasionally also physicians and
residents - check an information system of the pharmacy or
national guidelines and local guidelines and protocols.
Digital sources can be accessed via the Computer-on-
Wheels but some protocols are available as printed copies.
The
antibiotic
delivery/administration
information
application can bring all these sources of information
together in one place. That way nurses, physicians and
residents do not have to search in multiple sources. Also,
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

this application can fulfill the need for uniformity in
protocols and information, if content of the application has a
consistent presentation.
4)
App #4: Information patient care transfer
The care of patients is transferred between multiple
disciplines: Physicians transfer the care to nurses or
physicians can transfer among each other or to residents. An
opportunity for an application can be to provide an
infection-specific
or
antibiotic-specific
checklist
of
important therapy details that need to be shared during
transfer. A nurse gave as an example that he sometimes had
to verify with the attending physician or resident when to
stop therapy or that therapy was continued longer than
officially stated in protocols.
5)
App #5: Facilitating the team/audit
A possible ASP application is a bed-side assistance
application
to
quickly
access
information:
1)
Patient
information
(primary
parameters
(age/weight),
history,
allergies); 2) Antibiotic medication information (antibiotic
formulary, guidelines); 3) Laboratory results.
This bed-side assistance application can be useful for
microbiologists, infectious disease physicians, pharmacists
and physicians (depending on the ASP team formation) to
obtain information while doing audit rounds. Providing
antibiotic medication information is easiest to manage as the
technology and content will have much in common with the
information
applications
described
above.
Patient
information
and
laboratory
results,
however,
require
connectivity with existing IT systems or some manual
preparation beforehand.
6)
App #6: Alerts/notifications
Within the antibiotic therapy process there are a few
critical moments where an alert or notification application
can be helpful: 1) In the reviewing process, done by clinical
pharmacists, an alert or messaging system for important
messages per receipt can be used to notify physicians to re-
evaluate therapy or to provide patient-specific information
such as conflicting medications. This can be combined with
a restriction-approval strategy as suggested as a possible
ASP strategy in IDSA/SHEA guidelines for implementing
antibiotic stewardship programs in hospitals [11]; 2) When
laboratory results are available for a certain patient, the
currently attending physician or resident can be notified in
addition to sending results directly to the physician or
resident who requested them; 3) When an antibiotic is
prescribed and administered, after a certain time a re-
evaluation is in order. This is described as a day-3 bundle
that after two or three days the effectiveness of antibiotic
therapy can be assessed [12]. At that point, the prescribed
antibiotic can be continued, adjusted or even stopped. An
eHealth opportunity here is to give an alert or notification
when the re-evaluation should take place or co-create an
application providing a daily list of antibiotic therapies to
re-evaluate.
7)
App #7: E-Learning
In the focus group, it became apparent that education is
important.
Also
in
ASP
guidelines,
education
is
an
important supplementary strategy in implementing ASP
interventions [11]. For every educational element of ASP
there is an eHealth possibility to provide that education
using E-Learning applications. The following educational
activities were deemed interesting when implementing ASP
applications: 1) All personnel needs to be informed about
the importance of ASP in general to gain awareness and
understanding; 2) All personnel needs to be informed why a
team is performing audits; 3) Physicians, residents, nurses,
microbiologists,
infectious
disease
physicians
and
pharmacists should stay up-to-date with new information,
guidelines, protocols, etc.; 4) Training in using other
eHealth applications implemented for ASP.
E.
Ideating an implementation strategy for a platform with
ASP applications
In
the
follow-up
interviews,
we
discussed
with
stakeholders and two ASP experts what the expected-added
value of the platform and eHealth applications should be.
All
stakeholders
unanimously
agreed
that
the
most
important benefit from optimized antibiotic therapy will be
a reduction in length-of-stay. The length-of-stay of patients
will reduce when they have optimal therapy, can go home
sooner
with
oral
antibiotics,
and
have
less
risk
of
complications
with
infections.
This
has
beneficial
consequences for the quality of care as well as less
antibiotic use and thus less antibiotic costs.
All stakeholders also agreed that hospital management
needs to be convinced that ASP and subsequently using the
infectionmanager.com platform and its eHealth applications
is beneficial. There is supportive evidence in literature of
already
existing
ASPs
that
they
are
beneficial
[13],
however, the role of technology in ASP is rather limited.
Using eHealth applications as part of an ASP in the hospital
may lead to improvements when integrated with ASP
initiatives within the hospital. Proving the beneficial effects
of individual parts of a program is difficult as results are
always reported over a program consisting of multiple
interventions. Therefore, the platform can be implemented
as part of (starting) ASP initiatives, but requires these
existing ASP initiatives as a prerequisite. It can be part of a
program
and
the
team
can
choose
which
eHealth
applications they want to embed in the ASP in their
hospital. Nonetheless, the platform can also improve its own
value by providing information how to set ASP initiatives
up using the platform and its eHealth applications to
facilitate teams with the introduction of the eHealth
applications in their program.
Based on the above, the strongest business case for the
hospital management is that this reduced length-of-stay that
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

will
reduce
costs
and
improve
patient
safety.
One
interviewee
said
the
hospital
management
needs
to
understand that “investing at the beginning will pay off at
the end”. The investment
mostly requires FTEs and
resources for stakeholders to prepare and perform ASP
activities. Also for the platform and eHealth applications,
minimal costs are necessary for general maintenance. The
revenue is in cost reductions: all costs related to length-of-
stay can be reduced but also when speedier interventions in
antibiotic therapy can be made, complications can also be
reduced and thus reduce costs and negative effects for the
patient.
IV.
DISCUSSION
We involved stakeholders in our research to ideate
eHealth applications and a possible implementation strategy
for improving the antibiotic therapy process in hospitals.
Stakeholders
expressed
complications
mostly
with
information sharing and, related, communication. With a
focus group and interviews, we had value-driven dialogues
with stakeholders to assess opportunities for eHealth. In this
article, we conclude seven applications that are worthwhile
to implement to support antibiotic therapy processes in a
hospital. In sum, these applications mostly need to provide
therapy or patient specific information to assure optimal
therapy.
With
a
growing
body
of
literature
of
expert
recommendations on antibiotic stewardship [3, 4, 11, 14],
the available ideas for interventions for ASP are expanding.
Nonetheless, these expert recommendations still need to be
implemented locally in every hospital. Despite guidelines,
these local implementations are still diverse and Patel et al
pose that little guidance is offered on the practical aspects of
implementing ASPs and that e.g., non-academic hospitals in
the US
need
to
overcome
implementation issues by
accounting for unique characteristics of their institutions
[15]. The strong point of our bottom-up focus is that by
combining value-driven dialogues with available guidelines,
we assessed which interventions are required and supported
by the stakeholders themselves. The stakeholders, therefore,
added a local relevance to the possible eHealth technologies.
ASPs can be very comprehensive programs and contain
multiple interventions for basically any process where
antibiotics are involved. We decided to focus on primary
care processes in the hospital and specifically the antibiotic
therapy process as a first focus to implement possible
interventions for ASP as one of the key pillars of antibiotic
stewardship is a more optimal prescription of antibiotics.
When we looked in a review for the use of eHealth in
ASP in literature, we noticed eHealth technology is rarely
mentioned or used. Some ASPs make use of existing
software systems like electronic prescribing, electronic
patient records, but few technological tools specifically
designed for ASP were present. eHealth is attributed to
helping efficiency and thus, can be helpful to optimize
efforts and resources for ASP. Especially as manpower and
(financial) resources are most attributed barriers that hinder
ASP implementation.
The first step in our ASP research was to prepare a plan
of action for possibilities to implement eHealth applications
in ASP. By putting the antibiotic therapy process central, we
identified stakeholders that fit the local, Dutch context and
daily processes in the piloting ward. Also, the seven
possible eHealth applications to support ASP were ideated
based on this process. These ideated applications are input
for further research and development to design eHealth
applications that fit the needs of end-users and that fits the
overall goals of an ASP. Further research is also needed in
the conditions necessary to implement ASP and further
analysis and co-creation with stakeholders is necessary to
determine a fitting implementation strategy for ASP.
Currently, there are three information applications in
development.
An
antibiotic
delivery/administration
information application for nurses (app #3) finished its pilot
with nurses at the pulmonary ward and is implemented in
other
participating
hospitals
[16].
Residents
saw this
application and asked whether they could have a spin-off
information application. We also developed a similar
information application called the antimicrobial therapy
information
application
(app
#1),
containing
German
antibiotic therapy information tested in three German
hospitals. Preparatory research for an antibiotic prescription
decision support application (app #2) is in progress. The
research and development of the other remaining possible
ASP applications are still to be planned.
eHealth applications available via infectionmanager.com
need to be part of a larger, more comprehensive ASP.
Commonly these ASPs require an ASP team, surveillance of
antibiotic use and infections, local guidelines, education and
audits)
[4,
11].
An
implementation
strategy
for
the
infectionmanager.com therefore has to align with starting
ASP initiatives. Helpful would be to add implementation
advice inside the infectionmanager.com how to embed
eHealth applications to support starting ASP initiatives. We
are also working on an additional implementation tool to
help to implement these apps in a wholesome ASP.
Limitations in this research are that we held a focus
group in one ward in one hospital, who offered to participate
in our research. Although some problems may be local and
hospital-specific, we decided to provide generic tools that
focus on the structure of presenting information and
knowledge. The content of these eHealth applications can be
hospital-specific and altered as hospital professionals see fit.
Later, we also expanded our research to multiple hospitals
to implement the applications elsewhere as there was
interest in trying the applications in other ASPs. Based on
this expansion we can test whether the structures are robust
and how the content changes.
When we started our ASP research, very few hospitals
were active with ASP. That was also the main reason why
we collaborated with the pulmonary ward as they offered to
be part of our pilot. Later when interest in ASP arose at
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

other hospitals, mainly due to new guidelines in The
Netherlands,
we
got
more
interest
in
our
eHealth
applications as well.
In future research, we will expand our research to other
hospitals and research the necessary components for ASP to
help hospitals with their implementation of ASP and the
eHealth applications available via infectionmanager.com.
For designing these applications, we used the ideas of the
ideated eHealth technologies and we use the principles of
the
CeHRes
roadmap,
human-centered
design
for
requirements engineering and designing the technology for
end-users and business modeling for stakeholder-based
value-creation to embed the eHealth applications in ASP [6-
9].
V.
CONCLUSION
This
example
case
of
infectionmanager.com
demonstrates the use of business modeling methods to
assess possible eHealth technologies for ASP. We argue for
more awareness among researchers who design and develop
technologies targeted for healthcare that they should not
only focus on designing great eHealth technology but also
focus on the implementation of these technologies. This
infectionmanager.com
example
case
demonstrated
that
analyzing the implementation of technology early on the in
any eHealth technology development process contributes to
the
understanding
of
what
the
added-value
of
this
technology should be. In terms of our example case, it adds
up to the available expert guidelines (that also hardly deal
with eHealth) for antibiotic stewardship. There is a role for
eHealth in ASP when one looks at the opportunities how
technology can improve processes. These applications are
worthwhile to develop for ASP and a basis for an
implementation strategy for eHealth applications within
ASP.
REFERENCES
[1]
World Health Organisation. “Antimicrobial resistance - Fact
sheet
N°194”
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets
/fs194/en/ [retrieved 10-12-2015].
[2]
European
Centre
for
Disease
Prevention
and
Control.
“Healthcare-associated
infections.“
http://ecdc.europa.eu/
en/healthtopics/Healthcare-associated_infections/pages/
index.aspx. [retrieved 10-12-2015].
[3]
Owens Jr, RC, Ambrose, PG. “Antimicrobial stewardship and
the
role
of
pharmacokinetics–pharmacodynamics
in
the
modern
antibiotic
era”.
Diagnostic
microbiology
and
infectious disease, 2007. 57(3): p. S77-S83.
[4]
MacDougall,
C,
Polk,
RE.
“Antimicrobial
stewardship
programs in health care systems”. Clinical microbiology
reviews, 2005. 18(4): p. 638-656.
[5]
Freeman,
RE.
“The
stakeholder
approach
revisited”.
Zeitschrift für Wirtschafts-und Unternehmensethik, 2004.
5(3): p. 228-241.
[6]
van Gemert-Pijnen, JEWC, Nijland, N, Ossebaard, HC, van
Limburg, AHM, Kelders, S, Eysenbach, G. “A holistic
framework to improve the uptake and impact of eHealth
technologies”. Journal of medical Internet research, 2011.
13(4).
[7]
van Limburg, M, van Gemert-Pijnen, JEWC, Nijland, N,
Ossebaard, HC, Hendrix, RMG, Seydel, ER. “Why business
modeling
is
crucial
in
the
development
of
eHealth
technologies”. Journal of medical Internet research, 2011.
13(4).
[8]
van Limburg, M, Wentzel, MJ, Sanderman, R, van Gemert-
Pijnen, JEWC. “Business modeling to implement an infection
control eHealth portal: a reflection on co-creation with
stakeholders”. JMIR research protocols 2015;4(3):e104
[9]
Van Velsen, L, Wentzel, J, van Gemert-Pijnen, JEWC.
“Designing eHealth that matters via a multidisciplinary
requirements
development
approach.”
JMIR
research
protocols, 2013. 2(1).
[10] Wentzel, J, van Limburg, M, Karreman, J, Hendrix, R, van
Gemert-Pijnen, L. “Co-creation with stakeholders: A web 2.0
antibiotic stewardship program.” The Fourth International
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine.
2012.
[11] Dellit TH, Owens RC, McGowan JE, Gerding DN, Weinstein
RA, Burke JP, Huskins WC, Paterson DL, Fishman NO,
Carpenter CF, Brennan PJ. “Infectious Diseases Society of
America and the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of
America guidelines for developing an institutional program to
enhance
antimicrobial
stewardship.”
Clinical
infectious
diseases. 2007. 44(2):159-77.
[12] Pulcini C, Defres S, Aggarwal I, Nathwani D, Davey P.
“Design of a ‘day 3 bundle’ to improve the reassessment of
inpatient
empirical
antibiotic
prescriptions”.
Journal
of
antimicrobial chemotherapy, 2008. 61(6): p. 1384-1388.
[13] Davey P, Brown E, Charani E, Fenelon L, Gould IM, Holmes
A, Ramsay CR, Wiffen PJ, Wilcox M. “Interventions to
improve
antibiotic
prescribing
practices
for
hospital
inpatients”. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2013. 4.
[14] Centre for Disease Control. “Core elements of Hospital
Antibiotic
Stewardship
Programs”
http://www.cdc.gov/
getsmart/healthcare/implementation/core-elements.html
[retrieved 10-12-2015].
[15] Patel, D, MacDougall, C. “How to make antimicrobial
stewardship work: practical considerations for hospitals of all
sizes”. Hospital Pharmacy, 2010. 45(1): p. S10-S18.
[16] Wentzel, J, van Velsen, L, van Limburg, M, de Jong, N,
Karreman, J, Hendrix, R, van Gemert, JEWC. “Participatory
eHealth development to support nurses in antimicrobial
stewardship”. BMC medical informatics and decision making,
2014. 14(1): p. 45.
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

