Personalized Motivation in Dementia Management through Detection of Behavior 
Patterns 
Ana Belén Sánchez-Calzón, Carlos Fernández-Llatas, Juan Carlos Naranjo, Teresa Meneu                 
1ITACA - Health and Wellbeing Technologies,  
Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Valencia, Spain 
{absanch;cfllatas; jcnaranjo, tmeneu}@itaca.upv.es 
 
 
Abstract— Dementia is one of the most common diseases in 
elderly people. Many people with dementia eventually become 
totally dependent on others for their care. With proper 
treatment, symptoms of dementia can be significantly reduced 
and stabilized. A successful treatment depends on recognizing 
which symptoms person experiences, making a careful 
evaluation, and identifying possible causes and methods to 
treat. Nursing Homes usually host a considerable number of 
people with dementia. To detect the disease in early stages may 
allow work on the development of mechanisms to reduce the 
cognitive impairment. The personalized motivation may help 
to adapt the patient environment, allowing adequate 
stimulating events, providing an opportunity for physical and 
psychosocial activity. The requirement is to study the behavior 
of patients in order to detect conduct disorders in their 
routines. This study presents a behavior pattern detection 
architecture based on the Ambient Assisted Living paradigm, 
and 
Process 
Mining 
technology 
allowing 
re-learning 
mechanisms in dementia disorders. 
 
Keywords-Dementia; 
eHealth; 
Monitoring; 
Motivation; 
Cognitive enhancement. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, dementia is one of the most devastating diseases 
of the elderly, causing a progressive decline of physical and 
mental functioning. International official organisms estimate 
that there are currently 30 million people with dementia in 
the world, adding about 5 million new cases annually. 
Detailed population-based studies of prevalence of dementia 
estimate that number of people affected will be over 100 
million by year 2050, in different world regions [1]. People 
with 
dementia 
experience 
forgetfulness, 
depression, 
disorientation and confusion, becoming unable to plan and 
organize activities, even simple everyday tasks. Dementia is 
a loss of brain function [2]. The decline of memory, as well 
as other problems with language, decision-making ability, 
the capacity to discern and personality are necessary aspects 
for diagnosis. Symptoms of dementia include difficulty with 
many areas of mental function, such as language, memory, 
perception, emotional behavior, and cognitive skills [2].  
It is estimated that 30-40% of people with dementia 
living alone at the time of diagnosis [2]. From that moment 
there is an increase in dependency, an increase in the risk of 
serious accidents, and difficulties to follow a proper 
treatment for the disease. To stop the advance of the 
dementia in elderly people it is needed to perform an 
individual comprehensive monitoring of the person. On one 
hand this allows detecting the dementia presence in early 
stages, and on the other hand, permits the evaluation of the 
state of the patient illness. Early identification of motor and 
cognitive changes, characterizing the beginning of this 
disease, may improve the therapeutic treatment and planning 
changes in lifestyle resulting [3].  
The deployment of this kind of individual monitoring of 
patients is very demanding and requires the use of intelligent 
environments based in paradigms like Ambient Assisted 
Living (AAL) [4]. The use of advanced sensors, capable of 
detecting and monitoring the movement in people with 
cognitive impairment, allows collecting relevant data on the 
overall activity of the person. The results of studies show 
that the time a patient with Mild Cognitive Impairment spent 
to travel a given distance is greater than that used by healthy 
people. In addition, elder patients with cognitive impairment 
have a greater variation in the proper conduct of their daily 
activities [3].  
There are 
multiple 
techniques 
for 
unobtrusively 
monitoring naturally occurring computer interactions to 
detect 
sustained 
changes 
in 
cognitive 
performance. 
Researchers have shown the importance of the early 
detection of cognitive decline. That detection is associated to 
a gently behavior change on the user. In this way subtle 
changes on the patient’s behavior might suppose the 
presence of dementia illness in an early stage. The detection 
of these kinds of behavior changes has been approached 
using Process Mining techniques [5]. This approach is based 
on the inference of a basic workflow based model of the user 
behavior, and to compare that model with posterior behavior 
models of the same user. Differences among models show 
the behavior changes and, finally, will help the detection of 
dementia. An early detection allows for more effective 
clinical intervention, working on algorithms for inferring a 
user's cognitive performance using monitoring data from 
computer games and psychomotor measurements [6]. The 
research methodology of eMotiva Project is being tested  
into a Nursing Home, primarily focuses on detection of 
behavior patterns in dementia patients, besides engage in a 
cognitive, physical and language rehabilitation. The 
integrated cognitive stimulation program is a treatment of 
cognitive impairment aimed at maintaining and enhancing 
several cognitive processes affected by dementia [5] [7].  
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Current best practices in care of elderly are based on 
comprehensive approaches that include actions, such as the 
stimulation and maintenance of cognitive processes. It has 
been shown that stimulation of ongoing cognitive activity 
can decelerate the degenerative process involving the 
diseases associated with dementia [8]. The modern society 
has experienced a rapid growth in the use of computers by 
elders. E-mail, Web browsing, computer games etc. are 
among the most common routine activities for this group of 
users. This work is developed in the framework of the 
National Spanish Project eMotiva. A pilot study is being 
carried out, relating the National Association of Physicians 
in Nursing Homes (SEMER). 
 
The paper presents the implementation of an active 
integral system of monitoring and motivation for dementia 
patients. The execution of the monitoring subsystem is based 
on recognizing patterns in time series, while the personalized 
motivation is based on computer technologies motivation. 
The research objective is to promote social inclusion as a 
therapeutic method, using digital content in response to 
behavior disorders. The purpose is the integration and 
deployment of the infrastructure for monitoring and 
encouraging people with dementia in a nursing home 
environment. The aim is the stimulation, reinforcement and 
maintenance of those cognitive processes affected by 
dementia. 
Evaluation results regarding usability and improvement 
on the dementia management are being gathered by pilots in 
focus group in a Nursing Home in Valencia (Spain). 
The following sections explain, in the first instance, the 
main objects that the project aims to obtain with their 
execution, as well as the methodology employed to the 
investigation development. In the following section, the 
eMotiva platform is explained, including a succinct 
description of the ongoing technology being used for 
detecting behavior patterns of patients. After that, the 
ongoing work in Nursing Home environment is explained, 
detailing 
the 
progress 
and 
achievements 
with 
the 
intervention, in the sense of utility and functionality of the 
platform. Finally, a discussion about main contributions of 
the project is presented, enclosed to outcomes.  
 
II. 
MOTIVATION AND OBJECTIVES  
There is no known cure for dementia. It is a disease that 
reveals how language skills disorders deprive people of their 
basic skills to be beings with feelings, thoughts and 
expression. Dementia patients require constant attention, 
because there is a serious loss of cognitive function, and 
gradually worsen over time, affecting memory, thinking and 
behavior [9].   
Each incidence of the Dementia has two victims: the 
person with the disease and the caregiver. Caregivers are 
faced with the meaning of mind and dependence on the 
Dementia patient [10].  
The main objective of the research is to create a tool that 
facilitates the association between health-care professionals 
and elder people with cognitive impairment caused by 
diseases associated with dementia, to provide them with 
personal and social benefits, encouraging inclusion social 
and therapeutic method through the use of digital content. 
The purpose of the research presented is to improve the daily 
environment of people with dementia, those who come daily 
or live permanently in residential institutions. The 
implementation of system has represented the creation of 
smart spaces based on the paradigm of Ambient Intelligence.  
The research team work on spaces with wireless sensors 
and pattern recognition algorithms, also computational tools 
of motivation with multimedia content, which make possible 
the detection of patterns and the generation of integrated 
actions based on motivation for a correct treatment. This 
system supports residencies for physicians can design their 
own models of motivation, and to provide new models to 
detect behavior patterns. In this sense, the physician becomes 
self-sufficient in configuring the system, improving 
sustainability. Wireless sensor infrastructure is done through 
advanced radio interfaces and high energy efficiency, based 
on the wireless communications network Zigbee [11], 
providing complex network connectivity (scalable and 
configurable). 
 
The applied methodology that is being used is goal-
oriented and carried out in different stages described below:  
- Development and application of intelligent tools for 
analyzing, designing and detect patterns in people with 
dementia. 
- Creation of innovative multimedia motivational tools, a 
set of serious games, which make possible influencing 
attitudes and subsequent behavior of people with dementia, 
in order to improve or alleviate their degenerative process.  
- Creation of a network infrastructure of sensors and 
actuators, radio interfaces using low energy to facilitate the 
interconnection of monitoring and motivation devices. 
- Creation of a Smart Environment to monitor people 
with dementia in institutional residence. Implementation of 
the system with the tools developed in several pilots in a 
residence associated to the Spanish Association of 
Physicians in Nursing Homes (SEMER). 
 
The interesting aspect about this platform is the 
motivation that occurs in people who are indisposed to move 
and train. Each physical and cognitive game presents a 
challenge and an attempt to improve day by day. It is 
important to focus on those games where people interact 
with self movement, recreations where the user moves and 
works against sedentary activity. The wireless controller that 
is used in games is able to detect motion and rotation in 
three-dimensional space. There is a significant increase in 
physical activity and, as a therapeutic tool, games help 
improving motor skills. The wireless controllers stimulate 
different motor skills and likewise help improving 
coordination and reflex.  
From the psychosocial point of view, there is the 
conviction 
that 
human 
factors 
(attitudes, 
attention, 
motivation, memory, etc.) affect the interaction with 
computers. Regarding to social interaction, the use of this 
type of technologies promotes learning process, reflection 
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and cognitive changes [12]. Moreover, video games are 
presented as elements that promote motivation, being 
playful. Video games generate emotions and cause effects on 
emotional interaction of people. The general atmosphere of 
the games developed (nice and visually pleasing relaxing 
landscapes) creates a climate of tranquility and animosity. 
The purpose is to manage in a properly way the cognitive 
impairment, to maintain or enhance cognitive aspects such as 
orientation, memory, different visual-spatial and executive 
abilities, or language. 
The emotional aspects become central, considering the 
first-person games have the potential to induce emotions in 
the players. People may be emotionally involved with what 
happens on the screen, which increases their motivation to 
perform the task, developing a sense of immersion, in other 
words, a direct participation in a world of objects. Emotions 
represent an important part of motor learning, a way of 
reinforcement or avoidance certain behaviors [13]. They 
produce a significant motivation, helping prevent apathy, 
inactivity or passivity. 
The games aim to raise enough motivation so users feel 
connected to their internal dynamic, which includes a playful 
and entertaining feature, besides a high value of perceptual 
stimulation and the incorporation of progressive and gradual 
levels of difficulty, encouraging the motivation. 
  
 
 
Figure 1. eMotiva Architecture 
 
III. 
 EMOTIVA PLATFORM 
The project presented aims to create an intelligent 
environment to monitor people in nursing homes. The aim is 
to help staff Nursing Homes through the use of serious 
games to alleviate the cognitive decline in dementia patients, 
a sensing system to monitor the activity of residents, and a 
support system to detect anomalous behavior in patients 
(events), providing reasons and solutions to help to correct 
those behaviors.  
 
 
Figure1 shows the eMotiva architecture. This architecture 
is mainly composed by three layers: the user context layer, 
the behavior patterns detection and reaction layer, and the 
behavior patterns design and control layer. 
 
 
The user context layer is in charge of keeping a 
continuously actualized picture of the user data. 
This layer has the similar function that the AAL 
context. This layer is composed by the sensors, 
and the actuators that are in touch with the 
users. The sensors gather the raw information of 
the user, which is stored in the context layer. 
The data gathered by that layer is used by the 
rest 
of 
modules 
to 
perform 
intelligent 
individualized user behavior detection. The 
monitoring and motivation platform is deployed 
by using a choreography paradigm [14]. All the 
sensors and actuators are connected as services 
to a choreographer, and the choreographer 
allows the communication among the services 
installed. In that architecture is possible to make 
service 
composition 
using 
workflow 
technology. Thanks to that, it is possible to 
preprogrammed motivation workflows that can 
be described by the professionals. Professionals 
can use workflow technology to predefine 
motivation sessions. In eMotiva, a workflow 
engine based on Timed Parallel Automatons 
(TPA) [15] was created in order to allow 
professionals the composition of services to 
perform the convenient games according to the 
individual used needs. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Screen capture of the workflow design tool is 
shown 
 
 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
The behavior patterns detection and reaction 
layer is able to react to anomalous behavior 
patterns 
to 
individuals. 
This 
layer 
is 
compounded by the erroneous behavior patterns 
detector and the motivation scheduler modules. 
The erroneous behavior patterns detector 
module is able to detect anomalous behaviors of 
individuals that must be corrected. This module 
is based on Artificial Intelligence technologies 
to allow the detection of those patterns.  This 
quick reaction layer uses a rule engine to detect 
specific situations preprogrammed by health 
professionals, to detect specific situations. For 
example, that module is able to detect the 
presence of patient in prohibited spaces like the 
kitchen, or patient that is too much time in 
bathroom. In addition to this, an algorithm that 
allows comparison of workflows describing 
behavior 
patterns 
with 
the 
real 
actions 
performed by patients was implemented. This 
algorithm, called WIAA (Workflow Instance 
Aceptor Algorithm), shows how the flow of the 
current actions of the subject fits with the 
expected flow. In case of differences, these are 
highlighted. The result of the algorithm can be 
shown to health professional in a graphical way. 
 
 
Figure 3. Screen capture of the Comparison of a workflow 
inferred by PALIA and compared with an execution instance 
Using WIAA  
 
 
 
The behavior patterns design and control 
layer is in charge of providing knowledge about 
how the plans are executed in the Nursing 
Homes, helping health professionals to evaluate 
the behavior evolution of patients. This layer is 
compounded by Workflow Mining System that 
is able to present graphically the activities flow 
of the user actions to health professional. The 
core of the Workflow Mining System is based 
on PALIA Algorithm [16]. This algorithm is 
able to infer workflows from the user activity 
logs and present it to health professionals. Using 
this 
graphical 
information, 
the 
health 
professionals 
could 
individually 
detect 
erroneous behavior patterns of the user and 
provide corrective motivation protocols.  
 
The wide variety in human behavior makes 
difficult to detect dementia symptoms with a 
static view of the subject flow. In this way, a 
workflow representing the usual flow of the user 
behavior 
is 
not 
conclusive. 
Hence, 
the 
Workflow Mining System is able to provide a 
comparative view of the user activities at 
different stages. 
 
Figure 3 shows an example of workflow 
inferred by PALIA Algorithm compared with an 
execution instance using WIAA algorithm. The 
green states represent the states that the instance 
has visited. And the red ones are those that are 
not foreseen by the original workflow. 
 
 
 
As it was mentioned previously, the eMotiva 
Choreographer is in charge to allow the interconnection 
of the different services installed in the system. The 
choreographer dispatches the messages among the 
modules using a specific  XML message protocol called 
XMSG, based on the combination of FIPA [19] and 
SOAP [20] protocols. There are Java, DotNet and 
Android choreographer versions that can interchange 
messages, to allow the interconnection among services 
programmed in different platforms. In figure 4, a 
graphical view of the choreographer is shown 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Choreographer Architecture 
 
 
The choreographer has some facilities to allow a 
better communication of services. There are TCP and 
Message Queue Connectors that allow interconnect 
different choreographers among themselves, rule Engine 
Services and configuration services that allows starting 
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and stopping individually services without to re-start the 
choreographer. 
 
IV. 
MOTIVATION RESULTS 
The introduction of new techniques for detection of 
particular behaviors in patients with cognitive impairment, 
and the introduction of a system to propose appropriate 
activities to correct the behavior or detect the cause of its 
origin are useful for professionals in Nursing Homes. To 
measure the eMotiva system acceptance by professionals of 
the Nursing Home, a methodology based on TAM 
(Technology Acceptance Model) [17], it is completing a 
questionnaire to gather opinions about the usefulness and 
simplicity of use perceived by users. At this stage of 
research, according to the initial proposal, it has achieved the 
integration and deployment of the necessary infrastructure 
for monitoring and motivation of patients in Nursing Home. 
The current infrastructure is detecting behavior patterns, and 
providing mechanisms for personal motivation. The research 
team is working on stimulation, reinforcement and 
maintenance of cognitive processes. 
Motivational tools are being implemented in order to 
influence the attitude or behavior of people with dementia, to 
mitigate and slow the degenerative process. According to 
this, it has been crucial to find out what would be more 
interesting activities to reinforce certain conditions. A series 
of in-depth interviews [18] with medical and health 
professionals in Nursing Homes were done. They had asked 
about the admission procedures of patients, a description of 
their routine activities, interaction with caregivers, the main 
symptoms and behaviors found in a state of mild dementia, 
the methods developed by physicians to detect anomalous 
behavior in patients, types of intervention, the perceived 
relevance, as professionals, towards motivation, and the 
physical and psychological benefits the games can report. 
Interviews results contributed to the proper planning of the 
technical and psycho-sociological intervention.  
In-depth 
interviews 
were 
accompanied by 
other 
qualitative research technique, participant observation, the 
basic method by which the social scientist obtains 
information about some aspect of the world. It allows finding 
and studying certain behaviors described in the exact 
moment they are happening [18]. Participant observation 
was done at Nursing Home, allowing the patients to share 
their background, experience and everyday life, meet directly 
with all information apprehended by patients about their own 
reality. It was important to get people their definitions of 
reality and the contacts with which they organize their world. 
Dementia patients were observed during the sessions, 
interacting with them and participating in their activities, in 
order to they were comfortable and relaxed, without changes 
in their routine and common behavior.  
A network of sensors and actuators has been installed, 
using low power radio interfaces, which facilitate the 
interconnection of monitoring devices and motivation. It is 
interesting to contribute ideas to develop with location 
sensors, and to study their utilities.  
Regarding the serious games developed, there is a brief 
description of them, aiming their main benefits. The first 
game is based on a graphical model as realistic as possible to 
allow the user to immerse themselves in a delightful 
environment, interacting with it. The user moves and works 
against a sedentary lifestyle. Wireless controllers detect 
motion in a space of three dimensions. There is an increase 
in physical activity, enabling improved motor skills. The 
wireless controllers stimulate different motor skills. 
In the following package of games, patients work with 
touch screen, allowing interaction between the user and 
screen in a simple way. The games enhance the psycho-
motor capabilities and several cognitive processes. They aim 
to raise enough motivation so that users feel connected to 
their internal dynamics, which includes a playful and 
entertaining feature, with a high value of auditory and visual 
stimulation, incorporating difficulty levels that encourage the 
patient to improve and keep learning. 
Finally, a set of games have been developed to enhance 
cognitive processes such as perception, memory, attention, 
language and emotions. Players must answer a series of 
general knowledge questions, adapted to their particular 
condition, and also to associate a set of images and sounds to 
known events of their lives. These serious games are also 
played with touch screen, encouraging the patient to interact 
with user-friendly new elements, as the touch technologies 
are. The newness represent a relevant element of motivation 
for people, although in the case of patients with dementia 
may become an obstacle, due to fear of the unknown, not 
understanding things correctly, the incomprehension of a 
new task. The eMotiva Project has the challenge of 
overcoming these obstacles, showing high profits and 
earnings of ICT in all social groups, in this concrete case 
study, in people with dementia, helping to improve their 
treatment and quality of life.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
Dementia is the most destructive disease of the elderly. It 
leads to a progressive decline of mental functioning, 
experiencing lack of memory, depression, confusion, or 
inability to plan and organize activities, even simple 
everyday tasks. Dementia illness can be detected and treated 
in early stages finding behavior disorders in people. This 
requires an individualized and appropriate human behavior 
modeling. The eMotiva Project is designed at motivating 
and monitoring of Dementia patients in Nursing Homes. 
The aim is to promote social inclusion as a therapeutic 
method by the use of digital content in response to behavior 
disorders.  
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is the stage between 
normal forgetfulness due to aging and the development of 
some type of dementia. People with cognitive impairment 
have mild problems with thinking and memory that does not 
interfere with daily activities. The purpose of eMotiva 
Project is to provide tools for the detection and study of 
patterns of behavior associated with the disease, as well as a 
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

set of tools to help alleviate the degenerative process, 
reinforcing the fundamental cognitive aspects. 
Symptoms of Mild Cognitive Impairment include, for 
example, forgetting recent events or conversations, 
difficulty performs more than one task at a time, difficulty 
solving problems, or take longer to perform more difficult 
mental activities. The monitoring and motivation strategies 
developed are currently working on these points, and 
waiting for complete data collection, there is significant 
progress in meeting the objectives. The psychosocial 
intervention, the methods of motivation and reinforcement 
of physical and cognitive processes damaged by dementia 
are intended to provide benefits, such as the following: 
Speech problems such as difficulty finding the name of 
familiar objects, misplaced items, lost on familiar routes, 
changes in personality and loss of social skills, to lose 
interest in things previously enjoyed, flat mood, learning 
new information or routines, forgetting events in their life, 
difficulty reading or writing, wrong use of words, deficient 
understanding of language, withdrawing from social 
contact, difficulty in performing basic tasks and recognizing 
family members. This platform is being tested in the 
National eMotiva Project, aiming to reveal the validity and 
acceptance of a personalized computerized support system 
for treatment of dementia disease. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors want to acknowledge Spanish Government, 
eMotiva Project (TSI-020110-2009-219) partners, Health 
Institute 
Carlos III through the retics combiomed 
(RD07/0067/2001), and Programa Torres Quevedo from 
Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia, co-founded by the 
European Social Fundation (PTQ05-02-03386) for their 
support. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Alzheimer´s Disease International 
www.alz.co.uk/adi/pdf/prevalence.pdf  Retrieved: september, 2011 
[2] E. Krishnamoorthy, M. Prince, and J. Cummings (Ed.) 2010, 
Dementia: A global approach. New York: Cambridge University 
Press 
[3] T. Hayes, F. Abendroth, A. Adami, M. Pavel, T.A. Zitzelberger, 
and J.A. Kaye, 2008. Unobtrusive assessment of activity patterns 
associated with Mild Cognitive Impairment. Alzheimer’s and 
Dementia 4(6): 395–405 
[4] H. Steg, H. Strese, J. Hull, and S. Schmidt, 2005. Europe is facing a 
demographic challenge. Ambient assisted living offers solutions. 
Technical report, European Commission (Contract No. 004217) 
[5] C. Fernández-Llatas, J.M. Garcia-Gomez, J. Vicente, J.C. Naranjo, 
M. Robles, J.M. Benedí, and V. Traver, 2011. Behaviour patterns 
detection for persuasive design in Nursing Homes to help dementia 
patients. 33nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 2011. Forthcoming 
[6] H. Jimison, M. Pavel, J. McKanna, and J. Pavel, 2004. Unobtrusive 
monitoring of computer interactions to detect cognitive status in 
elders. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in 
Biomedicine 8(3): 248–252 
[7] S. Chatterjee, and A. Price, 2009. Healthy living with persuasive 
technologies: framework, issues and challenges. Journal of 
American. Medical Informatics Assocciation, 16(2):171-178, 2009 
[8] L. Clare, and R.T. Woods, 2004. Cognitive training and cognitive 
rehabilitation for people with early-stage Alzheimer’s disease: a 
review. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 14, 385–401. 
[9] N. Aggarwal, A.A. Vass, H.A. Minardi et al., 2003. People with 
dementia and their relatives: personal experiences of Alzheimer’s 
and of the provision of care. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental 
Health Nursing, 10, 187–197. 
[10] A. Rosen, and E.K. Proctor (eds.) 2003. Developing Practice 
Guidelines for Social Work Interventions: Issues, Methods and 
Research Agenda. New York: Columbia. University Press 
[11] A. Elahi, and A. Gschwender, 2009. ZigBee Wireless Sensor and 
Control Network. New York: Prentice Hall 
[12] J. Rosen, B.H. Mulsant, M. Kollar et al., 2002. Mental health 
training for nursing home staff using computer-based interactive 
video: a 6-month randomized trial. Journal of the American 
Medical Directors Association, 3,291-296 
[13] M. Knapp, L. Thorgrimsen, A. Patel et al., 2006. Cognitive 
stimulation therapy for people with dementia: cost-effective 
analysis. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 188, 574-580 
[14] C. Fernández-Llatas, J.B. Mocholí, P. Sala, J.C. Naranjo, S.F. 
Pileggi, S. Guillén, and V. Traver, 2011. Ambient Assisted Living 
Spaces Validation by Services and Devices Simulation 33nd 
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society, EMBC2011. Forthcoming 
[15] C. Fernández-Llatas, S.F. Pileggi, V. Traver, and J.M. Benedí, 
2011. Timed Parallel Automaton: a Mathematical Tool for Defining 
Highly Expressive Formal Workflows Asia Modelling Symposium 
AMS 2011. Forthcoming 
[16] C. Fernández-Llatas, T. Meneu, J.M. Benedí, and V. Traver, 2010. 
Activity-Based Process Mining for Clinical Pathways Computer 
Aided Design 32nd Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 2010. Forthcoming 
[17] A.K. Yarbrough, and T.B. Smith, 2007. Technology Acceptance 
among Physicians: A New Take on TAM. Medical Care Research 
and Review , 64( 6 ), 650-672 
[18] A.J. Gordo López, and A. Serrano Pascual (coord.), 2008. 
Estrategias y prácticas cualitativas de investigación social. Madrid: 
Pearson Educación 
[19] P. D. O'Brien and R. C. Nicol. Fipa towards a standard for software 
agents. BT Technology Journal, 3:51{59, 1998. 
[20] Henrik F. Nielsen, Noah Mendelsohn, Jean J. Moreau, Martin 
Gudgin, and Marc Hadley. SOAP version 1.2 part 1: Messaging 
framework. W3C recommendation,W3C, June 2003. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

