Creating a Framework for Testing Wellness Visualization Systems 
 
Chitsutha Soomlek 
Electronic Systems Engineering 
University of Regina 
Regina, Canada 
chitsutha@hotmail.com 
Luigi Benedicenti 
Software Systems Engineering 
University of Regina 
Regina, Canada 
luigi.benedicenti@uregina.ca
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a methodology for creating a 
framework to test wellness visualization systems. The 
methodology is applied to our research on an agent-based 
wellness visualization system to create a framework for testing 
the wellness visualization systems we created in our research. 
The proposed framework employs both technical-oriented and 
user-oriented testing tools and methods in the measurement. A 
comprehensive testing plan is also provided.  
Keywords-system testing; testing methodology; wellness 
visualization system; information visualization  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
An agent-based wellness visualization system has been 
previously proposed in [1-2] as an alternative solution to 
help an individual to learn, to monitor, and consequently to 
promote a personal state of wellbeing; it also designed to 
support a caregiver’s tasks. An operational wellness model 
was then created as a basis for developing a wellness 
visualization system [2]. The operational wellness model 
designed for the agent-based wellness visualization system 
has been presented and peer reviewed in [2].  In order to 
ensure that the agent-based wellness visualization system 
meets all of the research goals, is usable, and can be 
compared to other published results; an effective evaluation 
method is required.  
Since a wellness visualization system is constructed from 
the knowledge of various fields, employing techniques in 
software testing alone is not sufficient. Software testing can 
verify that the software system works as expected and can 
provide benchmarking results in term of software quality [6], 
but it cannot evaluate a wellness visualization system in term 
of usefulness, impression, satisfaction, etc. E-health system 
evaluation criteria are also available to employ, e.g. [8-9], 
but they do not specifically focus on the main objectives and 
goals of a wellness visualization system. Thus, it is important 
to find a testing method that covers all possible areas of 
wellness visualization system, can be repeated, and its results 
are comparable.  
In this research, the methodology for creating a 
framework for testing wellness visualization systems derives 
from the Goal-Question-Metric (GQM) approach [6-7]. The 
framework in this research is developed by combining the 
testing tools and methods used in software testing, usability 
testing, and techniques for finding an impact on a user’s 
impression toward the system together. As a result, a 
wellness visualization system can be measured from 
different aspects. It is also possible to compare different 
wellness visualization systems adopting this framework. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
the methodology for creating the framework. Framework 
creation and a comprehensive testing plan are given in 
Section III. Conclusion and future work are given in the last 
section.        
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. What should be measured? 
In order to list what is needed to be measured, the 
definition and the generic goals of wellness visualization 
systems have to be identified. 
A wellness visualization system is a software system and 
an information visualization system that can communicate 
wellness information by employing graphical presentations. 
Information visualization is the use of computer-support, 
interactive, and visual presentations of abstract data to 
amplify cognition; where cognition is the acquisition or use 
of knowledge [3].  
Based on the definition, it is obvious that the quality of 
the software product is to be measured to ensure that the 
software system works as expected and meets technical 
requirements. Moreover, the main functionality of a 
wellness visualization system is to communicate wellness 
information that can promote cognition. In order to ensure 
that the system can present key information effectively, the 
visual presentations must be usable. They should create a 
good impression and should not engender frustration. Thus, 
usability testing is required. Both desirable and undesirable 
effects caused by a wellness visualization system also have 
to be identified. 
Software testing involves the verification and validation 
of a software system and of the functionalities provided by 
the system [6]. In case of usability testing, a wellness 
visualization system is usable when it is useful, efficient, 
effective, satisfying, learnable, and accessible [4]. Also, it 
should be easy to use to eliminate frustration and even 
create a positive impression on users. In summary, the 
aspects that should be tested are system verification, system 
validation, 
verification 
of 
system’s 
functionalities, 
validation of system’s functionalities, usability of the 
83
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Graphical 
User 
Interface 
(GUI) 
and 
graphical 
presentations, accessibility, and impression. 
The aspects given above are created for the general 
definition and generic goals of a wellness visualization 
system. More aspects can be added to measure additional 
properties and goals of a particular wellness visualization 
system. 
B. Procedure 
When measuring something, a goal is needed as a 
reference point of achievement and also a reference point 
for failure. Thus, testing goals must be set up before a 
testing session is started. Testing goals should be linked to 
research goals because research goals represent what the 
research is trying to achieve.  
The following steps are the main activities of this 
framework: 
Step 1 – Clarify research goals and link the goals to the  
                    testing aspects 
Step 2 – Form testing goals regarding the research goals  
                    and the aspects 
Step 3 – Select testing tools/methods for each testing  
                     goal 
Step 4 – Set up a testing plan 
Step 5 – Conduct a test as planned 
C. Testing Tools/Methods 
A variety of tools and methods can be employed to test a 
wellness visualization system because they are constructed 
for different purposes. Since a wellness visualization system 
involves 
both 
technical 
requirements 
and 
users’ 
requirements, testing tools and methods from both sides 
should be employed. 
As a result, the testing tools and methods used in this 
framework can be divided into two categories: technical-
oriented and user-oriented testing tools/methods. Technical-
oriented testing tools/methods focus on benchmarking and 
technical requirements, for example, error rate and start-up 
time. 
User-oriented 
testing 
tools/methods 
focus 
on 
subjective data such as feeling, impression, and satisfaction 
of a user toward a wellness visualization system. 
III. 
FRAMEWORK CREATION 
This section uses our research on the agent-based 
wellness visualization system as an example of how to 
employ the framework to test a wellness visualization 
system. 
A. Research Questions 
A state of wellbeing is definitely desirable at both 
personal and the public levels [1-2]. Many efforts are 
required to achieve the desirable wellness level [1-2]. Our 
research intends to assist a person to have the best possible 
state of physical wellbeing by employing existing 
technologies and electronic resources [1-2]. All research 
questions are listed as follows: 
• 
How can we communicate wellness information to 
persons who do not have any specific level of 
medical knowledge, by using existing technologies 
and electronic resources? 
• 
How can we assist people in having a better 
understanding of their wellness status based on the 
information from electronic resources? 
• 
How can we assist people to keep track of their 
state of well-being and consequently improve their 
personal wellness status? 
• 
While assisting someone, how can we assist the 
tasks of that person’s caregiver? 
B. Research Hypothesis 
After analyzing the research questions, our research 
hypothesis is formed as follows: 
“An 
information 
visualization 
system 
containing 
appropriate 
graphical 
presentations 
for 
wellness 
information and supporting tools can answer all of the 
research questions given above.” 
C. Research Goals 
1. To develop an agent-based wellness visualization 
system that can support both general users and 
healthcare professional users. 
2. To develop an information visualization system 
containing appropriate graphical presentations that 
can communicate wellness information effectively 
to both general and healthcare professional users. 
3. To develop an information visualization system 
that can assist an individual to track on his/her 
wellness status and encourage the person to 
improve the state of wellbeing. 
4. To develop an information visualization system 
that can support a caregiver’s tasks. 
5. To develop an information visualization system 
that 
has 
simplicity, 
understandability, 
expandability, and modularity characteristics. 
D. Testing Goals 
One research goal involves with one or more testing 
aspects. One testing aspect can form more than one testing 
goals; this depends on a number of sub-goals (regarding the 
testing aspect) lies within each research goal. 
If a testing goal is derived from a users’ requirement, 
then a relevant user-oriented testing tool/method is selected. 
On the other hand, if a testing goal is relevant to a technical 
requirement, then a technical-oriented testing tool/method is 
employed. More details about each testing tool/method will 
be described in the next subsection.  
Table I presents the testing goals as well as the 
relationships among research goals, testing aspects, testing 
goals, and testing tools/methods. The highlighted testing 
goals are relevant to the users’ requirements and the un-
highlighted testing goals are relative to the technical 
requirements. The highlighted testing tools/methods are in 
84
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

the user-oriented testing tools/methods category and the un-
highlighted testing tools/methods are in the technical-
oriented category.  
E. Testing Tools/Mehods Description 
The followings are the description of each testing 
tool/method presented in Table I. 
1) Questionnaire: a data collection tool that can collect 
subjective data and get opinions from the participants [4]. In 
this research, two different sets of questionnaires will be 
used. One is created for a general user. Another one is 
created for a healthcare professional user. During a testing 
session, all activities will be recorded in video, audio, or 
both formats if the permission from a participant is granted. 
A participant might be contacted after the testing session is 
over for an interview or to clarify the information that is 
filled in the questionnaire.  
2) Error rate: a number of errors each participant 
encounters during a task divided by time spent on the task 
(in minute). The average error rate will be compared to the 
acceptable error rate from literature. The description of each 
error will also be collected for future improvement. 
3) Unit testing: is performed during the implementation 
phase of the research to verify that each unit of the system 
works correctly as expected. The results of each unit of the 
visualization system are evaluated against the design and 
research goals. 
4) Integration testing: is performed regularly to confirm 
that a group of software units works correctly as designed. 
5) Comparative method: compares the results generated 
by two or more activities against each other. In this case, the 
comparative method is performed differently regarding the 
testing goals and the types of users. The three different 
comparative approaches presented in Table I are: 
Comparative method (1) – the results generated by the 
wellness visualization system will be compared with reliable 
external sources to confirm their validity. 
Comparative method (2) – a raw data set and a set of 
questions will be given to a general user to answer. Then, 
the participant will be asked to use the wellness 
visualization system to answer the same set of questions. 
The results from both set of answers will be compared.  
Comparative method (3) – healthcare professional users 
will be divided into two groups. The first group will receive 
a raw dataset and a set of questions. The time the first group 
spent on answering the questions will be recorded. The 
second group will use the wellness visualization system to 
answer the same set of questions. The time the second group 
spent on answering the questions is also recorded. Both the 
recorded time and the answers produced by the two groups 
of participants will be compared. 
6) Exploratory study: is created to find the “unknown”; 
in this case, the unknown is an impression on the wellness 
visualization system. It can be both desirable and 
undesirable effects left on a user after using the system. 
Examples of the effects in questions are “Does the wellness 
visualization system make you feel like learning more about 
your personal state of well-being and how to improve it?” 
and “Does the wellness visualization system make you feel 
stress or too worried about your wellness status when you 
see the overall wellness level moved down?”. An 
exploratory 
study 
is 
performed 
by 
employing 
a 
questionnaire and conducting an interview. 
7) Peer review: gets opinions and acceptance from 
experts in the field. 
8) System Architecture Analysis: employs the structure, 
characteristics, and properties of the system as a proof 
against the testing goals. 
F. Testing Plan 
The testing process in this research is divided into three 
phases: preparation phase, testing sessions, and analysis 
phase. The activities in the test process will be performed 
according to the recommendation in [4-5].  
In the preparation phase, all materials needed, e.g., 
questionnaires and orientation scripts, will be prepared. A 
number of volunteers will be recruited, categorized by user 
type, and divided into groups of 3-4 people, as this is an 
appropriate number of participants per testing session [5]. 
The subsequent activities are making appointments with 
every group and setting up the testing environment. 
During each testing session, an introduction and a set of 
guidelines will be presented to the participants [4-5]. Some 
background information will be collected, followed by 
testing tasks. Making observations and note taking during 
the phase is a must [4-5]. A checklist will be employed 
before closing each testing session to ensure that everything 
is covered [4-5]. 
In the last phase, the collected data must be compiled, 
summarized, and analyzed [4-5]. Then, the results will be 
employed to create a testing report, and the conclusion and 
future plan of this research. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
85
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

TABLE I.  
RELATIONSHIPS AMONG RESEARCH GOALS, TESTING ASPECTS, TESTING GOALS, AND TESTING TOOLS/METHODS 
Research 
Goals No. a 
Aspects of 
Testing Goalsb 
Testing Tools and Methodsc 
1 
System Verification 
1. To verify that the functionalities provided  by 
the wellness visualization system meet the 
expectation and needs of both types of users 
 
2. To verify that the functionalities provided by 
the wellness visualization system work correctly 
and effectively from the users’ viewpoints 
Questionnaire 
3. To verify that the functionalities provided by 
the wellness visualization system work correctly 
and effectively as planned and designed 
Error rate 
Unit testing 
Integration testing 
System Validation 
1. To confirm that the agent-based wellness 
visualization system is satisfying and delightful to 
use 
 
2. To confirm that the functionalities and  
information provided by the visualization system 
can support both types of users 
Questionnaire 
3. To confirm that the information provided the 
wellness visualization system is valid   
Comparative method (1) 
Impression 
To find both desirable and undesirable effects on 
users, e.g., impression and stressful  
Exploratory study 
Questionnaire 
2 
Usability of the GUI d  
 
To verify that the wellness visualization system is 
usable 
in 
term 
of 
usefulness, 
efficiency, 
effectiveness, learn-ability, satisfaction [4], and 
ease of use/simplicity 
Questionnaire 
Usability of the Operational Wellness 
Model 
1. To verify that the model is acceptable to be 
used by the experts in the field 
Peer review 
2. The results produced by the model are easy to 
understand 
Questionnaire/Comparative method (1) 
To verify that: 
1. the model has the ability to produce the 
wellness status of a person 
2. the model is computable 
3. the results produced by the model can be 
presented in graphical formats 
Unit testing 
Accessibility e 
 
 
1. To verify that a user has the ability to access to 
the visualization system through a desktop within 
an acceptable time frame 
 
2. To verify that a user has the ability to access to 
visualization through a mobile device within an 
acceptable time frame 
Questionnaire 
Appropriate graphical presentations (that 
can communicate wellness information 
effectively) 
1. To confirm that the graphical presentations are 
easy to understand and simple, i.e. a user can 
perceive some information correctly without any 
explanation 
Comparative method (2) 
Questionnaire 
2.  To confirm that the graphical presentations 
have 
the 
ability 
to 
communicate 
certain 
information 
Questionnaire 
3. Learn-ability, i.e. a user can perceive more 
information or have an insight after a period of 
training/using the system 
Questionnaire 
3 
Verification 
of 
the 
following 
functionalities: 
- Viewing current wellness information 
- Viewing history information 
- Finding alerts with relevant description, 
suggestion, and links to external sources 
- Exploring more about personal wellness 
status by employing analytical tools 
provided by the visualization system 
- Recording and reporting short complaints 
to authorized caregivers 
1. To verify that each functionality meets the 
expectation and needs of a general user 
 
2. To verify that each functionality works 
correctly and effectively from the general user’s 
point of view 
Questionnaire 
3. To verify that the each functionality work 
correctly and effectively as planned and designed 
Error rate 
Unit testing 
86
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

- Creating personal indicators 
- Choosing viewing mode, i.e. regular and 
advance modes 
- Performing general setting  
Integration testing 
Validation of the following functionalities: 
- Viewing current wellness information 
- Viewing history information 
- Finding alerts with relevant description, 
suggestion, and links to external sources 
- Exploring more about personal wellness 
status by employing analytical tools 
provided by the visualization system 
- Recording and reporting short complaints 
to authorized caregivers 
- Creating personal indicators 
- Choosing viewing mode, i.e. regular and 
advance modes 
- Performing general setting 
1. To verify that each functionality is satisfying 
and delightful to use by a general user 
Questionnaire 
2. To confirm that the results generated by each 
function is valid   
Comparative method (1) 
Impression 
1. To verify that the visualization system can 
encourage a person to be more aware about 
his/her wellness status and that of the public 
 
2. To verify that a person feels more confidence 
in realizing and learning about his/her own state 
of wellbeing from the visualization than from raw 
data and other sources, e.g., internet and 
pamphlets 
Questionnaire 
4 
Verification 
of 
the 
following 
functionalities: 
- Viewing current wellness information of 
each patient under care 
- Viewing history information of each 
patient under care 
- Finding alerts with relevant description, 
suggestion, and links to external sources 
generated for each patient under care 
- Performing further analysis by employing 
analytical 
tools 
provided 
by 
the 
visualization system 
- Recording and reporting short notes to 
each patient 
- Defining indicators for each patient 
- Setting weight for each indicator for a 
patient 
- Performing general setting  
1. To verify that each functionality meets the 
expectation and needs of a healthcare professional 
user 
 
2. To verify that that each functionality works 
correctly and effectively from a healthcare 
professional user’s point of view 
Questionnaire 
 
3. To verify that the each functionality works 
correctly and effectively as planned and designed 
Error rate 
Unit testing 
Integration testing 
Validation of the following functionalities: 
- Viewing current wellness information of 
each patient under care 
- Viewing history information of each 
patient under care 
- Finding alerts with relevant description, 
suggestion, and links to external sources 
generated for each patient under care 
- Performing further analysis by employing 
analytical 
tools 
provided 
by 
the 
visualization system 
- Recording and reporting short notes to 
each patient 
- Defining indicators for each patient 
- Setting weight for each indicator for a 
patient 
- Performing general setting 
1. To verify that each functionality is satisfying 
and delightful to use by a healthcare professional 
user 
Questionnaire 
2. To confirm that the results generated by each 
function is valid   
Comparative method (1) 
Supporting a caregiver’s tasks 
To verify that the wellness visualization system 
can support a caregiver’s tasks 
Comparative method (3) 
5 
Simplicity 
To verify that the wellness visualization system 
has the simplicity characteristic 
Questionnaire 
Understandability 
To verify that the wellness visualization system 
has the understandability characteristic 
Questionnaire 
87
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Expandability 
To 
verify 
that 
the 
agent-based 
wellness 
visualization system is expandable 
System architecture analysis 
Modularity 
To verify that the wellness visualization system is 
modular 
System architecture analysis 
a. Refer to Section III, C for details.  
b. The highlighted sections are relative to the users’ requirements and the un-highlighted sections are relative to the technical requirements.  
c. The highlighted sections are in the user-oriented category and the un-highlighted sections are in the technical-oriented category. 
d. Measuring what makes the GUI usable [4]. 
e. Measuring the ability to access the agent-based wellness visualization system to accomplish a task, not what makes the system usable for people with a disability [4].
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A wellness visualization system is constructed by 
employing the knowledge from various fields such as 
wellness, information visualization, software engineering, 
human-computer interaction (HCI), art, and many other 
sources. Thus, a methodology for measuring a wellness 
visualization system in all possible aspects is required to 
evaluate the performance of the system and to compare it 
with other wellness visualization systems. 
We have presented a methodology for creating a 
framework for testing wellness visualization systems. The 
method is applied to our research on the agent-based 
wellness visualization system to create a framework 
which forms a reference for testing our wellness 
visualization system and can be applied to other research 
in the same area.  
Currently, the framework leads us to a comprehensive 
testing plan. This plan will be expanded further and 
refined for more details. Then, it will be implemented to 
measure our agent-based wellness visualization system 
[1-2].   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Thailand’s Office of 
Educational Affairs and TRLabs (Telecommunication 
Research and Laboratories) Regina for providing financial 
support to this research. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Benedicenti and C. Soomlek, An Agent-Based Modeling 
System for Wellness, in Multi-Agent Systems for Healthcare 
Simulation and Modeling: Applications for System Improvement, 
1st ed., Medical Information Science Reference, IGI Global, 2009, 
pp. 137-163. 
[2] C. Soomlek and L. Benedicenti, “Operational Wellness Model: A 
Wellness Model Designed for an Agent-Based Wellness 
Visualization System,” the 2nd Int’l Conf. eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine (eTELEMED2010), Feb., 2010, pp. 45-50, 
doi:10.1109/eTELEMED.2010.14. 
[3] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, Readings in 
information visualization: using vision to think, 1st ed., Morgan 
Kaufmann, 1999, pp.1-34. 
[4] J. Rubin, D. Chisnell, and J. Spool, Handbook of Usability Testing: 
How to Plan, Design, and Conduct Effective Tests, 2nd ed, John 
Wiley & Sons, 2008. 
[5] S. Krug, Don’t Make Me Think!: A Common Sense Approach to 
Web Usability, 2nd ed, New Riders Publishing, 2005. 
[6] R. S. Pressman, Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach, 
6th ed., McGraw-Hill, 2005. 
[7] N. E. Fenton and S. L. Pfleeger, Software Metrics: A Rigorous and 
Practical Approach, 2nd ed., PWS Publishing Company, 1998.  
[8] J. Li, L. P. W. Land, S. Chattopadhyay, and P. Ray, “An Approach 
for E-Health System Assessment & Specification,” the 10th IEEE 
Int’l Conf. e-Health Networking, Applications and Services 
(HEALTHCOM2008), 
July, 
2008, 
pp. 
134-139, 
doi: 
10.1109/HEALTH.2008.4600124.  
[9] E. Ammenwerth, J. Brender, P. Nykänen, H. Prokosch, M. Rigby, 
J. Talmon, et al., “Visions and strategies to improve evaluation of 
health information systems: Reflections and lessons based on the 
HIS-EVAL workshop in Innsbruck”, Int’l J. Med. Informatics, vol. 
73, 
no. 
6, 
June, 
2004, 
pp. 
479-491, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2004.04.004.    
 
 
 
88
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

