ICT Platform for Cognitive Stimulation: Technological Description and Evaluation 
of Effectiveness and Impact of the Practice in Alzheimer’s Disease Patients 
 
Andrea Caroppo, Alessandro Leone, Pietro Siciliano 
Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems, Italian 
National Research Council (CNR), Via Monteroni, c/o 
Campus Università del Salento, Palazzina A3 
Lecce, Italy 
email:andrea.caroppo@le.imm.cnr.it 
email:alessandro.leone@le.imm.cnr.it 
email:pietro.siciliano@le.imm.cnr.it 
Daniele Sancarlo, Grazia D’Onofrio, Antonio Greco 
Geriatric Unit & Laboratory of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 
Department of Medical Sciences, IRCCS “Casa Sollievo 
della Sofferenza” 
San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy 
email:d.sancarlo@operapadrepio.it 
email:g.donofrio@operapadrepio.it 
email:a.greco@operapadrepio.it 
 
 
 
Abstract— Cognitive impairments, such as memory problems 
or other thinking problems, are a defining feature of the early 
stages of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). Cognitive Stimulation (CS) 
is a relatively new approach to improve well-being for people 
with mild to moderate AD. At present only preliminary 
evidence regarding efficacy is available but it is enough to 
suggest that this CS has the potential to bring about changes in 
behavior and maintain involvement in daily life. The main 
contribution of this work is to evaluate the effectiveness and 
impact of CS in AD patients using an information and 
communication technologies (ICT) platform, implemented 
through a customized Virtual Personal Trainer (VPT) that can 
allow the patients to perform the CS practice directly at home. 
The whole system is made up of an embedded PC connected to 
a TV monitor with internet connection, a low-cost 3d sensor 
and an optional e-shirt with textile electrodes for clinical signs 
detection. Moreover, the system provides an audio/visual link 
with the medical center, so the physician can interact with the 
patient during the rehabilitation practice, increasing the 
compliance and the efficacy and making sure that type and 
intensity of treatment are appropriate. Results obtained after 
the experimentation stages demonstrates that the use of the 
aforementioned ICT platform can improve the cognitive and 
neuropsychiatric state of the patient and its quality of life, 
confirming that CS could be represent an attractive option in 
the support of caregivers and patients affected of AD. 
Keywords- Cognitive Stimulation; Alzheimer’s Disease; ICT 
Platform; Quality of Life. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the recent years, there has been significant progress in 
using Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) 
in the field of healthcare; in particular, a great effort has 
been addressed by researchers in order to develop enabling 
solutions that are cost-effective. Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) 
is the most common form of dementia, a neurologic disease 
characterized by loss of mental ability. This kind of deficit 
interferes frequently with normal activities of daily living 
(ADLs) and usually occurs in old age. Generally, it is 
marked by a decline in cognitive functions such as 
remembering, reasoning and planning.  
The importance of Cognitive Stimulation (CS) in the 
treatment of patients with dementia is underlined by recent 
scientific publications [1]-[3]. Therefore, a recent study 
showed that integrated treatment with 
rivastigmine 
transdermal patch and CS for six-months significantly 
improves the cognitive, emotional, behavioral aspects and 
mortality risk of AD patient [4]. The development of a low-
cost platform/home-care service with CS functionalities 
could be very useful in order to increase the chances of an 
appropriate medical therapy. Some preliminary studies show 
that ICT tools are well accepted by elderly people, although 
education and ICT skills level is often low. Moreover, it is 
scientifically proven that ICT technologies improving 
quality of life and increasing the permanence at home.  
In the field of healthcare, different kinds of technologies 
have being developed and used for cognitive training and 
stimulation in the past years [5]-[7]. For example, virtual 
reality offers training environments in which human 
cognitive and functional performance can be accurately 
assessed and rehabilitated [8][9]. On the other hand, 
augmented reality provides safer and more intuitive 
interaction techniques allowing interaction with 3D objects 
in 
real 
world 
[10][11]. 
In 
this 
scenario, 
social 
communication channels (natural speech, para-language, 
etc.) are not blocked, breaking down mental barriers 
applying such a technology to specific problems or 
disabilities. New solutions for cognitive assistance based on 
touch system have been implemented: in the field of CS, 
commercial products (Nintendo’s Brain Age, Big Brain 
Academy, etc.) have been tuned as educational tools helping 
to slow the decline of AD [12][13]. More recently, the large 
diffusion of interaction devices enabling body movements to 
control systems have been investigated, with specific focus 
on ICT technologies for natural interaction. Microsoft 
Kinect is the state-of-the-art [14] as 3d device for body 
movements acquisition and gesture recognition and the 
effects of this kind of technology for rehabilitation purposes 
is widely investigated [15][16]. 
In this work, a Natural User Interface (NUI) platform has 
been designed with the aim to support different kind of 
patients during the multi-domain stimulation practice 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

without the presence of medical staff or caregiver. The 
remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
reports the overview of the platform with specific focus on 
the hardware devices used for the interaction with the 
system. In Section III, some details about stimulation 
practice and environment setup are described. Section IV 
reports the evaluation of effectiveness and impact of the ICT 
platform in AD patients. In the Section V the result obtained 
are reported and finally the conclusions of this paper are 
presented in Section VI. 
II. 
OVERVIEW OF THE PLATFORM 
The developed ICT platform (called AL.TR.U.I.S.M. - 
Alzheimer patient’s home rehabilitation by a Virtual 
Personal 
Trainer-based 
Unique 
Information 
System 
Monitoring) provides a digital tool for CS through VPT 
allowing the patients to perform the rehabilitation practice at 
home. From this perspective, the process is a highly 
innovative compared to existing systems [17] as the 
caregiver/physician defines a specific sequence of exercises 
(the therapeutic session) according to the residual abilities of 
the patient. From the hardware point of view the platform is 
made up of a set-top-box (a commercial embedded PC) 
connected to a TV monitor with Internet connection, a 
Microsoft Kinect sensor for human body tracking and 
gesture recognition and a WWS system with textile 
electrodes for clinical signs monitoring (Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1.  AL.TR.U.I.S.M. platform overview 
Moreover, the platform integrates a software module able 
to stream visual and audio data acquired during the therapy. 
This module can record the video streaming for post-
verification from a remote architecture by the caregiver or 
physician. From this perspective, the physician or the 
psychologist of the reference centre could communicate to 
the patients through a remote connection and then monitor 
the progress or trouble in the execution of the different 
required tasks.  
At the end of the rehabilitation session, the central 
platform collects different kinds of data locally stored on the 
embedded PC. Finally, an ad-hoc multi-modal messaging 
procedure (e-mail, SMS, Mobile App for Android devices, 
etc.) is performed and relevant data are sent to the physician 
allowing instant verification of the performance through an 
easy-to-use Graphical User Interface (GUI). In the next 
sections some details regarding the hardware devices 
involved in the platform are reported. 
A. 
Microsoft Kinect Sensor 
In order to approach the CS practice, the end-user needs 
a specific hardware device (Microsoft Kinect) which allows 
to interact intuitively with a GUI using their bodies (Figure 
2.a). The Kinect is a motion sensor that can measure three-
dimensional motion of a person. From the functioning 
principle point of view, the Kinect device integrates both a 
high resolution RGB camera and an infrared depth sensor. 
Microsoft's ‘Kinect for Windows SDK’[18], was used to 
provide an Application Programmer's Interface (API) to the 
Kinect hardware. The API was used to interface with the 
Kinect sensor and its skeletal tracking software, providing an 
estimate for the position of 20 anatomical landmarks at a 
frequency of 30 Hz and spatial and depth resolution of 
640 × 480 pixels.  
The space resolution along the x and y axis is 3 mm at a 
depth of 2 meters, whereas the resolution of z-depth is 1 cm 
at the same depth. While increasing distance from the sensor, 
the accuracy decreases remaining within an acceptable range 
for people body part detection.  
B. 
Wearable Wellness System 
Another important feature of the platform is the 
continuous monitoring of physiological parameters during 
the execution of the therapy, for the evaluation of psycho-
emotive stress of the patient involved in the CS practice. 
Physiological 
parameters 
are 
collected 
by 
a 
Wearable Wellness System (WWS) produced by Smartex 
[19]. The system includes a sensorized garment (Figure 2.b) 
and an electronic device (Figure 2.c). The sensorized 
garment is equipped with two textile electrodes directly 
connected to the device (named SEW). A jack connector 
links the sensorized garment with the electronic device. The 
e-shirt is available in both male and female version, with size 
ranging from S to XL. WWS is able to simultaneously 
acquire ECG, heart rate, breath rate and acceleration values 
along x-axis, y-axis and z-axis. Data acquired are sampled 
with different rates (breath-rate@25Hz, heart-rate@0.2Hz, 
1-derived ECG channel@ 250Hz) and transmitted to the set-
top-box via Bluetooth radio link. 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 2.  (a) Kinect 3d sensor device, (b) smart garment and (c) electronic 
device able to collect and elaborate physiological parameters 
III. 
STIMULATION PRACTICE DETAILS AND 
ENVIRONMENT SETUP 
A. Multi-Domain CS Practice 
The CS program is composed by sequences of exercises 
appropriately tuned by the physician or psychologist. Each 
exercise belongs to a category, bringing out specific 
cognitive activities according to guidelines of the state-of-
the-art international evaluation scales for AD (e.g., Mini 
Mental State Examination - MMSE [20]). An innovative 
feature of the platform deals with the opportunity to 
customize each exercise on the basis of the severity of 
cognitive impairment and residual skills of the target. For 
this purpose, during the setting procedure, few input 
parameters need to be defined a-priori (e.g., execution time, 
maximum 
numbers 
of 
allowed 
errors, 
movement 
sensitivity). From the taxonomic point of view, the 
following categories of exercises have been implemented: 
temporal orientation, personnel guidance, topographical 
memory, visual memory, hearing attention, visual attention, 
categorization and verbal fluency. Figure 3 shows the GUI 
of some CS exercises. 
 
 
Temporal Orientation 
 
Topographical Memory 
 
Visual Memory 
 
Categorization 
 
Visual Attention 
 
Verbal Fluency 
Figure 3.  Examples of GUI for different categories of CS exercises. 
 The design of the therapy can be remotely performed, 
thanks to a web application that allows physician to 
configure all the exercises based on the patient's residual 
abilities and related performance. As a result, the interface 
of a specific exercise can be different for each patient. For 
example, the exercise “Topographical Memory” requires the 
following parameters: number of rows in the grid, number 
of columns in the grid, number of red dots (correct 
answers), whereas the exercise “Categorization” requires 
only the number of images to display. In addition to the GUI 
modelling, it is possible to establish the maximum length (in 
time unit) of every exercise and to set (only for a certain 
categories of exercises) the number of aids. The specific 
input required for each category of exercise with the 
information about the presence or not of aids are reported in 
the next table: 
 
TABLE I. SPECIFIC INPUT REQUIRED FOR EACH CATEGORY OF EXERCISE  
Category 
Specific Input 
Help? 
Temporal Orientation 
Year, month, day, day of 
the week 
Yes 
Personnel Guidance 
Body part target 
Yes 
Topographical Memory 
N° of answers, N° grid 
rows, N° grid colums 
Yes 
Visual Memory 
N° of images 
Yes 
Hearing Attention 
Text/Story, N° of words to 
identifiy 
No 
Visual Attention 
N° of answers, N° grid 
rows, N° grid colums 
No 
Categorization 
N° of images 
Yes 
Verbal Fluency 
Target word, 
synonym/contrary word 
Yes 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

 
An appropriate display of every exercise and the 
independence from the specific output device (digital 
monitor, HD TV, etc.) is obtained thanks to the 
implementation of a software module for the best video 
rendering. The definition of graphics objects displayed on 
the GUI has been designed according to the principles of 
ergonomics, usability as referred in ISO/IEC 2001a [21] and 
acceptability through an extensive literature search, user 
experience and expert opinion. 
B. Environment Setup 
The setup of the environment can be done without any 
specific help, but it is important to observe a few simple 
requirements for proper CS practice execution. 
For the best performance during the practice, Kinect 
must be placed allowing to acquire the whole body (see 
Figure 4). Some tips on how to place the sensor are listed in 
the following: 
 
• 
sensor must be place near the edge of a flat, stable 
surface; 
• 
sensor should be within 15 cm above or below a 
TV monitor, and between 0.6 meters and 1.8 meters from 
the floor; 
• 
avoid positioning the sensor in direct sunlight or 
within 0.3 meters of audio speakers.  
 
The end-user must be far from Kinect sensor at least 1.5 
meters and never more than 3 meters (Figure 5), assuring 
the proper functioning of 3d skeletonization procedure 
provided by Microsoft Kinect SDK. Some categories of 
exercises can be executed from a seated position; however 
the user must always respect the specific operative range of 
the platform.. In order to interact with the VPT, the patient 
must move the hand minimizing occlusion with other body 
parts. Hand tracking algorithms have been implemented 
providing a customized level of movement sensitivity which 
is manually tuned by the physician (three different level of 
sensitivity have been implemented). For specific exercise 
(e.g., Personnel Guidance) gesture recognition algorithms 
have been developed in order to verify the correctness of the 
hand movement with respect to a previously recorded 
template. 
 
 
Figure 4.  (a) Kinect position for best performance during CS practice  
 
 
Figure 5.  Spatial position of end-user for proper interaction with the 
platform  
IV. 
EFFECTIVENESS AND IMPACT OF THE 
PRACTICE IN AD PATIENTS 
The study was conducted according to the Declaration of 
Helsinki, the guidelines for Good Clinical Practice and 
following the CONSORT statement. Was approved by our 
local Ethic Committee. The experimentation stages have 
begun at September 2013 up to February 2014. Inclusion 
criteria were: 1) age ≥ 65 years; 2) diagnosis of Dementia 
according to the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's 
Association (NIAAA) criteria [22]; 3) ability to provide an 
informed consent or availability of a proxy for informed 
consent. Exclusion criteria were: presence of serious 
comorbidity, tumours and other diseases that could be 
causally related to cognitive impairment (ascertained blood 
infections, vitamin B12 deficiency, anaemia, disorders of 
the thyroid, kidneys, or liver), history of alcohol or drug 
abuse, head trauma, and psychoactive substance use; 
presence of severe cognitive impairment (MMSE< 10). At 
the baseline and at the follow-up, performed after 
experimental stage, the following parameters, explained in 
details in the text, were collected by a systematic interview, 
clinical evaluation, and review of records from the patients’ 
general practitioners: demographic data, clinical and 
medication history and a complete multidimensional and 
cognitive-affective assessment.  
A. Cognitive evaluation and diagnosis of dementia  
In all patients, cognitive status was screened by means 
of the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) Babcock 
Story Recall Test (BSRT) [23], Attentional Matrices (AM) 
[24], Verbal Fluency (VF) [25], and Copying of Geometric 
Figures (CGF) [26]. 
Dementia was diagnosed by the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders – 5 Edition (DMS 5) 
criteria [27]. Diagnoses of possible/probable AD were made 
according to the NIAAA criteria and supported by 
neuroimaging evidence (CT scan and/or NMR).  
B. Neuropsychiatric and affective assessment 
Neuropsychiatric symptoms was evaluated with the 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) [28] including the 
following 
12 
domains: 
delusions, 
hallucinations, 
agitation/aggression, depression mood, anxiety, euphoria, 
apathy, disinhibition, irritability/lability, aberrant motor 
activity, sleep disturbance and eating disorder. Affective 
status was evaluated using the Hamilton Rating Scale for 
Depression (HDRS-21) [29].  
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

C. Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment (CGA)  
A CGA was carried out using assessment instruments 
widely employed in geriatric practice. Functional status was 
evaluated by activities of daily living (ADL) index [30], and 
by instrumental activities of daily living (IADL) scale [31]. 
Cognitive status was screened by the Short Portable Mental 
Status Questionnaire (SPMSQ) [32]. Comorbidity was 
examined using the Cumulative Illness Rating Scale (CIRS) 
[33]. Nutritional status was explored with the Mini 
Nutritional Assessment (MNA) [34]. The Exton-Smith 
Scale (ESS) was used to evaluate the risk of developing 
pressure sores [35]. Medication use was defined according 
to the Anatomical Therapeutics Chemical Classification 
code system, and the number of drugs used by patients was 
recorded. Social aspects included household composition, 
home service, and institutionalization.  
D. Quality of Life and Satisfaction assessment 
The instrument to be used to assess the quality of life 
and satisfaction. will be Quality of Life Enjoyment and 
Satisfaction Questionnaire (Q-LES-Q) [30]. It’s a self-report 
measure designed to easily obtain sensitive measures of the 
degree of enjoyment and satisfaction experienced by 
subjects in various areas of daily functioning 
V. 
RESULTS 
A. Questionnaire results before experimental period 
Between January and April 2013 a survey was 
conducted at the Alzheimer Evaluation Unit of the “Casa 
Sollievo della Sofferenza” Research Hospital in San 
Giovanni Rotondo (FG). The questionnaire included 17 
items that explored different areas; the survey included 72 
patients and their caregivers. The summary of the results are 
the following: 51.6% of patients need care in self-hygiene, 
15.6% in moving at home, 12.5% in moving out of home 
and 10.9% in taking drugs. Among the patients with mild 
AD: 46.9% had a slight deficit in personal care, 37.5% had a 
mild motor disability, 6.3% sever loco motor disability, 
4.7% present a serious lack in personal care, and 4.8% 
significant sensory deficits. The 48.4% of patients live with 
a spouse, 26.6% with a child or sibling, 23.4% alone and 
1.6% with a private caregiver. Patients are assisted by 
family members (92.2%, with a mean age of 63.59 years ± 
16.50) and private caregiver (7.8%, with a mean age of 
48.20 ± 2.78 years). Family members take care for patients 
for an average of 6.22 ± 1.02 days a week and 6.94 ± 5.44 
hours per day; private caregivers caring for patients for 6.00 
± 0.71 days a week and 12.0 ± 7.87 hours per day. 
In the sample, 54.7% of patients like to watch TV and 
26.6% watch preferably film. The 92.2% of patients are 
capable to turn on and off the TV, 85.9% is able to choose 
the programs in autonomy and use the remote control, the 
67.2% is able to maintain a level of attention from the 
beginning to the end of a television program; the 79.7% of 
patients can use a PC only if helped and 50% cannot use the 
PC keyboard. Family members/caregivers have reported in 
their preferences that the AL.TR.U.I.S.M. system could be 
useful to facilitate communication with the medical center 
of reference (34.4%) and improve the quality of care 
through constant monitoring of the exercises performed 
(32.8%). Moreover, the system could be very useful to 
improve the quality of life (73.4%) and quality of care and 
assistance (73.4%). Finally, 62.5% of patients could accept 
the use of interactive TV and devices to monitor vital signs 
and gesture recognition at a distance. 
B. Pilot Results 
The pilot study has included 6 patients enrolled in three 
different sites. Each patients have an initial program of six 
exercises for session with parameters established on the 
basis of the first rehabilitation test. Analysing the user 
responses, the number of exercises and parameters were 
increased or reduced respectively. All the patients enrolled 
showed a similar good acceptability to the use of the 
platform as measured through the use of subjective feed-
back. All patients have concluded the study and no drop-out 
were registered. The sensorized shirt was used to better set-
up the system during the first rehabilitation test meanwhile 
at home these system weren’t used.   
 After experimental period, the end users showed an 
improvement of 10.4% on the MMSE score, of 1.2% on the 
BSRT, 1.3% on the Rey-15, 12.64% on the AM, 2.5% on 
the VF and 1.3% on the CGF. In addition, the end users 
showed an improvement of 24.5% on the HDRS-21 score, 
13.2% on the NPI score and 11.78% on the NPI-D (subscale 
of NPI that assesses the distress of the caregiver) score. 
They showed a significant improvement of 47.89% on the 
Q-LES-Q score. The data included the CGA domains 
showed no differences. Unfortunately the results were not 
significant different from a statistical point of view for the 
extremely small sample size but the trend are promising.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
For elderly people, home is a place of memories where 
they spend most of their time. Their demands on to stay 
home will increase and change with growing age, especially 
when their health status starts to worsen. An important 
aspect for all people having the need to be supported in their 
daily-life-activities is to remain integrated in social life, 
despite of their age and/or existing disabilities. 
We demonstrated that the use of the VPT can improve 
the 
functional, 
nutritional, 
cognitive, 
affective 
and 
neuropsychiatric state. Furthermore, the VPT can improve 
the customer’s satisfaction and quality of life. 
The home cognitive rehabilitation could be represent an 
attractive option in the support of caregivers and patients 
affected of AD. VPT is being implemented into more and 
more homes of the elderly in order to maintain their 
independence and safety. These VPT allow the elderly to 
stay in their homes where they feel comfortable, instead of 
moving to a health care facility. The transition to a health 
care facility can cause a lot of anxiety and to stay home 
using the VPT can either prevent or delay this anxiety. 
Moreover, VPT can provide the elderly with many different 
types of emergency assistance systems, security features, 
automated timers, and alerts. These systems allow for the 
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

individual to feel secure in their homes knowing that help is 
only minutes away. VPT will make it possible for family 
members to monitor their loved ones from anywhere with an 
internet connection.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been carried out within AL.TR.U.I.S.M. 
project, funded by Apulia Region under the Health-care call 
for the promotion of regional partnerships for innovation. 
Authors thank the staff of the Geriatric Unit of the Hospital 
in San Giovanni Rotondo (Italy) for the validation of the 
platform. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Clare and R. T. Woods, ”Cognitive Rehabilitation in 
Dementia”, 
in 
Neuropsychologistical 
Rehabilitation, 
Psychology Press Ltd, 2001, 193 – 196. 
[2] M. Neal and M. Briggs, “Validation therapy for dementia”, 
(Cochrane Review). The Cochrane Library, Issue 2. 
Chichester, UK, 2004. 
[3] L. Clare, R. T. Woods, E. D. Moniz Cook, M. Orrel, A. 
Spector, “Cognitive Rehabilitation in Alzheimer’s Disease”, 
Aging Clinical and Experimental Research,2006, 18:141-143. 
[4] G. D'Onofrio et al. “A pilot randomized controlled trial 
evaluating an integrated treatment of rivastigmine transdermal 
patch and cognitive stimulation in patients with Alzheimer's 
disease” Int J Geriatr Psychiatry, 2015, 30(9):965-975. 
[5] E. 
Richard, 
V. Billaudeau, 
P. 
Richard, 
G. 
Gaudin, 
“Augmented Reality for Rehabilitation of Cognitive Disable 
Children: A preliminary Study” Virtual Rehabilitation, 2007, 
102-08. 
[6] P. Standen and D. Brown, “Virtual reality and its role in 
removing the barriers that turn cognitive impairments into 
intellectual disability” Virtual Reality, 2006, 10 (3), 241-52. 
[7] M. J. D. Taylor,  D. McCormick, R. Impson, T. Shawis, M. 
Griffin, “Activity-promoting gaming systems in exercise and 
rehabilitation” Journal of Rehabilitation Research, 2011, 48 
(10), 1171-86. 
[8] M. Wang and D. Reid. “Using the virtual reality-cognitive 
rehabilitation approach to improve contextual processing in 
children with autism.” The Scientific World Journal 2013, 
2013 
[9] E. B. Larson, M. Feigon, P. Gagliardo, A. Y. Dvorkin, 
“Virtual reality and cognitive rehabilitation: A review of 
current 
outcome 
research.” NeuroRehabilitation, 
2014, 34.4:759-772. 
[10] R. Azuma, Y. Baillot, R. Behringer, S. Feiner, S. Julier, B. 
MacIntyre, “Recent advances in augmented reality” IEEE 
Computer Graphics and Applications, 2001, 21(6): 34–47. 
[11] R. Azuma, “A survey of augmented reality” Presence: 
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 1997,6(4): 355–385. 
[12] L. E. Nacke, A. Nacke, C. A. Lindley, “Brain training for 
silver aged gamers: effects of age and game form on 
effectiveness, 
self-assessment, 
and 
gameplay” 
in 
Cyberpsychology & Behavior,  2009, 12(5), 493 – 499. 
[13] F. Imbeault, B. Bouchard, A. Bouzouane, “Serious Games in 
Cognitive 
Training 
for 
Alzheimer’s 
Patients” 
IEEE 
International Conference on Serious Games and Applications 
for Health, 2011, 122 – 129. 
[14] http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/kinectforwindows, retrieved: 
March,2016  
[15] A. Da Gama, T. Chaves, L. Figueiredo, V. Teichrieb, 
“Improving Motor Rehabilitation Process through a Natural 
Interaction Based System Using Kinect Sensor” Proceedings 
of IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces, 145-46, 2012. 
[16] B. Lange, C. Y. Chang, E. Suma, B. Newman, A. S. Rizzo, 
M. Bolas, “Development and evaluation of low cost game 
based balance rehabilitation tool using the Microsoft Kinect 
Sensor” 33rd IEEE International Conference on Engineering 
in Medicine and Biology Society, 2011. 
[17] J. Solana et al., “PREVIRNEC, A new platform for cognitive 
tele-rehabilitation” 
Third 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications, 2011 
[18] https://dev.windows.com/en-us/kinect, retrieved: March,2016 
[19] http://www.smartex.it , retrieved: March,2016 
[20] M. F. Folstein, S. E. Folstein, P. R. McHugh, “Mini-mental 
state: a practical method for grading the cognitive state of 
patients for the clinician” Journal of psychiatric research, 
1975, 12(3), 189-198. 
[21] ISO/IEC. 2001. International Standard ISO/IEC 9126 – 1. 
Software engineering - Product quality - Part 1: Quality 
model. 
International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization/International Electrotechnical Commision, 
Geneva, 2001. 
[22] G. M. McKhann, D. S. Knopman, H. Chertkow, et al. “The 
diagnosis 
of 
dementia 
due 
to 
Alzheimer's 
disease: 
recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-
Alzheimer's Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines 
for Alzheimer's disease Alzh. Dement, 2011, 7:263–269. 
[23] Rey A., L’examen clinique en psychologie. Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1964. 
[24] H. Spinnler and G. Tognoni, "Standardizzazione e taratura 
italiana di test neuropsicologici” Ital J Neurol Sci, 1987, 
8(suppl):1–120. 
[25] H. M. Lezak, D. Howieson, E. Bigler, D. Tranel 
“Neuropsychological Assessment” New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press, 2012. 
[26] G. Arrigoni and E. De Renzi. “Constructional apraxia and 
hemispheric locus of lesion” Cortex, 1964, 1 pp. 170–197. 
[27] J. L. Cummings et al. “The Neuropsychiatric Inventory: 
comprehensive assessment of psychopathology in dementia” 
Neurology,1994, 44:2308–2314. 
[28] M. Hamilton, “A rating scale for depression” J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry, 1960, 23:56-62. 
[29] S. Katz, T. D. Downs, H. R. Cash, et al. “Progress in the 
development of an index of ADL” Gerontologist, 1970,  
10:20–30. 
[30] M. P. Lawton and E. M. Brody, “Assessment of older people: 
self-maintaining and instrumental activities of daily living” 
Gerontologist, 1969,  9:179-186. 
[31] E. Pfeiffer, “A short portable mental status questionnaire for 
the assessment of organic brain deficit in elderly patients” J 
Am Geriatr Soc, 1975,  23:433-441. 
[32] P. A. Parmelee, P. D. Thuras, I. R. Katz, M. P. Lawton, 
“Validation of the Cumulative illness rating scale in a 
geriatric residential population” J Am Geriatr Soc, 1995, 
43:130-137. 
[33] B. Vellas et al. “The Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA) and 
its use in grading the nutritional state of elderly patients” 
Nutrition, 1999, 15:116-122. 
[34] M. R. Bliss, R. McLaren, A. N. Exton-Smith “Mattresses for 
preventing pressure sores in geriatric patients” Mon Bull 
Minist Health Public Health Lab Serv, 1966, 25:238-268. 
[35] J. Endicott, J. Nee, W. Harrison, R. Blumenthal “Quality of 
life 
enjoyment 
and 
satisfaction 
questionnaire” Psychopharmacol Bull, 1993, 29(2), 321-326, 
1993. 
 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 20

