Developing a Supportive Tool to Facilitate Shared Decision Making in Dementia  
Involvement of end users in the design phase 
 
Marijke Span, Marike Hettinga, Carolien Smits, Leontine 
Groen-van de Ven, Jan Jukema 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
m.span@windesheim.nl, m.hettinga@windesheim.nl, 
chm.smits@windesheim.nl, lm.groen-
vande.ven@windesheim.nl, js.jukema@windesheim.nl 
 
 
 
Myrra Vernooij-Dassen  
Radboud University Nijmegen, IQHealth Care and 
Department of Primary Care, Kalorama Foundation, 
Radboud Alzheimer Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands  
myrra.vernooij-dassen@radboudumc.nl 
Jan Eefsting 
EMGO+ Free University Medical Centre of Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands 
j.eefsting@zgijv.nl 
 
Abstract— Developing an IT application facilitating Shared 
Decision Making (SDM) in dementia is complex. This is caused 
by the increasing cognitive decline associated with dementia 
and the number of involved people (people with dementia, 
informal caregivers and case managers). The aim of this study 
is to identify design issues in developing a user-friendly IT 
application facilitating Shared decision-making in dementia. 
Data collection in this study with an iterative participatory 
design based on the CeHRes roadmap included: focus group 
interviews with people with dementia, informal caregivers and 
case managers; a cognitive walkthrough with researchers; and 
a first usability test with case managers. This resulted in a list 
of issues addressing the quality of the system, content and 
service and a revision of the tool before informal caregivers 
and people with dementia will be invited to participate in 
usability tests.  
 
Keywords-shared decision-making, dementia, supportive 
device, design, co-creation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Dementia is a degenerative disease that increasingly 
affects people worldwide; from 66 million in 2030 to 115 
million in 2050 [1, 2]. Decreasing abilities address memory 
loss, oute planning, behavioral change and orientation 
problems among other things. People with dementia and 
their informal caregivers are faced with many problems and 
decisions addressing both care and well-being [3, 4]. 
Unfortunately, participation of people with dementia in 
decision-making processes is not self-evident [5]. 
Shared Decision Making (SDM) is an approach that 
involves 
patients 
in 
making 
medical 
decisions 
in 
collaboration with professionals. [6, 7]. SDM increases 
patient autonomy and empowers the patient [5]. Several 
decision aids (digital or paper based) have been developed 
to facilitate SDM in medical decisions in the clinical setting. 
Our research program aims to develop an IT application to 
facilitate case managers in supporting SDM in care 
networks of people with dementia in a community setting.  
 
This IT application distinguishes itself from existing IT 
applications in aiming to do justice to all involved parties, 
both in decision-making and in its design and development. 
With regard to SDM, the new IT application differs from 
existing decision aids. First, people with dementia and their 
caregivers have to make many decisions over time versus 
single –issue decisions. Second, the new IT application has 
to take into account the (decreasing) cognitive capacities of 
people with dementia versus decision aids that focus on 
cognitive able people. Third, SDM in dementia is 
characterized by a variety of involved persons, a network, 
versus regular decision aids focusing on patient-clinician 
relation. Fourth, decisions people with dementia and their 
informal caregivers have to make concern mainly care and 
well-being aspects, versus medical decisions in traditional 
decision aids.  
The new IT application aims to increase the influence of 
people with dementia in decision-making by giving them a 
voice in the decision-making process of care and well-being 
related issues.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section II elaborates 
on the complexity of designing an IT application in 
dementia networks. Section III describes the design and  
methods used. Section IV presents the main results: design 
issues. Finally, Section V provides a conclusion and future 
work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Developing an IT application facilitating SDM in 
dementia is complex because it involves a variety of people 
(people with dementia, informal caregivers and case 
managers) with different capacities and different interests 
and the cognitive decline inherent to dementia. Computer 
interfaces do not fit all persons. Older persons and disabled 
persons, e.g., persons with dementia are not average web 
users. They have problems using a ‘one size fits all’ 
computer interface [8]. Zaphiris et al. [9] distinguished 
guidelines when designing computer interfaces for older 
people in their review (e.g., information should be 
concentrated mainly in the center; clear navigation should 
253
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

be provided; screen layout should be simple, clear and 
consistent; colored text on colored background should be 
avoided). Savitch and Zaphiris [10] noticed that the 
terminology and phrases used when designing for people 
with dementia are extremely important – possibly more so 
than for the average web user. Several researchers give 
dementia related interface recommendations to designers: 
facilitating an easy orientation [11, 12]; using cues that are 
familiar; legible and distinctive  [13]; using touch screens, 
large format screen and large font sizes, minimal use of text; 
use of a hypermedia structure with limited options for 
selection, and an attractive design [14]; using tablets [15]. 
Less information is available addressing design of 
interactive IT applications for users with different 
capacities. Nevertheless, involvement of end users is 
mentioned as an important feature [16]. Moreover, 
involvement of people with dementia leads to better attuned 
IT applications [17].  
The present study, developing an IT application 
facilitating SDM in dementia, is part of a major research 
program on SDM in care networks of people with dementia 
aiming to improve professional care. Besides, developing 
theory building and competencies for case managers, 
developing a supportive IT application to facilitate SDM in 
dementia care networks aiming to contribute to dementia 
care practice. In a prior study we identified user 
requirements to determine the content of such an IT 
application [18]. This paper focuses on designing the 
computer interface that has to take these user requirements 
into account. The aim of this study is to identify design 
issues. The research question read: which design issues can 
be identified in developing an IT application facilitating 
SDM in dementia.  
III. 
APPROACH 
In this study with an iterative participatory design we 
consider involvement of end users, particularly people with 
dementia [17], as one of the key factors for developing a 
user-friendly and usable IT application.  
We used the CeHRes  (Center for eHealth Research and 
Disease Management) roadmap for the development of the 
IT application, because this approach connects a Human 
Centered Design with eHealth Business Modeling and 
emphasizes the importance of involving all stakeholders to 
develop sustainable innovations [19]. The CeHRes roadmap 
offers a holistic framework consisting of five phases:  
contextual inquiry phase; value specification phase; design 
phase; operationalization; and summative evaluation. This 
paper describes the third phase, the design of the IT 
application facilitating SDM in dementia.  
 
A. Focusgroup interviews 
First, eight focus group interviews were organized with 
end users including people with dementia, informal 
caregivers and case managers. The goal of these focus group 
interviews was to receive feedback on the first mock-ups of 
the IT application, the DEcideguide (Figure 1). The mock-
up, including 11 slides, was presented in the focus groups 
[19]. End users were asked to comment on the different 
slides in common, textual, in content, on user -friendliness 
and on the (attractiveness of) design. 
Twenty-seven end users participated in the six focus 
group interviews. The two focus group interviews with 
people with dementia and informal caregivers consisted 
both of six and four participants respectively. The focus 
group interviews with case managers consisted both times 
of the same seven participants. Participants of the second 
focus groups commented both on the mock-up and the 
feedback of the first focus group. The principal researcher, 
assisted by another researcher or designer, moderated the 
focus groups.  
People with mild to moderate dementia were recruited 
from two day-care centers. Informal caregivers were 
recruited from residential homes and the Dutch Alzheimer 
Association. Case managers were recruited from regional 
case managers’ networks. All participants gave their written 
informed consent. The focus group interviews that lasted 1-
2 hours were audio taped and transcribed verbatim.  
Framework analysis was used to analyze the focus group 
interview transcriptions [20]. The three levels of assessing 
design quality of the CeHRes was used as framework to 
identify design issues: system quality (technology that is 
user-friendly and safe), content quality (content that is 
understandable and meaningful) and service quality (service 
that is timely and persuasive) [21].  
 
 
Figure 1. Concept SDM application. Perspective of people with 
dementia used in focus groups 
 
B. Cognitive walkthrough 
Second, 
a 
cognitive 
walkthrough 
session 
with 
researchers was organized to test the first interactive 
prototype of the DEcideguide (Figure 2). During a two 
hours session three researchers tested the DEcideguide using 
a case with the perspectives of a person with dementia, an 
informal caregiver and a case manager to identify bugs, 
possible user problems and testing the user friendliness. The 
session was audio and video taped. The analysis of the 
254
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

transcripts focused on identifying (additional) design issues 
to the focus group interviews related to system, content and 
service quality.  
 
 
Figure 2. Chat in  the DEcideguide used in cognitive walkthrough and 
usability test 
 
C. Usability tests  
Third, usability tests were performed with the adapted 
interactive prototype of the DEcideguide (Figure 2). The 
goal of these usability tests is to further refine the 
DEcideguide into a prototype that is robust enough to be 
used in a pilot study [22].  Case managers tested the 
working prototype in a two hour Think aloud session [20]. 
The session was audio and video taped and transcribed 
verbatim. The analysis of the transcript focused on 
identifying additional design issues. After adjusting the 
DEcideguide, usability tests will be conducted with elderly, 
informal caregivers and people with dementia in succession. 
We chose for this iteration in participants to iron out major 
bugs in an early stage in order to enable end users to focus 
on the refinement of the DEcideguide.   
 
IV. 
RESULTS  
A. Focus group interviews 
All respondents participated because they experience 
decision-making in dementia as an important and difficult 
area. They expect a supportive tool to be very useful and 
helpful. The design issues that arose from feedback of 
respondents could be assigned to the three levels of design 
quality: system; content and service quality.  Design issues 
addressed mainly the system quality and the content quality. 
Case managers were the only respondents who commented 
directly on the service quality. They considered the tool as 
very nice and useful for their practice. All respondents 
commented on the content quality and agreed about the 
difficulty of the content: too much and too difficult. 
Moreover, case managers’ comments on the content of the 
tool focused on extra options they would like: e.g., skype, 
agenda, domotics, and separate communication with family 
members. Informal caregivers commented in particular on 
terminology. Similar questions were removed and synonym, 
more familiar, words given (e.g., ‘social contacts’ changed 
into ‘family and friends’).  People with dementia advised 
simplifying the tool in words and size. Most feedback 
addressed the system quality. Main comment of all 
participants focused on the ‘ease of use’ that was failing 
(Table 1). 
 
TABLE 1 DESIGN ISSUES IN DEVELOPING THE DECIDEGUIDE 
Design quality 
Identified design issues  
System quality 
User-
friendliness 
‘Nice to haves’ 
-Adding things like an agenda; personalized part in tool for case 
managers; linking with domotics; skype function 
-Alerts for daily activities (taking medication; eating etc)   
 
Navigation structure/ease of use 
-Too much screens for people with dementia (cm/ pwd)a 
-Simplifying the screens for people with dementia (pwd) 
-Too many examples with too many colors with too small letters (not all 
pwd agreed) 
-messy screens with too much information (ic) 
-Messages in timeline with chat become a big mess (cm) 
Presentation of content 
-use of smileys is clear but not really nice  (pwd)  
-use of colors red, orange and green is nice. Use of smileys is a bit 
childlike (if) 
-frequency of monitor question differs per network. Monitoring well-
being is important (ic).  
-Attention for use of red color in tool. Red smiley is similar to feeling not 
well. Using also red color for a (neutral) theme suggests ‘danger’ (ic)  
- use of colors in messages is not clear/distinguishing enough (cm+ic) 
Design 
persuasiveness 
Lens for design 
All network members view all messages because the starting point of the 
tool is transparency and open communication.  This is not always 
advisable for person with dementia.  (cm) 
Content quality 
Comprehen-
sibility 
Comprehensibility/Terminology=semantic shortcomings 
-Use of some terms is not clear enough and tool difficult; e.g., options and 
pros and cons of options (pwd)  
-Use of terms is not specific enough; e.g., ‘How are you right now?’ 
instead of  ‘How are you today?’ (pwd) 
 
Accuracy 
- Date and year are incorrect (pwd+ic)  
 
Relevance 
- Open questions are less attractive than question that also offer examples.  
- tool is too directive (pwd) 
- tool is directive: easy to use because you don’t have to invent answers 
by yourself  (ic)  
-adding a wish button… (ic)  
Service quality 
Perceived 
usefulness 
- the tool is very useful  in facilitating SDM in dementia  but how useful 
will it be for people with dementia? (cm) 
aPwd=person with dementia; ic=informal caregiver; cm= case manager 
 
B. Cognitive walkthrough 
The cognitive walkthrough with the research team 
resulted in a fundamental discussion that addressed the 
complexity of the context of decision-making in dementia. 
Researchers commented mainly on the complexity of the 
DEcideguide in particularly for people with dementia. 
Researchers argued that the desirable starting point of the 
DEcideguide, transparency between all network members, 
easily conflicted with the well-being of people with 
dementia. Researchers advised to simplify the DEcideguide 
for those end users. 
255
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. Usability tests 
The feedback of case managers addressed mainly the 
system quality. A variety of bugs was detected together with 
lack of user-friendliness and presence of too many technical 
errors. Case managers commented also on service quality. 
They experienced the tool as very useful and helpful to their 
daily practice but in the mean time they doubted whether the 
tool would be useful for the current group of people with 
dementia because of the lack of computer experience of that 
group. In their opinion the transparency in the DEcideguide 
can be confronting and therefore conflicting with the well-
being of people with dementia. Many people with dementia 
are suspicious. On the one hand, transparency helps to 
decrease suspicion. On the other hand, transparency can 
give an overload of information that people with dementia 
cannot cope with and could result in restlessness. The 
comments of the case managers resulted in a revision of the 
DEcideguide. After this revision is finished other end users 
will test the DEcideguide (Table 1). 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND  FURTHER WORK 
The design phase of the DEcideguide resulted in a list of 
design issues addressing mainly user friendliness and 
comprehensibility. Both researchers and case managers 
considered that the starting points of the DEcideguide, 
transparency and open communication, probably conflict 
with the overall well-being of people with dementia because 
it provides too much information. The usability tests with 
informal caregivers and people with dementia will show 
whether this dilemma will be confirmed or not. Developing 
an IT application for various end users with different 
capacities and interests requires involvement of all end users 
in the design phase of the development trajectory. 
The next step, after finishing the usability tests, is 
conducting a pre-pilot with the refined tool with a dementia 
network consisting of a person with dementia, informal 
caregivers and a case manager acting in daily life. Then, a 
five-month pilot study will be conducted and evaluated.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The Dutch Foundation Innovation Alliance (SIA RAAK 
[Regional Attention and Knowledge Circulation] PRO), 
Zorgpalet Hoogeveen (Residential care organization for 
older adults) and Windesheim University of Applied 
Sciences funded this study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Prince, R. Bryce, and C. Ferri, “World Alzheimer Report 2011,” 
2011. 
[2] 
C. Ferri, et al., “Global prevalence of dementia: a Delphi consensus 
study,” Lancet, 2005. 366: pp. 2112-2117. 
[3] 
G. Livingston et al., “Making decisions for people with dementia who 
lack capacity: qualitative study of family carers in UK,” BMJ, 2010, 
341((aug 18 1) c4184). 
[4] 
H.G. van der Roest et al., “What do community-dwelling people with 
dementia need? A survey of those who are known to care and welfare 
services,” International Psychogeriatrics, 2009, 21(05), pp. 949-965. 
[5] 
M. 
von 
Kutzleben, 
W.Schmid, 
M. 
Halek 
B.Holle, 
S. 
Bartholomeyczik, “Community-dwelling persons with dementia: 
What do they need? What do they demand? What do they do? A 
systematic review on the subjective experiences of persons with 
dementia,” Aging & Mental Health, 2012, 16(3), pp. 378-390. 
[6] 
G. Elwyn, A. Edwards, and P. Kinnersley, “Shared decision-making 
in primary care: the neglected second half of the consultation,” 
British Journal of General Practice, 1999, 49, pp. 477-482. 
[7] 
G. Elwyn et al., “Developing a quality criteria framework for patient 
decision aids: online international Delphi consensus process,” BMJ, 
2006. 
[8] 
P. Zaphiris, M. Ghiawadwala, and S. Mughal. “Age-centered 
Research-Based Web Design Guidelines,” in Proceedings of CHI 
2005 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2005, 
Portland, USA. 
[9] 
P. Zaphiris, S. Kurniawan, and M. Ghiawadwala, “A Systematic 
Approach to the Development of Research-Based Web Design 
Guidelines for Older People,” Universal Access in the Information 
Society Journal, 2007, 6(1), pp. 59-76. 
[10] N. Savitch.and P. Zaphiris. “Accessible websites for People with 
Dementia: a Preliminary Investigation into Information Architecture,” 
in ICCHP, 2006. 
[11] K. Day, D. Carreon, and C. Stump, “The therapeutic design of 
environments for people with dementia: a review of the empirical 
research,” The Gerontologist, 2000, 40(4), pp. 397-416. 
[12] L. Mitchell et al.,  “Making the outside world dementia friendly: 
design issues and considerations,” Environment and Planning B: 
Planning and Design, 2003, 30, pp. 605-632. 
[13] E. Burton and L. Mitchell, “Urban design for longevity,” Urban 
Design Quarterly, 2003, 87, pp. 32-35 
[14] N. Alm et al., “Making software accessible for users with dementia,” 
In J. U. Lazar (Ed.), Niversal usability: Designing computer 
interfaces for diverse users 2007, Wiley: New York. pp. 299-316. 
[15] F.S. Lim et al., “Usability of tablet computers by people wih early-
stage dementia,” Gerontology, 2013, 59, pp. 174-182. 
[16] H. Beyer. and K. Holzblatt, Contextual Design. Defining Customer-
Centered Systems, 2010, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
[17] M. Span et al., “Involving People with Dementia in the Development 
of Supportive IT Applications: a Systematic Review,” Ageing 
Research Reviews  2013, 12, pp. 535-551. 
[18] M. Span et al., “Towards an Information Technology Application that 
Supports Shared Decision Making in Dementia: Identifying User 
Requirements,” Unpublished. 
[19] J.E.W.C. Van Gemert-Pijnen et al., “Introducing a holistic framework 
for eHealth technologies,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, 
2011, 13 (4):e111. 
[20] N. Nijland, “Grounding eHealth: towards a holistic framework for 
sustainable eHealth technologies,”, University of Twente, Enschede,  
2011. ISBN: 9789036531337  
[21] J. Brender, Handbook of Evaluation Methods for Health Informatics. 
2006: Elsevier Academic press, USA. ISBN-13: 978-0-12-370464-1 
[22] J. Ritchie and L. Spencer, eds. “Qualitative data analysis for applied 
policy research,” in Bryman and Burgess, eds., Analysing Qualitative 
Data. 
1994: 
London: 
Routledge 
pp.173-194.
256
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

