An Integrated and Collaborative eHealth System for the Mental Health Services
Claudio Dario, Claudio Saccavini, Silvia Mancin,
Giulia Pellizzon
Veneto’s Research Centre for eHealth Innovation
Arsenàl.IT - Treviso, Italy
{presidente, csaccavini, smancin, gpellizzon}
@consorzioarsenal.it
Gerardo Favaretto
Local Health Authority n. 9
Mental Health Department, Cà Foncello Hospital
Treviso, Italy
gfavaretto@ulss.tv.it
Abstract—As reported by the World Health Organization,
depression is a disorder that can be reliably diagnosed and
treated in primary care, with preferred treatment consisting of
basic psychosocial support combined with antidepressant
medication or psychotherapy, such as cognitive behaviour
therapy, interpersonal psychotherapy or problem solving
treatment. The European project MasterMind, started in
March 2014 and, with 36 months duration, is an observational
study aiming to implement collaborative care services and
cCBT treatment in order to improve the care of people
suffering from depression. The services will be tested in 15
European regions, for a total target of over 5280 patients and
141 professionals involved.
Keywords
-
Integrated
care,
Depression,
General
Pratictioner, Collaborative Care, cCBT.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Reducing quality of life and impairing social and
personal relationships, a depressive disorder may start early
in life and the course is often recurrent [1][2][3]. The World
Heath Organization also said that depression is a treatable
pathology [4], but most people with depression do not
receive
the
care
and
support
they
need.
Frequently,
depression is not recognized and therefore not treated, and
this exposes those affected to various negative consequences.
In Italy, only the 29% of patients affected by depression
receive treatment the same year in which the pathology
appears [5].
The Local Health Authority n° 9 Treviso is one of the
pilot of the MasterMind Project [6]. The European project
MasterMind, started in March 2014 and, with 36 months
duration, has the aim to implement collaborative care
services and cCBT (computerized Cognitive Behaviour
Therapy) treatment in order to improve the care of people
suffering from depression.
MasterMind is an observational study and organizational
improvement of the services, which aims to implement and
disseminate
care
activities
via
tele
psychiatry.
The
MasterMind Project was created to promote the development
of guidelines for the application of tele psychiatry services in
Europe in a safe, effective and efficient way. The project
includes:
•
The organization
according to
the
model of
collaborative care of the relationship between
mental health services and primary care or General
Practitioners (GPs) based on the use of tele
psychiatry
with
data
sharing,
recruitment
procedures
agreed
upon
and
use
of
videoconferencing;
•
A
service
of
Cognitive
Behavioural
Therapy
available
online
(computerized
Cognitive
Behavioural Therapy - cCBT).
The services will be tested in 15 European regions and
the trial evaluation will be developed using a rigorous
method (Model for Assessment of Telemedicine MAST [7])
that follows the Health Technology Assessment (HTA)
rationale.
In adherence to the project, the Local Health Authority
n. 9 has the objectives to:
•
Define an informative system (clinical database)
shared between specialists services (Mental Health
Department) and General Practitioners
•
Supply to the General Practitioners diagnostic
elements
and
guidelines
for
diagnosis
and
treatment
•
Use computerized assessment tools (questionnaires
and/or interviews) whose results can be accessible
to all professionists involved in the network
•
Provide
possibility
of
advice,
also
with
a
videoconferencing system, for the cases discussion
and for the evaluation of therapeutic plans.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we mention the theories and methods used. Section III
presents the results and discussion, and we conclude
proposing next activities in Section IV.
II.
THEORY/METHODS
Improving the collaborative care between the primary
and secondary care and giving new tools to the patients to
support them in the management of their disease is the core
of the Veneto’s pilot initiative. The collaborative care
between
General
Practitioners
and
Mental
Health
Professionals has the scope to
allow the progressive
education of General Practitioners in the identification of
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

first symptoms of depression and give to the primary care the
support of highly skilled specialists when required during the
treatment of a patient.
On the other hand, giving the specific tools to the
patients, the system has the aim to support them in the
management of their disease putting them in contact with
their clinician, when necessary.
The
project
is
on
going
and
currently
the
videoconference service and the cCBT treatment have been
implemented and are in use. At the end of the study
(December 2016), the results of the implementation and
introduction of the use of these services will be evaluated
through an HTA method: the MAST will be applied with a
particular focus on the organizational and economic aspects,
in order to measure the impact on the organization involved,
on the patients treated and on the operating clinical actors.
III.
RESULTS/DISCUSSION
In accordance with the project objectives, the Local
Health Authority n.9 of Treviso has created a network
between General Practitioners and specialists through the
territorial
information
service
and
videoconferencing
(CCVC), for the early identification of depressive disorder
and an effective treatment planning from the first access; and
the implementation of a computerized cognitive behavioural
therapy (cCBT) for patients with depression.
The Local Health Authority n. 9 – Treviso, in the Veneto
Region, has implemented a new model of integrated care,
improving the collaborative care between the primary and
secondary care and giving to the patients the necessary
support in the management of their disease. The actors
involved are General Practitioners from two social district
areas, psychologists and psychiatrists from the Mental
Health Department of Treviso.
The new model includes two new services for what
concerns the collaborative care: the videoconference tool and
a new computerized therapy, the cCBT (computerized
Cognitive Behavioural Therapy).
The videoconference tool is used by the General
Practitioner to ask for support from the specialists. The
General Practitioner can use the videoconference sessions to
share the symptoms and the situation of his patients and
define together the best follow up. Furthermore to permit the
real integration of care, the Territorial Information System
has been integrated with the primary care, giving to the
General Practitioners the possibility to know the history of
the patient, in every moment, and to have the necessary
background to decide the right clinical path. Thanks to the
new integrated relationship, the General Practitioners and the
Mental Health Professionals share the same information
about symptoms, drugs and actions taken and decide together
the better way to take care of patients. Once a month,
General Practitioners, care managers, and psychiatrists have
video consultations discussing each individual patients’
cases. This creates the opportunity for health professionals
closely related to the case to discuss any problems with a
psychiatrist whose role is more specialized and distanced
from the case. Without videoconference, this level of
cooperation and support is not feasible, because it would be
too time consuming and not as efficient and focused.
The second service, the cCBT (computerized Cognitive
Behaviour
Therapy),
is
mostly
a
therapeutic
service
delivered through online sessions with a secure web-based
online treatment platform that provides:
•
Self-help modules that explain the situation the
patient is living in and the relationship between his
emotions and his daily life;
•
Worksheets that actively involve patients regarding
their moods, experiences, quality of sleep, planning
for the future;
The duration of each module is about 30-45 minutes and the
patient should complete one module per week. This tool
supports the patient to deal with his disease, providing the
method
to
recognize
and
change
thought
patterns,
dysfunctional behaviours and perceived feelings, related to
the disease of depression. The activities carried out through
the modules and worksheets are intended to increase the
capacity of people with depression to prevent relapse of
depressive symptoms.
The new care model will be applied to a target of 200
patients followed for three or more months, to monitor the
impact of their improved management and care, in term of
organizational efficiency and clinical integration between
different settings.
The
clinician
through
a
structured
computerized
questionnaire evaluates the patient, who refers to the
General Practitioner to report a likely depression, that
indicates if the patient will be recruited in the study. This
assessment is shared, through the information system with
the Mental Health Department who, subsequently, agrees on
a time for a joint evaluation (by videoconference or at least
through a phone discussion). If the two professionals agree
on the diagnosis, they decide if the patient needs an
intervention and/or a treatment plan. In the first case, the
patient is paced in charge of the Mental Health Department,
otherwise the General Practitioner supports the patient in the
management of the disease. In the event of significant
emergency,
the
General
Practitioner
has
always
the
possibility to transfer the patient to the specialists’ services.
In order to improve the collaborative care between the
primary and secondary care and give new tools to the
patients supporting them in management of their disease, the
services proposed have the scope to allow the progressive
education of General Practitioners in the identification of
first symptoms of depression and give to the primary care
the support of highly skilled specialists when required
during the treatment of a patient.
Assessing the impact of the collaborative care model
with videoconference and sharing of clinical data for patients
with depression, the intervention aims to provide patients
with high quality treatment in their immediate environment
(General Practitioners’ clinic), also extending the points of
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

access for first assessment (General Practitioners, Mental
Health departments, social health districts).
Currently, 30 clinicians and 70 patients are enrolled and
the services presented are implemented and used by all.
During the study, data of the enrolled patients and
professionals are collected in a central database; therefore, at
the end of the study, some qualitative analysis are going to
be done related to the organizations that provide the services.
These data will be the basis for an HTA analysis (Health
Technology Assessment) that will be made at the end of the
project with the objective of assessing the impact of
organizational, economic and social services proposed, with
a view to large-scale deployment services.
The four objectives proposed from the LHA n. 9 and
reporting at the beginning of the article, are all achieved: at
today a specific informative system has been put in place
and has been shared between specialists services (Mental
Health Department) and General Practitioners involved in
the project. In addition, the system has been used to collect
data (questionnaires and/or interviews) that are accessible to
all professionals involved in the network.
All the General Practitioners involved in the project have
been trained through the videoconference sections and
meetings done during the study, enhancing their expertise in
diagnosis
of
depression
and
evaluation
of
efficient
therapeutic plans.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
Depression is a common mental disorder that can be long
lasting or recurrent, substantially impairing an individual’s
ability to function at work or school or cope with daily life.
At a most severe level, depression can lead to suicide. When
mild, people can be treated without medication but when
depression is moderate or severe they may need medication
and professional treatments. Depression is a disorder that can
be reliably diagnosed and treated by non-specialists as part
of primary health care. Specialist care is needed for the
proportion of individuals with complicated depression or
those who do not respond to first-line treatments [8].
Through the continuous sharing of data, the course of
treatment is carried out as cooperation between the GP, the
psychiatrist and the patient. By increasing cooperation
between the different healthcare actors, the new integrated
and collaborative care model aims to delivery of treatment,
care and learning.
REFERENCES
[1]
L.J. Barney, et al., Stigma about depression and its impact on
help-seeking intentions, Aust. N. Z. J. Psychiatry, 40 (1)
(2006), pp. 51–54
[2]
R.V. Bijl,
A.
Ravelli, Current
and residual
functional
disability associated with psychopathology: findings from The
Netherlands Mental Health Survey and Incidence Study
(NEMESIS), Psychol. Med., 30 (3) (2000), pp. 657–668
[3]
N. Titov, Internet-delivered psychotherapy for depression in
adults, Curr. Opin. Psychiatry, 24 (1) (2011), pp. 18–23
[4]
www.who.int/mental_health/en/ [retrieved in April 2016]
[5]
www.salute.gov.it [retrieved in April 2016]
[6]
www.MasterMind-project.eu/ [retrieved in April 2016]
[7]
www.mast-model.info/ [retrieved in April 2016]
[8]
www.who.int/topics/depression/en/ [retrieved in April 2016]
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

