Creation of OAIS-Compliant Archival Packages for Long-Term Preservation of 
Regulatory Metadata, Records and Dossiers 
 
Hrvoje Stancic 
Kresimir Pavlina 
Department of Information Sciences 
Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Zagreb, Croatia 
e-mail: hrvoje.stancic@zg.t-com.hr 
e-mail: kpavlina@ffzg.hr 
Arian Rajh 
Agency for Medicinal Products and Medical Devices 
Zagreb, Croatia 
e-mail: arian.rajh@halmed.hr 
 
Vito Strasberger 
Nanokinetik  
Novo mesto, Slovenia 
e-mail: vito.strasberger@nanokinetik.com
 
 
Abstract – The authors continue their previous research on the 
long-term preservation solution for complex digital objects 
preserved as archival information packages in the domain of 
pharmaceutical records by evolving the proof of concept appli-
cation "ArchiMed" to the level of the prototype. The research 
is put in the context of the responsibility of Marketing Authori-
sation Holders for submitting medicinal products’ dossiers to 
the National Competent Authorities, i.e., regulatory institu-
tions, and the problems of long-term preservation of such rec-
ords. The authors explain the problems those institutions are 
facing, the theory behind the long-term preservation concept 
and the requirements that digital preservation systems are fac-
ing with. The authors also explain the regulatory business pro-
cess for better understanding of the organisational differences 
and technical issues on the European level. The differences be-
tween four formats of dossiers, NtA, CTD, NeeS and eCTD, are 
indicated. Based on the detected problems and previous proof 
of concept, the ArchiMed module was developed in order to 
further test its functionalities required by the digital preserva-
tion theory and to prove its conformance with the most im-
portant international standards like ISO 15489-1, ISO 14721: 
2003 and others. The authors conclude that the proposed 
solution contributes to the regulation of archival procedures in 
the area of long-term preservation of regulatory records in the 
digital form. The paper shows how to regulate the regulatory 
process in the domain of control of medicines from the archival 
point of view with the aim of long-term preservation of 
important electronic records. 
Keywords – digital preservation, medicinal products, dossiers, 
OAIS, ArchiMed, regulatory business, Europe, eCTD. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Marketing Authorisation Holders (MAHs) are responsi-
ble for submitting medicinal products’ dossiers and National 
Competent Authorities (NCAs) as regulatory institutions are 
responsible for granting marketing authorisation for their 
medicinal products. Marketing authorisation is issued by 
NCA after the positive assessment of submitted dossiers. The 
EU Member States’ NCAs started to receive electronic me-
dicinal product dossiers published according to the electronic 
Common Technical Document standard (eCTD) [1][2]. An 
eCTD dossier consists of sequence(s), modules and sections 
of administrative records, summaries, quality records, non-
clinical and clinical records, and XML backbone. It is rec-
ommended that a MAH organises the eCTD dossier for the 
same medicine always in the same root folder, but this re-
quirement is not obligatory. Beside eCTD, there are several 
other standards for pharmaceutical records in circulation, and 
NCAs often have additional national requirements concern-
ing records, which are not included in international standards 
and have to be submitted separately, usually in the working-
documents folder.  
MAHs and NCAs have difficulties with managing dossi-
ers and other records and with preparing them for the long-
term preservation. MAHs should be able to preserve their re-
cords in order to meet regulatory and legal requirements, to 
provide support for everyday business processes, to provide 
business continuity and legal evidence when needed. NCAs 
should prepare for digital archiving in order to react on time 
in case of any public safety incident. Additionally, they are 
often under supervision of national archival authorities. Dif-
ficulties in managing and preserving electronic dossiers and 
other records, in a MAH organisation, can result with failure 
when their headquarters or NCA asks them to show medici-
nal product records that were valid for the specific product in 
the specific period, when they are asked to show records that 
were submitted for particular market, or to show the latest 
state of the dossier. NCAs have similar difficulties and more 
serious obligations regarding demands of the public health. 
That is why we are proposing a better solution in managing 
and archiving regulatory dossiers and records. The proposed 
solution is a result of extension of our previous research [3] 
and integration with the newly developed application for 
managing regulatory processes. The concept that lies beneath 
the solution is strongly process-oriented and based on ISO 
14721:2003 – Open Archival Information System Reference 
Model. 
Next, the research that preceded the development of the 
proposed solution is presented followed by the detailed de-
scription of the regulatory business processes. Then, the 
proof of concept and integration into the prototype applica-
tion is explained followed by the conclusion and information 
on the future research. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
RESEARCH 
Archival materials, in this case dossiers and other records 
created in the process of controlling medicines, are easily 
created by the use of information technology. The same tech-
nology also enables those materials to be easily changed or 
modified. For various usages in the everyday workflow this 
is an advantage but in the context of the preservation it 
should be looked upon as a disadvantage. Archived materi-
als, once they become records, should not be changed in any 
way that affects their authenticity, integrity, reliability or 
usability, as defined by ISO 15489-1 [4]. This could be 
solved by storing those records in a safe place, only if the 
technology would not change substantially in the matter of 
few years. Kuny [5] is consenting with the Moore's law when 
stating: "Organizations are being asked to make fiscal com-
mitments to creating complex technical infrastructures that 
change every 3-5 years and which require increasingly ex-
pensive technical expertise to keep functioning." Neverthe-
less, when the electronic records need to be preserved in the 
long-term it is not only the problem that the infrastructure, 
i.e., computer architecture, is changing quickly, but the soft-
ware applications and file formats change as well. Therefore, 
to be able to read an old e-record it is necessary either to 
keep the original hardware/software solutions, which is 
highly unlikely and very expensive, or to use one of the other 
techniques, migration most likely, as in Thibodeau [6]. This 
means changing the records in order for them to function and 
be readable using the latest technology. How to do this with-
out endangering authenticity?  
The Authenticity Task Force [7] differentiates two kinds 
of establishing the notion of authenticity – the presumption 
and the verification of authenticity. 
• A presumption of authenticity is an inference that is 
drawn from known facts about the manner in which 
a record has been created and maintained. The evi-
dence that supports the presumption that the record 
creator created and maintained them authentic are 
enumerated in the Benchmark Requirements Sup-
porting the Presumption of Authenticity of Elec-
tronic Records. A presumption of authenticity will 
be based upon the number of requirements that have 
been met and the degree to which each has been met. 
The requirements are, therefore, cumulative: the 
higher the number of satisfied requirements, and the 
greater the degree to which an individual require-
ment has been satisfied, the stronger the presumption 
of authenticity. 
• In any given case, there may be an insufficient basis 
for a presumption of authenticity, or the presumption 
may be extremely weak. In such cases, further analy-
sis may be necessary to verify the authenticity of the 
records. A verification of authenticity is the act or 
process of establishing a correspondence between 
known facts about the record and the various con-
texts in which it has been created and maintained, 
and the proposed fact of the record’s authenticity. 
In any case, it is best if it could be proved that the records 
are not changed in the way that their authenticity is ques-
tioned, or, when the migration is needed, that the authenticity 
was not compromised during that process. Both requirements 
could be answered by the properly established preservation 
environment with properly implemented and documented 
preservation processes and procedures. OAIS reference 
model [8] could be used to build such a system environment. 
Although it does not suggest the concrete technology to be 
used it presents a model to be built using the latest technol-
ogy. By creating all the functional entities and their interre-
lated connections, a trusted digital preservation environment 
could be established. OAIS information model comprises of 
three types of information packages – submission informa-
tion package (SIP), archival information package (AIP), and 
dissemination information package (DIP). It is important to 
understand that if both Marketing Authorisation Holder and 
National competent authority have implemented the digital 
archive according to the OAIS reference model than what 
MAH creates is a DIP from their standpoint while the same 
package is a SIP from the NCA’s standpoint it is a SIP. We 
will refer to this notion later on in the explanation of the 
functions of the proposed solution for long-term preservation 
of authentic medicinal records. 
In the process of long-term preservation the metadata are 
of the utmost importance. Dobreva and Ikonomov [9] state 
that "there are two key issues which need to be considered 
vis-à-vis metadata and preservation: 
1. What metadata are needed for preservation pur-
poses (...) (besides assuring a reliable preservation 
process, they should help the designated communi-
ties to understand the resources), and 
2. How to preserve the metadata accompanying exist-
ing digital objects. 
Having all these in mind, preservation metadata area pro-
vides many challenges. What preservation metadata to use? 
What minimum set needs to be supplied in order to guaran-
tee a reliable preservation process? How to automate the 
creation of preservation metadata? How to guarantee that the 
digital resources developed within a particular project are ac-
companied by sufficient preservation quality metadata? And 
how to guarantee interoperability between multiple existing 
schemes? It is not easy for any organisation or project to 
make decisions regarding the metadata in this situation." 
Having acknowledged these problems and the fact that there 
are several main metadata standards, in our previous work 
[3] we have suggested the minimum set of metadata to be 
preserved mapped them across the different standards 
(METS, ISO 23081, ISO 14721:2003) for ease of the future 
preservation actions. Also, in our previous research we have 
developed a model for the long-term preservation of phar-
maceutical records in the eCTD file format, determined the 
functionalities that an application intended for the creation of 
a complex electronic object record of a medicine, intended 
for the long-term preservation in a digital archive, should 
have, and created a proof of concept – ArchiMed – the ap-
plication for archiving and long-term preservation of eCTD 
records. Upon the latest research we have determined the im-
provement possibilities and developed the application fur-
ther, from the proof of concept to the prototype level, in or-
der to be able to advance managing the regulatory processes. 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
REGULATORY BUSINESS PROCESSES 
Regulatory processes in the domain of control of medi-
cines are very complex in Europe [16]. There are a lot of 
stakeholders involved and collaboration between them is dif-
ficult due to their organisational differences and technical is-
sues. MAHs could submit dossier and other records for mar-
keting authorisation, renewal of that authorisation or varia-
tion of authorisation for medicines placed on one particular 
national market, several European Member States’ markets 
or for a single European Community market. If MAH sends 
application for more than one market, it has to opt between 
tree different procedures – centralised procedure, decentral-
ised procedure or mutual recognition procedure. Selection of 
marketing authorisation procedure depends on the legal ba-
sis, type of application and MAH’s sales strategy. As we will 
see later, this will be an important factor in the creation of 
digital archival records.  
The centralised procedure (CP) is set aside for medicines 
applied to the single market of the Community. Marketing 
authorisation granted under this procedure is suitable for all 
Member States markets and this procedure is led by the 
European Medicines Agency. It is mandatory for innovative 
or biosimillar medicines developed by biotechnological 
manufacturing processes such as “recombinant DNA tech-
nology, controlled expression of genes coding for biologi-
cally active proteins (…), hybridoma and monoclonal anti-
body methods (…), medicinal products (…) containing a 
new active substance which (…) was not authorised in the 
Community” (for AIDS, cancer, neurodegenerative disorder, 
diabetes), and for orphan medicines [11]. Medicinal products 
with a new, unauthorised active substance for other treat-
ments and medicines that significantly improve therapies or 
represent improvements in scientific or technological sense, 
and generic or hybrid medicines, which have reference me-
dicinal product authorised by European Medicines Agency 
can also be authorised via the centralised procedure.  
The decentralised procedure (DCP) is a marketing 
authorisation procedure that starts at the same time in a 
referent Member State and all other involved Member States. 
The referent member state is represented by NCA in the 
particular Member State that leads the process by producing 
assessment report. Assessment report is the basis for granting 
approvals in other NCAs.  
The mutual recognition procedure (MRP) is a procedure 
of granting marketing authorisation in which applicant sends 
its application to other Member States after the medicine has 
been approved for market in the referent Member State.  
The national procedure (NP) is reserved for one national 
market only.  
Majority of NCAs have their own particular requirements 
regarding the dossiers and this makes submitting of applica-
tion even more complex. That is the main reason why we 
have decided to shift back to business processes instead of 
focusing to the business process resources or dossiers. The 
main problem lies in usage of different formats of business 
process resources (dossiers). Although some of them have 
become obsolete on the conceptual level [12], some medi-
cines, which are important for different markets do not have 
new documentation, some applicants are incapable of pub-
lishing technically valid electronic dossiers, and for stated 
reasons even now applicants submit dossiers in four different 
formats – NtA (Notice To Applicants), CTD (Common 
Technical Document), NeeS (Non-eCTD electronic Submis-
sion) and eCTD. NtA consists of four parts (administrative, 
pharmacological-biological, nonclinical and clinical part) 
and it is considered to be obsolete on the conceptual level. 
CTD, NeeS and eCTD share the same structure and 
granulation (administrative module, module of summaries, 
quality module, module for nonclinical data and module for 
clinical data), but CTD is a paper dossier, and NeeS and 
eCTD are e-dossiers. The difference between NeeS and 
eCTD is that NeeS does not contain XML backbone and thus 
does not enable the review software to monitor the lifecycle 
of contained files automatically. However, it is easier for 
MAHs to produce NeeS dossier because they do not have to 
invest in specialised publishing tools. Because of that 
majority of smaller generic pharmaceutical companies and 
MAHs prefer to use NeeS. Bigger companies work with 
eCTDs, but staff of their local MAHs subsidiaries lack the 
technological knowledge sufficient for producing technically 
valid dossiers. eCTD dossiers are a novelty even for NCAs’ 
staff, despite the Heads of medicines agencies meeting in 
Reykjavik in 2005 during which the shift to eCTD was agreed.  
Because of situation described above the dossier-centric 
approach has resulted in the operational problems for MAHs 
and NCAs and in insufficiencies of records management 
technologies so far. Typical large IT vendors usually do not 
have enough know-how for regulatory affairs’ processes, es-
pecially for NCAs’ processes. MAHs and NCAs respond to 
these difficulties by avoiding the use of the eCTD dossiers, 
because, for using electronic dossiers in-house, processes 
and organisation of work should be carefully designed and 
heavy, non-scalable, partially operational and very expensive 
typical IT solutions should be invested into [13]. That is the 
very reason why we are suggesting turning back to the root 
problem. It means satisfying the requirement for managing 
regulatory processes and regulatory affairs first, and then 
managing dossiers and documents.  
Our first goal is to focus on the regulatory business proc-
esses. They are supported by carefully designed metadata 
and by a process of metadata inheritance starting from the 
regulatory processes themselves and going all the way to the 
related archival packages with their components and files. 
Metadata can be colected even reversibly, from XML of the 
eCTD dossier back to the process.  
Our second goal is to automate the creation of archival 
information packages (AIPs) and dissemination information 
packages (DIPs). Dissemination information packages are 
packages of content prepared for dissemination to NCAs or 
to other stakeholders from MAHs’ perspective. For NCAs 
they will be considered as submission information packages. 
AIPs should enable long-term preservation of content with 
pertaining metadata in a manner that they logically encapsu-
late content and enable reporting about the content. Reports 
can provide information necessary for long-term preserva-
tion activities, i.e., information about the containing filetypes 
that might become obsolete and need to be migrated. 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV. 
PROOF OF CONCEPT AND INTEGRATION INTO THE 
PROTOTYPE APPLICATION 
Previously developed proof of concept application “Ar-
chiMed”[3] was improved and is being integrated with the 
newly developed application for managing regulatory af-
fairs’ processes called “READY”, produced by Nanokinetik. 
ArchiMed is being integrated into READY on the module 
level. The newly created prototype made of READY and Ar-
chiMed has functionalities for managing regulatory proc-
esses and managing dossiers as well as other documents and 
metadata as the OAIS-compliant information packages.  
Information packages, in the previous, self-standing, Ar-
chiMed application were divided into SIPs (1 and 2) and 
AIPs. SIP 1 represented the package for eCTD or NeeS dos-
siers, and SIP 2 represented the package for workingdocu-
ments. AIPs were used for archived content in the external 
repository.  
In the new prototype the information model was redes-
igned (compare with [3]) and now it additionally encom-
passes flexible AIPs and DIPs – as a category reserved for 
content prepared for MAH–NCA communication. DIP pre-
pared as described is a SIP from NCAs’ perspective and the 
basis for creation of NCAs’ AIPs (see Figure 1). The main 
difference between AIPs and the other packages prepared by 
the new prototype is that AIPs can be versioned, which 
means that new components and files can be added, while 
DIPs/SIPs cannot be modified or deleted at all. This re-
striction is introduced because the content sent or received 
by NCA should have quality of non-repudiation. Each ver-
sion of AIPs can be tracked reversibly so AIPs have broad 
long-term preservation prospect and quality of authenticity at 
the same time. Authenticity is supported by versioning, 
tracking and protection of each version, and every part of its 
content, by the MD5 checksum. For the purpose of the 
development of the new prototype, content of packages was 
redesigned and a new category of component was added into 
the prototype data model. It is positioned on a level between 
package and file, introduced for enabling adding, editing or 
deleting large “chunks” of information previously prepared 
by the READY application or other external system. Files 
and components are categorized. In this sense stand-alone 
files also pertain to one category. Non-file components are 
eSubmissions (category which describes structure of root 
folders, sequences, modules, sections, and files), working-
documents (category with possibility to pre-define or import 
directory structure for files required by a particular NCA) 
and other categories created according to the business needs. 
The new prototype also introduced changes related to meta-
data describing packages and functions. 
The main objects of ArchiMed module are: 
• 
package (AIP in OAIS context),  
• 
disseminated package (DIP/SIP in OAIS context, 
depending on the standpoint),  
• 
component, and  
• 
file.  
 
The metadata was coded according to the international 
standards ISO 14721:2003 Open Archival Information Sys-
tem – Reference Model [8], ISO 23081 Metadata for records 
[14][15], and METS scheme [16]. Different metadata groups 
from the stated standards and scheme were reduced to a 
common denominator. The intention was to have possibility 
of mapping ArchiMed metadata to OAIS, ISO 23081 and 
METS metadata groups. Even external metadata, which are 
extracted from the content or READY application, can be 
mapped to the standards, i.e., metadata on an eCTD docu-
ment type definition version belongs to OAIS provenance 
preservation description information, ISO 23081 use meta-
data group and to METS techMD class of descriptive meta-
data section [3]. Some metadata describing packages are also 
functioning as identifiers – hash strings and metadata related 
to the validity of package and validity check intervals.  
Disseminated package contains similar metadata and it 
could be created out of one or more components form one or 
more packages because it represents what is going to be sent 
from MAH to NCA. Component related metadata include 
identifier, hash strings and relation metadata for connection 
component with a particular package. File metadata addition-
ally take account of file types, extensions and version of file 
formats, because ArchiMed enables content analysis and re-
porting for preservation purposes. This is the realisation of 
the Preservation planning function of OAIS functional 
model. Other component metadata are inherited from the 
READY application and the content. The content related 
metadata is metadata about applicant, agency, invented 
name, active substance etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Conversion from the MAHs’ Archival Information Package 
(AIP 1) to the Dissemination Information Package (DIP) intended for the 
National Competent Authorities (NCAs) where they receive it as the 
Submission Information Package (SIP) and preserve as AIP 2. 
Functions of ArchiMed module prototype are divided to 
package functions, component and file functions, and report-
ing functions. 
1. Package functions 
1.1. Create package – function inserts new AIP to data-
base and creates basic information from input para-
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

meters. Function also adds version number of AIP 
and generates MD5 hash for every file in the com-
ponent, every component of the package and for the 
whole AIP package. XML file with metadata is cre-
ated and value of MD5 hash function is added into 
the XML metadata file. If the hash check interval is 
set, function check package will be called on par-
ticular date and time. 
1.2. Edit package – function updates package informa-
tion in database and raises the version of the pack-
age. All package attributes can be edited by using 
this function (i.e., components and files can be 
added into package). The new XML metadata file is 
created, MD5 check is recalculated and its new 
value is embedded into the XML file.  
1.3. Delete package – deletes package from the data-
base. 
1.4. Create dissemination package – creates package 
that will be delivered to NCA, local MAH, or other 
regulatory affairs’ stakeholder.   
1.5. Get package – function returns package or packages 
information from the database. Packages are re-
trieved according to the selected descriptors, i.e., 
function gets all packages for a particular medicinal 
product that was valid for particular period. 
1.6. Get all packages – function returns all packages’ in-
formation from the database. 
1.7. Check package – function performs MD5 hash 
check on a specified package. 
1.8. Check all packages – function performs MD5 hash 
check on all packages and finds invalid ones. 
2. Component and file functions 
2.1. Select component type – function categorizes com-
ponents. Files and components are categorized 
(they have a value of component type attribute; in 
this sense stand-alone files also pertain to one cate-
gory). All additional components except eSubmis-
sion and workingdocument should be defined with 
Add component type function. Function Select com-
ponent type is called after Create package, Add 
component/file or Edit package. 
2.2. Add component type – each structure should be de-
fined as a component of the package. 
2.3. Delete component type – function deletes unneces-
sary component type if there is no package contain-
ing component of such type in the database.  
2.4. Add component/file – function inserts new compo-
nent into a package. Function is also called when 
creating a package. It generates MD5 hash for the 
created component(s) and file(s). Valid-until meta-
data can be used for adding information about va-
lidity of the component (i.e., when MAH receives 
license that is valid until a defined date). This infor-
mation can be imported and mapped from the 
READY application’s metadata. 
2.5. Edit component/file – function updates component 
in a package, i.e., edits component for new version 
of the package. 
2.6. Delete component/file – function deletes compo-
nent and/or files from a package in order to prepare 
new version of the package. 
2.7. Check component/file – function performs MD5 
hash check on a specified component in a package 
(component could be a file). 
3. Report functions 
3.1. Check expiration – function returns all packages 
that expire before the defined date. 
3.2. Filetype report – function returns statistical data for 
every file type in repository per package and per 
component in the package. Function should be used 
for preparation of the migration of independent 
files and files in components (all components in a 
package) into new version of the package. 
3.3. Sent to partners report – function returns all dis-
seminated packages that have been sent to the se-
lected partner (MAH should be able to prove which 
package was sent to which NCA). 
For the example of proof of concept and integration into 
the prototype application see Figure 2. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
We have put this research in the context of the regulatory 
processes in the domain of control of medicines. We have 
described the difficulties the Marketing Authorisation Hold-
ers have with managing dossiers and other records and with 
preparing them for the long-term preservation. Upon re-
searching the relevant resources and clarifying the digital 
preservation requirements, we have explained the regulatory 
business process and possible marketing authorisation proce-
dures, as well as the types of records created and used. In this 
research we have argued not only the importance of long-
term preservation of digital records created in the process of 
controlling medicines but the importance of their preserva-
tion of the authentic records too. In any legal dispute involv-
ing digital medicinal products’ dossiers it is very important 
that it is possible to prove their authenticity, integrity, reli-
ability and usability. In that sense the records should be pre-
served in the way that any change, intentional or uninten-
tional, is detected. It is also important that the system is ca-
pable of automatic records’ validation possibilities, back-
ground or initiated at any time. The system we have pro-
posed is having these characteristics and is also capable of 
checking the expiration state of the records, of reporting the 
file types in the archive thus facilitating the migration proce-
dures etc. We have developed the prototype application 
READY. Previously developed ArchiMed proof of concept 
has been developed as READY’s module. We have also pre-
sented the ArchiMed module’s package functions, compo-
nent and file functions, and report functions. 
It is important to point out that the prototype application 
is fully consistent with the OAIS’s functional model’s Pres-
ervation planning function. It preserves records’ authenticity, 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

integrity and reliability by calculating the hash values both 
for individual files and packages. It enables and facilitates 
preservation of usability by detecting file format types and 
format versions, which is very usable for the long-term pres-
ervation planning. Therefore, in our opinion, it presents a 
valuable contribution to the regulation of archival procedures 
and long-term preservation of regulatory metadata, records 
and dossiers. We are expecting that stakeholders and end-us-
ers will be using READY application since it is going to be 
consistent with the Best archiving practice (guidance) that 
are just being put together at the EU level. Also, the new 
pharmacovigilance legislation will require, starting from 1 
July 2012 at the EU level, that all documentation changes are 
to be tracked. READY application could improve intra-EU 
collaboration in the area of DCP and MRP procedures since 
the national agencies should work together on the preserva-
tion of regulatory records. 
The future research will be focused on the development 
of the fully functional application from the prototype de-
scribed here. It will be necessary to study the additional 
functionalities that the application intended for the long-term 
preservation of the regulatory digital records and dossiers 
should have in order to make Marketing Authorisation Hold-
ers, National Competent Authorities and in the end – patients 
certain that the sensitive and important records will be prop-
erly preserved for the needed period of time. 
REFERENCES 
[1] EU Module 1 specification v.1.4, August 2009, http:// 
esubmission.emea.europa.eu/eumodule1/docs/EU%20M1%20
1.4/EU%20M1%20Specifications%20v1.4%20FINAL.pdf 
(23/12/2010).  
[2] ICH M2 EWG electronic common technical document 
specification, 
July 
2008, 
http://estri.ich.org/ectd/eCTD_ 
Specification_v3_2_2.pdf (23/12/2010). 
[3] H. Stančić, A. Rajh, and K. Pavlina, "Long-term Preservation 
Solution for Complex Digital Objects Preserved as Archival 
Information Packages  in the Domain of Pharmaceutical 
Records," Digital World 2011, IARIA, Gossier, Guadeloupe. 
[4] ISO 15489-1 Information and documentation – Records 
management.  
[5]  T. Kuny, "A Digital Dark Ages? Challenges in the Preserva-
tion of Electronic Information," 63rd IFLA Council and Gen-
eral Conference, 4 September, 1997, http://archive.ifla.org/IV/ 
ifla63/63kuny1.pdf (27/08/2011). 
[6]  K. Thibodeau, "Overview of Technological Approaches to 
Digital Preservation and Challenges in Coming Years," The 
State of Digital Preservation: An International Perspective, 
CLIR, Washington, D.C., July 2002, pp. 4-31, http://www. 
clir.org/pubs/reports/pub107/pub107.pdf (27/08/2011). 
[7]  The Long-term Preservation of Authentic Electronic Records: 
Findings of the InterPARES Project – Authenticity Task 
Force Report, March 2002, http://www.interpares.org/book/ 
interpares_book_k_app02.pdf (27/08/2011). 
[8]  ISO 14721:2003 Space data and information transfer systems 
– Open archival information system – Reference model. 
[9]  M. Dobreva and N. Ikonomov, "The Role of Metadata in the 
Longevity of Cultural Heritage Resources," Proc. EACL 2009 
Workshop on Language Technology and Resources for 
Cultural 
Heritage, 
Social 
Sciences, 
Humanities, 
and 
Education –LaTeCH – SHELT&R 2009, Athens, Greece, 30 
March 2009. Association for Computational Linguistics, 
2009, pp. 69-76. 
[10] H. Dureja and R. Dulichand, "New Drug Approval Process: 
Regulatory View," Pharmaceutical Reviews journal, 2010, 
8/4, http://www.pharmainfo.net/reviews/new-drug-approval-
process-regulatory-view (23/11/2011). 
[11] European Medicines Agency pre-submission procedural 
advice for users of the centralised procedure, May 2011, 
http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Re
gulatory_and_procedural_guideline/2009/10/WC500004069.p
df, (10/08/2011). 
[12]  H. Stančić, Teorijski model postojanog očuvanja autentičnosti 
elektroničkih informacijskih objekata (dissertation). Zagreb, 
Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences University of 
Zagreb, 2005. 
[13]  A. Rajh and N. Zorić, "Prva regionalna radionica o 
elektroničkoj dokumentaciji o lijeku," Farmaceutski glasnik, 
Hrvatsko farmaceutsko društvo, Zagreb, 2011, 67/5. 
[14]  ISO 23081-1 Information and documentation – Records 
management processes – Metadata for records – Part 1: 
Principles (ISO 23081-1:2006). 
[15]  ISO 23081-1 Information and documentation – Records man-
agement processes – Metadata for records – Part 2: Concep-
tual and implementation issues (ISO/TS 23081-2:2007). 
[16]  METS – Metadata Encoding and Transmission Standard: 
Primer and Reference Manual, Version 1.6 Revised, Digital 
Library Federation, 2010, http://www.loc.gov/standards/mets/ 
METSPrimerRevised.pdf (01/09/2011). 
 
 
Figure 2.  READY Application 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

