Patient-Buddy-Build: Customized Mobile Monitoring for Patients with 
Chronic Diseases 
 
Vitor Pinheiro de Almeida, Markus Endler e Edward Hermann Haeusler 
Department of Informatics 
Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio) 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
{valmeida, endler, hermann}@inf.puc-rio.br 
 
 
Abstract—This work consists of developing a tool for 
generating mobile apps containing a questionnaire tailored to 
the distance monitoring of patients with chronic diseases. The 
customization is based on parameters and formal descriptions 
such as patient preferences, type of chronic disease, monitoring 
process required by the doctor, prescribed medication and 
information about the context (i.e. environment) of the patient, 
that are to be obtained from sensors. The questionnaire 
generated from this data should be completed by the patient 
with his/her condition and possible symptoms. These pieces of 
informations will be sent by the mobile app together with the 
data from the sensors to the responsible physician. The medical 
treatment and the kind of chronic disease will define the set of 
information to be collected. It should be stressed that the goal 
is not to support automatic diagnosis, but only to provide 
means for physicians to obtain updated information about 
their patients, so as to allow remote monitoring of patients. 
Keywords - mobile health; patient monitoring; ontologies; 
expert system; context-aware application. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
From the 90’s until now, we can see a huge growth in the 
development 
of 
technologies 
for 
cellular 
mobile 
communication. The popularization of these technologies has 
enabled access to remote information anytime and anywhere, 
opening a wide range of new applications and services to 
users. 
The number of mobile devices like smartphones grows 
increasingly in Brazil. According to data released by IDC, a 
consultancy 
firm 
specialized 
in 
technology 
and 
telecommunications market, approximately 15,4 million 
units of these devices have been sold in Brazil in 2012 [2]. 
In parallel, the coverage of mobile network also increases 
continuously; by the end of 2012, Brazil should have 124 
million mobile broadband access points. It is expected that in 
the near future even low income people will have smart 
phones and access to mobile broadband in cities, as well as 
in many rural areas. 
Hence, in this scenario there is an increasing urge of 
mobile application development for every field, including 
health care.  
Mobile Health characterizes the practice of medicine and 
healthcare through mobile devices [3]. This area grows every 
day, and more and more hospitals and healthcare 
professionals are adopting to mobile technology. 
The health application for mobile phones and mobile 
devices are expanding and changing the way of how and 
where medical care is done. Actively engaging patients and 
health professionals using sensor-rich mobile devices can 
help to monitor, prevent and treat diseases [4]. Furthermore, 
patients that have difficulties to go to a hospital or their 
doctors, either because they live far away or do not have 
sufficient funds, may benefit from a more convenient, 
cheaper and yet effective medical care. 
This work addresses the monitoring of patients with 
chronic diseases mainly because of the following [1]:  
 
• 
A characteristic of an aging population. 
• 
Involves high cost treatment. 
• 
May include high risk patients. 
 
The remote monitoring of these patients can help to 
prevent their health conditions from worsening and avoid 
health crises. [5]. 
II. 
OBJECTIVE 
The main objective of this work is to develop Patient-
Buddy-Build (PBB), a prototype tool for generating mobile 
applications containing a customized questionnaire for 
remote monitoring of patients with chronic diseases.  
The purpose is not to develop a complete and readily 
usable mobile application, but to use it as a proof of concept 
of the proposed technique of automatic generation of mobile 
questionnaires from formal descriptions (including patient 
and doctor preferences, symptoms of disease, treatment 
method, etc) and to identify benefits and limitations, of the 
approach. In particular, this work has its focus in: 
 
• 
Representation of medical knowledge and context 
information using ontologies [6]. 
• 
Generation of customized questionnaires using a 
knowledge base that contains information about the 
patient, available mobile sensor data, the disease and the 
monitoring process. The idea is that the information 
obtained from the questionnaires (filled out by patients) 
and the information provided by the sensors (such as 
GPS), are suitable for remote monitoring of the patient 
by doctors. 
 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section III describes the overall project, introduces the 
cooperation partners and explains what methodology is being 
used in this project. In Section IV, we describe about the 
current developed prototype. Section V gives an overview of 
our proposal for the final prototype and the technique of 
automatic 
generation 
of 
questionnaires 
for 
remote 
monitoring of patients with chronic disease. And finally, in 
Section VI, we draw some conclusions about the project. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
 This work is being developed within the scope of the 
MobileHealthNet project [7], a joint effort of the Distributed 
Systems Lab at UFMA [8] and the Laboratory for Advanced 
Collaboration at PUC-Rio [9], with support from the 
University Hospital (HUUFMA) of UFMA (Federal 
university of Maranhão). In particular, the development of 
the Patient-Buddy-Build (PBB) is being supported by two 
units of the HUUFMA: The Assistance Program to 
Asthmatic Patients (PAPA) and the “Casa da Dor”, which 
specializes in treating patients suffering with chronic pain. 
The PBB relies on the MobileHealthNet communication 
middleware which has authentication and cryptographic 
mechanisms already implemented in it. Therefore issues 
regarding security will not be discussed in the paper. 
The overall methodology for development of the Patient-
Buddy-Build (PBB) consists of the analysis and evaluation 
of the results obtained from the process described below: 
1. Meetings with doctors involved in the project to 
survey requirements regarding the monitoring of patients 
with chronic disease. 
2. Development of a first prototype to gain more 
involvement with doctors, giving them a more concrete 
example and thus helping them to better understand how to 
contribute. 
3. Proposal for a model with a high level language for 
describing processes for monitoring of patients to be 
discussed and refined with doctors. 
IV. 
THE FIRST PROTOTYPE 
According to number 2 (described in the previous 
section), a prototype was developed to give the doctors a 
better understanding of the tool, and to improve our 
familiarity 
with 
the 
Android 
platform 
and 
the 
communication middleware that will be used in the project. 
Fig. 1 shows an overview of the prototype’s components: 
 
 
Figure 1.  The first prototype. 
In this first prototype a group of symptoms is associated 
with a questionnaire. So, depending on the symptoms that 
the patient has, a different questionnaire will be generated. 
The specialist defines the questionnaires, the group of 
symptoms and relates them to each other. All this 
information is defined through an ontology persisted in the 
mobile phone. This ontology defines as well how to answer 
each question (ex.: using a text box or preset options).      
A location provider was created that informs the 
geographical position of the user. An address provider, that 
given a latitude and longitude, informs the address that the 
user is located. And a provider that, given an address, gathers 
current weather information in the region. Since we are 
working with chronic diseases like asthma, weather 
information can be very useful to better monitoring the 
patient.  
Asthmatic patients are more susceptible to climate 
change. Their health condition can get worse if, for example, 
the weather gets too hot or too cold. For this reason was 
created a context provider that informs the application about 
the climatic conditions. 
The patient executes the application and answers a 
questionnaire. At the end of it, the answers and the 
information collected by the context providers are sent to the 
doctor’s application that shows the information received on 
screen. 
V. 
THE FINAL PROTOTYPE 
We will develop a framework for generation of mobile 
applications, where each one will be responsible for 
monitoring a patient. The monitoring will be done by 
collecting information from the environment and in response 
to questionnaires generated automatically. The idea is that 
these questionnaires can be answered in a quick and practical 
way, without excessive input text and prevalence of multiple 
choice answers. The information collected is sent to the 
doctor, so he can make an assessment of the patient’s 
condition. We also will develop a notification system where 
the doctor can, for example, notify the patient to attend the 
hospital for a change in treatment or further analysis. 
 
A. The organization of the knowledge base 
Here we will talk about the organization of the 
knowledge base [10] that will be used to generate the 
questionnaire and for aiding the patient monitoring. It is 
divided into four ontologies described below: 
1) Disease Ontology: Contains disease data relevant to 
the application as it relates to the monitoring of patients 
with chronic disease. Information like symptoms, disease’s 
name and description.  
 
2) Questionnaire Ontology: This ontology describes 
information concerning the questionnaire. Question types, 
e.g., font size to be used, text color, etc. The type of answer 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

that will be allowed, for example, multiple choice, text box 
or by using the accelerometer provided by the smartphone. 
 
3) Environment Ontology: Describes what context data 
will be captured from the environment. These data can be 
captured through sensors or web services. Depending on the 
mobile device used, it may have different sensors that can 
be configured to use the application. Examples: GPS 
(Global Positioning System), to determine location and 
accelerometer can be used as another way to answer 
questions with “yes” or “no” as possible answers. The 
context data will be modeled as described here [11]. 
4) Control Ontology: It defines the disease states in 
which the patient may be during monitoring. In Fig. 2 they 
are named as: Healthy, Pre-critic and Critic. This ontology 
describes how the knowledge from all the other ontologies 
will be applied to monitor the patient. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Control Ontology. 
Each of these states has a set of rules that define whether 
a patient is in that state or not. Transitions have a source state 
and a target state; they also have a set of rules that define 
what is needed to go from the origin state to the target state. 
When a questionnaire is generated it will direct the questions 
to extract information to help identify if the patient’s state 
has changed or not. 
Furthermore, this ontology also defines the frequency of 
the formulation of questionnaires and the factors that may 
trigger it. The user can set, for example that if the climate is 
favorable to a worsening of the patient, the frequency of the 
questionnaire generation should be increased. 
 
B. An overview of the process for generating the 
questionnaire 
 
Fig. 3 presents more detailed information about the 
transition 1, also presented in Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Transition 1. 
The transitions are divided into two parts: the conditions 
and the conclusion. In transition 1 illustrated in fig. 3, the 
conditions are breathing difficulties, peak flow rate between 
50%-80% and trouble to sleep; and the conclusion is the pre-
critic state. This means that when all the conditions are true, 
the conclusion also will be.  
The generation of the questionnaire is done while the 
questions are being answered by the patient. During this 
process, the PBB knows the last state in which the patient 
was classified. The first classification is given at the moment 
that the application is created, by the doctor. 
Here is an overview of the algorithm for generating the 
questionnaire:  
1) The program will visit each of the transitions that 
have the current state of the patient as the source state.  
 
2) For each of these transitions, the program will check 
if the conditions are true. If they are, the patient may have 
his state changed. 
The generation of the questionnaire is obtained through 
this process of verifying the conditions of the transition. For 
example, the transition 1 presented in Fig. 3, that has the 
conditions: breathing difficulties, peak flow rate between 
50%-80% and trouble to sleep, for its verification will be 
raised two questions. One trying to find out if the patient has 
trouble to sleep and another asking if he has breathing 
difficulties. The verification of the condition: peak flow rate 
between 50%-80% can be done automatically through a 
sensor.  
 
3) In case for all transitions, neither condition is 
satisfied, it is inferred that the patient is still in the same 
state. If all conditions of any transition are true, it is inferred 
that the patient is in the target state of that transition. If none 
of the transitions has its entire set of conditions satisfied, the 
program searches through the transitions with greater 
similarity with the patient’s acquired data and it defines the 
new state of the patient as being the target state of this 
transition. The proposed calculation of similarity will be 
made for each condition as follows: 
 
• 
Set A: Set of the conditions of the transition. 
• 
Set B: Set of conditions (information) acquired from the 
patient. 
• 
Result Set: Set A – Set B, if Set A has a greater number 
of elements, or Set B – Set A, otherwise. 
 
The minus sign used is the set-difference operation. The 
transition with the Result Set that has fewer elements is 
chosen. We now calculate the percentage of satisfied 
conditions that this transition has. At least 70% of the 
conditions of the transition should be satisfied; otherwise the 
state of the patient remains unchanged. 
 
4) In this step the program now has infered a new state 
for the patient. It is checked all the conditions listed in the 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

chosen state not yet verified with the patient. And here ends 
the cycle of questions. 
 
5) The doctor will receive a report with the collected  
data. This report contains a brief explanation of how the 
diagnostic process was preformed by the application. The 
report will say which state (eg healthy, pre-critic or critical) 
the patient was in at the beginning of the questionnaire’s 
generation. It will also tell when and why the program was 
seeking evidence of a possible transition to another state, 
aiming to indicate what steps were taken by the diagnostic 
process done. 
 
It is important to understand that the goal of the process 
of generation of the questions is to gather information from 
the patient, so that the doctor can make a diagnosis and 
define what state the patient is. The application only suggests 
a state and it will not conclude anything alone. After the 
doctor’s evaluation of the information collected by the 
application, he can send a notification to the patient, for 
example, asking him to attend the hospital.  
The existence of these states aims to guide the 
application in the process of collecting data about the patient. 
They define which data the application will worry about 
monitoring. The application will behave according to the 
information described in the control ontology. Through it, 
the doctor can set the way he considers most appropriate to 
monitor his patient. 
It is also possible for the doctor to disable the automatic 
generation of the questionnaire and manually enter a 
questionnaire. The rehabilitation of the generation can be 
made each time the doctor receives the report with the 
patient’s data. One should note that at the time the automatic 
generation is turned off; all data collected through the 
questions have no meaning for the application and will only 
be persisted in text form. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Remote monitoring enhances the contact between doctor 
and patient, providing them with an additional form of 
communication that both may decide how best to take 
advantage. 
Several papers contained in the literature focus on 
monitoring patients. This work has some different 
approaches: 
• 
The use of ontologies for knowledge representation. 
• 
A proposal to separate the monitoring process of the 
patient from the application. 
• 
The concept that the same system can be used for a 
variety of chronic disease from a change in the 
ontologies. 
• 
The possibility of defining which context data will be 
captured from the environment. 
 
One of the possibilities of future work is to develop new 
ways for the physician to insert information in the 
ontologies. At this stage of the work, the doctor needs a 
specialist in ontologies to write his or her form of monitoring 
their patients.  
Another possibility is in the form that we represent the 
monitoring process dictated by the doctor. Now, it is all 
represented by an ontology, we could try to use first order 
logic, like description logic, to express the rules of the 
monitoring process. Using logic, the program will have 
much more information about the monitoring process and 
will have much more capability of inferring new 
information.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Asmi A, Ragavan L, and Chhabra J, Pervasive Asthma 
Monitoring System. PAMS. A Health Systems Approach to 
Remote Monitoring of Asthma. 2007, in press.  
[2] F. Rosa. (2012, Mar.) “Em 2012, smartphones venderão 73% 
mais”. 
Gazeta 
do 
Povo. 
Available: 
http://www.gazetadopovo.com.br/economia/ 
conteudo.phtml?tl=1&id=1235834&tit=Em-2012-
smartphones-venderao-73-mais. [Sep. 13, 2012] 
[3] R. H. Istepanian, S. Laxminarayan, and C. S. P. M-Health: 
Emerging Mobile Health Systems. New York, NY, USA: 
Springer, 2006, pp. 3-15. 
[4] “Cleveland clinic unveils top 10 medical innovations for 
2012.” 
Internet: 
http://my.clevelandclinic.org/media_relations/library/2011/ 
2011-10-6-cleveland-clinic-unveils-top-10-medical-
innovations-for-2012.aspx, Oct. 6, 2011 [Sep. 13, 2012]. 
[5] Wagner, E. H., Austin, B. T., Davis, C., Hindmarsh, M., 
Schaefer, J., and Bonomi, A. “Improving chronic illness care: 
translating evidence into action.” Health Affairs, vol. 20, pp. 
64-78, Nov. 2001. 
[6] Gruber, Thomas. “Toward Principles for Design of 
Ontologies Used for Knowledge Sharing.” International 
Journal Human-Computer Studies, vol. 43, pp. 907-928, Nov. 
1995. 
[7] “Mobile Social Networks for Health Care.” Internet: 
http://www.lsd.ufma.br/~mbhealth/, Jul. 7, 2007 [Sep. 13, 
2012]. 
[8] “Laboratório 
de 
Sistemas 
Distribuídos” 
Internet: 
http://www.lsd.ufma.br, [Sep. 13, 2012]. 
[9] “Laboratory for Advanced Collaboration” Internet: http://lac-
rio.com/, [Sep. 13, 2012]. 
[10] Willian J. Clancey, Edward H. Shortliffe. Readings in medical 
artificial intelligence. Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley 
Longman Publishing Company, 1984, pp. 4-14. 
[11] I. Cafezeiro, J. Viterbo, A. Rademaker, E. H. Haeusler, and 
M. Endler, A formal framework for understanding context-
aware behavior in ubiquitous computing. Germany, BW, 
Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 2008, vol. 17. 
 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

