Interruption Management for Hospital Communications Systems  
A user requirements study 
 
Bernd Talsmaa, Terje Solvolla,b, Gunnar Hartvigsenb 
aNorwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine, 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
bDepartment of Computer Science, 
University of Tromsø 
Tromsø, Norway 
b.g.talsma@gmail.com, terje.solvoll@telemed.no, gunnar.hartvigsen@uit.no 
 
Abstract—Working in a hospital environment requires highly 
mobile personnel. To facilitate the increasing need for 
exchange of patient data between healthcare professionals, 
mobile 
communication 
devices 
are 
used. 
Mobile 
communication devices also increase the occurrence of 
inappropriate interruptions during clinical task performance. 
These interruptions have been related to decreased quality of 
clinical care. User requirements were elicited using a scenario-
based approach. The results present insights into user 
requirements for an interruption management system for 
hospitals. Hospital workflow protocols were identified as a 
major source of interruptions. Suggestions by participants for 
managing these interruptions related to improving workflow 
using IT instead of merely preventing interruptions. We have 
shown that even though the hospital is an exceptionally 
demanding 
environment, 
the 
user 
requirements 
for 
interruption management concur with earlier findings in the 
broader fields of context aware interruption management and 
computer supported cooperative work. 
Keywords-Hospital communications systems; interruption 
management; workflow support; user requirements 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Medical personnel’s working environment requires them 
to frequently move around during their work and at the same 
time be able to communicate with colleagues when needed 
[1–3]. Mobile communications devices, which are used to 
make this possible, have introduced a new problem; 
increased interruptions during their work related tasks. Such 
interruptions increase the likelihood of several negative 
consequences [4–8].  
This situation calls for help to balance between increased 
availability and increased interruptions. This has been 
discussed by Solvoll and Scholl [9], who analysed the need 
and user preference for a better communication system. The 
CallMeSmart project at the Norwegian Centre for Integrated 
Care and Telemedicine, University Hospital of North 
Norway, has presented one approach to solve this problem. 
In CallMeSmart decision making is supported by a rule-
based system. The rules and resulting actions must reflect the 
wishes of the medical personnel [10].  
The purpose of this study is to formally verify and 
possibly identify additional requirements for a system aiming 
to achieve our overall goal – to find a way to balance 
between 
the 
increased 
availability 
and 
increased 
interruptions. 
In this paper a user-oriented approach is used to verify 
and expand identified user requirements for an interruption 
management system for mobile communications in hospitals. 
The paper presents the results from interviews and 
discussions with doctors and nurses concerning interrupts in 
their daily work situation. This study was previously 
presented as a poster [11].  
II. 
MATERIALS & METHODS 
A. Eliciting User Requirements 
Several different techniques can be used to elicit the 
requirements of a system from the stakeholders. In the early 
stages of a project, techniques such as interviews (Fig. 1) and 
user observation can be used to clarify the problem. When 
some 
knowledge about 
the 
stakeholders 
and their 
requirements 
has 
been 
acquired, 
workshops 
and 
brainstorming can be used to define requirements for the 
system. Carroll [12] argues for the use of scenarios in the 
design of human-computer interaction (HCI). Lu and Bao 
[13] propose that context aware service design should be 
scenario driven process. Benyon and Macaulay [14] lay 
down a framework for their use in human-computer 
interaction. 
The user-system interaction scenarios can be written 
based on the previous steps. Creating the scenarios according 
to a specified framework, as described by Benyon and 
Macaulay [14], helps to shape it into a multidisciplinary 
design tool. This is useful since the next step is to formalize 
the interactions in use cases. A prototype can be used to play 
out the elicited concrete scenarios and if necessary to refine 
the service.  
The framework laid down by Benyon and Macaulay [14] 
consist of two main approaches to uncover the design 
dimensions and their aspects. First the user-centred 
perspective is characterized by Person, Activity, Context, 
and Technology (PACT). After the PACT aspects have been 
uncovered, 
the 
designer-centred 
aspects, 
Function, 
Interactions, Content, and Structure (FICS) can be discussed. 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Introduction 
Background figures, information, and study aim.  
Introducing the interview structure. 
 
Checking user story 
Are there any critical situations missing? 
Do you think the situations are realistic? 
 
Interruption management 
Introducing the CallMeSmart prototype: 
- Its context aware features 
-The envisioned interruption management techniques 
 
Discussion 
Discussing the conceptual scenario and PACT aspects.  
-Do you think the concept is useful? 
 
(P) Who do you think will benefit from this system and who 
will use it? 
(A) How and with what purpose would you or others use 
the system? 
(C) When and where? 
(T) What kind of devices would benefit? 
 
What will adoption success depend on? 
Figure 1: The interview protocol based on the PACT framework. 
Hevner et al. [15] describe a framework for information 
systems research. This framework divides business needs in 
three categories, People, Organizations, and Technology. 
The PACT framework seems to mirror these elements. 
Continuing the framework laid out by Benyon and Macaulay 
[14] also complies with the guidelines on research conduct, 
as stated by Hevner et al. [15]. 
Sutcliffe [16] has also described the use of scenarios 
throughout the design process. In the first phases of system 
design he describes his scenarios as ‘visioning scenarios’, 
‘scenarios of use’, and ‘context and use scenarios’. These 
three types of scenarios again mirror Benyon and 
Macaulay’s [14] framework for scenarios throughout the 
design process. 
Go and Carroll [17] describe the use of scenarios in HCI 
and requirements engineering. Their article also describes the 
shift of scenario usage from a single user with a single 
device to computer supported cooperative work. In a project 
these different levels of scenarios can also be used, as 
Benyon and Macaulay [14] also argues for a broad use of 
different types of scenarios throughout the de-sign process. 
Two projects in context-aware systems by Bardram [18]. 
and Favela et al. [19], similar to CallMeSmart, have also 
applied scenario design in some form. 
Bardram [18] wrote about scenario-based design in 
computer supported cooperative work. He agrees with 
Benyon and Macaulay [14] on the dynamic nature of 
scenarios throughout the process. This work describes 
various types of records, oriented towards different aspects. 
The ‘organizational’ and ‘personal’ oriented records 
resemble the PACT aspects. The ‘object’ oriented record on 
the other hand, resembles the FICS aspects. 
Favela et al. [19] have used a less formalized scenario 
structure to illustrate typical environment in which their 
solution has to function and how it does so.  
Scenario design and the framework for the actual 
scenario will be performed according to the framework 
presented by Benyon and Macaulay [14]. This approach 
includes the PACT and FICS aspects. The Structure aspect 
of FICS is however replaced with a Service aspect as 
presented in other studies [20,21]. 
Scenarios in HCI design have been used for different and 
sometimes contrasting goals. Sometimes scenarios are meant 
to leave room for discussion and interpretation, while on the 
other hand, scenarios and their adaptations are used to deal 
with any present ambiguities [14]. 
In this research the conceptual scenario is supposed to 
leave room for discussion. The scenario describes a 
generalized day of a physician, performing several 
recognizable 
tasks, 
such 
as 
handover 
meetings, 
consultations, surgery, and patient rounds. In this conceptual 
scenario, the CallMeSmart system is used for managing 
mobile communications. The scenario was presented and 
discussed together with a parallel user story, mirroring the 
same tasks, but without the interruption management system. 
The complete scenario document is not included here due to 
space limitations.  
Concrete scenarios should eventually deal with any 
remaining ambiguities, so the system requirements can be 
clearly defined. After the developers have been involved in 
formulating the concrete scenarios, the results should be 
evaluated by potential users before proceeding to the next 
step. The resulting requirements can then be used to guide 
software engineers who have not been part of the process so 
far and have less knowledge about the subject. In this way, a 
formal user oriented approach is applied, similar to the 
development of the first prototype described by Botsis et al. 
[22]. 
B. Data Analysis 
The scenario discussions were recorded and transcribed. 
The participants’ expectations of, and opinions on, 
interruption management systems were compared to the 
literature based on the PACT framework, on which the 
scenarios are based. The focus was on the similarities 
between the interview results and various parameters and 
abstractions that are used in context-aware and interruption 
management literature [23-27]. 
 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 2: CallMeSmart prototype network structure 
 
C. The CallMeSmart Prototype 
A working prototype of the CallMeSmart system has 
been developed. The network on which the CallMeSmart 
prototype operates is shown in Figure 2. Interruption 
management can be provided for both android-based 
smartphones and tablets, as well as for Ascom DECT-
phones. The interruption management service itself runs on a 
server, which also serves as a private branch exchange 
(PBX). A PBX facilitates in-house phone communications 
for organizations and businesses, including hospitals. 
A context aware application handles data and sends 
relevant information to a call handling script to provide the 
correct services at the right moment. For more information 
on the softphone and android mobile devices, see Solvoll et 
al. [10]. There are several theoretical frameworks in which 
CallMeSmart can be placed. Here we will introduce three of 
them. 
De Guzman’s classifications of ‘receiver oriented’, 
‘negotiated’, or ‘caller oriented’, as presented by De Guzman 
et al. [23], fit the CallMeSmart system clearly in the ‘caller 
oriented’ category. Of these three categories, ‘caller 
oriented’ is the only one that doesn’t require any attention 
from the user. In the hospital environment, reducing 
interruptions would only be achieved by such a ‘caller 
oriented’ system. 
The CallMeSmart system implements ‘burden-shifting’, 
‘time-shifting’, and ‘activity-based sharing’ as used by 
Lindqvist and Hong [24]. The burden is shifted, because the 
first step, if a user is busy, is to notify the caller of the user’s 
inferred situation. The options presented to the caller, the 
interrupter, allow for ‘time-shifting’. The ‘time-shifting’ can 
be achieved by suggesting using other, conventional, 
technologies, such as messaging or voicemail. 
The design dimension axes of availability sharing, as 
defined by Hincapie-Ramos et al. [25], can be used to 
classify CallMeSmart. The system abstracts the sensor data 
to a ‘discrete’ ‘availability’ mode. ‘Implicit interaction’ is 
used to present the data whenever necessary. The 
presentation of availability data is ‘asymmetric’, since you 
do not need to share your status to be able to identify the 
status of the person you're trying to call. When two persons 
are in each other’s contact list, their status sharing could be 
called ‘symmetric’. Connected to the ‘symmetry’ dimension 
is the ‘traceability’. Here Hincapie-Ramos et al. [25] defined 
parameters, which do not describe the possibilities for the 
dimensions they identify as accurately as the parameters in 
other dimensions. The system can be either ‘blind’ or 
‘traceable’, according to the framework. This represents the 
systems options to let users know not only how and when 
others see them, but also who these others are. In this aspect, 
CallMeSmart is however two thirds blind. The status callers 
get to see is the same as the status shown on the user’s 
phone. Information on who has viewed a user’s status and 
when they have done this, is however not being registered. 
CallMeSmart’s obtrusiveness along the axes is ‘selectively 
focal’. On the ‘temporal gradient’ it focuses on users’ 
‘current availability’. With the identified design dimensions, 
CallMeSmart adheres quite close to the optimal dimensions 
identified by the authors. The main difference is the 
‘blindness’ in the information ‘asymmetry’. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The results presented here are representative quotes from 
interviews and discussions, which led to interesting new 
insights. This section is organized following the PACT 
framework. 
Quotes of the three doctors are identified by Dr. A, B, 
and C. The nurses’ quotes are identified with nurse A, nurse 
B, and nurse C. 
Discussing the aspects of the PACT framework led to 
some interesting insights into the wishes of the intended 
target environment and users. While discussing aspects of 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the framework, some obtained results were more relevant to 
other aspects and are presented there. 
A. Persons 
As nurse A stated:  
“The doctors are definitely the ones who are the most 
disturbed.”  
Dr. A stated however, that he expected:  
“The most advantage is for the caller.” 
Dr. B made an interesting remark about the sources of 
interruptions.  
“We have incoming calls all the time, from GPs [general 
practitioners], wanting to ask questions.” 
Previously Dr. A had already mentioned a possible 
solution for this, now verified, problem:  
“He[a general practitioner] should have an option, if it’s 
urgent he gets through, if not he can wait. It could be very 
useful for the GP. Including GP’s directly, system can help 
more than switchboard currently does.” 
Dr. C generalized this even further saying that: 
“So many interruptions are from outside the hospital. 
Personal, from family, or even media trying to call. There 
should be a barrier to calls from the outside [of the 
hospital].” 
B. Activities 
The CallMeSmart prototype has the option to hang up 
after hearing the callee is busy, without this information 
being shared with the callee. In a reaction to this feature, Dr. 
A stated the following: 
“I would strongly suggest making it an option to be able to 
see everyone who has tried to reach you, even if they decided 
not to leave a message. I guess some people would like to 
know that.”  
Nurse A suggested that the possibility for everybody to 
send text messages will lead to more asynchronous 
communication. 
“[about messages]It’s the same as when we started to use e-
mail [on desktop computers]. You don’t need to synchronize 
communication.”  
Dr. C made the same point and voiced the need for a way 
to handle any backlogs that might occur. 
“They will need to prioritize this backlog of communication 
requests. Maybe color-coded. They should be able to give 
these prioritizations themselves.” 
Which was directly in line with Dr.A’s request for: 
“Some asynchronous feature to allow me to start working, 
which should also show priorities to the pending messages 
and call back requests.” 
To which nurse C added an interesting idea, which 
however wasn’t mentioned by anyone else. The idea is that 
users should be notified when calls initially directed at the 
user are successfully handled by a colleague.  
“An overview of all calls and messages that don’t need 
further follow-up would be useful.”  
Two typical answers when talking about the activities 
aspect came from Dr. B and nurse A respectively: 
“If you had a function that could let you say “I’m busy” or 
“ask me via sms” that would be nice. A function where you 
set up the busy button as similar to the silent mode, or as a 
response to a call is feasible to think about.”  
“Standard messages are a good thing. If I can’t reach 
someone who will be available in a minute I won’t have to 
use my time to find someone else to answer my question.(...) 
Maybe an option to let the callee know when someone is 
trying to call and let the caller know when he will be 
available, though this is an interruption.” 
An interesting remark from nurse B reflected a topic that 
came up several times with several participants: 
“If you know where a person is, you know he’s busy and 
why and thus call a different person.” 
C. Context 
Two quotes from Dr. A and B respectively, made it clear 
that they do not want to be disturbed in the operating room 
(OR). 
“The operation setting is the most important one. That’s a 
situation where people really don’t want to be disturbed.” 
“They’re always busy in two places, the trauma room and 
the OR. If you’re there, you’re busy, that’s the name of the 
game.” 
Dr. B also stated that the contexts, from which many 
interruptions originate, are standard situations, dictated by 
protocols, for example: 
“Most nurses are experienced, but need to have the doctors’ 
permission. […] It’s like, can I take aspirin or paracetamol 
for pain, of course, but they have to ask for permission. It’s 
the doctor who’s responsible for the patient. That’s a very 
typical situation. It would be nice to have a way to arrange 
that”. 
D. Technology 
To be able to integrate any solution in the hospital 
environment, Dr. A advised the following: 
“I would be careful to exclude options, someone might 
prefer the pagers.” 
Dr. C clearly stated an issue that came up more often. 
“It would be nice if you could use the system on a device 
like an iPad and have information, like the EPJ, integrated.”  
E. System Adoption 
A subject that came up with all the participants was 
clearly stated by nurse A: 
“It is more the culture to want the answer now. You need to 
teach the people that they don’t need the answer right now.”  
Dr. C formulated an issue that was mentioned by all 
doctors participating in this research: 
“If the doctors can’t trust the system to be consequent and 
reliable, they will go back to their old system.” 
A concerned voiced by several participants was 
explained by Dr. C in the following way:  
“Doctors will be the main users of the system. They might 
however try to use the system to put up a cocoon around 
themselves, using it as a barrier and not as a tool. Some 
doctors currently switch of their phones, or never turn them 
on. They might use the system in a similar way, always 
keeping their phone on busy.” 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Widya et al. [20] pose that scenarios should be very 
domain specific for participants to recognize the situations. 
In the CallMeSmart project, more general scenarios have 
been used. This was intentionally done for several reasons. 
The first of which is that the CallMeSmart system is meant 
for many different sub-domains inside the hospital. It also 
enabled discussions of the scenarios with healthcare staff 
from the various disciplines, which were available for this 
research. Even though it was not very domain specific, 
several interviewees spontaneously noted that they could 
relate to it.  
There was, however, one physician who felt unable to 
participate in this research. This was because the physician 
did not recognize personal work situations in the scenario. 
When the system is being customized for a hospital and 
its departments, very domain specific, detailed, accurate 
scenarios can be used. The local policies, user habits, and 
preferences can then be taken into account. The current 
scenarios are also quite fragmented. This fragmentation is 
the result of the systems' wide range of functions and options 
for the varying situations. Since many functions are 
replacing functionalities of current communication systems, 
they could be given less attention in future user requirement 
research. 
Only a limited number of medical staff participated in 
this study. They were from widely varying backgrounds, 
which had several consequences. The results represent 
requirements of a wide variety of hospital workers, i.e., 
nurses, an anaesthesiologist, a surgeon, and a department 
head. The participants did not, however, discuss the results 
with their colleagues. It could be that the current results 
include personal opinions or suffer from oversight. 
A. Persons 
One might expect doctors, as senior responsible staff, to 
gain the most benefit from interruption management. During 
interviews however, both doctors and nurses brought up the 
benefits they expected the interrupters would gain. 
Interruptions are generated by a need for information to 
accomplish a task. Proper interruption management would 
have to deal with these information requests, thus facilitating 
the work of the interrupters. 
It was interesting to note that medical personnel seemed 
very annoyed by calls from outside the hospital. It could 
mean that either the volume of interruptions is indeed high, 
or that these interruptions more often occur at inappropriate 
moments, due to even less knowledge about the availability 
of the callee for the callers. Either way, this source of 
interruptions should be considered in designing an 
interruption management system. 
B. Activities 
One of the doctors made an interesting remark on the 
symmetry of information sharing. When the CallMeSmart 
system intervenes, a caller can infer information about the 
person in question, thus enabling the need for traceability 
measures, as discussed by Hincapié-Ramos et al. [25].  
The expected increase of asynchronous communication 
has been shown to increase efficiency in hospital work [7]. 
Managing these communications could further increase the 
efficiency. 
It is interesting to note that users came up with ideas for 
handling interruptions in ‘receiver oriented’, ‘negotiated’, 
and ‘caller oriented’ approaches, as described by De Guzman 
et al. [23]. They also expressed a strong preference for 
interruption management not only ‘during switch phase’, but 
also ‘after switch’, as described by McFarlane and Latorella 
[26]. The notion to classify communications by priority will 
probably suffer from the same mismatches in perceived 
urgency between users as described by Wu et al. [7]. 
‘Awareness’ or ‘presence’ cues were suggested as a way 
to reduce interruptions. These cues can be visualized by 
icons and represent contextual information, such as location. 
The CallMeSmart project does not have this feature, as it 
requires extra time investment from the users, every time 
they want to make a call. This was assumed to be 
unfavorable for efficient system adoption and the good 
results achieved by Oulasvirta and Petit [27] were not 
expected to be reproducible in a hospital environment. 
C. Context 
All 
participants 
emphasized 
the 
significance 
of 
interruptions on the OR. They emphasized that the first 
problem that should be solved are interruptions on the OR 
and ER. Even if a system would only solve interruptions on 
these locations they would like to try it. 
D. Technology 
Including options to integrate the different devices could 
lead to higher adoption rates, because it doesn’t require users 
to switch to a new device. It would however also give users 
the option to handle a larger variety of interruptions via 
mobile communication devices. The use of tablet devices to 
handle interruptions could lead to more mobile workflow 
support of users, while their information requests to each 
other can be managed by CallMeSmart. 
E. System Adoption 
Three main issues for adoption were identified. Firstly, 
hospital personnel will have to get used to asynchronous 
communication. Secondly, the system should be reliable, 
consistent, and transparent for users to understand its 
functionality. Thirdly, users will have to be loyal to the 
system, using it in the way it is intended. Trying to use the 
system as an extra barrier all the time will not lead to 
successful implementation. 
F. Insights gained 
The potential users suggested new ways of managing 
interruptions, but also suggested integration of the 
communication system with other hospital IT systems.  
Though the interviews yielded a lot of ideas on 
interruption management, many of the mentioned causes for 
interruptions originated from workflow protocols. The 
participants would often offer solutions which would change 
the workflow. This is interesting because of the comments 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

on system adoption, where participants stated it should not 
require change to the current processes.  
Although the study included only a limited number of 
participants and the results might therefore not be 
generalizable, it is suggestive that their opinions do highly 
correlate to the literature of the wider field of context-aware 
interruption management. 
The study aims of Bardram and Favela, to support 
computer workflow instead of managing interruptions 
directly, is interesting [18,19]. According to our findings, 
supporting workflow could further reduce the need for 
interruptions. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The requirements, elicited using scenarios, match with 
the broader literature of interruption management and 
previously identified requirements. Wishes of medical 
personnel adhere to previous literature in the broader fields 
of context awareness and interruption management. 
Computer supported cooperative work is closely related to 
interruption management due to its potential to reduce the 
need for interruptions.  
The CallMeSmart system has been further developed 
according to the feedback from the users and is now ready to 
be tested in clinical settings. This pilot will start during 
January 2014, and CallMeSmart will first be installed and 
tested at the Oncology department at University Hospital of 
North Norway. The results from this pilot will be published 
during and after the pilot, late 2014 and 2015.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work was supported by Norwegian Research 
Council Grant No. 174934. We would like to thank the 
doctors, nurses, and developers who participated in the 
process. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Coiera E. Communication systems in healthcare. The Clinical 
Biochemist. Reviews / Australian Association of Clinical 
Biochemists 2006;27, pp. 89–98. 
[2] Scholl J, Hasvold P, Henriksen E, Ellingsen G. Managing 
Communication Availability and Interruptions : A Study of 
Mobile Communication in an Oncology Department. 5th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Pervasive 
Computing, 
PERVASIVE, 2007, pp. 234–50. 
[3] Bardram J, Doryab A. Activity analysis: applying activity 
theory to analyze complex work in hospitals. CSCW  ’11 
Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work, pp. 455–64. 
[4] Coiera E, Tombs V. Communication behaviours in a hospital 
setting: an observational study. BMJ 1998;316:673–6. 
[5] Grundgeiger T, Sanderson P. Interruptions in healthcare: 
theoretical 
views. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Medical 
Informatics 2009;78, pp: 293–307. 
[6] Westbrook JI, Coiera E, Dunsmuir WTM, Brown BM, Kelk 
N, Paoloni R, Tran C. The impact of interruptions on clinical 
task completion. Quality & Safety in Health Care 2010;19, 
pp: 284–9. 
[7] Wu R, Rossos P, Quan S, Reeves S, Lo V, Wong B, Cheung 
M, Morra D. An evaluation of the use of smartphones to 
communicate between clinicians: a mixed-methods study. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research 2011;13:e59. 
[8] Coiera E. The science of interruption. BMJ Quality & Safety 
2012;21, pp. 357–60. 
[9] Solvoll T, Scholl J. Strategies to reduce interruptions from 
mobile communication systems in surgical wards. Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare 2008;14, pp. 389–92 
[10] Solvoll T, Gironi L, Hartvigsen. CallMeSmart: A VoIP 
Softphone on Android based mobile devices using SIP. 
eTELEMED2013, pp. 198-203 
[11] Bernd G. Talsma, Terje Solvoll, Gunnar Hartvigsen: User 
Requirements for Interruption Management in Mobile 
Communications in Hospitals. MedInfo 2013: p. 1095 
[12] Carroll JM. Five reasons for scenario-based design. 
Interacting with Computers 2000;13, pp. 43–60. 
[13] Lu T, Bao J. A Systematic Approach to Context Aware 
Service Design. Journal of Computers 2012;7, pp. 207–17. 
[14] Benyon D, Macaulay C. Scenarios and the HCI-SE design 
problem. Interacting with Computers 2002;14, pp. 397–405. 
[15] Hevner A, March S, Park J, Ram S. Design science in 
information systems research. MIS Quarterly 2004;28, pp. 
75–105. 
[16] Sutcliffe A. Scenario-based requirements engineering. Journal 
of Lightwave Technology, IEEE Comput. Soc; 2003, pp. 
320–9. 
[17] Go K, Carroll JM. The blind men and the elephant. 
Interactions 2004;11, pp. 44–53. 
[18] Bardram J. Scenario-based design of cooperative systems. 
Group Decision and Negotiation 2000;9, pp. 237–50. 
[19] Favela J, Tentori M, Castro L a., Gonzalez VM, Moran EB, 
Martínez-García AI. Activity Recognition for Context-aware 
Hospital Applications: Issues and Opportunities for the 
Deployment of Pervasive Networks. Mobile Networks and 
Applications 2007;12, pp. 155–71 
[20] Widya I, Bults R, Wijk R De. Requirements for a nutrition 
education demonstrator. Requirements Engineering, 2011, pp. 
48–53. 
[21] Van ’t Klooster J-W, Van Beijnum B-J, Eliens A, Hermens H. 
Interactive scenario visualization for user-based service 
development. 2012 International Conference on Collaboration 
Technologies and Systems (CTS), IEEE; 2012, pp. 498–503. 
[22] Botsis T, Solvoll T, Scholl J, Hasvold, P, Hartvigsen, G. 
Context-aware systems for mobile communication in 
healthcare: a user oriented approach. AIC’07, Athens: 2007, 
pp. 69–74. 
[23] De Guzman ES, Sharmin M, Bailey BP. Should I call now? 
understanding what context is considered when deciding 
whether to initiate remote communication via mobile devices. 
Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2007 on - GI  ’07, New 
York, New York, USA: ACM Press; 2007, p. 143. 
[24] Lindqvist J, Hong J. Undistracted driving. Proceedings of the 
12th Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and 
Applications - HotMobile  ’11, New York, New York, USA: 
ACM Press; 2011, pp. 70–5. 
[25] Hincapié-Ramos JD, Voida S, Mark G. A design space 
analysis of availability-sharing systems. Proceedings of the 
24th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and 
technology - UIST  ’11, New York, USA: ACM Press; 2011, 
p. 85. 
[26] McFarlane D, Latorella K. The Scope and Importance of 
Human Interruption in Human-Computer Interaction Design. 
Human-Computer Interaction 2002;17:1–61. 
[27] Oulasvirta A, Petit R. Interpreting and acting on mobile 
awareness cues. Human–Computer Interaction 2007;22, pp: 
97–135. 
 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

