On the Need for Interdisciplinary Teams in Health IT Design 
 
Kari Dyb, Conceição Granja, Stein Roald Bolle 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
{kari.dyb, conceicao.granja, stein.roald.bolle}@telemed.no 
 
Gunnar Hartvigsen 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
Department of Computer Science 
UIT – The Arctic University of Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
gunnar.hartvigsen@telemed.no
 
 
Abstract—Health Information Technology is recognized as a so-
lution to manage health care and improve the quality of care. 
However, literature reports on unsuccessful implementation 
projects, challenges and unforeseen consequences of IT in health 
care. In order to define health IT system requirements, a meth-
odology to comprehensively model health care processes is de-
scribed. It is concluded that the design of health IT systems 
should not be done by software engineers or technical personnel 
in an isolated manner. It is argued for the necessity to engage 
with the health care sector as an empirical field, and the need 
for interdisciplinary teams, to tackle the idiosyncrasies of health 
care processes. The suggested methodology is a useful approach 
for supporting the definition of the IT requirements, aiming a 
successful implementation. 
Keywords- Methodology; Interdisciplinary Studies; Health 
Information Systems; Workflow; Physicians; Nurses; Secretaries. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many studies have identified inefficiencies in the current 
health care systems. Health Information Technology (IT) is 
often presented as a solution to such inefficiencies, as it sup-
ports health care management and improves the quality of 
care. However, health IT has only proven its full potential and 
benefits in specific fields [1]. The aim of the work presented 
herein is to describe a methodology to comprehensively 
model health care processes in order to define health IT sys-
tem requirements. The elective surgery cancellation problem, 
in a University Hospital in North Norway, is used as a case 
study to describe the methodology and the gains that come 
from its application in health IT design. 
In order to reduce elective surgery cancellations due to 
lack of information, at the University Hospital of North Nor-
way (UNN), the eTeam-Surgery project was established. 
eTeam is approaching the pre-operative planning process to 
determine if it can be moved from the hospital to the patient 
at home, through electronic collaboration.  
To develop a tool for electronic collaboration between the 
patient and the hospital is not an easy, nor a straightforward 
task. Literature surveys report on unsuccessful implementa-
tion projects, challenges and unforeseen consequences of IT 
in health care [2-12]. A contributing factor for the slow diffu-
sion of health IT may be found on its focus on improving in-
dividual tasks, rather than supporting value added care pro-
cesses. 
The aim of the work presented is to describe a method on 
how to comprehensively model care processes to establish a 
basis to define health IT requirements. It is argued the neces-
sity for health IT designers to understand the complexity of 
care processes, and their dynamic relation with the environ-
ment in which it takes place. Given the idiosyncrasy of care 
processes, it is recognized that an interdisciplinary team is es-
sential. 
This report is divided in four sections. In the first section, 
the health IT limitations are introduced and the aim of the 
study is described. In the second section, a brief introduction 
to the challenges in Health IT implementation are presented. 
The methodology to model health care processes is described 
and explained in the third section. The last section elaborates 
on the need for interdisciplinary teams to understand care pro-
cesses, in order to achieve successful health IT implementa-
tions. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The patients within the Norwegian population are well 
prepared and able to use IT [13-15], and health care workers 
use personal electronic devices to support their clinical work 
[9, 16, 17]. Hence, there is a substantial evidence in the field 
of health IT, on unsuccessful implementation projects [2-4]. 
IT implementation challenges, slow diffusion, and unforeseen 
consequences in health care, have been described [2-12]. 
There is vast amount of literature on how to design IT sys-
tems that address the problem of unsuccessful IT implemen-
tations. A cause may be found in the inadequate design of IT. 
Several techniques for IT design are used as a tool to approach 
this issue, e.g., goal-oriented requirements engineering 
(GORE) [18], user-centered and participatory design [19], and 
others. However, within this report, the focus is on how to 
model a care process, in all its aspects (i.e., patient flow, work-
flow and information flow), so its complexity can be under-
stood, and described in health IT design. It is argued that, 
when applied to healthcare, this task requires a different meth-
odology that uses an interdisciplinary approach. 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
METHODS AND RESULTS 
The methodology is described below; for further infor-
mation refer to [20]. 
Stage 1 Gathering data on the hospital’s representation of 
the problem; 
Stage 2 Observations and semi-structured interviews at 
the hospital, related to the processes at the depart-
ments; 
Stage 3 Individual, in-depth interviews with all profes-
sional groups involved in the process at a specific 
department. 
In Stage 1, the aim was to gather knowledge on how the 
problem is represented by the field itself. The hospital under-
standing of the elective surgical cancellation problem and the 
hospital’s representation of the pre-operative planning process 
was approached. 
In Stage 2, the aim was to model the process at different 
departments at the hospital. This comprised three weeks of 
fieldwork at UNN, conducting observations and thirteen inter-
views with physicians, nurses and administrative personnel. 
The main finding from this stage, was internal variation be-
tween the different departments in who plans the surgery and 
how, and when it was done. 
In Stage 3, one department was chosen to proceed with an 
in-depth study based on the knowledge gained in the two first 
stages. This department was described to be more efficient but 
still evidenced a representative number of cancellations. The 
aim at this stage was to comprehensively model the process at 
this department. We interviewed representatives from the dif-
ferent health professions (e.g., physicians’, nurses and secre-
taries) involved in the preoperative planning, at this specific 
department. The interviews were semi-structured, on the pre-
operative planning process at the department, lasted between 
one to two hours, and were done at the workplace. This ena-
bled the identification of decision activities, and the health 
worker responsible for each of them. In addition, knowledge 
on the information flow was gathered, and the underlying pro-
cess issues were identified. The main finding was heterogene-
ity in how departments and individual professionals carry out 
the pre-operative planning process 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
The described three-stage methodology permitted the 
modelling of the information flow and the workflow, and to 
describe the complexity of the process. 
For the eTeam-Surgery project, the models will facilitate 
the development of a standard preoperative planning process, 
as future work. It is our understanding that in order to move 
the pre-operative planning from the hospital to the patient at 
home, through electronic collaboration, the preoperative plan-
ning process at UNN needs to be re-engineered, in order to 
resolve the identified bottlenecks, targeting the process stand-
ardisation. This is a sensitive job that has impact on the whole 
organization. The knowledge gathered while applying the de-
scribed methodology will enable a sensitive analysis, and the 
integration of the health care workers empirical and/or per-
sonal knowledge into IT.  
It is concluded that the design of health IT systems should 
not be done by software engineers or technical personnel in an 
isolated manner. It is necessary to engage with the health care 
sector as an empirical field, and an interdisciplinary team is 
required to tackle the idiosyncrasies of health care processes. 
The suggested methodology is a useful approach for support-
ing the definition of the IT requirements, aiming a successful 
implementation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. M. Walker and P. Carayon, "From Tasks to Processes: The 
Case for Changing Health Information Technology to Improve 
Health Care," Health Affairs, vol. 28, pp. 467-477, 2009. 
[2] J. Starling and S. Foley, "From Pilot to Permanent Service: Ten 
Years of Paediatric Telepsychiatry," Journal of Telemedicine 
and Telecare, vol. 12, pp. 80-82, 2006. 
[3] P. Whitten, B. Holtz, and L. Nguyen, "Keys to a Successful and 
Sustainable Telemedicine Program," International journal of 
technology assessment in health care, vol. 26, pp. 211-216, 
2010. 
[4] P. Zanaboni and R. Wootton, "Adoption of Telemedicine: 
From Pilot Stage to Routine Delivery," BMC medical 
informatics and decision making, vol. 12, p. 1, 2012. 
[5] M. Berg, "Implementing Information Systems in Health Care 
Organizations: Myths and Challenges," International journal 
of medical informatics, vol. 64, pp. 143-156, 2001. 
[6] R. Heeks, "Health Information Systems: Failure, Success and 
Improvisation," International journal of medical informatics, 
vol. 75, pp. 125-137, 2006. 
[7] C. May, M. Mort, F. S. Mair, and T. Finch, Telemedicine and 
the Future Patient: Risk, Governance and Innovation: 
Economic and Social Research Council, 2005. 
[8] M. Mort and A. Smith, "Beyond Information: Intimate 
Relations in Sociotechnical Practice," Sociology, vol. 43, pp. 
215-231, 2009. 
[9] S. Dünnebeil, A. Sunyaev, I. Blohm, J. M. Leimeister, and H. 
Krcmar, "Determinants of Physicians’ Technology Acceptance 
for E-Health in Ambulatory Care," International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 81, pp. 746-760, 2012. 
[10] KS, "Ikt I Helse- Og Omsorg 2008-20012 - Strategi- Og 
Handlingsplan," Oslo2008. 
[11] H. K. Andreassen, "What Does an E-Mail Address Add?-
Doing Health and Technology at Home," Social Science & 
Medicine, vol. 72, pp. 521-528, 2011. 
[12] N. Schreurs. (2012) Fiasko Eller Fremtid? Computerworld.  
[13] M. Knox, E. Myers, I. Wilson, and M. Hurley, "The Impact of 
Pre-Operative Assessment Clinics on Elective Surgical Case 
Cancellations," Surgeon-Journal of the Royal Colleges of 
Surgeons of Edinburgh and Ireland, vol. 7, pp. 76-78, 2009. 
[14] M. R. Rai and J. J. Pandit, "Day of Surgery Cancellations after 
Nurse-Led Pre-Assessment in an Elective Surgical Centre: The 
First 2 Years," Anaesthesia, vol. 58, pp. 692-9, 2003. 
[15] A. R. Seim, T. Fagerhaug, S. M. Ryen, P. Curran, O. D. Sæther, 
H. O. Myhre, et al., "Causes of Cancellations on the Day of 
Surgery at Two Major University Hospitals," Surgical 
Innovation, vol. 16, pp. 173-180, 2009. 
[16] M. N. Boulos, S. Wheeler, C. Tavares, and R. Jones, "How 
Smartphones Are Changing the Face of Mobile and 
Participatory Healthcare: An Overview, with Example from 
Ecaalyx," Biomedical engineering online, vol. 10, p. 24, 2011. 
[17] B. Dolan. (2010, October 2014). 72 Percent of Us Physicians 
Use 
Smartphones. 
Available: 
http://mobihealthnews.com/7505/72-percent-of-us-
physicians-use-smartphones/ 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[18] J. Gordijn, M. Petit, and R. Wieringa, "Understanding Business 
Strategies of Networked Value Constellations Using Goal-and 
Value Modeling," in Requirements Engineering, 14th IEEE 
International Conference, 2006, pp. 129-138. 
[19] C. Spinuzzi, "The Methodology of Participatory Design," 
Technical Communication, vol. 52, pp. 163-174, 2005. 
[20] C. Granja, K. Dyb, E. Larsen, S. R. Bolle, and G. Hartvigsen, 
"Methodology for Health Care Process Modelling: Bringing 
the Health Care Complexity into Health It System 
Development," in Scandinavian Conference on Health 
Informatics, Grimstad, 2014, pp. 17-21. 
 
 
 
 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

