Get Moving - the Practice Nurse is Watching You!  
A case study of the user-centered design process and testing of a web-based coaching system to 
stimulate the physical activity of chronically ill patients in primary care. 
Renée Verwey, Sanne van der Weegen, Marieke Spreeuwenberg, Huibert Tange,  
Trudy van der Weijden, Luc de Witte  
Department of Health Services Research (HSR) 
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI). Maastricht University, the Netherlands 
Research Centre Technology in Care. Zuyd University, the Netherlands  
r.verwey@maastrichtuniversity.nl, s.vanderweegen@maastrichtuniversity.nl, m.spreeuwenberg@maastrichtuniversity.nl, 
h.tange@maastrichtuniversity.nl, trudy.vanderweijden@maastrichtuniversity.nl, l.dewitte@maastrichtuniversity.nl
 
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes the development and testing of 
a web-based coaching system. The system informs the practice 
nurse about the level of physical activity in daily living of 
patients who are using the It’s LiFe! tool. Nurses can monitor 
patients via a secured website. Patients’ physical activity is 
measured in minutes per day compared to pre-set activity 
goals. The goals are set by the nurse in dialog with the patient. 
To increase the probability of effective use, the coaching 
system was developed and tested in an iterative way, following 
user-centered design principles. The needs and preferences of 
practice nurses were determined through qualitative research. 
Automatically generated feedback messages were defined 
based on the requirements of practice nurses. The usability of 
the system was evaluated in a laboratory situation. The results 
from these tests gave insights into how to improve the structure 
and the quality of the information of the system.  
Keywords— user-centered design; persuasive technology; 
physical activity; self-management support; primary care. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
According to guidelines and care standards, stimulating 
physical activity is an important element in the treatment of 
people with a chronic disease such as chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) or type II diabetes (DM) [1][2]. 
In the Netherlands, the majority of chronically ill patients are 
treated in primary care. They visit the family practice 
regularly to monitor their condition and it is the task of the 
practice nurse to provide lifestyle counseling during these 
consultations [3][4].  
The use of technology for long term monitoring and 
feedback could support patients in achieving a more active 
lifestyle and could also help practice nurses to coach patients 
in establishing this behavioral change more easily. An 
example of a technological lifestyle intervention is self-
monitoring of physical activity using a pedometer or an 
accelerometer. Although this has been identified as an 
effective approach towards behavior change, it is not often 
used in practice [5][6]. In the project It’s LiFe! (an acronym 
for Interactive Tool for Self-management through Lifestyle 
Feedback!) an innovative monitoring and personalized 
feedback tool was developed and tested. The tool aims to 
support patients in achieving an active lifestyle as part of 
their self-management [7]. The tool consists of three 
elements:  
1. a 3D accelerometer worn on the hip;  
2. an application (app) on a Smartphone; 
3. a server and a web application called ‘It’s LiFe! 
monitor’. 
The patient receives three types of feedback on the mobile 
phone concerning the amount of activity, the amount of 
activity in relation to an activity goal, and the response of a 
practice nurse based on the measured activity. 
In this paper, the emphasis is on the third element: the 
development and testing of the server and the web-based 
coaching system used by practice nurses in primary care. 
The involvement of users in the development and testing 
of technologies is associated with significant benefits such 
as: the generation of ideas by users; an improvement in 
system 
designs 
and 
user 
interfaces; 
considerable 
improvement in the functionality, usability, and quality of 
the system; access to and knowledge about user perspectives 
[8]. Furthermore, early and on-going user involvement and a 
close fit with organizational priorities and processes are 
important because attention paid to socio-technical factors 
maximizes the likelihood of successful implementation and 
the adoption of the technology [9]. 
Therefore the aim of this study was to examine the user 
requirements for the It’s LiFe! monitor and to test the extent 
to which practice nurses were satisfied with the system. The 
following research questions were posed: 
•  
What are the user requirements for the coaching 
system from the perspective of a practice nurse? 
•   How do practice nurses rate the usability (user 
performance and satisfaction) of the developed 
system? 
In this paper the methods and some preliminary results of the 
development and testing of the monitoring system will be 
described and plans for the upcoming years will be 
explained. 
II. 
METHODS 
A user-centered design strategy was chosen for the 
development and testing of the tool, the coaching system and 
the Self-management Support Program (SSP), the behavior  
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
  
Figure 1. Iterative user-centered design model. 
 
change counseling protocol for practice nurses. This strategy 
was based on several existing models for the design of 
medical devices [10-12]. The model is depicted in Figure 1.  
From November 2010 to September 2012 three sub-
studies were undertaken: a user requirements study (A), a 
test of the system in a laboratory situation (B), and a pilot 
study (C). In this paper some preliminary results of studies A 
and B will be presented. The studies were successive in time, 
but user-centered design requires iteration, which is why 
some results of the final study revealed new user 
requirements additional to the results of the first study. The 
optimization of the system is therefore an on-going process 
which started with a general project idea. 
This project idea was developed together with several 
experts and business partners. It was based on a literature 
review of studies on coaching patients to achieve a more 
active lifestyle [1318]. Subsequently a ‘use case’ was 
written [19] from the perspective of a practice nurse. A use 
case is a narrative scenario comprising a description of four 
main elements (PACT): the people involved (P), their 
activities (A), the context (C), and the technology used (T) 
[20]. The use case was a description of the use of the 
coaching system by a practice nurse coaching a patient in 
achieving an active lifestyle who started using the tool.  
A. User requirements 
    A qualitative study was undertaken using semi-
structured, audio-taped interviews in two iterative cycles to 
determine the user requirements of the coaching system.  
Sixteen interviews with care professionals, directly 
involved in the care of patients with COPD or DM were 
held. In the interviews, the care professionals gave their 
opinions of the use case, different aspects of the coaching 
system and the use of the system in daily practice. 
The interviews were transcribed verbatim and the data 
were analyzed, using the QSR NVivo 2 software package, 
following a directed content analysis method [21][22]. 
General themes emerged and these themes were used as 
input for the user requirements document.  
Based on this document, the system was built in 
collaboration with two companies: Sananet Ltd developed 
the web-based system as part of a special program (It’s LiFe! 
monitor) in an already existing system (SananetOnline) and 
IDEE/Maastricht Instruments Ltd provided the upload of the 
data from the It’s LiFe! app on the Smartphone to the 
Sananet server.   
B. Usability 
The system was tested at Maastricht University by five 
practice nurses to reveal the utility (whether the system 
provided the necessary features) and the usability (whether 
the user interface and content areas of the system were easy 
and pleasant to use) [23][24]. Practice nurses were asked to 
perform six tasks while using the system and to give their 
opinions of the manual. The tasks were: 
 
registering a new patient; 
 
viewing an individual client chart; 
 
setting a daily target; 
 
viewing the progress report; 
 
changing the threshold;  
 
sending a new username and password. 
There was no further explanation of the system beforehand, 
but the participants could use the manual which was 
organized in chapters corresponding to the tasks. While 
performing the tasks, they were asked to give comments 
(think aloud method) and afterwards they provided their 
feedback for each task and indicated the difficulty of the task 
on a scale from 1 (very difficult) to 7 (very easy). The 
sessions lasted approximately 11.5 hours, were directly 
observed by the researcher involved and videotaped. Two 
laptops were used with the Morae usability assessment 
software (Techsmith, Inc., Okemos, MI) to record the 
participants (Figure 2). At the end of all the tasks, the nurses 
were asked to complete the Post Study System Usability 
Questionnaire (PSSUQ), a questionnaire with 19 items [25]. 
Finally, to get an impression of the desirability of the system, 
participants were asked to mark five words from a list of 118 
words (product reaction charts) that in their view best 
characterized the system [26]. This list was translated into 
Dutch independently by two researchers. Descriptive 
statistics and simple content analyses were used to organize 
the data into categories that reflected the emerging usability 
themes. Frequently occurring errors were scored by 
analyzing the video tapes. Based on the results of the 
usability tests, system improvements were made. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Screenshot of the usability study using Morae. 
 
 
 
 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
A. User requirements 
In Table I an overview of the characteristics of the 
interviewees is presented.  
TABLE I.  
INTERVIEWEE CHARACTERISTICS 
Characteristics of the Interviewees 
Profession 
  Practice 
Nurse 
(PN) 
  Diabetes 
Nurse 
(DN) 
  Pulmonary 
Nurse 
(PN) 
  General Practitioner (GP) 
  Physiotherapist (PT) 
Number 
7 
2 
2 
3 
2 
Age  
  Years (Range) 
 
42 (2658) 
Sex 
  Male 
  Female 
 
4 
12 
Treating 
patients 
with 
  COPD 
  DM 
  Both 
 
6 
4 
6 
 
The following clusters of user requirements emerged from 
the interviews. 
 
1) The opinion of the interviewees towards the use case 
Most interviewees liked the idea that using the tool would 
give both patient and practice nurse the ability to monitor 
physical activity levels. They confirmed the added value 
compared to self-reported activity because patients often 
overestimate their level of activity. The use case suggested a 
mix of the use of technology and extra consultations. Most 
interviewees indicated that use of the tool should be part of 
care as usual; the extension of consultation time was not 
appreciated. Interviewees stressed the importance of goal 
setting 
being 
part 
of 
supporting 
self-management. 
Furthermore they indicated that the goals should be flexible, 
tailored to the individual situation of the patient, and that 
comorbidities of patients should be taken into account when 
setting a goal. 
 
2) The role of the practice nurse in stimulating physical 
activity 
Although a sedentary lifestyle is often seen with COPD or 
DM patients, most practice nurses indicated that they 
normally do not spend much time on the assessment of the 
level of physical activity during consultations. Therefore, 
the use of this tool by patients to assess physical activity 
levels objectively during the first two weeks was considered 
valuable. Furthermore, interviewees suggested that were a 
diary for patients part of the system, this would give more 
insights into the normal activity patterns of the patients. 
 
 
 
3) How the information generated by the system should 
be presented in order to support the practice nurses in their 
work 
Practice nurses wanted to use the coaching system during 
consultations and therefore the activity data should be 
clearly represented within the information system they 
normally used in the practice or it should be linked with this 
system. A lot of nurses complained about using two or more 
systems and they wanted to avoid “double registration”. 
Furthermore, the coaching system should present a 
summary of all information about all their patients’ 
adherence and goal attainment at a single glance, using 
numbers and graphs. 
 
4) The integration of the system in the workflow and the 
opinions of practice nurses about giving feedback in 
between consultations 
The majority of the practice nurses were not enthusiastic 
about giving feedback on the physical activity levels of 
patients in between consultations. Only a few mentioned 
that they would probably monitor activity levels to find out 
if the patient was actually using the tool. They did not by 
any means want to receive push information, such as 
notifications from the system. 
   After these interviews it was clear that providing feedback 
in between consultations was too much to ask of the practice 
nurses and therefore it was decided to provide patients with 
automatically generated feedback messages from the 
coaching system. Furthermore, automatically provided 
dialog sessions were developed to support the practice nurse 
and the patient in preparing for a consultation. 
 
 
5)    The coaching system 
Based on the user requirements that were identified, the It’s 
LiFe! monitor was developed. The systems consist of a 
server 
with 
two 
portals, 
one 
for 
care 
providers 
(www.sananetonline.com/monitor) and one for patients 
(www.itslife.nu). The practice nurse subscribes the patient 
to the system. The login name and password are sent to the 
patient by mail. At home the patient has to complete an 
additional 
questionnaire 
online 
(session) 
concerning 
physical activity preferences. At 6 a.m. the Smartphone 
automatically connects to the It’s LiFe! server to store the 
physical activity data for the past day on the server. There is 
a pre-measurement period of 14 days. In the second week, 
the patient receives short sessions every day to keep a diary. 
These can be accessed both on the Smartphone and on the 
website. Furthermore, there are two sessions concerning 
targets and activity planning. The nurse can see the answers 
given by the patient in the system on the individual chart of 
the patient (Figure 3).  
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 3. Screenshot of an individual patient chart. 
 
After two weeks a daily target goal is set in the system by 
the practice nurse in dialog with the patient. Based on the 
physical activity data, the patient receives feedback 
messages. There are several types of message (tips, 
encouragement, 
positive 
trend, 
rewards, 
barriers, 
facilitators, and adjusting goals/target values). Participants 
get such messages when they reach or do not reach their 
goal after 3, 5 and 14 days. All messages are written in a 
positive tone, e.g., “Good that you still try to be more active. 
We can see that it is hard to reach your daily target. If you 
want to adjust your goal, contact your practice nurse or click 
here.”  
 
B. System Usability 
All five practice nurses who were invited took part in the test 
sessions. They were all female and their mean age was 45 
years old with a range of 3154 years. They agreed to the 
sessions being videotaped. Only one participant was unable 
to complete all the tasks because of time constraints. At the 
start of the test session the accelerometer and the 
Smartphone were demonstrated to inform the nurses about 
the patients’ part of the system.  
 
1) Results of task performances and feedback on the 
manual 
Some of the participants used the manual all the time and 
others only when they were in doubt.  Although it was the 
first time participants had used the system, they were mainly 
positive about the ease of use.  
TABLE II.  
TASK PERFORMANCE 
Task Performance 
Tasks scores a  
N  
Mean(SD) 
Register a new patient  
5 
6.6 (0.5) 
View an individual client chart 
5 
5.8 (0.8) 
Set a daily target 
5 
5.6 (1.5) 
View the progress report 
4 
5.5 (1.0) 
Change the threshold 
4 
5.5 (1.9) 
Send new username and password 
4 
6.3 (1.0) 
a Scores range from 1 (very difficult) to 7 (very easy)   
Scores on task performance ranged from 5.5 to 6.6 on a 
scale from 1 to 7 (Table II). Furthermore, the participants 
indicated that the manual was understandable and readable. 
 
2) Results of observations and measurements during 
task performance (errors) 
When registering a new patient in the system, three 
participants used the back button of the web browser instead 
of the back button in the system. This caused an error with 
the connection to the server. Furthermore there was one 
small button (more▼) in the individual charts with more 
information about the preferences of patients which was 
overlooked by four of the five participants. Finally, 
sometimes the system was slow due to internet connectivity 
problems. 
 
3) Participants’ remarks  
Most remarks made by the practice nurses related to the 
structure and the quality of the information. 
 
Structure of information: 
 
The system is organized in four different layers 
(subpages). Many practice nurses commented on the 
difficulty of navigation. Practice nurse, aged 41:“I 
get lost in this system.” 
 
Participants asked if it were possible to remove 
subpages which were not necessary for the coaching 
of physical activity (e.g., a medication chart).  
 
The opening page of the system is a progress report 
on all participating patients, but two practice nurses 
preferred to see the individual charts of the patients 
because in their opinion these charts give the most 
important information (users had to click three times 
to open the individual charts). 
 
There were two types of remarks about the 
individual charts: the most important information 
should be presented at top of the page and this page 
was too long (users had to scroll to see all the 
information). 
 
Quality of information: 
 
Participants liked the use of the graph indicating the 
level of activity over the past months and they were 
satisfied with the content of the individual charts. 
They said that it was useful information and that this 
could support them when talking to the patients 
during consultations. 
 
The progress report was not very clear to the 
participants; although an explanation of the different 
colors was part of the manual, four practice nurses 
preferred to see this explanation in the system as 
well. 
 
 
 
  
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE III.  
RESULTS PSSUQ 
PSSUQ 
Scoresa 
N  
Mean(SD) 
Overall PSSUQ 
5 
5.4 (0.8) 
    System Usefulness  
5 
5.6 (0.8) 
    Information Quality  
4 
5.3 (1.2) 
    Interface Quality  
5 
5.7 (0.8) 
a Scores range from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree)  
4) Results from the PSSUQ 
The results of the PSSUQ (Table III) were also positive and 
equivalent to the remarks of the respondents concerning the 
information provided by the system. The overall score of the 
PSSUQ was 5.4 on a scale from 1 to 7. Scores on the 
subscales were 5.6 for System Usefulness, 5.3 for 
Information Quality, and 5.7 for Interface Quality. 
 
5) Results of the product reaction wordlist 
From the 118 words of which the respondents could chose, 
the following five words to characterize the system were 
chosen twice: “professional”, “motivating”, “valuable”, 
“customizable” and “innovative”. Most words selected were 
positive. Only two negative words were chosen: “slow” and 
“time-consuming”. An overview of all the words is 
represented in Table IV. 
   
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The It’s LiFe! monitor was built for practice nurses to 
support self-management of physical activity by chronically 
ill patients in primary care. Different components of the 
system were based on the user requirements of practice 
nurses, such as the development of automatically generated 
feedback messages. The iterative approach during the 
development resulted in a system which was appreciated by 
the practice nurses. The results of the usability tests gave 
insights into how to improve the structure and the quality of 
the information provided. As a next step, the system will be 
evaluated in two general practices as part of a self-
management support program. Finally a randomized 
controlled trial will be set up to measure the effects of the 
tool and the coaching system embedded in the self-
management support program.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE IV.  
PRODUCT REACTION WORD LIST RESULTS 
Product Reaction Word List a 
1 
Enthusiastic 
Novel  
Professional 
Stimulating  
Interesting 
2 
Confident  
Convenient 
Familiar  
Motivating  
Valuable 
3 
Approachable 
Customizable 
Innovative 
Relevant  
Slow  
4 
Innovative 
Motivating 
Personal  
Professional 
Valuable 
5 
Clean  
Controllable 
Customizable 
Essential  
Time-
consuming  
a Words in bold were chosen twice   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The project is funded by Zon MW in the program “New 
Instruments for Healthcare”. The companies involved in the 
development are: 
•  
IDEE Maastricht UMC+ Universiteitssingel 50, 
level 0.2 6229 ER Maastricht, the Netherlands  
www.idee-mumc.nl  
•  
Maastricht Instruments Ltd. Oxfordlaan 70, 6229 
EV Maastricht, the Netherlands 
www.maastrichtinstruments.nl  
• 
Sananet Care Ltd.  
Rijksweg Zuid 22A, 6131 AP Sittard, the Netherlands 
www.sananet.nl  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Long 
Alliantie 
Nederland, 
“Care 
standard 
COPD,” 
[Zorgstandaard 
COPD] 
Amersfoort: 
Long 
Alliantie 
Nederland, 2010 [updated 2010; cited Dec 7 2012]; Available 
from: <http://www.longalliantie.nl/zorgstandaard-copd> 
[2] Nederlandse Diabetes Federatie, “NDF care standard, 
transparency and quality of diabetes care for people with type 
2 diabetes,” Amersfoort: Nederlandse Diabetes Federatie, 
2007 [updated 2007; cited 2012 Dec 7]; Available from: 
<http://www.diabetesfederatie.nl/start/zorgstandaard/diabetes-
care-standard/download.html> 
[3] M. J. W. M. Heijmans, P. Spreeuwenberg and M. Rijken, 
“Developments in the care of chronically ill Reporting 2010,” 
[Ontwikkelingen 
in 
de 
zorg 
voor 
chronisch 
zieken 
Rapportage] Journal [serial on the Internet]. 2010 [cited  Dec 
7 2012]; Available from: < http://www.nivel.nl > 
[4] NHG/LHV-Position paper: the supportive team for general 
practices [NHG/LHV-Standpunt Het (ondersteunend) team in 
de huisartsen-voorziening] Journal [serial on the Internet]. 
2011 [cited Dec 7 2012]: Available from:  
 <http://nhg.artsennet.nl/actueel/Nieuwsartikel/Standpunt-
Het-ondersteunend-team-in-de-huisartsenvoorziening-1.htm > 
[5] T. van Achterberg, G. G. Huisman-de Waal, N. A. Ketelaar, 
R. A. Oostendorp, J. E. Jacobs and H. C. Wollersheim, “How 
to promote healthy behaviours in patients? An overview of 
evidence for behaviour change techniques,” Health Promot. 
Int., vol. 26, no. 2, 2010, pp. 148162. 
[6] C. Tudor-Locke and L. Lutes, “Why do pedometers work? A 
reflection upon the factors related to successfully increasing 
physical activity,” Sports Med., vol. 39, no. 12, 2009, pp. 
981-993. 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[7] R. Verwey, S. van der Weegen, M. Spreeuwenberg, H. Tange, 
T. van der Weijden and L. P. de Witte, “A monitoring and 
feedback tool to support patients in achieving a more active 
lifestyle: the development of portable technology embedded 
in primary care,” in Proc. eTELEMED 2012, L. Van Gemert-
Pijnen, H. C. Ossebaard, Å. Smedberg, S. Wynchank and P. 
Giacomelli, Eds. Valencia: IARIA, 2012, pp.147-150. 
[8] S. G. Shah and I. Robinson, “Benefits of and barriers to 
involving users in medical device technology development 
and evaluation,” Int J Technol Assess Health Care, vol. 23, 
no.1, 2007, pp.131137. 
[9] A. D. Black, J. Car, C. Pagliari, C. Anandan, K. Cresswell 
and  T. Bokun, “The impact of eHealth on the quality and 
safety of health care: a systematic overview,” PLoS Med 
2011, 8:e1000387. 
[10] S. de Rouck, M. Leys and A. Jacobs, “A methodology for 
shifting the focus of e-health support design onto user needs. 
A case in the homecare field,” Int J Med Inform, vol.77, 2008, 
pp. 589601. 
[11] S. G. S. Shah, I. Robinson and S. Alshawi, “Developing 
medical device technologies from users' perspectives: a 
theoretical framework for involving users in the development 
process,” Int J Technol Assess Health Care, vol. 25, no. 5, 
2009, pp. 514521. 
[12] J. L. Martin, B. J. Norris, E. Murphy and J. A. Crowe, 
“Medical device development: the challenge for ergonomics,” 
Appl Ergon, vol. 39, 2008, pp. 271283. 
[13] C. Foster, M. Hillsdon and M. Thorogood, “Interventions for 
promoting 
physical 
activity,” 
Cochrane 
database 
of 
systematic reviews (Online), no. 2, 2009. 
[14] D. M. Bravata, C. Smith-Spangler, V. Sundaram, A. L. L. 
Gienger, N. Lin and R. Lewis, “Using pedometers to increase 
physical activity and improve health: a systematic review,” J 
Am Med Assoc, vol. 298, no.19, 2007, pp. 22962304. 
[15] R. E. Glasgow, S. Emont and D. C. Miller, “Assessing 
delivery of the five ‘As’ for patient-centred counselling,” 
Health Promot. Int., vol. 21, no. 3, 2006, pp. 245255. 
[16] K. M. Khan, R. Weiler and S. N. Blair, “Prescribing exercise 
in primary care,” BMJ 2011;343:d4141. 
[17] E. P. Whitlock, C. T. Orleans, N. Pender and J. Allan,  
“Evaluating primary care behavioral counseling interventions: 
an evidence-based approach,” Am J Prev Med, vol. 22, 2002, 
pp. 267-284. 
[18] J. A. Peterson, “Get moving! Physical activity counseling in  
primary care,” J Am Acad Nurse Pract, vol. 19, 2007, pp. 
349357. 
[19] I. Jacobson, Object Oriented Software Engineering: A Use 
Case Driven Approach. Wokingham: ACM Pr.-Wesley, 2007. 
[20] R. M. Huis in 't Veld, I. A. Widya, R. G. Bults, L. Sandsjö, H. 
J. Hermens and M. M. Vollenbroek-Hutten, “A scenario 
guideline 
for 
designing 
new 
teletreatments: 
a 
multidisciplinary approach,” J Telemed Telecare, vol.16, 
2010, pp.302307. 
[21] D. F. Polit and C. T. Beck, Nursing Research: Generating and 
Assessing Evidence for Nursing Practice. Philadelphia: 
Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2008. 
[22] H. F. Hsieh and S. E. Shannon, “Three approaches to 
qualitative content analysis,” Qual Health Res, vol. 15, 2005, 
pp. 12771288. 
[23] J. Nielsen and R. L. Mack, Usability Inspection Methods. 
New York: Wiley, 1994. 
[24] C. W. Turner, J. R. Lewis and J. Nielsen, “Determining 
usability test sample size,” in International Encyclopedia of 
Ergonomics and Human Factors, W. Karwowski, Ed. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press. 2nd ed., 2006, pp. 30843088.  
[25] J. R. Lewis, “Psychometric evaluation of the PSSUQ using 
data from five years of usability studies,” Int J Hum-Comput 
Interact, vol.14, no.3, 2002, pp. 463488. 
[26] J. Benedek and T. Miner, “Measuring desirability: new 
methods for evaluating desirability in a usability lab setting,” 
[Proc. “Humanizing design: Eleventh annual conference 
proceedings,” Orlando Florida, July 8-12, 2002, Usability 
Professionals Association]. 
 
 
 
 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

