Security Challenges and Solutions for Telemedicine over EPON 
Ying Yan and Lars Dittmann 
Department of Photonics Engineering, Technical University of Denmark 
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
{yiya, ladit}@fotonik.dtu.dk 
 
 
Abstract— Keeping data integrity and privacy is a major de-
sign concern for telemedicine applications, where sensitive and 
personal information are collected and disseminated over tele-
communication system. For this reason, this study discusses 
the network characteristics and security issues in the Ethernet 
Passive Optical Network (EPON), which is responsible for 
conveying traffic between the hospital or healthcare centers 
and patients. Subsequently, different types of security chal-
lenges are classified and a survey of solutions is presented. The 
purpose of this research is to highlight the security issues in 
EPON system as a transmission method of telemedicine ser-
vices and any person will be aware of the potential attacks 
during data transmission.  
Keywords-security challenges; EPON; telemedicine. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Security issue is a primary concern for the telemedicine 
application, where confidential data are exchanged between 
healthcare providers and patients. A telemedicine communi-
cation system consists of three principal divisions: a hospital 
service/data center, a transmission and distribution system, 
and patient home environment. The hospital service/data 
center provides medical instructions and assignments to in-
dividual patient, meanwhile it stores patient personal infor-
mation and medical records/documents in the data center. 
The transmission and distribution system connects the hospi-
tal and the patient at home and exchanges data (such as mes-
sages, files, videos, and so on). Telemedicine applications 
and devices are used by patients at their homes, so that they 
can remotely communicate with doctors and get correct and 
necessary medical advices. This work studies the usage of 
optical access network for the telemedicine communication 
system for data transmitting and distributing.   
Delivering data over optical fiber links becomes the most 
prominent way in the access networks. Presently, the Fiber to 
the Home (FTTH) are being deployed to the subscriber by a 
strong worldwide push: in United States, the annual growth 
rate was 112% during September 2006 to September 2007 
and in Denmark, the FTTH subscribers increased 90% in 
year 2008 [1] [2]. The cost effective Ethernet Passive Optical 
Networks (EPON) with point-to-multipoint architecture is 
the prevalent solution to FTTH. The typical EPON system is 
a tree structure consisting of an Optical Line Terminal (OLT) 
located at a central office, a 1:N splitter, and multiple Optical 
Network Units (ONUs) at the end users’ premises.  
The telemedicine communication system relies primarily 
on health information security and confidentiality. Many 
countries have legislations with appropriate confidentiality 
policies, individual identification procedures and practices, 
so that information access is strictly limited to authorized 
person with the consent of the patient [3]. In order to design 
a completely secure telemedicine system, security must be 
integrated into every node and each element is responsible 
for ensuring information security. This dictates that data se-
curity is related to the entire communication system.  
Currently, various research projects begin to investigate 
the potential security risks on different aspects in the tele-
medicine system in order to minimize the consequential im-
pacts on the privacy of the whole system and patient personal 
information. The telemedicine communication system con-
tains different kinds of hardware equipments, software appli-
cations and transmission mediums. Therefore, the security 
and privacy issues are identified and discussed from different 
aspects. At the software level, Baker and Wallace [4] explore 
the risks of hacking in software and computer systems and 
tempering user database, where data can be stolen or altered. 
At the network level, two network technologies, Ethernet 
and mobile network, have been studied and discussed regard-
ing to the security aspect, respectively Kiravuo et al. in [5] 
and Boukerche and Ren [6]. In [7], besides the manmade 
events, Carvalho and De Souza worked on network resili-
ence and path protection in order to reduce the risks caused 
by natural effects or earthquake.  
This paper focuses on the security issues in the stage of 
data transmission and distribution. On the basis of EPON, it 
is vitally important to ensure that any data transmitted over 
optical channel, for example, medical history of a patient, 
cannot be leaked out and used to identify a person.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 
II, we first describe the basic architecture and operation pro-
cesses of EPON. We present the security challenges in 
EPON and give a survey on proposed solutions in section III 
and section IV, respectively.   
II. 
EPON SYSTEM  
In an EPON system, one OLT is functionalized as an 
administrator connecting multiple ONUs in the subscribers’ 
locations. IEEE 802.3ah Task Force [8] specifies the physi-
cal layer and MAC layer characteristics of EPON.  
As shown in Figure 1, we consider an EPON system con-
sisting of K ONUs that connect to a central control station, 
OLT, via the optical link. In the downstream direction from 
the OLT to the associated ONUs, data are broadcasted to 
each ONU in a point-to-multipoint architecture. On the other 
hand, it is a multipoint-to-point architecture in the upstream 
direction from the ONUs to the OLT. 
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

1:N 
splitter
OLT
ss1
1
2
k
1
1
1
2
k
1 k
1
2 1 2
k
uplink
downlink
1
1
1
2
2
k
k
ONU 1
ONU 2
ONU k
ss2
ssk
 
Figure 1. EPON system: upstream (multi-point to point) and downstream 
(point to multi-point) transmission. 
 
Multiple ONUs share the optical bandwidth with Time 
Division Multiplexing (TDM) technique [1]. The OLT allo-
cates upstream bandwidth among the ONUs and each ONU 
transmits packets in dedicated time slots in order to avoid 
collision. Two processes are performed: the auto-discovery 
process and the normal process.  
 
During the discovery process, the OLT searches for 
ONUs, authenticates and registers attached ONUs, and 
calculates the Round Trip Time (RTT). After discover-
ing and registering the connected ONUs, the OLT sets 
up an entry table, which contains the ONU Logic Link 
Identification (LLID) and RTT values.  
 
A key perspective of the normal process is the ability to 
assign bandwidth and schedule transmission for all reg-
istered ONUs in a manner of fairness and without con-
flict. The OLT polls registered ONUs and assigns time 
slots either statically or dynamically based on the re-
source requirement negotiation. 
III. 
SECURITY CHALLENGE IN EPON 
In a communication system for telemedicine applications, 
security management is applied for keeping the data integrity 
without being tampered, patient privacy and confidentiality 
without being released or retrieved, and access control with-
out being unauthorized accessed. In this paper, EPON is used 
for data transmission for telemedicine service and we study 
communications security challenges in EPON. EPON have 
security threats and vulnerabilities that are experienced in the 
general network. Meanwhile, there are special attacks due to 
transmission characteristics in EPON, for example, network 
topology, control protocol, communication equipments as 
well as network access ports [9][10].  
A. Potential Security Risk with EPON Topology 
Security depends highly on the configuration of network 
architecture. Unlike a peer-to-peer network, where a trust 
between a server and a user is normally existed, EPON sys-
tem with a point-to-multipoint structure is vulnerable to in-
truders. In EPON, downstream traffic is broadcasted and 
upstream bandwidth resources are shared by multiple users. 
Besides, we cannot assume a fixed topology, because the 
registration of ONUs is dynamic and an ONU may leave or 
join the network at any time. The potential threats, eaves-
dropping and Denial of Service (DoS), are possible occurred 
due to the point-to-multipoint topology.  
 
 
Eavesdropping: ONUs can receive all downstream traffic 
by simply disabling the address/ID filter and freely re-
ceiving data destined to other ONUs. Since it is difficult 
to detect such an attack at OLT, a malicious ONU can 
eavesdrop traffic without being noticed and interrupted 
for 24 hours per day.  
 
Denial of Service (DoS): the upstream bandwidth is dis-
tributed among several users. Each ONU needs to trans-
mit in upstream direction by complying with the assigned 
timeslots. If a misbehaved ONU on purpose transmits 
outside the schedule, it can consequently cause collision 
with the ongoing transmission from a legitimate ONU, 
and even worse, it can block the channel with large 
amounts of traffic.   
 
Theft of Service (ToS): ToS is threat that is common to all 
networks. One malicious subscriber attempts to imper-
sonate another legitimate ONU, by forging all useful 
ONU information including LLID, MAC address, and so 
on. Since the LLID is the identity assigned during the 
registration process and used as a digital signature during 
the normal process, the malicious subscriber obtains 
bandwidth without any access cost by a forged LLID.   
B. Potential Security Risk with Control Protocol 
The Multi-Point Control Protocol (MPCP) as the control 
and signaling protocol is defined in EPON standard. After 
the registration process, the OLT communicates and sched-
ules transmission timeslots to ONUs based on their assigned 
identifications, LLIDs. During the registration process, a 
potential threat is called impersonation.  
The malicious user has opportunity to collect information 
about the target ONU such as its LLID and MAC address 
and masquerade as a legitimate ONU to use network re-
sources with free charge. Even worse, the attacker can seri-
ously invade other’s privacy by forging wrong information 
and transmitting on behalf of another ONU.  
IV. 
SURVEY OF SOLUTIONS FOR EPON SECURITY 
EPON system has unsurpassed advantages in comparison 
to the data transmission over copper wires or air interfaces. 
However, protecting the patient’s privacy and secure the 
transmission system becomes an important concern due to its 
topology. With properly designed security management can 
reduce the risk of security attacks even though they may not 
be eliminated. Based on the potential threats and security 
challenges in EPON, various solutions are proposed to an-
swer specific security requirements.   
A. Data Cryptography 
Cryptography is the process of hiding the original data in 
a serial of meaningless scrambled code during transmission. 
At the receiver node, data is deciphered and converted back 
into the original information. Due to the point-to-multipoint 
network topology, eavesdropping is possible in the down-
stream direction by simply changing a registered ONU con-
figuration into the promiscuous mode. Thus, the downstream 
data need to be encrypted to safeguard the information.  
 
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The data encryption for 1G-EPON is undefined in origi-
nal 802.3ah-2004 standard [8]. Later in 2008, the YD/T 
1771-2008 Technical Requirements for Access Networks - 
Interoperability of EPON Systems uses the triple churning 
algorithm [11]. When evolving into 10G-EPON, an ad-
vanced encryption method, Galois Counter Mode (GCM) is 
adopted as described in the IEEE MAC security (MACsec) 
standard, 802.1AE [12]. GCM provides high security by 
using 128 bits Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) in 
counter mode and supports high speed data transmission due 
to the pipeline architecture of AES [13]. An alternative solu-
tion is the multi-byte churning encryption algorithm, which 
increases the key length in order to improve the security lev-
el and can be implemented at fast transmission speed [14].   
In order to analyze the alternative encryption algorithms 
proposed for EPON system, we compare the single / triple 
churning algorithm and the AES algorithm in terms of speed, 
complexity and security strength (shown in Table 1). The 
churning algorithm is used to protect data confidentiality by 
scrambling function. The single churning algorithm uses a 
24-bit key code. The implementation is simple and high 
speed. Triple churning algorithm is expanded on the basis of 
single churning algorithm in order to increase the security 
level. The key length is increased to 48 bits. AES is a sym-
metric-key encryption algorithm, where the same key is used 
for both encryption at the transmitter and decryption at the 
receiver. In EPON standard, GCM uses the AES with a key 
length of 128 bits. Designed as a pipelined architecture, AES 
is suitable for high-speed hardware implementation and 
meets the operation requirement in the10G EPON systems.  
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF ENCRYPTION ALGORITHMS IN EPON  
 
Single 
Churning 
Triple Churning 
GCM with AES 
Speed 
Fast 
Fast 
Fast 
Security level 
Low 
(14 
bits key) 
Low (48 bits 
key) 
High (128 bits 
key) 
Implementa-
tion  
Complexity 
Low 
Low 
high 
 
B. Authentication Protocols 
An authentication protocol is used to verify an identifica-
tion of a node as a valid member in the network. Same as 
date encryption, node authentication is also a main defense 
again attack. EPON topology is open and dynamic. In the 
upstream direction, an authorization and authentication 
mechanism is required to ensure the communication reliabil-
ity and to avoid the impersonation from illegal masquerading 
users. A new ONU must be mutually authenticated during 
the auto-discovery process.  
Given various authentication protocols have been pro-
posed [10], ONU authentication and secure provisioning are 
presented in the latest IEEE 1904.1-2013 standard for Ser-
vice Interoperability in EPON (SIEPON) [15] [16]. To deal 
with both legacy 1G-EPON and the next generation 10G-
EPON, IEEE 802.1X-2004 and IEEE 802.1X-2010 are de-
fined as ONU authentication mechanisms, respectively. Both 
two generations are based on Extensible Authentication Pro-
tocol (EAP) methods:  
 
 
IEEE 802.1X-2004 and EAP-MD5: The EAP-MD5, 
defined in RFC 2284, is known as simple with very light 
and fast processing. The principle is in a challenge-
response principle. The OLT as an authenticator sends 
an EAP request. The ONU as a supplicant replies with 
its identification in a response message, which is relayed 
to an authentication server. The OLT then sends an EAP 
challenge packet of type MD5 challenge to the ONU. 
After calculating a MD5 hash based on the challenge, 
the ONU returns a response containing the hash value. 
On the server side, the same hash computation is per-
formed and two values are compared. The authentication 
is success if two hash values are identical, otherwise, the 
authentication fails.  
 
IEEE 802.1X-2010 and EAP-GPSK: the authentication 
scheme, EAP Generalized Pre-Shared Key (EAP-
GPSK), is an advanced technique to obtain mutual au-
thentication and key agreement between the authentica-
tor and supplicant [17]. For the authentication in the 
10G-EPON, an OLT starts with an EAP request mes-
sage containing its identification ID_olt. The applicant 
ONU responses with its own identification, ID_onu. The 
OLT sends ID_olt, a random number RAND_server, 
and a list of supported ciphersuites, CSuite_List. The 
ONU then requests with ID_onu, a random number,    
RAND_onu, a repeat of received parameters of the 
OLT, the selected ciphersuite and a Message Authenti-
cation Code (MAC_onu) that is computed based on all 
the transmitted parameters. The OLT verifies the re-
ceived MAC_onu code and the consistency of parame-
ters. In case of successful verification, the EAP server 
computes a MAC_olt over the session parameter and re-
turns it to the peer. The peer verifies the received 
MAC_olt code, and consistency of parameters.  If the 
verification is successful, ONU replies with a message 
that can optionally contain the peer's protected data pa-
rameters. Then, the OLT sends an EAP Success mes-
sage to indicate the successful outcome of the authenti-
cation. The keys used to compute MAC at the OLT and 
ONU are both derived from a Key Derivation Function 
(KDF), which based on a long-term pre-shared key. 
Both the server OLT and the peer ONU are authenticat-
ed by using the MAC key code.   
 
During the authentication process, three types of ONU 
identification are used: MAC address based, logical ID based 
and hybrid authentication. The first method uses information 
provided by ONU during the auto-discovery process. The 
second method requires a provider defined logical ID, which 
is manufactured into an ONU device. In the hybrid mode, if 
the MAC address based authentication fails, the OLT then 
initiates to the logical ID based authentication [16].  
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. Security Enhanced Communication Technologies 
PON technology is developed with the aims of increased 
data rate, increased range, reduced cost and reduced energy 
consumption. The following technologies improve network 
performances and profits. Meanwhile they affect the security 
properties of EPON system in term of involving multiple 
wavelengths, operating at fast speed, and deploying a differ-
ent multiplexing method.  
 
 
Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) technology: 
The straight way to improve network security is to setup 
a point-to-point communication between the server and 
the client. By assigning traffic on links with different 
wavelengths, the WDM-PON allows the OLT exchange 
data with each ONU at a unique wavelength.   
 
High speed 10G-EPON: The churning encryption 
scheme has drawbacks such as short key length and low 
operation speed. With the upgrading to 10G EPON, 
GCM is deployed to ensure data security as well as to 
guarantee the information reliability. By combining 
Galois field message authentication code (GMAC), the 
method realizes authentication process and can be used 
as an incremental MAC [13]. 
 
Optical Code Division Multiple Access (OCDMA) tech-
nology: While being successfully developed in wireless 
communication, the OCDMA introduces this concept in-
to fiber optic communication systems, where encoding 
and decoding operations are performed in optical do-
main. Advantages of using OCDMA include realizing 
higher spectral efficiency, providing higher system ca-
pacity and enhancing security. In OCDMA-PONs, dif-
ferent users are assigned orthogonal codes, with which 
each user’s data are encoded/decoded with an optical 
pulse sequence. Thus, this technique provides asynchro-
nous communications and security against unauthorized 
users [18] [19]. 
D. Security Enhanced Communication Devices 
Using a conventional TDM PON, security enhancement 
can be introduced to the physical devices, OLT and ONU. In 
[20], authors demonstrate the physical security enhancement 
from using a pair of matched tunable lasers in OLT. A 
unique point-to-point link is created between the OLT and 
the destination ONU since the tunable laser transmits each 
frame with a unique identifying code and each ONU is also 
assigned with a unique wavelength.  
E. Security Mechanism in Hybrid Network Topology 
A telemedicine communication system is composed of 
different communication technologies instead of a solo 
transmission links. EPON is responsible for delivering traffic 
to the users’ premises. The last-mile can be accomplished by 
using Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) or Wireless Local Area 
Network (WLAN) technologies. Research about a unified 
security framework for integrated technologies is ongoing. In 
[21] [22], authors discuss about the integrated authentication 
process and data encryption scheme in the combined EPON 
and wireless networks. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The major strengths of EPON are its high data rate and 
low cost. They are also the causes of its prevalence in the 
access network. Nowadays, security issues for EPON system 
become a serious concern, particular for transmitting patient 
medical histories and hospital health records. Concerns are 
raised about patient privacy and data security due to the 
broadcast characteristics in EPON. This paper discusses sev-
eral research efforts, which have been trying to address the 
security issues in EPON. The challenges are addressed in 
order to point out the secure weakness caused by EPON 
structure, protocol and devices. Hence, this work shows that 
as the transmission channel is vulnerable, potential attacks 
can be possible to harm the entire telemedicine system. This 
paper further presents a survey of existing solutions to deal 
with data confidentiality, authentication, access control and 
integration with other network technologies. Through our 
study, we showed different aspects and concerns for a securi-
ty framework for the telemedicine system over EPON. Fu-
ture work will consider simulation and result analysis for the 
discussed solutions.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the support by 
the Patient @ Home project - Danish welfare technological 
research and innovation initiative project [23].  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Maier, “Optical Access-Metro Networks”, in “Broadband 
Access Networks”, Springer US, pp. 237-259, 2009. 
Doi:10.1007/978-0-387-92131-0_11 
[2] “Denmark Sees the Light: 90% Increase in the Fibre‐to‐the
‐Home Subscribers in the Past Year”, Press release, 2009. 
[3] B. Fong, A.C. M. Fong, and C.K. Li, “Telemedicine 
Technologies: Information Technologies in Medicine and 
telemedicine”, Wiley, United Kingdom, pp.137-170, 2011.  
[4] W. H. Baker and L. Wallace, “Is Information Security Under 
Control?: Investigating Quality in Information Security 
Management”,  IEEE Security & Privacy, vol 5, iss. 1, pp. 36 
– 44, Feb 2007.  
[5] T. Kiravuo, M. Sarela, and J. Manner, “A Survey of Ethernet 
LAN Security”,  IEEE communications surveys & tutorials, 
vol. 15, no.34, pp. 1477 – 1491, 2013. 
[6] A. Boukerche and Y. Ren, “A Secure Mobile Healthcare 
System using Trust-Based Multicast Scheme”,  IEEE Journal 
on selected areas in communications, vol 27, no. 4, pp. 387 – 
399, May 2009.  
[7] M. M. Carvalho and E. A. De Souza, “A Novel Protection 
Mechanism in TDM-PON”, 11th International Conference on 
Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON), pp. 1-4, July 2013. 
[8] IEEE 802.3ah Ethernet in the First Mile Task Force. 
[9] S. Roh and S. Kim, “Security model and authentication 
protocol in EPON-based optical access network”, 5th 
International Conference on Transparent Optical Networks 
(ICTON), pp. 99-102, July 2003. 
[10] M. Hajduczenia, P. Inacio, H. Silva, M. Freire, and P. 
Monteiro, 
“On 
EPON 
Security 
Issues”, 
IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, pp. 68-83, May 2007. 
[11] YD/T 1771-2008, “Technical Requirements for Access 
Networks – Interoperability of EPON Systems”, Mar 2008.  
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[12]  “IEEE 802.1AE – Media Access control (MAC) Security”, 
2006.  
[13] X. Chen, G. Shou, Z. Guo and Y. Hu, “Encryption and 
Authentication Mechanism of 10G EPON systems Based on 
GCM”, 2nd International Conference on e-Business and 
Information System Security (EBISS), pp. 1-4, May 2010. 
[14] X. Xu, G. Shou, Z. Guo and Y. Hu, “Encryption Method of 
Next Generation PON systems”, 3rd International Conference 
on Broadband Network and Multimedia Technology (IC-
BNMT), pp. 384-387, Oct 2010. 
[15] G. Kramer, L. Khermosh, F. Daido, A. Brown, H. Yoon, K. 
Suzuki, and W. Bo, “The IEEE 1904.1 Standard: SIEPON 
Architecture and Model”, IEEE Communications Magazin, 
pp. 98-108, September 2012.  
[16]  “1904.1-2013 - IEEE Standard for Service Interoperability in 
Ethernet Passive Optical Networks (SIEPON)”, September 
2013. 
[17] T. Clancy, and H. Tschofenig, "Extensible Authentication 
Protocol - Generalized Pre-Shared Key (EAP-GPSK) 
Method", RFC 5433, IETF Request for Comments, February 
2009  
[18] A. Stok and E. H. Sargent, “The Role of Optical CDMA in 
Access Networks”, IEEE Communication Magazine, vol. 40, 
iss. 9, pp. 83 – 87, 2002 
[19] H. A. Bakarman, T. Eltaif, P. S. Menon, M. Muqaibel, and S. 
Shaari, “Optical Access Network based on OCDMA Systems: 
Transmission and 
Security Performance”, Journal 
of 
Communications , vol. 7, pp. 35-41, 2013.  
[20] A. Harris, A. Sierra, S. Kartalopoulos, and J. Sluss, “Security 
Enhancements in Novel Passive Optical Networks”, IEEE 
International Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 
1399-1403, 2007.  
[21] S. Chowdhury and M. Maier, “Security Issues in Integrated 
EPON and Next Generation WLAN Networks”, IEEE 
Consumer Communications and Networking Conference 
(CCNC), pp. 1-2, Jan 2010 
[22] W. Gu, P. K. Verma and S. V. Kartalopoulos, “A Unified 
Security Framework for WiMAX over EPON access 
Networks” Security and Communication Networks, vol 4, iss. 
6, pages 685–696, June 2011.  
[23] Patient 
at 
Home 
project. 
Website: 
http://www.patientathome.dk/ 
 
 
240
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

