A Knowledge Representation for Cardiovascular Problems Applied to Mobile 
Monitoring of Elderly People 
Clauirton A Siebra, Manuella D C Silva 
Informatics Center 
Federal University of Paraiba 
Joao Pessoa, PB, Brazil 
{clauirton,manuella}@di.ufpb.br 
Fabio Q B Silva, Andre L M Santos, Regina Miranda 
CIn/Samsung Laboratory of Research and Development 
Federal University of Pernambuco 
Recife, PE, Brazil 
{fabio,alms,rcgm}@cin.ufpe.br
 
 
Abstract— Although the decline of physical conditions is a 
continuous process related to the ageing, elderly people 
generally desire to maintain their privacy and autonomy for as 
long as possible. The technology of mobile health monitoring is 
an important approach to be applied into this scenario, once 
such technology enables a prompt identification of health 
problems. One of the trends in this area is to implement levels 
of intelligence into monitoring systems, so that they can take 
decisions and act in a more optimized way. For that end, one of 
the approaches is to provide deduction resources to mobile 
devices, so that they can manipulate knowledge in form of 
rules. This work shows how we can implement a light 
deduction system using a free-context grammar, which is 
mainly used to codify experts’ knowledge. Our focus is on a 
grammar for cardiovascular problems, once this is the main 
kind of problem that affects elderly people. 
Keywords- health monitoring; knowledge representation; 
mobile applications; cardiovascular. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As medical science advances, people can live with better 
health and alone up to a very advanced age. Thus, we have a 
new kind of social behavior, where elderly people are 
becoming more independent. In this scenario, where we must 
allow elderly people to live in their own homes leading their 
normal life, while, at the same time taking care of them, 
requires new type of assistant systems [1]. 
In this context, we have seen an increase in the number 
of researches towards the implementation of systems that 
carry out a remote monitoring of patients [2,3]. In fact, such 
systems bring several advantages, such as reduction of the 
public health care costs and more convenience to their users. 
The literature [4] lists interesting scenarios where the use of 
a health monitoring platform could be useful. One of such 
scenarios is the support to elderly people who are living in 
their own households. 
Current researches in health monitoring are mainly 
focused on infrastructure aspects, such as network support 
[5] and information security/privacy [6]. Independently of 
the nature of the research, we see the use of mobile devices 
just as a router of health information. In other words, mobile 
devices are used as a component that receives vital signals 
from wearing sensors and sends such signals to central 
databases. However, we argue that mobile devices can act as 
an active element, rather than a passive and temporary 
repository of information. This means that mobile devices 
should present an autonomous behavior and be able to take 
decisions in accordance with its current knowledge. 
The technique of rule-based systems [7] is one of the 
classical ways to implement autonomy in a system. Rule-
based systems are used as an alternative to store and 
manipulate knowledge, interpreting information in a useful 
manner. Typical examples of rule-based systems are domain-
specific expert systems that use rules to make deductions or 
choices. For example, an expert system might help a doctor 
in choosing the correct diagnosis based on a cluster of 
symptoms, or selecting tactical moves to play a game. 
One of the main advantages of rule-based systems is its 
difference from standard procedural or object-oriented 
programs. In order, in such systems there is no clear order in 
which code executes. Instead, the knowledge of the expert is 
captured in a set of rules, each of which encoding a small 
piece of the expert's knowledge.  
Frameworks for the development of rule-based systems 
are complex, mainly because they are domain independent. 
Thus, we do not have support for implementations of rule-
based systems in mobile architectures. Considering this 
aspect, we restricted our domain to cardiovascular problems 
and defined a free-context grammar to represent the 
knowledge associated with this domain. This grammar 
enables the description of rules and the implementation of a 
decision making process, as detailed later on in this paper. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section II describes an overview of the health monitoring 
area, relating their approaches to aspects such as use of 
specific or general mobile devices, or presence of intelligent 
resources. Section III presents the architecture of our 
monitoring approach, detailing its three modules. Section IV 
discusses our representation module, which defines a 
grammar to codification of rules. Section V describes our 
experiments and results so far. Finally, Section VI concludes 
this paper with the main remarks and future research 
directions. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
A complete elderly monitoring system should consider 
several typical problems of aging. For example, while this 
paper is focused on the cardiovascular domain, several other 
works consider problems such as recognition of unusual 
behaviors, dementia, detection of falls and diabetes. 
314
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The work presented in [8] uses a structural pattern 
recognition approach to propose a monitoring model using 
body sensors networks. This proposal is divided into two 
stages. First, a processing unit acquires health signals of 
uses, carrying out a pre-processing and local classification of 
such signals. In the next stage, a mobile device does a second 
data classification, storing the important information and 
triggering critical events, such as alert messages. The final 
aim of this work is to evaluate patient moving behavior and 
classify its physical activities. This approach is very useful 
for elderly monitoring, once activities patterns, such as low 
levels of activities, are strong indicators of health problems. 
The work of Andreao et al. [9] considers the monitoring of 
cardiovascular problems. In this case they use a specific 
device, called Remote Unit, which receives cardiovascular 
signals and transmits such signals to a monitoring central 
where they are analyzed. The work presented in [10] also 
uses a similar approach. However, it integrates several kinds 
of sensors, differently of the previous work that only 
considers the ECG signal. Unfortunately, this work also uses 
a specific device to transmit data. In both cases, any kind of 
intelligent analysis is carried out. More recent works [11,12] 
tried to use traditional mobile devices, such as PDAs or 
mobile phones, rather than specific hardware. However, the 
devices are still only acting as a router of information.  
Differently, some works started to use intelligent 
resources during the monitoring process. The system of 
Copetti [13], for example, uses several sensors, in a home 
care environment, which send health signals to a personal 
computer. The patient diagnostic process is carried out using 
Fuzzy Logic and a set of production rules in the own patient 
personal computer. In case of problems detection, this 
computer contacts health professional. Similarly, the work 
discussed in [14] is also classified as a home care system and 
it uses pattern recognition techniques to identify the behavior 
of patients in terms of locomotion and diary activities. 
We see that when more advanced processing techniques 
are used, the monitoring systems tend to be a home care 
service, rather than a mobile application. The reason is the 
limited support that the Java Micro Edition provides for the 
mobile platform. The use of Android and other more 
powerful operating systems will eliminate the majority of 
these current limitations. For example, the LaCasa project 
[15] proposes a novel decision-theoretic model that estimates 
the risk faced by persons with dementia and decides on the 
appropriate action to take, such as prompting the person with 
dementia or calling the caregiver. The model can be tailored 
to the user needs (e.g. known locations, level of cognitive 
decline) and takes into account uncertainty, and contextual 
information gathered from sensors, such as current location, 
noise, and proximity to the caregiver. A preliminary version 
of the system has been instantiated in a wandering assistance 
application for mobile devices running on an Android 
platform. 
From this discussion we see that current embedded 
systems that run in mobile devices do not support any kind 
of declarative codification in the form of production rules. 
Note that such rules are a natural way to codify knowledge. 
Indeed, ever production systems are not able to run in mobile 
devices, once we do not have first-order logic engines 
available to this platform. Rule-based systems are a natural 
way to codify knowledge if we have the knowledge 
providers. One of its main advantages is the ability to 
provide explanations about its decisions, once the reasoning 
flow can be tracked. Differently, case-based reasoning needs 
a high number of past cases to be configured, while 
conexionist (e.g., neural networks) forms of reasoning also 
need a training set and they generally do not provide ways to 
identify the reasons for their conclusions. 
 
III. 
THE RULE -BASED MONITORING ARCHITECTURE 
The monitoring architecture that we are specifying is 
composed of health sensors and an assistant agent running at 
a mobile device. Health sensors account for capturing 
important vital signals of patients and transmit such signal to 
the assistant agent. The sensors can use the Bluetooth 
technology, which is a standard communication protocol 
primarily designed for low power consumption, with a short 
range (power-class-dependent: 100 m, 10 m and 1 m, but 
ranges vary in practice) based on low-cost transceiver 
microchips in each device. Because the devices use a radio 
(broadcast) communication system, they do not have to be in 
line of sight of each other. 
The assistant agent has three main modules (Figure 1): 
the Bluetooth drivers, the reasoning process and the SMS 
handler. Bluetooth drivers account for receiving signals from 
health sensors and transform such signals in facts. In order, 
getting rid of cables is a trend in the medical field, as it gives 
patients and healthcare workers more freedom and 
possibilities. Thus, Bluetooth is used in a variety of medical 
applications as a secure and reliable connection method. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture for a rule-based assistant agent. 
Typical implementations have been based on Bluetooth 
Serial Port Profile (SPP) and manufacturers specific 
proprietary implementations and protocols. Therefore, 
different implementations have had a poor level of 
interoperability with each other. For this reason some initial 
efforts, such as the Bluetooth SIG Medical Device Working 
Group, intend to develop a profile that would introduce 
interoperability between different medical sensors and 
collecting devices from different manufacturers. Initial 
works resulted in the Multi-channel Adaptation Protocol 
(MCAP) and the Bluetooth Health Device Profile (HDP) 
[16].  
The facts extracted from the Bluetooth communication 
are then saved in the Knowledge Base (KB) of the reasoning 
315
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

process module. These facts must respect a general pattern-
value format, which is specified as 

((data time vital-signal-identifier),vital-signal-value)

This could be instantiated to mean, for example, “on 
19/10/2009 (data) at 17:30 (time) the temperature (vital-
signal-identifier) was 38.5 (vital-signal-value)”. Apart facts, 
a knowledge base is also composed of rules that represent 
the expertise of a health specialist. A rule has a left hand side 
(a sensory precondition or "IF" statement) and a right hand 
side (action or “THEN statement). The left hand side 
contains information about certain facts and objects which 
must be true in order for the rule to potentially fire (that is, 
execute). Any rules whose left hand sides match in this 
manner at a given time are placed on an agenda. One of the 
rules on the agenda is picked (there is no way of predicting 
which one), its right hand side is executed and then it is 
removed from the agenda. The agenda is then updated 
(generally using a special algorithm called the Rete 
algorithm), and a new rules is picked to execute. This 
continues until there are no more rules on the agenda. 
A production system [17] controls the reasoning process 
and it also contains a database, sometimes called working 
memory, which maintains data about current state or 
knowledge, and a rule interpreter. The rule interpreter must 
provide a mechanism for prioritizing productions when more 
than one is triggered.  
The reasoning process can generate content to be 
delivered to its user, via display or sound interfaces; or to the 
central root via short messages. The SMS handler accounts 
for encoding the content, which was generated by the 
reasoning module, into SMS messages. The principal reason 
to use this kind of communication service is its low cost. 
This aspect is important if we want to monitor the health 
conditions of different social classes, once we need to reduce 
the operational cost of this environment. Furthermore, the 
kind of discrete information that we intend to transmit (e.g. 
blood pressure, pulse and temperature) does not require a 
high band to be transmitted on. 
 
IV. 
KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION AND USE 
The best option to create an instance of a production 
system is to use a framework, which abstracts several of the 
production systems concepts. Several options are available to 
the personal computer platform, such as Jess and JEOPS 
[18], which are extensions of the Java language. 
At a first moment, we tried to use a framework called 
KEOPS [19], a restricted adaptation of JEOPS to mobile 
platform. However, this framework requires a previous 
compilation of the rule base each time that the base is 
modified. Thus, this requirement prevents the process of 
updating the knowledge base by the own device. Considering 
this fact, we decided to create a light and domain-dependent 
inference mechanism to running in mobiles, as detailed in the 
next subsections. 
A. Grammar Symbols 
The grammar language is composed by reserved words, 
identifiers, punctuation signals and relational operators. The 
reserved words are only used in specific cases, as in any 
other formal language. An example is the "conditions" word, 
which is used to identify the beginning of the preconditions 
section of a rule. The punctuation signals are used to mark 
the end of a file (.), the end of a precondition or action (;) and 
the beginning of a block (:). The relational operators are used 
to define premises that must be (on not) validated by the 
system. When we define premises in the same precondition 
section, we are indirectly applying the “and” logical operator 
on such premises.   
Table I shows all the elements that were considered in 
this version. 
TABLE I.  
GRAMMAR SYMBOLS 
Type 
Token 
Function 
Reserved 
word 
ruleBase 
Name of the knowledge 
base 
Rule 
Name of the production  
rule 
Conditions 
Beginning of conditions 
Actions 
Beginning of actions 
Normal 
Type of detected health 
situation 
Alert 
Emergency 
Identifiers 
Name 
Name identifier 
Age 
Age identifier 
Gender 
Sex identifier 
Weight 
Weight value 
VitalSigns 
Health signal identifier 
SBP 
Systolic blood pressure 
value 
DBP 
Diastolic blood pressure 
value 
heartRate 
Heart frequency value 
respiratoryRate 
Respiratory frequency value 
temperature 
Body temperature value 
oximetry 
Blood oxygen  rate 
SBPVarianceSleeping 
Variance of SBP during the 
sleeping 
 
SBPVarianceHomeActivity 
Variance of SBP during 
home activities 
SBPVarianceStand 
Variance of SBP during rest 
VERY_LOW 
Possible constants used to 
classify the variation of 
health signals 
LOW 
NORMAL 
HIGH 
VERY_HIGH 
Punctuation 
symbols  
: 
Indicates the beginning of a 
condition in a rule 
; 
Indicates the end of a line in 
a condition or action  
. 
Indicates the final of a rule 
base 
Relational 
operators 
<     <=     >     <=     =     # 
Symbols used to carry out 
relational operations 
 
B. Creating Instances of Rule Bases 
To represent production rules using such symbols, we 
have specified a simple context free grammar to facilitate the 
316
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

work of formalizing the expertise used in this work. Figure 2 
shows a simple example of rule base specified in accordance 
with that grammar. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of simple rule base specified in accordance with the 
defined language 
 
 
This example shows that every base is composed for a set 
of rules and each rule has obligatorily two parts: the 
conditions and the actions. Given this initial example, next 
sections discuss both the elements of the grammar and its 
syntactical aspects. 
C. Intrepretation of Instances of the Grammar 
The description of a knowledge base instance is carried 
out according to the previous figure (Figure 2). This instance 
is stored in a text file called “RuleBase.rule”, which is loaded 
to be interpreted by the algorithm described in Figure 3. 
Such algorithm also uses input signals (health information 
acquired via sensors) during the evaluation of logic 
sentences. 
The idea of such algorithm is to interpret the conditional 
part of the rules and, based on the results of such 
interpretation, to activate the right side of the rules, which 
are related to actions of emergence, alert or normality. In 
order, the algorithm can be interrupted to execute an action 
and, after that, resume such execution. 
 
 
 
 
 
ruleBase test 
     rule first: 
          conditions: 
               SBPVarianceSleeping = LOW; 
          actions: 
               alert; 
     rule second: 
          conditions: 
               SBPVarianceSleeping = NORMAL; 
          actions: 
               normal; 
     rule third: 
          conditions: 
               heartRate = HIGH; 
          actions: 
               alert; 
. 
Figure 3. Activity diagram of the rule base analysis algorithm 
 
317
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

When an action is chosen, a second algorithm (Figure 4) 
is triggered to execute such action. This algorithm receives 
the action identifier and additional data related to the rule 
that was activated. Then, the algorithm controls the calling of 
several methods, such as: 
 
sendSMS: this method uses one or more pre-defined 
telephone numbers to send warning messages. 
Before transmission, messages are divided into 
packages of 160 characters; 
 
reportHistoric: this method accounts for reporting all 
the information of patients that is stored in the 
devices database, which are stored in the device, to a 
central database (e.g., web server);  
 
activeTimer: this method accounts for scheduling the 
automatic execution of the algorithms based on the 
time that is defined by the production rules. 
 
 
Figure 4. Activity diagram of the action control algorithm 
In a situation of “alert”, the system sends a message via 
SMS to pre-defined receivers and displays such message in 
the device’s graphic interface, informing its user about the 
alert status. This message shows the health signals that are 
not normal. After that, the algorithm reduces the time 
regarding the next execution of the rule base. When an 
emergency situation is detected, the system acts similarly to 
the alert scenario. The differences are associated with the 
time for execution, which is adjusted to 30 seconds, and the 
warning messages. In this case, the system suggests a phone 
call and prepares a shortcut button for such call. 
During the interpretation of rules, the system can stand 
by its execution to ask its user about her/his current physical 
activity. Alternatives to answer this question are: Stand, 
Home Activity, Sleeping, Other. Users can also pre-define 
the answer for this question. For example, when they go 
sleep, the "Sleeping" status can be pre-defined. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
To create the knowledge base, we have used the 
reference patterns for cardiovascular anomalies and different 
combinations of the set of production rules defined in [13]. 
The precedence is defined by the order of the rules in the 
“RuleBase.rule” file. Then, different test cases were defined 
to evaluate the correctness of the system. For such cases, 
synthetic facts were used to generate different scenarios. An 
example of scenario is specified in next table (Table II).  
TABLE II.  
ONE OF THE SCENARIOS FOR EVALUATION, WHERE SIX 
HEALTH SIGNALS ARE REGISTERED: S1 (CARDIAC FREQUENCY), S2 
(RESPIRATORY FRQUENCY), S3 (SBP), S4 (DBP), S5 (BLOOD OXIDATION) 
AND S6 (BODY TEMPERATURE). 
 
S1 
S2 
S 
S4 
S5 
S6 
Measure 1 
100 
16 
120 
80 
100 
37 
Measure 2 
90 
15 
141 
90 
95 
38 
Measure 3 
160 
30 
120 
75 
98 
37 
Measure 4 
100 
17 
120 
80 
95 
38 
Measure 5 
90 
16 
110 
60 
90 
36 
Measure 6 
100 
20 
160 
90 
97 
38 
Measure 7 
110 
19 
120 
85 
99 
37 
Measure 8 
112 
18 
120 
80 
95 
36 
 
The print screens presented in Figures 5 show messages 
that are displayed to users during the execution of one of the 
test scenarios.  
 
 
Figure 5. Print screens of the execution scenarios 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
318
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

This emulation was carried out via the Wireless Toolkit 
2.5.2.  Figure 5a displays messages about the initialization of 
the system Figure 5b shows an execution where, at the end 
of the execution, the system performs a backup of the device 
database to a datacenter represented by the number 555001. 
In Figure 5c, the system detects an emergency situation and 
shows a warning message to its user suggesting a phone call 
to a pre-defined number. Figure 3d presents a moment after 
the detection of an emergency situation, where we can notice 
the new period of 30 seconds to check vital signs. 
We have used a knowledge base with 21 rules and 20 
different scenarios to validate this approach. The scenarios 
were first analyzed by one health specialist, which described 
the procedure that should be done for each case. After that, 
the scenarios were sequentially uploaded by the system, and 
the results of its behavior were compared to the specialist 
analysis. This experiment validated the correctness of the 
rules and also demonstrated the easy way to codify 
knowledge. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 
One of the advantages of real time and pervasive 
monitoring systems is their ability of detecting possible 
problems in an early stage of evolution. Thus, they are very 
useful as support to preventive medicine. Our main 
contribution in this context is to present an alternative to 
codify the knowledge of expertise, so that this representation 
can be easily manipulated inside a limited computer 
platform. Unfortunately, this form of manipulate the 
knowledge is domain dependent, so that it must be changed 
to deal with other domains.   
As monitoring systems provide diagnostic about 
particular situations, they must be reliable. This means, such 
systems must provide correct and accurate interpretations of 
income information. However, a complete reliable system is 
hard to be implemented once we need to consider possible 
software and hardware failures. We are aware of this 
problem, so that we consider that the system outcomes are 
currently only indications of users` health status rather than 
final diagnostics. Then, health specialists must evaluate the 
results before taking some action. To support such 
evaluation, the system can be configured to generate 
explanations that justify its interpretations. Future directions 
of this research can investigate the design of fault-tolerant 
modules to ensure reliability, using, for example, cross 
information analysis of diverse sources. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The results presented in this paper have been developed 
as part of a collaborative project between Samsung Institute 
for Development of Informatics (Samsung/SIDI) Federal 
University of Pernambuco (CIn/UFPE), financed by 
Samsung Eletronica da Amazonia Ltda., under the auspices 
of the Brazilian Federal Law of Informatics no. 8248/91. The 
authors would like to thank the support received from 
Samsung/SIDI team, in particular from Marcionilia Furbino 
Villefort, Rogerio de Rangel Moreira, Alexandre Bader 
Krafzif, Ildeu Fantini and Vera Bier.  
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Tablado, A. Illarramendi, J. Bermudez and A. Goni. 
“Intelligent Monitoring of Elderly People”, Proc of the 4th 
Annual IEEE Conf on Information Technology Applications 
in Biomedicine, UK, 2003. 
[2] S. Ohta, H. Nakamoto, Y. Shinagawa and T. Tanikawa. “A 
health monitoring system for elderly people living alone”, 
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare", 8(3):151-156, 2002. 
[3] M. Scheffer M and E. Hirt. “Wearable devices for 
telemedicine applications”. In Journal of Telemedicine and 
Telecare, 11(Supplement 1), 11(1):11–14, 2005. 
[4] E. Hirt and M. Scheffler. “Building a Mobile Healthcare 
Network within Public Networking Infrastructures”. In 
Mobile Telemedicine. CRC Press, 2009. 
[5] B. Woodward, R. Istepanian and C. Richards, “Design of a 
telemedical system using a mobile telephone”, IEEE 
Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 
5(1):13–15, 2001. 
[6] Y. Choi, J. Muller, C. Kopek and J. Makarsky, “Corporate 
wireless LAN security: Threats and an effective security 
assessment framework for wireless information assurance”, 
Int. Journal of Mobile Communications, 4(3): 266–290, 2006. 
[7] F. Hayes-Roth. “Rule-based Systems”, Communications of 
the ACM Magazine, 28(9):921-932, 1985.  
[8] R. Jajari, R. Bajcsy,  S. Glaser,  B. Gnade, M. Sgroi and S. 
Sastry. “Platform Design for Health-care Monitoring 
Applications”, Workshop on High Confidence Medical 
Devices, Software and Systems,  pp. 88-94, 2007.  
[9] V. Andreao, J. Pereira Filho, C. Calvi. “TeleCardio: 
Telecardiologia a serviço de pacientes hospitalizados em 
domicílio”, Proceedings of the Brazilian Conference of Health 
Informatics, Florianópolis, SC, Brazil, 2006. 
[10] A. Anliker, et al. “AMON: A wearable multiparameter 
medical monitoring and alert system”, IEEE Transactions on 
Information Technology in Biomedicine, 2004, 8(4): 415-427. 
[11] A. Machado, et al. “Utilização de Dispositivos Móveis, Web 
Services e Software Livre no Monitoramento Remoto de 
Pacientes”, Proceedings of the Brazilian Conference of Health 
Informatics, Campos do Jordão, SP, Brazil, 2008. 
[12] R. Lee, C. Hsiao, C. Chen and M. Liu. “A mobile-care system 
integrated with Bluetooth blood pressure and pulse monitor, 
and cellular phone”. IEICE Transactions Information and 
Systems, Tokio, Japan, v. E89-D, n. 5, pp. 1702-1711, 2006. 
[13] A. Copetti, “Monitoramento Inteligente e Sensível ao 
Contexto na Assistência Domiciliar Telemonitorada”. PhD 
Thesis, Federal University of Fluminense, RJ, Brazil, 2010. 
[14] Y. Xiao and H. Chen, “Mobile Telemedicine: A computing 
and networking perspective”. Boca Raton, USA: Taylor & 
Francis Group (LLC), pp. 5-25, 2008. 
[15] J. Hoey, X. Yang, E. Quintana and J. Favela. “LaCasa: 
Location And Context-Aware Safety Assistant”, Proceedings 
of the 6th International Conference on Pervasive Computing 
Technologies for Healthcare, San Diego, CA, USA, 2012 
[16] R. Latuske, “Bluetooth Health Device Profile and the IEEE 
11073 medical device framework”, Proceedings of the 
Embedded World Conference, Nürnberg, Germany, 2010. 
[17] S. Russel and P. Norvig, “Artificial Intelligence”, 3th Edition. 
Prentice Hall, 2009. 
[18] C. Figueira Filho and G. Ramalho, “JEOPS – The Java 
Embedded Object Production System”, Lecture Notes in 
Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 1952, pp. 52-61, 2000. 
[19] R. Albuquerque, P. Guedes, C. Figueira, J. Robin and G. 
Ramalho. “Embedding J2ME-based inference engine in 
handheld devices: The KEOPS case study”. Proceedings of 
the Workshop on Ubiquitous Agents on Embedded, 
Wearable, and Mobile Devices, Bologna, Italy, 2002. 
319
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

