                Sense-Making in Complex Healthcare Domains: The Role of Technology  
in Every Day Lives of Youth Suffering from ME/CFS 
Jorun Børsting  
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
jorubo@ifi.uio.no 
Alma L. Culén  
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
almira@ifi.uio.no
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we argue that the technology design 
needs to take a more holistic perspective, well beyond 
opportunities offered by the technology development alone. 
This is especially important when developing technologies for 
complex domains, such as healthcare, and with users who are 
at risk. We propose a sense-making process that helps human-
computer interaction researchers/designers to develop a 
broader understanding of such complex domains in which they 
often have no expert knowledge. We exemplify our approach 
by exploring the complex domain related to the design of 
technologies 
that 
could 
support 
youth 
with 
Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis to cope better with their situation. The 
approach is based on a combination of user research, Actor-
Network Theory adapted to the design context, a complex 
systems design tool (Giga-mapping) and a literature review. 
We find that this approach leads researchers to reflect deeper 
over the domain complexities, and to avoid solving problems 
that do not untangle complexity or lead to real-life solutions. 
Our conclusion is that such initial sense-making processes are 
fundamental when considering the design of new technologies 
for healthcare, and with vulnerable users.  
Keywords-complex systems; sense-making; ME/CFS; ANT; 
healthcare; design thinking.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Diverse self-management applications and technologies 
that aim to support people in improving and maintaining 
their quality of life, or helping them through an illness and a 
recovery process, are increasingly sought after within 
healthcare 
and 
addressed 
through 
Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCI) design and research. However, these 
applications are frequently developed without sufficient 
understanding of the complexities of the healthcare and 
problems within this domain that are often wicked [1]–[3]. 
Wicked problems have been discussed by Rittel and Webber 
already in 1973 [4], but have gained more attention lately 
through the use of design thinking, e.g., [5]. Wicked 
problems are incomplete, contradictory, changing and 
interdependent. Working with them is difficult, and is often 
relinquished too fast in favor of finding a good solution to 
some problem. Finding real design opportunities and 
problems to solve may then be lost. The design of healthcare 
technologies that support users and fit well the context of use 
require a broader and deeper inquiry into the nature of 
problems and their relation to the situated design space [6].  
In this paper, we discuss the initial sense-making in 
complex domains, a process that enables this broader and 
deeper understanding of the context, and design options. As 
an illustrative case, we use the design of supportive 
technologies for a particular user group, adolescents 
suffering from Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME), often 
referred to as the Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS), or 
ME/CFS. Almost no research results were to be found on 
this topic. Without a-priory knowing what kind of solution(s) 
to offer to these users, be it self-management tools, or other 
systems or services that could be useful in their everyday 
lives, we propose a framework for sense-making and finding 
problems that are meaningful to solve in this context.  
In recent years, the increase of chronic diseases, in 
particular among youth, has been significant [7]. Among 
these diseases, ME/CFS has become a growing concern, not 
only for those suffering from it and their families, but also 
for the medical science, governmental health management, 
and society at large. Tweens and adolescents who are 
affected by the illness, would be, if healthy, considered to be 
willing adopters and users of technology [8]. However, even 
for their healthy peers, intensive use of technology may lead 
to negative health consequences [9]. Thus, for those with 
ME/CFS, it is crucial that technology does not introduce a 
new set of problems or worsens their health condition [10].  
From this perspective, we consider youth with ME/CFS 
to be a group of vulnerable users [11]. Vulnerability is to be 
understood as a set of risks that these adolescents are 
exposed to. Understanding these risks, and how to reduce or 
eliminate them, is a step towards understanding design and 
technology design spaces when considering designing for 
and with this user group.  
Furthermore, the understanding of the design space in 
complex contexts may require understanding of several 
different fields pertinent to the context. Understandings can 
be at the micro-level (e.g., how a specific solution affects the 
user) and understandings at the macro-level (such as social, 
cultural and governmental influences on the design space). In 
a development of supportive technologies for and with youth 
with ME/CFS, we have chosen to use Actor-Network Theory 
(ANT) to produce rich descriptions of the interrelated social 
and material processes [12][13], Giga-mapping to represent 
and communicate our thinking about design, and finally, a 
firm focus on users and use. We argue that such combined 
approach helps researchers to develop and communicate 
growing insights efficiently, become aware of the broader 
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

range of issues and their interconnectedness, engage in more 
innovative designerly practices and reflect critically on own 
position and values in the sense-making process. When using 
Design Thinking (DT), an HCI researcher typically adopts 
designerly practices when making prototypes. The difference 
between a research prototype and a product in use is 
significant [14], as are the implications for knowledge 
production [15]. When working with wicked problems in 
complex domains, an HCI researcher needs to work with 
his/her own mindset and develop an ongoing sensibility and 
sensitivity to problems inherent to the context. 
The paper is structured as follows: we provide the 
literature review in Section II, followed by the section on 
ME/CFS and technology design. Section IV combines our 
findings and discussion around technology for adolescents. 
Finally, Section V presents our conclusions. 
II. 
THE LITERATURE REVIEW 
For the case presented in this paper, we started by 
mapping out our understanding of the context, see Fig. 1. 
The purple area in the center of the figure represents users 
for and with whom we aim to find and design solutions that 
could support them. To do so successfully, understanding 
what it means to be an adolescent with ME/CFS is crucial. 
This understanding is often referred to in the literature as an 
empathy with users [16]. We, however, believe that going 
beyond empathy, and venturing into the understanding of 
scientific, in our case medical, results related to the condition 
is also necessary, even when outside of our field of 
competence. These medical results, for example, could help 
to find a broader set of risks those adolescents with ME/CFS 
experience. Naturally, HCI and designerly thinking, being 
our own and familiar practices, are a fundamental ingredient 
in this process. ANT, as it applies to design and designers 
[13], is chosen to represent cultural, governmental and 
educational perspectives.  
 
Figure 1.  Giga-mapping fields of concern for design related to ME/CFS. 
In what follows, each subsection represents a short 
summary of literature findings related to areas depicted in 
Fig. 1 that became the starting point for our sense-making. 
 
A. A medical understanding of adult and paediatric ME/ 
CFS and its effects: the challenging nature of the disease 
ME/CFS, is a debilitating multisystem illness resulting in 
a plethora of symptoms that include severe physical and 
cognitive exhaustion, confusion, difficulties with memory, 
concentration, sensitivity to light and noise among others, 
see [17], [18]. What causes the illness remains an enigma, 
and the condition is presently researched on a broad scale, 
e.g., [19]. Many theories, ranging from viral infections to 
psychological stress have been proposed [17]. Some studies 
suggest that the immune system may be chronically active in 
CFS sufferers. This might relate to a theory that ME/CFS is 
caused by an abnormal reaction to common infectious 
agents. This theory could link ME/CFS to autoimmune 
diseases such as the Lyme disease and the Epstein-Barr 
virus. 
A review of thirty-four qualitative studies on ME/CFS, 
see [20], was done and the authors find that “For sufferers, 
illness development influenced identity, reductions in 
functioning, and coping. Physician-specific themes described 
lack of awareness about ME/CFS and recommended 
improvement in educational resources. Intersecting themes 
expressed issues with diagnosis creating tensions and fueling 
the stigmatization of ME/CFS”. Also, some research points 
in the direction where sufferers themselves help to perpetuate 
their condition. For example, Afari and Buchwald state that 
“current knowledge about chronic fatigue syndrome 
suggests that genetic, physiological, and psychological 
factors work together to predispose an individual to the 
condition and to precipitate and perpetuate the illness” and, 
further, that “sufferers’ perceptions, illness attributions, and 
coping skills may help to perpetuate the illness” [17, p. 230]. 
Such results, unless verified carefully, may help to 
perpetuate stigmatization. Other research, such as that of 
Geelen et al. [21], or Winger et al. [22], offers insight into 
personality issues relevant for understanding the youth 
suffering from ME/CFS. 
The treatment of those suffering from ME/CFS is highly 
individualized, frequently symptom-based, and includes both 
pharmacological [19] and behavioral approaches [23].  The 
most common form of help to those suffering from the 
illness in Norway [24] are self-management courses, offering 
guidance on how to stabilize the symptoms, find a balance 
between rest and activity, adjust to a life with ME, etc. This 
is in line with the trend to promote self-management 
wherever appropriate for sufferer care, and especially so for 
sufferers with chronic diseases [25]. Self-management often 
involves the management of medical conditions, behavior or 
emotions [26], [27]. For users with ME/CFS, self-
management also includes the management of so-called 
energy balance. An ME/CFS sufferer is considered to have a 
limited amount of energy available for use per day. If an 
activity takes too much energy, the overuse results in extra 
exhaustion over a period of time lasting from several hours 
to several days, leading to increased pain levels, sensitivity 
and overall worsened physical and cognitive condition. The 
problem is often that a person with ME/CFS does not know 
what amount of energy is required for an ordinary activity 
such as, for example, meeting a friend for a cup of coffee. 
Therefore, the energy balance management is difficult. 
A user study carried out by the Norwegian ME/CFS 
association [18] found that 40% of people suffering from 
ME/ CFS did not receive medical help with relieving 
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

symptoms caused by the illness. When sufferers were asked 
what kind of help they would like to receive from the 
healthcare 
sector, 
the 
results 
indicated 
professional 
assistance with sleep problems, stress management, stomach 
problems and general pain relief. 
For children and youth, the situation is additionally 
difficult because it is harder to make their voice on the 
matter heard:  
“Do children and adolescents suffer from ME/CFS? 
Simple common sense tells most parents, teachers and 
doctors that they do and often more severely than adults. 
Yet there remain a sizeable proportion of professionals in 
Health Care, Education and Social Services who are still 
prepared to ascribe the numerous, disabling but seemingly 
unconnected symptoms of this illness in young people to 
anorexia, depression, school phobia or a dysfunctional 
family background. All are, at least, agreed that the illness 
presents a considerable economic, educational and social 
problem” [28]. 
Resonating with these findings, and in part, because the 
illness does not leave visible marks on a person suffering 
from it, they are often dismissed as suffering from 
psychological problems, or worse, stigmatized by general 
population [20].  
The sufferers from ME/CFS have to bear the medical 
uncertainty of what causes the disease and, as a consequence, 
absence of an effective diagnostic tests and treatment for the 
illness [29]. Furthermore, ME/CFS social and political 
uncertainties related to the disease are of undetermined 
duration, depending most strongly on scientific, medical 
findings around the condition. The youth is affected by 
nearly the same rates, from about the age of 11, as adults 
[30].  
For someone to be diagnosed with ME/CFS, the 
symptoms need to be present to such a degree that they 
clearly limit a person’s ability to carry out ordinary daily 
activities [31].  Sufferers are classified into four groups: mild 
(an approximate 50% reduction in pre-illness activity level), 
moderate (mostly housebound), severe (mostly bedridden) or 
very severe (totally bedridden and in need of help with basic 
functions) [32].  
B. Previous research on ME/CFS in adolescence and 
technology 
As mentioned in the introduction, there is very little in 
the literature on assisting people, including adolescents, 
suffering from ME/CFS through the use of technology. 
ME/CFS sufferers, as mentioned above, have multiple 
challenges, at the physical and cognitive level, coupled with 
reduced tolerance to light and noise. They, thus, may not be 
the prime candidates for the use of screens for receiving 
information, whether they are smartphone screens, tablets or 
personal computers. All the solutions mentioned here are 
screen based. While screens may be a good option for 
adolescents in general, they may have limitations for those 
with ME/CFS. Thus, before deciding on any new solutions 
for these adolescents, one needs to make sure that proposed 
solutions do not introduce new problems and health risks.  
From the literature survey, we found that social isolation 
and access to education are important for these users. Several 
research efforts point in these directions, studying either the 
social media or platforms for education. General use of 
social media in medical care was described in [33], where 
authors have analyzed and synthesized 76 articles, 44 
websites, and 11 policies/reports and presented findings 
according to 10 different categories of social media such as 
blogs, micro blogs, social networks, professional networks, 
thematic networks, wikis, sharing sites and others 
(represented by the Second Life). Findings, in particular 
those related to the second life are relevant for adolescents 
with ME/CFS and have been taken further in the work of 
Best and Butler [34], [35].  The paper [35] describes how a 
virtual support center was constructed in the Second Life, 
featuring meeting areas, relaxation areas, library resources 
and a gallery of art by and for people with ME/CFS. 
However, the results of the investigation gave mixed 
conclusions, possibly reflecting the fact that certain level of 
mastery of the virtual environment was needed, and that was 
not possible for all users to accomplish. Also, a physical and 
cognitive condition of ME/CFS sufferers may affect their 
willingness to dedicate energy to learning about new virtual 
environments. The Second life application, in addition to 
providing information related to the condition, was aiming to 
address loneliness and social isolation. 
Considering the educational platforms for ME/CFS 
sufferers, the paper on e-learning, [36], can be brought 
forward. In this study, e-learning platforms were explored as 
an opportunity for children with ME/CFS to participate in 
classroom activities even though they are staying at home. 
As the authors state, this is especially relevant to Scotland, 
where many live far away from schools. However, the access 
to school and educational materials is only the first hurdle in 
receiving regular education and does not address other 
problems that youth with ME/CFS often have.  
C. Design Thinking and Design with and for Vulnerable 
users 
Design Thinking may be defined in many different ways. 
For example, it may be defined as a process that fosters 
innovative and creative thinking [37], or as an approach to 
mitigate complex problems through design [5], [38]. In [39], 
the authors also include the important discussion on the role 
of design research and designerly practice, with core 
concepts that include reflexive practice, meaning making and 
designerly ways of knowing. When working with vulnerable 
users, it is important to take into consideration ethical 
concerns as part of the reflection, and meaning making that 
ideally includes real users or those who represent them well.  
While the screen-based technology can play a supportive 
role in providing care for many users, the ME/CFS sufferers 
may have a very limited ability to concentrate, read, or even 
just look at a screen. ME/CFS adolescent sufferers are 
perceived as vulnerable also on being at risk of not using 
technology because of how their diverse illness symptoms 
limit their capabilities (physical or cognitive). In [10], 
authors argue that the term ‘vulnerable’ imply a set of risks. 
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

When identified, the risks could be helpful in defining design 
goals that aim to reduce or eliminate risks. They further 
argue “the awareness of risks/vulnerabilities in a design 
situation may be helpful in designing better products for 
vulnerable people” [10, p. 3]. These and other design 
concerns in design for and with vulnerable users need to 
come forth through a sense-making process. 
We find Giga-mapping [40], to be a particularly useful 
tool for sense-making in complex contexts. The Giga-
mapping aims to facilitate thinking and communication, at 
the same time inviting (basically by its large physical space) 
participation and collective production of understanding of 
the design context. Giga-mapping can be used to visualize 
fields of knowledge, as was done in Fig. 1. Furthermore, the 
complexity of a problem space can be mapped out, for 
example, in layers (e.g., understandings on micro, mezzo, 
and macro levels), fostering further understanding of 
complexity and relatedness of problems.  
D.  Theorizing technology and Actor-Network Theory 
(ANT)  
As this research aims to understand a larger, holistic 
picture around ME/CFS sufferers and technologies that could 
support them in their everyday lives, we propose the use of a 
pragmatic ANT inspired analysis of design opportunities in 
the initial, sense-making phases of a design process. To that 
end, a short overview of ANT is provided.  
ANT can be used as a framework to understand a 
heterogeneous network consisting of diverse human and non-
human actors. ANT is different from other social theories 
applied in information systems research, in how it helps to 
theorize the technology artefact, by focusing on both the 
social and the technical [41]. In ANT all the social-technical 
elements are included in networks of actors/actants. Latour 
describes the networks by stating “Behind the actors, others 
appear; behind one set of intentions there are others; 
between the (variable) goals and the (variable) desires, 
intermediate goals and implications proliferate, and they all 
demand to be taken into account” [42, p. 100]. The social-
technical focus draws attention to analyzing both the visible 
(the technical/objects) and the invisible (the social) and 
identifying 
the 
relationships 
between 
these. 
These 
relationships 
can 
be 
both 
material 
and 
semiotic 
simultaneously and combined into a network of actors that 
acts as a whole [43]. Tatnall and Gilding (2005) argue that 
ANT can be particularly useful for studies in areas that 
involve a consideration of some of the social and political 
issues in information systems. They further mention 
interface design, usability testing, and the use of distributed 
systems within organizations as examples of areas where 
ANT could be beneficial [44].  
There is an increasing focus on how ANT could be 
fruitful in a design of information systems [14], [45], [46]. 
Stuedahl and Smørdal found that “involving ANT concepts in 
co-design does help to frame co-design processes within the 
wider context and consequences of emerging knowledge 
development” [47, p. 204]. Others, focused on ANT in 
relation to designing visualizations that makes things public, 
in order to interest and engage people in participatory 
processes [48]. Storni explored how ANT can be used to 
offer an alternative perspective to co-designers, focusing on 
“a convention from Latour’s call for risky descriptions to a 
call to design things together” [14, p.167]. He further argues 
that ANT suggests three general turns to rethinking co-
design and participatory design practices. The first turn 
addresses the question of what to design? It also involves the 
idea to first design actor networks, and then look for ways to 
map them. He further describes the resulting maps as not 
only descriptive, but also as supporting participation in the 
design process. The second turn concerns the question of 
how to co-design and suggests the idea of designing as actor-
networking (in public). The last turn, described as epistemo- 
logical, involves what Storni describes as “moving from the 
idea of the designer as a network prince to the idea of the 
designer as an agnostic Prometheus” [14, p. 167].  
III. 
ME/CFS AND DESIGN OF TECHNOLOGY SESSION 
As mentioned in the introduction, this study uses a 
combination of user research, literature review and analysis 
inspired by ANT and Giga-mapping in order to tease out real 
problems and design opportunities related to assistive 
technologies for young people with ME/CFS.  
In terms of user research, we have organized a sense-
making session with experts on ME/CFS. These experts have 
a deep knowledge of ME/CFS. They have daily contact with 
children, youth and adults with ME, as well as their families, 
and therefore have a broad, personal knowledge of ME and 
experiences with ME challenges in lives of the sufferers and 
their families. These people came from 1) the Norwegian 
ME organization [18], 2) an organization that provides 
support to families of ME/CFS sufferers, 3) ME/CFS youth 
organization and 4) a medical doctor. The session lasted for 
close to three hours. The first part of the meeting was 
dedicated to getting to know what these organizations do. 
The results of insights gained are incorporated in Fig. 2.  
The second half of the session was used to discuss future 
technologies that could be useful for ME sufferers. Given the 
aforementioned deep insight available within the group, 
many design opportunities for future technologies, as well as 
novel uses of existing technology, were considered. Some of 
the suggestions that do not exist today, and are viewed as 
helpful, are presented bellow.  
The first suggestion was related to education, an 
important area for adolescents. It was an online e-learning 
solution with streamed lectures, accessible any time. It was 
brought up that most young people with ME/CFS want to 
follow up on their studies, but they have to be able to take a 
break when needed. This addresses the need for a flexible 
educational system. 
The second suggestion was an App designed with a 
critical design approach with special focus on how the 
energy levels are different for people with ME/CFS. The 
App could simulate the amount of energy needed for simple 
everyday tasks in order to reduce prejudice and increase 
general understanding of the disease. 
The third suggestion was another App that could be 
designed for self-management of the disease. The App could 
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

provide reminders to rest. It could also give short advice on 
things that have worked for others, which they could try to 
reduce illness symptoms. The App could also measure sound 
levels and give warnings when the levels are too high. Since 
exposure to high sound levels is known to increase illness 
symptoms, the App could also help visualize this, by 
showing sound measurements and giving reminders to use 
earplugs in spaces with high sound levels, e.g., when using 
public 
transportation. 
General 
personalized 
everyday 
reminders were also seen as valuable, as increase in disease 
symptoms may lead to memory problems and forgetfulness.  
The fourth suggestion was an electronic diary that could 
be used to register symptoms daily. The knowledge and 
awareness gained through daily activities, and their effects 
on illness symptoms were seen as valuable. This diary could 
also be a tool to explain better the current health status to 
healthcare professionals and social workers. For this diary to 
be used in periods with increased illness symptoms, it would 
be of outmost importance that the self-rating process is easy 
to conduct.  
The fifth suggestion was related to wearable devices, 
such as the Fitbit. ME/CFS sufferers experienced the 
possibility of tracking activity, sleep patterns and energy 
expenditure as desirable. It was suggested that a similar 
wearable technologies, tailored to the needs of people with 
ME/CFS, could be valuable.  
The sixth suggestion is a Social technology specially 
designed for people with ME/CFS, to meet and seek support 
from other people with the illness. 
The last one considered novel discussion platforms.  
IV. ADOLESCENTS WITH ME AND ANT 
Instead of considering any one of mentioned suggestions 
as a design opportunity, and in isolation, we performed a 
broad analysis, focusing on all data collected from the 
sense-making session with experts. At first, the traditional 
ANT analysis was used, but then, a more pragmatic, design 
and technology oriented approach was taken, in line with 
the literature such as [13] and [46]. The result is shown in 
Fig. 2. The image is a visual representation, a Giga-map at 
the macro level. All the relations shown are significant for 
the initial sense-making process. Each relation explicitly or 
implicitly contributes to discussion around technology that 
could aid adolescents suffering from ME/CFS in some way.  
Three large connected areas of the network emerge, related 
to what we named Personal/family, Educational and 
Governmental design spaces. At present, these spaces are 
not strongly connected, and connections within each one of 
them are sparse. As mentioned earlier, also in the literature, 
there were very few results to mention. 
In Fig. 2, a circle represents an actor and lines represent 
relations between actors. The number of actors shown is 
limited to the actors identified in the data analysis from the 
sense-making session with experts on ME/CFS. Actors in 
the network are both human (such as the ME/CFS sufferer, 
family members, hospital doctors and school teachers) and 
non-human (such as politics, prejudice, economics, and 
social media). They all have a role in and influence on the 
network. These roles and influences are not predefined but 
continuously evolve. For example, a family member may 
consider himself or herself to be without prejudice in other 
situations, but in the network representing the youth with 
ME/CFS they still can think that the adolescent is lazy 
rather than sick, and so contribute to maintaining the 
prejudice around the disease.  
Adolescents, different people that they interact with, as 
well as non-human entities, obviously form different 
heterogeneous networks. This directly relates to the 
wickedness of problems related to defining technologies that 
aim to help youth to have a better life, given their condition. 
Not only adolescents suffer from the condition to varying 
degrees, but their condition changes from day to day and 
period-wise as well. This changeability needs to be 
addressed as part of the sense-making. 
Furthermore, the analysis revealed two mediators. 
Mediators are non-human entities that increase difference 
among actors and, thus, should be carefully studied [49]. 
Mediators that we have identified impact how our society 
currently meets ME/CFS sufferers. Referring to Fig. 2, and 
the actors (human and non-human) in the network, the two 
mediators are marked with red circles. They are 
Understanding of ME/CFS and Prejudice. The first one is 
seen as a contributing factor that defines relations between 
ME/CFS sufferers and many other actors in the network. It 
influences, for example, how the social service caseworkers 
or physicians handle youth with ME/CFS. The Prejudice 
seeks to impose its version of reality on ME/CFS sufferers. 
Prejudice may determine what people see and in turn how 
they act towards people suffering from ME/CFS. As one 
person from our expert session said “If one could only 
eliminate the burden of the shame that many people with 
ME/CFS live with, and shift the focus to acceptance and to 
living their lives as best as possible, the quality of their lives 
would be so much better.” The red edges drawn in Fig. 2 
between the Understanding of ME/CFS and other nodes are 
also relevant for Prejudice as an actor in the network. 
However, the two are co-dependent: as the knowledge 
about, and understanding of, the ME/CFS increase, 
prejudice decreases. 
Other concepts from ANT, such as agency and 
delegation, are also very relevant but will not be further 
described here.  
V. 
CONCLUSION  
The numerous challenges related to ME/CFS are not 
easy to solve and clearly relate to the main characteristics of 
wicked problems. We have proposed a holistic approach to 
sense-making when considering technology design for 
adolescents with ME/CFS.  Using a literature review, a 
sense-making session with experts, ANT and Giga-
mapping, we gained insight in what ME/CFS is, developed 
the empathy with youth suffering from it. ANT provided 
rich descriptions of the complex design context and Giga-
mapping visual representations of relations that emerged as 
relevant. They also helped to define possible areas of 
interest for design (Personal/family, Educational and 
Governmental). Our findings align well with the literature 
related to Personal/family and Educational space. Another 
240
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

possible design focus could be relate to the mediators found 
- understanding of ME/CFS and helping to reduce prejudice 
and stigmatization through design.  
All relations among actors are significant for the initial 
sense-making process. They all, explicitly or implicitly, 
contribute to discussion around technology that could aid 
adolescents suffering from ME/CFS. Jointly, they provide a 
tool for critical reflection in the early sense-making phase of 
trying to understand adolescents with ME, and the situated 
design space related to technology that could be useful in 
their lives.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Profound thanks are due to all participants in the expert 
session. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. W. Head and J. Alford, “Wicked Problems Implications for 
Public Policy and Management,” Adm. Soc., vol. 47, no. 6, 
pp. 711–739, Aug. 2015. 
[2] S. Waddock, “The Wicked Problems of Global Sustainability 
Need 
Wicked 
(Good) 
Leaders 
and 
Wicked 
(Good) 
Collaborative Solutions,” J. Manag. Glob. Sustain., vol. 1, no. 
1, pp. 91–111, Jun. 2013. 
[3] R. Buchanan, “Wicked Problems in Design Thinking,” Des. 
Issues, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 5–21, Apr. 1992. 
[4] H. W. J. Rittel and M. M. Webber, “Dilemmas in a general 
theory of planning,” Policy Sci., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 155–169, 
Jun. 1973. 
[5] J. Kolko, Austin Center for Design, Wicked problems 
problems worth solving. Austin, Texas: Ac4d, 2012. 
[6] J. Redström, “Towards user design? On the shift from object 
to user as the subject of design,” Des. Stud., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 
123–139, Mar. 2006. 
[7] J. M. Perrin, L. E. Anderson, and J. V. Cleave, “The Rise In 
Chronic Conditions Among Infants, Children, And Youth Can 
Be Met With Continued Health System Innovations,” Health 
Aff. (Millwood), vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 2099–2105, Dec. 2014. 
[8] E. A. Witt, A. J. Massman, and L. A. Jackson, “Trends in 
youth’s videogame playing, overall computer use, and 
communication technology use: The impact of self-esteem 
and the Big Five personality factors,” Comput. Hum. Behav., 
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 763–769, Mar. 2011. 
[9] R.-L. Punamäki, M. Wallenius, C.-H. Nygård, L. Saarni, and 
A. Rimpelä, “Use of information and communication 
technology (ICT) and perceived health in adolescence: The 
role of sleeping habits and waking-time tiredness,” J. 
Adolesc., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 569–585, Aug. 2007. 
[10] A. L. Culén and A. Karpova, “Designing with Vulnerable 
Children: a Researchers Perspective,” in Human-Computer 
Interfaces 
and 
Interactivity: 
Emergent 
Research 
and 
Applications Book, IGI Global, 2014, pp. 118–136. 
[11] A. L. Culén and M. van der Velden, “The Digital Life of 
Vulnerable Users: Designing with Children, Patients, and 
Elderly,” in Nordic Contributions in IS Research, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 53–71. 
[12] B. Latour, “On using ANT for studying information systems: 
a (somewhat) Socratic dialogue,” Soc. Study Inf. Commun. 
Technol., pp. 62–76, 2004. 
[13] C. Storni, “Notes on ANT for designers: ontological, 
methodological and epistemological turn in collaborative 
design,” CoDesign, vol. 11, no. 3–4, pp. 166–178, Oct. 2015. 
[14] P. K. Chilana, A. J. Ko and J. Wobbrock, “From User-
Centered to Adoption-Centered Design: A Case Study of an 
HCI Research Innovation Becoming a Product,” in 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2015, 
pp. 1749–1758. 
[15] A. L. Culén and A. Følstad, “Innovation in HCI: What Can 
We Learn from Design Thinking?,” In Proceedings of the 8th 
Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Fun, 
Fast, Foundational, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 849–852. 
[16] A. A. Gasparini, “Perspective and Use of Empathy in Design 
Thinking,” in ACHI 2015, 2015. 
[17] N. Afari and D. Buchwald, “Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: A 
Review,” Am. J. Psychiatry, vol. 160, no. 2, pp. 221–236, 
Feb. 2003. 
[18] G. J. Bringsli, A. Gilje, and B. K. G. Wold, “The Norwegian 
ME Association National Survey Abridged English Version.” 
The Norwegian ME Association, 2014. 
[19] Ø. Fluge et al., “Benefit from B-Lymphocyte Depletion Using 
the Anti-CD20 Antibody Rituximab in Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome. A Double-Blind and Placebo-Controlled Study,” 
PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 10, p. e26358, Oct. 2011. 
[20] V. R. Anderson, L. A. Jason, L. E. Hlavaty, N. Porter, and J. 
Cudia, “A review and meta-synthesis of qualitative studies on 
Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue 
syndrome,” 
Patient Educ. Couns., vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 147–155, Feb. 2012. 
[21] S. M. van Geelen, G. Sinnema, H. J. M. Hermans, and W. 
Kuis, 
“Personality 
and 
chronic 
fatigue 
syndrome: 
Methodological and conceptual issues,” Clin. Psychol. Rev., 
vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 885–903, Dec. 2007. 
[22] A. Winger, M. Ekstedt, V. B. Wyller, and S. Helseth, 
“‘Sometimes it feels as if the world goes on without me’: 
adolescents’ experiences of living with chronic fatigue 
syndrome,” J. Clin. Nurs., vol. 23, no. 17–18, pp. 2649–2657, 
Sep. 2014. 
[23] P. White et al., “Comparison of adaptive pacing therapy, 
cognitive behaviour therapy, graded exercise therapy, and 
specialist medical care for chronic fatigue syndrome (PACE): 
a randomised trial,” The Lancet, vol. 377, no. 9768, pp. 823–
836, Mar. 2011. 
[24] Norwegian ME Association (in Norwegian only): me-
foreningen.com/. Accessed on April 12th, 2016. 
[25] H. Holman and K. Lorig, “Patient self-management: a key to 
effectiveness and efficiency in care of chronic disease.,” 
Public Health Rep., vol. 119, no. 3, pp. 239–243, 2004. 
[26] J. M. Corbin and A. Strauss, Unending work and care: 
Managing chronic illness at home, vol. xviii. San Francisco, 
CA, US: Jossey-Bass, 1988. 
[27] K. R. Lorig and H. Holman, “Self-management education: 
history, definition, outcomes, and mechanisms,” Ann. Behav. 
Med. Publ. Soc. Behav. Med., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1–7, Aug. 
2003. 
[28] E. G. Dowsett and J. Colby, “Long-Term Sickness Absence 
Due to ME/CFS in UK Schools,” J. Chronic Fatigue Syndr., 
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 29–42, Jan. 1997. 
[29] M. E. B. Smith et al., “Treatment of Myalgic Encephalo-
myelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: A Systematic Review for 
a National Institutes of Health Pathways to Prevention 
WorkshopTreatment of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome,” Ann. Intern. Med., vol. 162, no. 12, pp. 
841–850, Jun. 2015. 
[30] A. Farmer, T. Fowler, J. Scourfield, and A. Thapar, 
“Prevalence of chronic disabling fatigue in children and 
adolescents,” Br. J. Psychiatry, vol. 184, no. 6, pp. 477–481, 
Jun. 2004. 
[31] National Collaborating Centre for Primary Care (UK), 
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome/Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (or 
Encephalopathy): Diagnosis and Management of Chronic 
Fatigue 
Syndrome/Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis 
(or 
241
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Encephalopathy) in Adults and Children. London: Royal 
College of General Practitioners (UK), 2007. 
[32] B. M. Carruthers et al., “Myalgic Encephalomyelitis: 
International Consensus Criteria,” J. Intern. Med., vol. 270, 
no. 4, pp. 327–338, Oct. 2011. 
[33] “JMIR-Social Media: A Review and Tutorial of Applications 
in Medicine and Health Care | Grajales III | Journal of 
Medical 
Internet 
Research.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.jmir.org/2014/2/e13/. [Accessed: 18-Jan-2016]. 
[34] K. Best and S. Butler, “Second life avatars as extensions of 
social and physical bodies in people with Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome,” Continuum, 
vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 837–849, Dec. 2013. 
[35] K. Best and S. Butler, “The Necessity of Control for 
Computer 
and 
Internet 
Users 
with 
Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue 
Syndrome,” 
Inf. 
Commun. Soc., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 1042–1060, Sep. 2013. 
[36] A. K. Sheridan and  and members of the C. P. G.-E. of C. 
with M. (Scotland), “Exploring E-learning provision for 
Children with ME in Scotland,” Educ., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 78–
80, Jan. 2013. 
[37] T. Brown, “Design Thinking,” Harv. Bus. Rev., vol. 86, no. 6, 
p. 84, 2008. 
[38] T. Brown and J. Wyatt, “Design Thinking for Social 
Innovation (SSIR),” Stanford Social Innovation Review, 
2010. 
[39] U. Johansson-Sköldberg, J. Woodilla, and M. Çetinkaya, 
“Design Thinking: Past, Present and Possible Futures,” Creat. 
Innov. Manag., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 121–146, 2013. 
[40] B. Sevaldson, “Giga-Mapping: Visualisation for complexity 
and systems thinking in design,” Nordes, vol. 4, Mar. 2011. 
[41] O. Hanseth, M. Aanestad, and M. Berg, “Guest editors’ 
introduction: Actor-network theory and information systems. 
What’s so special?,” Inf. Technol. People, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 
116–123, 2004. 
[42] B. Latour, Aramis, or, The love of technology. Cambridge, 
Mass: Harvard University Press, 1996. 
[43] J. Law, “Notes on the theory of the actor-network: Ordering, 
strategy, and heterogeneity,” Syst. Pr., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 379–
393, Aug. 1992. 
[44] A. Tatnall and A. Gilding, Actor-Network Theory in 
Information Systems Research. 2005. 
[45] Y. Akama, “Being awake to Ma: designing in between-ness 
as a way of becoming with,” CoDesign, vol. 11, no. 3–4, pp. 
262–274, Oct. 2015. 
[46] A. Yaneva, “Making the Social Hold: Towards an Actor-
Network Theory of Design,” Des. Cult., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 
273–288, Nov. 2009. 
[47] D. Stuedahl and O. Smørdal, “Matters of becoming, 
experimental zones for making museums public with social 
media,” CoDesign, vol. 11, no. 3–4, pp. 193–207, Oct. 2015. 
[48] J. Schoffelen et al, “Visualising things. Perspectives on how 
to make things public through visualisation,” CoDesign, vol. 
11, no. 3–4, pp. 179–192, Oct. 2015. 
[49] E.Sayes. “Actor–Network Theory and methodology: Just 
what does it mean to say that nonhumans have agency?” 
Social Studies of Science, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 134-147, Feb. 
2014. 
 
Figure 2.  Using a combination of Giga-mapping and ANT to map out design spaces and consider design opportunities.  
242
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

