Comparison of Bed-Sensors for Nocturnal Behaviour Assessment 
Bruce Wallace1,2,3, Frank Knoefel1,2,3,4,5, Rafik Goubran1,2,3, Jeffrey Kaye6,7, Neil Thomas2,3,4,5 
1Systems and Computer Engineering,  
Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada; 
2Bruyere Research Institute, 
Ottawa, Canada; 
3AGE-WELL SAM3 Innovation Hub, 
Ottawa, Canada; 
4Bruyere Continuing Care, 
Ottawa, Canada; 
5Faculty of Medicine,  
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada; 
6NIA-Layton Aging & Alzheimer's Disease Center,  
Portland, OR, USA; 
7Oregon Center for Aging & Technology (ORCATECH),  
Portland, OR, USA; 
Emails: wally@sce.carleton.ca, fknoefel@bruyere.org, goubran@sce.carleton.ca, 
 kaye@ohsu.edu, nthomas@bruyere.org 
 
Abstract— Most older adults wish to age in place. Numerous 
home-based monitoring technologies are being developed to 
help provide solutions to the human resource challenge created 
by the aging population. Bed-based monitoring systems can 
measure something as simple as frequency of bed exits and as 
complex as sleep quality. This work compares the abilities of 
three available consumer bed mats from Best Buy, Withings 
and Emfit to identify bed exit, sleep time and sleep quality. The 
results show that the Best Buy Canada Assured Living 
platform provides the most accurate measurement of bed 
exit/entry with only a single error over 54 nights of testing. The 
estimates of sleep quality, based on sleep scores derived using 
commercial algorithms, did not align well between the Withing 
and Emfit sensors. However, these mats provide more detailed 
information on estimated time asleep and sleep state compared 
to the Best Buy sensor. Analysis of the raw data provided by 
the sensors may provide a more useful method to assess sleep 
related outcome measures in the research setting and to 
eventually guide clinical decision making. 
Keywords- IoT; cloud processing; bed-sensing; pressure 
sensing; aging-in-place. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Aging in place and independence for aging adults is 
important for their wellbeing and also to avoid the costs and 
demands that an alternative of communal care [1] places on 
the healthcare system or the family.  For older adults to 
continue to live independently, they are frequently supported 
by family care-givers [1] and this represents a burden 
affecting the care-giver especially when care is provided by 
an elderly partner. 
The potential for sensors, smart homes and Internet of 
Things (IoT) technologies to provide an alternative source of 
information to support the aging adult, their care-giver or 
formal care providers is an emerging area of research 
including proposals for systems to assist in the ongoing 
assessment [2]–[5] of the aging adult.  
The sensors used within these systems include wearables 
[6][7] and passive sensing systems for assessment of very 
specific behaviours such as urination [8]. IoT sensors within 
a residence can now be easily connected to cloud services 
[9][10] and the advanced processing of the combined 
information from many sensors can then lead to insight into 
behaviours and behavioural changes by the aging adult [11]  
[12]. 
Sleep is important to the well-being of older adults, and 
changes in sleep pattern can be associated with numerous 
health conditions. For instance, Alzheimer’s disease can lead 
to disturbances in the circadian rhythm [12]. Nocturia can be 
associated with a number of clinical conditions and the 
resulting impact on sleep can be significant. Medical issues 
as simple as an infection can lead to frequent need urinate. 
Respiration related illness can also lead to sleep interruption 
[13] while sleep quality [14], often assessed by time spent in 
various sleep states, is also important. 
Bed sensing in conjunction with smart home technology 
has been applied and trialed for a supportive smart home 
system to support care-givers of persons with dementia 
specifically associated with the challenge of nighttime 
disorientation to time and/or place that can lead to wandering 
and elopement [15][16].  These works specifically used a 
pressure sensitive mat (Ideal Security Pressure Mat SK630) 
located between the mattress and box spring.  This mat was 
identified as the source of many errors associated with 
incorrect reporting of bed occupancy, such as detection of 
status for a specific occupant in a double occupancy bed 
[16].     
This report explores alternative bed mat sensors that have 
recently entered the consumer market to evaluate their 
performance to accurately detect overnight bed exits for a 
specific subject within a double occupancy bed, assess time 
in bed, and quality of sleep (if provided by the 
manufacturer). The Ideal Security Pressure Mat was not 
included in this assessment as two different versions of this 
mat with different sensitivities were tested in the study bed 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and they were either closed by the mattress weight alone 
(indicating someone always in bed) or never closed 
continuing some of the issues identified in the previous 
works [15][16]. 
This paper presents the methodology for the data 
collection and study in Section II, Section III presents the 
results from the bed sensors within the study with Section IV 
discussing the results and potential areas of further 
exploration. 
II. 
METHOD 
A. Research Subjects 
The participants in the project are summarized in Table I 
and included a spousal pair.  The research project had 
research ethics approved by the Bruyère Continuing Care 
and Carleton University Research Ethics Boards.  Both of 
the participants are adults with post graduate education and 
no known issues associated with general, physical or 
cognitive health. 
TABLE I.  
DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION FOR THE TWO BED 
OCCUPANTS.  SUBJECT 1 SLEPT ON THE SENSORS WHILE SUBJECT 2 WAS IN 
THE BED ADJACENT TO THE SENSORS. 
Subject 
Gender 
Age 
(yr) 
Height 
(m) 
Weight 
(kg) 
1 
M 
55 
1.85 
85 
2 
F 
50 
1.65 
60 
 
B. Sensors Systems and Set-up 
The sensors were placed in the queen sized (North 
American sizing) bed as shown in Figure 1.  Each of the 
sensors was placed on subject 1’s side of the bed in the 
positions shown in the figure.  Each sensor was placed 
according to the respective installation instructions between 
the box spring and mattress.  The three sensors had differing 
placement instructions allowing for them to be placed side 
by side without overlap. The selected sensors included two 
sensors used by the team in current trials (E) and (W) and a 
sensor just entering the market (B). There is a practical limit 
on the number of sensors that can be used by one subject 
without them overlapping or being installed in an incorrect 
location.   
The Withings Sleep (sensor W) [17], is a  62 x 18.8 x 0.5 
cm sensor that is placed under the chest area of the subject.  
The sensor consists of a single air bladder that occupies the 
full sensor which is then connected to a pneumatic sensor.  
The sensor inflates and when placed under the mattress, 
assesses the variations in the pressure in air chamber 
associated with the movements of the subject.   
The Emfit QS (sensor E) [18], is a 56 x 6 x 0.5 cm sensor 
that uses a proprietary plastic technology to create a pressure 
sensitive capacitor and from this assesses the subjects motion 
through ballistocardiography. This sensor is placed at the 
upper chest region. 
The bed sensor mat from Best Buy Canada’s Assured 
Living solution (sensor B) is a 76cm x 28cm x 1cm sensor 
from Telehealth Sensors [19] that is provided as a 
component of the Assured Living platform and the sensor is 
located near the hip region. This sensor is also based on a 
pressure sensitive capacitor but the unit includes post 
processing to determine an adaptive threshold leading to a 
binary output of occupied or not for the bed.  The Assured 
Living platform also includes other sensors such as motion 
sensors that were placed throughout the house.  For this 
work, the motion sensors located in the bathroom and a flight 
of stairs are reported as these represent the two potential 
directions for an overnight bed exit. 
The sensors were each placed in the bed per their 
respective installation instructions and each was connected 
through the residential Wi-Fi network to the Internet.  Sensor 
B, uses the Z-Wave wireless protocol to connect to a base 
station that then connects to cloud based Internet services 
within the Assured Living portal for data logging and 
review.  The W and E sensors directly connect to the 
residential Wi-Fi network and through that to cloud based 
services and portals provided by each of the vendors. 
The B sensor system was not available at the start of the 
study and was introduced 21 days into the study leading to 
75 consecutive nights of study for the E and W sensors and 
54 nights for the B sensor. The data presented represents a 
sample of convenience consisting of all nights that had all 
data available including API portal data allowing for direct 
comparison between the sensors. 
 
C. Data Collection and Analysis 
This work reports on the first 75 consecutive nights 
within a longitudinal study.  During the study, the research 
subject (Subject 1 – author BW) maintained a paper log for 
their bed entry and exit times and also the times associated 
with any overnight exits from the bed.  The subject also 
made note of additional details associated with each night 
such as the perceived sleep quality based on a simple rating 
of poor, average or above average.  
Each of the sensors independently captured their 
information within respective cloud-based services provided 
by each of the sensor vendors.  The data for each sensor is 
stored within the respective vendor’s cloud and the sleep 
summary is available each morning.  The E sensor includes a 
real-time monitoring tool within its portal.  The cloud 
systems for each of the sensors presents that sensor 
information to the research subject.  An end-user, such as the 
aging adult, their family or a health care provider, would 
access the data in this manner.  The systems had options for 
the download of raw data that were not readily available to a 
typical end user. This data was accessed to determine if there 
were any differences between the raw data and the Web 
browser presented summary. 
The comparison of the times recorded for each of the 
sensors to the recorded times within the logs was assessed 
such that if the log time and sensor reported time was within 
two minutes of each other, they were accepted as the same 
time to account for any drift or error in the reference time 
sources for each of the sensors and the log.  The actual 
results indicated that sensor logs were very similar to the 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

paper log reported time and there were no cases of sensor 
events that were just outside of the two-minute window. 
Time asleep, sleep state and sleep quality were assessed 
by comparing the results reported by the sensors that 
assessed these attributes and through comparison to the user 
log notes regarding subjective assessment of sleep quality. 
As this was a longitudinal study, it was not practical to use 
physiological sensors to directly assess sleep state and time.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Image showing the placement of the sensors within the bed. 
Upper portion of the figure shows a top view while the lower portion shows 
a side view of the bed. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
The three sensors under evaluation within this 
longitudinal assessment each provided a measure of presence 
in bed that would allow assessment of overall time in bed 
and also for the detection of nocturnal exits during the 
overnight period.  Two of the sensors (W and E) also claim 
to be able to identify the 4 distinct sleep states (awake, light 
sleep, deep sleep, REM sleep) purporting to be able to 
determine time asleep and sleep quality. 
A. Measuring Time in-Bed 
The performance of the three sensors to assess time in 
bed is summarized in Table II where the results for the 
sensors are shown for the 75 consecutive night study period. 
The W and E sensors were present for the complete study 
period while the B sensor was added when it arrived and was 
present for the last 54 days of the study period. 
Comparison of the results for the three sensors to the 
detailed log maintained by the subject show that all three 
sensors were able to measure the mean Time in Bed with 
sensor B providing the best performance compared to the 
research subject logs.  Sensor W assessment is lower than the 
log reference values as this appears to be associated with 
cropping of the overnight period on some nights where 
nocturnal exits happened just after the initial entry to bed or 
just prior to the final bed exit in the morning.   
During the study, subject 1 typically went to bed and rose 
from bed prior to subject 2 and the results for sensor E 
shown in Table II are higher than the log data for subject 1.  
The additional time is associated with the sensor reporting a 
later rise time, which turned out to specifically align with the 
noted rise time for subject 2. 
Table II shows the number of nights that each of the 
sensors reported the incorrect Start or End time for the night 
and the errors for each of the W and E sensors are associated 
with the above described cases.  The one error for sensor B 
(also reflected in sensor E) occurred on one morning where 
subject 2 was more centered in the bed when subject 1 rose 
leading to the sensors not detecting this rise.  This was the 
only occurrence of this in the reported period.  
TABLE II.  
PRESENCE IN BED BASED ON TIME OF ENTRY AND TIME OF 
EXIT COMPARISON OF EVENTS LOGGED BY EACH OF THE SENSORS IN 
COMPARISON TO A WRITTEN LOG MAINTAINED BY THE RESEARCH SUBJECT 
Sensor 
Nights 
 (count) 
Start 
Time 
Error 
(count) 
End Time 
Error 
(count) 
Mean 
Time in 
Bed (min) 
St. Dev. 
Time in 
Bed 
(min) 
Log 
75 
na 
na 
562.4 
39.6 
W 
75 
7 
9 
550.9 
44.2 
E 
75 
4 
19 
580.2 
36.9 
B 
54 
0 
1 
566.2 
39.4 
B. Measuring Nocturnal Exits 
Each of the sensors detects and reports nocturnal exits for 
the subject and these are summarized in Table III for all 
three of the sensors in comparison to a count of exits derived 
from the log maintained by the research subject.  Again, the 
W and E sensors were used for a 75-day longitudinal period 
while the B sensors were assessed for the last 54 days of that 
period.  In addition to the B sensor deployed within the bed, 
motion sensors from the B system were also deployed within 
the bathroom and flight of stairs.  This allowed for a second 
measure of nocturnal exits as these were either for washroom 
use or to let a family dog outside during the night. 
The results show that B bed sensor detected all of the bed 
exits during the study period with no errors, the motion 
sensors from the B system did have two errors that are 
directly attributable to a failed battery in a motion sensor.  
Although this issue was identified by the B system for 
correction by the subject, it was not corrected until the two 
errors occurred associated within a single overnight period. 
W
E
B
Mattress
Box Spring
 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The W sensor performed extremely well during the 
period and it only had 3 missed bed exits (false negatives - 
FN) while also reporting three exits that did not occur (false 
positives - FP).  The cause of the latter are not known while 
the cause of the FN appears to also be associated with the 
cropping of the overnight period noted previously for this 
sensor.   
The results for the E sensor show that this sensor 
frequently misses bed exits. The bed exits during the study in 
almost all cases were associated with the bed having double 
occupancy and so although subject 1 had left the bed, subject 
2 remained in the bed.  
TABLE III.  
NOCTURNAL EXIT DETECTION BY THE SYSTEMS OVER THE 
STUDY PERIOD IN COMPARISON TO THE LOG MAINTAINED BY SUBJECT 1.  
Sensor 
Actual 
Exits (n) 
Exits 
Detected  
(TP) 
Exits 
Missed  
(FN) 
Extra 
Exits 
Reported  
(FP) 
W 
92 
89 
3 
3 
E 
92 
30 
62 
0 
B bed 
73 
73 
0 
0 
B 
motion 
73 
71 
2 
0 
 
C. Assessment of Sleep State and Quality 
In addition to being able to assess time in bed and 
nocturnal bed exits, two of the sensors (W and E) provide 
information regarding sleep state and time asleep with the 
results summarized in Table IV.  These results show a large 
difference between the values reported for the two sensors. 
For instance, sensor W suggested mean time asleep was 7 
hours and 17 minutes, while sensor E provided a number of 
8 hours and 41 minutes.  Causes of this difference include 
the inclusion of sleep within the score for sensor E from 
participant 2, such as in example night 1 in Figure 3 vs 4, 
showing participant 1 as asleep during and around missed 
overnight exits and lastly missed bed exits resulting in the 
inclusion of sleep from participant 2 after participant 1 had 
risen. 
Further analysis of these data from the two sensors was 
performed by downloading the raw data for each sensor and 
doing subsequent analysis on the raw data in comparison to 
the known data within the sleep log.  Two example nights 
are reported and for the first night, the results presented 
within the Web portal for the W and E sensors is shown in 
Figure 2 while the raw data for the W sensor is shown in 
Figure 3 and the E sensor is shown in Figure 4.  This 
particular night, subject 1 reported poor sleep and 
specifically was unable to get to sleep at the start of the night 
leading to a number of hours of wakefulness, including two 
bed exits around 1 hour and 2 hours after entry to bed before 
the initial occurrence of sleep.  There was a noted additional 
overnight bed exit around 6 hours after entry within the sleep 
period. 
 
TABLE IV.  
TOTAL SLEEP TIME AND SLEEP STATE TIMES AS 
REPORTED BY THE W AND E SENSORS. 
Sensor 
Nights 
(n) 
Mean 
Time 
Asleep 
(min) 
St. Dev. 
Time 
Asleep 
(min) 
Mean 
Light 
Sleep 
(min) 
Mean 
Deep 
Sleep 
(min) 
Mean 
REM 
Sleep 
(min) 
W 
75 
437.1 
50.5 
350.7 
64.8 
21.5 
E 
75 
520.8 
47.3 
291.4 
92.9 
136.6 
 
The results for the W sensor shown in Figure 2, suggest 
that it incorrectly identified a reentry after one of the bed 
exits (the one about 2 hours after initial entry to bed) during 
the wakeful period as the first entry to bed and start on the 
night.  The W sensor does correctly report the subsequent 
overnight bed exit.  The raw data for the W sensor in Figure 
4 provides a more accurate portrayal of the night as it does 
show the correct entry time and the first two bed exits. The 
documentation for the W sensor notes that it determines and 
reports the overnight period automatically and this is an 
example of the effect of this algorithm leading to the portal 
not including two bed exits and the period of wakefulness 
not being reported. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Sleep State information as presented through the user Web 
portal for the W(upper) and E(lower) sensor example night 1. Legend  
Upper: grey - awake; cyan - REM, light blue - light sleep,  
dark blue - deep sleep, white gap – out of bed 
Lower: cyan - awake, light purple - REM, medium purple - light sleep, 
dark purple - deep sleep 
The portal results for the E sensor are shown in Figure 2 
while Figure 4 shows presents the raw data.  The raw data 
does not differ from the portal presented data and in both 
cases show the correct entry to bed time.  The E sensor 
appears to show the onset of sleep much earlier in the night 
than shown by the W sensor and during the actual prolonged 
wakeful period reported by the subject.  This onset of sleep 
 
 
 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

appears to be associated with subject 2 that was adjacent to 
the sensor while subject 1 was directly on the sensor.   
Further analysis for the results for the end of night bed 
exit time show that the exit time reported for the E sensor 
matches the time in the subject log while the results for the 
W sensor match the bed exit time for subject 2.  This is the 
night where it was noted that subject 2 was centered in the 
bed in the morning leading to the potential for this subject to 
“seen” by both sensors.   
 
 
Figure 3.  Sleep State reports for an example night per the information 
available only through detailed raw data download from the portal for the 
W sensor for example night 1. 
 
Figure 4.  Sleep State reports for an example night per the information 
available only through detailed raw data download from the portal for the E 
sensor for example night 1. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Sleep State reports for an example night per the information 
available only through detailed raw data download from the portal for the 
W sensor for example night 2. 
 
Figure 6.  Sleep State reports for an example night per the information 
available only through detailed raw data download from the portal for the E 
sensor for example night 2. 
Figures 5 and 6 show the raw data for another example 
night for the two sensors.  In this case there is a lot of 
similarity in the periods reported for the subject being asleep 
although there is variation in the actual sleep state being 
reported. In both cases, the sensors correctly reported the 
start of the night, but the data for the W sensor extends 
longer than the E sensor.  This end of night reporting for the 
E sensor is correct while again the W sensor results match 
those for subject 2 that was in a normal position in the bed 
and not on top of the W sensor in any way, as noted for 
example night 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 7.  Overnight sleep score are reported by the sensors over the 
duration of the study. Legend: Blue o – W, Red x – E through API, Orange 
+ – E through Web portal. 
 
Figure 8.  Comparison of the Sleep Score reports for Sensor W in 
comparison to Sensor E as reported through API for each of the nights 
within the study. 
In addition to measuring sleep state, both the E and W 
sensors report a sleep score for each night that is shown 
within the Web portal and available within the raw data. 
Neither sensor manufacturer provides details on the 
methodology or algorithm used for this assessment. The 
sleep score for the E and W sensors is shown in Figure 7.   
The E sensor data is shown twice as the Web portal presents 
a sleep score to the user that appears to be capitated at a 
score of 100 and when the hidden raw data was reviewed 
through an API, it was found that the scores were no longer 
capitated at 100, and results up to 124 were found. The 
minimum reported value was 73, so 100 is now almost the 
middle of the range and not the maximum.   
The comparison of the results between the E and W 
sensors is shown in Figure 8 where the E sensor data for each 
night is compared the non-capitated W sensor data.  Since 
these two systems were measuring the sleep quality of the 
same subject, it should be expected that there would be a 
high correlation in the results (i.e. a straight line).  Figure 7 
clearly shows that this is not the case and the correlation 
coefficient for the best-fit straight line through the data is 
0.077, indicating the poor correlation of the values. 
The results for the two example nights provide some 
contrast between the two sensors.  The subject reported poor 
sleep quality on night 1 with above-average sleep quality on 
night 2. The W sensor correctly scored sleep quality as 20 
and 80, respectively. In contrast, sensor E scored sleep 
quality as 107 and 106, respectively.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The challenge of well-being sensing associated with time 
in bed, nocturnal exits, overall sleep time and quality is of 
significant interest to care providers that are supporting 
adults wishing to age in place.  As many of these are 
supported through care partners that are frequently a spouse, 
the ability to assess the well-being of a specific subject 
within a shared bed is highly relevant and also presents a 
significant challenge as passive sensing within the bed has 
the potential to confuse the two bed occupants. 
The results of this work show that the B sensor is able to 
provide a highly accurate assessment of the time in bed for 
the specific subject.  This sensor greatly improves on the 
performance of a previous occupancy sensor used by the 
researchers [15][16].  However, the B sensor by design is 
limited to only the assessment of bed occupancy. 
The E and W sensors provide the potential for 
significantly more knowledge to be obtained for the 
overnight periods although each was shown to have 
limitations.  The W sensor was extremely effective at 
detecting entry and exits from the bed for the research 
subject with only a few errors but it did report shorter than 
expected nights on a few occasions.  A detailed review of 
available documentation for this sensor identified that the 
sensor reports only a single sleep period in each 24 hours and 
the start and end of the period are not based on first bed entry 
and last exit. The result is that this sensor will not report on 
sleep associated with a nap (second sleep period in a day) 
and can ignore time at the start or end of the night such as 
removing a period of wakefulness at the start or end of night.  
The E sensor performed well for the study and does not 
include the limitation to a single reporting during any 24-
hour period leading it to be better and more appropriate for 
use within a study where naps or multiple daily sleep periods 
are expected such as with aging adults.  The sensor appears 
to have had more difficulties associated with confusion 
between the bed occupants. The differences in sleep stage 
and sleep scores between the E and W sensors suggests more 
work needs to be done on these algorithms before 
assumptions can be made about reliability.  
 
 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The goal of this work was to understand the capability of 
emerging consumer bed sensing devices to provide accurate 
assessment of time in bed, bed entry and bed exits.  The 
work also explored the sleep quality assessments provided 
by some of the sensors. The work has shown the potential for 
passive bed sensing using consumer bed sensors while also 
showing the challenges that occur within a double occupancy 
bed.  The results show that studies should consider the use of 
multiple sensor technologies including wearable sensors and 
perhaps the use of sensors on both sides of a shared bed.   
One area for additional exploration is the effect of 
mattress structure and size on the performance of mats as this 
structure could have variable effect on any cross detection by 
the sensors. Future work could include the creation of a 
fusion based algorithm that can leverage the more accurate 
assessment of time in bed provided by the B sensor with the 
more detailed knowledge of sleep related measures provided 
by the W, E sensors or other sensors located through-out the 
home to provide better understanding of behaviour, such as 
the reasons for bed exit leading to potential for treatment if 
amenable. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work was supported in part by the CABHI Spark 
program and AGE_WELL NCE. BestBuy Canada Inc 
provided their Assured Living platform for the study. It was 
also supported in part by the Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council (NSERC) Discovery Grant, 
and by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) grants: 
P30AG008017; P30AG066518; P30AG024978. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. G. Manuel et al., “Alzheimer’s and other dementias in 
Canada, 2011 to 2031: a microsimulation Population Health 
Modeling (POHEM) study of projected prevalence, health 
burden, health services, and caregiving use,” Popul Health 
Metrics, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1-10, Dec. 2016. 
[2] 
N. W. Thomas et al., “Assessing Everyday Cognition in 
Older Adults with MCI or Alzheimer’s Disease Using a 
Home-Based Sensing and Computing System,” Alzheimer’s 
& Dementia: The Journal of the Alzheimer’s Association, 
vol. 14, no. 7, pp. P1466–P1467, Jul. 2018. 
[3] 
S. Casaccia et al., “Assistive sensor-based technology driven 
self-management for building resilience among people with 
early 
stage 
cognitive 
impairment,” 
in 
2019 
IEEE 
International Symposium on Measurements Networking (M 
N), pp. 1–5, Jul. 2019. 
[4] 
S. Massie, G. Forbes, S. Craw, L. Fraser, and G. Hamilton, 
“Monitoring Health in Smart Homes using Simple Sensors,” 
Proceedings of the 3rd International workshop on knowledge 
discovery in healthcare data co-located with the 27th 
Intenational joint conference on artificial intelligence and 
the 23rd European conference on artificial intelligence 
(IJCAI-ECAI 2018), p. 1-6, 2018. 
[5] 
J. Kaye et al., “Methodology for Establishing a Community-
Wide Life Laboratory for Capturing Unobtrusive and 
Continuous Remote Activity and Health Data,” JoVE 
(Journal of Visualized Experiments), no. 137, p. e56942, Jul. 
2018. 
[6] 
E. Como and F. Lucca, “Improving the Impact of Wearable 
Devices in Health Promotion and Wellbeing: the WEHMIX 
Project,” in eTELEMED 2018: The Tenth International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 
p. 5, 2018. 
[7] 
R. Wettstein and C. Fegeler, “Evaluation of Machine 
Learning Algorithms to Detect Irregular Health States in 
Wearable Sensor Generated Data,” in eTELEMED 2019: The 
Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine, p. 1-2, 2019. 
[8] 
T. Tsukiyama, “Ambient Monitoring System for Urination,” 
in eTELEMED 2019: The Eleventh International Conference 
on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, p. 1-4, 2019. 
[9] 
Y. Hu, S. Eriksén, and J. Lundberg, “Future Directions of 
Applying Healthcare Cloud for Home-based Chronic Disease 
Care,” in eTELEMED 2017: The Ninth International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 
p. 1-4, 2017. 
[10] R. B. Wallace, F. Horsfall, R. Goubran, A. El-Haraki, and F. 
Knoefel, “The Challenges of Connecting Smart Home Health 
Sensors to Cloud Analytics,” in 2019 IEEE Sensors 
Applications Symposium (SAS), Sophia Antipolis, France, pp. 
1–5, Mar. 2019. 
[11] A. Akl, B. Chikhaoui, N. Mattek, J. Kaye, D. Austin, and A. 
Mihailidis, “Clustering home activity distributions for 
automatic detection of mild cognitive impairment in older 
adults,” AIS, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 437–451, Jul. 2016. 
[12] G. L. Sprint, D. J. Cook, and R. Fritz, “Behavioral 
Differences Between Subject Groups Identified Using Smart 
Homes and Change Point Detection,” IEEE J. Biomed. 
Health Inform., pp. 1–1, 2020. 
[13] E. Dzięciołowska-Baran, A. Gawlikowska-Sroka, and J. 
Szczurowski, “Diagnosis of Sleep-Disordered Breathing in 
the Home Environment,” Adv. Exp. Med. Biol., pp. 1-6, Feb. 
2020. 
[14] M. Baran Pouyan, M. Nourani, and M. Pompeo, “Sleep state 
classification using pressure sensor mats,” in 2015 37th 
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Milan, pp. 1207–
1210, Aug. 2015. 
[15] B. Wallace, T. N. E. Harake, R. Goubran, N. Valech, and F. 
Knoefel, 
“Preliminary 
results 
for 
measurement 
and 
classification of overnight wandering by dementia patient 
using 
multi-sensors,” 
in 
2018 
IEEE 
International 
Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference 
(I2MTC), Houston, TX, pp. 1–6, May 2018. 
[16] L. Ault, R. Goubran, B. Wallace, H. Lowden, and F. 
Knoefel, “Smart Home Technology Solution for Nighttime 
Wandering in Persons with Dementia,” Journal of 
Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engineering, pp. 
1-8, Jan. 2020. 
[17] A. Gruwez, A.-V. Bruyneel, and M. Bruyneel, “The validity 
of two commercially-available sleep trackers and actigraphy 
for assessment of sleep parameters in obstructive sleep apnea 
patients,” PLoS ONE, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1-11, Jan. 2019. 
[18] J. M. Perez-Macias, J. Viik, A. Varri, S.-L. Himanen, and M. 
Tenhunen, “Spectral analysis of snoring events from an 
Emfit mattress,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 37, no. 12, p. 2130, 
Nov. 2016. 
[19] S. J. Hinterlong and M. S. Buck, “Electronic mattress or 
chair sensor for patient monitoring,” US20100228516A1, 
Sep. 09, 2010. 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

