Investigating Factors Determining the Use of the Clinical Care Module by Nurses
Through the UTAUT Model
Munyaradzi Zhou1
School of Computing, College of Science and Engineering
University of South Africa
Florida Campus, Johannesburg, South Africa
E-mail: zhoum@msu.ac.zw
Marlien Herselman2
CSIR, Meraka
Pretoria, South Africa
MHerselman@csir.co.za
Alfred Coleman3
School of Computing, College of Science and Engineering
University of South Africa
Florida Campus, Johannesburg, South Africa
Email: Colema@unisa.ac.za
Abstract - Nurses can be empowered in the decision making
process if provided with objective diagnostic data. This
research applied the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of
Technology model to investigate the usage of electronic health
systems and analyse the factors affecting the intention to use
the clinical care module which supports decision making
during point of care. Despite the efforts by governments,
donors and international partners in rolling out electronic
health systems, these systems are ‘partially’ or not being used
by healthcare workers during point of care. The deployed
applications are incompatible with nurses’ routine clinical
practice as they’re not customized. There is need to move from
using applications which solely supports capturing patients’
demographic data to systems customized for clinical care
practice. Semi-structured questionnaires were deployed in
three hospitals to 200 nurses who have been randomly selected
in maternity section. For triangulation purposes, focus group
interviews have been conducted in these hospitals. Interviewees
were purposively selected from respondents who completed the
questionnaires. The results showed that the key constructs for
use of the clinical care module in their order of importance are
facilitating conditions, performance expectancy and social
influence. Healthcare institutes authorities in Zimbabwe must
improve conditions that facilitate the use of the clinical module.
To derive value from electronic health systems being adopted,
the work processes involved need to be redefined and adequate
information has to be provided to healthcare workers.
Keywords - UTAUT; clinical care module; nurses; clinical care
I.
INTRODUCTION
Informed decision making is made possible by merging
nurses’ decisions (based on the nurse’s clinical experience
and patient’s narration) and the knowledge that informs
nurses.
Healthcare
workers’ clinical
practice
may
be
improved through the use of clinical decision support
systems (clinical care module). The clinical care module is
an application which aids Public Health Workers (PHWs) to
make
valuable
decisions
and
to
collaborate
with
all
authorized healthcare professionals during patient point of
care [18][33]. The clinical care module allows completion
of tasks electronically such as
making appointments,
referrals, accessing and updation of patient records, and
making laboratory test requests. Decisions which can be
made
using
the
module
include
writing
the
correct
prescription for the client, deciding whether to refer the case
to another provider such as transferring a client to caesar
ward or to make re-referral. The clinical care module also
support sending of medication alerts messages and aids
nurses in carrying out evidenced based care. Nurses are key
decision makers and are directly involved in patient care in
a healthcare set-up and hence they have to be equipped with
knowledge during clinical care. Delay in patient care might
be caused by lack of relevant and accurate information for
decision making.
[14] pointed out that ‘Healthcare involves the use and
management of an abundance of information that must be
collected, managed, reviewed, processed, and mined. High-
quality patient care relies on careful documentation of every
patient’s medical and family history, health status, current
medical conditions, and treatment plans. A clinical decision
based on information that has been efficiently managed and
processed lends itself to quality care outcomes.’
The Ministry of Health and Child Care (MoHCC) and
the hospital health authorities have managed to deploy
hardware and software requirements for the implementation
of
Electronic
Health
applications
together
with
the
necessary technical expertise [27]. The District Health
Information System (DHIS) has been rolled out since 2010
and the platform allows integration of other healthcare
systems such as mobile health Short Message Service
(SMS) and android based platforms. The DHIS has mainly
been used as a tool for capturing patient details, reporting
disease surveillance statistics (reporting and analysis needs)
by the Health Information System (HIS) personnel and the
administrative healthcare authorities. This platform does not
have the clinical care module functionality [29]. The
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Electronic Health (E-Health) projects rolled out do not offer
the clinical services module to aid clinicians during decision
making and this has been a trend even in mHealth projects
deployed in South Africa [30][35]. The MoHCC also
piloted
a
SAP
healthcare
solution
application
at
Chitungwiza Central Hospital which is mainly being used as
a
patient
records
management
system
(patients’
demographics, and billing purposes). The SAP healthcare
solution supports management of patient demographics data,
billing of patients and maintenance of clinical records;
provides real-time access to relevant patient and clinical
information at the point of care; and improves care
collaboration [22]. Irrespective clinical care delivery module
SAP Healthcare solutions a support, the module is not being
by nurses, they’re are using the software for management of
patient’s information [28]. The focus of this research is to
relate the UTAUT model to the use of the clinical care
module in E-Health projects deployed in Zimbabwe since
this might result in improved quality care. The unified
theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT)
model was used to determine the intention to use the clinical
module
by
nurses
without
compromising
workers’
performance and to explore the usage of E-Health systems
by nurses. Technology adoption will not improve a firm’s
competitiveness unless the adopted technology ends up
being used [13].
II.
BACKGROUND
The
MoHCC
(Zimbabwe)
is
supporting
health
information technology by deploying DHIS and SAP
Healthcare solution applications in hospitals and there is
need to harness the clinical services module during clinical
care delivery. Adoption and use of the clinical module is
important for value addition in the healthcare system. This
study applied the UTAUT model to investigate the factors
that affect the use of clinical care module in deployed E-
Health applications and the use of the applications. The
DHIS platform is mainly used by the Health Information
System (HIS) department in all districts where it has been
rolled out. Nurses do not have direct access to patient’s
information on this platform. The Health Information
System (HIS) department personnel such as clerks are the
ones with authorization rights to use the system for
capturing and retrieving patient information. Nurses obtain
patient information upon request to the HIS department
personnel who are responsible for accessing the DHIS.
There has been adoption of these systems but they are not
being used at all (or ‘very little use’) by nurses in clinical
practice [29].
Most
researches
focused
on
the
factors
affecting
adoption and diffusion of E-health systems while applying
the UTAUT and TAM models. In addition, several studies
hinged on adoption and use of IT in healthcare and how to
deploy mHealth projects, while little attention has been
given to the use of the clinical care module in E-Health
applications adopted and used [1][25][34]. However, this
research focuses on the use of the clinical care module in
applications rolled out and to explore the extent of usage of
projects deployed by nurses. The UTAUT model has been
applied in Health Informatics researches but little or no
research has been made on the UTAUT model as a tool for
ensuring the use of the clinical module of nursing [19]. The
use of the clinical care module might result in improved
quality care.
III.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Improving health outcomes such as access to high-
quality healthcare is important for national development and
can be achieved through a more effective health force [21].
Nurses’ work processes need to be explicitly defined and
avoid overlapping. Inter-linking of processes and having
good processes results in IT complementing the work
processes [2]. The clinical module of nursing is a decision
support application designed to improve nursing care [5].
These applications are used in a variety of ways by
clinicians such as documentation of patient information,
monitoring patients' progress and validating decisions made
using paper-based clinical notes [7].
A.
The UTAUT Model
The UTAUT model is behavioural factors centric and
focuses on four constructs namely: performance expectancy,
effort
expectancy,
social
influence,
and
facilitating
conditions to give an overview of problems related to
Information
Systems/Information
Technology
(IS/IT)
adoption and diffusion. The UTAUT theory was adopted in
this research since it mapped and integrated opportunities of
eight
dominant
theories
and
models
including
the
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [32]. Validation and
the use of the UTAUT model has been done to investigate
diffusion and use of E-Health [1][24][34] while this
research applies the UTAUT model to investigate the usage
of E-Health systems and determining the factors affecting
the intention to use the clinical care module.
Performance expectancy is defined as the extent to
which using a technology will provide benefits to nurses in
their work processes; effort
expectancy is viewed as the
degree of ease-of-use of technology by nurses; social
influence is the extent to which nurses perceive that local
health
authorities,
the
MoHCC,
patients
and
other
stakeholders believe they should use the clinical module;
and facilitating conditions refer to nurses’ perceptions of the
resources (ICT infrastructure) and support needed and
available to use a technology [3][31]. The UTAUT model
has four moderators that influence the perception of the four
constructs of the model namely gender, age, experience, and
voluntariness of use which are applied in this research
[16][31]. UTAUT model constructs were applied to ensure
use of the clinical care module. [6] coined that ‘Emerging
information
technology
cannot
deliver
improved
organizational effectiveness if it is not accepted and used by
potential users.’
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

B.
District
Health
Information
System
(DHIS)
and
Systems, Applications and Products in data processing
(SAP) Healthcare solution
The DHIS is a useful tool for the collection of aggregate
health data from all levels of healthcare which is transferred
to national server. The analysis of data collected and reports
generation is based on national indicators. The challenge
with DHIS data is the ability to follow patient cohorts, for
which an Electronic Health Record (EHR) should be used.
Most EHRs have a functionality which aids in decision
making and this concept has to be applied to E-Health
systems deployed. EHRs have an integrated view of the
patient across health facilities and a Master Patient Index
(MPI) for cohort analysis. The use of the clinical module
seems to be lagging behind in healthcare institutions, while
its use might result in best practices [15][17][30]. New
technologies are sometimes adopted and then used very
little or not at all [14]. The DHIS is being used by HIS
department staff but do not have the clinical care module
functionality.
SAP Healthcare solution is SAP’s IT software for the
healthcare industry. The SAP healthcare solution supports
management of patient demographic data, billing of patients
and maintenance of clinical records; provides real-time
access to relevant patient and clinical information at the
point of care; and care collaboration [22]. An integrated
system consists of grouped functionalities called modules
thus both DHIS and SAP Healthcare solution consists of
modules [4][10]. DHIS consists of modules but do not have
a module specifically tailored to provide clinical decision
support solutions while the SAP Healthcare solution has this
functionality but the module with this functionality has to be
bought as part of the package. The clinical module supports
capturing
of
patient
demographic
and
clinical
health
information,
clinical
decision
making
and
sharing
of
information between authorized healthcare entities and
assist in direct patient care and can be linked with other
systems from other sections such as the laboratory and
pharmacy [26].
IV.
METHODS
The Mixed method approach was employed with the use
of questionnaires for numerical data collection and narrative
data collection which was mainly done through the use of
focus group discussions. 200 nurses in maternity section
were randomly selected from three health institutions and
have been given questionnaires. 176 nurses returned the
questionnaires giving us a response rate of 88 percent.
Three FGDs have been held with purposively selected
respondents of six on average from each health institution.
The interviewees mainly consisted of healthcare workers
who completed the questionnaires. The selected hospitals
have been selected as pilot sites for implementation of
Electronic government projects in healthcare sector. A
Sequential Explanatory Design was used, thus the use of
questionnaires followed by FGDs for triangulation purposes
[12]. The research focused on investigating the factors
affecting use of the clinical care module in perinatal care
services. Data was analysed using Statistical Package for the
Social Science (SPSS) and the UTAUT constructs tested are
performance
expectancy,
effort
expectancy,
facilitating
conditions, and social influence using descriptive statistics.
Thematic analysis was used to analyse data collected using
Focus Group Discussion (FGDs). The results were later on
merged with the identified statistical relationships from
questionnaire data and then interpretation was done. The
clinical care module was described to nurses as an
application which aids nurses to make informed decisions
during patient care.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A.
Participant profile demographics
Health institution A constitutes 36.4 percent, B 36.9
percent, and C 26.7 percent of the respondents. The median
experience was more than 5 years and the median age is 38
years.
The
majority
of
the
respondents
(71.0%)
are
registered general nurses with midwifery.
B.
Mobile devices and applications used
SAP Healthcare solution has the clinical care delivery
module which is not being used by healthcare workers since
the module was not part of the package when the solution
was bought. In addition, the healthcare solution platform
was not customized to suit user requirements. There is need
for integrating the clinical care module with the DHIS and
the SAP platforms since there is a potential to improve care
processes and patient care outcomes.
Users of applications such as Google Play store,
Whatsapp and Facebook have a more positive perception of
the use of technology in comparison to the non-users as they
already have experience in computer use. At work PHWs
generally use desktop applications while at home 98% use
mobile devices to access the internet hence there is need for
use of mobile devices such as tablets, laptops at when
carrying out clinical activities.
There is need for integrating the DHIS with the nurses’
work processes to improve patient care (avoid delay in
patient care) and this can be achieved through a clinical
module for nursing. For example blood tests might be sent
to a laboratory where it will take three or more days to
receive the results which results in delaying patient care,
hence a link with laboratory services is important to receive
the results as soon as they have been processed. PHWs had
the opinion that there is need for employing more specialist
doctors to avoid unnecessary delays as they also provide
informed decisions such as referring patients to appropriate
wards. Resources such as personnel, drugs and instruments,
etc. for respective departments are essential for good
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

processes to be in place and then complement them with a
clinical module for nursing. The customisation of the
clinical
module
for
nursing
has
to
involve
users’
requirements analysis so that the healthcare workers will not
worry about issues such as security, for example, through
sharing of summarized clinical notes with authorized
healthcare professionals thereby supporting confidentiality
[9].
The
MoHCC
authorities
and
the
hospital’s
Chief
Executive Officers support the deployment and use of
healthcare applications by nurses. PHWS concurred that the
MoHCC and the local health authorities expect them in
using the clinical care module since they have already
deployed the DHIS and SAP Healthcare solution and are
partnering with local mobile network operators, software
development houses and international partners such as
European GSM networking companies [8].
Nurses agreed that the use of the clinical module for
healthcare processes is useful in their jobs and will augment
the accomplishment of tasks more quickly, for example, the
hassle of searching a patient file is eliminated. In general,
the use of healthcare applications directly linked to patient
care was applauded as it was suggested it simplifies
documentation of patients’ outcomes, reduces medical
errors and promotes quality care outcomes [32].
C.
User requirements analysis
There is lack of user training since maintenance of
clinical records in not comprehensive (medical history is
either missing or missing), which results in fear of exploring
new concepts by nurses as this might result in errors such as
inaccuracy of patient records. The project leader of the
company which deployed SAP for Healthcare solution
confirmed that users were not trained on use of the clinical
care module and its customisation to suit specific wards
work processes was not done. Even though other modules of
the SAP Healthcare solution are being used, the clinical part
might not be user-friendly to nurses. The IT staff is using
the
platform
for
capturing
patient
data
rather
than
supporting nurses in using the system. The use of the
clinical module for nursing must actually be done by nurses
while the IT staff gives support [11][23]. Effective use of
the patient demographic information module will result in
easy deployment and use of the clinical care module. The
clinical module becomes obsolete are there is no proper user
centred requirements gathering exercise hence nurses might
protest against the use of the solution as they feel they were
not involved and the application is not user-friendly. User
requirements
gathering
is
essential
for
successful
deployment of an application. Installation and training of
users is essential after deployment of the application. This
must be followed by a transition phase of familiarizing with
the new system and then data migration will be done by the
healthcare workers while the consultants and IT staff play a
monitoring role to address any challenges. The consultants
must gradually withdraw their support unless there is need
for help. The IT staff must provide support only where
necessary while software providers must address major
challenges which can be beyond the scope of the IT
personnel [9][20].
D.
UTAUT constructs outcomes
The UTAUT model was used to measure the variables
facilitating conditions, performance expectancy, attitude
towards the use of the platform, social influence and effort
expectancy. To measure internal consistency (reliability of a
series of items), Cronbach’s Alpha technique was used and
obtained a coefficient of 0.763 which matches with the
acceptance benchmark of at least 0.70 [31]. On average, the
variable performance expectancy resulted in a mean of
4.227 and a standard deviation of 0.923, social influence
resulted in a mean of 4.19 and a standard deviation of 0.849,
effort expectancy resulted in a mean of 4.09 and a standard
deviation of 0.919 and facilitating conditions resulted in a
mean of 3.803 and a standard deviation of 1.351. The results
from the three constructs performance expectancy, social
influence and effort expectancy show that respondents had a
common opinion (95% Strongly Agree) while on facilitating
conditions respondents had varied opinions.
95 percent strongly agree that the use of the clinical
module is easy since there will be training of users before
the use of the system and ‘some’ of their colleagues are
already using desktop applications (DHIS/SAP Healthcare
solution), thus they have the necessary skills in using
healthcare applications. ICT professionals will be helpful
in
training them on
how
to
use
health informatics
products and services though the PHWs feel that some
nurses must be trained as IT Experts who reside in wards
where the applications run rather than being dependent on
the HIS Department personnel. The nurses must be trained
to acquire certificates, diplomas or degrees in the Health
Informatics field to directly support their work processes.
The
course
in
IT
must
be
implemented
in
nursing
curriculum and even during their post basic education.
10.2 percent of the respondents were male and all
concurred to the use of the clinical module during patient
care while 80.28 percent of females had the same notion as
men. This conforms to previous researches that men
perceive usefulness of a technology more than women
[1][19].
66.5
percent
of
the
respondents
had
the
qualification Post Basic Diploma of which 33% of them
agree and 55.7% strongly agree to use of the module by
nurses. Health workers who are above the age of 43 proved
not to easily adopt and use clinical decision support systems
as they felt it might exert pressure on how they normally
carryout their duties, thus showing the element of resistance
to change. Middle aged to younger generations who have
the passion to learn and have higher social status tend to use
a technology early compared to the elderly as proved by
other researches Nurses with an experience of at least 2
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

years had a positive attitude towards the use of technology
[19][34].
VI.
CONCLUSION
The UTAUT model constructs predicted a moderate to
high level of user acceptance and use of the clinical care
module. The principal factors that affect the use of the
clinical care module are facilitating conditions, social
influence and performance expectancy. Healthcare institute
authorities must improve healthcare staffs' performance
expectancy towards use of the clinical care module and
facilitating conditions for use of the platform. The clinical
module has to be used as a blue-print for decision making
though a clinician must give the final recommendation
based on experience. Training of both nurses and HIS
personnel is essential for the use of the clinical module after
conducting thorough user requirements analysis. The system
must have comprehensive patient data unlike the current
platforms which have basically demographic data which is
incomplete and do not have the clinical notes and other
patient medical details. Nurses must be trained to attain
professional courses in Nursing Information System related
qualifications.
Time
taken
while
documenting
patient
profiles and other related information must be benchmarked
not to conflict with daily work processes operations.
Management buy-in (MoHCC, hospital Chief Executive
Officers and Medical Superintendents) might result in
successful implementation and use of the applications as
they craft policies and strategies for the use of the clinical
module [2].
Teamwork of all parties concerned is important such as
the project manager of the consultancy firm delivering the
SAP healthcare solution and the project manager of the
healthcare institute thus creating the spirit of ownership and
total commitment. Key decision makers must be role
models in the use of the technology thus encouraging their
subordinates.
In
future
other
Technology
Acceptance
Models can be blended with the UTAUT model to ensure
full utilization of Clinical Decision Support Systems. There
is need to explicitly apply the UTAUT model for the use of
the clinical care module in perinatal care services as a
software solution while the clinical areas are assessed and
benchmarked for improving work processes.
The users of the system must be able to use it with ease
and the applications must not be technically user centric,
otherwise the platform must provide a detailed user manual.
The customisation of applications must be in terms of
patients’
characteristics
(such
as
age,
gender
and
experience) and societal values centred and to match their
level of aptitude (users of the system). Healthcare personnel
needs to be trained and receive refresher courses on the
clinical module applications upgrades and deployment of
new programs as this might help in reducing resistance to
change. The necessary infrastructure for rolling out of HIS
is important and also government policies and regulations
concerning the use of decision support systems, needs to be
considered.
E-health applications are partially used by healthcare
workers. Midwives do not have direct access to the DHIS
application, they only get patient information they need
from the HIS department staff. The midwives need to be
authorized to use the system independently in wards since
the HIS department closes at 5pm while wards are open
24/7. Nurses who are using the SAP Healthcare solution are
making use of it for patient demographic data. There is need
for value addition on the DHIS and SAP Healthcare
Solution for the use of the clinical care module of nursing.
The E-Health maturity model need to be applied for use of
mobile devices during clinical healthcare delivery with the
aid of the clinical care module and strategies have to be
explored for reduced transition period between phases up to
the transaction and transformation phases. In addition, a
study on how clinical decision support systems can be
simulated to reduce delay in healthcare delivery (patient
flow) has to be done.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to acknowledge my academic supervisors
for their inestimable guidance and encouragement and for
consistently being a source of reassurance and support. I
would also like to thank the Medical Research Council of
Zimbabwe and the Ministry of Health and Child Care
(MoHCC) for their approval to carryout research in health
institutions. My gratitude also goes to authorities and
participants in the hospitals which took part in this study for
giving their time despite having busy work schedules.
Special mention goes to Mr. T.G Rebanowako for assistance
with language editing.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. T. Ami-Narh, and P. Williams, 'A Revised UTAUT
Model to Investigate E-health Acceptance of Health
Professionals in Africa.' Journal of Emerging Trends in
Computing and Information Sciences, 3(10), 2012,
pp.1383–1391.
[2]
C.J. Anumba, and K. Ruikar, e-Business in Construction.
1 st ed., West Sussex, United Kingdom: John Wiley &
Sons, 2008.
[3]
S.A. Brown, and V. Venkatesh, 'Model of Adoption of
Technology in the Household: A Baseline Model Test
and Extension Incorporating Household Life Cycle.' MIS
Quartely, 29:4, 2005, pp.399–426.
[4]
L.M.C. Buydens, and P.J. Schoenmakers, Intelligent
Software for Chemical Analysis, 1993.
[5]
M.M. Cruz-Cunha, I.M. Miranda, and P. Goncalves,
Handbook of Research on ICTs and Management
Systems for Improving Efficiency in Healthcare and
Social Care. IGI Global, 2013.
[6]
F.D.
Davies,
and
V.
Venkatesh,
'Measuring
user
acceptance
of
emerging
information
technologies:
anassessment of possible method biases.' Proceedings of
the
Twenty-Eighth
Annual
Hawaii
International
Conference on System Sciences, vol 4, 1995.
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

[7]
D. Dowding, N. Mitchell, R. Randell, R. Foster, V.
Lattimer,and C. Thompson, 'Nurses’ use of computerised
clinical decision support systems: a case site analysis.'
Journal of clinical nursing, 18(8), 2009, pp.1159–1167.
[8]
S.
Emmitt,and
K.
Ruikar,
Collaborative
Design
Management, New York, USA: Routledge, 2013.
[9]
J.O. Grady, System Requirements Analysis, New York,
USA: Academic Press, 2006.
[10] P.
Jalote,
An
Integrated
Approach
to
Software
Engineering, Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[11] M. Khosrow-Pour, Encyclopedia of Information Science
and Technology, 1st ed., Pennsylvania, USA: Idea Group
Inc (IGI), 2005.
[12] L.N. Kirk, M.L. Lewis, and J. Gaugler, Neuropsychiatric
Symptoms in Mild Cognitive Impairment: Development
and Testing of a Conceptual Model, ProQuest, 2008.
[13] G. Lanzolla, and F.F, Suarez, 'Closing the Technology
Adoption-Use Divide: The Role of Contiguous User
Bandwagon.' Journal of Management, 38(3), 2009,
pp.836–859.
[14] D.F.
McHaney,
Information
Management
and
technology, 2009.
[15] Medical Information Science Reference, E-Health and
Telemedicine: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and
Applications:
Concepts,
Methodologies,
Tools,
and
Applications, Pennsylvania, USA: IGI Global, 2015.
[16] V. Michell, D.J. Rosenorn-Lanng, S.R. Gulliver, and W.
Currie, Handbook of Research on Patient Safety and
Quality Care through Health Informatics, Pennsylvania:
IGI Global, 2013.
[17] E. Nikoi, K. Boateng, Collaborative Communication
Processes and Decision Making in Organizations, IGI
Global, 2013.
[18] K. Ong, Medical Informatics: An Executive Primer, 2nd
ed, Chicago, IL, USA: HIMSS, 2011.
[19] S.T.M. Peek, E.J.M Wouters, J. van Hoof, K.G. Luijkx,
H.R. Boeije, and H.J.M. Vrijhoef, 'Factors influencing
acceptance
of
technology
for
aging
in
place:
A
systematic review. International Journal of Medical
Informatics.',83(4), 2014, pp.235–248. Available at:
<http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S138650561
4000173>.
[20] D. Peters, Building a GIS: System Architecture Design
Strategies for Managers, Calfornia, USA: ESRI, Inc,
2008.
[21] C.
Rokx,
J.
Giles,
E.Satriawan,
P.
Marzoeki,
P.
Harimurti,
and
E.
Yavuz,
New
Insights
Into
the
Provision of Health Services in Indonesia: A Health
Workforce Study, World Bank Publications, 2010.
[22] SAP, Transform patient care with our healthcare industry
software,
2014.
Available
at:
<http://go.sap.com/solution/industry/healthcare.html>
[Accessed 12 Dec. 2015].
[23] G.
Shelly,
G.
Gunter,
and
R.
Gunter,
Teachers
Discovering Computers: Integrating Technology in a
Connected World, 7th ed., Boston, USA: Cengage
Learning, 2012.
[24] T.A.M. Spil, and R.W. Schuring, E-Health Systems
Diffusion and Use: The Innovation, the User and the Use
IT Model: The Innovation, the User and the Use IT
Model, Idea Group Inc (IGI), 2006.
[25] Y. Sun, N. Wang, X. Guo, and Z. Peng, 'Understanding
the
Acceptance
of
Mobile
Health
Services:
a
Comparison and Integration of Alternative Models.'
Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, 14(2), 2013,
pp.183–200.
[26] J. Tan, and F.C. Payton, Adaptive Health Management
Information Systems: Concepts, Cases, & Practical
Applications: Concepts, Cases, & Practical Applications,
3rd ed., Jones & Bartlett Publishers, 2010.
[27] TechZim, Zim hospitals introduce a new e-Health
system:
How
does
it
work?,
2014,
Available
at:
<http://www.techzim.co.zw/2014/10/zim-hospitals-
introduce-new-e-health-system-work/>
[Accessed
12
Dec. 2015].
[28] The Herald, Chitungwiza Hospital now computerised,
2012, Available at
<http://www.herald.co.zw/chitungwiza-hospital-now-
computerised/> [Accessed 12 Dec. 2015].
[29] UNDP Zimbabwe, Promoting timely delivery of health
services, 2014, Available at:
<http://www.zw.undp.org/content/zimbabwe/en/home/pr
esscenter/articles/2014/06/05/supporting-zimbabwe-to-
deliver-timely-health-services-at-a-click-of-a-
button.html> [Accessed 16 Jan. 2016].
[30] UNDP, Newsletter of The Global Fund Programme in
Zimbabwe, March 2014.
[31] V. Venkatesh, M.G. Morris, G.B. Davis, and F.D. Davis,
'User Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward a
Unified View.' MIS Quartely, 27:3, 2003, pp.425–478.
[32] V. Venkatesh, J.Y.L. Thong, and X. Xu, Consumer
acceptance 
and 
use 
of 
information 
technology : 
extending the unified theory of acceptance and use of
technology. MIS Quartely, 36(1), 2012, pp.157–178.
[33] N. Wickramasinghe, J.N.D. Gupta, and S.K. Sharma,
Creating Knowledge-based Healthcare Organizations.
Idea Group Inc (IGI), 2005.
[34] M. Wills, O. El-Gayar, and D. Benett, Examining
Healthcare
Professionals’
Acceptance
of
Electronic
Medical Records Using UTAUT. Issues in Information
Systems, IX(2), 2008, pp.396–401.
[35] R. Wootton, and L. Bonnardot, Telemedicine in Low-
Resource Settings, Frontiers Media SA, 2015.
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

