 
Improving the Impact of Wearable Devices in Health Promotion and Wellbeing:  
the WEHMIX Project  
Elena Como  
Head of Research and Evaluation 
LAMA Agency 
e-mail: elena.como@agenzialama.eu 
Federico Lucca 
Head of Research 
Thread Solutions S.R.L. 
e-mail: federico.lucca@threadsolutions.com
 
 
Abstract— The promotion of healthy lifestyles has become a 
priority to tackle the spread of chronic diseases. Digital 
technologies, such as wearable devices, show great potential to 
support positive behaviour change and enable healthier 
behaviours. The WEHMIX project aims to offer new tools and 
a new user experience to improve the effectiveness and impact 
of these technologies for health promotion. This paper 
illustrates the results of the pilot testing of WEHMIX in two 
separate settings and scenarios of use. 
Keywords-wearable; platform; user experience; impact; 
digital health. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The rise of chronic diseases represents one of the major 
challenges for health and health care systems worldwide. 
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), such 
diseases – in particular cardiovascular diseases, cancers, 
chronic respiratory diseases, and diabetes – cause the 
majority of global deaths and burden of disease, affecting in 
particular the elderly but increasingly also the young and 
middle-aged individuals [1]. Chronic diseases represent a 
burden also in economic terms: only in Europe, they absorb 
around 70-80% of the health care costs, and their negative 
impact on overall labour supply and productivity has been 
found to cause a relevant loss of Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) and growth [2]. At individual and family level, 
chronic diseases can have dramatic economic effects, by 
reducing income and enhancing the costs of necessary care 
[1]. 
Fighting the chronic disease epidemic is therefore a 
policy priority at international level. Fortunately, a key role 
can be played by prevention, and in particular by primary 
prevention via the promotion of healthy lifestyles. Indeed, it 
is widely acknowledged that a considerable share of the 
global burden of chronic diseases could be reduced or 
avoided by promoting people’s healthier behaviours, in 
particular by tackling 4 lifestyle-related health risk factors: 
tobacco consumption, physical inactivity, unhealthy diet, and 
harmful alcohol use. According to existing research, the 
adoption of healthier behaviours in these four areas could 
lead to a reduction of up to 80% the global risk of chronic 
diseases [3], although other factors as well play a key role, 
including stress and sleep habits [4]. 
The WEHMIX for Healthcare project (WEarable Human 
Machine Interaction user eXperience for Healthcare, 
WEHMIX in short) aims to contribute to this challenge by 
proposing a new digital health solution in support of 
healthier lifestyles. In particular, WEHMIX proposes the 
integration of multiple wearable devices into a single 
platform, accompanied by personalised eHealth services to 
support the adoption and monitoring of healthy lifestyles. 
This paper presents the results of the pilot testing of 
WEHMIX in two different settings and scenarios of use. The 
paper is structured as follows: Section II illustrates the key 
project assumptions, highlighting in particular the potential 
of digital and wearable technologies for health promotion 
and behaviour change. Section III introduces the key 
innovations of WEHMIX and its distinctive features. Section 
IV describes the main outcomes from the work in progress, 
describing the WEHMIX technological platform, its pilot 
experimentation in the two settings, and the main findings 
from the user feedback and evaluation exercise. Section V 
illustrates the main conclusions of the study.  
II. 
MAIN IDEAS, MODELS AND ASSUMPIONS INVOLVED 
The use of digital technologies in the field of wellbeing 
and health promotion is a fast-growing trend. Indeed, there is 
increasing consensus around the fact that such technologies, 
and in particular mobile and wearable technologies, can 
contribute to more personalised prevention, monitoring, and 
self-management of disease. This consensus is reflected in a 
number of recent policies at international and national level 
(e.g., the European eHealth Action Plan 2012-2020) that 
support the adoption of e- and m-health solutions in various 
areas including health promotion.  
Significant interest is raised in particular by an emergent 
plethora of wearable devices (smart watches, head/shoe-
worn devices, wrist bands, smart shirts, clips, etc.) that are 
able to measure physical activity levels, as well as number of 
relevant biometric variables, providing valuable information 
on an individual’s health, at any time and with increasing 
accuracy. As these devices become smaller, cheaper, and 
more widespread, interest in them increases; however, it 
should be noted that the use of such devices cannot be 
expected to automatically imply better health for their users.  
A key question is the following: to what extent can 
wearable devices become effective and reliable tools for 
health promotion? To what extent can they have an impact 
beyond simple monitoring, towards actually promoting 
actual behaviour change for better lifestyles? A recent review 
[5] has looked at existing evaluation studies of these devices 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
and provides encouraging evidence of their impact on 
behaviour change; however, it also underlines that the 
effectiveness of these devices depends on a number of 
factors, including their capacity to incorporate adequate 
incentives and support. Indeed, it is acknowledged that 
people are empowered, i.e., acquire a higher control of the 
decisions and actions that affect their health [6], when a 
number of conditions are met: they are effectively informed 
about correct lifestyle choices, have a correct perception of 
their health and of possible risks, are motivated and can see 
the results of their virtuous choices, are technically and 
emotionally supported, and can rely on adequate decision 
support tools to make the best choices for their health [7]. In 
particular, the possibility to track one’s improvements in 
physical activity seems to motivate people in a constant 
progress towards their goals, while at the same time it 
increases the perception of self-efficacy [5]. The user 
experience (UX) of these wearable devices is another critical 
factor, since it determines the way in which people 
“interpret, understand, gain motivation and act on their data" 
[8], and more generally contributes to determining the long-
term retention and motivation to use the device, which has 
also been found to be a critical issue [9]. All these elements 
affect 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
wearable 
devices 
for 
empowerment and behaviour change, and call for their 
careful design taking into consideration also the human, 
beyond the technological factors. 
The idea of the WEHMIX project is to develop an 
innovative platform and web app that can improve the user 
experience and added value of wearable devices for users, 
hence improving their impact on health and encouraging the 
change of individual lifestyles for good. 
III. 
INNOVATIVE FEATURES AND POTENTIAL OF THE 
WEHMIX PLATFORM 
The key innovation features of WEHMIX can be 
summarised as follows.  
First of all, WEHMIX allows users to connect different 
wearable devices to a single digital platform, purposely 
designed to aggregate the data and to organise it in a smart 
and easy-to-read way. Thanks to this, users have an 
immediate and unique access point to consult a synthesis of 
all their data, without having to access the app of each single 
device. Moreover, by supporting devices of different brands 
and types, WEHMIX does not bind the user to a specific 
brand or device, and if the user decides to change it, 
WEHMIX ensures perfect integration of the new data into 
historical records. 
Secondly, WEHMIX gives users the possibility to create 
a personalised health/training plan, with specific goals and 
activities monitored. In doing so, WEHMIX offers value to a 
broad range of potential targets: sporty people willing to 
improve their physical activity, elders willing to monitor 
their health and prevent chronic diseases, or employees with 
sedentary jobs willing to improve their wellbeing and 
productivity thanks to a healthier lifestyle.  
Thirdly, WEHMIX allows users to access personalised 
support from a team of health and wellbeing professionals, in 
particular for goal setting, data interpretation, and feedback 
on progress made. In order to connect the user with the 
professionals, WEHMIX offers an internal chat service; 
moreover, it provides a specific platform interface for the 
professionals to visualise in real time the user’s data. 
IV. 
MAIN OUTCOMES FROM WORK IN PROGRESS 
A. Technology Development 
The WEHMIX platform is made of three main parts: 
• 
a backend side, connected with devices from major 
brands 
• 
a mobile app, to allows customers to interact with 
the data and with the doctor or coach from remote 
• 
a web portal, for the doctor or coach to view the 
data recorded by the user’s devices. 
The core of WEHMIX is therefore a modular distributed 
platform that is able to interact with a high number and 
variety of devices (potentially, any) chosen by the users on 
the market. A modular model is used by WEHMIX to work 
with different kinds of data models of different brands and 
devices, retrieving data from the cloud and giving them back 
to the user and the professionals in a clear and standardized 
format. A broad variety of devices has been bought and 
tested by WEHMIX during past the 2 years, and finally, 
three devices have been chosen for the first development of 
the platform, based on an evaluation of quality, price, and 
errors.  These are: Garmin Vivosmart smartwatch for activity 
and heart rate recording, Fitbit Aria scale for weight and 
body mass composition, and iHealth for blood pressure 
measurement. 
WEHMIX is based on API LED architecture by the 
MuleSoft framework MULE ESB, which permits a quick 
integration with third-party API of different wearable device 
brands (Figure 1). With MULE ESB, we can expose 
different layers of API to control the system security. The 
mobile app and the web app are developed with Ionic and 
AngularJS framework and communicate with the server side 
via a JSON REST interface, exposed by the superficial layer 
of the stack of MULE ESB.   
 
Figure 1. WEHMIX structure 
 
In the eHealth environment, the standard that we decided 
to use is Open mHealth, promoted by a startup for the 
integration of all the eHealth services in the world. The idea 
at the basis of Open mHealth is clearly stated on the 
company’s website: “In healthcare, common data schemas 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
are particularly important because of the semantic 
importance and complexity of health data. For example, the 
distinction between fasting and non-fasting blood glucose is 
critical to its clinical meaning […] Our common schemas 
define the meaningful distinctions for each clinical measure, 
increasing the overall clinical utility of digital health data 
and improving the ability of developers to quickly build 
clinically usable products” [10]. 
Ensuring privacy of the data constitutes one of the main 
priorities for WEHMIX, and a constant area of research and 
improvement. After the first release, we moved our core 
database into CHINO.io, an awarded start-up focused on the 
privacy of health data, and started working in partnership 
with them on this project. 
B. Use Cases and Experimentations 
The WEHMIX platform has been pilot tested with 20 
people in two separate experimental settings and scenario of 
use: a Corporate Wellness (CW) scenario and an Active and 
Healthy Ageing (AHA) scenario.  
The CW experimentation was done involving 12 
employees of two insurance companies based in Milan. Each 
user received the monitoring devices (Garmin Vivosmart, 
Fitbit Aria, iHealth smart scale), was visited by 2 
professionals (1 general practitioner and 1 personal trainer), 
and was given access to the WEHMIX platform and 
services. To start, each user set his/her own personal plan 
with the help of the professionals, subsequently they used the 
devices and platform to monitor their weight, body mass 
composition, sleep, heart rate, blood pressure, and physical 
activity, for a period of 3 months. The users could at any 
time consult their wellness plan and monitor progress via the 
mobile or web app of WEHMIX; the same data was also 
visible in real time by the professionals.  
The AHA experimentation was developed with a group 
of 8 users aged between 50 and 67, recruited via a 
physiotherapy studio located in Cologna Veneta, a town in 
the Italian province of Verona. They included people with 
minor and temporary physical issues, which were taken into 
consideration but not directly addressed by the intervention. 
In this experimentation, the physiotherapist acted as the 
supporting professional for the user group, and a slightly 
different model was tested: the users were given only the 
Garmin Vivosmart bracelet for tracking physical activity, 
heart rate, and sleep, while the other two devices (iHealth 
sphygmomanometer and Fitbit Aria scale) were placed in the 
studio 
and 
used 
once 
weekly 
together 
with 
the 
physiotherapist. 
The expected impacts of both experimentations were to 
raise awareness of users concerning their health and lifestyle, 
improve attitudes and incentives towards a healthier habit, 
improve trust in the new technologies for health, improve 
user experience and usability of the devices, enable the 
production of data in an easily shareable way, and ultimately 
improve health, wellbeing, and quality of life and work. 
C. User Feedback and Evaluation 
The two experimentations were used as an opportunity to 
not only test the technology, but also better understand its 
potential impacts, and to collect direct and practical feedback 
for improvement by the users. We carried out the evaluation 
using a two-step process, consisting of a pre-test analysis 
(aimed at capturing an initial profile of each user, 
understanding their previous experience with health and 
fitness technologies, and collecting their expectations), and 
an ex-post evaluation (aimed at analysing impacts and 
collecting actual feedbacks).  
We used a qualitative evaluation approach, with a 
combination of standard questionnaires and in-depth 
individual interviews; this was considered ideal for the small 
number of users involved (which allowed for direct contact 
and more in-depth analysis), and for the type of feedback and 
indications that we aimed to collect at this stage.  
Altogether, the evaluation confirmed the potential of 
WEHMIX, and the added value brought about by its key 
innovations. At the same time, the study shed light on the 
significant differences that exist in practice between the 
perceptions and preferences of different target groups, and 
pointed to the need to design specifically tailored solutions 
for different markets and scenarios of use. Moreover, the 
study brought the attention to the need to consider pre-
existing limitations and barriers to the use of wearable 
technologies by each type of user, limitations that cannot be 
addressed directly by WEHMIX, but are nonetheless an 
important pre-condition for its success.  
Below, we summarise the key points emerged from the 
feedback of the two experimental groups. 
 
Main uses of the WEHMIX platform. The potential 
use and added value of WEHMIX was perceived differently 
by the two groups, which reported different priorities and 
expectations. In the CW scenario, the majority of the users 
looked at WEHMIX as a valuable tool for health promotion, 
i.e., for improving their overall lifestyle and everyday habits, 
with the goal of improving present wellbeing and preventing 
future diseases. The users of the AHA experimentation, on 
the other hand, were more sceptical about the possibility to 
change their behaviours and lifestyles under the stimulus of a 
digital technology, and were more interested in WEHMIX as 
a monitoring tool for keeping track of specific, already 
known, health conditions.  
Flexibility towards the use of different devices. The 
possibility to connect different devices to the same platform, 
and to change them over time without losing their data, was 
perceived as positive by the majority of users in both groups. 
Nonetheless, this feature was perceived as more relevant by 
the CW group, especially by the most “expert” technology 
users, who were more likely to buy and change different 
devices over time.  In the AHA group, the possibility to 
change devices was appreciated in theory, but not 
immediately perceived as a priority. Some users, however, 
showed concern regarding the cost of the devices, which 
suggests that the possibility to choose their own device 
(eventually opting for a “cheaper” one) could actually make 
WEHMIX more broadly accessible for them.  
Access to professional support and coaching. The 
incorporation into the platform of a specific, professional 
coaching service was considered an important added value of 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
WEHMIX. In the CW group, this was considered the most 
important feature, and a truly distinctive feature. Users 
appreciated the initial health assessment and the support 
received in goal setting received by the professionals, at the 
same time they gave suggestions to improve the following 
interaction with them in terms of remote monitoring and 
periodic feedback. Users also pointed out that they would 
prefer the support of specific and complementary experts 
(e.g., nutrition specialist) rather than general practitioners. 
Similarly, the users of the AHA group argued that WEHMIX 
would hardly be valuable for them without the presence of a 
health professional that looks at the data collected by the 
devices. This was in line also with a generally lower trust of 
this group in the value of technology “alone” for the purpose 
of health and wellbeing. They further emphasised the need 
that the professional be a trusted person, and rejected the 
idea that he/she may be a “virtual doctor” (e.g., a chatbot), or 
a person that only operates from remote. The AHA users 
suggested that WEHMIX should partner with some trusted 
and recognisable health institution for this service.  
User Experience. The interviews also collected feedback 
and suggestions regarding the user experience of WEHMIX. 
Part of the feedbacks concerned basic elements, such as the 
on-boarding process, the connection of the devices, and the 
functionality and visual features of the app. Other feedback 
concerned key aspects, such as the visualisation of the data: 
here the users stressed the importance of finding the right 
balance between quantity and clarity of the data displayed, 
and asked for more detail but without replicating the original 
source. The visualisation of personalised goals and exercises 
was seen as a critical aspect and some suggestions were 
given for improvement.  
The most important feedback, however, concerned the 
desired level of interaction of the platform. In this respect, 
CW users expressed a preference for higher interaction (e.g., 
welcome messages, targeted alerts, weekly feedback, etc.), 
while AHA users preferred a lower level of interaction, 
avoiding push notifications except for emergency situations. 
Economic incentives and rewards. A future version of 
WEHMIX is expected to include additional features, such as 
incentives (bonus, rewards, etc.) for the achievement of a 
certain target. Although this is not present as for now, we 
asked the users a feedback on this idea. The CW group gave 
positive feedback, expressing preferences for rewards, such 
as discounts on their health insurance premium, on the 
purchase of new devices, or on personalised health 
consultancies. The AHA group, on the other hand, expressed 
lower interest and in some cases scepticism: they pointed out 
that for them healthy behaviours are strictly motivated by the 
desire for good health, and the idea of a platform offering 
other types of rewards would make them suspicious 
regarding the actual quality of the services, which would be 
seen as more commercial and less professional in some way. 
Willinness to pay. Lastly, we asked users about their 
willingness to pay. Most opted for a low amount (below 5 
euros/month) for the basic functionalities of WEHMIX; 
nonetheless, it also emerged that if all the improvements 
discussed were introduced successfully, users would start 
comparing WEHMIX with alternative fitness and wellness 
programmes (e.g., in gyms or specialised centres), and would 
be available to consider a higher price, given the higher 
flexibility offered by WEHMIX. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The WEHMIX project aimed to provide an innovative 
solution for improving the impact and user experience of 
wearable devices in the field of health promotion and 
wellbeing. The main product developed by the project, i.e., a 
digital platform able to connect with different wearable 
devices of the user, and to support the provision of 
personalised services with the contribution of a team of 
health and wellbeing professionals, has been tested in two 
different scenarios of use to collect feedback and identify 
future challenges and possible improvements.  
The evaluation performed confirmed the high innovation 
potential of WEHMIX, while at the same time shed light on 
the possible areas of improvement and further development. 
In particular, our findings shed light on the possible 
challenges and opportunities emerging from the specific 
targeting of this and similar services towards specific target 
groups and customer segments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The WEHMIX project received funding by The 
Autonomous Province of Trento under L.P 6/1999. Partners 
of the project are Thread Solutions S.R.L., Nous23 S.R.L., 
LAMA Agency, Fondazione Bruno Kessler, and Net Wise 
S.R.L.   
In addition to the partners, we thank for their 
participation and contribution to the experimentations: Kirey 
Group, Zurich Italia, Marco Corti (MD), Federico Frulloni, 
Pier Alberto Bressan, and all the users that took part and 
provided valuable feedback. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Busse, M. Blümel, D. Scheller-Kreinsen, and A. Zentner, 
“Tackling 
Chronic 
Disease 
in 
Europe. 
Strategies, 
interventions and challenges”. European Observatory on 
Health Systems and Policies, Observatory Studies n.20, 2010. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0008/96632/E
93736.pdf [retrieved: January, 2018] 
[2] Directorate General Health and Consumers, European 
Commission, “Reflection process on chronic disease. Final 
Report.”, 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://ec.europa.eu/health//sites/health/files/major_chronic_di
seases/docs/reflection_process_cd_final_report_en.pdf 
[retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[3] F. Al Maskari, “Lifestyle diseases: An Economic Burden on 
the Health Services”, UN Chronicle Vol. XLVII No. 2, July 
2010. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://unchronicle.un.org/article/lifestyle-diseases-economic-
burden-health-services [retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[4] Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Health and 
Behavior: Research, Practice, and Policy, “Health and 
Behavior: The Interplay of Biological, Behavioral, and 
Societal Influences”, 2, “Biobehavioral Factors in Health and 
Disease”, Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US), 
2001. 
[5] A. N. Sullivan and M. E. Lachman, “Behavior Change with 
Fitness Technology in Sedentary Adults: A Review of the 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Evidence for Increasing Physical Activity”, Frontiers in 
Public Health, vol.4, p. 289, 2017. 
[6] World Health Organisation, “Health Promotion Glossary”, 
1998. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.who.int/healthpromotion/about/HPR%20Glossary
%201998.pdf?ua=1[retrieved: January, 2018]. 
[7] S. Cyril, B. J. Smith, and A. M. N. Renzaho, “Systematic 
Review of Empowerment Measures in Health Promotion”, 
Health Promotion International, vol. 31(4), pp. 809–826, July 
2015. 
[8] S. Asimakopoulos, G. Asimakopoulos, and F. Spillers., 
“Motivations and User Engagement in Fitness Tracking: 
Heuristic for Mobile Healthcare Wearables”, Informatics 
2017, vol. 4(1), p.5. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing 
Institute, 2017. 
[9] P. C. Shih, K. Han, E. S. Poole, M.B. Rosson, and J. M. 
Carroll, “Use and adoption challenges of wearable activity 
trackers.” IConference 2015 Proceedings, pp. 1-12, 2015. 
[10] Open 
m-Health 
website. 
[Online.] 
Available: 
http://www.openmhealth.org/documentation/#/schema-
docs/overview 
[retrieved: 
January, 
2018].
 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

