A Joint Organizational and Technical Development  
of a Telematic Rescue Assistance System  
for German Emergency Medical Services 
Marie-Thérèse Schneiders, Daniel Schilberg, Sabina Jeschke 
Institute of Information Management in Mechanical Engineering (IMA)  
RWTH Aachen University 
Aachen, Germany 
 
Email: {schneiders, schilberg, jeschke.office}@zlw-ima.rwth-aachen.de 
 
 
 
Abstract— The German research project Med-on-@ix aims 
at optimizing the efficiency and quality of preclinical 
emergency health care by introducing a Telematic Rescue 
Assistance Systems into the Emergency Medical Services. 
Paramedics and emergency physicians will be supported on 
site by a specialized physician in a remote Competence 
Centre. During the last three years, an interdisciplinary 
project team of emergency physicians, university scientists 
and 
developers 
supported 
by 
industrial 
enterprises 
developed a telematic system supporting the emergency care. 
The Telematic Rescue Assistance Systems provides the real 
time transmission of voice communication, vital parameters, 
pictures and videos from any emergency site using mobile 
radio networks. Both the technical development of the 
Telematic Rescue Assistance System and the organizational 
implementation 
into 
the 
regular 
operations 
of 
the 
Emergency Medical Services constitute the central pillars of 
the research project. Beside the technical requirements, the 
user centered requirement management applied within Med-
on-@ix identified the necessary organizational changes to 
realize the introduction of the telematic system into 
Emergency Medical Services. This paper traces the joint 
organizational and technical development of the Telematic 
Rescue Assistance Systems based on a consistent user 
involvement into the development process. Simulation 
studies have been used to identify the main challenges 
regarding the implementation process. Exploring the impact 
of the system on the working process, organizational changes 
have been worked out, aiming at the design of a successful 
implementation process.  
Keywords - Telematic Rescue Assistance System; German 
Emergency 
Medical 
Services; 
telemedicine; 
joint 
organizational and technical approach; implementation 
process. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
German 
Emergency 
Medical 
Services 
(EMS) 
professionals are supported in 50% of all missions by a 
qualified emergency physician to guarantee the highest 
quality of care on emergency sites. These days, 
demographic development contributes amongst others to a 
considerable rise of missions involving EMS physicians 
[1]. Whereas the demand of EMS has doubled since 1990, 
a serious lack of physicians particularly in rural areas can 
be considered. The closing of various EMS physician 
stations lead to a delayed arrival of the physicians on scene 
and thereby to an augmented interval without sufficient 
therapy. As paramedics and EMS physicians are organized 
in a so-called “rendez-vous system” [2], physicians and 
paramedics arrive at the accident scene in different 
vehicles. The ambulance, staffed with paramedical 
professionals, reaches the patient in general within the 
statutory period of 12 minutes after the emergency call. 
Whereas mainly in rural areas the physicians gets delayed 
to the emergency patient, making it decisive to bridge the 
time period before the arrival of the emergency doctor [3].   
To secure a high quality of treatment in the chain of 
survival [4], innovative strategies to assure an early 
professional aide on scene are needed. As the German 
EMS is one of the highest qualified in the world, efforts 
are made to stick to the physician-led EMS in Germany by 
structural measures and hereby to provide the highest 
medical qualification to the patient. The expensive German 
emergency care gets a lot of stick these days, innovative 
solutions are needed to preserve the fundamental 
philosophy of bringing physician-centered definitive care 
to the patient, rather than bringing the patient to the care, 
as paramedic based EMS systems do. 
The legislators have paved the way by assimilating 
rescue service acts, restructuring the rescue service 
catchment areas and the introduction of integrated 
demand-oriented control stations with a consequent quality 
management system as well as the implementation of a 
medical leader for each rescue department. Besides these 
improvements, the technological support of EMS offers a 
wide scope of possibilities to reduce the “no-therapy-time” 
by referring to communication technology that is used as 
self-evident in non-professional context. 
The quality of EMS work is directly related to an 
efficient 
information 
management. 
As 
everyday 
experiences of EMS personnel are characterized by 
adverse surrounding conditions of work, it is furthermore 
affected by a constant lack of information regarding the 
specific emergency situation, the patient’s history or his 
150
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

actual medication. The use of modern information 
technologies has the potential to intensify and to accelerate 
the information flow related to the actual mission.  
So far research and development activities focus in 
particular the transmission of vital data from an ambulance 
to a hospital. The German project “Stroke Angel” [5] 
transmits audio and video data from the ambulance in 
order to diagnose and pass on stroke patients directly to the 
nearest stroke unit. Using telemedicine the contact-to-
balloon time decreased on average from 32 min to 16 min.  
Various similar publications testify that teleconsultation 
systems are considered potentially lifesaving [6]. The 
necessity to increase the mobility of telemedical support 
systems for EMS operations is evident. Furthermore to 
avoid the development of isolated telemedical solutions 
and to foster the adoption into regular practice of EMS, 
integrated development and implementation approaches 
are needed.     
Within 
the 
research 
project 
Med-on-@ix, 
the 
Telematic Rescue Assistance Systems (TRAS) offers the 
possibility to make medical know-how available at any 
time for professional helpers on scene. Medical and 
mission tactical data is transmitted via 3G mobile radio 
networks from the place of emergency or the ambulance 
vehicle to the remote emergency physician in the 
Competence Center (CompC), communicating with the 
staff at the place of emergency via audio connection. The 
CompC also helps to optimize workflows by arranging 
communication with the health care facilities to which 
patients subsequently will be sent [7]. The technical 
components on site are connected to a communication 
which connects to the ambulance vehicle via an 802.11 
network or directly to Public Switched Telephone Network 
(PSTN) and the Internet through GSM/TETRA and 
GPRS/UMTS. On the CompC’s side the servers are 
connected to the PSTN via ISDN and to the Internet. The 
Clients in the CompC connect to the Servers through a 
reliable local network or VPN [7].  
The application scenario shown in Figure 1 illustrates 
the central position took up by the remote EMS physician 
in the CompC. 
 
pati
ent
da
ta
and
video
s
m
ed
ic
al
tre
at
m
en
t i
nst
ruc
tio
n
tra
ffi
c i
nfo
rm
ati
on
p
at
i
en
t
da
ta
re
so
u
r
c
e
in
fo
r
m
at
io
n
pa
tien
t re
lat
ed
dat
a
direct c
onsu
lta
tion
direct
consultation
consultation with the
competence center
t
r
e
a
t
m
e
n
t
f
a
c
il
it
i
e
s
c
o
m
p
e
t
e
n
c
e
c
e
n
t
e
r
a
m
b
u
l
a
n
ce
r
patient data and videos
 
 
Figure 1.  The Telematic Rescue Assistance System  
The CompC serves as an information hub between the 
involved clinical and preclinical facilities. The use of the 
TRAS in the work of EMS is related to decisive changes in 
working processes. The remote emergency physician is 
confronted with an unknown job specification and a new 
working environment. The EMS team on site has to handle 
new medical equipment and modified team and 
communication processes.  
By a constant participation of the University Hospital 
Aachen (UKA) in the requirement management process as 
well as the technical development and the implementation 
process, a one-year trial run could be realized (2009-2010). 
The trial run – as well as the preceding simulation studies - 
focused two possible scenarios involving on first level 
physicians and on second level paramedics on site being 
supported by the CompC. The elaboration of the 
organizational concept enabling the EMS to implement the 
system was designed in line with the requirement 
management used for the technical development.  
This paper outlines the approach for a joint 
organizational and technical development of a TRAS 
referring to two simulation studies carried out within the 
last two years. Based on the example of the identified 
impact of the TRAS on communication processes on the 
emergency site, the change management approach is 
described. By the use of user group surveys, necessary 
changes and measures for a successful implementation into 
daily work of EMS were identified. Finally the described 
example will show the possibilities to face organizational 
and technical requirements regarding the operation of a 
TRAS.  
II. 
JOINT ORGANIZATIONAL AND TECHNICAL 
DEVELOPMENT  
The TRAS can be described as a sociotechnical system 
[7] considering the relevant interactions between social, 
technical and organizational aspects in line with the 
development and the implementation of the system.  
An iterative and incremental requirement management 
constitutes the core of the development process within 
Med-on-@ix. The agile development of the TRAS [9] 
foresees the consequent involvement of the users at 
different stages of development. The applied research 
methods within Med-on-@ix meet this approach by 
considering 
aspects 
of 
human, 
organization 
and 
technology in every research question. The progressive 
specification of the TRAS is realized by the identification 
of the relevant functional and non-functional requirements 
within the scope of two experts workshop [7] and two 
simulation studies.   
The 
development 
process 
regarding 
both 
organizational and technical requirements is consequently 
attuned on the involvement of the different user groups 
(emergency physicians, paramedics), to increase system 
quality, user satisfaction and at least the usage of the 
TRAS. Both product requirements and functional 
specification have been elaborated in cooperation with the 
medical partners from UKA.  
151
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

User involvement is referring to the participation of a 
representative group of potential users especially in two 
relevant areas: participative decision making and planned 
organizational change. The involvement of the target 
group contributes in both areas to higher motivation of 
users and the success of change processes Fehler! 
Verweisquelle konnte nicht gefunden werden..  
In the Med-on-@ix project opinion surveys and 
interviews involving EMS professional have been used for 
example in line with the studies focused in this paper.  
EMS teams and emergency physicians tested within 
different simulated rescue scenarios the telematic support 
system at different stages of development. Different social 
research methods were applied to survey 135 test persons 
(87 in the first study in 2008, 48 in the second study in 
2009) in terms of acceptance and utilization issues [10]. 
The studies targeted on technical, as well as organizational 
and human research aspects. The test persons were trying 
out the main functions of the TRAS in simulated rescue 
scenarios, to test the handling of the technical system and 
to evaluate the impact on the working process. The 
developers gained awareness of usability aspects and 
susceptibilities of the system, whether the social scientists 
acquired knowledge about the impact of the TRAS on 
teamwork and communication processes. 
Using replicated emergency situations as a testing 
environment the studies have specified and validated the 
implemented exigencies. The simulated test setting aimed 
at encouraging new behaviors dealing with the TRAS and 
at least to promote shared meanings about the system. 
Fostering the dialogue between developers and users 
especially in line with the requirement management has 
been contributing to a positive trend in terms of user 
acceptance of the TRAS [10]. The latter important results, 
described in related publications, reinforced the chosen 
research strategy of joint organizational and technical 
development combining user involvement and a holistic 
requirement management.  
In addition, the present paper focuses the possibility 
using the described research approach to design a user 
oriented technology implementation process. The pursued 
change management approach based on transferring 
research results into change tasks will be described in the 
following by reference to the simulation studies.  
III. 
EXEMPLIFIED CHANGE MANAGEMENT APPROACH 
IN MED-ON-@IX 
The implementation of the TRAS into German EMS 
goes in line with the several changes regarding the 
working process in EMS Teams. To meet those 
challenges, the changing aspects have been identified at 
early stage in the development process in line with the 
incremental requirement management. The change tasks 
regarding in particular the organizational development of 
EMS have been detected for example in line with the 
conducted simulation studies. To illustrated the change 
management used in the Med-on-@ix project the concept 
and gained results of the simulation studies are 
exemplarily presented here. 
Meeting the user centered research approach the 
studies encouraged paramedics and physicians to enter a 
dialog with developers and by there aimed at a system 
improvement through reflective practices using different 
methods of social sciences. Based on the results of those 
surveys the necessary changes were detected and 
transferred into change measures.  
A. Simulation studies 
Within the scope of the simulation studies carried out 
at the Interdisciplinary Medical Simulation Center 
(AIXSIM) of the UKA, one main research question 
referred to the impact of the TRAS on the teamwork on 
site. The first survey in 2008 addressed the support of an 
emergency physician by another highly involved physician 
in two standardized simulated missions (ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction; severe traumatic brain injury). The 
second simulation study tackled the support of an EMS 
Team (two paramedics) by the remote emergency 
physician in the CompC. Five different scenarios (a diving 
accident, a renal colic, a second-degree burn, an 
intoxication and a hypoglycaemia) partly performed by 
patient-actors  playing patients  partly by involving a 
patient simulator offered the possibility to analyze the 
handling with and the potential of assistance of the TRAS.  
To allow a comparison of the quality of treatment with 
and without the application of the TRAS, control groups 
acting without the telematic support were drafted in. 
Questionnaires and group interviews were used to survey 
the EMS Teams after the simulated operations. The issue-
focused interview guide, applied within the semi-
structured interviews, enabled the scientists to focus on 
behavior patterns observed before. The video-documented 
interviews were transcribed and put to a qualitatively 
oriented content analysis. 
B. Results 
Taking into account the results from both simulation 
studies, the impact of the TRAS on team internal processes 
turned out to be one of the main challenges within the 
organizational 
development 
of 
the 
system. 
The 
involvement of the remote physician created an unusual 
working environment, adding to the demanding emergency 
situation a new communicative arrangement and the use of 
supplementary equipment.  
The communication structure during the operation is 
illustrated in the following Figure 2: the standardized 
scenario foresees an EMS Team consisting of a physician 
and two paramedics respectively only two paramedics in 
the second study. As a new participant the remote 
emergency physician in the CompC is connected via mobil 
radio to all members of the team. 
 
152
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

 
Figure 2.  Mission-related Communication structure  
The first simulation study immediately revealed the 
main changes in the working situation. The test persons 
experienced an altered situation having a remote team 
member being involved into the scene. The interviews 
revealed a negative impact of the TRAS on the 
communication with the patient. The emergency physician 
was struggling to concentrate on both the communication 
with the remote colleague and with the aggrieved patient 
on 
site. 
The 
interviewed 
paramedics 
underlined 
furthermore the necessity to be connected to the CompC, 
to be able to follow the diagnoses and treatment discussion 
between the physicians. 83% of the interviewees stated in 
2008 a negative impact of the TRAS on the 
communication situation during the operation.  
Based on these results communication rules were 
elaborated and evaluated in the 2nd simulation study (2009) 
to prevent miscommunication, as the loss of information 
can be related to a safety hazard for the treatment of the 
patient.  These rules compromise a clear role allocation 
between the team members assigning a standardized 
information 
committal 
between 
the 
physician 
(alternatively the team-leading paramedic) on site and the 
CompC after a first anamnesis. Furthermore the test 
persons in the second study were instructed in thinking 
loud, to reduce the necessity for the remote physician to 
ask question. The standardization of the working process 
on site using the ABCDE (Airway Breathing Circulation 
Disability Exposure) mnemonic, usually used for the 
prioritization in the management of trauma patients, also 
follows the aim of reducing the quantity of possible 
follow-up inquiries by the CompC.  
 The application of the elaborated communication rules 
clearly had a positive effect on the team communication in 
the 2nd study. Figure 3 indicates that over 50% of the 
questioned test persons stated a positive or no impact of 
the TRAS on team communication, compared to 83% 
complaining about negative impact in the first study.   
   
Impact of the TRAS on team communication 
(1st simulation study 2008)
positive
13%
negative
83%
neither 
4%
Impact of the TRAS on team communication                                     
(2nd simulation study 2009)
positive
25%
negative
45%
neither 
30%
 
Figure 3.  Comparing results from simulation studies 
Besides the importance of communication rules, the 
simulation studies uncovered the importance of mutual 
confidence between all members of the EMS team, 
including the remote EMS physician. The interviewees 
pointed out the importance of working on both sides, the 
CompC and on site, to acquire a team spirit that fosters the 
efficiency of teamwork, being exposed to stressful 
working conditions as in EMS missions.   
Regarding the results of the studies three main 
challenges have been identified: 
• 
The alternate communication structure needs to be 
supported by the use of communication rules. 
• 
Both sides the CompC and the team on the 
emergences site have to follow standardized 
procedures to avoid miscommunication. 
• 
The success of the teamwork is mainly related to a 
sense of belonging between all involved team 
members. 
To meet these requirements organizational changes 
have been designed and implemented to support a 
successful trail run. 
C. Identification of change management tasks 
The selected results from the simulation studies were 
transferred into the change management concept, coming 
along with the implementation of the trial run in Aachen. 
The standardized management of operations in the 
emergency department improves significantly the outcome 
of prehospital care [12]. The upcoming training concept of 
Prehospital Trauma Life Support® (PHTLS) teaches a 
standardized and established approach to the trauma 
patient in EMS operations [12]. This concept for 
remote
emergency
physician
(CompC)
paramedic
(teamleader)
paramedic
emergency
physician
patient
on site
 
153
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

prehospital management includes the ABCDE approach 
instructing EMS personnel to act according to the principle 
„treat first what kills first“:  
• 
Airway management, cervical spine stabilization  
• 
Breathing (ventilation) 
• 
Circulation (hemorrhage and perfusion) 
• 
Disability 
• 
Exposure/Environment 
 
By using these steps, the EMS personnel on site follow the 
standardized process, consisting in a primary survey 
focusing the vital functions of the patient, followed by a 
secondary survey to identify the relevant injuries. The 
application of this concept helps the remote physician to 
follow and to document the ongoing operation easily.   
The achievement of a standardized working process using 
the ABCDE concept was supported by the implementation 
of a digital checklist (Figure 4) in the CompC, supporting 
the physician in following step by step the work of his 
team on site.   
 
 
 
Figure 4.  ABCDE Checklist in the CompC 
The EMS personnel were trained on the use of the concept 
mainly on the job, supported by debriefings of the 
missions. Within the first phase of the trial run, the EMS 
teams got used to the standardized procedures.   
The compliance of the defined working process was 
additionally fostered by the implementation of job rotation 
for the involved physicians between the CompC and the 
mission site. Furthermore the rotational assignment 
between the two positions counteracted the lack of mutual 
confidence required by the users. The experience of 
working together on site and knowing the working 
processes in the CompC encouraged the manageability of 
the TRAS.  
To prepare the EMS personnel for the trial run of the 
TRAS, a specific training was inserted into the regular 
weekly classes at the fire department. Besides lessons on 
the content of the project, the regulatory framework of the 
trial run and the intensification of pharmaceutical 
knowhow, 
the 
formation 
comprised 
trainings 
on 
operational techniques like the initialization of intravenous 
accesses. In line with these courses the communication 
rules were integrated into a specialized lesson on 
communication in critical situations. The participants were 
put into the complex communication situation by different 
exercises, to be able to reflect the situation on site as well 
as the challenges, the remote physician is facing at. The 
lessons were used to discuss and first of all to further 
develop the rules of handling the TRAS. The training was 
consequently used to enhance the involvement of the user 
groups into the research project and hence to affect the 
user acceptance of the TRAS. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK  
The TRAS as a sociotechnical system compromises 
beside 
technological 
challenges 
particularly 
many 
organizational challenges, critical in view of a successful 
implementation of the TRAS into daily work of EMS. The 
development of such assistance systems therefor requires 
the involvement of all relevant stakeholders. The approach 
by a joint technical and organizational development has 
enabled the scientists to identify the necessary change 
management tasks. The latter were developed in 
cooperation with the user groups. The described results 
demonstrated the importance of user involvement right 
from the beginning of a development project. Various 
research results have shown so far “that user engagement 
during the installation phase is strongly associated with 
user satisfaction” [13]. The described research results 
underline the necessity of a development approach 
regarding both technical and organizational challenges 
enabling thereby an accepted implementation into the 
target organization. 
The aim of Med-on-@ix is to support EMS in their 
daily work by using today’s technological innovations. To 
achieve an optimized work in emergency missions the user 
has to identify the requirements in terms of both types of 
requirements technical and organizational. Neglecting the 
latter 
is 
oftentimes 
the 
reason 
why 
innovative 
technological assistance is not turned into daily operation.  
The final evaluation of the Med-on-@ix trial run by the 
end of 2010 will identify further change management 
tasks, which will support the implementation of the TRAS. 
To be able to run in a future scenario the telematic support 
of EMS paramedics throughout the “no-therapy-time”, the 
system will be further developed in a follow-up project 
already started in August 2010. The challenge of the latter 
will be the parallel implementation in five other regions 
around 
Aachen. 
The 
one-time 
approved 
change 
management approach developed within the Med-on-@ix 
project will be further developed in view of the design of 
an incremental implementation concept deserving at a time 
five emergency departments. 
Due to the federal topology of the German EMS the 
user groups from different emergency department will 
differ particularly in qualification, but moreover in the 
handling of medical instruments or supporting systems. 
Therefore the organizational and technical requirements 
154
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

from the user groups have to be consistently refreshed and 
adopted to the specificities of the involved emergency 
department. This matter of fact reveals a further research 
subject: 
Besides 
the 
realization 
of 
a 
multi-case 
implementation the change tasks have to meet the 
individual requirements of the target departments. 
The methodology of transferring the identified 
technical 
and 
organizational 
requirements 
into 
implementation measures of different types will be carried 
on in the coming month, on the one hand to develop an 
optimized change process but also to gain the necessary 
user acceptance by consequently involving the target user 
groups. 
V. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by the German Federal 
Ministry of Economics and Technology, the University 
Hospital Aachen, Philips HealthCare, P3 communications 
GmbH and the Fire Department of the City of Aachen. 
All authors are members of the Institute of Information 
Management in Mechanical Engineering of RWTH 
Aachen University, Germany. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Gries, M. Helm, and E. Martin, “Die Zukunft der präklinischen 
Notfallmedizin in Deutschland.“ Der Anaesthesist, vol. 52, 2003. 
[2] T.A. Bey, S.A. Hahn, and H. Moecke, “The current state of 
hospital-based emergency medicine in Germany”. Int J Emerg Med 
2008, pp.273-277 
[3] B. Reimann, B. C. Maier, R. Lott, and F. Konrad “Gefährdung der 
Notarztversorgung im ländlichen Gebiet.“ Notfall Rettungsmed 7, 
pp. 200–204  
[4] Cummins, R. 0., Ornato, J. P., Thies, W., Pepe, P., et al.. 
Improving survival from cardiac arrest: the chain of survival 
concept. Circulation 83, 1991, pp. 1832-47  
[5] Ziegler V. et al., “Einsatz mobiler Computing-Systeme in der 
präklinischen Schlaganfallversorgung“ Anaesthesist 57, 2008, pp. 
677–685 
[6] Latifi R, Hadeed GJ, Rhee P, O'Keeffe T, Friese RS, Wynne JL, 
Ziemba ML and Judkins D. “Initial experiences and outcomes of 
telepresence in the management of trauma and emergency surgical 
patients”. Am J Surg. 2009 Dec;198(6), pp.905-10 
[7] M. Protogerakis, A. Gramatke, and K. Henning, “A System 
Architecture for a Telematic Support System in Emergency 
Medical Services.”, Proceedings of The 3rd International 
Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering, 2009, 
1–4. IEEE. 
[8] S. Marks, “Gemeinsame Gestaltung von Technik und Organisation 
in soziotechnischen kybernetischen Systemen,“ VDI Reihe 16: 
Technik und Wirtschaft, Nr. 60. Düsseldorf, 1991.  
[9] M. 
Protogerakis, 
“Systemarchitektur 
eines 
telematischen 
Assistenzsystems in der präklinischen Notfallversorgung”, RWTH 
Aachen University, Books on Demand 2010 
[10] I. Blakes and M.H. Olson, “User involvement and MIS success: a 
review of research” Management Science. 1984; 30, pp. 586-603 
[11] M. Schneiders, M. Protogerakis, and I. Isenhardt „User acceptance 
as a key to success for the implementation of a Telematic Support 
System in German Emergency Medical Services”. Proc. of 
International Conference on Successes & Failures in Telehealth 
2009: SFT-09 Australia. 2009, pp.170-174 
[12] C.G. Wölfl, B. Bouillon, C.K. Lackner, A. Wentzensen, B. 
Gliwitzky, B. Groß, J. Brokmann, and T. Hauer, “Prehospital 
Trauma 
Life Support® (PHTLS®). Ein 
interdisziplinäres 
Ausbildungskonzept für die präklinische Traumaversorgung.“ 
Unfallchirurg 2008, Springer Medizin Verlag  
[13] L. A. Kappelman and E. R. McLean, “The respective roles of user 
participation and user involvement in information system 
implementation success.” Proceedings of the twelfth international 
conference on Informationsystems, New York, New York, United 
States, University of Minnesota, 1991, pp. 339-34 
 
 
155
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

