Home Monitoring Service for Critically Ill Children 
Edith Maier, Pascale Baer-Baldauf, Claudia Pedron, Ulrich Reimer 
Institute for Information and Process Management 
Eastern Switzerland University of Applied Sciences  
St. Gallen, Switzerland 
e-mail: edith.maier@ost.ch, pascale.baer@ost.ch, claudia.pedron@ost.ch, ulrich.reimer@ost.ch 
 
 
Abstract—Although the benefits of remote patient monitoring 
(home monitoring) are widely recognized, there has been no 
large-scale integration into regular healthcare delivery. The pa-
per describes a home monitoring service aimed at severely ill 
children. A smart algorithm detects if parameters have ex-
ceeded pre-defined thresholds and thus may imply a critical sit-
uation. The service has been developed by a team of medical, 
technological and research partners and is offered by profes-
sional nurses employed by an ambulatory care association. The 
paper describes the technical solution of the monitoring service, 
its infrastructure, and relevant processes as well as its integra-
tion into the healthcare market. The paper finishes with outlin-
ing possible future developments that could help promote the 
uptake of such a service. 
Keywords–healthcare; eHealth; digital health; home care; 
remote monitoring; support service. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Thanks to recent technological advances, such as smart de-
vices, sensors and mobile technologies, the remote monitoring 
of patients who suffer from chronic disease or who can be 
taken care of at home instead of being hospitalized has be-
come feasible. Remote patient or home monitoring has come 
to be an attractive option because healthcare systems are under 
intense pressure due to an ageing population with chronic dis-
eases and comorbidities, demographic and lifestyle trends, 
and shortage of healthcare personnel [1][2]. Besides, due to 
the Corona crisis, there appears to be an increasing willingness 
to accept and pay for services delivered online, such as tele-
consultations, remote monitoring, etc. 
Improvements in quality, efficiency, and accessibility of 
care, especially in rural or remote areas, have been identified 
as the main benefits of home monitoring. Potential beneficiar-
ies include patients, who can stay at home, but also healthcare 
personnel, such as physicians or nurses who may monitor the 
status of their patients continuously. This allows early recog-
nition of health problems or exacerbations (e.g., in the case of 
obstructive pulmonary disease) as well as monitoring the ef-
fect of medication or a therapy plan as well as a patient’s ad-
herence to it. Remote monitoring may also encourage patients 
to take on an active role in the delivery of the service, e.g., by 
monitoring their vital functions or carrying out necessary in-
terventions on their own. 
Despite the known benefits, many remote patient monitor-
ing projects do not develop beyond the initial pilot phase 
[3][4]. Quite often the initial funding comes from research 
grants or special digital health initiatives. Not surprisingly, 
there is an abundance of successful pilot projects, which fail 
to be introduced into the regular healthcare delivery systems, 
i.e., the so-called ‘first healthcare market’, which includes re-
imbursable products, medicines, and services. Because of the 
widespread reluctance or inability of patients to pay for tele-
medicine services, adoption in the first healthcare market is a 
prerequisite for the long-term success and sustainability of a 
home monitoring service. 
To succeed in the first healthcare market, country-specific 
requirements and characteristics have to be taken into account. 
For a home monitoring service provider to have its services 
reimbursed by the health or invalidity insurance, this will usu-
ally imply furnishing evidence for the cost-effectiveness, im-
pact, and usefulness of a particular service. According to [5], 
the second healthcare market, i.e., privately financed health 
services, is primarily helpful as a launching pad for new solu-
tion into the primary healthcare market.  
In this paper, we present a home monitoring solution that 
was especially developed for remotely monitoring severely ill 
children and thus relieving their parents from many nights of 
interrupted sleep or no sleep at all. Section II provides an over-
view of related work. Section III describes the methodological 
approach we have adopted to develop the solution. In Section 
IV we outline the technical aspects of the monitoring solution 
and how it has been embedded in an organizational context 
and a process infrastructure. We especially focus on the chal-
lenges that we encountered during the project and how we met 
them. In Section V we go on to discuss the hurdles, prerequi-
sites, and opportunities of introducing our home monitoring 
service into the first healthcare market. Finally, Section VI 
sets out possible future developments to extend the services 
offered by a home monitoring system. In this section we also 
present some policy considerations (e.g., reimbursement ap-
proaches) that could help promote the uptake of home moni-
toring services in general. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Our home monitoring solution has been inspired by a gen-
eral trend towards digital, and in particular mobile, health sys-
tems based on the use of sensors and medical devices [6]. 
These applications include monitoring systems which collect 
data either with sensors embedded in smartphones, such as ac-
celerometers, gyroscopes, GPS, microphones or cameras [7] 
or by means of wearables, such as smartwatches, and are able 
to measure physiological parameters like heart rate, blood 
pressure, respiration rate, oxygen saturation, body tempera-
ture or electrocardiogram [8]. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Reference [6] conducted a comprehensive literature re-
view of remote patient monitoring systems which covered re-
mote monitoring systems based on sensors attached to the 
body, ambient sensors and systems based on contactless cam-
era-based methods. The authors show that remote monitoring 
is suitable for a wide range of conditions. Among the most 
common are those directed at chronic diseases, such as diabe-
tes, the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, fall detection 
and mobility-related diseases, which are addressed mainly at 
the elderly, as well as neurological disorders and mental health 
[9][10]. 
It appears that only a few monitoring systems address chil-
dren, in particular, who tend to have special requirements, 
e.g., with regard to the size of sensors or how these can be 
attached to the body [11]. In [12] a camera-based monitoring 
system for hospital environments is discussed, which 
measures respiration rates and detects apnea using a Kinect 
camera. Reference [11] proposes a smart monitoring solution 
based on wearable sensors and a smartphone that continuously 
monitors a child’s activity and vital signs. Whenever the sys-
tem detects any deviations, it sends an alert to the caregivers 
(e.g., parents or teachers) as well as the physician in charge. A 
similar system based on wearable vests is presented by [13].  
III. 
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH 
We relied on a design science approach [14] for the devel-
opment of the monitoring system. We evaluated the monitor-
ing prototype in various field tests and conducted several iter-
ations, evaluating and refining the prototype and the processes 
relevant for the remote monitoring solution.  
In line with a participatory human-centred design ap-
proach, we conducted semi-structured interviews with the 
nurses who would be in charge of monitoring the sick children 
in the headquarters of the ambulatory care association for chil-
dren. The results were analysed and subsequently translated 
into a set of detailed functional and non-functional require-
ment specifications for the monitoring application.  
We decided early on to use existing devices that had al-
ready obtained medical approval. We then examined how 
these could best be integrated into the application scenario. 
Apart from medical approval, devices had to meet additional 
requirements, most importantly providing access to raw, non-
aggregated data measured in real-time. Moreover, the option 
to switch off the video and audio recording of the monitoring 
devices on the patient side was required so as to ensure peo-
ple’s privacy. 
The results from the iterative testing were continuously 
fed into the further development and adjustments of the vari-
ous components, be it the adaptation of the thresholds, the 
alert process, or the graphic user interfaces of the dashboard. 
The processes relevant to remote monitoring were identified 
in close collaboration with representatives of the ambulatory 
care association, validated in the tests and adapted to the find-
ings. 
With a view to the later acceptance of our solution in the 
health care sector it was essential that our monitoring solution 
should not be inferior to a hospital setting in terms of reliabil-
ity and accuracy, which is why we conducted an equivalence 
test in a children’s clinic. The test included a comparison of 
all triggered alerts, a video analysis of both monitors as well 
as an observation of the test persons by experts.  
We furthermore examined different approaches to meas-
ure respiration rate, which included impedance pneumogra-
phy and respiration rate estimation, both from electrocardio-
gram (ECG) and from audio signals. For the latter we used a 
microphone attached to the throat, a measure which because 
of its obtrusiveness, was only applied in the pre-tests. The res-
piration rate values showed some deviations compared with 
the manual counting performed on both systems. Besides, we 
found artefacts in all measurements, which is why we decided 
to use this parameter just in combination with other parame-
ters to reduce the rate of false alarms. 
The hospital test was followed by a test on healthy children 
in a home setting and further tests in a special home for seri-
ously ill children which is supervised by the ambulatory care 
association and offers their parents temporary relief from their 
care responsibilities. Such a scenario comes closest to the 
home setting, which for both time constraints and ethical con-
siderations could not be implemented during the project pe-
riod. 
IV. 
DESCRIPTION OF HOME MONITORING SOLUTION 
The solution is composed of the following components: 
• 
the medical devices and sensors, 
• 
the data transfer architecture, 
• 
an on-demand audio and video surveillance system. 
Since the home monitoring solution must not be inferior 
to monitoring in a hospital setting, we opted for a multipur-
pose HEACO monitor which is also used by clinics. It allows 
to observe physiological parameters including an electrocar-
diogram, SpO2 (oxygen saturation), PR (pulse), RESP (respi-
ration) and TEMP (temperature).  
The need for the audio-visual components only emerged 
in the course of the project. The nurses involved in the project 
are employed by an ambulatory care association which initi-
ated the project. Besides, a software development company 
and a children's hospital participated in the project. The task 
of the hospital was to make sure that the solution to be devel-
oped was on par with the monitoring service in the hospital 
with regard to reliability, safety and accuracy of measure-
ments. Apart from the technological challenges, the solution 
had to be embedded in a process landscape and be associated 
with a detailed organizational plan with regard to authoriza-
tion, roles and tasks. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1.  Application scenario for remote monitoring. 
 
For the purpose of monitoring, sensors are attached to the 
body of the child and the values of the vital parameters are 
continuously transmitted to a monitoring center based at the 
headquarters of the ambulatory care association. There, expe-
rienced nurses watch the data streams on a dashboard (see Fig-
ure 1). Comparable to a traffic lights system, the color red in-
dicates a potential danger or possible emergency, yellow 
stands for caution and green means ‘ok’. If vital signs exceed 
or fall below the thresholds set by a doctor or the vital param-
eters are not transmitted, the color turns yellow or red. In the 
case of a red alarm, the nurse can wake the parents and, if nec-
essary, talk them through the appropriate measures by phone. 
In severe cases, the professional staff in the monitoring center 
may contact the ambulance straight away. To prevent false 
alarms, a video surveillance system enables the nurse to ob-
serve the child and judge, for example, if an epileptic seizure 
is imminent or if the parents should be wakened. 
The choice of vital parameters was largely determined by 
the physician involved in the project and the parameters usu-
ally monitored in the hospital, i.e., respiration rate, heart rate 
and oxygen saturation. These parameters tend to be relevant 
for the majority of diseases. Besides, they swiftly respond to 
changes in a patient’s condition.  
The proposed solution includes a smart algorithm that de-
tects if a certain combination of parameters has exceeded pre-
defined thresholds and thus may imply an emergency.  
  
A. Monitoring infrastructure 
The tests carried out with the prototype showed that an in-
frastructure could be established that is comparable to a sta-
tionary monitoring system as used in hospitals. The test in the 
hospital which involved running two systems in parallel 
showed that the monitoring system developed for the home 
setting was not inferior to the hospital setting. 
After extensive discussions and testing with the nurses to 
be in charge, the following quantitative parameters or the 
monitoring unit were defined: Depending on the case mix and 
the expected number of alarms, up to 20 patients can be mon-
itored simultaneously. Based on organizational constraints, a 
child can be placed under surveillance for a maximum of 12 
hours. The service is offered from 8pm to 8am, with two ac-
tive nurses and one nurse on stand-by. The set-up consists of 
a central dashboard and three individual surveillance stations 
as depicted in Figure 2. 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 2.  Schematic overview of monitoring unit. 
 
The central dashboard provides an overview of all the pa-
tients that are being monitored, giving their names, the most 
recent values of each vital parameter and the status colors 
(green, yellow or red). A patient’s status color can only be 
downgraded from red to yellow or to green if the patient has 
been inspected in one of the surveillance stations. The status 
of yellow does not trigger an acoustic signal but exhorts the 
nurse to look at a particular patient more closely. The thresh-
olds for triggering the alarms have to be pre-defined by the 
physician for each individual patient. 
The partner network is especially important in the pro-
posed service: The ambulatory care association for children 
offers the remote monitoring service. Its specialist nurses op-
erate the monitoring units and monitor patients in real time for 
up to 12 hours during the night. The same nurses pay regular 
visits to the families for treatment and basic care services. 
They have established profound relationships with the fami-
lies. Another important partner is the paediatrician who de-
fines the thresholds for the vital parameters that are measured 
and transmitted to the monitoring unit.  
Finally, an infrastructure partner provides the monitoring 
infrastructure and platform, supports the set-up of operation at 
the patient’s home and assures the operability of the monitor-
ing units.  
B. Relevant processes 
A major task consisted in defining the processes to accom-
pany the implementation of a monitoring system. The pro-
cesses relevant were identified in close collaboration with rep-
resentatives of the ambulatory care association, validated in 
the tests and adapted to the findings. These included authori-
zation and login, the actual monitoring process, inform-
ing/alerting parents, alerting emergency services, and 
contingency plans. It was above all defining the interaction 
processes between nurses, caregivers at home and emergency 
staff, e.g., when to issue an alert and whom to alert whenever 
there was an emergency, that caused lengthy discussions.  
The implementation of the planned monitoring solution 
therefore required developing a detailed process reference 
model that described the relevant processes associated with re-
mote monitoring. A central issue is related to the question 
what to do if a threshold is exceeded. For example, should the 
nurse alert the parent immediately or first make sure that it 
really is an emergency? 
The concept of emergency itself proved to be far from un-
ambiguous and triggered extensive discussions in the project 
team. It is closely related to the definition of thresholds for the 
various parameters, which tend to differ considerably between 
individuals. It also involved defining the number of children 
that a professional nurse might monitor simultaneously.  
The main challenge consisted in reducing the high number 
of alarms per child per night. In the beginning, we registered 
up to 250 alarms per child and night. We were able to halve 
that number by adjusting the algorithm. By fine-tuning the 
thresholds, we further managed to bring the number down to 
ten to 35 alarms per child and night. In addition to that we 
decided to introduce audio-visual inspection to be carried out 
by the professional nurses. The inspection serves as a prelim-
inary check so as not to obliviate the whole purpose of the 
project, which is facilitating a good night’s sleep for the par-
ents. Finding the right balance between safety or caution and 
running the risk of missing an emergency proved to be a major 
challenge. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

V. 
INTRODUCTION OF HOME MONITORING INTO REGULAR 
HEALTHCARE DELIVERY 
The overall purpose of the service offered is to support the 
family caregivers (parents) during the night hours as the re-
sponsibility of caring for a severely ill child often comes at the 
cost of lack of sleep as well as physical and psychological 
strain, which may lead to chronic stress and eventually physi-
cal and mental break-down [15]. This has been confirmed by 
the findings of a research report commissioned by the Swiss 
Ministry of Social Insurance, which shows that one in five 
caregivers never or only rarely enjoys a good night’s sleep 
[16]. 
Given the importance of introducing our home monitoring 
service into the first healthcare market, the business partners 
attached a great deal of importance to the organizational as-
pects required for the eventual reimbursement of the service. 
Therefore, medical approval by the relevant body is necessary 
(the Swissmed in the case of Switzerland). To achieve this, 
evidence must be furnished to prove the usefulness, cost-ef-
fectiveness and efficiency of the solution.  
Usefulness: Every year, the ambulatory care association of 
Eastern Switzerland is responsible for around one hundred 
mentally and physically handicapped or chronically ill infants, 
children and young adults. Its clients also include prematurely 
born children as well as sick, injured, convalescent children 
and those recovering after surgery. The purpose of the home 
monitoring service is both preventive and therapeutic: it 
should detect exacerbations of the child’s state of health on 
the one hand and enable early interventions on the other. 
Providing more restful nights and guidance by a nurse in an 
emergency helps to increase parents’ endurance as a care-
giver. The remote monitoring service also has a therapeutic 
effect since care at home tends to contribute to the recovery 
and enhance the quality of life of children with severe illnesses 
or disabilities [17][18][19]. 
Cost-effectiveness: Home monitoring is a service offered 
by the ambulatory care association in addition to its on-site 
services and replaces night watches by nurses as well as the 
children’s parents. It can therefore be considered an extension 
to its current portfolio. Due to their 1:1 setting, night watches 
are very expensive because of the high cost of labour. Night 
watches are recognized by the Swiss Ministry of Social Insur-
ance and thus a tariff item number exists. This tariff item num-
ber is a prerequisite for invoicing the service. However, a re-
mote monitoring service currently has no tariff item number 
and therefore cannot be invoiced. 
This is why it is crucial that the Ministry of Social Insur-
ance as well as the health insurance introduce, such a tariff 
item number. Otherwise, the business model for the home 
monitoring service will not be sustainable in the long run. As 
a result of the Corona crisis, chances are good that this might 
happen in the near future.  
Efficiency: In the preliminary business plan, the service 
provider calculated the savings due to the productivity in-
creases as a result of remote monitoring. The new home mon-
itoring service allows the simultaneous monitoring of up to 20 
patients by three nurses (two active nurses and one nurse on 
stand-by) in the central monitoring unit, whilst for traditional 
night watches, only one patient can be monitored at a time. As 
a result, the fully inclusive fee for the remote monitoring ser-
vice turns out to be about five times cheaper than an on-site 
night watch performed by a nurse.  
Given the fact that severely ill children usually need to re-
ceive intensive care to monitor their health state, the costs tend 
to be even higher. The experience of the ambulatory care as-
sociation shows that without their services, children in need of 
care have to be transferred back to hospital twice as often. In 
short, as the home monitoring service would substantially sup-
port the parents, readmissions to hospital could be prevented. 
A further effect of the home monitoring service is the re-
duction of the secondary costs of stress of the caring parents. 
In a survey of the stress experience of parents of severely 
handicapped children, 86.6% of parents stated that taking care 
of their child costs them a lot of strength and energy [20]. 
Avoiding or at least reducing these health care costs, which 
may also include loss of income from paid work, is a further 
argument in favour of introducing home monitoring.  
There is further potential in the more efficient use of scarce 
nursing staff. At present, nurses take over night watches to 
provide relief and a good night of sleep to the parents. This 
activity is very monotonous and according to the ambulatory 
care association for children, quite a few nurses would there-
fore be very interested in taking over the remote monitoring 
of several children instead. Thus, a home monitoring service 
would make more efficient use of the short supply of nursing 
staff [21]. 
It is above all the technical partner who may be interested 
in exploring new business opportunities, e.g., by extending its 
services to other partners, user groups or healthcare providers. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
From a medical point of view, continuous remote moni-
toring has proven to be feasible and, if implemented properly, 
is equivalent or not inferior to monitoring in a hospital envi-
ronment. Audio-visual inspection in the case of possible emer-
gencies crystallized as a central element in remote monitoring, 
which had not been considered in the original study design. 
Furthermore, it has been shown that during the first nights 
close supervision by the attending physician is desirable so as 
to be able to adjust individual threshold values.  
In the future, it is conceivable that the home monitoring 
service might evolve in the direction of self-learning systems 
for decision support as well as automated generation of rec-
ommendations for interventions. However, to be accepted by 
consumers, the algorithms and thus the decision-making pro-
cess behind the recommendations would have to be made 
transparent. 
Besides, the analysis of the captured vital data may lead to 
the development of a decision-making aid for adjusting treat-
ment or medication. The storage of vital data is a central com-
ponent of the prototype and the basis for analysing the test 
data. However, any such tool will have to conform with data 
protection legislation, which implies anonymizing the data 
and/or obtaining the consent of both parents and the child to 
use their data.  
As far as the long-term sustainability of the service is con-
cerned, home care agencies appear to be a promising avenue 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to pursue as also pointed out by [22]. The business model as-
sociated with home care agencies is largely dependent on 
fixed case-rate reimbursement. This could also be applied to 
our solution provided that home monitoring is officially rec-
ognised. This might involve maintaining patient contact, as-
sessing needs, counselling caregivers while reducing staff 
travel time.  
A major challenge faced by home care agencies is finding 
a way to share in the much larger savings they generate, e.g., 
by taking care of chronic care patients or sick children at home 
instead of hospitalizing them. However, the recent introduc-
tion of Diagnosis-Related Group (DRG) system in Switzer-
land might help persuade hospitals as well as insurance com-
panies to enter into partnerships. Because of the DRG system, 
hospitals are interested in making sure that care at home is of 
such a quality that the likelihood for a patient to be readmitted 
within 30 days is minimized. Any expenses incurred by a 
‘premature’ readmission will have to be covered by the same 
flat amount, i.e., the hospital is not entitled to any additional 
payments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work described in this paper was funded by the Swiss 
Commission for Technology and Innovation (CTI). 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Mars, “Telemedicine and advances in urban and rural 
healthcare delivery in Africa,” Progress in cardiovascular 
diseases, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 326–335, 2013, doi: 
10.1016/j.pcad.2013.10.006. 
[2] V. Saliba et al., “Telemedicine across borders: a systematic 
review of factors that hinder or support implementation,” 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 81, no. 12, 
pp. 793–809, 2012, doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2012.08.003. 
[3] M. Gupta, L. Chotard, Ó. Ingþórsson, J. Basto, and I. Borges, 
“Health@home – an e-service model for disease prevention 
and healthcare in the home,” in Electronic Healthcare: eHealth 
2008, D. Weerasinghe, Ed., 2009, pp. 17–24, doi: 10.1007/978-
3-642-00413-1_3. 
[4] A. A. M. Spil and B. Kijl, “E-health Business Models: from 
pilot project to successful deployment,” IBIMA business 
review, vol. 1, pp. 55–66, 2009. 
[5] F. 
Rappert, 
“Business 
Model 
Design 
im 
zweiten 
Gesundheitsmarkt/Business model design in the second 
healthcare market,” master thesis, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Berlin, 2018.  
[6] L. P. Malasinghe, N. Ramzan, and K. Dahal, “Remote patient 
monitoring: a comprehensive study,” Journal of Ambient 
Intelligence and Humanized Computing, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 57–
76, 2019, doi: 10.1007/s12652-017-0598-x. 
[7] N. D. Lane et al., “A survey of mobile phone sensing,” IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 140–150, 2010, 
doi: 10.1109/MCOM.2010.5560598. 
[8] A. Pantelopoulos and N. G. Bourbakis, “A survey on wearable 
sensor-based systems for health monitoring and prognosis,” 
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C 
(Applications and Reviews), vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2010, doi: 
10.1109/TSMCC.2009.2032660. 
[9] Y. Guo and G. Bai, “A general architecture for developing a 
sustainable elderly care e-health system,” International 
Journal of Information Technology and Business Management 
(JITBM), vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 95–101, 2014, doi: 
10.1109/ICSSSM.2011.5959443. 
[10] M. P. Rajasekaran, S. Radhakrishnan, and P. Subbaraj, 
“Elderly patient monitoring system using a wireless sensor 
network,” Telemedicine and e-Health, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 73–
79, 2009, doi: 10.1089/tmj.2008.0056. 
[11] S. Sendra, L. Parra, J. Lloret, and J. Tomás, “Smart system for 
children’s chronic illness monitoring,” Information Fusion, 
vol. 40, pp. 76–86, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.inffus.2017.06.002. 
[12] A. Al-Naji, K. Gibson, S.-H. Lee, and J. Chahl, “Real time 
apnoea monitoring of children using the Microsoft Kinect 
sensor: a pilot study,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 2, p. 286, 2017, doi: 
10.3390/s17020286. 
[13] R. Jansi, R. Amutha, and S. Radha, “Remote monitoring of 
children with chronic illness using wearable vest,” in 
Telemedicine Technologies, H. D. Jude and V. E. Balas, Eds., 
2019, 121–137. 
[14] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design 
science in information systems research,” MIS quarterly, pp. 
75–105, 2004, doi: 10.2307/25148625.  
[15] R. Schulz and P. R. Sherwood, “Physical and mental health 
effects of familiy caregivers,” Journal of Social Work 
Education, vol. 44, sup3, pp. 105–113, 2008, doi: 
10.5175/JSWE.2008.773247702. 
[16] M. Gehrig, J. Guggisberg, and I. Graf, “Wohn- und 
Betreuungssituation von Personen mit Hilflosenentschädigung 
der IV: Eine Bestandsaufnahme im Kontext der Massnahmen 
der 4. IVG-Revision/Housing and care situation of persons 
with disability helplessness allowance: a stocktaking in the 
context of the measures of the 4th IVG revision,” Bundesamt 
für Sozialversicherungen, Beiträge zur sozialen Sicherheit 
2/2013, 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.bsv.admin.ch/bsv/de/home/publikationen-und-
service/forschung/forschungspublikationen.exturl.html?lang=
de&lnr=02/13 [retrieved June, 2021] 
[17] A. Bagust, A. Haycox, S. A. Sartain, M. J. Maxwell, and P. 
Todd, “Economic evaluation of an acute paediatric hospital at 
home clinical trial,” Archives of disease in childhood, vol. 87, 
no. 6, pp. 489–492, 2002, doi: 10.1136/adc.87.6.489. 
[18] P. Revill, P. Ryan, A. McNamara, and C. Normand, “A cost 
and outcomes analysis of alternative models of care for young 
children with severe disabilities in Ireland,” Alter, vol. 7, no. 4, 
pp. 260–274, 2013, doi: 10.1016/j.alter.2013.04.002. 
[19] P. Sloper, “Models of service support for parents of disabled 
children. What do we know? What do we need to know?,” 
Child: care, health and development, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 85–99, 
1999. 
[20] F. Peterander and O. Speck, “Subjektive Belastungen. Mütter 
schwerbehinderter Kinder in der Frühförderung/Subjective 
stress. Mothers of severely disabled children in early 
intervention,” Geistige Behinderung, vol. 2, pp. 95–107, 1995. 
[21] A. A. Abera, G. H. Mengesha, and P. F. Musa, “Assessment of 
Ethiopian health facilities readiness for implementation of 
telemedicine,” Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, vol. 34, no. 1, p. 67, 2014, doi: 
10.17705/1CAIS.03465. 
[22] M. J. Coye, A. Haselkorn, and S. DeMello, “Remote patient 
management: technology-enabled innovation and evolving 
business models for chronic disease care,” Health Affairs, vol. 
28, no. 1, pp. 126–135, 2009, doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.28.1.126. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

