Improving The Well-Being of Older People by Reducing Their Energy 
Consumption Through Energy-Aware Systems 
 
Jon Robinson   Kofi Appiah   Raheem Yousaf 
 
Department of Computing & Technology 
Nottingham Trent University 
Nottingham, UK 
email:jon.robinson@ntu.ac.uk 
email:kofi.appiah@ntu.ac.uk 
email:raheem.yousaf022012@my.ntu.ac.uk 
 
Abstract-Fuel poverty is becoming a problem amongst the 
older community in the UK. We propose an assistive 
technology for reduced energy consumption in aid of active 
aging. We introduce how the well-being of older people 
within the community can be improved by reducing anxiety 
associated with fuel poverty.  A recommender and 
behavioural change system will be introduced, which enables 
older people to improve their energy footprint through 
energy-aware systems. Using systems to help reduce fuel 
poverty will invariably improve their general well-being.  
Results show how this technology can be accepted and act as 
an enabler in improving the overall well-being of older 
people. 
Keywords- 
energy-efficiency; 
energy-awareness; 
intelligent sensor systems; recommender systems; well-
being. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
   At present, older people within the community face a 
host of technological and perceptual problems, which can 
inhibit their interaction and well-being while using 
information and communications technology (ICT) 
solutions to improve their lives.  This is especially 
relevant when considering Internet of Things (IoT) based 
systems to improve their well-being within their home 
environment, dealing with heating and reducing costs.  
Fuel poverty is a key societal problem that impacts on 
large numbers of the older community within the UK [1] 
as older people tend to fall into the low-income range due 
to low pensions and rising energy costs.  The worry and 
anxiety concerning their limited financial resources 
results in 20,000 – 25,000 deaths in the UK [3].  This is 
due to reducing their dependency on heating their homes 
as they are not financially secure enough to afford or pay 
for their monthly house hold heating or cooling bills [4].  
The use of technology to help older people reduce costs is 
constrained by their fear and distrust of technology.  To 
enable older people to accept ICT solutions, the UK 
government has a number of initiatives in place to help 
reduce this fear (e.g., digital by default [2]), which aims to 
provide them with skills to use modern technology.  
However, figures show that high numbers of individuals 
are still susceptible to fuel poverty which is not only 
reducing their well-being but also putting their lives at 
risk [3]. 
   Compounding the issue of fuel poverty, older members 
of the community also fear the use of technology which 
can impact on the successful deployment and adoption of 
technology to address the issue of fuel poverty.  Other 
issues relating to the acceptance of technology and the 
security of personal information also factor into the dis-
trust of ICT, which is there to help improve their well-
being.  
   In this work we intend to provide a prototype system to 
show how unobtrusive and intelligent technology can help 
reduce the energy consumption of older people and how 
this can impact on their behaviour by adopting more 
energy conscious patterns through a real-time responsive 
recommender system.  We will therefore examine 
whether an intelligent recommender system can reduce 
the energy consumption of older people by predicting and 
modifying their daily patterns and behaviours so that they 
minimise their energy needs.  The rest of this paper is 
structured as follows: Section 2 provides an insight into 
existing systems; Section 3 discusses the design 
considerations that need to be taken into account when 
considering energy-awareness as a whole; Section 4 
introduces our proposed system and its key components; 
Section 5 discusses user interaction issues and factors that 
can deter engagement; Section 6 provides initial results; 
and finally, in Section 7, we present our conclusion. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
   Reducing the energy consumption of individuals has 
been widely tackled by a variety of commercial and 
academic systems.  An approach taken by some 
commercial systems is to view each room as a separate 
entity and give contextual information regarding the state 
of the room.  Some systems require user intervention in 
the control of the ambient energy consumption.  For 
example, with the Hive system [10], to adjust or improve 
the heating within a room, a separate mobile based 
application is required which can lead to problems when 
considering older people.  Although additional sensors 
and smart plugs are available to provide the ability to turn 
on and off devices, these still need to have some form of 
user intervention.  Voice control or a mobile phone 
application is required to govern their operation.  
However, this forces the user to actively monitor, respond 
and modify temperatures rather than allow the system to 
proactively shape the energy use of the home.  IFTTT (IF 
This, Then That) [11] is another system which allows IoT 
integration within the home by providing users with a 
simple rule-based approach for governing the operation of 
smart devices.  Devices are linked to a web based system 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
which can then control the devices within the home.  
Systems like this would fail to address the needs and 
anxiety encountered when older people interact with 
technology [5] due to mobile technology and applications 
not being accessible to all older people which also 
increases their fear of technology.  Another similar system 
is the Honeywell evoHome [12] system provides users 
with contextual information about the room temperature 
and provides them with a digital thermostat to control 
ambient temperatures.  The Heat Genius system [13] is 
another commercial product which uses motion control to 
determine whether heating is required in a particular 
room.  This system also provides the ability to learn and 
adjust room temperatures based on the life style of the 
users.  However, these commercial systems do not 
address the issue of reducing energy consumption as a 
whole but instead focus on one specific problem - heating.  
   Smart energy meters have been used extensively in the 
home and in some cases targeting low-income and older 
users. In [15], a number of smart energy systems and the 
interactions with users are discussed.  Here, users used the 
Duet and Trio devices in a bid to monitor their real-time 
energy consumption over a one year period.  Smart home 
and assistive technology can also play an important part in 
monitoring and adapting the environment to best suit an 
older person.  Kim et al [14] discuss the U-Health system 
for monitoring and supporting the older person within 
their home.  Wireless sensor technologies embedded 
within appliances in the home allow for the collection and 
mining of information regarding the habits of the older 
user, as well as providing decision-making capabilities to 
allow the system to adapt to the users’  needs. 
   The issue of fuel poverty is a multi-dimensional one 
which covers more than just the heating of homes.  To 
provide a representative picture of how energy-awareness 
impacts older people, all aspects of energy consumption 
needs to be considered.  When looking at the problem of 
fuel poverty, any savings of an older person’s  energy 
expenditure must yield in financial benefits.    In turn, for 
a technological solution to fully address the issue of fuel 
poverty it must holistically look at energy-awareness as a 
whole and provide ways in which behaviours and usage 
patterns can be altered to improve energy expenditure 
through an unobtrusive and proactive system which does 
not require constant user interaction to govern the control 
of the environment. 
III. 
DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
   Older people face a number of challenges in today’s 
society which can impact their lives and well-being.  Fuel 
poverty is a major societal challenge which affects 
significant proportions of the society.  With limited 
financial resources available to older people who are 
reliant on state pensions, paying for fuel (i.e., electricity 
and gas) becomes a major concern for their well-being 
[3].  Within the UK alone, a high number of unnecessary 
deaths are caused each year due to weather concerns [1].  
This can be due to excessively hot weather during the 
summer months or excessively low temperatures during 
the winter.  In circumstances like this, which require a 
higher expenditure, it is common for the older person to 
go without basic heating or cooling due to limited 
financial resources, which enables them to focus on other 
costs (e.g., food and rent) [4].  However, this has a 
detrimental impact on their well-being due to the 
suffering involved, and possible death, during low or high 
temperature times during the year.  Not only does it 
impact the older people, but the costs to healthcare for 
dealing with emergencies relating to the admission and 
care of older patients at these times, places stress on 
services which are already over-stretched.  
   Communities and community care offer care services 
where carers or social workers visit the older person to 
ensure that they are coping and not suffering.  However, 
with finite resources, only so much is able to be done.  To 
help in the care of older people, smart technology has 
been employed quite extensively.  For example, in [15], 
smart devices help monitor the older resident.  However, 
relying on technology can introduce other challenges.  
More specifically, older people distrust and fear the use of 
technology [5].   This often leads to technology being 
ineffective due to the lack of engagement from the older 
person, especially if they are required to interact and 
engage with the technology in some way.  Davis [5] 
introduces the Technology Acceptance Model which 
impacts on the perceived usefulness of technology by the 
older person which can introduce barriers for adoption. 
However, older users also encounter problems with a 
general lack of understanding of ICT which introduces 
barriers to the user as it impedes them from making 
strategic decisions when managing fuel costs [9]. This 
lack of understanding needs to be addressed for the 
system to be effective and allow seamless interaction with 
the user.  For instance in [14][15] mobile technology is 
used but can introduce problems with engagement due to 
the fear of technology whereby the older person has to 
interact not only with an unknown and unfamiliar device 
but also some form of application and visual interface.  If 
the interaction between the system and older person is 
perceived to be too difficult then a lack of engagement 
usually results [5][ 9].  Therefore, intelligent devices need 
to be unobtrusive as well as the system offering a less 
technological way of interacting with the older person to 
minimise the impact of the fear of technology.   
   Behavioural change is another key consideration for 
such systems as the technology would also have to 
monitor and determine if there are better behaviour 
patterns when interacting with energy-reliant devices 
within the home.  For example, making a cup of tea or 
cooking dinner relies on some form of energy 
consumption (either electricity or gas) to complete the 
task.  However, energy tariffs can change through the day 
and can impact on the total expenditure over a month.  By 
modifying the behaviour of the older person to a more 
cost-conscious time can have benefits in the long term. 
   Therefore, when designing effective systems for 
reducing the energy consumption of older people, a 
number of design considerations have to be taken into 
account.  Namely, the use of unobtrusive technology 
which is embedded within the environment; simple 
interaction devices which promote trust; behaviour 
modification and prediction to reduce or better manage 
the use of energy reliant devices within the home; and, 
systems to recommend changes to patterns.  
   We propose to address the question of whether an 
intelligent recommender system can reduce the energy 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

consumption of older people by predicting and modifying 
their daily patterns and behaviours so that they minimise 
their energy needs to ensure an improvement in their 
general well-being by reducing anxiety associated with 
fuel poverty. Anxiety has a clear detrimental effect on the 
well-being of an older person [8], which will hinder their 
interactions and acceptance of technology.  Improving the 
quality of life of older users is difficult to gauge as 
different people assign different values to things [7].  For 
that reason, the proposed system aims to reduce the fear 
of poverty and improve the quality of life for older users 
by providing them with guidance and options on how to 
change their behaviour so that they are more energy-
conscious and aware of what they are doing through a 
simple house model interface.  More detailed feedback 
can be given to those users who feel comfortable with 
technology or to carers, or family members who are 
actively helping the older user.  By providing them with a 
more holistic and wide-ranging understanding of the 
energy-consumption which takes into account not only 
their heating but also their activities during the day can 
help them improve their overall energy consumption.  By 
looking at the whole, more substantial savings can be 
made which in turn reduce their chances of falling into the 
fuel poverty trap. 
   Therefore, in summary we intend to address the issue of 
the acceptance of technology as well as factors relating to 
the trust of intelligent systems and improving well-being 
by reducing fuel poverty.  This will be through simple, 
trusted and unambiguous human-computer interfaces, 
behaviour and activity analysis; and, recommender 
systems to help promote more informed energy-aware 
decisions.  This will allow older people to consider all 
aspects of their energy consumption, rather than focusing 
on one single aspect (e.g., heating) as their overall energy-
footprint will be made out of many different components.  
For example, heating, cooking, recreation, etc., which 
complements their potentially sedentary life-style.  
IV. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM 
   From a conceptual perspective, the system (see figure 1) 
will process sensor telemetry from devices located within 
the environment, determine if the behaviour of the person 
can be changed based on the task activity they are 
performing, which includes using tariff information 
gathered from energy suppliers through IoT and then 
facilitate in providing feedback to the older person. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   The guiding principle in the design of the prototype is to 
determine if the energy consumption of the user can be 
reduced by determining the behaviour and patterns they 
are exhibiting.   The system relies upon a number of key 
components that deal with the interactions with energy 
suppliers to provide information, which informs the 
recommender 
system; 
activity/task 
detection 
and 
interfacing with the user through an unobtrusive interface.  
A system prototype has been developed which allows the 
seamless interaction with an older person, which could 
reduce their energy consumption.  For this prototype 
iteration the full system was implemented but deployed 
within an idealised test environment to capture telemetry.  
The system was also able to save and playback telemetry 
for user evaluation. 
A. Sensors 
   A variety of off-the-shelf sensors have been used to 
provide contextual information regarding the state of the 
environment, the location of the older person, and what 
they are interacting with in the home environment.  
Sensors that provide telemetry on light, motion, pressure, 
electricity use, sound, as well as other sensors providing 
contextual state information of the environment, have 
been used. Sensors were typically subsumed within the 
appliances which consumed energy.  This was mostly 
electrical appliances but scope for gas based appliances 
will be incorporated in a later iteration.  Sensors can be 
added seamlessly to the system by simply plugging them 
in and informing the software that a particular type of 
sensor has been added.  Different sensors can be 
dynamically added, along with information which 
provides contextual information regarding how telemetry 
can be analysed and interpreted during the behavioural 
analysis phase.  Environmental and power usage sensors 
were based on Phidgets’ technology and were used to 
record and forward telemetry using an event system that 
had been developed (details in section IV. B). For the next 
phase of the work, smart Wi-Fi enabled energy plugs and 
other Wi-Fi enabled technology, will be used. 
B. Behavioural Analysis 
   To aid in the process of determining how much energy 
is being consumed within the house and whether a better 
alternative is available, telemetry from sensors are 
aggregated and processed within the behavioural analysis 
component of the system.  An overview of the activity, 
behaviour and recommender stages is outlined in figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Activities are used to identify what task the user is 
performing within the home.  For example, making a meal 
would involve using a variety of sensor equipped devices 
within the kitchen, each of which will be generating 
telemetry.  In a typical use case, the oven, along with the 
Sensors 
Activity 
Manager 
Behaviour 
Analysis 
Historical 
Pattern 
Matching 
Recommender 
System 
User 
Notification 
System 
Figure 2. Activity, behavioural and recommender stages. 
System 
System 
Interface 
Sensors 
Energy Suppliers 
Figure 1. System overview. 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
cooker and supplementary devices (e.g., kettle) could be 
used.  Combined with environmental state information 
originating from embedded sensors in the home, 
additionally telemetry regarding light, sound and motion 
information would be generated and be contextualised 
within the kitchen environment. 
   Activities are generated by end-users and allow the 
association between different telemetry and sensors and a 
given activity.  The approach that has been taken is to 
offer a simple means for users to define an activity and 
then to associate sensor combinations to that activity.  
These activities will then form the basis of the 
behavioural analysis and pattern-matching functionality 
whereby the system will be able to determine what type of 
activity is being performed by the user. 
   Raw sensor telemetry is tagged with additional meta-
information regarding the sensor type, timestamp and 
location and transmitted around the system within an 
event message.  Events are captured and processed within 
the 
behavioural 
component 
during 
the 
activity 
identification process.  To aid in providing an 
environmental snapshot of what is happening within the 
environment, a window of applicability is used which 
allows events to be received over a short period of time.  
This populates activity states which are triggered when all 
associated sensor telemetry has been received during a set 
period.  When this has been satisfied, activities trigger 
notifications, which are in turn, processed by the analysis 
component.  At this point, a decision can be made on what 
to do next.  The first option is to process an associated 
action which causes the system to perform some form of 
real-world 
action 
which 
impacts 
the 
end-user.  
Alternatively, notifications can be used to build up 
composite 
events 
which 
provide 
more 
complex 
combinations of activities to be associated with each 
other.  This allows the system to provide a richer and 
more complex activity detection process. 
   Historical information regarding past activities is used 
to provide the ability to determine if activities have 
occurred during similar times in the past.  For example, 
cooking food at specific times; use of kettle to make 
drinks; and activities that relate to their life-styles.  This 
information is used by the recommender system to 
determine if user activity patterns can be modified to help 
improve the energy use within the home based on their 
occurrences.  For instance, when coupled with tariff 
information, the recommender would be able to inform 
the user that by changing their pattern to do a particular 
activity by a few minutes could result in a tangible energy 
cost saving over a period of time. 
C. Recommender System 
   The purpose of the recommender system is to provide 
end-users with feedback on their energy consumption 
performance or provide alternative actions.  To best 
inform end-users of any energy cost savings, tariff 
information is used from the electricity supplier that they 
are signed up with.  By analysing their past behavioural 
patterns, the recommender system will determine if any 
energy savings can be made by suggesting to the end-user 
how best to alter their habits.  For instance, as a profile of 
the user is generated, any patterns or behaviours they 
exhibit will be identified and any improvements will be 
suggested. This information can be conveyed in a number 
of ways to the end-user.  Notification messages detailing 
the current cost and potential savings can be shown to the 
user, whilst real-time feedback is given through a physical 
prototype system, which allows users to instantly see how 
much energy they are consuming within different rooms 
in the house.  
   An administrative component is provided which allows 
carers or family members to configure the system and 
provide guidance on what levels of energy expenditure 
the older user should use on average.  This information is 
used to inform the older user that targets are not being met 
and to keep the carer or family member informed and 
involved in the care of the user.  Additionally, these set 
targets also allow carers/family members to closely 
monitor that the older user is using a minimum threshold 
amount of energy, thereby ensuring that they are not 
suffering from the lack of heating or cooling.  
V. 
USER INTERACTION 
   Compounding the problem of fuel poverty, older users 
also suffer from technology acceptance.  This adds 
additional constraints in which electronic systems 
subsumed within the home impact the experience and 
engagement of the older user.  If the technology with 
which the older user has to interact is complicated or non-
intuitive, this can lead to users disengaging with the 
system put there to improve their well-being and causes 
an opposite effect so that the user is even more isolated 
and stuck within the fuel poverty trap. The issue of 
reducing a lack of understanding and purpose of the 
system [9] needs to be considered to allow the prototype 
to be effective with users.  In turn, Leonardi [6] highlights 
that the interactive medium needs to take into account the 
“motor and cognitive capabilities” [ 6] of the older user.  
When considering the perceived usefulness of the system 
[5] to promote older users to engage and trust the system 
and recommendations, a clear simple interface is required.  
These issues are important when considering how the 
older person interacts with the prototype system.  
However, it does pose challenges when considering the 
acceptance of the interface as it must not rely on 
something that might cause confusion or anxiety when 
interacting with the system.  Therefore, some form of 
mobile device or interface would pose significant 
challenges to older people. 
   Different interfaces were constructed and evaluated to 
determine which one offered the older user with the best 
way to interpret energy usage information. One method of 
conveying information was through a clock metaphor 
where LED’s 
indicated the general energy usage within 
the home.  However, this did not prove to be too useful or 
popular with older-users. 
   The approach, which ended up being taken, was to 
provide the older user with a simple, non-technical 
interface which does not rely on any interactive 
technology (e.g., mobile phones or smart televisions) but 
instead uses a simple traffic light metaphor.  A mock-up 
miniature house was provided which uses a traffic light 
system located in each of the rooms within the model.  
Instant visual feedback is provided to the older end-user 
by indicating their power consumption in each room.  Red 
indicates that they are excessively using energy within 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

that room, amber indicates they are using more than they 
should but there is room for improvement with a few 
recommendations, while green indicates that they are 
using energy within the guidelines, or what the 
carer/family member might have specified.   
   Figure 3 shows the model house prototype interface.  
Each room of the house contains a set of LED’s which 
indicates the real-time use of energy within that room.  
This was found to be the more successful of the 
prototypes for conveying straight forward energy usage 
information to older users. 
Figure 3. Model house prototype. 
A. Administrative interfaces 
   The administrative interface provides carers or family 
members with cost saving’s information either on a day-
by-day basis or over a projected month.  If older users felt 
comfortable with the technology they were also provided 
access to this information, rather than simply relying on 
the model house.  For example, figure 4 shows the costs 
incurred for a number of monitored appliances within the 
home environment.  Information is outlined, based on the 
activities that have been detected during the day and 
shows a comparison of their energy use.  Both 
carers/family members and the more technically confident 
older user can utilise this information to determine how 
many times a day they perform specific activities with a 
view to reducing the frequency over time or to more 
suitable times which reduces their energy costs. 
Figure 4. Savings graph. 
   Another way in which financial information can be 
conveyed to the user is through a monthly chart outlining 
the costs that have been incurred for each of the activities 
during that particular time period.  Figure 5 shows how 
information can be presented to end-users regarding the 
total costs incurred and by activity. 
Figure 5. Monthly energy costs. 
   Recommendation notifications were also provided to 
end-users and carers/family members to allow them to 
determine where savings could be made by changing 
habits.  For example, recommendations could be made to 
change the time of morning snacks and eating times to 
make best use of energy costs by moving these 
occurrences by a few minutes. 
VI. 
INITIAL RESULTS 
   To combat fuel poverty, older users have to overcome 
issues with anxiety caused from the distress of lack of 
finance to pay for energy bills and also the fear of 
technology, which impedes the adoption of technology to 
help them become more energy efficient.  Data was 
collected from an idealised test environment and played 
back through the system for evaluation purposes.  The 
prototype was evaluated by 10 older users, whose ages 
ranged between 50 and 70 and were used to measure their 
technological fear and acceptance of using this 
technology.  This was to determine whether monitoring 
energy use and recommending more efficient use of 
energy through modifying activity patterns, would 
improve their well-being by reducing their overall energy 
costs.   
   Preliminary testing has been conducted using 10 users 
to determine the effectiveness of the model house 
prototype.  Older users were asked to answer a 
questionnaire after evaluating the usefulness of the 
interface.  The data collected represented activities spread 
over several days from the test environment and was 
played in compressed form for them to evaluate the 
prototype.  Activities were highlighted and explained 
during the playback of telemetry to help identify what was 
being done.  100% of the respondents identified with what 
the model house prototype was attempting to do by 
making them more aware of their energy consumption 
patterns. It was found that 80% of users were able to 
interpret the real-time information with ease while 20% of 
the respondents experienced difficulty at times when the 
system detected an increase or decrease in the energy use 
and notified them through flashing LED’s.  When 
addressing the question of technology acceptance and the 
fear of using new technology which can beset an older 
user, 100% of respondents said that they did not feel 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
anxiety or fear regarding accepting information generated 
through the model house prototype.  When asked if the 
prototype provided them with a way to monitor and adjust 
their habits during the day to make better use of energy, 
all respondents replied favourably (100%).  In fact, it was 
discovered at this point that a number of users would like 
even more information presented to them on improving 
their energy expenditure.  This proved to be encouraging 
and a validation that the model house improved their 
energy awareness and reduced their anxiety from 
worrying about fuel costs.  Another group of 10 users 
(aged between 20 and 50) were used to evaluate the 
usability and functionality of the backend functionality of 
the system.  This type of functionality would be used by 
carers or family members to help advise the older end-
user on how to improve their energy-use by exposing 
them to fine-grained data regarding which activities were 
done and how potential savings could be made.  The type 
of 
questions 
asked 
to 
these 
participants 
were 
predominantly focused on activity management, savings 
information, monthly projections and recommendations.  
The results from this evaluation showed that 100% of 
participants understood what the activities were and how 
they related to the system and data while 70% of 
participants were able to deal with, and manage, activity 
related features.  The remaining 30% required extra 
guidance before they felt fully comfortable with the back-
end system.  When addressing the usefulness of the 
recommendations and potential financial savings, all 
participants agreed that the system was easy to use and 
offered important and helpful information on how to 
improve energy usage.    
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
   Our intention was to produce a simple ICT system 
which would attempt to reduce the anxiety that older 
people experience in relation to fuel poverty as well as 
address the issue of accepting technology.  It was found 
that the prototype system promoted the perceived 
usefulness of the system to older users.  This is in addition 
to other areas of our research into energy-aware 
programming languages and runtime systems. 
   By focusing on the energy-awareness of everyday use 
from the start, the prototype system was able to 
successfully improve the energy use of a user over the 
initial trial period.  The behavioural analysis and 
recommender systems were found to accurately identify 
activities which in turn aided in recognising and 
highlighting the cost awareness of what users were doing 
in association to their activities.  By increasing this cost 
awareness of their actions, users were found to be more 
aware of how to reduce their energy costs by changing 
times or common activities to more cost effective times of 
the day.  Carers/family members would be able to help by 
raising awareness of what the older user was doing on a 
day-to-day basis by showing them how simple changes to 
their daily patterns could result in tangible cost savings as 
well as improved health. 
   Following on from our preliminary results and 
prototype system we intend to expand trials for longer 
periods of time as well as integrating other technology 
dealing with energy-conservation within IoT devices 
populating these homes.   Experiments on how the system 
affects the overall well-being of the older person will also 
be conducted as well as the impact of gender, disability 
(both physical and cognitive related), living status and age 
on their acceptance and use of the technology.   
REFERENCES 
[1] Department of Energy & Climate Change, “Fuel Poverty 
Report 2015.” Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/ 
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/468011/Fuel_Pove
rty_Report_2015.pdf [retrieved: November, 2016] 
[2] G. Flood, (2013). “British government's 'Digital By Default' 
plans challenged”, Information Weekly (Online), available at: 
http://search.proquest.com/docview/1319367398?accountid=146
93 [retrieved: November, 2016]  
[3] The Poverty site, “UK: excess winter deaths”, The Poverty 
Site. Available at: http://www.poverty.org.uk /67/index.shtml 
[retrieved: November, 2016]  
[4] Greenseniors.eu,”Green Seniors In The European Union | 
Ageing Is Nothing For Cowards (May West)”. Available at: 
http://www.greenseniors.eu [retrieved: November, 2016] 
[5] F. Davis, “Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and 
User Acceptance of Information Technology”, MIS Quarterly, 
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 319, 1989. 
[6] C. Leonardi, C. Mennecozzi, E. Not, F. Pianesi, and M. 
Zancanaro, “Designing a familiar technology for elderly 
people”, Gerontechnology, vol. 7, no. 2, 2008. 
[7] M. Farquhar, “Elderly people's definitions of quality of life”, 
Social Science & Medicine, vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 1439-1446, 
1995. 
[8] E. De Beurs, A. Beekman, A. Van Balkom, D. Deeg, and W. 
Van Tilburg, “Consequences Of Anxiety In Older Persons: Its 
Effect On Disability, Well-Being And Use Of Health Services”, 
Psychological Medicine, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 583-593, 1999. 
[9] R. Ellis, J. Allaire, “Modeling Computer Interest in Older 
Adults: The Role of Age, Education”, Computer Knowledge, 
and Computer Anxiety. Human factors, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 345-
355, 1999. 
[10] Hivehome.com. “Hive”, Available at: https://www.hive 
home .com, [retrieved: November, 2016] 
[11] IFTTT.com, IFTTT”, Available at: https://ifttt.com/ 
[retrieved: November, 2016] 
[12] Honeywelluk.com, “evohome - Honeywell UK Heating 
Controls”, Available at: http://www.honeywelluk.com/products 
/Underfloor-Heating/evohome-Main/ 
[retrieved: 
November, 
2016] 
[13] Heat Genius, “Heat Genius remote heating control benefits: 
save money, save energy, save time”,
 
Available at: 
https://www.heatgenius.co.uk/benefits/ [retrieved: November, 
2016] 
[14] J. Kim, H. Choi, H. Wang, N. Agoulmine, J. Deerv, and W. 
Hong, “POSTECH's U-Health Smart Home for elderly 
monitoring and support”, IEEE International Symposium on a 
World of 
Wireless Mobile and Multimedia Networks 
(WoWMoM), pp. 1-6, 2010. 
[15] T. Hargreaves, M. Nye, and J. Burgess, “Making energy 
visible: A qualitative field study of how householders interact 
with feedback from smart energy monitors”, Energy Policy, 
Volume 38, Issue 10, pp. 6111-6119, ISSN 0301-4215, October 
2010. 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

