iCARE - Telematic Platform for Network Management of Pediatric Patients with
Incurable Disease and High Complexity Care
The Ligurian Experimental Model
Luca Bianconi, Cristiana Degano, Matteo Toma
R&D Business Unit
Gruppo SIGLA S.r.l.
Genova, Italy
e-mail: luca.bianconi@grupposigla.it,
cristiana.degano@grupposigla.it,
matteo.toma@grupposigla.it
Riccardo Berta
Elios Lab, DITEN, Università di Genova
Genova, Italy
e-mail: berta@elios.unige.it
Luca Manfredini(1), Federica Penco(1), Sandro
Dallorso(2), Paolo Petralia(2)
(1)Centro Regionale di Riferimento di Cure
Palliative e Terapia del Dolore Pediatrico,
(2)Istituto Giannina Gaslini
Genova, Italia
e-mail: lucamanfredini@gaslini.org,
federicapenco@gmail.com
sandrodallorso@ospedale-gaslini.ge.it,
paolopetralia@ospedale-gaslini.it
Abstract— The Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT) support service to the activities of home care has, as its
main objective, the creation of a technological tool aimed at
improving the operation and the quality of home care services
for pediatric palliative care. In particular, it will provide a tool
to support the performance of the core activities required to
provide assisted home care of excellent quality and, to
clinicians, a whole process management system able to ensure
simplification and efficiency.
Keywords-Telematic; mHealth; IoT; Home Care.
I.
INTRODUCTION
iCARE has been designed and is under development
within Health@Home (H@H) project, funded by the Italian
Ministry of University and Research (MIUR) as part of the
Smart Cities and Communities Call, and whose goal is to
create assistance services to citizens based on a network of
integrated services in the health, territory, and society filed,
through the use and implementation of interoperable devices
and systems [1].
The development of information technology solutions for
the collection, processing and use of critical data, can
provide a very useful support to the young patient, family
and clinicians. Furthermore, the telemedicine, so as the m-
Health applied to the field of Paediatric Palliative home-care
may allow the patient and his family to interact effectively
and real-time with the medical team (local and the one of
reference center) through a remote control of the different
phases of the care process, from diagnosis to treatment.
In this context, iCARE will be a telematics platform for
the management of pediatric patients with incurable disease
and with high-complexity care needs.
Particularly,
iCARE
platform
firstly
aims
at
the
realization of a system able to ensure adequate quality of
services
by
improving
and
optimizing
the
situations
described previously and the process that characterizes them.
Secondly it aims to avoid unnecessary house calls, reducing
the feeling of hospitalization and, while ensuring security in
the continuity relief, facilitate the stay of patients at home
and reduce improper hospitalizations.
Because the research project is currently in progress, we
can here propose a short presentation of the iCARE platform
dealing with the main end users’ required functionalities and
the first application implemented.
This paper is composed of Section II that describes the
clinical context and functionality, and of Section III, in
which the two main applications are described: Home Care
management system and Mobile Diary.
II.
CLINICAL CONTEXT AND FUNCTIONALITY
The context within iCARE platform will be developed
for the home-care services and is for the palliative care at
home of Giannina Gaslini Institute that
treats pediatric
patients at their residence or at care facilities (in the case of
children coming from outside the region), administering
first-line treatments and, if necessary, appropriate palliative
care.
In this context, one of the main objectives of the research
is the development of a tool based on the so-called Family
Centered Care [2].
Since iCARE belongs to the so-called Digital Medicine,
the system will provide the following functionalities:
•
Communication among patient and Medical
Doctor (MD)
o
Doctor’s visit
o
Drug prescription and administration
o
Warning of complicated health status
o
Knowledge exchange about therapy
o
Visit
recording
with
automatic
generation of the report
o
Storing and sharing of visits performed
•
Communication among MD and MD
272
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

o
Management of the patient’s medical
staff
o
Sharing of not solved problems and
important information about
o
Countersign of drug prescription
•
Patient’s
electronic
diary
(clinical
events,
therapeutic events, etc.).
•
Patient’s information management.
•
Automatic and semi-automatic warning of MD
actors relating with particular situations.
III.
APPLICATIONS
It is mandatory that iCARE platform must satisfy the
following requirements:
•
Appropriate
interface
between
the
biomedical
devices at home and the data transmission systems.
•
User friendly system providing clinical information
to the young patient e family (taking into account
cultural and linguistic differences).
•
IT protocols for the storage of data, coming from
home
devices,
in
the
medical
record
system
belonging to the Reference Palliative Care Center.
•
Clinical and Information Technology (IT) protocols
to analyze the collected data and to verify their
accuracy and quality.
In order to provide the functionalities mentioned in
Section II and to satisfy the abovementioned requirements,
two applications have been developed: the Home-Care
management system and the Mobile Diary.
A.
Home-Care management system
The main functional requirements provided by the Home-
Care management system are:
•
Management and tracking of therapy.
•
Management of clinical intervention at home.
•
Noninvasive data collection about health status of
the young patient.
•
Efficient communication among the young patients
(young patient and his family) and the medical staff
(oncologist,
pediatrician,
nurse,
healthcare
assistance, etc.).
•
Sharing of therapy data among the actors belonging
to
the
medical
personnel
(MD
of
Reference
Palliative Care Center, specialized MD, MD of
palliative care, pediatrician, etc.).
The system is accessible through the family’s device(s)
such as personal computer, tablet and smart phone, while
data will be processed and managed centrally via cloud
technologies. Furthermore, the system is composed by a
front-end, dedicated to users, and by an administrative back-
end. Back-end access to the different functionalities is
regulated through roles and authorizations based on the
users’ categories.
B.
Mobile Diary
The Mobile Diary is the first application implemented. It
is the user’s (patient, family, medical personnel) interface
providing the described functionalities. Particularly, it is an
application that has been developed to record and monitor
the daily clinical and psychophysical status of the patients.
The use of Mobile Diary allows the patient, family and
medical staff to answer to ad-hoc questionnaires through a
dedicated interface, and to fill information related to the
clinical parameters and drug therapies associated with the
pathology and the adopted treatment protocol. On the other
hand, the Mobile Diary allows the MD staff to create and
manage new kinds of questionnaires, to analyze collected
data and to export them in different format through a back-
end that is accessible by the MD staff only.
Then, the application is composed of two different
interfaces: the interface devoted to the patient and the
administrative back-end devoted to the MD staff.
The interface for the patient is available in two ways: as a
Web application (thus accessible through a common web
browser) or as a mobile application itself. Both client types
provide the same functionality.
To the contrary, the administrative back-end takes the
form of a Web portal for administration and management of
both questionnaires and data collected. Its natural means of
fruition is the Web browser.
The application is still accessible via the mobile device
(smartphone and tablet) so as from any other device
equipped with a browser and Internet access.
The data generated and processed by the system will be
managed centrally via cloud technologies.
The system provides the following features:
•
Interaction
with
questionnaire
(creation,
management, publication, response).
•
Data analysis.
•
Monitoring of physical/psychophysical status of
critical events.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
The reduction of the residence times in the hospital and
the costs associated with them will result in an improvement
of the conditions of patient’s safety and comfort.
Particularly, the home-care service will allow to:
•
rationalize and improve the management of
clinical and therapeutic data of the patient by
ensuring appropriate access to people involved
in the various phases and assistance situations.
•
improve
the
availability
of
communication
between assisted care facilities and patients,
ensuring efficiency in communications and non-
invasiveness of the same.
•
improve the lifestyle of patients, each actor of
the care process will help, according to the tools
provided by the system, to provide additional
data in support of care activities, sometimes also
as a preventive perspective.
REFERENCES
[1]
http://www.si4life.com/index.php?option=com_content&view
=article&id=71:smart-cities-en&catid=20&lang=en
[2]
Smith, T., & Conant Rees, H. (2000). Makinng family-
centered care reality. Semin Nurse Manag.; 8 (3), 136-142.
273
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

