Assessing Well-Being in Spain in the Post-COVID
Era: A Population Study Using Mobile Sensors and
Experience Sampling
Oresti Banos
Research Centre for Information and
Communication Technologies (CITIC-UGR)
University of Granada
Granada, Spain
email: oresti@ugr.es
Carlos Bailon
Research Centre for Information and
Communication Technologies (CITIC-UGR)
University of Granada
Granada, Spain
email: cbailon@ugr.es
Miguel Damas
Research Centre for Information and
Communication Technologies (CITIC-UGR)
University of Granada
Granada, Spain
email: mdamas@ugr.es
Carmen Goicoechea
Mind, Brain and Behavior
Research Center (CIMCYC)
University of Granada
Granada, Spain
email: carmengoico@correo.ugr.es
Hector Pomares
Research Centre for Information and
Communication Technologies (CITIC-UGR)
University of Granada
Granada, Spain
email: hector@ugr.es
Ciro Rodriguez
Research Centre for Information and
Communication Technologies (CITIC-UGR)
University of Granada
Granada, Spain
email: crleon@ugr.es
Claudia Villalonga
Research Centre for Information and
Communication Technologies (CITIC-UGR)
University of Granada
Granada, Spain
email: cvillalonga@ugr.es
Abstract—The coronavirus outbreak has impacted severely
the well-being of populations all around the world. All of a
sudden, people had to shift to remote work and social distancing
measures, which resulted in profound changes to daily routines,
causing stress, anxiety, and depression. Hence, it is important
to understand the effects of COVID-19 on the well-being of
populations, in order to make informed decisions on public health
interventions and policy recommendations. This paper presents
the first population study conducted within the context of the
POSTCOVID-AI project, which combines mobile sensing and
artificial intelligence techniques to shed new light on the impact
of COVID-19 on the well-being of the Spanish population. The
aim of this article is to present the methodological framework,
data collection, and preliminary results generated for this study,
as well as the future directions towards the achievement of the
goal of the project.
Index Terms—COVID-19; smartphones; sensors; experience
sampling; well-being.
I. INTRODUCTION
The outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has
had a profound impact on the well-being of populations
around the globe. The unexpected shift to remote work and
social distancing measures resulted in significant changes to
daily routines, causing stress, anxiety, and depression in many
individuals. The pandemic has also illustrated clear disparities
in our societies, with certain populations, such as those living
in poverty, marginalized communities, and essential workers,
being disproportionately affected. Additionally, the economic
consequences of the pandemic have also led to financial stress
and insecurity for many households.
After a few years, the pandemic has been brought generally
under control, mostly thanks to the widespread use of diagnos-
tic tests [1], administration of vaccines [2] and the remarkable
efforts of healthcare workers and scientists. Nonetheless, it
is of much importance to understand the direct and indirect
effects of COVID-19 on the well-being of populations. In
particular, studies on the impact of the pandemic on well-
being can provide, for example, insights into its long-term
consequences, such as post-traumatic stress disorder and other
mental health conditions [3]. Likewise, this type of studies
can also enlighten us to have a better understanding on
other important social consequences, like increased feelings
of loneliness and isolation for many individuals, particularly
for older adults and those living alone [4].
Spain was one of the countries hardest hit by the COVID-19
pandemic, with a high number of cases and deaths reported in
the first wave of the pandemic [5]. The Spanish government
implemented strict lockdowns and social distancing measures,
which had a significant impact on the daily lives of individuals
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

and families. The Spanish economy was also greatly impacted
by the pandemic, with high levels of unemployment and
financial insecurity reported.
According to recent studies, the Spanish population expe-
rienced a range of negative impacts on their well-being as a
result of the COVID-19 pandemic. One study found that the
pandemic led to increased levels of stress, anxiety, and depres-
sion among the Spanish population, particularly among those
who were directly affected by the illness, such as healthcare
workers, and those who lost loved ones [6]. Another study
reported that the lockdowns and social distancing measures
resulted in increased levels of loneliness and social isolation,
which can have long-term consequences for mental health [7].
In addition to the psychological effects, the economic conse-
quences of the pandemic have also had a significant impact
on the well-being of the Spanish population. Some studies
reported that the pandemic has resulted in increased levels of
poverty, particularly among marginalized populations, such as
immigrants and single-parent families [8].
Great efforts have been made both in Spain and globally to
comprehend better the consequences of the pandemic. Several
studies have been conducted to that end, normally by means
of one-shot surveys. Some works particularly relied on the use
of digital questionnaires, which could be filled in via a web
browser [9] or a mobile app [10], [11]. More sophisticated
approaches adding mobile sensing features have been also
developed to measure diverse social and behavioural indica-
tors for small population samples [12]. Many such studies
took place during the early phases of the COVID outbreak,
particularly during or right after the lockdowns. Nonetheless,
many more efforts are needed, especially now and in the
years to come, to track the evolution of the well-being of the
population. In light of this necessity of follow-up data on the
effects of the pandemic, we contribute with POSTCOVID-
AI, a project aimed at providing a longitudinal and holistic
description of relevant factors associated to population well-
being during the post-pandemic era. The project overarching
goal is to build an AI-driven system to automatically and
continuously monitor and analyse population-level indicators
relating to physical activity, social interactions, and emotional
states, among others, as well as their links to general well-
being. In this paper, we present the overall idea behind
POSTCOVID-AI and the first population study conducted
within the project using the developed digital tools. Moreover,
initial results and findings derived from this study are briefly
outlined.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section II de-
scribes the POSTCOVID-AI intelligent system. Section III
describes the study conducted and the preliminary results are
shown in Section IV. The main conclusions and next steps are
outlined in Section V.
II. POSTCOVID-AI
POSTCOVID-AI is a novel framework that employs real-
time acquisition and analysis of social, behavioral, and emo-
tional data to assess the impact of the post-COVID-19 context
POSTCOVID-AI app
Intelligent monitoring layer
Intelligent analysis layer
Fig. 1. POSTCOVID-AI high-level architecture.
on the well-being of the Spanish population. Leveraging the
widespread use of smartphones among most segments of the
population, POSTCOVID-AI continuously and anonymously
monitors social, behavioral, and emotional data at both the
individual and group levels. The framework combines digital
sensing and artificial intelligence techniques to process raw,
anonymous, and mobile big data into meaningful longitudinal
representations of the social, behavioral, and emotional states
of the population. These representations are then used to
identify relevant patterns and tipping points that may impact
well-being, as well as to predict its future evolution.
POSTCOVID-AI relies on a two-layered methodological
framework and a mobile app, schematically presented in
Fig. 1.
The POSTCOVID-AI app is designed to gather both ob-
jective and subjective data from individuals in real-time to
monitor the impact of post-COVID-19 context on the well-
being of the population. This is achieved via the integration
of built-in smartphone sensors and digital questionnaires.
Objective data is collected passively using the smartphone’s
built-in sensors, such as the light sensor to monitor sleep
patterns, accelerometry to monitor activity levels, audio level
to measure environmental noise, and Bluetooth/WiFi/GSM to
measure interactions with others. The app also uses Experience
Sampling Methods (ESMs) to collect self-reported data related
to health status, emotions, and subjective well-being. The
collected data includes demographic information, COVID-19
related information, emotional, social, behavioral, and well-
being data, providing a comprehensive view of the social,
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

behavioral, emotional, and well-being states of each individual.
The data is anonymised and securely transferred to a cen-
tral data center for aggregation, harmonization, and analysis.
The vast amount of data collected by POSTCOVID-AI app
enables the use of innovative machine learning and artificial
intelligence methods to generate new knowledge and insights
into the impact of this and similar pandemic on people’s well-
being.
The intelligent monitoring layer comprises all the mecha-
nisms for gathering, aggregating and harmonising (i.e., clean-
ing, transforming and normalizing) the data collected anony-
mously via the POSTCOVID-AI app. The dataset harmonisa-
tion task prepares the recorded data for processing. It includes
the labelling, coding, adaptation, cleansing and wrangling of
the data so that they can be processed by the analytical
routines implemented in the intelligent analysis layer. This
task also ensures the full anonymisation of the data for its
public sharing. As a result, a comprehensive big dataset of
harmonised mobile data is produced.
The intelligent analysis layer sophisticatedly processes the
harmonised mobile big dataset in order to generate more
interpretable contextual and factual information describing the
social, behavioural and emotional situation of the individuals,
thus creating a multivariate longitudinal dataset. To that end,
machine learning techniques are used, such as clustering
algorithms (e.g., principal component analysis, deep clustering
networks) to group and select statistically relevant and non-
redundant mobile data features. Advanced classification algo-
rithms (e.g., support vector machines, convolutional neural net-
works) are applied to translate these data features into categori-
cal and numerical indicators describing social, behavioural and
emotional states. As an example, body motion registered via
the phone accelerometer sensor is transformed into physical
activity labels of the type ”sitting”, ”walking” and the like. As
a result, a collection of rich time series variables or indicators
is generated, which quantify aspects such as the overall mood
or activity performed at home vs. outdoors, during daytime
vs. night-time, in weekdays vs. weekends, etc. The resulting
unique multivariate longitudinal dataset is continuously and
automatically analysed via artificial intelligence algorithms to
generate new knowledge and evidence on how past and present
events are affecting and will affect the population’s well-being.
More specifically, multivariate pattern mining techniques (e.g.,
vector autoregressive integrated moving average, dynamic
programming change point detection) are used to determine
individual and population level tendencies and change points,
such as a positive a trend in the number of hours spent at home
or a decrease in the sleeping hours linked to a negative trend in
the general state of mind. All these analytical findings are then
mapped to the reported individual and population well-being.
III. POPULATION STUDY
The participant sample for this study was sourced through
a market research company that established a panel of in-
dividuals meeting the specific requirements of the study.
The selection process employed a quota stratified sampling
methodology to ensure representation of the Spanish popula-
tion in terms of gender, age, location, and annual income.
Before the study began, candidates were provided with a
detailed information sheet that outlined the study’s parameters,
including its duration and start date, the number of surveys to
be completed, and the frequency of their completion, as well
as data privacy considerations. The rewards for participating
were also outlined, with a minimum of 80% completion rate
of the daily surveys required to receive the reward.
All study procedures were conducted in accordance with
relevant ethical guidelines and regulations. The study was
approved by the Ethical Committee of the University of
Granada under reference number 2214/CEIH/2021. Prior to
participating, all individuals provided informed consent and
confirmed that they were at least 18 years old. Participation
in the study was strictly voluntary and all data collected was
anonymous and confidential. The study adhered to the ethical
standards outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki.
A total of 110 individuals completed the minimum required
registration period (i.e., November 15, 2021 to December 15,
2021). During the study, 7 participants withdrew, but they
were promptly replaced with other individuals with similar
characteristics. The participants were composed of 53 (48.2%)
females and 57 (51.8%) males, with ages ranging from 18
to 70 years (mean±std age=44.3±16.1). Annual net income
was classified according to the criteria established by the
Spanish Statistical Institute (INE). To ensure representation
of the diverse Spanish population, the Nielsen Geographic
Zones criteria were used. Of the 110 participants, 77 (70%)
completed 80% or more of the surveys.
For the data collection, the study participants were required
to install the POSTCOVID-AI app on their smartphones,
enter the identification number provided by the recruitment
company, grant the necessary permissions for the app’s proper
functioning, and provide their digital informed consent to
participate in the study. As a part of the enrollment process,
participants were asked to complete an initial survey, which
included demographic and COVID-19 related information, as
well as questionnaires aimed at measuring their well-being.
Once enrolled, the app initiated the passive data collection
through the smartphone’s sensors, including physical activity
recognition, and indicators of social activity such as con-
nection type, screen usage, WiFi networks, ambient light,
and noise. Moreover, the self-reported emotional data was
collected using the ESMs implemented through the app. The
app pushed notifications to participants at six designated times
per day, randomly distributed between 7:00-8:00, 10:00-11:00,
13:00-14:00, 16:00-17:00, 19:00-20:00, and 22:00-23:00. The
notification persisted for one hour before disappearing. Upon
opening the notification, the app prompted participants to com-
plete the corresponding survey, which was then transmitted to
the data storage server. In addition to the daily surveys, the app
prompted participants to complete weekly questionnaires on
their socio-economic, health, and well-being status, to monitor
any changes over time. Table I outlines the different data types,
variables, and indicators collected via the phone.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF THE DATA COLLECTED IN THE POPULATION STUDY.
Data type
Variable
Instruments or Indicators
Sensor
Activity recognition
Detected physical activities
Wifi
Connections to WiFi networks
Connectivity
Type of connections with the network
Light
Ambient light measurements
Noise
Ambient noise measurements
Screen
Smartphone screen status
Initial Survey
Participant’s characteristics
Questions on socio-demographic and COVID-19 related data
Psychological measures
International PANAS Short Form (I-PANAS-SF)
General life satisfaction and seven domain of life
Flourishing Scale (FS)
Patient Health Questionnaire – 9 (PHQ-9)
Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7)
Brief Resilience Scale (BRS)
Acceptance And Action Questionnaire – II (AAQ-II)
Daily Survey
Affect
Valence
Energetic Arousal
Tense Arousal
Emotional event
Report on any remarkable situations at the emotional level
Weekly Survey
Follow up variables
Questions on socio-demographic and COVID-19 related data
General life satisfaction and seven domain of life
IV. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
The dataset obtained in the initial POSTCOVID-AI study,
which will be publicly released soon, encompasses a diverse
array of variables, as described above. Among the most salient
data is the mood of the study participants. Following the
preprocessing of mood data collected from daily surveys,
we identified 57 participants with an adequate number of
responses, constituting at least 80% of the 180 total responses
recorded over the course of the month-long study. This will
allow us to calculate indices of psychological well-being. The
sample comprised 30 male participants (53%) and 27 female
participants (47%). The mean age of participants was 44 years
with a standard deviation (SD) of 17 years. The youngest
participant was 18 years old and the oldest was 70 years old.
In terms of the psychological characteristics of the partic-
ipants, based on the questionnaires administered at the start
of the study, we compared the results to mean scores of the
general pre-pandemic population as reported in prior studies.
Specifically, our participants had a mean score of 5.95 (SD =
4.85) on the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale - 7 (GAD-
7), which indicates a mild level of anxiety. The mean score
of the general population in Spain prior to the pandemic was
3.54 (SD = 3.32). On the Patient Health Questionnaire - 9
(PHQ-9), our participants had a mean score of 6.86 (SD =
4.72), reflecting a mild level of depression. The mean score
of the general population prior to the pandemic was 2.91 (SD
= 3.52). All the responses of each participant for the GAD-7
and the PHQ-9 are shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 respectively.
These findings suggest that our participants exhibit slightly
elevated levels of both anxiety and depression compared to
those reported in previous studies of the general population
prior to the pandemic. These results are consistent with those
obtained in another study involving almost 2000 participants
conducted during the pandemic in Spain, with a mean GAD-7
score of 5.86 (SD = 5.24) and a PHQ-9 score of 6.50 (SD
= 5.65). This supports the validity of the data and reiterates
the mental health impacts of the pandemic that have been
documented in multiple studies. Our group’s aim is to carry
out further studies to validate these results.
GAD_1
GAD_2
GAD_3
GAD_4
GAD_5
GAD_6
GAD_7
Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale items
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Participants
0
1
2
3
Fig. 2.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7) responses of each
participant. The seven items address how often participants have been bothered
by any of the following problems: GAD 1 - ”Feeling nervous, anxious or on
edge”; GAD 2 - ”Not being able to stop or control worrying”; GAD 3 -
”Worrying too much about different things”; GAD 4 - ”Trouble relaxing”;
GAD 5 - ”Being so restless that it is hard to sit still”; GAD 6 - ”Becoming
easily annoyed or irritable”; GAD 7 - ”Feeling afraid as if something awful
might happen”. Each item of the scale (GAD x) is scored with a 0, 1, 2, or
3 value.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

PHQ_1
PHQ_2
PHQ_3
PHQ_4
PHQ_5
PHQ_6
PHQ_7
PHQ_8
PHQ_9
Patient Health Questionnaire items
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Participants
0
1
2
3
Fig. 3. Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) responses of each participant.
The nine items address how often participants have been bothered by any of
the following problems: PHQ 1 - ”Little interest or pleasure in doing things”;
PHQ 2 - ”Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless”; PHQ 3 - ”Trouble falling or
staying asleep, or sleeping too much”; PHQ 4 - ”Feeling tired or having little
energy”; PHQ 5 - ”Poor appetite or overeating”; PHQ 6 - ”Feeling bad about
yourself - or that you are a failure or have let yourself or your family down”;
PHQ 7 - ”Trouble concentrating on things, such as reading the newspaper
or watching television”; PHQ 8 - ”Moving or speaking so slowly that other
people could have noticed? Or the opposite - being so fidgety or restless that
you have been moving around a lot more than usual”; PHQ 9 - ”Thoughts
that you would be better off dead or of hurting yourself in some way”. Each
item of the scale (PHQ x) is scored with a 0, 1, 2, or 3 value.
V. CONCLUSION
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a profound impact on the
well-being of populations around the world, with the Spanish
population being no exception. The pandemic has resulted in
increased levels of stress, anxiety, depression, loneliness, and
financial insecurity, among other negative impacts. Nonethe-
less, further research is needed to fully understand the long-
term consequences of the pandemic on the well-being of
populations.
In this work, we introduced POSTCOVID-AI, an on-going
project that aims to continue monitoring the effects of the
pandemic on the population well-being. In doing so, the
project ambitions to objectively inform governments, health
organizations, and communities to help them implement in-
terventions and policies that address the psychological and
economic consequences of the pandemic, and support the most
vulnerable populations.
A first population study has been conducted in Spain show-
ing the potential of the proposed approach. At this time, the
project team is undergoing the curation of the collected data,
which will be made open access soon. A preliminary analysis
of the data confirm that both anxiety and depression hold after
the most severe phase of the pandemic, thus confirming the
need to keep on tracking the well-being of the population, with
the overarching goal of supporting individuals and families as
they navigate this challenging time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The project leading to these results has received funding
from ”la Caixa” Foundation under the project code SR20-
00668. The authors want to express their gratitude to all the
participants of the study.
REFERENCES
[1] R. W. Peeling, D. L. Heymann, Y.-Y. Teo, and P. J. Garcia, “Diagnostics
for covid-19: moving from pandemic response to control,” The Lancet,
vol. 399, no. 10326, pp. 757–768, 2022.
[2] D. M. Altmann and R. J. Boyton, “Covid-19 vaccination: The road
ahead,” Science, vol. 375, no. 6585, pp. 1127–1132, 2022.
[3] A. Kumar and K. R. Nayar, “Covid 19 and its mental health conse-
quences,” pp. 1–2, 2021.
[4] T.-J. Hwang, K. Rabheru, C. Peisah, W. Reichman, and M. Ikeda, “Lone-
liness and social isolation during the covid-19 pandemic,” International
psychogeriatrics, vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 1217–1220, 2020.
[5] L. Redondo-Bravo, M. J. S. Moros, E. V. M. S´anchez, N. Lorusso,
A. C. Ubago, V. G. Garc´ıa, P. S. Villanueva, A. P. Az´on, J. G. Besc´os,
A. L. Boone et al., “The first wave of the covid-19 pandemic in spain:
characterisation of cases and risk factors for severe outcomes, as at 27
april 2020,” Eurosurveillance, vol. 25, no. 50, 2020.
[6] R. Rodr´ıguez-Rey, H. Garrido-Hernansaiz, and S. Collado, “Psycholog-
ical impact and associated factors during the initial stage of the coro-
navirus (covid-19) pandemic among the general population in spain,”
Frontiers in psychology, vol. 11, p. 1540, 2020.
[7] M. Martinez-Garcia, E. Sansano-Sansano, A. Castillo-Hornero, R. Fe-
menia, K. Roomp, and N. Oliver, “Social isolation during the covid-19
pandemic in spain: A population study,” Scientific Reports, vol. 12, no. 1,
p. 12543, 2022.
[8] J. C. Palomino, J. G. Rodr´ıguez, and R. Sebastian, “The covid-19 shock
on the labour market: Poverty and inequality effects across spanish
regions,” Regional Studies, pp. 1–15, 2022.
[9] N. Oliver, X. Barber, K. Roomp, K. Roomp et al., “Assessing the impact
of the covid-19 pandemic in spain: large-scale, online, self-reported
population survey,” Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 22, no. 9,
p. e21319, 2020.
[10] C. Bailon, M. Damas, H. Pomares, D. Sanabria, P. Perakakis,
C. Goicoechea, and O. Banos, “Smartphone-based platform for affect
monitoring through flexibly managed experience sampling methods,”
Sensors, vol. 19, no. 15, pp. 1–23, 2019.
[11] C. Bailon, C. Goicoechea, O. Banos, M. Damas, H. Pomares, A. Correa,
D. Sanabria, and P. Perakakis, “Covidaffect, real-time monitoring of
mood variations following the covid-19 outbreak in spain,” Scientific
Data, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2020.
[12] K. Konsolakis, O. Banos, M. Cabrita, and H. Hermens, “Covid-behave
dataset: measuring human behaviour during the covid-19 pandemic,”
Scientific Data, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2022.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

