Context-Oriented Data Processing for Homecare Application  
 
 
Mirvat Makssoud 
Doctoral School of Sciences and Technology 
Lebanese University 
Tripoli, Lebanon 
abbaskarine@hotmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—Due to growing numbers of elderly and increase in 
chronic diseases, many homecare systems have been proposed 
in order to improve the quality of care and social assistance 
services. These systems are based on using advanced 
technologies such as sensors in order to ensure a continual 
patient’s monitoring and support contextual information 
provided anywhere and at any time. Effectiveness and 
efficiency of homecare solution depends on the capability of 
processing the large amount of data acquired through sensors 
in a continual basis.  This paper addresses this issue and 
proposes an extensible approach aiming to process and filter 
data in real time in order to distinguish between normal and 
abnormal situations, detect alarm conditions and store only 
relevant information. To process data and take into account 
patient’s physiological and environmental changes, a sensors-
based context model and context-based rules are defined.  
Keywords—Context 
model; 
homecare 
system; 
rules 
management; sensors; data filtering; alarm situations. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, face to growing numbers of elderly and 
increase in chronic diseases, many homecare applications 
have been proposed in order to improve the quality of care 
and social assistance services [1][2]. Financially, living in a 
smart home is preferable to living in a nursing home, which 
is quite expensive [3]. These applications integrate various 
advanced information and communication technologies such 
as sensors [4], wireless communication, ubiquitous 
computing [5], etc., which support ubiquitous information 
provided anywhere at home and at any time in order to 
ensure 
a 
continual 
patient’s 
monitoring. 
However, 
effectiveness and efficiency of long-term condition care 
depends on the capability of processing data gathered in 
continual basis and proposing adequate services to the 
patient.  
This situation confronts us with various challenges:     
(1) sensors generate a large amount of data in a continual 
basis, (2) data are not all necessary for use, (3) data should 
be analyzed immediately when received in order to detect 
alarm situations, (4) data should be filtered at home to 
eliminate irrelevant data before being transferred to health 
care professionals, and (5) sensors can change according to 
the development of the patient’s situation. 
In light of these challenges, we are proposing a home 
care solution capable of processing data locally at home. 
The motivation of this research is to design an approach 
aiming to filter data according the patient’s care needs. It 
provides an extensible prototype for monitoring and 
handling sensed data. This approach is based on using 
sensors in order to collect data on the patient’s everyday 
life. For this, managing the context in which the patient 
lives becomes a primordial requirement in order to support 
any changes in the patient’s status and environment. 
The prototype we develop will be implemented in a local 
application located in the patient’s home for two reasons. 
Firstly, data have to be filtering locally in order to send only 
useful information to health professionals. Secondly, critical 
situations should be taken into account immediately in the 
form of available services without waiting for the opinion of 
a health professional.  
This work is considered as a first phase of a complete 
project capable of processing data or external requests (for 
example, from professional health care) in order to propose 
and manage personalized services according to the patient’s 
needs and preferences. To release this goal, the prototype 
we develop should be generic and extensible in order to 
cover all patients’ needs and to adapt to any patients’ 
preferences.  
In this research, three processes are identified: alarm, 
storage and delete processes. Defined context-based rules 
are used for separating between normal and abnormal data 
and analyzing normal data in order to make decision to store 
useful information and reject useless data.    
We note that we are not concerned to collect data from 
sensors. We suppose that data are available to be processed 
in an exploitable format. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses 
related works. Section 3 presents the architecture of the 
system. Section 4 discusses about the modeling of context 
model based on using sensors. Section 5 presents the 
modeling of different rules useful for filtering data. Section 
6 explains the data acquisition process. Section 7 shows the 
different steps for data processing mechanism. We will end 
the paper with a conclusion and future works. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Nowadays, many researchers have been interested in 
elderly and dependent people needs, particularly in Europe 
[6], and proposed homecare systems such as Ambient-
assisted Living [7], Remote patient monitoring [8], location 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

tracking, patient behavior modeling, etc. in order to 
recommend adequate solutions related to long-term 
monitoring of patient’s activity and homecare assistance [9].  
This convergence of homecare systems enables elderly 
and dependent people to stay at home and receive human 
care in a much quicker and easier manner [10][11]. These 
systems have mainly focused on the patient’s data 
acquisition through data monitoring devices such as sensors 
placed either directly on the patient’s body for collecting 
individual data (temperature, heart rate, oximetry, etc.) or at 
the patient’s environment for detecting distress situations 
(patient falling, fire, abnormal movement, etc.) [12]. Sensed 
data are then transferred to a central server via wireless 
communication technology to be analyzed by medical 
professionals in order to make decisions in consequence of 
them.    
In recent years, we have noticed that a homecare system 
providing a patient remote care is closely combined with the 
notion of context which is more commonly considered in 
context awareness systems [13][14]. A context is mainly 
defined as any information that can be used to characterize 
the situation of entity as the location, the time, the 
preferences, etc [15]. This concept has been mostly used in 
ubiquitous computing systems [16] and, more recently, in 
Ambient-Assisted Living (AAL) domain in order to locate 
users anywhere and propose services at anytime according 
to the user’s status and environmental conditions [17]. The 
contextual information acquisition and processing are 
among the main challenges identified in the AAL systems 
and performed by a central middleware [18]. Most of the 
context-based healthcare middleware centralize the data 
processing transferred from homes and focus on detecting 
critical situations. Moreover, most of researches in 
homecare domain are very specific to particular needs such 
as detecting alarm situations. However, to be more efficient 
and adaptive, it is more interesting to be able to cover all 
daily patients’ needs by abstracting from the different 
contextual situations in order to filter data, which specify 
the context and propose social assistance accordingly. In our 
opinion, the core of the application should be designed in a 
contextual independent way, i.e., by defining different 
contexts in which it will be used. In this paper, we are 
taking into account this challenge by proposing a data 
processing mechanism capable of filtering data in order to 
propose personalized and auto-trigged services in function 
of patients’ needs.    
III. 
ARCHITECTURE OF PROPOSED APPLICATION 
The main objective of this research is to design a data 
processing mechanism responsible for filtering contextual 
data acquired through sensors according to the patient’s care 
needs. The filtering process consists in analyzing sensed 
data in real time in order to distinguish between abnormal 
and normal situations and eliminate irrelevant information. 
Abnormal status concerns with critical conditions which 
need to be detected and handled immediately, whereas, 
normal status designates either the need to store data for a 
later use or simply to ignore them if no use. As a matter of 
fact, in normal situations, some gathered data are needed for 
specific tasks decided by health professionals (for example, 
writing a report once a day at 6 p.m on the patient’s state). 
Thus, the data processing mechanism refers to three 
steps: 1) alarm process for detecting critique situation, 2) 
storage process for testing if data need to be stored and 3) 
delete process for deleting useless data.  
Fig. 1 presents a functional description of the 
mechanism which consists of four modules: 1) acquisition 
of data, 2) data processing mechanism, 3) context-based 
rules, and 4) sensors-based context management. The first 
one describes how collected data are stored in an exploitable 
text format before being processed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Functional description of the application. 
The second one explains the different steps of 
performing the alarm, storage and delete processes in order 
to filter contextual data. The third module defines the 
context-based rules used in the data processing module in 
order to reason over the contextual information. The latest 
module creates a sensors-based context model served to 
represent a generic description of sensors and sensed 
contextual information. Each of these modules will be 
presented in detail in the next sections.  
IV. 
SENSORS-BASED CONTEXT MANAGEMENT 
In general, a home-based care system relies on using 
sensors located anywhere at home in order to provide 
information on patient’s daily-live conditions and the home 
environment. Thus, one of our key requirements is to 
manage sensors efficiency and easily by identifying their 
characteristics, their roles and their locations and by 
providing a description of contextual information collected 
from sensors. To do this, a generic, reusable and extensible 
sensors-based context model is proposed in order to 
facilitate adding new sensors, updating or deleting sensors at 
any time if needed.  
Sensors-based 
context 
management 
Context-based 
rules 
Model 
Rules 
Alarm process 
Storage 
process 
Delete process 
Data flow  
from 
sensors 
Acquisition 
of data 
XML 
file 
Sensors 
table 
Data processing 
mechanism 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Because the rules definition and the data acquisition 
modules use the high description of the sensors-based 
context model, it is important to be able to start with 
defining the sensors implemented at the patient’s home 
through the model.   
Fig. 2 represents an abstract description of sensors-based 
context model. A patient is characterized by a context which 
is identified by a set of sensors categories. Each category is 
composed of sensors or other categories. A sensor is 
described by a set of sensorInfo which describe the roles 
and the characteristics of the sensor. Each sensor is sensed 
by a set of composite context parameters represented by the 
entity complexContextP.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Abstract description of sensors-based context model 
These parameters give a high description of data 
extracted from a given sensor. A complexContextP entity is 
composed of contextParam entities which designate simple 
context parameters. The entity location represents where a 
sensor is located at patient’s home.  The entity priority 
represents the priority associated to a sensor. We identify 
three levels of priority: high (1), middle (2), low (3). 
Fig. 3 represents an example of concrete structure of 
sensors-based context model. This example identifies two 
categories of sensors: activity and environment sensors. 
Accelerometer 
and 
Temperature 
are 
two 
sensors. 
Accelerometer and temperature sensors are located at the 
bedroom. Info designates sensorInfo entity. Role is a 
simpleInfo entity which has a value ―detect walk‖. 
Accelerometer sensor is sensed by a contextParam ―action‖. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Concrete sensors-based context description 
V. 
DEFINITION OF CONTEXT-BASED RULES 
Once the sensors and their characteristics have been 
defined through the sensors-based context model, the rules 
useful for the data processing mechanism could be 
determined. These rules are applied on contextual data 
extracted from sensors what involves a relationship of 
dependence between sensors and rules (Fig. 4).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Abstract context-based rules model 
A rule is generally defined as a collection of one or 
several elementary conditions. Each condition depends on a 
sensor which means that one rule is associated to one or 
several sensors which regroup one or multiple elementary 
conditions (Figure 4). If a sensor is related to one condition, 
the latter is simply represented as a child node of sensor. 
Otherwise, conditions related to a sensor are interconnected 
by links named connectivity. We distinguish two forms of 
connectivity {AND, OR}. 
Fig. 5 illustrates an example of a rule with four 
conditions C1, C2, C3, C4 related to a given sensor, these 
conditions have to be connected with AND and/or OR. We 
suppose that C1, C2 and C3 are interconnected by AND and 
this collection is linked to C4 by OR.  
Therefore, we notice that these conditions are structured 
in three levels (Fig. 5). Level 1 is for OR, level 2 is for 
Patient1 
 
 
Context1 
 
 
 
 
Activity 
         
 
Environment 
 
 
 
Accelerometer 
     
               Temperature 
 
 
id    info       location   priority                    id        location    priority 
 
 
S3   role complexContextP bedroom  2   S1    complexContextP  1 
 
 
 Detect Walk   action  hour  date 
          temp      hour date 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

AND or/and elementary conditions and level 3 for 
representing elementary conditions.  
An elementary condition is composed of three parts: 
contextParam, 
predicate 
and 
value. 
contextParam 
designates an entity already defined in the sensors-based 
context model. As a rule is applied on data extracted from 
sensor, the use of the entity contextParam is highly 
justified. The predicate designates one of these possibilities 
{<, <=, >, >=, =, !=} . The value can be a number or a text. 
The manner of defining rules facilitates adding new 
rules for any process and updating existing rules. As the 
main objective of this application is to test if collected data 
from sensors is concerned with alarm, storage or delete 
cases, rules are then classified in two groups: alarm rules 
responsible for detecting alarm situations and storage rules 
which test if collected data must be stored for a later use. 
We will explain the use of these rules more in detail in 
the next section. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  An example of a rule 
VI. 
ACQUISITION OF DATA 
The data acquisition introduces the way in which 
contextual data are represented to be exploitable by the data 
processing mechanism. In this research, we consider that 
contextual data are received by our application in a final 
format available to be analyzed. To deal with data, the data 
processing mechanism requires two basis: 
 
A table in which active sensors are declared 
 
XML files used to insert collected contextual data 
 
The table represents the identifications of sensors which 
are in action and send contextual data. This table is 
organized according to the sensors emission frequency. Two 
cases are possible: at a frequency f, we can have either one 
sensor which send data or several sensors which act 
together.  
Other more important factor which needs to be 
precessed is the priority between sensors. Indeed, each 
sensor has its own priority level already defined in the 
sensors-based context model by the priority entity. 
Therefore, sensors should be ordered and handled in order 
of priority. Once active sensors are specified in the table, 
our mechanism verifies their priority level and then 
classifies them in three levels: high, middle and low. Table1 
illustrates an example of the sensors representation. S1 and 
S2 are two sensors with high priority, S3 a sensor with 
middle priority, whereas S4 a sensor with low priority.  
TABLE I.  EXAMPLE OF SENSORS REPRESENTATION 
             Priority 
Frequency 
Low 
Middle 
High 
f1 
S4 
 
S1 ; S2 
f2 
 
S3 
S1 
f3 
S4 
 
S2 
 
The second facet of the data acquisition part consists in 
representing contextual data in XML files. This step is not 
discussed in this research. We work on the assumption that 
contextual data is organized in XML files and available to 
be handled in the data processing mechanism. The structure 
of a XML file is based on the sensors-based context model 
and more specifically by the entities: sensor, contextParam, 
complexContextP. Fig. 6 gives an example of a part of xml 
structure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Example of XML structure 
VII. 
DATA  PROCESSING MECHANISM 
The mechanism mainly consists in filtering data stored 
in XML files as described in the data acquisition section. 
Sensors which generate these data are specified in a sensors 
table. The filter process is based on using rules defined in 
the context-based rules module. We have two types of rules: 
alarm and storage rules. Each rule contains conditions 
<rule id=1> 
 
 <sensor id =3> 
 
       <OR> 
 
 
<condition id=’C4’> 
 
 
      <contextParam>param1</contextParam> 
 
 
      <predicate> = </predicate> 
 
 
      <value>45</value> 
 
 
</condition> 
 
           <AND> 
 
 
<condition id=’C1’> 
 
 
     <contextParam>param2</contextParam> 
 
 
     <predicate> = </predicate> 
 
 
     <value>45</value> 
 
              </condition> 
 
 
<condition id=’C2’> 
 
 
     <contextParam>param3</contextParam> 
 
 
     <predicate> = </predicate> 
 
 
     <value>29</value> 
 
 
 </condition> 
 
 
 <condition id=’C3’> 
 
 
     <contextParam>param1</contextParam> 
 
 
     <predicate> = </predicate> 
 
 
     <value>48</value> 
 
 
 </condition> 
 
           </AND> 
 
         </OR> 
 
    </sensor> 
    </rule> 
 
<sensors> 
< sensor id=’S3’> 
                 <complexContextP> 
                            <action>walking</action> 
  
<hour>8.30</hour> 
  
<date>25/12/2013</date> 
</complexContexP> 
</sensor> 
<sensor id=’S1’> 
      <complexContextP> 
<temp>37</temp> 
<hour>8.30</hour> 
<date>25/12/2013</date> 
    </complexContexP> 
</sensor> 
</sensors> 
 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

related to given sensors. Fig. 7 illustrates the different steps 
of the data processing mechanism. Firstly, we test if data are 
abnormal or normal. Then, we verify if data should be 
stored or deleted. 
The filter process is performed in various steps: 
1) For each row of the sensors table, we have to 
calculate all combinations between sensors. This 
calculation is made in function of the priority of 
sensors. We remind that we have three levels of 
priority: high, middle and low. We start with 
sensors which have high priority. We pass then to 
sensors with middle priority. Finally, we terminate 
with low priority sensors. We illustrate this 
calculation by an example. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 7.  Data processing mechanism 
In row1, there are three sensors 
 
S1-S2 
with  
high priority 
 
S4 
 
with  
low priority 
- 
Firstly, we start by calculating combinations 
between high priority sensors S1 and S2 which has 
as result: S1, S2, S1-S2. 
- 
Secondly, as we do not have middle priority 
sensors, we pass to low priority sensors. We have 
one sensor S4. Then one combination is calculated 
= S4.  
- 
Finally, we calculate combinations between sensors 
S1, S2 and S4. We have as result: S1-S4, S2-S4, 
S1-S2-S4. 
The calculation of combinations has as result 
C = {S1, S2, S1-S2, S4, S1-S4, S2-S4, S1-S2-S4} 
2) Once combinations are found, the second step 
consists in looking for rules which correspond to 
sensors designated in each combination. As we 
have alarm and storage rules, we start by alarm 
rules because alarm process is more priority to take 
into account.  
For each combination c of C, we have two 
possibilities: 
 
Rules corresponding to sensors of c are 
not found => next combination 
 
Otherwise, conditions contained in each 
rule are extracted in order to form a XML 
query 
 
The formed query will be executed on the 
contextual data stored in the xml file. The 
execution of the query returns either 1 or 0. 
 
1 => data are abnormal 
 
0 => data are normal 
The first case triggers an alarm situation and data 
storage 
The second case triggers the storage process 
3) For normal data, we have to test if data need to be 
stored or deleted. Similar to alarm process, the 
same steps are applied on the combinations of C. 
We research if there are storage rules which 
correspond 
to 
sensors 
contained 
in 
each 
combination. If it is the case, a query is formed 
which will be executed on the xml file. We can 
have two responses: 
 
1 => data storage is needed 
 
0 => data can be deleted 
Once these different tasks are ended up, we can delete 
xml file which contains data under process and pass to next 
row of the sensor table.  
The next step in this research consists of triggering 
services in function of patient’s needs. In this paper, we do 
not develop this point, but we can give an idea on which our 
next research will include. In principle, each rule is 
associated to one or many services as described in Figure 8. 
Once a rule is found and its formed query returns 1 as a 
result, services related to this rule is triggered to execute 
tasks defined for selected services.  
 
Figure 8. Relationship between rule and service 
 
Thus, we have described the different steps needed to 
process and filter data generated through sensors and stored 
temporarily in xml files.    
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In the paper, we have presented an approach capable to 
process and filter data acquired through sensors locally in 
order to classify them in three categories: alarm data to 
detect alarm situations, relevant data to be stored for a later 
use and irrelevant data to be eliminated. We remind that the 
Storage rules 
Collected data 
Test if alarm 
Abnormal data 
Alarm rules 
Normal data 
Test if data storage 
Data stored 
Data deleted 
YES 
NO 
YES 
NO 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

main objective of this application is not to trigger alarm 
situations, but only to indicate there are abnormal data 
which need to be taken into account immediately or normal 
data.  
This work is the first step in a project, which consists of 
assisting any patient at home whatever the situation, needs 
and preferences he has. To achieve this goal, a generic and 
personalized view is proposed in order to consider any new 
adding or change in the daily patient’s context.  For this, a 
sensors-based context model has been designed for 
characterizing sensors and contextual data. Context-based 
rules have been defined for reasoning over contextual data.  
This application has for advantage to eliminate irrelevant 
data at patient’s home and transfer only useful data. 
Extensibility and configurability of the context-oriented data 
processing mechanism behavior may be achieved by 
extending the context-based sensor model with new 
concepts or specializations of existing ones and by 
adding/modifying reasoning context-based rules. This 
application can be easily extended with using specified 
services in order to satisfy patient’s needs and provide 
personalized access to patient’s data. 
Presently, we are planning to implement the approach in 
java to evaluate and test the success of the prototype from a 
scenario. The second step is about using and managing 
services in order to improve alarm management and real-
time monitoring. We are also thinking about managing 
profiles needed for defining all patients’ characteristics such 
as pathologies, disabilities, preferences and personal data in 
order to propose to the patient personalized services. 
Finally, we will also consider actors involved in a different 
extent in the care of a patient such as patient’s relatives, 
doctors, nurses, the care center, etc. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Canale, ―The Bravehealth Software Architecture for the 
Monitoring of Patients Affected by CVD,‖ 5th eTELEMED, pp. 29-
34, 2013, Nice, France.  
[2] A. J. Bharucha, ―CareMedia: Automated Video and Sensor Analysis 
for Geriatric Care,‖ Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Association for Geriatric Psychiatry, 2006, Puerto Rico. 
[3] M. Chan, D. Esteve, C. Escriba, and E. Campo, ―A review of smart 
homes—Present state and future challenges,‖ Comput. Methods 
Programs Biomed. 91, 55–81, 2008. 
[4] A. Pietrabissa, C. Poli, D.G. Ferriero, and M. Grigioni, ―Optimal 
planning of sensor networks for assets tracking in hospital 
environments,‖ accepted for publication in Decision Support System 
(Elsevier), 2013.  
[5] J. Bravo, L. Fuentes, and D. Lopez-de-Ipina, ―Ubiquitous Computing 
and Ambient Intelligence,‖ Pers. Ubiquitous Comput, 5, 315-316, 
2011. 
[6] C. Willems, M. Spreeuwenberg, L. Heide, A. Glascock, D. Kutzik, 
and L. de Witre, ―Activity monitoring to support independent living 
in Dutch homecare support,‖ Everyday Technology for Independence 
and Care, G. Gelderblom, et al., Ed., Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2011, 
pp. 145-151.  
[7] W. Kurschl, S. Mitsch, and J. Schoenboeck, ―Modeling Situation-
Aware Ambient Assisted Living Systems for Eldercare,‖ In Proc. of 
the 6th Int. Conference on Information Technology : New 
Generations, 2009, Las Vegas, USA. 
[8] F. Paganelli, D. Giuli, ―An Ontology-based Context Model for Home 
Health Monitoring and Alerting in Chronic Patient Care Networks,‖ 
1st Int. Workshop on Smart Homes for Tele-Health, AINA 2007.  
[9] B.J.F. Van, B.P. Pawar, C.P. Dulawan, and H.J. Hermens, ―Mobile 
virtual communities for telemedicine: research challenges and 
opportunities,‖ International Journal of Computer Science and 
applications, Technomathematics Research Foundation, Vol. 6, no. 2, 
pp. 19 – 37, 2009. 
[10] D. Ding, ―Sensor technology for smart homes,‖ Maturitas, 69, 2011, 
131–136. 
[11] P. Paganelli, E. Spinicci, and D. Giuli, ―ERMHAN: a context-aware 
service platform to support continuous care networks for home-based 
assistance,‖ International Journal of Telemedicine and Applications, 
vol. 2008, iss. 5, Article no. 4. 
[12] S. Cheng, M. Azarian, and M. Pecht,  ―Sensor system for prognostics 
and health management,‖ Sensors , 10, 5774–5797, 2010. 
[13] N. Bricon-Souf, C.R. Newman, ―Context awareness in health care: A 
review,‖ Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 2–12. 2007.  
[14] J. Park, M. Moon, and S. Hwang, ―CASS: A Context-Aware 
Simulation System for Smart Home,‖ In Proc. of the 5th ACIS 
International Conference on Software Engineering Research, 
Management & Applications, Washington DC, USA, 2007. 
[15] A. Dey, K. Anind, ―Understanding and Using Context,‖ Personal 
Ubiquitous Computing 5 (1): 4–7, 2001. 
[16] T. Chaari, D. Ejigu, F. Laforest, and M. Scuturici, ―Modeling and 
Using Context in Adapting Applications to Pervasive Environments,‖ 
In the Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Pervasive 
Services (ICPS'06), Pages 111-120, Lyon, France, 2006.  
[17] N. Saranummi, ―IT applications for pervasive, personal, and 
personalized health,‖ IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 12, no. 
1, pp. 1–4, 2008.  
[18] C. Doukas, I. Maglogiannis, and G. Kormentzas, ―Advanced 
Telemedicine Services through Context-aware Medical Networks,‖ In 
Proceedings of the IEEE EMBS cosponsored International Special 
Topic Conference on Information Technology in Biomedicine (ITAB 
2006), Ioannina-Epirus, Greece, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

