MoodLine and MoodMap 
Designing a Mood Function for a Mobile Application with and for Young Patients 
Maja van der Velden and Margaret Machniak Sommervold 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
majava@ifi.uio.no and margarma@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—Tracking mood or emotional experiences over time 
is a popular function found in mobile health applications. In 
this study, young patients with chronic health challenges 
consider this also an important function of a multifunctional 
app supporting them in the transition to adult care. At the 
same time they expressed the need to be seen as a young 
person, not a diagnosed body. A lifeworld-led design approach, 
based on a Participatory Design methodology, resulted in a 
mood tracking and a mood mapping design, which was 
meaningful to the young persons’ everyday experiences. Photos 
tagged with colors representing different emotional states were 
chosen as the best way to represent their moods. An overview 
of moods, by day as well as by color, gives an understanding of 
the wider context in which these moods appear and can play a 
motivational role in dealing with a difficult day or episode in 
their lives.  
Keywords-Mobile health application; lifeworld; Participatory 
Design; teenagers; transition 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The KULU research and design project1 focuses on the 
design and use of interactive technologies with and for 
young people (15-25 years old) with chronic health 
challenges. Mobile applications are popular among young 
people, but a systemic review showed that there is no 
empirical evidence for their beneficial use in the personal 
health management of young patients [1]. The review did 
emphasize the value of involving young patients in designing 
these apps [1]. 
This paper addresses the design of the mood function in a 
multifunctional mobile application (app). The aim of the app 
is to support young patients in the transition from pediatric to 
adult healthcare. Mood is often differentiated from acute 
emotional states, such as being angry, sad or happy. They 
last longer and are often not related to an immediate trigger: 
“mood state appears to be an integrative function of the 
organism’s acute emotional experiences over time” [2]. In 
the field of IT health, e-health, and m-health (health IT), this 
differentiation disappears when describing or designing 
mood technology. This becomes for example clear in [3], 
which categorizes mood technologies into Technology that 
measures mood; Technology that expresses user mood; 
Technology that adapts to user mood; and Technology that 
influences user mood. Another categorization of mood 
                                                             
1 KULU is a Norwegian acronym for Cool Technologies for Youth with Long-term Health 
Challenges (www.kulu.no/en) 
technology is diagnosis-based versus general mood. For 
example, mood apps can address specific mood disorders, 
such as bipolar disorder [4], anxiety disorders [5], and 
depression [6], or have a more general approach, such as 
happy apps [7]. 
Research focusing on apps for adolescent mental health 
report that the participation and adherence rate to treatment 
was higher for mobile phone apps than on paper [8][9], 
rating mood was seen as most useful [10], and “the ability of 
mobile phones to offer personal space is also considered to 
increase levels of perceived autonomy, control, and self-
esteem in young users” [11]. Young people with chronic 
physical health challenges are more likely to have mood-
related issues, ranging from emotional problems to mood 
disorders [12]. 
On the question about the preferred functions of an app 
that would support them in their transition to adult health 
care, a group of young chronic patients participating in 
KULU research proposed, among others, a mood tracking 
function. This paper presents and discusses the design of an 
app-based mood tracking functionality with and for young 
patients. The aim of the paper is to explore how we can 
design with and for young patients, while taking their whole 
being, as a teenager or young adult and as a patient, into 
consideration. 
The contribution of this paper is threefold. It contributes 
to designing interactive technologies from the perspective of 
young people with health challenges. A lifeworld-led design 
approach, 
combined 
with 
a 
participatory 
design 
methodology, enables patients to be met as co-designers and 
experts of their own lives and facilitates patient contributions 
to the design of health IT. Secondly, it contributes to 
understanding young patients’ lifeworlds. It shows how they 
value moods in their lives and the importance of taking a 
holistic perspective when tracking moods. Lastly, it 
contributes to understanding the role of technology in the 
lives of young people in general. Teenagers and young 
adults’ technology preferences and use are often very 
different from those of the researchers. Designing with the 
future users of a technology increases the chance that the 
technology reflects the values and needs of that particular 
user group. 
In Section II, we will first explore some concepts that 
support a holistic patient perspective in the design process of 
a lifeworld-led design approach. This is followed, in Section 
III, by a brief presentation of SHARM (Situation-based 
learning; Having a say; Adaptability; Respect; Mutual 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

learning), our Participatory Design approach. In Section IV, 
we present the design process, the methods used, the 
different stages in the development of the mood tracking 
function, and the final results. In Section V, we discuss the 
design process and its results through the lens of the 
lifeworld concept and we evaluate the SHARM approach. In 
the final section, we present our concluding remarks and 
outline future research. 
II. 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
Teenagers and young adults with chronic health 
challenges have made clear that they want to be met as 
young people, not as patients. Their wish to push their 
‘patientness’, the quality of being a patient, to the 
background is also confirmed in the literature [14]–[16]. 
Young patients use the terms normal and regular to express 
how they want to be perceived and treated by the world 
around them [14][16]. They acknowledge their illness, but 
want to have lives like their peers and they do not want their 
caregivers to see only their diagnosed bodies: “the doctor 
should be interested in me, all of me, not just my diagnosis” 
[17]. 
This particular positioning by the young patients can be 
explained with the notion of the lived body, the body as 
experienced by the self and as being-in-the-world, as 
described in phenomenology [18]. The concept that 
encompasses both the lived body and its experiences in the 
world is the notion of lifeworld. Lifeworld can be described 
as “the world of lived experience or the beginning pace-flow 
from which we divide up our experiences into more abstract 
categories and names” [19]. Lifeworld theory describes five 
intertwined dimensions in which these experiences become 
meaningful: 
temporality, 
spatiality, 
intersubjectivity, 
embodiment, and mood [19]. Mood, in this context, is 
described as a “messenger of the meaning of our situation” 
or our being-in-the-world, “mood is complex and often more 
than words can say” [19]. 
Lifeworld-led care is a particular perspective on 
healthcare, which focuses on the wellbeing of the whole 
person, not just the illness or diagnosis [19][20]. This 
perspective is both a deepening of the understanding of 
patient-centered care and a critique on the dehumanisation 
and depersonalization of care, not the least through the use of 
technology [19][20]. The aim of a lifeworld-led design 
approach is to let the young patients’ lived experiences of 
everyday life, diagnosis, and technology use, guide the 
design of new technology that supports them in living their 
everyday life with their health challenges [20]. 
In order to provide an enabling environment in which 
young patients can build forth on these experiences, KULU 
implements its design activities within a participatory 
methodology 
called 
SHARM, 
which 
is 
based 
on 
Participatory Design [20]. The participation of young people 
as co-designers of their own healthcare technologies enables 
a design space in which the young participants can position 
themselves in the way they perceive themselves and how 
they want to be perceived by others. The SHARM approach 
is based on five principles [22]: 1) Situation-based action 
locates the design activities in the lifeworld and relationships 
of the participants; 2) Having a say is about creating real 
opportunities for participants to share the decision-making 
power; 3) Adaptability is about applying tools and methods 
in the design activities that can easily adapt to the 
participants’ changing physical or emotional state; 4) 
Respect is about treating the young participants as experts on 
their own life and body; and 5) Mutual learning refers to 
choosing methods and tools that enable the participants to 
lean as much from us as we do from them. 
III. 
RESULTS FROM THE DESIGN PROCESS 
The design of a mood tracking functionality was part of a 
larger design project with the Youth Council of the Akershus 
University Hospital (AHUS) in Norway. The Youth Council 
had made a wish list of issues and technologies they wanted 
to address in the design project with KULU. The transition to 
adult healthcare was one of the main concerns of the Council 
and they wanted to explore how a mobile phone application 
(app) could support them in the transition process. 
We will report here on the design of the mood tracker 
functionality for a multifunctional transition app. The design 
process consisted of four workshops and an online prototype 
evaluation. The workshops took place in two large meeting 
rooms and were attended on average by seven Council 
members. In total, ten young patients participated, five male 
and five female participants, who were between 14 and 21 
years old. They had a variety of chronic diagnoses. The 
project was evaluated and approved by the data authority for 
universities in Norway and the privacy officer of AHUS. All 
participants had given their consent to participate. Additional 
consent was sought from the legal guardians of the 
participants that were younger than 16 years old. Further 
details of the design process can be found in [22].  
A. Identifying functionality 
During the first workshop, the functionality of the 
transition app was explored with a brainstorming technique 
[23], resulting in a two lists: Cool-to-have and Must-have 
[24]. The Must-have list consisted of functionalities that the 
app needs in order to be used, such as calendar for doctor 
appointments, alarm for taking medicines, checklists, and 
registration of the general state of the user (e.g., mood, 
energy level), but also attributes, such as colors and privacy. 
Color preferences were perceived as very personal and one 
of the participants proposed that colors could be used to 
personalize the app. A password or pass code was proposed 
to keep the content of the app separate from other apps [24]. 
The Cool-to-have list mentioned aspects and functionalities 
that made the app extra attractive for young people, such as 
an ‘Instagram’-like environment, music play-list (similar to 
‘Spotify’), and film and tv tips [24]. An analysis of the group 
discussion of all proposals resulted in the identification of 
three 
categories: 
to 
have 
an 
overview 
(medicines, 
appointments, routines); strengthen autonomy (registration of 
general state, checklists); and entertainment (music; tips). 
B. General State 
During the second workshop, the registration of the 
general state, was one of several functions further explored. 
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

In a collaborative prototyping session, three design proposals 
were presented in the form of both paper-based and digital 
prototypes. Collaborative prototyping enables the translation 
of values and needs into design requirements [25][26]. The 
three proposals reflected different ways of mapping their 
energy levels and mood. The registration of the general state 
through images was perceived as more creative and personal. 
In the discussion that followed, the difference between 
taking your own photos and finding images on the net was 
explored, with one participant expressing the concern that 
finding and uploading images from the net needed focus and 
energy, which was not always available. Another participant 
mentioned “when you are really down, you can go back and 
look at the photos and see that there is one that makes you 
happy. For example, when you are admitted to the hospital, 
you can go back and look for what gives you energy, and 
look at the photos” [24].  
C. Mood 
The discussions of the three prototypes evolved around 
the use of photos, colors, and mood. The next iteration of the 
function for mapping the user’s general state focused on 
these three aspects and consisted of three low-fidelity digital 
prototypes, which were also produced as plasticized paper 
printouts. In order to enable the user to “go back”, we used 
the concept of timeline as an organizing principle for the 
photos. Each photo could be tagged with a colored frame, 
which would be an expression of the mood associated with 
the photo. During the third workshop the different prototypes 
were explored and discussed (Fig. 1). The participants 
preferred the option to scroll up and down through the list of 
photos. Secondly, they preferred photos of the same size to 
the option to have different sizes, because this gave a better 
overview of the photos in the timeline. The timeline itself 
should be based on the date, not on photos, so it would be 
clear to them on which days they were too tired or sick to 
add a photo to the timeline. Colored small dots on the side, 
based on the colors selected for the images, would give a 
quick overview of mood over time (Fig. 2). 
 
Figure 2. MoodLine with dots 
The timeline of photos with different color-tags inspired 
a discussion of what they could do with the colors. One 
participant proposed to add a new option to the mood 
tracker, namely the possibility to see only photos tagged with 
one color, similar to Instagram. For example, on a sad day, 
the user could scroll through photos tagged with the color-
tag happy, in order to get through the day and inspire or 
motivate oneself with photos that presented happier times or 
moods. 
We 
also 
explored 
different 
options 
for 
personalization through colors [27]. The option to allow the 
user to configure the colors and their associated meanings 
was chosen over option to use a default set of colors with 
associated moods (See Fig. 3). The combination of images 
and colors enabled a focus on tracking their mood, not on 
taking pretty pictures. This option also expresses the wide 
variety of color associations found among the participants, 
which were the result of age, gender, and personal 
preferences [27]. 
D. Final iteration 
The final iteration of the mood function was produced in 
InVision, an online prototyping software for clickable, high-
resolution prototypes. During the last workshop, our co-
designers were invited to access what was now named the 
KOOLO app on Invision, in order to click through the 
different options, such tagging colors with a mood, adding a 
photo, color-tagging the photo, scrolling through photos, and 
accessing the mood map to select a collection of photos 
 
Figure 1. Prototypes of MoodLines 
 
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

tagged with the same color. All the participants received 
information on how to access the online prototype and were 
invited to use and evaluate the prototype. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
“Lived experience is coloured by mood” [18] 
 
The KOOLO app, including its mood function, has now 
been fully developed for both the Android and iOS platform. 
The co-designers’ preferences and needs form the core of the 
mood function (see summary in Table 1).  
TABLE I.  
IMPLEMENTATION OF DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS 
Requirement 
Implementation 
1. Registration 
of the general 
state 
Photos in an ‘Instagram’-like environment 
2. Time as 
organizing 
principle 
AMoodLine organized by dates, including dates 
without photos 
3. Color as 
organising 
principle 
No default settings for tags 
Can be used for personalization of the whole app 
The photos can be organized by color via the 
MoodMap option 
4. Privacy 
Photos are stored in the app, which is 
password/code protected 
 
In the discussions on the registration of the general state, 
the co-designers included their existing experiences with 
apps. This function therefore evolved very early in the design 
process into an image-based mood function. It could use the 
existing functionality of the mobile phone (the photo app) 
and was perceived as an intuitive, easy, and personal way to 
track one’s mood. Also, the shape of the images reflected the 
participants’ existing app use: square shape of the images 
was preferred over round-shaped ones, because of its 
similarity with square-shaped images of the popular 
Instagram app (see Fig. 1 and 2).  
Our co-designers also made clear that they wanted to 
track both positive and negative moods and did not want to 
favor one type of mood over the other by presenting them in 
different formats or styles. As an example they mentioned 
that a day with a negative mood could be a very important 
day, but that this could get lost in a design that would present 
positive mood images larger than negative mood images.  
This example makes clear that the co-designers were able 
to find and explore connections between their lifeworlds and 
the specifications of the mood function. That they wanted to 
track their mood in relation to their lived experiences became 
also clear in the design of the timeline and the application of 
mood colors to other functions in the app. They preferred the 
MoodLine to track all days, not only the days in which a user 
added a photo. This way, a day without a photo has meaning 
as well, by evoking reflection on the reason for not adding a 
photo to the MoodLine, such as being too tired or too sick. 
Inspired by the color tags of the MoodLine, they proposed to 
use color tags in other functions of the app, such as the dates 
in the calendar function of the app. A date tagged with a 
color thus became a meaningful way to highlight days with 
doctor appointments or test results (Fig. 4). 
The idea for the MoodMap (Fig. 5) came up in a 
discussion about keeping an overview of things. The larger 
the MoodLine would become over time, the more difficult it 
would be to find patterns that were meaningful in their lives. 
The proposal for a MoodMap was inspired by the Instagram 
 
Figure 3. Color tags 
 
Figure 4. Calendar with color tag 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

photomap, which geographically maps where a user has 
taken a photo and shows all photos taken on that same 
location. All participants perceived this as a fun and intuitive 
way of organizing their mood images. The MoodMap gives 
an indication of how many photos are tagged by a particular 
color. Selecting one color in the MoodMap (Fig. 5) results in 
a MoodLine (Fig. 2) with only images tagged with the 
selected color. 
The young patients can use the mood function to keep an 
overview of their moods over time as well as per mood. In 
addition, they can use mood colors to in other functions of 
the app, such as calendar and date function. This can give 
them an understanding of the context in which their moods 
appear. Keeping an overview and looking for meaning are 
related to mastery, the experience of emerging stronger from 
a very stressful health condition [28]. The experience of 
mastery increases when young patients can participate in a 
meaningful way in decisions that affect their lives. The 
MoodMap allows the user to focus on one particular 
emotional state, which may effect motivation, inspiration, 
learning, and change. 
Lastly, the privacy specification: the co-designers 
proposed a strict division on their mobile phone between 
general apps and an app focusing on their diagnosis or health 
challenges. The design of the mood function, and the app as 
a whole, are designed according to Privacy by Design 
principles [29]. Privacy is default, as well as integrated to the 
system, without diminishing functionality. There is no 
communication between this app and the other apps stored 
on the mobile phone - data produced in the app, calendar 
events, photos, and checklist entries, are stored within the 
app – and there is no communication with a website or with 
third parties. The source code is open and available for 
investigation. 
The five principles of the SHARM approach played a 
central role in creating a lifeworld-led design process. The 
design workshops took place in the hospital, providing them 
a safe place for reflecting on their experiences and needs as 
young people with serious health conditions (situation-based 
action). The iterative approach, in which the design 
preferences, ideas, and results from the last workshop were 
presented in a more designed and developed manner, 
providing real opportunities for the co-designers to take part 
in decision-making based on their expertise of their own life 
and body. The methods we used in the workshops enabled a 
mutual learning process that was at the one hand explorative 
and inspiring, and on the other hand based on research and 
experience.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
 A systematic review of apps supporting adolescents’ 
personal management of chronic and long-term physical 
conditions [1] shows that the lack of large-scale studies 
makes it difficult to find empirical evidence of their benefit, 
but that engaging the adolescents contributes to changes in 
the mobile intervention’s design. Our study confirms that the 
participation of young people with health challenges in the 
design of their own interactive technologies can result in 
creative and important contributions to the design process. A 
participatory and lifeworld-led design process, based on 
collaborative methods and an iterative approach, allows 
young patients to explore mood-related needs and values in a 
more holistic and relational manner. This resulted in very 
specific design requirements that were closely related to the 
young persons’ everyday experiences with technology. The 
popular Instagram app was an important inspiration in the 
design process. Secondly, it resulted in a more meaningful 
mood tracking and mapping practice, such as personalizing 
the use of self-selected colors and self-produced images; the 
equal importance of positive and negative moods and days 
with and without images (MoodLine); and the organization 
of photos by mood (MoodMap).  
The young patients were met as co-designers and experts 
of their own lives, which enabled them to be heard as well as 
to have a say in the design process. This allowed them to 
make important contributions to the design of health IT. In 
turn, this enabled the researchers to learn more about the 
young patients’ lived bodies, their lifeworlds, and the role of 
technology in their lives. 
The design of the mood tracking function resulted in two 
new design concepts for organizing mood data, the 
MoodLine and the MoodMap. The use of photos, framed 
with colors representing emotional states, enabled a 
meaningful registration of the young persons’ mood in a 
visually pleasant manner (MoodLine) and in a meaningfully 
organized way (MoodMap).  
 
Figure 5. MoodMap – each dot presents one photo tagged with that color 
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Future work consists of making the transition app, 
including the mood function, available to a group of test 
users, with and without a diagnosis, followed by qualitative 
interviews with the users as well as health personnel.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the Youth Council of the Akershus University 
Hospital for sharing their expertise and time. We are grateful 
to the Hospital’s staff of for supporting our research. We also 
acknowledge the contribution of former master student Nora 
Svarverud Aasen. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Majeed-Ariss et al., “Apps and Adolescents: A Systematic 
Review of Adolescents’ Use of Mobile Phone and Tablet 
Apps That Support Personal Management of Their Chronic or 
Long-Term Physical Conditions,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 
17, no. 12, Dec. 2015, pp. e287. 
[2] D. Nettle and M. Bateson, “The Evolutionary Origins of 
Mood and Its Disorders,” Curr. Biol., vol. 22, no. 17, Sep. 
2012, pp. R712–R721. 
[3]  P.M. A. Desmet, “Design for Mood: Twenty Activity-Based 
Opportunities to Design for Mood Regulation,” International 
Journal 
of 
Design. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.ijdesign.org/ojs/index.php/IJDesign/article/view/2
167/691. [Retrieved: 18-Jan-2016]. 
[4] J. Alvarez-Lozano et al., “Tell Me Your Apps and I Will Tell 
You Your Mood: Correlation of Apps Usage with Bipolar 
Disorder State,” Proceedings of the 7th International 
Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive 
Environments, New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 191–197. 
[5] A. Miloff, A. Marklund, and P. Carlbring, “The challenger 
app for social anxiety disorder: New advances in mobile 
psychological treatment,” Internet Interventions, vol. 2, no. 4, 
2015, pp. 382-392. 
[6] N. Shen et al., “Finding a Depression App: A Review and 
Content Analysis of the Depression App Marketplace,” JMIR 
MHealth UHealth, vol. 3, no. 1, Feb. 2015, pp. e16. 
[7] J. McNamara, “Get Happy iPhone App Gets You Happy One 
Tip At A Time,” TheAppReviewZone.com, 28-Dec-2012.  
[8] Y. Seko, S. Kidd, and D. Wiljer, “Apps for those who help 
themselves: Mobile self-guided interventions for adolescent 
mental health,” Sel. Pap. Internet Res., vol. 3, 2013, pp. 1-4. 
[9] M. Matthews, G. Doherty, J. Sharry, and C. Fitzpatrick, 
“Mobile phone mood charting for adolescents,” Br. J. Guid. 
Couns., vol. 36, no. 2, May 2008, pp. 113–129. 
[10] R. Kenny, B. Dooley, and A. Fitzgerald, “Feasibility of 
‘CopeSmart’: A Telemental Health App for Adolescents,” 
JMIR Ment. Health, vol. 2, no. 3, Aug. 2015, pp. e22. 
[11] Y. Seko, S. Kidd, D. Wiljer, and K. McKenzie, “Youth 
Mental Health Interventions via Mobile Phones: A Scoping 
Review,” Cyberpsychology Behav. Soc. Netw., vol. 17, no. 9, 
Jul. 2014, pp. 591–602. 
[12] S. Turkel and M. Pao, “Late Consequences of Pediatric 
Chronic Illness,” Psychiatr. Clin. North Am., vol. 30, no. 4, 
Dec. 2007, pp. 819–835. 
[13] M. van der Velden and K. El Emam, “‘Not all my friends 
need to know’: a qualitative study of teenage patients, 
privacy, and social media,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 
JAMIA, vol. 20, no. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 16–24. 
[14] A. M. Kanstrup, P. Bertelsen, and C. Nøhr, “Patient 
innovation: an analysis of patients’ designs of digital 
technology support for everyday living with diabetes,” Health 
Inf. Manag. J., pp. 1–9, 2014. 
[15] L. S. Liu, K. M. Inkpen, and W. Pratt, “‘I’m Not Like My 
Friends’: Understanding How Children with a Chronic Illness 
Use Technology to Maintain Normalcy,” Proceedings of the 
18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing (CSCW15), ACM, 2015, pp. 
1527–1539, ISBN: 978-1-4503-2922-4. 
[16] Akershus University Hospital, Youth Council at HPH 
international 
conference. 
2015 
[Online]. 
Available 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=izWTk5lqzbM 
[Retrieved: 18-Jan-2016]. 
[17] J. A. Aho and K. Aho, Body Matters: A Phenomenology of 
Sickness, Disease, and Illness. Lexington Books, 2008. 
[18] L. Todres, K. Galvin, and K. Dahlberg, “Lifeworld-led 
Healthcare: Revisiting a Humanising Philosophy that 
Integrates Emerging Trends,” Med. Health Care Philos., vol. 
10, no. 1, Jul. 2006, pp. 53–63. 
[19] K. Dahlberg, L. Todres, and K. Galvin, “Lifeworld-led 
healthcare is more than patient-led care: an existential view of 
well-being,” Med. Health Care Philos., vol. 12, no. 3, Aug. 
2009, pp. 265–271. 
[20] A. Pulman et al., “Empathy and Dignity through Technology: 
Using Lifeworld-Led Multimedia to Enhance Learning about 
the Head, Heart and Hand,” Electronic Journal of e-Learning, 
vol. 10, no. 3, 2012, pp. 349–359. 
[21] J. Simonsen and T. Robertson, Routledge international 
handbook of participatory design. New York: Routledge, 
2012. 
[22] M. van der Velden, M. M. Sommervold, and A. L. Culén, 
“Designing interactive technologies with teenagers in a 
hospital setting,” in An HCI Perspective on Working with 
Teenagers in Research Projects, Springer, 2016, in press. 
[23] V. P. Seidel and S. K. Fixson, “Adopting Design Thinking in 
Novice Multidisciplinary Teams: The Application and Limits 
of Design Methods and Reflexive Practices: Adopting Design 
Thinking in Novice Teams,” J. Prod. Innov. Manag., vol. 30, 
Dec. 2013, pp. 19–33. 
[24] N. Aasen, “Transitionapp – Responsibility for your own 
health,” Master Thesis, University of Oslo, Oslo, 2014. 
[25] S. Bødker and K. Grønbæk, “Cooperative prototyping: users 
and designers in mutual activity,” Int. J. Man-Mach. Stud., 
vol. 34, no. 3, Mar. 1991, pp. 453–478. 
[26] Y.-K. Lim, E. Stolterman, and J. Tenenberg, “The Anatomy 
of Prototypes: Prototypes As Filters, Prototypes As 
Manifestations of Design Ideas,” ACM Trans Comput-Hum 
Interact, vol. 15, no. 2, Jul. 2008, pp. 71–727. 
[27] M. van der Velden, M. M. Sommervold, and A. L. Culén, 
“Patient-Intitiated Personalisation: Privacy, Moods, and 
Colours,” Proceedings of the International Conference on e-
Health 2015 (E-Health), IADIS Press, 2015, pp. 95-103, 
ISBN 978-989-8533-42-5.  
[28] J. B. Younger, “A theory of mastery,” ANS Adv. Nurs. Sci., 
vol. 14, no. 1, Sep. 1991, pp. 76–89. 
[29] A. Cavoukian, and M. Prosch, “The Roadmap for Privacy by 
Design in Mobile Communications: A Practical Tool for 
Developers, Service Providers, and Users,” Inf. Priv. Comm. 
Ont. Can., 2010, pp. 1-27. 
 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

