Doctors, Patients, and Service Providers:  
A cloud-based approach for managing healthcare processes 
 
Ayman Moghnieh, Oriol Galimany, Joaquim Colás,  
Alan Tapscott, Miguel Angel Carralero, Josep Blat 
Interactive Technologies Group,  
Universitat Pompeu Fabra 
C/Tanger 122-140, E-08018 Barcelona, Spain 
{ayman.moghnie, oriol.galimany, joaquim.colas, alan.tapscott, miguel.carralero, josep.blat} @upf.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—The ability of an eHealth system to empower and 
support doctors in undertaking healthcare processes and 
adapting them to the specific needs of their patients is key for 
its success. In this paper, we present a cloud-based approach 
for this type of eHealth systems, and consequently encourage 
their proliferation. First, we discuss a new healthcare business 
model that emancipates doctors from their reliance on 
technical assistance, and facilitates their cooperation with 
healthcare service providers. Then, we introduce a conceptual 
model of healthcare processes that allows doctors to 
understand, program, and upkeep them easily. We illustrate 
how both these components constitute a basis for cloud-based 
eHealth systems by discussing the development of a prototype 
implementation. Finally, we show how the prototype can be 
integrated in existing workflows by discussing a contextual 
analysis conducted to guide this integration. We conclude by 
discussing our results. 
Keywords-eHealth; Business Process Management; Cloud 
Computing  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Despite the exponential growth in information and 
communication technologies (ICT) and their pervasive 
integration in different domains of human enterprises, 
current ICT solutions do not generally address the needs of 
today’s modern medicine [1]. In particular, in the context of 
the rise of web-based social networking, Service-Oriented 
Architectures (SOAs), and cloud computing, little support 
for translating healthcare processes to the web, and 
managing remote doctor-patient relations is provided. In 
order to support this translation, there is a need to develop a 
new approach for modern healthcare systems that facilitates 
the sharing of information, modules, and services, as 
recommended by Valeri et al. in their extensive study 
conducted for the European Commission for Health [2]. 
Currently, 
cloud-based 
healthcare 
services 
made 
available by third-party providers are growing in number and 
maturity [10]. These services have an important potential to 
improve overall healthcare delivery on the web, but they 
require appropriate Service-Oriented Architectures (SOAs) 
that stimulate and support their integration into customized 
healthcare processes. These SOAs enable the creation of 
cloud-based systems that could empower doctors to create 
diagnostic, medical, and monitoring processes from third-
party services available in the cloud, and publish them on the 
web for the benefit of their patients without the help or direct 
intervention of ICT experts. This would allow doctors to 
exert a more elaborate control over their patients’ web 
experiences, and adjust their processes according to the 
patients’ profiles (e.g. older people, chronically ill, 
handicapped, or children). As a result, now the patients could 
execute the personalized processes designed by their doctors 
more confidently. This direct doctor-patient interaction will 
allow service providers to study and understand how both 
doctors and 
patients 
use the services 
they 
offer. 
Consequently, service providers could alter, improve, or 
adjust their services based this essential feedback.  
We identify two main requirements for cloud-based 
eHealth systems: first, they should implement an adequate 
business model that permits stakeholders (doctors and 
service providers) to capitalize on their investments, and 
guarantees a long-term sustainability to build up its success 
[2]. Second, the systems must support and empower doctors, 
patients, and service providers, in performing their roles 
independently. In particular, doctors should easily create 
healthcare processes and customize them for their patients, 
patients should use them with confidence and ease, and 
service providers should create and adjust adequate services 
relevant to the needs of both doctors and patients.  
In this paper we introduce an approach fulfilling these 
two requirements of cloud-based eHealth systems. It consists 
of two main components: an eHealth business model 
designed to emancipate doctors from IT consultants and 
software developers, and facilitate their collaboration with 
service providers; and an intuitive conceptual model for 
healthcare processes that enables doctors, patients, and 
service providers to understand them easily and evenly. Both 
components provide a foundation for the development of 
cloud-based eHealth systems and promise to facilitate more 
and better ICT integration into healthcare.  
In the following section, we discuss some related work 
before introducing a new cloud-based business model for 
eHealth that supports doctors in managing their online 
healthcare processes, and service providers in tapping into 
the eHealth market. Then, we propose a conceptual model of 
healthcare processes conceived as a mediation tool for 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

forging interaction and cooperation between doctors, 
patients, 
and 
service 
providers. 
We 
then 
present 
VirtualClinic, a prototypical system designed to illustrate the 
feasibility of our approach. Finally, we discuss a contextual 
inquiry conducted at a local clinic to evaluate if VirtualClinic 
can be integrated in existing workflows and understand how 
this integration should be effectuated.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Currently, apart from the challenges discussed earlier, the 
development of eHealth systems is hindered by several 
barriers proper to the eHealth sector, such as those stated by 
Sittig et al. [3].These challenges need to be overcome to 
develop such architecture and consequently integrate ICT 
technologies in healthcare successfully. Several cloud-based 
approaches exist, such as the integrated eHealth Living Labs 
introduced by Mazurek and Stroinski, which is a platform 
with application areas from disease research, through 
treatment organization, to remote consultations, among 
others [1]; and Rolim et al. for remote monitoring of patients 
through sensor-based data collection [4]. However, the 
existing approaches do not provide doctors with the required 
control over the processes, nor facilitate the incorporation of 
a wide range of third-party services.    
In addition, eHealth business models are still immature 
and 
specifically 
not 
adapted 
for 
cloud 
computing 
environments[2]. However, it is possible to formulate new 
adequate models by relying on the conceptual business 
architecture proposed by Motahari-Nezhad, Stephenson, and 
Singhal for cloud computing in [5], which addresses the 
business context (in this case, eHealth), the support for non-
technical profiles, the lifecycle of business processes, and 
third-party services.  
III. 
A CLOUD-BASED BUSINESS MODEL FOR EHEALTH 
In general, business processes should follow an iterative 
agile lifecycle that permits them to keep evolving and thus 
adequately answering the changing requirements of their 
users [6]. In healthcare, doctors can easily devise and 
personalize the onsite diagnostic, medical, and monitoring 
processes of their patients, but to the extent of our 
knowledge, there are no available tools for supporting 
doctors in developing and maintaining these processes when 
they are transposed to eHealth systems. Doctors still need 
external technical support, making difficult to follow the 
agile lifecycle. 
This situation was investigated by conducting a six-
month dialogue with three Spanish service providers for 
eHealth and two leading hospitals in Barcelona. This 
revealed the characteristics of the classic business model 
(figure 1) that forms the backbone of current practices in the 
Spanish sector. Currently, in order to design, develop, and 
publish online healthcare processes, doctors first need to ask 
for the help of IT consultants to define these processes in a 
standardized business process notation (such as BPMN [7]), 
and later to manage their publication on the web. Then, 
software developers would implement the processes using 
their development frameworks. The developers can 
incorporate third-party services in the processes, but this is 
usually hindered by the lack of interoperability between the 
designs of these processes and third-party modules [8].  
 
Figure 1.  Current business model of the Spanish eHealth sector  
The current business model makes doctors heavily 
dependent on IT consultants and software developers in 
their quest to provide online healthcare processes for their 
patients. This requires a hefty dialogue between doctors, IT 
consultants, and software developers, and therefore 
increases the risk of losing knowledge during the transition 
between requirements and design, especially for the design 
of complex healthcare processes that accommodate various 
alternatives in the same patients’ profile. Similarly, 
upgrading the resulting healthcare processes to address new 
requirements (e.g. to cover a new chronic illness, or to 
introduce a novel memory enhancement service for 
Alzheimer) also has an important cost. Furthermore, medical 
knowledge about patients is complex and may be difficult to 
capture and assimilate by IT professionals.  
This complexity leads to centralized solutions (at the 
level of hospital or larger) that seldom account for 
interoperability with third-party services and usually do not 
capture the rich practice of doctors. The maintenance and 
updating of these centralized solutions is heavy, complex, 
and very expensive. 
The cloud-based model proposed (figure 2) can eliminate 
dependencies between doctors and technical profiles, 
improves the doctor’s control on the patient’s experience, 
and streamlines the management of healthcare processes. It 
also provides a platform for service providers to share their 
services more efficiently. In addition, it creates a more direct 
and trustworthy relation between patients and their doctors.  
 
Figure 2.  A proposed cloud-based business model 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The works of Motahari-Nezhad et al. provide a 
framework for applying cloud-based business models to 
eHealth cases by considering the roles of three main actors in 
healthcare processes: doctors, patients, and service providers. 
Doctors compose these processes from a pool of available 
services and customize them in order to address the specific 
needs of their patients, including personalization. Service 
providers offer the pool of generic healthcare services that 
could be configured and personalized to befit different 
healthcare processes. The services are defined in a generic 
way that makes the management of healthcare processes 
more modular and dynamic by enabling the reuse of same 
services in several distinct processes. This guarantees a 
larger usage for the services, and therefore increases their 
economical feasibility and encourages service providers in 
identifying potential markets for the services they offer. 
Patients interact with the processes proposed by their doctors 
through the web without interference from service providers. 
However, the success of this model rests on having the 
required services available in the cloud, and on abstracting 
the technical complexity of process management from 
doctors in order to allow their intuitive modeling and 
management. This is addressed in the following section. 
IV. 
A CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF EHEALTH PROCESSES 
The functional requirements of cloud-based eHealth 
systems that empower doctors in managing healthcare 
processes independently have been defined and studied by 
Beyer, Kuhn, and Indulskain [9]. They found that the 
technical and technological complexity associated with 
business process management represents one of the largest 
barriers for the direct involvement of non-technical profiles 
(such as doctors), and therefore should be reduced. Doctors 
do not have the required knowledge to program processes 
and therefore can only rely on non-technical paradigms to 
manage them. Therefore, they cannot utilize the current 
standardized notations for designing and implementing 
business processes (such as BPMN). Hence, we propose the 
following conceptual model to encapsulate the complexity of 
business process management in order to facilitate the 
involvement of non-technical profiles, especially doctors, in 
managing healthcare processes. 
 
 
Figure 3.  The proposed healthcare process model  
This model of healthcare processes has formulated by 
conducting iterative focus sessions with stakeholders 
(doctors and service providers), computer scientists, and 
graphical designers. The objectives of these sessions were to 
seek a convergence between the different mental models that 
represent the profiles involved with any cloud-based eHealth 
system. For this purpose, several different eHealth scenarios 
were discussed, analyzed, and designed collaboratively (e.g. 
medical consulting, remote assistance, and follow-up on 
chronic patients). Figure 3 shows the components (process, 
step, condition, service, widget, and page) of the resulting 
model. They are explained in the following. 
A. Process 
The process represents an entire healthcare procedure. 
Doctors usually manage a variety of processes tailored 
according to needs of their patients. These needs differ 
according to the patient’s profile and usually evolve in 
parallel with the evolution of medical practices and 
treatments. These processes can be published online as a set 
of linked pages, each hosting one or several components 
that patients interact with. The process has specific start and 
end, and several possible routes may exist to execute it from 
start to end.  
B. Steps and conditions 
A process may be composed of one or several steps. 
Each step addresses to a specific segment of the healthcare 
procedure, and groups many atomic actions that correspond 
to a given objective (e.g. take an appointment, measure and 
communicate your blood pressure, contact medic and 
describe symptoms, etc…).  
Conditions are logical statements that define bifurcations 
that processes may have. These conditioned bifurcations 
allow the process to be flexible and able to respond to 
several variations of the same patient profile. For example, a 
condition is used to differentiate between patients with 
urgent issues that need immediate teleconferencing with 
their doctor, and those that only require an appointment, 
allowing the same eHealth process to attend to both cases.  
C. Services  
In essence, a step is an encapsulation of linear sequences 
of healthcare services connected together to achieve the 
corresponding segment of healthcare procedure. Services 
are cloud-based resources offered by service providers. 
Each represents an indivisible action that users may perform 
inside a step (e.g. measuring your temperature, selecting an 
appointment date, etc…). Services are collocated in steps 
sequentially.  
D. Widgets and web pages  
Services may require user interaction. Widgets are the 
graphical user interface of these services. Each service may 
have a single widget, but these widgets may have several 
interface modes. 
In essence, web pages represent the patients’ view of the 
process. They are linked according to the order of the 
corresponding steps in the process. On the web, each web 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

page represents a single step of the process. It composed of 
the widgets that represent the services of the corresponding 
step. The widgets are collocated vertically on the page in the 
order of their corresponding services. When services are 
grouped non-sequentially, the corresponding widgets are 
presented in a tab-container on the web page. 
E. The process dataflow  
According to the model, each step in the process 
requires a set of input data and generates a set of output data 
that feeds further steps. Similarly, each service requires a set 
of input data and generates a set of output data as a 
response. This output data may be used as an input data for 
further Services inside the same step. In addition, this data is 
transmitted along the process and can be used as data input 
for services. This data can be generated by user interaction 
with widgets and medical sensors, or retrieved from 
databases connected to the services.   
EHealth systems usually have a rich dataflow of medical 
and personal information of sensitive and private nature. 
This information should be securely protected to avoid 
incidences that can affect the public trust in online 
healthcare systems. This information should only be 
revealed to people with legitimate access rights, and 
otherwise encrypted especially when flowing between cloud 
components.  
F. Evaluating the Process Model with Potential Users  
The model has been collaboratively developed by a 
group of nine persons representing the three main profiles 
(doctors, patients, service providers). In order to evaluate 
the intuitiveness of this model, a two hours session was 
organized with sixteen subjects with no experience in 
business process modeling, but with knowledge about user-
oriented design. The process model was briefly introduced 
to all the participants, then each one was asked to design 
healthcare processes for a given scenario by using the 
model. Finally, the participants were asked to fill a 
questionnaire 
about 
their 
experience, 
and 
informal 
interviews were conducted with each of them.  
The results of these activities show subjects easily 
understand the model (only one participant did not fully 
grasp the model components). The subjects found the model 
to be highly intuitive, and used it to design the required 
healthcare processes accurately (defining different processes 
and their steps, selecting the proper services, and connecting 
all components to insure a correct dataflow).  
V. 
VIRTUALCLINIC: A CLOUD-BASED EHEALTH SYSTEM  
In order to assess the feasibility of using both cloud-
based business model and the healthcare process model 
introduced in the design of eHealth systems, we have 
designed and implemented VirtualClinic, a prototype system 
for remote diagnosis and medical assistance. It consists of a 
SOA that permits service providers to offer healthcare 
services in an interoperable manner, allowing their 
incorporation in customized healthcare processes. The SOA 
also manages the publication of these processes on the web 
and the interaction of patients with them. In addition, the 
system includes a tool that doctors use to compose and 
manage healthcare processes. The SOA implements the 
principles of a cloud-based business model for eHealth, and 
the tool implements the healthcare process model. 
A. A Cloud-Based Service Oriented Architecture 
The system architecture is designed to automate the 
composition and publication of online healthcare processes 
in a cloud environment. It is composed of a core platform 
hosted on the system server and three different client 
modules, each hosted on a corresponding client terminal 
(figure 4). The core platform design is inspired from that of 
BPEL engines where a server-based platform controls the 
execution of the processes. This platform incorporates three 
main modules: the communication module, the workflow 
engine, and the service repository. 
 
Figure 4.  A SOA for eHealth systems 
Service providers use their own client on their terminal to 
add new services to the service repository. The client 
interface is an online form that generates a standardized RDF 
definition for each service. Doctors make use of their process 
manager to compose healthcare processes from these 
services. The workflow engine compiles and executes the 
composed processes, and the communication module 
generates the corresponding web pages, which are accessed 
by the patient client. The communication module also 
manages the sending of messages between services, and 
supports the exchange of information between the process 
executing on the workflow engine and the patient client, 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

enabling patients to interact with the processes a step at a 
time. 
B. A Doctor’s Tool for Managing Healthcare Processes  
The process manager tool is designed to empower 
doctors in managing healthcare processes by using the 
process model to represent them. It addresses the functional 
requirements as defined by the doctor’s role in a cloud-based 
eHealth system. The tool has two interface modes: one for 
creating and managing healthcare processes (figure 5), and 
another for composing the process steps from existing 
services (figure 6).    
 
 
Figure 5.  The process manager interface. 
 
Figure 6.  The step editor interface. 
Doctors can compose a given healthcare process by 
creating and ordering its steps. In general, the steps are 
sequentially ordered inside the process, but doctors can 
define different execution paths by arranging several steps in 
parallel. This is achieved by introducing a condition in the 
process that evaluate the output of the previous step in order 
to decide which of the subsequent parallel steps is the 
adequate one in the course of the process execution.  
The steps are composed from existing services by using 
the step editor, which is access from the process manager. A 
browser assists the doctors in searching for and exploring 
healthcare services available in the repository. Selected 
services are integrated in the step sequentially, but services 
can be grouped into service containers. For each integrated 
service, its data input is automatically connected to the 
output of its antecedent service, and doctors can edit and 
modify this linkage. Services are ordered vertically on the 
corresponding web page, and grouped services are ordered 
horizontally in tab containers.   
C. Executing a remote asistance scenario 
VirtualClinic revolves around the scenario where a 
doctor wishes to remotely provide general medical 
assistance to two different types of patients: fairly healthy 
and chronically ill patients. The doctor needs to reduce 
congestion in the clinic and the patients would like to reduce 
the travels they effectuate to receive healthcare. Fairly 
healthy patients only use common eHealth services (e.g. 
inquiring about their medical history, checking the calendar 
of consultations, and conferring online with their doctor). 
Chronically ill patients require a wider more specialized 
range of services (e.g. checking their vital signs with 
sensors, sending this data to their doctor, and inquiring 
about medications and newly developed symptoms). They 
also might require specific services in accordance with their 
illness (e.g. Alzheimer patients require memory exercises). 
 
 
Figure 7.  Patient using the remote asistance service 
The design and implementation of the VirtualClinic 
architecture sustain this scenario from a technical stance. The 
service repository contains a number of general cloud 
services by default (e.g. registration, billing, calendar, maps, 
social network services, etc...). In addition, service providers 
added several healthcare services, including a remote 
assistance service (figure 7), an electronic prescription 
service, and a drug delivery service. Given this pool of 
services, three distinct healthcare processes were created 
with the process manager and published on the web. One 
process was dedicated for taking appointments or conferring 
with a medic for urgent matters; another process allowed 
chronic patients to renew and update their prescription, and 
order their medication; the third process centered on the 
remote diagnosis of older patients. In essence, VirtualClinic 
provides a proof of concept that illustrates how cloud-based 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

systems can be engineered to facilitate both the composition 
of customized healthcare processes and their execution.  
VI. 
INTEGRATING VIRTUALCLINIC IN REAL SETTINGS 
The VirtualClinic as a proof of concept represents a 
positive assessment of the feasibility of cloud-based eHealth 
systems. We studied its deployment in a local clinic in order 
to assess its compatibility and adaptability to real-world 
settings. 
A local clinic (subsidiary of Munich Health, a leading 
European health insurer) specialized in work-related 
accidents treatment and prevention was chosen as the test 
bed for this study. This typical clinic is part of an intricate 
network of private healthcare services in Spain, which 
includes private hospitals, laboratories and diagnostic 
centers. This network represents a prime customer base for 
commercial healthcare service providers, including the 
emergent eHealth services.We conducted a contextual 
inquiry in the local clinic, which included interviewing the 
different relevant profiles, understanding the workflow 
among them, and the systems they rely on to manage their 
work. Its results identify the manner by which VirtualClinic 
should be integrated. 
A. Identifying the workflow at the local clinic 
 
Figure 8.  The current workflow in the local clinic 
Five main profiles are considered relevant in our context: 
the chief of medicine drafts and updates the clinical 
guidelines that doctors follow, and assign doctors to specific 
medical programs (e.g. prevention of aspiratory diseases in 
the workplace, or treatment of head injury and trauma); the 
doctors (a total of 18) keep a direct and periodic contact with 
patients, and often use the web system to assign them visits, 
reminders, and exercises. The web system is a doctor/patient 
interface;patients(more than 2,000) use the systemto access 
relevant information and services from their homes; TheIT 
department (5 IT experts) developed the web system and 
services and upgrades it according to the directions of the 
chief of medicine; in addition, third-party eHealth service 
providers sell off-the-shelf solutions to the clinic and service 
them afterwards in collaboration with the IT department, and 
discuss new products with the chief of medicine.  
The workflow associated with these profiles is drawn in 
figure 8.It isolates the section of the clinic workflow relevant 
to the deployment of cloud-based eHealth systems. It is 
typical of contemporary clinical workflows, with a strong 
initiative in eHealth and telemedicine.  
B. Understanding the views of different profiles 
The interviews with the chief of medicine, a doctor, and 
two IT experts focused on the potential of adopting a cloud-
based model, its advantages and disadvantages from the 
point of view of each profile.  
The chief of medicine requires a more dynamic way to 
manage the creation and upgrade of clinical guidelines, and 
include third-party services in them. He views cloud-based 
systems a necessity as the relation with patients becomes 
more digitized. The doctor does not wish to rely excessively 
on remote services nor sees alternatives to meeting regularly 
with patients, however she recognizes the potential of web-
based services in therapy and rehabilitation.The doctor also 
considers videoconferencing a positive and efficient 
approach for support and emergencies. The IT experts are 
capable of building and handling complex systems, they 
think cloud-based systems are good and advanced solutions 
but they raise concerns about data security. Adopting a 
cloud-based infrastructure allows them to expand their 
system easily by relying on third-party components.  
 
Figure 9.  The integration of VirtualClinic in the workflow 
C. Integrating VirtualClinic 
The integration of VirtualClinic in this workflow should 
preserve the current structure as much as possible and avoid 
disadvantaging any profile. The system should also be 
integrated with other existing tools (e.g. the patient manager 
that doctors use to maintain digital dossiers).  
For this purpose an integration proposal has been 
conceived, discussed with the different profiles and adjusted 
to provide a good fit. This integration (figure 9) is currently 
ongoing. According to it, the chief of medicine uses the 
process manager to draft new processes as clinical 
guidelines; future upgrades will look into unifying both 
digital and printed systems. The doctors use an integrated 
patient manager (currently under development) to assign the 
processes designed by the chief of medicine to their patients 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

“step by step”. The IT department manages the entire system 
architecture and mediates the participation of service 
provides. These can now benefit from a broader opportunity 
to sell their services. The patient experience also benefits 
from the new services, as the system is not design to replace 
any existing procedure.  
VII. DISCUSSION 
Our experience with VirtualClinic illustrates the viability 
of cloud-based solutions for eHealth applications. It shows 
how the technical complexity of these systems can be 
encapsulated by making the involved profiles more 
independent and supporting each in performing its role. 
Doctors assume control over the management of healthcare 
processes, patients benefit from more personalized and 
trustworthy procedures, and service providers sell their 
services in the cloud. 
The contextual inquiry conducted at a local clinic and the 
subsequent integration (undergoing) of the VirtualClinic 
demonstrate that these systems can be adopted as a major 
transition step toward a cloud-based business model. They 
also simplify the workflow by making each profile more 
independent and empowered: the chief of medicine can 
manage the guidelines with ease and also integrate services 
from external providers. Doctors have more access and 
control over these services. In addition, the IT department no 
longer needs to maintain direct relation with the chief of 
medicine.  
The approach proposed in this work can be applied in 
other domains where non-experts require the help of 
technical profiles in managing their business processes. In 
particular, it is currently being applied in an eCommerce 
scenario where a t-shirt manufacturing company wishes to 
allow customers to design, customize, and order their own t-
shirts on the web. In this scenario, one of the interesting 
challenges is to empower marketing directors to constantly 
create and publish sales campaigns on the web sites, 
including social networks. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
Current eHealth business models require a constant 
involvement of IT professionals to create and maintain 
online healthcare processes. The cost of managing healthcare 
processes in accordance with these models is elevated, and 
its efficiency is reduced. In this work, we evaluated the use 
of a cloud-based business model that simplifies the 
management of healthcare processes, dispenses this task 
directly to the doctor, and facilitates the incorporation of 
third-party healthcare services.  Consequently, it allows for a 
more direct doctor-patient relationship through the web.  
A conceptual model of healthcare processes is introduced 
to address the interaction requirements that the cloud-based 
business model entails. This process model allows doctors to 
assume control over the creation and customization of 
healthcare 
processes 
and 
minimizes 
their 
technical 
complexity. We evaluated the feasibility of our approach by 
implementing VirtualClinic, an eHealth system design for 
remote assistance. In addition, a contextual inquiry was 
conducted at a selected clinic to integrate VirtualClinic. The 
results illustrate how VirtualClinic is being integrated. 
 This approach also has its limitations. Several important 
aspects of eHealth systems were not addressed, including 
data security and privacy issues, which are important due to 
existing risks and regulations. The services currently used in 
VirtualClinic do not raise such concerns; however they 
should be addressed in the near future to include services 
(e.g. remote-diagnostics) that raise them. In addition, the 
cloud-based system requires a largeand diversified pool of 
services to allow a diversity of processes to be created. The 
quality of the available services also plays an influential role. 
Nonetheless, the lucrative opportunities inherent in the 
eHealth sector act as a sufficient incentive for service 
providers to refine the services they offer. With the ability to 
monitor the use of their services, service providers can 
receive essential feedback to improve them. This constitutes 
the backbone of our future work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially sponsored by the R&D 
project España Virtual funded by CNIG-Spain under the 
Ingenio 2010 R&D program. The authors would also like to 
thank Ernesto Arroyo, Androme IbéricaS.L., DKV Seguros, 
as well as Mario Quesada and Raúl Vallespín for their 
contributions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Mazurek and M. Stroinski, “Innovative ICT Platform for Emerging 
eHealth Services: Towards Overcoming Technical and Social 
Barriers and Solving Grand Challenges in Medicine,” in proc. 
eTELEMED 2010, pp. 33-38. 
[2] K. K. Lorenzo Valeri, Daan Giesen, Patrick Jansen, Business Models 
for eHealth Final Report. February. 2010. 
[3] D. F. Sittig, A. Wright, J.A. Osheroff, B. Middleton, J.M.Teich, J.S. 
Ash, E. Campell, and D.W.Bates, “Grand challenges in clinical 
decision support.,” Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 41, pp. 
387-92, Apr. 2008. 
[4] C. O. Rolim, F. L. Koch, C. B. Westphall, J. Werner, A. Fracalossi, 
and G. S. Salvador, “A Cloud Computing Solution for Patient’s Data 
Collection in Health Care Institutions,” in proc. eTELEMED 2010, 
no. i, pp. 95–99. 
[5] H. R. Motahari-nezhad, B. Stephenson, and S. Singhal, “Outsourcing 
Business to Cloud Computing Services: Opportunities and Challenges 
Outsourcing Business to Cloud Computing Services: Opportunities 
and Challenges,” IEEE Internet computing, 2009. 
[6] R. K. L. Ko, “A computer scientist’s introductory guide to business 
process management (BPM),” Crossroads, vol. 15, no. 4, p. 4, 2009. 
[7] S. White, “Introduction to BPMN,” IBM Cooperation, no. c, pp. 1-11, 
2004. 
[8] J. Recker and M. Indulska, “How good is BPMN really? Insights 
from theory and practice,” 2006. 
[9] M. Beyer, K. Kuhn, and C. Meiler, “Towards a flexible, process-
oriented IT architecture for an integrated healthcare network,” in 
proc. Proceedings of SAC 2004, pp. 264-271.  
[10] J. D. A. Medinilla Corbellini, S. Giest, J. Artmann, J. Heywood, 
Country Brief: Spain - eHealth Strategies, no. October. 2010, p. 3
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

