Co-creation of an Innovation Network: 
Engagement and User Involvement in Digital Care Services 
 
Torbjørg Træland Meum 
 Department of Information Systems 
University of Agder 
Campus Kristiansand, Norway 
 torbjorg.t.meum@uia.no 
 
Etty Ragnhild Nilsen 
Department of Strategy and Finance 
University College of Southeast Norway 
Campus Ringerike, Norway 
etty.nilsen@hbv.no
Abstract— This work in progress paper presents a study of 
digital innovation in municipal care services, and we highlight 
collaboration and communication among various stakeholders 
in the process of implementing welfare technologies. We 
characterize innovation in municipal care services as socio-
technical networks of organizations that enable innovation and 
we emphasize mechanisms that enable engagement and mutual 
learning across professional, organizational and geographical 
boundaries. In particular, we focus on how knowledge is 
mediated and how actors and resources are mobilized in the 
network.  The study is further inspired by Action Design 
Research and we present ongoing activities of the creation of 
an innovation network.  
Keywords- Welfare technology; Innovation; Information 
Infrastructure; 
Socio-technical 
systems; 
Action 
Design 
Research. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Designing information systems is one of the core areas in 
the interdisciplinary community of health informatics, 
emphasizing technological, sociological and organizational 
challenges as key issues in developing and maintaining 
effective health information systems [1]. In particular, 
studies of the sociotechnical tradition has highlighted the 
contextual nature of health information and consider design 
as the synergy between the specific particularities of health 
care work, and the informating properties of information and 
communication technologies (ICT) [2]. Accordingly, new 
methods and techniques for user involvement in the design 
process have emerged to bridge the design-reality gap. 
Several studies have applied user-centric design methods in 
healthcare and demonstrate the capability to translate user 
needs into technical requirements [3]. However, the 
changing nature of health care combined with evolving 
technological capabilities leads to new challenges to user 
involvement in the design process. 
First and foremost, the evolving use of mobile 
technologies changes the information pathway in society in 
general and the healthcare sector in particular. The 
demographic change in society has led to increased pressure 
on the organization and performance of health care services. 
In particular there is a need for new models and technologies 
to support long-term care of the increasing population of 
elderly as well as people with chronic illnesses and 
disabilities. Accordingly, various research fields, such as 
telecare, assistive technologies and Ambient Assisted Living 
(AAL) systems have taken part in international research 
efforts and have led to increased knowledge and insight into 
currently available solutions and enabling technologies [4]. 
The term welfare technology is used in Scandinavia and 
national initiatives in Norway highlight technological 
solutions that promote safety and enable people to better 
manage their own health [5]. Despite the promising impacts 
and opportunities with the use of ICT in elderly care, there is 
limited and inconsistent evidence about the effects of 
assistive technologies [6] as well as limited use beyond the 
pilot-study level [4]. A recent systematic review of AAL 
systems also argues for more participatory approaches, user 
feedback and collaborative efforts in the development 
process [4]. Innovation in mobile technologies has also 
increased the complexity and introduced new challenges to 
existing “IT silos” in the e-health field [7]. In line with the 
increased use of computers as an embedded part of everyday 
practices, the scope of healthcare technologies has moved 
from singular tools to networks of systems, practices, and 
people, i.e., digital infrastructures [7]. As ICT systems have 
become deeply socially embedded, we need to take into 
account the dynamic interplay between planned design and 
context of use as well as integration of new technologies in 
the socio-technical network. The notion of users in socio-
technical networks are often characterized by diversity and 
the challenge is to manage heterogeneous knowledge 
resources that span across professional and organizational 
units [8].  Based on these insights, we focus on user 
involvement in the adoption and use of welfare technology in 
municipal care services, and we emphasize the innovation 
process in particular, i.e., to do something new in order to 
create value. 
The study is based on a research and innovation project 
on adoption and use of digital surveillance in municipal care 
services. The opportunity for mutual learning and knowledge 
sharing across professional and organizational boundaries is 
one of the research areas in the project and in this paper we 
focus on user engagement and collaboration in the 
innovation process. In particular we are interesting in how 
actors involved in the project share knowledge and how 
actors and resources are mobilized during the innovation 
process. Furthermore, our study is inspired by user-oriented 
methods such as Participatory Design [9] and Action Design 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Research (ADR) [10]. These methods emphasize design and 
development as an iterative process of mutual learning and 
thus enable co-design with community members in the 
context of their daily lives.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follow: Section II 
provides a brief introduction to the theoretical foundation of 
the study. The research setting and method is presented in 
Section III and provides insight into the objectives of the 
overall research project in order to illustrate how engagement 
and learning are part of the innovation process. Section IV 
and V provides insight to the case study, as well as ongoing 
activities of design and development of a communication 
platform. Finally, in Section VI we discuss the need to 
establish a shared information place in the project and further 
design and development of a digital platform. 
II. 
 DIGITAL INNOVATION AND ACTION DESIGN 
RESEARCH  
An official Norwegian report on innovation in the care 
services has made recommendation for new innovative 
solutions in order to meet future challenges [11].  In 
particular, the report highlights the use of new technology as 
a resource for value creation and emphasize user influence, 
participation and co-creation in the development of future 
care services.   
Innovation in health care involves interdisciplinary 
collaboration and is typically distributed across various 
organizations. Yoo, Lyytinnen and Boland [8] have used the 
term innovation network to refer to socio-technical networks 
of organizations that enable innovation [8, p.1]. Moreover, 
they conceptualize innovation as a series of translations 
between ideas (either in form of physical products or 
services), mediated through technology artifacts [8, p. 2]). Of 
particular interest in our project is what they refer to as 
“social translation” that takes place at the boundaries of 
communities where individual actors negotiate and mutually 
adjust to other’s perspectives. Similar studies have 
emphasized different mechanisms for how information 
systems evolve as well as the capabilities to generate new 
services [12] [13]. Overall, these studies have illustrated the 
generative power of information infrastructures and 
emphasized knowledge sharing and learning as capabilities 
during innovation process. 
Based on these insights, we have used an ADR approach 
for the formation of an innovation network across 
professional and organizational boundaries in our project. 
ADR provides an opportunity to combine basic principles of 
traditional Design Research (building and evaluating 
innovative IT artifacts) [14], while also emphasizing 
participation and cooperative change [15]. In contrast to 
traditional design that separates building from evaluating, 
ADR is characterized as an iterative process that addresses a 
problem situation encountered in a specific organizational 
setting by intervening and evaluating [10]. The notion of 
information technology in ADR is based on the ensemble 
view of IT artifacts and involves the interaction of design 
efforts and contextual factors throughout the design process. 
The design process consists of four stages that include; 1) 
Problem formulation; 2) Building, Intervention, and 
Evaluation; 3) Reflection and learning; 4) Formalization and 
learning. Traditional design is often described as a step-by-
step 
process 
in 
which 
problem 
formulation 
(user 
requirements) is followed by development of the artifact, 
which in turn is followed by an evaluation. In contrast, the 
ADR process is a highly iterative process and thus highlights 
the emergent nature of the ensemble artifact. There are some 
main features that we consider highly relevant for our 
project. Firstly, it takes into consideration the dynamic and 
emergent nature of socio-technical systems and the interplay 
between planned design and the context of use. Second, the 
ADR process focuses on participation among researchers, 
practitioners and end-users throughout the design process. 
Thirdly, it is strongly oriented toward collaboration and 
change involving both researchers and subjects [15, p.330]. 
Eventually the outcome of the design process is formalized 
and shared with practitioners and generalized as design 
principles for a particular type of information systems.  
In addition, our research is based on previous studies on 
design and use of digital platforms in healthcare [16] as well 
as studies on knowledge management [17] and trans-situated 
learning [18].  
III. 
RESEARCH SETTING AND METOD 
The study is based on an ongoing research project in the 
municipal care services involving partners from different 
professional communities and organizational units. The 
project originates from a health innovation cluster (Arena 
Health Innovation) that was formed in 2009 as a partnership 
between academia, public sector and academia. A key 
objective among partners in the innovation cluster was to 
identify capabilities to improve services and provide 
technologies to support the needs of municipal care. Based 
on ongoing activities in the health innovation cluster, a pilot 
project was initiated and carried out between June 2013 and 
May 2014. Moreover, experiences and findings from the 
pilot project have been prolonged to a larger research project 
lasting from 2014 to the end of 2017.  
The primary research objective of the overall project is to 
identify factors for successful implementation of welfare 
technologies in municipal care services. Communication and 
collaboration among various stakeholders is a challenge and 
one of the research areas in the project is how knowledge 
and skills are shared among stakeholders during the 
innovation process.  Stakeholders involved in the project 
include eight municipalities, two research institutions, as 
well as two providers who are partners in the innovation 
cluster. All municipalities started with the same basic 
technology that includes a web-based portal and sensors 
embedded in security blankets and door handles. In an 
iterative process of design and use, new features will be 
added and the number of service receivers will increase in 
line with the innovation process. Accordingly, research and 
innovation goes “hand in hand” and this involves adjustment 
of 
technology, 
identification 
of 
new 
services 
and 
technological capabilities. Thus, the project requires a high 
level of engagement from all stakeholders who have signed a 
consortium agreement that involves commitment to 
participate in all planned activities.  
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Data collection has been a combination of participant 
observations, 
semi-structured 
interviews 
and 
archival 
documents. A main source of data collection has been 
participant observation at workshops. In total, we have 
participated at five workshops that have gathered all the key 
people involved in the project, that is, nurses, nursing 
assistants, vendors, employees at the IT departments, and 
researchers. As researchers, we have had a dual role during 
these meetings. First, we have acted as facilitators by 
participating in the preparation as well as practical support 
during the workshops. Secondly, we have acted as observers 
and followed closely emerging discussions, reflections and 
interaction between various actors. In addition, we 
participated in local project meetings in the municipalities as 
well as informal meetings in the project. In order to get more 
in-depth understanding of the social context of interaction 
and engagement in the project, we have carried out 5 
interviews with project managers in municipalities. Finally, 
various documents such as strategy documents, minutes of 
meetings, evaluations, reports and social media posts were 
collected. Analysis of data was based on an interpretative 
approach to qualitative research [19] and we have used 
NVivo to identify and categorize topics related to 
communication and interaction among stakeholders in our 
study. 
IV. 
ORGANIZING FOR USER ENGAGEMENT  
As mentioned, one of the research areas in the project is 
communication and collaboration, and one of the aims was 
to create an environment for learning and knowledge 
sharing. Organization of workshops has thus been an effort 
to strengthen collaboration and five workshops have been 
arranged so far in the project. On an average, 30 – 40 people 
from different professional fields and organizational units 
attended the meetings. A manager in Arena Health 
Innovation has played a key role in the planning and 
organizing the workshops and the main theme has been 
service innovation. Moreover, the agendas for the meetings 
have been based on activities described in the project plan as 
well as emerging issues during the meetings. The structure of 
the workshops has been a combination of presentations and 
group work. Some key people have been hired to lecture on 
the various topics, as well as facilitate the group work. For 
example, service designers have attended several workshops 
and provided methods and tools for the preparation of 
scenarios and user stories during group work. The purpose of 
the group work was to reflect on practice; identify actors 
involved, how the use of technology affects work processes 
as well as new service areas. Several of the methods and 
tools used during the workshop sessions have contributed to 
the identification and visualization of user needs, demands 
and expectations of the project and thus provided valuable 
knowledge for further progress. Some of the issues that have 
been discussed are related to communication, collaboration 
and 
organizational 
aspects. 
For 
example, 
reliable 
technological solutions are a primary goal and the need for 
guidelines and procedures have been identified. Guidelines 
for the assessment and mapping of the use of digital 
surveillance, risk and vulnerability analysis and user support 
has been highlighted, and the ongoing work on these issues 
has been the topic of the last two workshops. Discussion of 
these issues has facilitated reflection and mutual learning and 
thereby raised awareness of the use of digital surveillance in 
care services. Nevertheless, several challenges have also 
been identified and have affected further work in the project. 
For example, it was pointed out that healthcare professionals 
and technologists speak different languages and thus makes 
it difficult to obtain a shared understanding of issues in 
everyday practice. Another challenge has been the need to 
co-develop procedures and guidelines and to maintain 
involvement in the time between workshop sessions. As 
mentioned, project members in the study are located in eight 
municipalities distributed in four different counties in 
southern Norway. This involves long traveling distances and 
limited opportunities for face-to-face meetings between the 
workshops. To deal with these issues we have looked at 
online communication as a resource for sharing knowledge 
and experience in the project. 
V. 
CO-CREATION OF A INNOVATION NETWORK 
To 
promote 
engagement 
and 
interaction 
among 
participant in the project, we have started the design and 
development of a digital platform. Design activities in the 
first phase have been inspired by similar studies in the 
healthcare domain [16] as well as studies on digital platforms 
and innovation networks in general [8] [18]. Furthermore, 
the identified needs to share experiences, co-development of 
procedures and guidelines, and interdisciplinary interaction 
has formed the basis of the initial user requirements. In 
addition, we searched for available solutions to build on what 
already exists. We did not find, however, any available 
solutions that met the requirements for safety and 
accessibility for all stakeholders in our study. Although 
several municipalities use platforms such as SharePoint, 
these are not available to all the users in our project and were 
thus not relevant solutions. We have also considered social 
networking sites such as Facebook as a resource in the 
project. Several of the project members use Facebook and 
we have created an account for the project. At the moment 
there are 33 members in the group, all participants in the 
project. In addition, some of the project members also 
participate in several other Facebook groups. Most of the 
posts in this and similar Facebook groups deal with general 
news on welfare technology, links to public documents or 
policies, as well as news and pictures from workshops. 
However, Facebook is an open network and does not meet 
the requirements for safety when sharing internal documents. 
In order to move forward, we made contact with a local 
partner and made an agreement with a provider who has 
developed similar solutions. The local provider, who has 
previously been involved in activities in the Arena Health 
Innovation cluster, wanted to participate in the project and is 
now involved in the ongoing work to develop a solution.  
In the first stage, we (the researchers) acted as mediators 
between the vendors and users.  Empirical data from the 
workshop sessions formed the basis for user needs, and we 
had several meetings with the vendor in order to provide 
input to the development of the first version of a platform 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

solution. As mentioned, we have identified the need to co-
develop guidelines and procedures, as well as a shared 
awareness among stakeholders involved in the project. Thus, 
the main features of this first solution are the ability to share 
documents, coordinate activities, video meetings, messages 
and posts. Further development depends on feedback from 
users and we have invited one of the project members to a 
video meeting to make a brief test of basic features. In 
particular, the ability to video meetings was considered an 
important feature to maintain interaction between project 
managers in the municipalities. Thus it was decided to test 
the use of the system in a real-world environment and all 
project leaders in the eight municipalities were invited to 
participate. These ongoing activities and future development 
are planned as an iterative process of evaluation, re-design 
and intervention in the organizational context. So far, in the 
process we have focused on interactions between project 
members in the municipalities. Further in the process we will 
also include technologists and providers, and we will be 
open to emerging needs and capabilities in order to expand 
the innovation network. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK 
In this research in progress paper we have focused on 
engagement and mutual learning in digital innovation in the 
municipal care services. In particular, we highlighted how 
the project participants in our study play a key role in the 
innovation process that is characterized by reflection in 
practice and mutual learning [10]. Adoption and adjustments 
of the socio-technical system depends on ongoing shaping by 
organizational use, perspectives, and participants (ibid. p. 
44). Skills and knowledge that emerge in the daily use of 
digital surveillance are valuable contributions to the 
innovation process. However, articulating this kind of 
knowledge (situated learning) is not a straightforward matter 
but requires translation and transformation across domain-
specific contexts [17]. The interdisciplinary environment that 
characterizes our study indicates the need to create a “shared 
design space” that enables translation of different meanings 
as well as negotiation of interests and making trade-offs 
between actors [17]. In addition, the project members are 
dispersed across several municipalities and this limits the 
face-to-face interaction. Vaast and Walsham [18] have 
argued that the ability of sharing resources and experiences 
in such an environment depends on a supportive information 
infrastructure. They have also proposed a model for “trans-
situated” learning supported by an information infrastructure.  
The project is still at an early stage and several ongoing 
activities will have an impact on further progression. A 
primary goal is to create a digital innovation network that 
provides user utility in the organizational context. The 
iterative process means that the technological solution and 
the organizational setting will continuously be subject to 
reinterpretation, reformulation and redesign [16]. Moreover, 
reflection and learning, and formalization and learning are 
important stages in the ADR method. The research process 
involves more than simply solving a problem. It must also 
contribute to knowledge that can be applied to a wider class 
of problems [10]. This means that we strive to develop 
design principles that can be generalized to the design of 
innovation networks as well as insight into collective actions 
that shape new processes and services in innovation 
networks. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Aarts, J. Callen, E. Coiera, and J. Westbrook, “Information 
technology in health care: socio-technical approaches.,” International 
journal of medical informatics, vol. 79, no. 6, Jun-2010, pp. 389–90,. 
[2] 
M. Berg, J. Aarts, and J. Van der Lei, “ICT in Health Care : 
Sociotechnical Approaches What Are Sociotechnical,” Methods Inf. 
Med., vol. 4, 2003, pp. 297–301. 
[3] 
R. Heeks, “Health information systems: failure, success and 
improvisation.,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 75, no. 2, Feb. 2006, pp. 
125–37. 
[4] 
M. Memon, S. R. Wagner, C. F. Pedersen, F. H. A. Beevi, and F. O. 
Hansen, “Ambient assisted living healthcare frameworks, platforms, 
standards, and quality attributes.,” Sensors, vol. 14, Mar. 2014, pp. 
4312–41,  
[5] 
Norwegian Directorate of Health, “Helsedirektoratets anbefalinger på 
det velferdsteknologiske området,” Oct. 2014. 
[6] 
J. Barlow, D. Singh, S. Bayer, and R. Curry, “A systematic review of 
the benefits of home telecare for frail elderly people and those with 
long-term conditions.,” J. Telemed. Telecare, vol. 13, no. 4, Jan. 
2007, pp. 172–9,  
[7] 
B. Bygstad, O. Hanseth, and D. Truong Le, “From IT Silos to 
Integrated Solutions . A Study in E- Health Complexity,” Proc. ECIS, 
May 2015, pp. 0–15. 
[8] 
Y. Yoo, K. Lyytinen, and R. J. Boland, Jr., “Distributed Innovation in 
Classes of Networks,” Proc. 41st Annu. Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. 
(HICSS 2008), Jan. 2008, pp. 1–9. 
[9] 
T. Robertson and J. Simonsen, “Challenges and Opportunities in 
Contemporary Participatory Design,” Design Issues, vol. 28, no. 3, 
Jul. 2012, pp. 3–9. 
[10] M. K. Sein, O. Henfridsson, S. Purao, M. Rossi, and R. Lindgren, 
“Action Design Research,” MIS Q., vol. 35, no. 1, Mar. 2011, pp. 37–
56. 
[11] The Ministry Health and Care Services, “Innovation in the Care 
Services,  NOU2011: 11,” 2011, pp. 1–40. 
[12] B. Bygstad, “Generative mechanisms for innovation in information 
infrastructures,” Inf. Organ., vol. 20, no. 3–4, Jul. 2010, pp. 156–168. 
[13] C. U. Ciborra and G. F. Lanzara, “Formative contexts and 
information technology: Understanding the dynamics of innovation in 
organizations,” Accounting, Manag. Inf. Technol., vol. 4, no. 2, 1994, 
pp. 61–86.  
[14] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design Science in 
Information System Research,” MIS Q., vol. 28, no. 1, Mar. 2004, pp. 
75–105.  
[15] R. Baskerville and M. D. Myers, “Special Issue on Action Research 
in Information Systems: Making IS Research relevant to Practice- 
Foreword,” MIS Q., vol. 28, no. 3, Sept. 2004, pp. 329–335. 
[16] P. Spagnoletti, A. Resca, and Ø. Sæbø, “Design for social media 
engagement: Insights from elderly care assistance,” J. Strateg. Inf. 
Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, May 2015, pp. 128–145. 
[17] P. R. Carlile, “Transferring, Translating, and Transforming: An 
Integrative 
Framework 
for 
Managing 
Knowledge 
Across 
Boundaries,” Organ. Sci., vol. 15, no. 5, Oct. 2004, pp. 555–568. 
[18] E. Vaast and G. Walsham, “Trans-Situated Learning: Supporting a 
Network of Practice with an Information Infrastructure,” Inf. Syst. 
Res., vol. 20, no. 4, Dec. 2009, pp. 547–564. 
[19] G. Walsham, “Interpretive case studies in IS research : nature and 
method,” Eur. J. Inf. Syst. No. 4, May 1995, pp. 74–81.  
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

