Measuring Perceptions of Openness in Health Information Technology Platforms 
Results from Pilot Testing Proposed Survey Framework 
Kristian Malm-Nicolaisen 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
UIT – The Arctic University of Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
E-mail: Kristian.nicolaisen@ehealthresearch.no 
Rune Pedersen 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
UIT – The Arctic University of Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
E-mail: Rune.pedersen@ehealthresearch.no 
 
Asbjørn Johansen Fagerlund 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
Tromsø, Norway 
E-mail: Asbjorn.johansen.fagerlund@ehealthresearch.no
 
 
Abstract— The paper focuses on the concept of Open Platforms 
as an emerging Health Information Technology and investigates 
how subjective perceptions of platform openness can be 
investigated across different socio-technical dimensions by 
piloting a novel survey framework among a small sample of 
domain experts. Using six main topics of inquiry, the framework 
was able to distinguish between type and degree of platform 
openness 
across 
different 
implementations 
of 
Health 
Information Technology platforms. The results indicate high 
aptness and relevance of the included topics. The paper 
proposes a step towards operationalizing the concept of Open 
Platforms within the e-health domain, with a special focus on 
patient records and interoperable systems. 
Keywords-Health Information Technology; Open Platform; 
Platform Openness; Interoperability; Data Standardization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The concept of Open Platforms has emerged in the 
research and applied fields of Health Information Technology 
(HIT) domain as an elusive sub-category of traditional digital 
platforms. However, an authoritative definition of Open 
Platforms is still lacking [1]. This is a hindrance for healthcare 
organizations and implementers, that need to carefully 
consider the type and degree of openness their case requires. 
Furthermore, socio-technical research on real-world HIT 
settings requires the means to identify systems that more or 
less conform to the principles of Open Platforms. Therefore, a 
method for measuring openness over different central socio-
technical platform principles is needed.  
In this paper, we propose a definition of an Open Platform 
that we break down into six topics, which can be 
operationalized to measure openness in HIT platforms. The 
aim is to propose an early step towards establishing a 
measurement that can be used in real-world settings to 
evaluate a platform’s degree of conformity towards generally 
accepted principles for Open Platforms. The paper describes a 
set of principles and a proposal on how to operationalize them 
in a survey format. Finally, we present the results from an 
initial pilot test among a small sample of expert respondents. 
We have not identified any equivalent instrument or 
measurement tool that can measure the extent of platform 
openness in a real-world context, and previous studies have 
stated that an agreed-upon method for how to dimensionalize 
and measure platform openness is lacking [2]. The research 
objective in the present study is as follows: Conduct a pilot 
survey of the drafted measuring instrument among a small 
sample of domain experts, investigating i) whether the 
instrument is able to distinguish between different levels of 
openness in HIT platforms, and ii) if the Open Platform 
principles are perceived as important by the respondents. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, 
we 
introduce 
the 
relevant 
background 
and 
the 
conceptualization of Open Platforms within the e-health 
domain. In Section 3, we describe the method employed in the 
present study. Section 4 presents the results of the survey pilot 
test. Finally, we discuss the findings, limitations, and 
contribution of the paper. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The digitalization of healthcare and the introduction of 
HIT systems has transformed the organization, provision, and 
planning of medical and care services. This transformation 
has affected organizations, healthcare professionals, patients, 
and decision makers alike. For clinicians, the Electronic 
Health Record (EHR) represents one of the most vital HIT 
tools for providing patients with treatment and care [3], and 
has ostensible benefits related to improved quality of care, 
patient safety and increase in productivity [4][5]. However, 
interoperability and data communication remains a challenge 
[6][7]. One reason for this is a failure to adhere to a common 
data representation; data from many sources must conform to 
a common representation that faithfully specifies certain 
aspects, such as the context of data, the structure of the 
information, and its precise meaning [8][9]. Although the 
usefulness and importance of standards for building shared 
health information networks has been proved, adoption and 
standardization processes have shown to be slow [10]. In 
addition, a lack of regulatory requirements, technology 
governance and supportive legislation has contributed to 
slowing down the progression [8]. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In a recent scoping review, a combination of codes, 
terminologies, reference models, Clinical Information 
Models (CIMs) and standards were identified as the most 
common methods for structuring patient data [10]. 
Traditionally HIT generally, and EHRs specifically, are built 
using primarily proprietary technologies, with technical 
standards and CIMs developed, controlled and maintained by 
the vendor [1]. From a business perspective, the idea behind 
these monolithic mega-suite systems has been to offer most, 
if not all, required software functionality and features in a 
single solution [11]. While this approach can yield great 
stability, it inevitably leads to ‘vendor lock-in’, a situation 
where the vendor controls the data, and information 
interoperability and agility are impeded [12]. Consequently, 
organizations become heavily reliant on single vendors and 
‘closed HIT systems’. As a result, healthcare organizations 
struggle with a fragmented system portfolio with limited 
possibilities for integration, numerous legacy systems, siloed 
data repositories that challenge (semantic) data exchange and 
interoperability, and costly and complex data migrations 
when applications are switched [8][13]. Arguably, this is a 
consequence of a largely application-centric focus instead of 
a data-centric one [14]. In addition, monolithic suite HIT 
tends to assume a generative form, requiring extensive 
adaption and customization to fit local context. This is 
illustrated by the challenges, and subsequent failures, of 
implementation efforts of large-scale suite systems in local 
contexts which they were not originally designed for [15]. 
A. Defining and conceptualizing Open Platforms 
Increasingly, the market trends indicate a significant shift 
from the traditional single-vendor mega-suite scenario 
towards Open Platform-based multi-vendor system ecologies 
based on international and open technologies [1]. However, 
research concerned with the concept of platform openness 
within a HIT perspective is limited, with most studies 
assuming a domain-agnostic perspective [16]. Arguably, the 
inherent socio-technical complexity and multifaceted 
interdependencies between different stakeholders (e.g., 
clinicians, patients, vendors, IT staff) within the HIT and 
medical field, requires conceptualizations and knowledge 
based on the specific domain in which the platform is 
embedded [17].  
While Open Platforms have several aspects in common 
with traditional digital platforms, as defined by Rolland et al. 
(2018), these definitions lack a dimension of openness which 
we argue distinguishes an Open Platform from traditional 
digital platforms. A key principle for an Open Platform is that 
it provides an infrastructure and core services that are 
extensively based on openly published standards and used in 
common or reused across implementations [18]. Another 
important distinction is that between an Open Platform and 
an open-source platform; while we can regard all open-
source platforms as Open Platforms, not all Open Platforms 
are open source. The main difference is that an open-source 
platform makes available the source code, while an Open 
Platform provides the interfaces and data modelling rules but 
may still contain proprietary components and technologies 
(e.g., source code). Hence, a necessary first step is therefore 
to provide an objective and comprehensive definition of 
Open Platforms. We formulate the following working 
definition based on a synthesis and further development, 
including a broader socio-technical perspective: 
An Open Platform provides a vendor- and technology-
neutral digital infrastructure and associated services that 
are based on open, published standards that, in principle, 
everyone can use to access the platform. The platform 
makes it possible to link applications and services from 
many different suppliers without discrimination, such that 
there is a many-to-many substitutability between 
applications and services, and support for data portability 
and sharing in defined, standardized formats using 
common APIs. Through a governed and modularized 
architecture, the platform provides flexibility by 
facilitating features for a heterogenous user group, 
supporting a multitude of use cases, and promoting 
innovation [13][19]. 
Based on this definition, an Open Platform architecture 
potentially limits the challenges related to non-standard 
interfaces and proprietary data formats traditionally used in 
HITs. Building the platform on open standards, interfaces and 
technologies through a modularized and well-governed 
architecture also allows for far greater flexibility for the 
organization to adapt and compose their system ecology as 
requirements change, which the interconnected network of 
monolithic systems lack [20][21]. In a previous multicenter 
case study of hospitals that recently had implemented large-
scale clinical HIT platforms, we identified the flexibility to 
adapt the systems to individual or group level needs as 
significant contributing factor in reducing user resistance and 
increasing perceived system usability, illustrating the 
importance of the flexibility characteristic of Open Platforms 
[22]. 
Building on existing literature and the definition provided 
above, we defined six distinct topics that should be 
considered when assessing the similarity between a real-
world HIT case and the concept of open platforms [23]. The 
topics are constructed to cover multiple dimensions of the 
platform’s architecture and services, and we use the notion of 
both technical and organizational aspects to expose the 
necessary characteristics. Each of the six topics are 
supplemented with a principle designed to envision the 
maximum extent of possible openness in a platform. 
1) Vendor neutrality 
Open Platforms are designed to reduce reliability on 
single systems and vendors by utilizing openly published 
standards. This contrasts with traditional HITs where 
proprietary technologies have been the norm. Any 
application that adheres to the open standards can operate, 
produce, and consume data on the platform, eliminating 
challenges with vendor lock-in and overdependence to closed 
systems [13][24]. This promotes continuous and agile change 
and growth in line with emergent user needs. 
Principle: 
To 
ensure 
broad 
compatibility 
and 
interchangeability between products and technologies, the 
platform is based on open, available, and published 
technologies and standards and does not depend on individual 
suppliers and vendors. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

2) Flexibility of system portfolio 
By design, an Open Platform facilitates flexibility and 
adaptability over time [25]. This is important as the platform 
represents a non-static HIT expected to change. In addition, 
the modular architecture allows for applications to be 
exchanged in line with newly arising needs, e.g., the 
organization or users have greater access and flexibility to 
integrate with vendors and applications that are a better fit 
[11]. Using well-defined and published interfaces also allows 
for use in ways other than initially intended or implemented 
[26]. The inherent tension between flexibility and increased 
standardization needs special attention; standardization must 
be coherent and comprehensive enough to allow reuse, 
semantic interoperability, and common points of integration, 
while still allowing for differences in actors’ needs, emerging 
requirements, and variances in workflow.  
Principle: The platform allows flexibility that allows 
users to adopt and use applications differently and 
independently, based on individual or group level needs. New 
applications can be integrated with existing systems and can 
share, consume, and produce data. 
3) Clinical information models 
Common CIMs and data models are a core component of 
an Open Platform. CIMs are used to provide an unambiguous 
description of the clinical content, to represent it across 
applications on the platform, and support persistence and 
querying of structured data [27]. Hence, CIMs should provide 
the data in a sharable, open, and computable format.  
However, efficient use of CIMs depends on sufficient 
governance and development models; the same clinical 
concepts may be modelled in different ways, each of which 
correct [28]. User involvement in design is therefore 
essential, 
but 
not 
trouble-free; 
collaborative 
user 
development increases the risk for extensive negotiation 
processes and show of power-relations between actors, often 
with unpredictable outcomes [29]. This underpins the need 
for proper governance models for management and control of 
the technologies [10]. For shared HITs, such as an Open 
Platform, the governance should be performed centrally (e.g., 
by government bodies). 
Principle: Applications on the platform share open 
information models in a way that preserves the semantics in 
the data when it is moved between applications. 
4) Open data 
In accordance with good patient information governance 
practice, the Open Platform should present all data it contains 
in a usable and open format. While there are different 
methods for operationalizing this (e.g., either by using the 
open format natively in data storage or through mapping and 
transformation from other open or proprietary formats), the 
purpose is to provide patient information in a form that 
supports interoperability, data portability and reuse [8][13]. 
Principle: The platform supports open data, and data is 
exposed as needed (subject to good information governance 
practice) in an open, shareable, computable format in near to 
real-time. 
5) Technical openness in the platform 
APIs are the technical interfaces used by applications to 
connect to the platform and access and interact with the data. 
In Open Platform the full specifications of the APIs should 
be published and freely available. This includes definitions of 
the types of data, features and functions that are provided 
through the APIs. Several mature open APIs exist, and ideally 
the Open Platform should support and provide multiple 
interfaces [30]. 
Principle: To support innovation and flexibility, open 
APIs that provide access to the platform and data are used. 
6) Organizational openness in the platform 
Besides technical aspects, there are organizational 
principles that must be fulfilled for the platform to be truly 
open. As healthcare is a highly regulated sector, it is possible 
that local, national, or international laws and regulations 
could prohibit total openness. We therefore consider this to 
be a context-sensitive principle, and implementers and 
providers should thoroughly assess the desired, necessary, 
and permitted degree of openness. 
Principle: 
Organizational, 
financial, 
and 
legal 
frameworks does not prevent third-party suppliers and the 
integration of additional functionality or applications. 
III. 
METHODS 
A. Survey development and design 
A survey based on the six topics presented in the previous 
section was developed in an iterate process between the 
authors. Complementary statements have been defined for 
each main topic for further probing and exposure of the 
specific topic. The statements were operationalized into 5-
point bipolar Likert items that could be administered in a web-
based survey (Table I) [31]. For five of the six topics, multiple 
Likert items were formulated in order to allow for more 
extensive probing. A web-based questionnaire was developed 
in Questback (Questback AS, Oslo, Norway). For each item, 
respondents gave their response over two dimensions: 1) 
Extent of presence in the platform: To which extent do you 
agree that the statement is true for your hospital’s HIT 
platform, and 2) Overall importance: To which extent do you 
agree that the statement is important for an open HIT platform. 
The method employed in this study is designed to measure 
openness as a subjective construct in the eyes of domain 
experts [32]. First, we wanted to measure the respondent’s 
perception of the extent to which their HIT platform 
corresponded to the Open Platform principles. Secondly, we 
were interested in testing the respondents’ perception of the 
Likert items’ relevance for Open Platforms in general. The 
resulting questionnaire had 16 items, that each included both 
a presence and an importance rating. The survey was piloted 
among two domain experts and adjusted based on feedback 
prior to finalization. We assess the survey by evaluating 
whether the measurement can distinguish between varying 
degrees of adherence to the Open Platform principles between 
systems, and perceived face validity of the survey items. We 
explore this by considering two variables: i) presence of either 
floor or ceiling effects, indicating that items might be able to 
discriminate, and ii) items score on perceived importance to 
assess face validity.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I.  
MAIN TOPICS AND CORRESPONDING ITEMS USED IN SURVEY, INCLUDING KEY REFERENCES 
 
B. Recruitment to survey and data analysis 
We identified nine hospital organizations across five 
different European countries relevant for the survey. The 
sample group was identified based on prior work by the 
researchers [1] and consisted of hospitals using both suite 
IT systems and systems based on open specifications, 
comprising systems from five different vendors. All 
hospitals delivered specialized care and were organized as 
public providers in socialized healthcare settings.  
Participation invitations were sent to high-level 
managers in the health informatics domain of each hospital 
organization. From each of the hospitals, we invited one 
respondent to participate, in total nine individuals were 
invited. Electronic questionnaires were distributed to the 
respondents by email, starting on the 16th of June, and 
closing on 17th of August 2020. Data was exported from 
Questback into a spreadsheet software (Microsoft Excel for 
Mac OS, Microsoft 365) and structured for analysis. 
Analyses were conducted in SPSS (IBM SPSS for Mac OS, 
version 26.0.0.1). To explore the range and the central 
tendency in the responses, minimum, maximum, and 
median scores were calculated [44]. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Out of the nine respondents that were invited to 
participate, four completed the survey within the timeframe, 
yielding a response rate of 44%. The respondents of the 
completed surveys were from three different countries 
(Norway, Denmark, and the United Kingdom), using three 
different 
HIT 
systems. 
One 
organization 
refused 
participation based on perceived lack of study relevance. 
Two had opened the survey but did not complete it. Two did 
not open the survey. See Table II for results, interpretation, 
and value distribution.  
Overall, calculated median scores from all respondents 
show a degree of presence between Disagree and Agree for 
the items relating to vendor neutrality (V1-V3), while the 
same items have received a rating of Agree to Strongly 
Agree for importance. All items relating to flexibility in 
system portfolio (F1-F3) are rated as Agree in terms of 
presence, and Strongly Agree for importance. Items 
corresponding to the topic on CIMs (I1-I2) are rated as 
Agree for presence and Strongly Agree for importance. The 
one item on Open Data (OD1) is rated Agree for presence, 
while it was rated Strongly Agree for importance. Both 
items relating to Technical Openness (T1-T2) received a 
median value translating to Agree for the presence 
dimension, and Strongly Agree for importance. Value 
scores on the item in the category Organizational Openness 
(O1-O5) varied from Neutral to Agree, with the item 
describing access to core platform functionality receiving 
the lowest score. The same items received values translating 
to Agree and Strongly Agree on importance. 
The minimum and maximum results for the presence 
dimension indicate neither floor effect nor ceiling effect. 
Further, the results indicate that the principles were present 
only to a limited degree in existing HIT platforms. Overall, 
for the importance dimension, all items received median 
scores translating to Agree (18.75%) and Strongly Agree 
(81.25%) indicating strong relevance and aptness. 
 
 
Topic 
Code 
Item 
Vendor neutrality 
[33][34]  
V1 
The platform builds upon open and non-proprietary technologies 
V2 
The platform builds upon open standards, such as HL7 FHIR, IHE-XDS and openEHR 
V3 
The platform is not dependent on a single vendor 
Flexibility in system 
portfolio [35][36] 
F1 
The platform allows flexibility for individual users to use applications based on their needs and preferences 
F2 
The platform allows flexibility for sub-divisions of the organization (i.e., departments, clinics etc.) to use applications 
based on their needs and preferences 
F3 
The platform allows new applications to be integrated with the existing systems on the platform and 
share/consume/produce data 
Clinical information 
models [1][28][37] 
I1 
The specifications for information model and terminologies are openly available 
I2 
The applications on the platform share information models such that the semantics in the data is preserved when moved 
between applications 
Open data [38][39] 
OD 
Data is separated from application, in the sense that data is available in a readable, open and shareable format regardless 
of vendor or application 
Technical openness in 
the platform 
[40][41][42] 
T1 
The types of data, features and functions that are offered through open APIs are defined 
T2 
API specifications are published and available 
Organizational openness 
in the platform 
[2][17][43] 
O1 
It is clearly defined who has access and what is required to further develop core functionality on the platform 
O2 
It is clearly defined who has access and what is required to develop additional functionality (e.g., decision support, apps, 
analytical tools) on the platform 
O3 
It is clearly defined who has access to use data from the platform 
O4 
Requirements for compliance with technical standards or payment of license fees - are reasonable and non-
discriminatory, that is, they are used uniformly for all potential platform participants 
O5 
The hospital IT services have freedom to modify, query and map the information scheme of the platform with no added 
licensing cost 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE II.  
SURVEY RESULTS OVER BOTH DIMENSIONS, SHOWING 
MEDIAN (MDN) AND MIN-MAX VALUES FOR EACH LIKERT ITEM. LIKERT 
SCALE INTERPRETATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF VALUES: 1 STRONGLY 
DISAGREE (1.0-1,49); 2 DISAGREE (1.5-2.49); 3 NEUTRAL (2.5-3.49); 4 
AGREE (3.5-4.49); 5 STRONGLY AGREE (4.5-5.0). 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we were able to pilot the measuring tool 
among a small number of domain experts. Even though we 
consider them highly informed respondents, it is likely that 
further drivers, challenges, and topics should be considered. 
While the study was designed to only include a small 
number of respondents, the survey achieved a response rate 
comparable to other internet based surveys aimed towards 
professionals [45]. The respondents in this survey were a 
convenience sample of mid-to-high level professionals. The 
results suggested that the measuring tool was able to 
distinguish between different degrees of open platform 
presence in the surveyed HIT implementations. The range 
between minimum and maximum scores indicated that on 
most items, the respondents had not answered uniformly. 
Furthermore, the results indicated that the respondents 
perceived the items as important. The median item scores 
indicate that the included platforms are positioned far from 
the end of an openness spectrum. This corresponds well 
with the actual platform market landscape we can observe; 
Open Platforms as a HIT approach are still in the early 
stages, with some immature technological traits and lack of 
supporting regulations and governance models.  
The present study has some clear but intended 
limitations and should be considered an early proposal on 
how to move towards operationalization and application of 
concepts that originates in a highly theoretical field of 
research. Real-world implementation and use of Open 
Platforms are complicated at several levels. Our framework 
for measuring perceptions of openness deliberately 
excludes topics relating to regulatory aspects and law as 
these are highly context sensitive and vary greatly. The 
miniscule sample of respondents rules out the possibility for 
any meaningful ordinary validation procedure with 
measurements of internal consistency and factor analyses. 
However, given the consistent high importance valuation of 
the items by the respondents, we consider it worthwhile to 
further investigate the Open Platform concept within this 
framework. This study resides within a larger research 
portfolio interested in design and implementation of shared 
large-scale HIT platforms. Based on the work presented in 
this study, we have conducted a qualitative study 
investigating the Open Platform principles in relation to an 
ongoing national HIT platform project in Norway. The 
topics and statements used in the framework guided the 
development of an interview guide, and we were able to 
investigate how the properties aligned with a HIT project 
described as an Open Platform. While not yet published, the 
results indicates that an ambiguous and disparate 
understanding of the concept of Open Platforms among 
different stakeholders created misunderstandings and 
contrasting expectations, and that the proposed HIT 
platform shared few of the characteristics outlined in our 
framework, although being described as an “open platform” 
[23]. While the present study is limited to the perspective of 
health informatics experts, we widen the scope to also 
include healthcare professionals and HIT vendors in our 
related work. The final results from the qualitative study 
will be used to further develop the framework presented in 
the present paper, establishing the basis for employing a 
larger survey and enabling a validation procedure. A 
validated set of measurable principles can provide 
important insight and grounds for a common and 
unambiguous concept understanding for implementors and 
organizations considering an Open Platform approach in 
their HIT infrastructure.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was funded by the Norwegian Centre for E-
health Research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Malm-Nicolaisen, R. Pedersen, and A. J. Fagerlund, 
«Open or closed: A project proposal for investigating two 
different EHR platform approaches.» Context Sensitive 
Health Informatics: Sustainability in Dynamic Ecosystems, 
vol. 265, no., pp. 207-212, 2019. 
[2] L. D. Thomas, E. Autio, and D. M. Gann, «Architectural 
leverage: Putting platforms in context.» Academy of 
management perspectives, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 198-219, 2014. 
[3] R. F. Gillum, «From papyrus to the electronic tablet: a brief 
history of the clinical medical record with lessons for the 
digital age.» The American journal of medicine, vol. 126, 
no. 10, pp. 853-857, 2013. 
[4] R. Hillestad, J. Bigelow, A. Bower, F. Girosi, R. Meili, R. 
Scoville, et al., «Can electronic medical record systems 
transform health care? Potential health benefits, savings, and 
costs.» Health affairs, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1103-1117, 2005. 
[5] B. Chaudhry, J. Wang, S. Wu, M. Maglione, W. Mojica, E. 
Roth, et al., «Systematic review: impact of health 
information technology on quality, efficiency, and costs of 
medical care.» Annals of internal medicine, vol. 144, no. 10, 
pp. 742-752, 2006. 
Topic 
Code 
Presence 
Importance 
Mdn 
Min 
Max 
Mdn 
Min 
Max 
Vendor 
neutrality 
V1 
3 
2 
4 
5 
4 
5 
V2 
4 
3 
5 
5 
4 
5 
V3 
2 
1 
4 
3.5 
3 
5 
Flexibility 
in system 
portfolio 
F1 
3.5 
2 
4 
4.5 
2 
5 
F2 
3.5 
3 
4 
5 
4 
5 
F3 
3.5 
2 
4 
4.5 
4 
5 
Clinical 
information 
models 
I1 
4 
2 
5 
5 
4 
5 
I2 
4 
2 
4 
5 
4 
5 
Open data 
OD1 
3 
1 
5 
5 
4 
5 
Technical 
openness in 
the 
platform 
T1 
4 
2 
4 
4.5 
4 
5 
T2 
4 
2 
4 
4.5 
4 
5 
Organizatio
nal 
openness in 
the 
platform 
O1 
2.5 
2 
4 
4 
4 
5 
O2 
3 
1 
4 
4 
4 
5 
O3 
3.5 
3 
5 
5 
4 
5 
O4 
4 
3 
5 
4.5 
4 
5 
O5 
4 
1 
5 
5 
4 
5 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[6] J. M. McGinnis, D. Aisner, and L. Olsen, «The learning 
healthcare system: workshop summary.». 2007: National 
Academies Press. 
[7] C. P. Friedman, A. K. Wong, and D. Blumenthal, 
«Achieving a nationwide learning health system.» Science 
Translational Medicine, vol. 2, no. 57, pp. 57cm29, 2010. 
[8] L. Marco-Ruiz, K. Malm-Nicolaisen, R. Pedersen, A. 
Makhlysheva, 
and 
P. 
Bakkevoll, 
«Ontology-based 
terminologies for healthcare.» Nasjonalt senter for e-
helseforskning, no., pp. 78, 2017. 
[9] E. V. Bernstam, J. L. Warner, J. C. Krauss, E. Ambinder, W. 
S. Rubinstein, G. Komatsoulis, et al., «Quantitating and 
assessing 
interoperability 
between 
electronic 
health 
records.» Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, no., 2022. 
[10] K. Malm-Nicolaisen, L. M. Ruiz, E. R. Evenstad, and R. 
Pedersen. «Efforts on Using Standards for Defining the 
Structuring of Electronic Health Record Data: A Scoping 
Review.»  Proceedings of the 17th Scandinavian Conference 
on Health Informatics, November 12-13, 2019.: Linköping 
University Electronic Press. pp. 108-115. 
[11] A. Williams. Best of Breed vs. Monolithic Systems: Finding 
the Best Software Solutions Philosophy. 2018  [cited 2022 
03.15]; 
Available 
from: 
https://www.mapcom.com/blog/best-of-breed-vs-
monolithic-systems-finding-the-best-software-solutions-
philosophy/. 
[12] A. Byrne. Can the road to open platform run alongside 
closed systems? 2017  [cited 2022 03.06]; Available from: 
https://www.digitalhealth.net/2017/11/can-the-road-to-
open-platform-run-alongside-proprietary-systems/. 
[13] Apperta Foundation CIC. Defining an Open Platform. 2017  
[cited 
2022 
02.15]; 
Available 
from: 
https://apperta.org/assets/Apperta_Defining_an_Open_Plat
form.pdf. 
[14] T. Gornik. The Postmodern EHR: The Data Layer. 2016  
[cited 
2022 
03.05]; 
Available 
from: 
https://www.openhealthnews.com/story/2016-05-
04/postmodern-ehr-data-layer. 
[15] R. Bergstrøm. Demanding to implement e-health solutions 
from the USA (Krevende å implementere helseløsninger fra 
USA). 
 
[cited 
2022 
02.21]; 
Available 
from: 
https://www.dagensmedisin.no/artikler/2019/11/25/kulturfo
rskjeller-skaper-it-trobbel/. 
[16] P. Van Gorp, M. Comuzzi, A. Jahnen, U. Kaymak, and B. 
Middleton, «An open platform for personal health record 
apps with platform-level privacy protection.» Computers in 
biology and medicine, vol. 51, no., pp. 14-23, 2014. 
[17] M. De Reuver, C. Sørensen, and R. C. Basole, «The digital 
platform: a research agenda.» Journal of Information 
Technology, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 124-135, 2018. 
[18] K. Boudreau, «Open platform strategies and innovation: 
Granting access vs. devolving control.» Management 
science, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 1849-1872, 2010. 
[19] G. C. Bowker and S. L. Star, «Sorting things out: 
Classification and its consequences.». 2000: MIT press. 
[20] M. Aanestad and P. Vassilakopoulou. «Innovation 
Readiness in Healthcare Information Infrastructures. Key 
Resources to Enable Collaborative Digital Innovation.»  
Proceedings of the 17th Scandinavian Conference on Health 
Informatics, 12 -13 Nov 2019.: Linköping University Press. 
pp. 61-66. 
[21] K. H. Rolland, L. Mathiassen, and A. Rai, «Managing digital 
platforms in user organizations: the interactions between 
digital options and digital debt.» Information Systems 
Research, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 419-443, 2018. 
[22] K. Malm-Nicolaisen, A. J. Fagerlund, and R. Pedersen, 
«How does users of modern EHR perceive the usability, user 
resistance and productivity five years or more after 
implementation?» MedInfo 2021, In press, no., 2021. 
[23] K. Malm-Nicolaisen, A. J. Fagerlund, and R. Pedersen, 
«Openness 
in 
Health 
Information 
Technologies: 
Conceptualizing and Leveraging Flexibility in Open 
Platforms.» Unpublished, no. 
[24] J. Hoeksma. Gartner says NHS over-reliant on closed 
systems. Digital Health 2017  [cited 2022 04.23]; Available 
from: https://www.digitalhealth.net/2017/09/gartner-says-
nhs-reliant-closed-systems/. 
[25] T. Beale. What is an ‘open platform’? 2014  [cited 2022 
04.25]; 
Available 
from: 
https://wolandscat.net/2014/05/07/what-is-an-open-
platform/. 
[26] D. Furstenau and C. Auschra. «Open digital platforms in 
health care: Implementation and scaling strategies.»  Thirty 
Seventh International Conference on Information Systems, 
2016. pp. 1-12. 
[27] Inidus. What is an Open Platform?  [cited 2022 03.26]; 
Available 
from: 
https://inidus.com/what-is-an-open-
platform/. 
[28] T. A. Oniki, J. F. Coyle, C. G. Parker, and S. M. Huff, 
«Lessons learned in detailed clinical modeling at 
Intermountain Healthcare.» Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1076-
1081, 2014. 
[29] B. Latour, «Science in action: How to follow scientists and 
engineers through society.». 1987: Harvard University 
Press. 
[30] E. Davis. Defining An Open Platform for Health IT. 2016  
[cited 
2022 
04.15]; 
Available 
from: 
https://www.openhealthnews.com/story/2016-03-
12/defining-open-platform-health-it. 
[31] R. Likert, «A technique for the measurement of attitudes.» 
Archives of Psychology, no., 1932. 
[32] A. Benlian, D. Hilkert, and T. Hess, «How open is this 
Platform? The meaning and measurement of platform 
openness from the complementers’ perspective.» Journal of 
Information Technology, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 209-228, 2015. 
[33] G. Ellingsen, B. Christensen, and L. Silsand, «Developing 
large-scale electronic patient records conforming to the 
openEHR architecture.» Procedia Technology, vol. 16, no., 
pp. 1281-1286, 2014. 
[34] A. Gawer and M. A. Cusumano, «Industry platforms and 
ecosystem innovation.» Journal of product innovation 
management, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 417-433, 2014. 
[35] A. Gawer, «Bridging differing perspectives on technological 
platforms: Toward an integrative framework.» Research 
policy, vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 1239-1249, 2014. 
[36] D. Tilson, C. Sorensen, and K. Lyytinen. «Change and 
control paradoxes in mobile infrastructure innovation: the 
Android and iOS mobile operating systems cases.»  45th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2012. 
IEEE. pp. 1324-1333. 
[37] G. Ellingsen and E. Monteiro, «Seamless integration: 
standardisation across multiple local settings.» Computer 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 15, no. 5-6, pp. 
443-466, 2006. 
[38] G.-H. 
Ulriksen, 
R. 
Pedersen, 
and 
G. 
Ellingsen, 
«Infrastructuring in healthcare through the openEHR 
architecture.» Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW), vol. 26, no. 1-2, pp. 33-69, 2017. 
[39] K. Vestues and K. Rolland, «Platformizing the Organization 
through Decoupling and Recoupling: A longitudinal case 
study of a government agency.» Scandinavian Journal of 
Information Systems, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 5, 2021. 
[40] D. Soto Setzke, M. Böhm, and H. Krcmar. «Platform 
openness: A systematic literature review and avenues for 
future research.»  14th International Conference on 
Wirtschaftsinformatik, February 24-27, 2019. 
[41] A. Ghazawneh and O. Henfridsson, «Balancing platform 
control and external contribution in third ‐ party 
development: the boundary resources model.» Information 
systems journal, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 173-192, 2013. 
[42] K. Kapoor, A. Z. Bigdeli, Y. K. Dwivedi, A. Schroeder, A. 
Beltagui, and T. Baines, «A socio-technical view of 
platform ecosystems: Systematic review and research 
agenda.» Journal of Business Research, vol. 128, no., pp. 94-
108, 2021. 
[43] T. R. Eisenmann, G. Parker, and M. Van Alstyne, «Opening 
platforms: how, when and why?» Platforms, markets and 
innovation, vol. 6, no., pp. 131-162, 2009. 
[44] H. N. Boone and D. A. Boone, «Analyzing likert data.» 
Journal of extension, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 1-5, 2012. 
[45] G. Yetter and K. Capaccioli, «Differences in responses to 
web and paper surveys among school professionals.» 
Behavior Research Methods, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 266-272, 
2010. 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

