Enhanced Performance Analysis of a Hierarchical Polling-based MAC Access 
Scheme for WBAN 
Fernando Di Gianni and Shusaburo Motoyama 
Master Program in Computer Science 
Faculty of Campo Limpo Paulista - FACCAMP 
Campo Limpo Paulista, Brasil 
fernandodigianni@gmail.com; shumotoyama@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—An 
enhanced 
performance 
analysis 
of 
a 
hierarchically structured access scheme for a Wireless Body 
Area Network (WBAN) is carried out in this paper. The access 
scheme uses the polling technique in each hierarchy level. 
Sensor nodes from first level are provided with infinite size 
buffers and both first and second levels use exhaustive polling 
technique. The study is done through computer simulation and 
mathematical models. Initially, the results of computer 
simulation are compared to the mathematical modeling. In 
spite of some approach used in mathematical modeling, the 
both results are very close. Next, to overcome the sensibility of 
second level to the input load of first level the performance 
analysis is carried out using different transmission rates for 
first and second levels. 
Keywords-hierarchical 
polling; 
computer 
simulation; 
wireless body sensor network. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In Wireless Body Area Network (WBAN), sensors are 
placed in various parts of the body and measure vital signs, 
such as temperature, blood pressure, heartbeat, etc., and 
transmit these data to an external device. The sensors can be 
placed on the skin or be implanted under the skin, and 
communication with the external device is always wireless, 
which ensures greater mobility and comfort to patients with 
WBAN. When a sensor is equipped with processing and data 
transmission capabilities will be denoted sensor node and the 
external device as sink node in this paper. 
In the deployment of sensors in the body, certain 
requirements must be considered, as the short distance 
transmission, low power consumption and very small 
dimension of a sensor. These features provide a low level of 
radiation, longevity in use the sensor without battery 
replacement and providing comfort for users [1]. 
When multiple sensor nodes begin to transmit packets 
simultaneously, collisions occur and packets must be 
retransmitted, wasting energy. Thus, the MAC must be 
designed to avoid collision and operate efficiently to reduce 
energy consumption. One of the MAC access schemes 
presented in the literature uses the polling technique for data 
collection of sensors [2]. In the presented work, the sensors 
are divided into groups and each group has a sink node that 
collects data from sensors using the polling technique. To 
collect the data from sink nodes, there is another node called 
master that collects the data, also using the polling technique. 
This structure was denoted hierarchical MAC access based 
on polling technique [2] and the performance of this scheme 
has been studied theoretically using mathematical models.  
In the theoretical models presented in [2], some 
approaches were used for the analysis of second level of 
hierarchy and the accuracy of models must be verified. The 
purpose of this article is twofold. Firstly, the analysis of the 
proposed structure in [2] is carried out through computer 
simulation to validate the theoretical model. Secondly, to 
overcome the sensibility of second level to the input load of 
first level is proposed different transmission rates for first 
and second levels and its performance analysis is carried out.  
The paper is organized in six sections. In Section II 
related work is described. The concepts related to MAC 
access scheme based on hierarchical topology are presented 
in Section III. The developed computational simulator and 
the analysis of the results are discussed in Section IV. In 
Section V the performance analysis using different 
transmission rates for first and second levels is carried out. 
Finally, the main conclusions are presented in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
To fulfill the MAC protocol requirements for WBAN 
such as low power consumption, quality of services and 
security many proposals have been presented in the 
literature. The main standard for WBAN the IEEE 802.15.6 
proposes general guidelines and it is not concerned with a 
specific type of access. Thus, many MAC scheme proposals 
can be implemented. Some proposals are compatible with 
IEEE 802.15.4 as presented in [6] denoted BAN MAC 
protocol which is a low power, designed for star topology. 
Upon receiving the data from the sensors, this MAC protocol 
dynamically adjusts the protocol parameters to improve 
energy conservation in sensors with low energy level.  
Many proposals are based on Time Division Multiple 
Access (TDMA) access technique [4][5][8][9]. Each of the 
proposals explores some special features based on medical 
needs. For instance, in [4] to deal with the light and heavy 
loads in normal and urgent situations, a context aware MAC 
is proposed. To guarantee Quality of Service (QoS) of a 
WBAN, a MAC protocol based on random access technique 
is proposed in [9]. In the proposal presented in [8], the heart 
beating is used for the purpose of clock synchronization. In 
[5], the beacon used for wake-up sensor nodes is used for 
battery charging, increasing the network life time. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Some proposals are based on polling access technique 
[2][7][10][11]. In [7] the MAC scheme based on flexible 
polling, guaranteeing QoS for WBAN is proposed. In the 
proposed MAC scheme the urgent traffic has high priority 
and is served before the normal traffic. The performance of 
MAC scheme based on polling in [10] is studied under 
different types of On-Off sources. The hierarchical polling 
based MAC scheme and its performance study are presented 
in [2][11]. The study is carried out using mathematical 
modeling and some approaches are used. Since the 
performance study of this paper is also to analyze the scheme 
by computer simulation and without approaches the 
hierarchical scheme will be detailed in next section.  
III. 
HIERARCHICAL POLLING 
The concept of hierarchical topology for WBAN was 
first presented in [3]. The idea was to minimize the fading of 
signals due to constant movement of the patient using 
WBAN. The sensor nodes have short ranges, typically less 
than 1 meter, and the transmission power is very low so that 
the fading of signals can be constant. In the work presented 
in [3], the sensors were divided into groups and each group is 
attended by an intermediate node using technique based on 
TDMA. The intermediate nodes are served by other hub 
node that also uses the TDMA technique. 
In the work presented in [2], it was also used the concept 
of hierarchical topology, however, the technique of data 
collection is based on polling. In this proposal, sensor nodes 
of the first level are also divided into groups and the sink 
nodes collect the data from each group using the polling 
technique and in the second level, the master node collects 
all the data from sink nodes using also the polling technique. 
The hierarchical polling concept applied in a human body is 
illustrated in Figure 1.  
The sensors, such as electroencephalography (EEG), 
electrocardiography (ECG), temperature (TPR), etc., are 
placed on the upper part of the body and are polled by the 
sink 2 which is attached to the arm, as shown in Figure 1. 
The sensors like motion (MTN), electromyography (EMG), 
glucose (GLC), etc., placed on the lower part of the body are 
polled by the sink 1 attached in a belt. The master node that 
polls the sink nodes can be a cellular phone or a device 
placed near the body. This device has connection to the 
internet so that the sensor data can be processed in a hospital 
or showed to a physician for diagnosis. 
The 
communication 
protocol 
used 
to 
exchange 
information between the sensors and the sink node in a group 
works briefly as follows, noting that all communication is 
done wirelessly. The sink node transmits a broadcast packet 
containing the number of sensor node (a number that 
uniquely identifies the sensor node), that is, an authorization 
for a sensor node to transmit the data. This authorization 
packet contains in its header enough bits for the 
synchronization in the sensor node. After recognition of its 
number, if a sensor node has packets to transmit, begins the 
 
Figure 1.  Hierarchical polling concept applied in a human body. 
transmission. After transmission, the sensor node waits for 
confirmation packet in case of the need for retransmission. If 
the sensor node has no packets to transmit, the transceiver 
remains switched off to save power. The sink node 
recognizes that a sensor node is off waiting a small time 
interval after transmission of the authorization packet. If data 
do not arrive from the investigated sensor node, the sink 
node concludes that the sensor node has no data to transmit 
and begins to investigate the next sensor node in the 
sequence. 
In 
this 
communication 
scheme, 
virtually 
all 
communication functions are in sink node and only the 
transmission function is assigned to the sensor node, in order 
to save its energy. 
This same communication protocol described above can 
be used in the second level when the master node 
investigates sink nodes to obtain the data. Probably for a 
WBAN, only two levels are sufficient. 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
For the performance analysis the hierarchical polling 
scheme can be modeled as shown in Figure 2. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 2.  Hierarchical polling model for performance analysis. 
As can be seen in Figure 2, the first level of the hierarchy 
is constituted of a number of sensors divided into groups, 
and each group is polled by a sink. The arrows represent the 
packets generated by each sensor with rate λ packets/s. In the 
second level the sink nodes are polled by the master node. 
Based on the network model presented in Figure 2, a 
simulation program in Java language was developed for 
performance analysis of hierarchical polling scheme.  
The input parameters of the simulation program are mean 
packet size of E{X} = 900 bits, the link capacity of R1 = 20 
kbps, packet transmission time of 900 / 20k = 45 ms 
(milliseconds), authorization packet transmission time of 4.5 
ms and the packet synchronization time of 2 ms. These 
parameters are used to perform comparison with the 
theoretical model presented in [11].  
A packet generated at each sensor follows a negative 
exponential distribution of mean 1/λ. To ensure that the 
statistics are collected under a statistical equilibrium, the first 
10,000 packets are discarded at each sensor node.  
The input load, S1, is defined as 
1
1
{ }
S =
R
ME X
                                  (1) 
where M is the number of sensors, λ is the average packet 
arrival rate, E{x} is the average packet size and R1 is the 
channel capacity.  
As a performance criterion, it is used the average transfer 
time of packets defined as the average waiting time of 
packets in the queue added to average packet transmission 
time in each sensor node. Another performance parameter is 
the average cycle time defined as the average time to inspect 
all sensor nodes in a cycle.  
It was considered that the buffer for storing packets has 
infinite size, that is, lossless and the discipline of service is 
exhaustive, meaning that the buffer is completely emptied 
when it is inspected. 
 The central part of the algorithm used in the simulation 
is detailed in appendix A, after the references. 
In a real case, the proposed body sensor network can 
monitor different biological signals such as temperature, 
pressure, among others, as shown in Figure 1. Since the 
sensors of a WBAN have short-range transmission 
capabilities due to energy saving, the communication signals 
among sensors and the sinks for some cases can be very 
impaired. Thus, two sinks placed in different positions to 
improve the communication capabilities are proposed in this 
paper, as shown in Figure 1.  
The network structure of developed simulation program 
is based on the standard IEEE 802.15.6 in capability and 
function. The network structure of the simulator operates in a 
star topology and in accordance with the polling protocol. 
The polling network has a centralized node that controls the 
packet transmission and avoids collisions of packets as 
demonstrated in [14].  
The developed simulator has the flexibility of adding 
new parameters to obtain the results, as is shown in appendix 
A, where a screen of simulator is presented. 
Figure 3 shows simulation results and comparison with 
theoretical results in first level for mean transfer time. It can 
be observed that the results obtained in the simulation are 
close to the theoretical up to the load of 0.5. For load greater 
than 0.5, the simulation and theoretical curves are diverging, 
but considering that the load is high and the polling scheme 
is already operating in unstable condition, different results 
for simulation and theoretical are expected. 
 
Figure 3.  Packet mean transfer time of first level. 
Figure 4 shows results for mean cycle time in first level. 
In this case, for the input load ranging from 0.1 to 0.6 the 
results obtained in the simulation are very close to the 
theory. For load greater than 0.6 the same phenomenon 
observed for mean transfer time occurs, that is, the curves are 
divergent. 
For the analysis of second level it must be observed that 
in the exhaustive polling technique, the packets are stored in 
the buffer at each sensor node and wait its turn to be 
attended, and when a sensor node is polled, all packets are 
transmitted, so that the packets arrival to the sink node in 
burst. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 4.  Mean cycle time of first level. 
But, in the case of theoretical model, the negative 
exponential distribution of packet arrival at input of sink 
nodes is assumed [12]. In the case of simulation, the negative 
exponential distribution is assumed only at output of a sensor 
node. Figure 4 shows the comparison of results obtained by 
simulation and theoretical means for mean transfer time. It 
can be observed the both curves are very close, meaning that 
the approach used in theoretical model is very reasonable.  
The curves of Figure 5 also show that the polling system, 
for given parameters, cannot operate with the load greater 
than 0.3 because the transfer times become prohibitively 
large, meaning that the waiting time of packets at each 
sensor node buffer is too large. 
 
Figure 5.   Packet mean transfer time of second level. 
Figure 6 shows the behavior of the curves for mean cycle 
time. The curves show that for load up to 0.3 the mean cycle 
values are very close but some divergence for load above 0.3 
can be observed but it is not significant. 
It can also be observed that for load above 0.3, a small 
increment of input load, a large mean cycle time is obtained, 
approaching to the infinity quickly, showing the second level 
high sensitivity to the input load.  
The general conclusion is that in order to have stable 
operation in the first and second levels of the hierarchical 
polling scheme with the given parameters, the system must 
operate with a load lower than 0.3. 
 
Figure 6.  Mean cycle time of second level. 
It can also observed that for input load above 0.4, a small 
increment of the load, both transfer and cycle times have  
exponential values as can be seen in Figures 5 and 6, 
meaning a high sensitivity of the second level to the input 
load. 
V. 
ENHANCED CAPACITY OF SECOND LEVEL 
As seen in section four the second level has high 
sensitivity to the load of first level. To improve the 
performance of second level a higher link capacity can be 
used in this level. The use of low link capacity in first level is 
convenient because the sensors are implanted under skin or 
placed very close to the skin, so that low frequencies devices 
can avoid any damage to human body. The hierarchical 
structure studied in this paper can use different capacities for 
first and second levels to improve the performance of 
system. 
To show the performance of second level using different 
capacities a theoretical analysis is carried out. 
Since there is no loss in first level, the performance 
model for second level will be as shown in Figure 7 [11]. 
 
Figure 7.  Second level performance model for infinite buffer case. 
The mean cycle time for this case is given by 
,)
= 1(
Tc2
x
x
S
Nw

                                      (2)                      
where N is the number of sink nodes, wx is the walk time 
(packet authorization transmission time plus synchronization 
time) and Sx is given by 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

x
x
R
NS R
R
E X
NM
1
1
x
{ }
S =


                    (3)                                                                        
where R1 is the transmission capacity of first level, Rx is the 
transmission capacity of second level and S1 is given by (1). 
The stability condition is given by 
Sx < 1⇒ NMλE{X} < Rx.                       (4)                                                                   
The queuing time in a buffer of second level is given by 
[11] 
,)
1(
2
}
{
)
1(
2
)
/
1(
}
{
2
x
x
x
x
x
x
S
R
E X
S
S
N
S
Nw
E W





           (5)                                                       
for deterministic packet length. 
The packet transfer time for the second level is given by 
}
{
{ }
}
{
2
2
E W
R
E X
T
E
x


.                        (6) 
Assuming the capacity of 20 kb/s for first level and for 
the second level the following capacities will be assumed: 40 
kb/s, 100 kb/s and 250 kb/s. In the literature the most 
frequent capacities cited are 19.2 Kbits/sec and 38.4 
Kbits/sec used in Mica2Dot [12], and 250 Kbits/sec used in 
MicaZ [12][13]. These capacities are always used in first 
level in cited references. An advantage of the hierarchical 
structure is that the capacities of first and second levels can 
be uncoupled, so that a higher link capacity can be used in 
second level. 
TABLE I.  
PARAMETERS FOR SECOND LEVEL. 
Capacity 
Rx 
Kbit/sec 
Authorization 
Packet Time 
(ms) 
Synchronization 
Time 
(ms) 
Walk Time 
wx 
(ms) 
20 
4.5 
2 
6.5 
40 
2.25 
1 
3.25 
100 
0.9 
0.4 
1.3 
250 
0.36 
0.16 
0.52 
 
Table 1 shows the parameters used for second level. The 
packet authorization time in the first line of Table 1 is 
calculated considering that packet has 10 % of length of data 
packet (E{X} = 900 bits) and a transmission rate of 20 
Kbit/sec, that is, 90 / 20 K = 4.5 ms. The synchronization 
time in first line of Table 1 is approached to 2 ms and the 
walk time is the addition of packet authorization time and 
synchronization 
time. 
The 
other 
values 
of 
packet 
authorization and synchronization times are calculated 
considering inversely proportional to the link capacities. 
Using (5) and (6) and the parameters of Table 1, the 
mean transfer times for various link capacities of second 
level can be calculated as is shown in Figure 8. The figure 
shows that the performance limitation of second level using 
the same capacity of first level can be completely overcame 
using different capacities. 
 
Figure 8.  Performance comparison of transfer times for different 
transmission capacities of second level. 
A Figure 8 shows using the double of first level capacity 
(40 Kbit/sec) the performance in relation to transfer times is 
much better. For the link capacity of 250 Kbit/sec the 
transfer time is very low and almost constant for any input 
load. 
As shown in Figure 9 the curves of mean cycle times 
have the same behavior of mean transfer times. Using the 
double of link capacity of first level the cycle time of second 
level becomes stable, and for the capacity of 250 Kbit/sec the 
cycle time is almost constant for any input load. 
 
Figure 9.  Performance comparison of cycle times for different 
transmission capacities of second level. 
The results obtained in Figures 8 and 9 can be compared 
to the results presented in [2][11]. The performance study 
presented in [2][11] considered the same transmission rate of 
20 Kbit/s in both first and second levels and as the result, the 
mean transfer and cycle times of second level were very 
sensitive to the input load. The second level could operate in 
stable condition if only less than 0.4 of input load was 
applied in first level. Figures 8 and 9 show that just doubling 
the transmission rate of second level, the input load can also 
be doubled to 0.8 for stable operation of second level. For 
higher transmission rates, the stable operation of second 
level is almost independent of load of first level.      
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
A MAC scheme hierarchy structured using polling-based 
technique was analyzed is this paper. The results obtained for 
mean transfer times by simulation in first level of hierarchy 
were compared to the theoretical results, showing good 
closeness for light loads and some divergence for high loads. 
For high loads, the polling system is operating in unstable 
condition so that some divergence is expected. The same 
conclusion was observed for mean cycle time in the first 
level. The results for mean transfer times of second level of 
hierarchy, in spite of some approach assumed in theoretical 
model for this level, showed a good closeness for both 
simulation and theory for all range of load. Thus, concluding 
that theoretical model is a good model. The results for mean 
cycle times of second level showed that for load up to 0.3 are 
very close but some divergence for load above 0.3 can be 
observed but it is not significant. It was also observed that 
for load above 0.3, a small increment of input load, a large 
mean cycle time is obtained, showing the high sensitivity of 
second level to the input load. 
To overcome the sensitivity of second level to the input 
load a study using different and higher transmission 
capacities in second level was carried out. The study showed 
that using the double capacity in second level the polling 
system becomes stable for almost all input load, and for the 
capacity of 250 Kbit/sec the transfer times, as well cycle 
times are almost constant for any input load. 
In future work, other models of sensor nodes reflecting 
real situations will be incorporated to the simulation program 
to study real capability of hierarchical polling-based MAC 
scheme. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Ullah and K. S. Kwak, “Performance study of low-power 
MAC protocols for Wireless Body Area Networks,” Personal, 
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications Workshops 
(PIMRC Workshops). IEEE 21st International Symposium. 
Istanbul, Turkey, 2010, pp. 112-116. 
[2] S. Motoyama, “Hierarchical Polling-based MAC scheme for 
Wireless Body Sensor Network,” The 2013 International 
Conference on Wireless Networks - ICWN’13, Las Vegas, 
USA, 2013, pp. 103-109. 
[3] S. Marinkovic, C. Spagnol, and E. Popovici, “Energy-
Efficient TDMA-Based MAC Protocol for Wireless Body 
Area Networks,” Third International Conference on Sensor 
Technologies and Applications, SENSORCOMM '09, Athens, 
Greece, June 2009, pp. 604-609. 
[4] Z. Yan and B. Liu, “A context aware MAC protocol for 
medical Wireless Body Area Network Wireless,” Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers - IEEE Computer 
Society. 7th International Communications and Mobile 
Computing Conference - IWCMC 2011, vol. 2, Istanbul, 
Turkey, 2011, pp. 2133-2138. 
[5] D. Layerle and A. Kwasinski, “A power efficient pulsed 
MAC protocol for body area networks,” in IEEE 22nd 
International Symposium on Personal Indoor and Mobile 
Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2011, pp. 2244-2248. 
[6] M. Chen, S. Gonzalez, A. Vasilakos, H. Cao, and V. C. M. 
Leung, “Body Area Networks: A Survey”, Mobile Network 
Application, Springer, 2011, pp. 171-193. 
[7] S. Motoyama, “Flexible Polling-based Scheduling with QoS 
Capability for Wireless Body Sensor Network,” 37th Annual 
IEEE Conference on Local Computer Networks - LCN 2012, 
Clearwater, USA, 2012, pp. 749-756. 
[8] L. Huaming and T. Jindong, “Heartbeat-driven medium-
access control for body sensor networks,” IEEE Transactions 
on Information Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 14, No. 1, 
Jan. 2010, pp. 44-51. 
[9] A. A. Khaled, H. S. Jahangir, and T. H. Mouftah, “QoS-based 
MAC protocol for medical wireless body area sensor 
networks,” in IEEE Symposium on Computers and 
Communications (ISCC), 2010, pp. 216-221. 
[10] T. A. Pazeto, L. F. Refatti, and S. Motoyama, “Polling-based 
Medium Access Control Scheme for Wireless Body Sensor 
Network,” in International Conference on Wireless Networks 
- ICWN-12, Las Vegas, 2012, pp. 87-93. 
[11] S. Motoyama, “Performance of Hierarchical Polling-based 
MAC scheme for Wireless Body Sensor Network,” The 2014 
International Conference on Wireless Networks - ICWN’14, 
Las Vegas, USA, 2014, pp. 23-28. 
[12] Crossbow. 
MicaZ 
Datasheet. 
Available 
in: 
http://www.openautomation.net/uploadsproductos/micaz_data
sheet.pdf - [retrieved: September, 2014]. 
[13] M. L. Sichitiu, “Cross-Layer Scheduling for Power Efficiency 
in Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proceedings of INFOCOM 
2004, Hong Kong, 2004, pp. 1740-1750. 
[14] M. R. Yuce and J. Y. Khan, “Wireless Body Area Networks, 
Technology, Implementation, and Application,” Pan Stanford 
Publishing, Boca Raton, 2011, pp. 270. 
 
 
APPENDIX A 
 
Figure 10 shows the main parts of the developed algorithm 
for simulator.  The first step of the algorithm is the 
generation of the arrival times of packets using the 
negative exponential distribution and store in a attribute of 
class named Packet. Each newly generated packet is 
placed in a FIFO (First In First Out) queue that represents 
a Sensor. Two other attributes of this class are the sink and 
master clock times which are obtained during the 
simulation. The following step is the verification of sensor 
queues of Group1 in a polling sequence so that the packets 
of each queue can be served exhaustively. Each attended 
packet receives a clock stamp and is moved to the Sink1 
queue. When all packets are served, the packets are in a 
FIFO sequence in the Sink1. Then the process goes to the 
next Group2 and same procedure of previous step is 
repeated so that the packets are stored in the queue of 
Sink2. The next step is the verification of sink queues of 
second level to serve the packets in the exhaustive polling 
sequence. Each attended packet receives a clock stamp and 
is sent to the Master queue. During the polling process the 
mean transfer and polling cycle times and other parameters 
are calculated. 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 10.  Overview of main algorithm developed for the performance analysis of hierarchical polling-based MAC scheme. 
 
Figure 11 shows a screen of simulator where the  changes 
of source/input values, process and output are possible. In 
the tab named “Source/Input” the initial values can be 
typed. They are: numbers of packets and sensors, the mean 
packet size in bits and the number of packets to be 
discarded before the statistics. In this tab, it is also possible 
to select the type of source packet generation distribution 
("Negative Exponential" or "On/Off") as well as the 
transmission rates of first and second levels.  
In the tab named "Process" the sensor buffer size can be 
set, what technique for packet service will be used and the 
system load range. In the tab named "Output", it is 
possible to select the result graphs for presenting at the end 
of the simulation process. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Overview of the simulator screen. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

