An Optimized Infrastructure for Deferred Telemonitoring of Home Rehabilitation in
Chronic Rheumatic Patients
Danilo Pani, Gianluca Barabino, Alessia Dess`ı, Luigi Raffo
DIEE - Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
University of Cagliari
Cagliari, Italy
Email: pani, gianluca.barabino, alessia.dessi, luigi@diee.unica.it
Matteo Piga, Alessandro Mathieu
Chair of Rheumatology and Rheumatology Unit
University and AOU of Cagliari
Cagliari, Italy
Email: matteopiga@alice.it, mathieu@pacs.unica.it
Abstract—The interest towards telemedicine and its various
branches is constantly growing, given the opportunities in terms
of costs reduction, efﬁciency and capillarity in delivering health
services. In particular, telerehabilitation aims at improving
the quality of life of physically impaired patients, providing
the support for home-managed rehabilitation sessions. Moving
from an existing outpatient device for the quantitative evalu-
ation of hand rehabilitation exercises, opportunely enhanced
to be used in a telemonitoring scenario, in this paper the
development of the remaining telerehabilitation infrastructure
is presented and evaluated. It includes, beyond the rehabilita-
tion kits, a remote server and a deferred monitoring software
application. The kits, entrusted to the patients for rehabilitation
in their home, are able to send to the remote server via
a GSM/GPRS connection, quantitative measurements of the
patients’ performance. The physician’s monitoring application,
retrieving such data and providing an appropriate visualiza-
tion, allows the evaluation of both the patients’ compliance to
the rehabilitation protocol and their progresses. The system
has been evaluated by a small panel of rheumatologists in
order to assess its acceptability in a clinical environment and
is currently under test for experimental trials in Italy.
Keywords-telerehabilitation; telemedicine; hand disability.
I. INTRODUCTION
Telemedicine is a ﬁeld of medicine which deals with
providing health services at distance, exploiting information
and communication technologies (ICT) resources to diag-
nose, treat and prevent diseases and injuries [1]. The interest
towards this practice is based on the possibilities disclosed in
terms of efﬁcacy, quality and cost-effectiveness of the health
services delivered [2] to an increasing number of patients.
Telerehabilitation, dealing with delivering rehabilitation ser-
vices over distance, can be used in a number of different
scenarios, from post-stroke to invalidating chronic diseases.
In such cases, it is important to step in with personalized
kinesitherapies whose effectiveness strongly relies on the
patient’s rigour in following the medical protocol. Without
remote monitoring it is not possible for therapists to assess
the compliance to the rehabilitation protocol when it is per-
formed at home and to adjust possible incorrect behaviours
which could undermine the rehabilitation effectiveness. At
the same time, closely assisting every patient during the
rehabilitation (either in person or from remote) would re-
quire a huge effort, considerable costs and discomfort for
the patients, being hardly practicable.
In fact, several telehomecare systems have been developed
including a videoconferencing support in order to interact
with the patient, as for the Twoway InterActive TeleVision
[3]. This kind of solution requires large bandwidth and it is
expensive not only in terms of actual cost but also in terms
of time dedicated by the physician to every patient, that is
incompatible with the real workload of a clinician. Store-
and-forward solutions, where the analysis of the patient’s
parameters sent to the physician for evaluation is deferred,
can be more acceptable provided that a proper data sum-
marization is ensured. In fact deferred monitoring allows
keeping track of a large number of patients’ therapies with a
limited effort. Nevertheless, the introduction of any ICT tool
in the clinical practice cannot neglect its overall acceptability
from both the patient’s and physician’s viewpoints. The latter
is usually overlooked compared to the former, with the result
of drawing unrealistic conclusions about the possibility of
exploiting such a tool in a real scenario. Physicians need
intuitive and user-friendly software tools able to provide
useful, informative data allowing to ease the assessment
of the patient’s performance, speeding up the evaluation
process rather than complicating it. At the same time the
system approach must be sustainable in terms of costs for
both the patients and the Public Health System.
Moving from the extension of a device for the quantitative
evaluation of hand rehabilitation exercises in rheumatology
clinics [4], this paper deals with the development of the
best suited telemedicine infrastructure able to include such
(modiﬁed) device into a telerehabilitation scenario. The
development of such infrastructure is driven by the need
of meeting the requirements of effectiveness, sustainability,
acceptability and user friendliness. Such aspects are in depth
covered in this paper in order to present the proposed
implementation along with its critical appraisal in terms
of alternative technologies. The evaluation of the system
usability from the physician’s perspective has been carried
out exploiting a panel of physicians getting in touch with
301
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

it for the ﬁrst time. The proposed system is currently being
used for experimental trials in Italy.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II presents the proposed telemedicine infrastructure
implementation issues, on a speciﬁc use case. The critical
motivation of the speciﬁc choices in the light of possible
technological alternatives is presented in Section III, along
with the results of a usability test performed on a small
panel of rheumatologists. In Section IV the ﬁnal remarks
are presented along with the future developments of this
work.
II. THE PROPOSED TELEREHABILITATION
INFRASTRUCTURE
As mentioned in Section I, this work moves from the
extension of a device for the quantitative evaluation of hand
rehabilitation exercises in rheumatology clinics [4]. In such
a work, a hardware kit for the outpatient examination of
kinesitherapic exercises aimed at restoring the hand func-
tionality in patients affected by chronic rheumatic diseases
was presented. That kit enables the therapist to monitor
the execution parameters for a set of hand kinesitherapic
exercises while they are in progress, by means of a Matlab
user interface controlling the device in real-time. The exten-
sion of such system to add telemonitoring features requires
modiﬁcation to the hardware kit and the development of the
whole telemedicine infrastructure able to include it into a
telerehabilitation infrastructure.
The proposed infrastructure is aimed at deferred monitor-
ing, so it is necessarily composed of three main components,
as depicted in Fig. 1. A set of rehabilitation kits, in this case
modiﬁed versions of the portable briefcases presented in [4],
are entrusted to the patients. They allow to perform several
rehabilitation exercises, extracting parameters characteristic
of their execution. The kits are able to send the collected data
to a remote server. This is in charge of both gathering and
storing such data in a database, keeping track of the progress
in the patient’s performance over time. The last component is
the monitoring software, an application expressly designed
for the physicians to access such data and perform some
basic analysis. From Fig. 1 it is possible to see how the
direct communication over the Internet of the kits with the
physician’s PC is not allowed. In the following, the different
parts of the system are presented.
A. The rehabilitation kit
The kit provided to the patient allows the execution of dif-
ferent rehabilitation exercises, which include both strength
and agility exercises, expressly designed by expert rheuma-
tologists [4]. With respect to its ﬁrst version, the kit has been
enhanced in order to support the telemonitoring features. The
set of exercises to be executed, the number of series and the
number of repetitions within each series, can be adapted
to the patients needs. Following the indications provided
Re.Mo.To.
Re.Mo.To.
Re.Mo.To.
Server &
Database
Internet
(TCP/IP)
Physicians’ PCs
Rehabilitation kits
Figure 1.
Main components of the telemonitoring system for hand
rehabilitation.
by the kit through a simple led-based interface, patients
are able to perform a training session autonomously. The
kit collects quantitative data representative of the patient’s
performance in each exercise, summarizing them through
a set of statistical values including the mean, standard
deviation, maximum and minimum values of the physical
quantities of interest for each exercise and the associated
temporal information.
The kit has been equipped with a GSM/GPRS module
(SIM900 by Simcom) able to provide a wireless connectivity
mean to transmit only the summarized data to the remote
server over the Internet at the end of each training session
without any user intervention. The module is controlled by
the central processing unit of the rehabilitation kit via a
serial port (USART) interface and is managed exploiting
the AT commands. These basically are ascii strings, origi-
nally introduced to manage dial-up modems, which encodes
operations such as conﬁguring the connection, dialling and
hanging up. It ﬁrst establishes a TCP/IP connection with
the remote server and then sends a chunk of data composed
of an header and a payload. The header is a unique code
extracted from the SIM card installed on the GSM/GPRS
module, namely the International Mobile Subscriber Identity
(IMSI) code, a 15 digit number. In this way, a patient-
SIM couple is intrinsically created, ensuring anonymous
data transmissions. The payload is the vector of the training
session statistics, in binary format. The amount of data sent
is constant, regardless of the actual rehabilitation protocol
conﬁguration (the areas corresponding to non-executed ex-
ercises are zero-padded), so it is easy to identify the data
302
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

of a given exercise simply relying on their position into the
frame. As soon as the server acknowledgement is received,
the kit can be turned off, otherwise the data is stored on a
persistent storage mean (embedded onto the device) and it
is made available for a further try. Hence it is possible to
recover the data after an unsuccessful transaction due, for
example, to a momentary GSM network malfunctioning.
B. The remote server
The remote server is the software application responsible
of collecting the data from the rehabilitation kits and of
storing them in a database for an easy retrieval. Furthermore
it processes and answers the requests forwarded by the ther-
apist’s software tool. The application listens continuously
for incoming connections, ready to receive new data at any
time (allowing the patients to have no time schedule for
their training sessions). The software is a multi-threaded
C++ application, developed for a Linux server platform. The
server actual functionalities, such as taking care of the data
trafﬁc from/to both ends of the system (i.e. from patients’
kits and from physicians’ PCs) are handled by two parallel
threads (S1 and S2), each one listening on a different socket
for incoming connections. The ﬁrst one (S1) is the interface
towards the rehabilitation kits. When a new connection is
requested, S1 creates a sub-thread which handles the transfer.
By default the incoming data frame is accepted, temporarily
stored and parsed. If a valid device is recognised the ﬁxed
sized data frame is received and analysed to check the data
integrity. An error is logged if:
• the client device is not recognised
• an insufﬁcient amount of data has been received
• the received data integrity check fails.
In case of errors the data is written into a separate ﬁle
(mainly for debugging purposes) but no entry is set into
the database. After a successful validation, the acknowledge-
ment is sent to the device, the connection is closed and the
data is inserted into the database. The server is capable of
managing multiple connections at the same time, since each
transaction is handled by a different thread. To avoid issues
while accessing the database, all the operations performed
on it are protected by mutexes (which implements mutual
exclusivity), so only one thread at a time can access it.
The interface towards the monitoring application is han-
dled by the S2 thread. It is capable of answering to nine
different queries by which it is possible to request different
sets of data. The limited number of allowed queries confers
a good ﬂexibility to the therapist in choosing with a ﬁne
granularity the data to download, without an excessive
increase in the design complexity.
1) Database management: The server application relies
on a SQLite relational database for the storage of the
patients’ historical data. This choice eases the system design,
being not necessary the adoption of a database manager. Still
it can be accessed by means of standard SQL queries and all
its contents reside on a single ﬁle, which can be backed-up
easily for safety reasons. Its structure is fairly simple and
consists of 4 tables (Fig.2):
• a table T1 containing the list of registered kits
• a table T2 containing the list of the rehabilitation
session recorded by the system. Each row of T2 is
related to a unique row of T1
• one table T3 for each exercise containing the data
related to the executions of that particular exercise by
each patient. Each row is related to a unique row of T2
• a table T4 containing the protocol (i.e. number of series
per exercise, number of repetitions, etc.) associated with
each kit. Each row of T4 is related to a unique row of
T1.
T2 and T3 can be accessed by both the rehabilitation kits
(to insert the data) and the physician’s monitoring software
(read only, through the 9 access queries). The latter can
also modify T4 content. Each query issues a SELECT SQL
instruction on the tables they identify. Fig. 3 shows the
format of the messages exchanged between the server and
the client applications. The messages containing the server
answers are formatted as depicted in Fig. 3 regardless of
the query being answered to. This eases the monitoring
application design and possible modiﬁcations/enhancements
to the communication protocol. Deleting entries from the
database, when necessary, must be done at low level by
issuing speciﬁc SQL queries by the system administrator,
in order to avoid accidental loss of data. To improve safety,
a copy of the database is automatically backed-up every day
via a Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) connection. This
avoids loosing the data stored onto the server memory in
case of accidental damages to the machine, saving the costs
and the hassle of managing a RAID unit, which is in any
case a viable option.
Devices (T1)
device S/N
IMSI code
Executions (T2)
ID
DATE
S/N
TIME
Exercise 2 (T3)
ID
STATISTICS
Exercise 1 (T3)
ID
STATISTICS
Exercise 0 (T3)
ID
STATISTICS
ID
STATISTICS
ID
Protocols (T4)
S/N
Val 1
Val N
Val 2
- - -
Figure 2.
Internal structure of the database.
query parameters
query ID
end string
header
data frames
frame N-1
frame N
data type
frame size
N
void data flag
date
patient ID
binary data
header
trailer
Figure 3.
Format of the messages exchanged between client and server
applications. From top to bottom, the request frame format and the response
one.
303
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. The physician’s monitoring application
The therapist can access the data and evaluate the patient
performance by means of a custom software. The application
is based on the Qt framework, and allows an easy visualiza-
tion of each patient’s data by means of an intuitive graphical
user interface (GUI). The GUI is composed of four main
views where the user can:
• customize the application settings in the options tab
• send a query to the remote server and download the
data
• check the patients rehabilitation sessions
• analyse with more details the historic results achieved
by each patient.
The software has been designed trying to achieve ﬂexibility
both in terms of data management and analysis. In order
to ease the data retrieval, the user can graphically build the
query to forward to the remote server by selecting which
data he wants to access.
Once the data has been downloaded, the therapist has
the possibility to perform different actions. It is possible
to verify who is performing the training according to the
protocol and who’s not. An immediate analysis of the
patients’ performance can be carried out and the data can be
exported in a portable format (a .csv ﬁle) and saved locally
for a delayed analysis. The ﬁrst operation can be carried out
by means of the Execution tab (Fig. 4), where a table shows
which patients do have a correspondent entry in the table
T2 of the database (marked with a green “v”) and which
not (a red cross is shown). This is a fast way to verify if
some patients are not following the protocol correctly; the
therapist can hence get in touch with them to ﬁnd out if any
problem has arisen.
By means of the Analysis tab (Fig. 5), a more detailed
analysis can be performed by selecting speciﬁc data subset
representative of the historic trend of each patient’s perfor-
mance in the individual exercises. The data are hence plotted
on a time chart separately for each hand and series (I and
II) executed in the training sessions. In the graphs, each
point corresponds to the performance obtained by a patient
in a given date. The plotted data are the one mentioned in
Section II-A. The performance is quantiﬁed approximately
by the mean value of the physical quantity relevant for that
exercise (e.g.: torque in Nm). The trend of this quantity gives
a clue on the patient progresses. Further information such
as maximum and minimum values, standard deviation and
number of repetitions associated with each series are though
necessary to assess the meaning of the mean value. The
physician interface makes such data available in an intuitive
and easily interpretable way, in order to ease performing
such kind of analysis (Fig. 6). For a deeper insight, or
statistical data characterization, the data can be exported in
order to allow the exploitation of speciﬁc external software
tools typically used in the medical community.
Figure 4.
Execution table of the therapist GUI.
Figure 5.
Analysis selection screen of the therapist GUI
III. CLINICIANS’ EVALUATION
The proposed telemonitoring infrastructure is currently
under test in Italy by the Chair of Rheumatology and
Rheumatology Unit of the University of Cagliari, within a
trial involving 20 chronic rheumatic patients. In order to as-
sess the usability of the system, a panel of 9 rheumatologists
not directly involved in the trial has been asked to undergo a
simple test in order to evaluate the telerehabilitation system.
The choice of asking to experts in the ﬁeld descends from
the need to ensure the user has an idea of the usefulness of
the system and all the more so he is able to understand what
he is analysing in terms of patient’s data.
After attending an half-an-hour presentation on the whole
telemedicine infrastructure with details on the physician’s
monitoring application, the rehumatologists had the possi-
bility of using the system for the time required to carry
out 3 simple tasks, without any possibility of interacting
with the designers, reporting if they were able to perform a
given task and their difﬁculty in performing it (on a scale
from 1 to 5). The tasks were a synthesis of common oper-
ations included in a normal use case and consisted of: data
download, execution data and statistics visualization, and
304
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 6.
Exemplary historic series for an extension exercise performed
by a real rheumatic patient over the ﬁrst 6 therapy weeks.
raw data comparison through the graphic interface. Then,
a questionnaire for the evaluation of the system usability
has been administered. To this aim, we chose the System
Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire [5]. Such a scale tries
to measure the perceived usability of the system (from the
physician’s perspective) within the reference context. In fact,
usability can be intended as the perceived appropriateness to
a context of a given artefact, and cannot be fairly evaluated
outside it (for instance with physicians with a different
background and specialization). The 10-item scale yields
a single number from 0 to 100 representing a composite
measure of the overall usability of the system being studied
[5]. The SUS presents 10 statements, the responder being
asked to choose the level of agreement within a scale from
1 to 5. The sentences concern the system ease of use and
usefulness, e.g. ”Q1. I think that I would like to use this
system frequently” or ”Q2. I found the system unnecessarily
complex” (the complete questionnaire con be found at
www.usabilitynet.org/trump/documents/Suschapt.doc).
A. Results and discussion
In the proposed test all the tasks have been performed
correctly by the physicians, and the average difﬁculty level
marked was 1.4. In Fig. 7 the results of the SUS assessment
are shown. It is possible to see the distribution of the answers
to the 10 questions proposed by the questionnaire in terms
of mean and standard deviation (the scale is from 1 to 5,
where 1 is for “strongly disagree” and 5 for “strongly agree”
with the questionnaire statements). The ﬁnal score is a mean
SUS of 85.3 (minimum value 55, maximum value 97.5)
with a standard deviation of 13.8. Taking into account that
the system has been used for the ﬁrst time by the panel of
physicians in that occasion, it is overall a very good result.
From a physician perspective the system presents several
advantages under different viewpoints. At ﬁrst, the whole
infrastructure is completely standalone, i.e. it can be used
as it is, without the need of any additional support device
at both ends (patient’s and physician’s), limiting possible
additional costs for both the patient and the Public Health
System. For instance, as said an embedded GSM/GPRS
1
2
3
4
5
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
Q9
Q10
Figure 7.
Mean and standard deviation of the answers to the individual
SUS questions (the vertical scale represents the level of agreement, with 1
for “strongly disagree” and 5 for “strongly agree”).
module provides the Internet connectivity. Among all the
different solutions, apt to achieve the same result, the
proposed one allows to limit the required telecommunication
infrastructure at the patient’s home. He is not required to
have neither a Wi-Fi or wired (i.e. Ethernet connectivity)
wide-band connectivity nor a dial-up telephone line (with all
the security and regulatory issues). Getting rid of any burden
such as having and managing additional external tools is also
particularly important when dealing with elderly patients.
For instance, in [6] a telerehabilitation system somehow
similar to the one presented here is introduced, but the
patient’s kit is not stand-alone, requiring a PC with an
internet connection. The same holds for systems requiring
advanced mobile phones as telecommunication gates [7] or
speciﬁc home entertainment devices such as Nintendo Wii
[8] and similar tools. Even telemedicine systems exploiting
apparently widespread devices such as DVB-T apparatus
for digital TV [9] can pose some problems when speciﬁc
features are required (e.g. dial-up connection from the set-
top-box, embedded smart card reader, etc.). This fact could
leave out of a telerehabilitation program those patients who
are not accustomed to such technologies, not equipped with
the basic infrastructure, not able to pay for the connectivity
costs. In the proposed system, pre-paid SIMs allow the
hospital to easily manage the connectivity costs.
All the low level aspects of the whole telemedicine
infrastructure are completely transparent for the physicians.
In this way the physician can better focus on the monitoring
aspect and the interaction with the patient. The execution
table on the monitoring application allows a birdview of the
patients population in terms of execution without entering
the details. Further analyses on the single patient are also
allowed. The patient-physician interactions are enforced: the
physician can correct or stimulate the patient whereas the
patient, knowing its monitored status, is motivated and more
prone to communicate with the physicians if some physical
problems arise.
From a more technical perspective, summarizing the data
305
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

in terms of relevant statistics at the source implies efﬁciency
advantages not only in terms of connection costs reduction
but also in terms of battery life extension (on the kit) and
lightweight database (on the server) which means faster
queries response time. Such process also avoids overwhelm-
ing the physician with data not immediately interpretable,
slowing down the monitoring process. Also the choice of
sending only binary data with the header composed only
by an IMSI code is particularly useful for privacy issues,
avoiding expensive and complex systems to cipher the
communications between the kits and the server, mainly,
since from the physician’s side the decryption process could
be more easily implemented.
The cost-effectiveness of the proposed infrastructure is
demonstrated by the maintenance values: a 24H server with
a dedicated hardware machine by an external provider costs
71 Euros/month; every SIM costs 2.5 Euros/week. Then
the maintenance cost of the system is about (71/N + 10)
Euros/patient, where N is the number of involved patients
having a kit, which seems to be reasonable for the level of
the service provided.
IV. CONCLUSION
The main challenge in designing effective telerehabil-
itation systems is the correct evaluation of the trade-off
between different requirements, such as the medical needs
and the economical resources. Within this study a possible
solution to these issues has been presented, taking into ac-
count both patients’ and physicians’ needs. The problem of
minimizing the system maintenance costs has been carefully
taken into account, giving raise to a low cost telemedicine in-
frastructure which clearly simpliﬁes the system management
for patients, exploiting an automatic wireless connection on
a stand-alone device. Also, the evaluation of the system
therapists’ interface by means of the SUS test, performed on
a panel of 9 rheumatologists, evidences the efforts that have
been done in realizing a system usable in clinical practice.
Although the presented system applies to a particular case
of telerehabilitation, the considerations made throughout
the paper are common to other telemedicine applications.
Telerehabilitation of course does not implies that it is be
possible to neglect the patient to doctor human interaction,
which still represents an important aspect of health care.
In fact, the presented system could evolve just to improve
it; for example a web based system where physicians and
patients could share opinions, suggestions and possibly also
schedule meetings or request assistance could be joined to
the existing framework.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the Region of Sardinia, Fundamental Research Pro-
gramme, L.R. 7/2007 “Promotion of the scientiﬁc research
and technological innovation in Sardinia” under grant agree-
ment CRP2 584 Re.Mo.To. Project. Alessia Dess`ı grate-
fully acknowledges Sardinia Regional Government for the
ﬁnancial support of her PhD scholarship (P.O.R. Sardegna
F.S.E. Operational Programme of the Autonomous Region
of Sardinia, European Social Fund 2007-2013 - Axis IV
Human Resources, Objective l.3, Line of Activity l.3.1). The
authors wish to thank Salvatore Fara for his cooperation in
the preliminary setup of the GSM/GPRS expansion of the
rehabilitation kits.
REFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization, “A health telematics policy: in
support of the who’s health-for-all strategy for global health
development, report of the who group consultation on health
telematics,” WHO, Tech. Rep., Dec. 1997, WHO/DGO/98.01.
[2] J. Craig and V. Patterson, “Introduction to the practice of
telemedicine,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 11,
no. 1, pp. 3–9, 2005.
[3] S. Guillen, M. Arredondo, V. Traver, J. Garcia, and C. Fer-
nandez, “Multimedia telehomecare system using standard TV
set,” Biomedical Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 49,
no. 12, pp. 1431–1437, Dec. 2002.
[4] D. Pani, G. Barabino, A. Dess`ı, A. Mathieu, and L. Raffo,
“A portable real-time monitoring system for kinesitherapic
hand rehabilitation exercises,” in Proc. of 5th International
Joint Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and
Technologies (BIOSTEC), 2012, pp. 82–89.
[5] J. Brooke, “Sus: a “quick and dirty” usability scale,” in P. W.
Jordan, B. Thomas, B. A. Weerdmeester, and A. L. McClelland.
Usability Evaluation in Industry.
Taylor and Francis, 1996.
[6] V. Macellari, S. Morelli, C. Giacomozzi, G. D. Angelis,
G. Maccioni, M. Paolizzi, and D. Giansanti, “Instrumental
kit for a comprehensive assessment of functional recovery,”
in Hand Transplantation, 2006.
[7] A. Sarela, J. Salminen, E. Koskinen, O. Kirkeby, I. Korhonen,
and D. Walters, “A home-based care model for outpatient
cardiac rehabilitation based on mobile technologies,” in Perva-
sive Computing Technologies for Healthcare, PervasiveHealth,
2009.
[8] J. Burke, M. McNeill, D. Charles, P. Morrow, J. Crosbie, and
S. McDonough, “Serious games for upper limb rehabilitation
following stroke,” in Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious
Applications, 2009. VS-GAMES ’09. Conference in, Mar. 2009,
pp. 103–110.
[9] G. Angius, D. Pani, L. Raffo, and P. Randaccio, “KeepInTouch:
A telehealth system to improve the follow-up of chronic
patients,” in Collaboration Technologies and Systems (CTS),
2011 International Conference on, May 2011, pp. 311–318.
306
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

