 
 
Virtual Coach: Towards Personalized Mental Support 
K. van Noppen – Kleist1 , W. Mulder 1,2, T.B. Dijkhuis 2,3, M.R. Dam2 
1KPN ICT Consulting, Data Innovation Lab, Groningen, The Netherlands 
2Institute for Communication, Media & IT, Hanze University of Applied Sciences, Groningen 
3Center for Human Movement Sciences, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands 
1  e-mail:{katharina.vannoppen-kleist, wico.mulder}@kpn.com 
2 e-mail:{m.r.dam, t.b.dijkhuis}@pl.hanze.nl 
Abstract— Self-management is widely seen as a viable 
contribution to sustainable health-care as it allows to promote 
physical and mental well-being. A promising approach to 
promoting a healthy lifestyle is the deployment of personalized 
virtual coaches, especially in combination with the latest 
developments in the fields of Data Science and Artificial 
Intelligence. This paper presents a framework for a virtual 
coaching system, as well as a use case in which parts of this 
framework are applied. The virtual coach in the use case aims 
to encourage customer contact center employees to protect 
their mental health. This article outlines one part of the use-
case in particular, viz. how to promote employee autonomy 
and supervisor support by, inter alia, monitoring employees’ 
levels of emotional exhaustion. Current systems focus on 
providing users with insight in their health status or behavior, 
the authors developed the functional architecture for a system 
that can be implemented for different goals and generates 
personalized, real-time advice based on the combination of 
user preferences, motivational success and predicted user 
behavior.  
 
Keywords- virtual coach; emotional exhaustion; artificial 
intelligence; mental support; data science; behavioral change. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Most people struggle with protecting their physical and 
mental well-being in daily life. A promising approach to 
promoting a healthy lifestyle stems from the development of 
eHealth and telemedicine services. Particularly, services that 
aim at increasing users’ health prevention and self-
management efforts, are gaining momentum [16]. This 
development, together with the increasing availability of data 
from mobile devices and techniques for real-time data 
analysis, provides new opportunities for health self-
management via personalized virtual coaching. 
As described by Blok and Dijkhuis [4], we define a virtual 
coach as an automated system that assists the user, either as a 
stand-in for or supplementary to a human coach, to exhibit 
desired user behavior. Additionally, we expand this definition 
by a generic lifestyle intervention framework which stresses 
the application of virtual coaches for health benefits. This 
framework emphasizes three domains of health: physical 
health, mental health, and social health [10]. A healthy 
lifestyle is a balancing act between the load, the recovery and 
the capacity of the individual [12]. Specifically, striking a 
balance between load (physical, mental and social) and 
recovery, enables individuals to sustain a healthy capacity to 
cope with daily life situations. For instance, mental load and 
the ability to recover are dependent on the individual’s 
capacity to deal with stressful situations [27]. Examples of 
sources of mental stress are pressure at work or major life 
changes that are perceived negatively [12][27]. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the 
first section introduces the state of the art on virtual coaching 
systems. Subsequently, we describe the general, functional 
architecture for the virtual coach proposed by us. In the third 
section we present the use case in which the first modules of 
the virtual coach architecture are being implemented at the 
time of writing this article. The conclusion of the current state 
of this implementation and description of future steps 
completes the paper. 
II. STATE OF THE ART 
Effectiveness of (e)-Coaching depends on timeliness and 
personal contextual information in combination with 
actionable insights [8]. In other words the user needs to 
receive relevant information and advice at the appropriate 
time. In order to achieve this goal, various types of virtual 
coaches have been developed, for example self-monitoring of 
chronic diseases such as diabetes [15], motivating increased 
activity levels [25] or making healthier choices in daily life 
[17]. Currently available systems provide insight in health 
and behavior, but do not facilitate long-term behavioral 
change [13]. Spanakis et al. [23] predict eating behavior for 
the near future using rules learned from a predictive 
algorithm, however, they do not use personalized motivation 
techniques. 
The architecture proposed in this article is a general, 
functional architecture that can be implemented in various 
situations, both for coaching on physical and mental health. 
The architecture provides not only insights, but also 
personalized real-time advice. During the generation of the 
advice, personal preferences regarding activities as well as 
the success rates of different motivational techniques are 
taken into account in order to strengthen motivation and 
support behavioral change. Furthermore, advice is not only 
based on current behavior, but also on predicted behavior in 
the near future. 
To the best of our knowledge no systems exist that can be 
implemented for multiple goals (e.g., mental and physical 
health) and generate personalized real-time advice based on 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
the combination of activity preferences, motivational success 
and predicted user behavior.  
 
III. VIRTUAL COACH: FUNCTIONAL 
ARCHITECTURE 
On the basis of our definition of a virtual coach, we have 
designed a functional, modular architecture that is applicable 
to multiple domains. The architecture proposed in this paper 
focuses on providing relevant real-time advice and supporting 
behavioral change.  
In order to increase the influence of a virtual coach, we 
propose to channel behavioral insights into concrete advice 
for the user. This advice needs to be personalized with regard 
to the user’s context and (motivational) preferences. This is 
done in several steps, as shown in Figure 1. In Step 1, the 
virtual coach identifies the moments when the user is in need 
of intervention. When intervention is called for, an 
appropriate personalized intervention method is generated by 
performing steps two and three simultaneously, the function 
of Step 2) being to determine which action a user had best 
perform to support him/her in reaching his/her goal, and that 
of Step 3) to determine the motivation technique most likely 
to influence his/her behavior. 
 
Figure 1. 
The steps in the functional architecture of the 
virtual coach. 
All steps are geared to the user’s specific context. In order 
to capture the user’s context we combine behavioral data 
(generated by the user) with data from IoT-sensors and other 
sources (e.g., weather, location, time). This way, we take 
advantage of the variety of available data sources and enable 
a virtual coach to learn to interpret the user’s context 
automatically. The final advice is then presented to the user, 
for example via a mobile application. In the following 
sections the above mentioned steps are described in more 
detail. 
A. Determine if intervention is needed 
The first step is the automatic identification of the 
moments when a user might need intervention. For this to be 
successful, a measurable and realistic goal must be set: the 
goals and needs of the user will have to be captured and 
objectively measured. Next, an appropriate amount of data 
must be collected in order to successfully establish whether 
or not a user reaches his goal. Patterns in the data can be 
learned using machine learning techniques, resulting in a 
predictive model [7]. The model has to be updated over time: 
the behavior of the user may change. Also, when the user 
frequently reaches his goal, the goal needs to be re-defined as 
well. The choice to intervene is context-aware and takes, for 
example, the hour of the day as well as the user’s calendar 
into account. 
B. Determine action 
Once the virtual coach has determined that an intervention 
is necessary, the system provides the user with personalized 
suggestions for actions. These actions are tailored to the 
user’s interests and preferences. Providing the user with a 
high variety of recommended actions is expected to increase 
user experience [14]. For the system to be able to recommend 
an appropriate and personalized action to the user, a list of 
possible actions must be created first. In order to overcome 
the cold start problems in the steps of the architecture, a new 
user completes an intake profile. This intake profile consists 
of, inter alia, the user’s demographics and preferences for a 
random subset of items on the action list. Also, the intake 
profile is used to assess the user’s ability. The virtual coach 
considers the feasibility of an action and links it to the user’s 
ability level using a Rasch model in order to select appropriate 
action items [19]. Based on the user’s ability, the probable 
willingness to engage in a particular action can be determined. 
When this probability is high, the action is seen as feasible. 
Note that a user’s ability might change over time (for better 
or worse, depending on fluctuations in his/her health and 
fitness). These changes in ability need to be recomputed 
regularly in order to recommend appropriate actions. 
Furthermore, all action recommendations must be context-
aware (e.g., don’t send a user outside when it is raining). 
C. Determine motivation techniques 
There are many theories on how to motivate humans and 
they attempt to link individual motivation techniques to, inter 
alia, personality factors and locus of control. We are aiming 
for an approach that compares different motivational theories 
and systematically explores their effectiveness among users. 
Ultimately, we investigate whether tailoring actions by 
creating personality and preference profiles for motivation 
techniques stimulates behavioral change. First attempts to 
generate messages aimed at changing health-related behavior 
(e.g., handle potentially conflicting goals and motives) were 
introduced by Baskar et al. [3] and Op den Akker et al. [16]. 
Along with the above mentioned intake profile, a test battery, 
as well as a few examples of motivation messages may be 
given to the user right at the beginning, allowing him to rate 
the messages. Furthermore, clustering can be used to identify 
groups of users with a similar profile based on a questionnaire 
at the intake of the virtual coach. Individuals within the same 
group could initially be treated similarly [23]. The proposed 
model can be applied to several situations as long as the users’ 
behavior can be measured frequently and the probability of 
users reaching their goal can be predicted accurately. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
IV. USE CASE: SERVICE WITH A SMILE 
Research suggests that people who report high levels of 
work stress run a greater risk of developing a range of mental 
and physical health conditions such as depression, anxiety, 
hypertension and heart disease [11]. Work-related issues, like 
the combination of high demand and low control, have been 
shown to require sustained physical and psychological effort. 
These sustained efforts typically come at significant 
physiological and psychological costs [6][22] and have been 
linked to increased employee burnout, turnover, absenteeism 
and decreased performance [2]. Unfortunately, after 
recovering from these experiences, individual employees are 
often assigned less responsibility, they work fewer hours and 
are paid less than before [18], turning work-related mental 
health issues into the cause of serious long-term problems for 
both employees and employers. 
Especially in highly demanding service environments, 
where employees are expected to deliver ‘service with a 
smile’, many of the above mentioned negative health 
consequences are very common. In addition, the subsequent 
high rates of employee turnover entail enormous direct and 
indirect costs because of the expenditure of hiring and training 
new employees and the financial impact of diminished service 
quality [1]. It is crucial that employers create environments 
where employees can be themselves, because exhausted 
employees can neither enjoy their job nor deliver good 
service. 
Customer service centers are typically such highly 
demanding service environments. Hence, most customer 
service centers struggle to sustain their employees’ wellbeing; 
exhaustion, high stress levels and burnouts are common 
among call center employees [5]. 
While employees need to take into account that a 
customer’s perception of a company is determined by the 
quality of their interactions [21] and hence have to maintain a 
friendly disposition, they are also expected to quickly solve 
the issues of their customers. Matching these job demands has 
been shown to negatively influence job satisfaction and job 
performance because of, inter alia, emotional dissonance [28] 
and emotional exhaustion [24]. The above mentioned 
research outlines how high levels of psychological stress in 
call center employees lead to health impairment (particularly 
emotional exhaustion) and demotivation [26]. 
Both, job autonomy and supervisor support are the most 
commonly found work-related factors to negate the above 
mentioned health risks for customer service center employees 
(particularly emotional exhaustion)[28]. Providing customer 
service center employees with autonomy means providing 
them with a degree of freedom to make at least some decisions 
on their own. Autonomy has been shown to improve coping 
with emotionality of customers, to relate significantly to job 
satisfaction and performance [20] and to alleviate negative 
emotions felt by customer service employees doing stressful 
work. When autonomy in the workplace is absent, however, 
customer service center employees have been found to be 
more stressed, less satisfied and to report poorer mental and 
physical health [9]. 
V. DIGITAL CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER 
ASSISTANT 
In collaboration with the customer contact center of Van 
Lanschot, a private Dutch bank, we set out to develop a virtual 
coach or ‘digital customer contact center assistant’ (hereafter: 
DC3A) with the aim of diminishing negative mental health 
influences and increasing the motivation of employees. As 
outlined in the virtual coach framework, the DC3A assesses 
the mental state of the employees (e.g., emotional exhaustion) 
on the basis of both direct and indirect factors. After each call, 
employees indicate, inter alia, the perceived tone of the call 
(positive, neutral or negative). This feedback serves as a direct 
indicator of their emotional exhaustion (i.e. the higher the 
number of negative customer interactions, the higher the level 
of emotional exhaustion). When employees are emotionally 
exhausted, both key performance indicators and service 
quality indicators are expected to decrease. Hence, the DC3A 
extracts relevant key performance indicators and service 
quality indicators from customer interaction records and links 
the employees’ feedback to these two sets of indicators. 
Machine learning techniques (such as classification and 
clustering), but also automated text analysis of call scripts are 
used to find patterns and assess the level of emotional 
exhaustion. On the basis of this assessment, the DC3A 
determines whether an intervention is needed and, if so, which 
type of action needs to be recommended (e.g., taking a break 
or seeking supervisor support). As described in the general 
framework for the virtual coach, the type of motivation that is 
paired with the recommended action is determined by using 
hybrid recommender systems. This allows us to optimize the 
action with a personalized motivational approach, based 
either on facts extracted from calls or on an informed 
selection of the type of action. We postulate that this added 
motivational component enhances a) the action’s level of 
persuasion and therefore b) the employee’s level of 
compliance. Both action and motivation are then combined to 
formulate the intervention message for the employee, aiming 
at initiating behavior that decreases levels of emotional 
exhaustion. The effect of this intervention, and whether or not 
the message is understood, is measured through key 
performance indicators and service quality. On the basis of 
the results of our first prototype we will adjust algorithms for 
both content and timing of the messages for the employees, 
and incorporate the necessary changes. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
We have designed a functional architecture for a virtual 
coach that addresses the mental health and operational 
support of customer contact center employees. Our design 
and approach are based on research that addresses mental 
health problems of people working in highly demanding 
service environments. A first prototype, aiming at supporting 
the mental health and well-being of customer contact 
employees, is currently being tested in an organization whose 
customer contact center is a key instrument in achieving 
customer satisfaction. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
During the development of the presented architecture, as 
well as during the building process of the first prototype, the 
authors encountered a few challenges. One of these 
challenges was bridging the various, necessary fields of 
expertise (e.g., find a common understanding of the problem 
and agree on vocabulary and methods). Another challenge 
was the business driven use-case; the authors were asked to 
work with mostly predetermined information and minimize 
the collection of new data points. Both challenges could be 
addressed 
successfully 
by 
forming 
a 
dedicated, 
multidisciplinary research team with a common goal. This 
dedicated team, consisting of experts in the areas of Computer 
Science, 
Software 
Engineering, 
Psychology, 
Applied 
Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, formed the basis for 
a new ecosystem. This ecosystem is sponsored by the 
involved private businesses as well as academic institutions 
and enables the team to take the next steps in the development 
of the virtual coach. These steps are: 1) development and 
implementation of the first prototype in the use case, and 2) 
combine this work with exploratory research at academic 
institutions to fill gaps and further interdisciplinary research 
in other related areas.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank van Lanschot for permitting us to 
describe their use case in this paper, the Data & Analytics 
department of KPN ICT Consulting for the financial means 
to attend the eTelemed 2019 in order to present this paper, the 
Hanze University of Applied Sciences for their collaboration 
and partnership and L.M. van Noppen for text correction. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Alexandrov, E. Babakus, and U. Yavas, "The effects of 
perceived management concern for frontline employees and 
customers on turnover intentions: moderating role of 
employment status," Journal of service research, vol. 9, no. 4, 
pp. 356-371, 2007. 
[2] A. B. Bakker, and E. Demerouti, “The job demandsresources 
model: State of the art,” Journal of managerial psychology, vol. 
22, no. 3, pp. 309-328, 2007.  
[3] J. Baskar,  R. Janols,  E. Guerrero,  J.C. Nieves and H. 
Lindgren, “A Multipurpose Goal Model for Personalised 
Digital Coaching,” In: Agents and Multi-Agent Systems for 
Health Care A2HC 2017, AHEALTH 2017. Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, vol. 10685, S. Montagna, P. Abreu, S. 
Giroux and M. Schumacher, Eds. Springer, Cham, 2017.  
[4] J. Blok, T. Dijkhuis and A. Dol, “Toward a generic 
personalized virtual coach for self-management: A proposal for 
an architecture,” The Ninth International Conference on 
eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTelemed 2017), 
Nice, France.  
[5] F. Castanheira and M. J. Chambel, “Reducing burnout in call 
centers through HR practices,” Human Resource Management, 
vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 1047-1065, 2010.  
[6] E. R. Crawford, J. A. LePine and B. L. Rich, “Linking job 
demands and resources to employee engagement and burnout: 
A theoretical extension and meta-analytic test,” Journal of 
applied psychology, vol. 95, no. 5, pp. 834, 2010. 
[7] T. Dijkhuis, F. Blaauw, M. van Ittersum, H. Velthuijsen and M. 
Aiello, “Personalized Physical Activity Coaching: A Machine 
Learning Approach” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 623, 2018. 
[8] M. 
Gerdes, 
S. 
Martinez, 
and 
D. 
Tjondronegoro, 
“Conceptualization of a Personalized eCoach for Wellness 
Promotion,” in Proceedings of ACM 11th EAI International 
Conference on Pervasive Computing. Barcelona: Association 
for Computing Machinery, 2017.  
[9] L. Holdsworth and S. Cartwright, “Empowerment, stress and 
satisfaction: An exploratory study of a call centre,” Leadership 
& Organization Development Journal, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 131-
140, 2013. 
[10] M. Huber et al., “How should we define health?,” BMJ, vol. 
343, no. 9666, p. 41-63, 2011. 
[11] International Labour Office (ILO) (2016). Workplace Stress: A 
collective challenge. International Labour Office – Geneva: 
ILO, 2016. 
[12] G. Kentta and P. Hassmen, “Overtraining and recovery: A 
conceptual model,” Sport Medicine, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 
1998.  
[13] R. Klaassen, K. Bul, R. op den Akker, G. J. van der Burg, P. 
M. Kato and P. Di Bitonto, “Design and Evaluation of a 
Pervasive Coaching and Gamification Platform for Young 
Diabetes Patients,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 402-429, 2018. 
[14] B. P. Knijnenburg et al., “Explaining the user experience of 
recommender systems,” User Modeling and User-Adapted 
Interaction, vol. 22, no. 4-5, pp. 441-504, 2012.  
[15] L. Piwek, D. A. Ellis, S. Andrews and A. Joinson, “The rise of 
consumer health wearables: Promises and barriers,” PLoS 
Med., vol. 13, no. 2, 2016.  
[16] H. op den Akker, M. Cabrita, R. op den Akker, V. M. Jones 
and H. J. Hermens, “Tailored motivational message generation: 
A model and practical framework for real-time physical 
activity coaching,” Journal of Biomedical Information, vol. 55, 
pp. 104–115, 2015.  
[17] H. J. A. op den Akker, R Klaassen and A Nijholt, “Virtual 
Coaches for Healthy Lifestyle” In: Toward Robotic Socially 
Believable Behaving Systems, Volume II., Intelligent Systems 
Reference Library, vol. 106, A. Esposito and L. Jain, Eds. 
Springer, Cham, 2016. 
[18] Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD 2012) “Sick on the job? Myths and realities about 
mental health and work”, ISSN: 22257985. 
[19] M. Radha, M. C. Willemsen, M. Boerhof and W. A. 
IJsselsteijn, “Lifestyle Recommendations for Hypertension 
through Rasch-based Feasibility Modeling”, Conference on 
User Modeling Adaptation and Personalization (ACM, 2016), 
New York, NY, USA, pp. 239-247.  
[20] S. Saragih, “The effects of job autonomy on work outcomes: 
Self-efficacy as an intervening variable,” International 
Research Journal of Business Studies, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 203-
215, 2015.  
[21] O. Sawyerr, S. Srinivas and S. Wang, “Call center employee 
personalityfactors and service performance,” Journal of 
Services Marketing, vol. 23, no. 5, pp301-317, 2009.  
[22] W. B. Schaufeli, A. B. Bakker and W. van Rhenen, “How 
changes in job demands and resources predict burnout, work 
engagement, 
and 
sickness 
absenteeism,” 
Journal 
of 
Organizational Behavior: The International Journal of 
Industrial, Occupational and Organizational Psychology and 
Behavior, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 893-917, 2009. 
[23] G. Spanakis, G. Weiss, B. Boh, L. Lemmens, and A. Roefs, 
“Machine learning techniques in eating behavior e-coaching”, 
Pers Ubiquit Comput, vol. 21, no. 4, pp.  645-659, 2017.  
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
[24] D. D. van Jaarsveld, D. D. Walker and D. P. Skarlicki, “The 
role of job demands and emotional exhaustion in the 
relationship between customer and employee incivility,” 
Journal of Management, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 1486-1504, 2010.  
[25] A. Watson, T. Bickmore, A. Cange, A. Kulshreshtha, A. and J. 
Kvedar, “An internet-based virtual coach to promote physical 
activity adherence in overweight adults: randomized controlled 
trial,” Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 14, no. 1, p. e1, 
2012. 
[26] D. Wheatley, “Autonomy in paid work and employee 
subjective well-being,” Work and Occupations, vol. 44, no. 3, 
pp. 296-328, 2017.  
[27] J. M. Williams and M. B. Andersen, “Psychosocial antecedents 
of sport injury: Review and critique of the stress and injury 
model’,” Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, vol. 10, no. 1, 
pp. 5–25, 1998.  
[28] M. Zito, F. Emanuel, M. Molino, C. G. Cortese, C. Ghislieri 
and L. Colombo, “Turnover intentions in a call center: The role 
of emotional dissonance, job resources, and job satisfaction,” 
PloS one, vol. 13, no. 2, 2018.  
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

