Co-creation with Stakeholders: A Web 2.0 Antibiotic Stewardship Program 
Jobke Wentzel, Maarten van Limburg, Joyce Karreman, Ron Hendrix, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen   
Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management, University of Twente 
Enschede, The Netherlands  
m.j.wentzel@utwente.nl, a.h.m.vanlimburg@utwente.nl, j.karreman@utwente.nl, r.hendrix@labmicta.nl, j.e.w.c.vangemert-
pijnen@utwente.nl  
 
 
Abstract - Patient Safety needs a rethinking about medicine due 
to the aging society, increase in chronic diseases and infections 
and a decrease in available budget for healthcare. Besides, 
patients are the driving force behind transparency of 
healthcare decisions. Participative Medicine supported by 
technology is promising to innovate medical thinking and 
workflows. In this paper we discuss a holistic eHealth 
development approach for participative medicine. We show, 
using the case of antibiotic stewardship, how participation of 
stakeholders can be used to co-create a digital platform with 
applications to support decision–making and collaboration. We 
demonstrate that participation of stakeholders (healthcare 
workers, providers, policymakers, management, patients) is 
needed to co-create eHealth technologies that make sense by 
being accessible, affordable, applicable, manageable and 
enjoyable.  
Keywords–eHealth; 
Antibiotic 
Stewardship; 
Holistic 
Development. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Most 
eHealth 
interventions 
are 
designed 
and 
implemented without taking the exact needs of the end-users 
and other stakeholders into account. This leads to a 
suboptimal adoption of the interventions and therefore sorts 
less favorable effects. In the wake of  Health 2.0 and 
Medicine 2.0 initiatives, a growing number of studies have 
emphasized the importance of a participatory development 
process involving (end-) users, and other stakeholders like 
payers, decision-makers, insurers, and government officials 
to increase the uptake of eHealth interventions [1]. To 
support a participative development process, we introduced a 
Holistic development guideline, the CeHReS (Centre for 
eHealth Research and disease management) roadmap [1]. 
Using this roadmap, we describe the development 
process of an Antibiotic Stewardship Program (ASP), that is 
part of Infection Manager, a cross-border Web-based 
platform for infection management [2]. The platform is 
available in Dutch, German, English and soon also in 
French. 
The goal of ASPs is to improve antibiotic prescribing and 
utilization in institutional care settings worldwide. This is an 
urgent need; it is estimated that around 30%–50% of the 
antibiotic use in hospitals is unnecessary or inappropriate [3, 
4]. A dramatic increase in antibiotic utilization is observed in 
several studies, resulting in multi-drug resistance among 
microorganisms and causing treatment complications [5, 6]. 
At the same time, no new pharmaceutical agents for effective 
antibiotic therapies are developed (due to high investments 
costs and long development time). So, antibiotic resistance is 
a growing threat for patients. This threat increases even more 
due to the aging society and increase in chronic diseases and 
infections [7]. Additionally, antibiotic resistance has a 
substantial economic impact as a consequence of the need 
for more expensive drugs and longer hospital stays 
associated with therapy failure [8, 9]. 
ASPs have been introduced as a solution to overcome the 
overuse and misuse of antibiotics in hospitals [10]. The focus 
of these ASPs is to support the prescribing behavior of 
healthcare workers (HCWs) via diverse interventions aimed 
at 1) prescribing narrow-spectrum antibiotics instead of 
broad-spectrum [11], 2) optimizing dose, type, and duration 
of therapy, 3) education of HCWs to change their behaviour 
regarding prescribing antibiotics, and 4) guidelines to 
support decisions. 
Some promising results are known of such ASPs, for 
example, reduction in costs (shorter hospital stays, shorter 
courses of drugs/therapies) and a decrease in antimicrobial 
resistance, such as MRSA [12-14]. However, several 
barriers hinder the effective implementation of ASP-
interventions such as a lack of resources knowledge, poor 
adherence, and lack of management support [12, 15-17]. 
Academic literature suggests to increase the adoption and 
implementation of ASP-interventions via a stakeholder-
driven development approach and the use of innovative 
technologies to support decision making (providing support 
at the right moment, right place, and in the right format) 
[10]. Like with other eHealth interventions, most of the 
ASP-interventions are expert-driven rather than taking 
HCWs‟ and patients‟ needs and demands into account [1, 
6]. Contrary to what, for example the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend, most ASP-
interventions are still developed by infection control 
experts. Stakeholders from various disciplines (pharmacists, 
physicians, nurses, patients, payers, and government 
agencies) are scarcely involved and often eHealth specialists 
are not consulted. We know from prior research that socio-
cultural and socio-economic factors and management 
support 
are 
important 
determinants 
for 
successful 
implementation of medical interventions [18]. By applying 
the CeHReS roadmap, we show how ASP-interventions can 
be developed that make sense to all stakeholders and that 
can overcome the aforementioned barriers.  
The aim of the Infection Manager platform is to provide 
applications for HCWs, managers and other stakeholders to 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

improve decision-making and to facilitate knowledge 
sharing and collaboration. The Infection Manager is a Web-
based platform in which we can offer applications for 
communication, information, and coordination of infection 
control. The Joomla architecture supports flexible and 
dynamic development of applications by means of  
templates and modular expandability. 
Based on prior research about the development of a web-
based application called MRSA-net [18, 19], we know that 
HCWs need a layered structure for infection control: 
Communication to consult medical experts and each other, 
to discuss interventions (forums), and to contact the research 
and development team of the portal. Modules for 
coordination are used to support the (care) process, for 
example by offering an infrastructure for information 
sharing or communication, or by offering tools for 
monitoring resources and benefits. Documentation or 
information modules refer to the guidelines and protocols 
that ground the applications and are made available on the 
platform. Besides we learned from prior research that 
stakeholders should be involved to create ownership and 
commitment for adherence to infection control interventions 
[18, 20]. In this paper we discuss the participatory 
development 
with 
stakeholders, 
focusing 
on 
the 
development of a Web-based ASP as one of the applications 
of the Infection Manager by involving stakeholders. 
The next section includes a short explanation of the 
CeHReS roadmap that we have developed [1, 21]. This 
roadmap was used as a guideline for the development 
process. In Section III, the research methods that we used 
for the development of the Infection Manager and the ASP-
interventions are described. After that, in Section IV, the 
research results are described. In the last sections, the results 
are discussed, and our plans for the operationalization and 
evaluation of the ASP-interventions are explained. 
II. 
HOLISTIC DEVELOPMENT FOR EHEALTH; THE 
CEHRES ROADMAP 
Internationally, (EU eHealth, European Center for Public 
Policy) the need has been explicitly emphasized for a 
holistic and interdisciplinary eHealth approach for durable 
technological interventions and sustainable innovations in 
healthcare [22]. A holistic approach would account 
precisely for the issues of finance, management and the one-
sided technology-driven approaches. It constructs a 
productive fit through the integration of social sciences, 
engineering and business modelling.  
The CeHRes roadmap [1, 21] is developed as an answer 
to the need for a holistic and interdisciplinary approach. The 
foundation for the roadmap is based on reviews in the 
field of eHealth, multidisciplinary theories from social 
sciences and engineering, business model theories, and 
empirical research applying the framework [1, 23, 24]. 
The roadmap serves as a practical guideline to plan, 
coordinate and execute the participatory development of 
eHealth technologies. It is meant for developers (for 
example, 
technicians, 
designers, 
or 
healthcare 
professionals), researchers and policy-makers, and also for 
educational purposes (for example, students and healthcare 
providers). It also serves as an analytical instrument for 
decision-making about the use of eHealth technologies.  
 
The roadmap integrates persuasive technology design, 
Human-Centered 
Design 
and 
Business 
Modelling. 
Persuasive and Human-Centered Design are applied to 
make technologies tailored to stakeholders needs, 
capacities and capabilities so that behavior change is 
enhanced. Business Modelling is interwoven with the 
development of eHealth technologies to foster dialogue 
and ownership by co-creation and to construct business 
cases to implement eHealth technologies. We use 
Business Modelling  to assess the needs of all stakeholders 
and 
transform 
these 
needs 
into 
a 
value-driven 
implementation by making a business model [25]. The 
Business Model Canvas, introduced by Osterwalder, acts as 
a blueprint and can be used to compose a business model 
[26]. The business model has to ascertain that the 
technology sustainably reaches its intended goals and 
effects. 
 
The roadmap consist of 5 cycles; contextual inquiry, 
value-specification, 
design, 
operationalization 
and 
evaluation. These cycles are explained in depth elsewhere 
[1, 21], in this paper we will describe the methods we 
applied in the first cycles of the roadmap. 
III. 
METHODS 
Different methods are used for the development of the 
infection manager and ASP-interventions. 
A. Development of  the Infection Manager 
To create a starting-point and explore the possibilities of 
eHealth technology to support infection management, the 
CeHReS roadmap was applied in a lean and mean way. 
Hereto, first ideas were researched and explored roughly 
while creating modules that can be adjusted with iterations 
later on in the development. The contextual inquiry, value 
specification and design phase are completed and described 
below. In the discussion, in Section A, future research 
activities (operationalization and evaluation phase) are 
described. Figure 1 shows how the Infection Manager 
research activities fit into the CeHReS roadmap; the 
roadmap phases are shown in the blue blocks, and the 
methods that were applied in each phase are shown below 
each phase, in orange blocks (Figure 1).  
For the contextual inquiry, a quick scan of the literature 
on antibiotic stewardship was performed. The stakeholders 
(HCWs, consultant clinical microbiology, hygienists) were 
selected based on the literature scan and expert validation. 
The contextual inquiry phase was further combined with the  
value specification and design phase via interviews. To 
optimize the understanding of the context and needs as 
identified in the literature scan, interviews were held with  
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1. First development process: The Infection Manager 
stakeholders (HCWs; physicians, consultants clinical 
microbiology, hygienists). During these interviews the value 
specification was performed by inquiring about the need for 
a layered infection management platform (communication, 
coordination, documentation). Three different mock-ups, 
that gave an impression of the possible lay-out and 
functionalities of the Infection Manager, and a number of 
scenarios, description of situations in which the Infection 
Manager could be useful, served as input for the semi-
structured interviews. The comments made about the mock-
ups served as input for the design process. 
B. Development of the ASP-applications 
The CeHReS roadmap was applied for a second iteration 
for the development of the ASP applications in the Infection 
Manager. For the ASP applications, we completed the 
contextual inquiry and value specification. Figure 2 shows 
the applied methods in orange blocks below each phase. The 
remaining roadmap phases (design, operationalization and 
evaluation) are described in the discussion, in Section A: 
Future research activities.  
In a local hospital three sites were selected, based on the 
urgency for patient safety and ASP: pulmonary diseases, 
surgical sites, and urology. In this paper we focus on the 
research activities carried out at the pulmonary ward. 
During the contextual inquiry, a literature scan identified the 
cornerstones for ASP as mentioned in the introduction of 
this paper. After that, the stakeholders of the ward to be 
included in the focus group were defined, based on a more 
in-depth literature scan [27]. The following stakeholders 
participated in the focus group: 
 
HCWs 
(consultants 
clinical 
microbiology, 
pharmacists, chest physicians,  residents, nurses)  
 
Management (nurse manager, general manager, staff 
member of management)  
 
 
Figure 2. Second development process: ASP applications 
In the focus group, the contextual inquiry was completed and 
value specification was performed. Via assignments and 
discussion the current workflow and work practices 
regarding antibiotics and the roles and tasks of the involved 
stakeholders came to surface. A number of other topics were 
discussed: the coordination flows and communication 
involved in the care process regarding antibiotics, problems 
that are encountered, and potential solutions. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results of the contextual inquiry, value specification 
and design phase of the Infection Manager, and the results 
of the contextual inquiry and value specification of the ASP 
application are described in the following paragraphs. 
A. Infection Manager Results 
In the interviews, the stakeholders expressed specific 
needs for communication, coordination and documentation 
regarding infection management in their work practice. 
Their preferences indicated a platform with applications, 
featuring at least functionalities such as document sharing, a 
forum for collaboration, and useful links to information 
resources. Also, the three different mock-ups were evaluated 
and criticized regarding their design. This resulted in a 
stakeholder preference for a dashboard-style design, with 
textual and pictorial operating buttons. The results were 
summarized and were incorporated in the (working) 
prototype design. Figure 3 shows the current prototype of 
the Infection Manager. The three rows represent the 
applications 
for 
communication, 
coordination 
and 
documentation. 
Each 
button 
represents 
a 
specific 
application. For example, MRSA-net informs and educates 
the general public and HCWs about the prevention of 
MRSA. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Screenshot of the Infection Manager website 
1: applications for communication (e.g., forum); 2: applications for 
documentation (e.g., document manager); 3: applications for coordination 
(e.g., calendar) 
 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. ASP contextual inquiry results 
The literature scan suggests that ASPs that are supported 
by technology, consist of either a single or multiple strategies 
and can have positive effects, especially on the costs level 
and appropriate antibiotic use [27-30]. Especially for the 
hospital management these are interesting effects. Other 
effects that are also beneficial for the patient are shorter 
Length-of-Stay or a quicker shift from intravenous to oral 
antibiotics [30, 31].  
The focus group with the stakeholders resulted in more 
insight into the roles of the different stakeholders, and in an 
overview of their problems and needs. 
 
1) Defining key-stakeholders 
During the focus group, the stakeholders were asked to 
define their role and tasks in the care process regarding 
antibiotics. Together, they defined the key-stakeholders as 
the chest physician, resident, and nurse. On a secondary 
level, consultants clinical microbiology, pharmacists, 
infectiologists and other consultants need to be involved. 
Lastly, management and support staff are not directly 
involved, but have support and managing roles. According 
to the participants in the focus group, missing stakeholders 
in the focus group were an infectiologist, and a dietician. 
Since they are not the key-stakeholders in antibiotic 
stewardship, their absence was not considered problematic. 
2) Problems with the current use of antibiotics 
During the focus group, the stakeholders mentioned 
several problems regarding their work practice with 
antibiotics that may threaten patient safety, see Table 1.  
Problems refer to the lack of access to information 
regarding the treatment or the patient status (including test 
results), or in other words, problems with the patient  
 
TABLE I.  WORKSHOP RESULTS: PROBLEMS 
Problem 
Category 
Problems 
Knowledge & 
Skills 
1. Unfamiliarity with guidelines and (new) procedures 
2. Inexperienced nurses and residents 
Documentation  
1. ICT systems for protocols,   
 2. Reference books are inaccessible and not user-
friendly 
Patient-
information flow 
1. Uncertainly regarding prescribed medication (due to 
prescribing program and transfer of information) 
2. Test results are unclear or not findable in the 
information system 
3. Patient data or status inaccessible to consultants 
4. Insufficient or no feedback to consultants  about the 
effects of treatment 
5. Swabs or screening materials are lost during logistics 
Communication, 
consultation 
1. Consultation about patients over the phone is 
inadequate 
2. Consultants lack necessary patient information to 
give accurate consults 
Resources, 
personnel 
1. There is  no 24/7 consultant occupation or service 
2. Lack of resources and personnel for asp 
Coordination, 
responsibility 
1. Overview/coordination of patient care process is 
sometimes unclear 
Commitment, 
adherence to 
treatment plans 
1. Treatment plans are not always as timely executed 
as was decided 
2. New programs or ICT systems do not receive 
hospital-wide commitment 
information flow. Another problem that was mentioned, was 
insufficient cooperation and consultation between the 
physician and pharmacists, microbiologists or other 
consultants, due to insufficient information sharing and 
unstructured 
procedures 
for 
consultation. 
Further, 
insufficient knowledge of (new) procedures or medication 
application poses a problem. 
 
3) Stakeholders’ Needs 
As demonstrated in Table 2, most urgent needs include the 
key-stakeholders‟ (chest physician, resident and nurse) wish 
for more structured cooperation and consultation about 
antibiotic use in patient care. All stakeholders expressed a 
need for quick, easily accessible information regarding the 
patients‟ former and most recent status, including test results 
and treatment plans, in other words, better patient-
information flows. This way, HCWs are able to act, decide, 
or give consultations based on complete, up-to-date 
information. Importantly, the physician and residents are 
considered to be the main „hub‟ in patient-information flows, 
because they need a good overview and they carry end 
responsibility. Usability and compatibility of ICT systems 
with work practice, and better accessible protocols, 
guidelines or other procedural information are also highly 
needed by all stakeholders even though they are most 
relevant to the key-stakeholders. 
 
TABLE II.  
WORKSHOP RESULTS: NEEDS 
Need category Needs 
Knowledge & 
Skills 
1. Increased knowledge  exchange among HCWs 
2. Adequate instruction & education 
Documentation  
1. Accessible information regarding medication, 
guidelines or procedures 
2. User-friendly documentation 
Patient-
information flow 
1. Well-arranged patient information sharing and 
accessibility 
2. Structured consultation and feedback 
3. Well-organized screening/swab logistics and feedback 
Communication, 
consultation 
1. Face-to-face (bed side) microbiology consults 
2. Adequate patient information sharing 
3. Feedback on treatment effects to consultants 
Resources, 
personnel 
1. Nightly and weekend availability of consultants to 
make policy 
2. Management commitment to provide resources 
Coordination, 
responsibility 
1. Chest physician has overview of patient care process 
2. Need to know who principal consultant is. 
Commitment, 
adherence to 
treatment plans 
1. Hospital wide commitment to new programs 
2. Clarity about treatment plans and insight in status of 
its execution 
 
4) ASP Value Specification 
During the workshop, the added values of an ASP were 
discussed. The stakeholders discussed and agreed on several 
values that were categorized as follows: 
 
ASP that is compatible with current ICT systems and 
work flow and practices (one login with access to all 
types of information/communication). 
 
ASP that saves time and procedures that correspond 
with medical practices (no extra system; no extra 
work). 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
ASP that is flexible and dynamic, tailored to HCWs 
and management needs and preferences. 
 
ASP that is available for HCWs, regardless of time 
and place, to support decision making (critical points 
of care). 
o 
Quality of Care; treatment decisions based on 
evidence/data.  
o 
Timeliness; patient receives timely and accurate 
care. 
 
ASP that supports cooperation and consultation 
among HCWs (physician, nurse, consultants). 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The results of the applied methods show that including 
stakeholders in the development process, renders a holistic 
view on problems and the accompanying values that need to 
be taken into account during development. Especially the 
stakeholder focus group resulted in a holistic view, for both 
researchers and stakeholders. By discussing stakeholder 
roles and values in an ASP, a broad understanding among 
the participants was created and solutions that have a reach 
beyond their own tasks were discussed. In addition, early in 
the development process it became clear that a one-fits-all 
solution in this case (to support infection control and ASP) 
is almost impossible. However, tailoring and designing with 
and for specific user-groups can help to fulfill specific 
needs. Applications should be adjusted for user groups to fit 
their specific needs and fit in their context. Thus, the 
technology that is used needs to be modular, because 
formative evaluations and adjustments to accommodate 
other user groups (other care facilities or types of HCWs) 
require easily adaptable applications. We have  experienced 
that the roadmap offers the tools to involve stakeholders in 
different phases of the design process. The per-application 
development ensures that different needs can be met. By 
bundling the applications in the Infection Manager, 
overview is created and the stakeholders are able to see how 
the (different) applications could be helpful to them. So in 
this sense, a one-fits-all solution might still be possible. 
A. Future research activities 
Since the Infection Manager and its applications 
(including the ASP application) are still under development,  
the last roadmap cycles need to be completed, future 
research focuses on the application of these remaining 
cycles to the Infection Manager and the ASP applications.  
1) Infection Manager Operationalization 
For the Infection manager, a selected user group (project 
members of EurSafety Health-net) is approached to try-out 
the Infection Manager. Based on the feedback of these first 
users, the system will be evaluated formatively and 
upgraded, so that it better fits the needs of the users. At the 
same time, the Infection Manager needs to be filled with 
applications 
for 
communication, 
coordination 
and 
documentation. Based on research, applications (such as the 
ASP applications), will be developed.  
2) Design and operationalization of ASP applications 
The ASP applications will be designed according to the 
identified problems, needs and values. To accommodate 
stakeholder needs for education, an ASP education 
application will be developed. During the literature scan, 
essential content of such an application was identified, 
validated by infection control experts and summarized in an 
ASP guideline (handbook). This ASP education document is 
currently available in PDF format in the Infection Manager. 
However, to fit HCW needs regarding structure and content, 
the guideline will be translated into a web-based, more 
interactive version via a card sort study. 
Further, an application will be designed to support 
prescribing behavior through information sharing and 
consultation regarding dose, duration and type of antibiotics. 
This application is an important start in view of the 
stakeholders (experts, management) to support HCWs and 
show the potentials of ASPs in order to increase commitment 
of HCWs to an ASP, to foster ownership and to clarify 
responsibilities. 
Thus, 
this 
application 
supports 
the 
coordination of care. The content of the application will be 
expert-driven, and via interviews and/or a focus group 
functional requirements for the design will be determined 
with the key-stakeholders. After field-testing and final 
adjustments the application will be ready for use. 
 Besides education about ASP, HCWs expressed a need 
for interactive information or communication about 
procedures or specific cases regarding ASP. An application 
will be designed together with HCWs to increase the access 
and usability of information. The precise content and 
functionalities will be determined by studying current work-
processes via a focus group and field observations. The 
resulting topics (of ASP related information) will be 
prioritized by HCWs via a critical decision system, the 
Analytic Hierarchy Process [32]. Lastly, the application‟s 
content will be organized using methods such as card sorts, 
as this approach has proven to be useful in the development 
of MRSA-net; a web-tool for practical information based on 
medical protocols [18]. The design is further established by 
using mock-ups and usability tests. 
To facilitate decision making, the effects of the ASP 
applications are evaluated and will be made available to the 
necessary stakeholders via a communication system to 
enable discussion among key-stakeholders and to support 
decision making. 
3) Infection Manager Business Model 
Meanwhile, a business model will be developed for the 
implementation 
of 
the 
Infection 
Manager 
and 
its 
applications. Preparing the implementation of an eHealth 
intervention such as the Infection Manager should start as 
early as possible in the development. Many eHealth 
interventions 
fall 
short 
as 
the 
attention 
for 
the 
implementation starts too late, usually ex post development 
[24]. Therefore, already in the contextual inquiry the 
problems are defined and the stakeholder network is made. 
In the value specification the values are determined, and in 
the design phase, implementation scenarios are developed 
with stakeholders. In the operationalization phase, the 
business model is really put to effect. In this stage, the 
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

business model and technology have become concrete 
enough to detail out the implementation and introduce the 
technology into practice. Currently, we are forming business 
models on a per-application basis to find sustainability for 
these applications, as well as a business model for the 
Infection Manager as a whole. Thus, we investigate how we 
can offer the Infection Manager to various stakeholders in a 
cross-border setting. 
4) Evaluation 
To assess the benefits of the ASP we will measure the 
effects using a combination of qualitative and quantitative 
instruments. Which effects are to be measured will be 
determined by the results of a systematic review that is 
currently being carried out to find all clinical and financial 
effects of ASP, and the methods used to measure this. The 
review outcomes will be used for the evaluations of the 
Infection Manager and ASP. A formative evaluation will be 
carried out continuously to get insights in the accessibility, 
applicability, and usefulness of the Infection Manager and its 
applications. We will use standard usability methods for 
prototyping and evaluations [33].  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have discussed how an eHealth 
technology can be developed with involvement of various 
stakeholders using a holistic approach. The first two ASP- 
applications (for guideline communication and prescribing 
behavior) will be available in December 2011. Future 
research involves the development of the applications for 
education and evaluation. The development procedure will 
be carried out simultaneously in other wards (urology, 
surgery) of Dutch and German border region hospitals. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the pilot hospital for supporting 
and cooperating in our research. Especially we want to thank 
the stakeholders for their engagement.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Gemert-Pijnen, J.v., N. Nijland, H. Ossebaard, A. Limburg, 
S. Kelders, G. Eysenbach, et al., “A holistic framework to 
improve the uptake and impact of eHealth technologies,” 
Journal 
of 
Medical 
Internet 
Research, 
In 
Press. 
DOI:10.2196/jmir.1672,  
[2] 
Infection Manager. www.infectionmanager.com, accessed on 
22 November 2011.  
[3] 
Hecker, M.T., D.C. Aron, N.P. Patel, M.K. Lehmann, and 
C.J. Donskey, “Unnecessary Use of Antimicrobials in 
Hospitalized Patients: Current Patterns of Misuse With an 
Emphasis on the Antianaerobic Spectrum of Activity,” 
Archives of Internal Medicine, 163(8), 2003, pp. 972-978. 
[4] 
Owens Jr, R.C. and P.G. Ambrose, “Antimicrobial 
stewardship 
and 
the 
role 
of 
pharmacokinetics–
pharmacodynamics in the modern antibiotic era,” Diagnostic 
Microbiology and Infectious Disease, 57(3), 2007, pp. S77-
S83. 
[5] 
Kaki, R., M. Elligsen, S. Walker, A. Simor, L. Palmay, and 
N. Daneman, “Impact of antimicrobial stewardship in critical 
care: a systematic review,” Journal of Antimicrobial 
Chemotherapy, 66(6), 2011, pp. 1223-1230. 
[6] 
Hulscher, M.E.J.L., R.P.T.M. Grol, and J.W.M. van der 
Meer, “Antibiotic prescribing in hospitals: a social and 
behavioural scientific approach,” The Lancet Infectious 
Diseases, 10(3), 2010, pp. 167-175. 
[7] 
Yoshikawa, T.T., “Antimicrobial Resistance and Aging: 
Beginning of the End of the Antibiotic Era?,” Journal of the 
American Geriatrics Society, 50, 2002. pp. 226-229. 
[8] 
Lesprit, P., L. Merabet, J. Fernandez, P. Legrand, and C. 
Brun-Buisson, “Improving antibiotic use in the hospital: 
Focusing on positive blood cultures is an effective option,” 
La Presse Médicale, 40(6), 2011, pp. e297-e303. 
[9] 
McGowan Jr, J.E., “Economic impact of antimicrobial 
resistance,‟ Emerging Infectious Diseases, 7(2), 2001, pp. 
286-292. 
[10] MacDougall, C. and R. Polk, “Antimicrobial stewardship 
programs in health care systems,” Clinical Microbiology 
Reviews, 18(4), 2005, pp. 638. 
[11] Frank, U., “Antibiotika am Krankenbett,” 15th ed., 2010, 
Berlin Heidelberg: Springer Verlag. 
[12] Hersh, A., S. Beekmann, P. Polgreen, T. Zaoutis, and J. 
Newland, 
“Antimicrobial 
Stewardship 
Programs 
in 
Pediatrics,” Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology, 
30(12), 2009, pp. 1211-1217. 
[13] Liebowitz, L. and M. Blunt, “Modification in prescribing 
practices 
for 
third-generation 
cephalosporins 
and 
ciprofloxacin is associated with a reduction in meticillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteraemia rate,” Journal of 
Hospital Infection, 69(4), 2008, pp. 328-336. 
[14] Nicastri, E., S. Leone, N. Petrosillo, M. Ballardini, C. 
Pisanelli, P. Magrini, et al., “Decrease of methicillin resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus prevalence after introduction of a 
surgical antibiotic prophylaxis protocol in an Italian 
hospital,” New Microbiologica, 2008. 31(4), pp. 519-525. 
[15] Hersh, A.L., M.D. Cabana, R. Gonzales, B.N. Shenkin, and 
C.S. Cho, “Pediatricians' perspectives on the impact of 
MRSA in primary care: A qualitative study,” BMC 
Pediatrics, 9(1), 2009, doi:10.1186/1471-2431-9-27. 
[16] Gurses, A., J. Marsteller, A. Ozok, Y. Xiao, S. Owens, and 
P. Pronovost, “Using an interdisciplinary approach to 
identify factors that affect clinicians' compliance with 
evidence-based guidelines,” Critical Care Medicine, 38(8), 
2010, pp. S282-S291. 
[17] Grimshaw, J., R. Thomas, G. MacLennan, C. Fraser, C. 
Ramsay, L. Vale, et al., “Effectiveness and efficiency of 
guideline dissemination and implementation strategies,” 
International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health 
Care, 21(01), 2005, pp. 149-149. 
[18] Verhoeven, F., “When staff handle staph: user-driven versus 
expert-driven 
communication 
of 
infection 
control 
guidelines,” dissertation, 2009, Enschede: University of 
Twente. 
[19] Wentzel, J., J. Karreman, and J.v. Gemert-Pijnen, “Towards 
an Internet-based Infectious Disease Management Platform 
to Increase Patient Safety,” proc. eTELEMED conference, 
2011, IARIA: Gosier, Guadeloupe, France. pp. 47-50. 
[20] Van Gemert-Pijnen, J, J. Karreman, S. Vonderhorst, F. 
Verhoeven, and J. Wentzel, “Participatory development via 
user-involvement:  A case study about the development of a 
web-based patient-communication system about Methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus,” Electronic Journal of 
Health Informatics, In Press. 
[21] Van 
Limburg, 
A.H.M 
and 
Van 
Gemert-Pijnen, 
J., 
“Introducing eHealth business modelling instruments for 
implementing eHealth technologies based on an integrated 
approach with human-centered design,” proc. eTELEMED 
conference, 2011, IARIA: Gosier, Guadeloupe, France, 
pp.134 -139. 
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[22] European Health Telematics Association, “Sustainable 
Telemedicine: paradigms for future-proof healthcare,” 2008, 
EHTEL: Brussels. 
[23] Black, A.D., J. Car, C. Pagliari, C. Anandan, K. Cresswell, 
T. Bokun, et al., “The Impact of eHealth on the Quality and 
Safety of Health Care: A Systematic Overview,” PLoS Med, 
8(1), 2011, pp. e1000387. 
[24] Nijland, N., “Grounding eHealth: towards a holistic 
framework 
for 
sustainable 
eHealth 
technologies,” 
dissertation, 2011, University of Twente: Enschede. 
[25] Van Limburg M., van Gemert-Pijnen J.E., Nijland N., 
Ossebaard H.C., Hendrix R.M.G., and Seydel E.R., “Why 
Business Modelling is crucial in the development of eHealth 
technologies,” Journal of Medical Internet Researdh, 
Accepted Pending Revision. 
[26] Osterwalder, A., Y. Pigneur, and C. Tucci, “Clarifying 
business models: origins, present, and future of the concept,” 
Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, 16(1), 2005, pp. 1-25. 
[27] Ewering, S., “Integrating stakeholders in the development of 
an Antibiotic Stewardship Program,” Bachelor Thesis. 
Faculty of Behavioural Sciences, 2011, University of 
Twente: Enschede. 
[28] Agwu, A.L., C.K.K. Lee, S.K. Jain, K.L. Murray, J. 
Topolski, R.E. Miller, et al., “A world wide web-based 
antimicrobial stewardship program improves efficiency, 
communication, and user satisfaction and reduces cost in a 
tertiary care pediatric medical center,” Clinical Infectious 
Diseases, 47(6), 2008, pp. 747-753. 
[29] Bassetti, M., A. Di Biagio, B. Rebesco, G. Cenderello, M.E. 
Amalfitano, and D. Bassetti, “Impact of an antimicrobial 
formulary and restriction policy in the largest hospital in 
Italy,” International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents, 16(3), 
2000, pp. 295-299. 
[30] Fine, M.J., R.A. Stone, J.R. Lave, L.J. Hough, D.S. Obrosky, 
M.K. Mor, et al., “Implementation of an evidence-based 
guideline to reduce duration of intravenous antibiotic therapy 
and length of stay for patients hospitalized with community-
acquired pneumonia: a randomized controlled trial,” 
American Journal of Medicine, 115(5), 2003, pp. 343-351. 
[31] Camins, B., M. King, J. Wells, H. Googe, M. Patel, E. 
Kourbatova, et al., “The Impact of an Antimicrobial 
Utilization Program on Antimicrobial Use at a Large 
Teaching Hospital: A Randomized Controlled Trial,” 
Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology, 30(10), 2009, 
pp. 931-938. 
[32] Saaty, T., “How to make a decision: The Analytic Hierarchy 
Process,” European Journal of Operational Research, 48(1), 
1990, pp. 9-26. 
[33] Nielsen, J., “Usability Engineering,” 1993, San Francisco: 
Morgan Kaufmann. 
 
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

