A Multifunctional Telemedicine System for Pre-hospital Emergency Medical Services
Sebastian Thelen, Marie-Th´er`ese Schneiders, Daniel Schilberg, Sabina Jeschke
Institute of Information Management in Mechanical Engineering
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, Germany
Email: {sebastian.thelen, marie.schneiders, daniel.schilberg, sabina.jeschke}@ima.rwth-aachen.de
Abstract—The paper presents the design and architecture
of a multifunctional telemedicine system for real-time telecon-
sultation in pre-hospital emergency medical services (EMS).
The application of telemedicine has shown to improve patient
treatment quality and efﬁciency in various settings. Still,
its use by pre-hospital EMS is lacking. Current technical,
normative standards do not provide a sufﬁcient framework
in order to design a multifunctional telemedicine system for
teleconsultation in pre-hospital EMS. Starting with a use-case
driven requirements analysis, a telemedicine system usable
in this setting is designed, realized and currently in use for
evaluation by selected German EMS departments. This system
uses commercial off-the-shelf medical devices, custom devices
for communication and an individual system architecture,
integrating the heterogeneous components as required by the
deﬁned use-cases.
Keywords-telemedicine; teleconsultation; EMS; system archi-
tecture;
I. INTRODUCTION
Specialized telemedical applications have shown to im-
prove patient care in different inner-clinical settings and
its beneﬁt has already been demonstrated for various pre-
clinical uses [1]–[3]. Despite the rapid evolution of personal
mobile communication devices with its current manifes-
tation of power-full computing devices like smartphones,
tablets or even wearable computing-devices [4], the use of
telemedicine in pre-hospital environment is still in its infants.
Research efforts have been undertaken to develop mul-
tifunctional telemedicine systems which enable emergency
medical service (EMS) teams to perform teleconsultation
with remote specialists or more broad treatment facilities like
hospitals [5]–[8]. These projects aim at creating pervasive
assistance systems using different combinations of audio and
video communication, transmission of biomedical data and
access to existing medical patient records.
The above systems do only allow teleconsultation from in-
side the ambulance and the additional devices they introduce
do not integrate well into commonly used, existing EMS
team equipment. System architectures are proposed which
require big parts of the created infrastructure to be classiﬁed
as a medical device and as such pose a high burden on their
realization from a regulatory point of view. Another concern
neglected by these approaches is the user role which serves
a teleconsultation request and thus guides the EMS team
during patient treatment or supports them otherwise.
The German research project TemRas has developed
the multifunctional telemedicine systems, described in this
paper, which allows on-scene EMS teams to consult a ded-
icated EMS physician, hereafter called tele-EMS-physician,
on duty in a teleconsultation center [9], [10]. This system’s
novelty is its level of integration into the EMS team’s
equipment and ease of use, enabling teleconsultation not
only inside or close to the ambulance but from every location
with suitable mobile network coverage, like inside a patient’s
home. On August 1st, 2012 the system was taken into service
with initially three ambulances connected for teleconsul-
tation in regular EMS missions. After a ramp-up during
August, six ambulances from different EMS departments
were connected to the system and operational since the
beginning of September. Until October 4th, 60 successful
teleconsultations have been performed using the presented
system.
II. METHOD
The system’s design was created in a mainly linear process
with strong user participation and close feedback loops
between engineers and users. The original intent of a true
iterative, agile development process could not be realized
for the whole system, but was instead used to develop
the individual user facing software-components. The whole
process was agile in that it was not artifact centered and no
sign-offs were performed like described by the waterfall-
process [11]. Rather, all process activities were focused
on the ﬁnal system being usable for teleconsultation and
fulﬁlling necessary safety requirements. Documents were
only generated as basis for further discussion and swapping
functionality in and out of development focus was possible
during the whole process.
Involved into the system’s design process was a team
of experienced emergency physicians, most of which had
already been working as tele-EMS-physicians during the
former project Med-on-@ix [12]. On one hand they are users
to the system as tele-EMS-physician, on the other hand they
were user representatives for the on-scene EMS personnel.
The participating physicians had used the system on-scene
during Med-on-@ix evaluation and had regular contact to
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

relevant EMS personnel during their work as regular EMS
physicians. The system design itself was created by a
small team of engineers which also realized most of the
currently available prototype; other parts were sourced out
to specialized hardware manufacturers.
The emergency physicians deﬁned four main scenarios
for the telemedicine system’s usage. Together the emergency
physicians and engineers described and detailed 21 use-cases
as functional requirements descriptions to guide the system’s
design. These use-cases deﬁne which services the system has
to provide in order to be usable for the main scenarios and
roughly describe their usage and inter-relationship. The use-
case’s descriptions contain additional non-functional require-
ments like demands regarding robustness, reliability and
data security. Service interface speciﬁcations were created in
close iterations by the engineers and user facing functionality
was created in a mockup-driven process with continuous
user involvement. As single service’s functionalities were
available, users were involved in initial testing and require-
ments and further design was adjusted according to their
feed-back.
Integration and system-tests were performed as early as
possible in the process to unveil integration issues, missing
necessary and planed unnecessary functionality early on.
The early system-tests allowed for a good judgment about
the actual relevant functionality for the systems intended
scope and allowed the development team to react accord-
ingly.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN
The multifunctional telemedicine system’s design is sub-
ject to some project related invariants which had inﬂuence
on the development process and the overall system design:
• The system was designed and built during the project’s
ﬁrst two years and had to be ready for use after that
phase in order two allow for its evaluation in regular
EMS missions.
• All medical devices used by the system are provided by
the associated project partners Philips HealthCare and
3M. Devices from other vendors were not considered
for initial integration.
A. Use-Cases and Main Requirements
The deﬁned use-cases can be clustered into three main
groups which are further detailed in Figure 1:
• Audio Communication
• Data Transmission
• Common Activities
Besides these main use-cases multiple support use-cases
were created to address aspects like user authentication
or system administration and are not speciﬁc to this
telemedicine system.
The prominent notion of audio communication related
use-cases is based upon existing experience by the involved
system users and user representatives, showing that an easy
to use, reliable and robust method for bidirectional voice
communication between the tele-EMS-physician and the on-
scene ambulance team is the single, most important factor
for a successful teleconsultation. Making regular phone calls
is necessary for the tele-EMS-physician in order to support
the on-scene team in administrative tasks or to contact
external specialists like the poison control center. To provide
a good usability, the tele-EMS-physician has only a single
phone-like interface which integrates handling of internal
calls (to the on-scene team) and calls to the public switched
telephone network.
All use-cases describing the transmission of case related
information between on-scene and the tele-EMS-physician
are grouped together in the Data Transmission cluster of
use-cases. This contains transmission of continuous real-
time or discrete biomedical signals, auscultation streams
as well as photo and real-time video transmission. The
cardiotocography (CTG) is covered as a special form of
biomedical signal transmission; it will only be used to
perform a smaller study regarding its usability in pre-hospital
EMS and does not have any impact on the current system
design.
Common Activities mainly contains use-cases describing
the electronic case documentation performed by the tele-
EMS-physician and the handling of reports automatically
generated from that data. The easiest method of delivering
a case report to the receiving hospital, together with the
treated patient, is by printing the case’s summary report on a
printer inside the ambulance. Using fax, a report can be sent
to the hospital before the patient arrives. Direct integration
with a hospital’s information systems is currently outside the
described system’s scope.
The top four non-functional requirements deﬁned for the
system are:
• overall system usability
• security of transmitted data regarding eavesdropping
• data correctness
• robustness of both data transmission and audio com-
munication.
Overall system usability is a very fuzzy formulation.
This requirement targets at providing an integrated system
experience in order to enable simple workﬂows during
patient treatment. To further concretize this requirement, the
system’s two main usage locations, on-scene and teleconsul-
tation center, are addressed in separation:
• On-scene the ambulance team’s current workﬂows and
carrying pay-load should be inﬂuenced as little as
possible. The system must seamlessly integrate with
the devices used on-scene and be usable for a regular
two-person team during potentially stressful patient
treatment.
• From
the
teleconsultation
center
one
tele-EMS-
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

tele-EMS-physician
 
AC-010
initiation of emergency 
call
 
AC-020
initiation of 
noncritical call
 
AC-030
reject call
ambulance team
external telephony 
pariticipant
 
AC-040
forward call
 
AC-050
initiate 
external call
 
AC-060
manage on-hold 
calls
 
DT-010
continuous real 
time vital signs
 
DT-020
discrete vital 
signs
 
DT-030
auscultation
 
DT-040
photo
 
DT-050
video
 
DT-060
CTG
 
CA-010
classification and 
accomplishment of 
cases
 
CA-020
access case relevant 
information
 
CA-030
generate case report 
document
 
CA-040
send case report 
document
 
CA-050
perform system 
diagnosis
 
CA-080
case 
documentation
hospital staff
Audio Communication
Data Transmission
Common Activities
Figure 1.
The main use-cases deﬁned for the telemedicine system described in this paper.
physician only interacts with one ambulance team at
a given time. All related services must ensure that
data only from that team is displayed. The different
services must integrate seamlessly into one working
environment in order to reduce the burden posed onto
the tele-EMS-physician by the system’s usage.
Data correctness covers two main concerns:
• Information must not be altered between its acquisition
on-scene and presentation thereof to the tele-EMS-
physician. If data is transformed in any way it must be
ensured that the information it presents is not affected
by that transformation.
• It must be ensured that data which is presented to a tele-
EMS-physician is at any time associated to the correct
ambulance and thus the right patient respective case.
B. System Architecture Overview
Various harmonization and standardization groups have
deﬁned different standards and interoperability proﬁles, a
collection of speciﬁcations often with accompanying restric-
tions and deﬁnitions, for a multitude of data-interchange and
device integration scenarios: Health Level 7 (HL7), Inte-
grating the Health enterprise (IHE), Continua, IEEE 11073
[13]–[15]. The amount of different, sometimes competing,
sometimes complementary speciﬁcations and usage proﬁles
makes it hard to know where to start when looking for
the right design for a system which does not fully ﬁt the
existing use-cases. At the same time the harmonization
efforts mainly target the hospital or consumer market. A
market survey regarding pre-hospital EMS devices shows
that by now ﬁrst manufacturers begin selling telemedicine
enabled devices, with each vendor creating an independent,
proprietary solution [16], [17].
Based on the use-cases, additional requirements and
project constraints, a system architecture was designed. This
process started by choosing the devices which compose the
on-scene system. This device-centric view onto the system
is depicted in ﬁgure 2 in which the system is divided into
the three locations: consultation center (top), ambulance/in-
car (left) and on-scene (right). All data transmission from
in-car peeqBOX
video camera
printer
monitor/
defibrilator-
device
on-scene 
peeqBOX
smartphone
stethoscope
headset
headset
desktop 
applications
stethoscope
system control
Figure 2.
Device-centric view on the telemedicine system’s system
architecture; adapted from [9].
inside the ambulance and on-scene is relayed to the consul-
tation center via a special data transmission unit (peeqBOX,
designed and manufactured for use in this system by P3
Communications GmbH, Aachen, Germany).
The in-car peeqBOX acts as gateway for the Local Area
Network (LAN) inside the ambulance, enabling TCP/IP net-
work trafﬁc between this and the consultation center’s LAN.
The following devices connect directly to the ambulance
LAN:
• A network enabled video camera (SNC-RZ50P, Sony,
Japan) is mounted at the ambulance’s ceiling. It is fully
controlled by the tele-EMS-physician who can tilt, pan
and zoom its view. The video is streamed using a H.264
video codec, eight frames per second, a Bit rate of 128
kilo Bits per second and an image resolution of 384
times 288 pixel.
• A thermal printer (PocketJet PJ-623, Brother, Japan)
with 300 dots per inch using a print server (TL-
PS110U, TP-Link, China) for its connection to the
network.
The on-scene devices all use Bluetooth to wirelessly
connect to the on-scene peeqBOX. This peeqBOX it-
self is housed inside the right pocket of the monitor-
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 3.
An early development prototype of the on-scene peeqBOX ﬁtted
inside the right pocket of the monitor/deﬁbrilator-device’s bag. The bag’s
right pocket was later adjust to provide space for patient therapy equipment.
ing/deﬁbrillation device, as shown in ﬁgure 3. The following
devices comprise the on-scene location of the system:
• A
monitor/deﬁbrillator-device
(HeartStart
MRx
M3535A,
Philips,
Netherlands)
conﬁgured
with
the options SpO2, NBP, EtCO2, 12-Lead, 12-LTx
Bluetooth,
Pacing,
Q-CPR,
Q-CPR
Data,
75mm
Printer, EventSum Bluetooth, IntelliVue Net and Per
Data Tx.
• Two headsets (Plantronics Voyager Pro HD, Plantron-
ics, USA) used by the ambulance team to communicate
with the tele-EMS-physician. This communication link
is delivered via a regular voice call established by
the on-scene peeqBOX using public circuit switched
mobile telephony networks.
• A smartphone (HTC Sensation XE, HTC, Taiwan)
serving two purposes: In regular operation it is used
to take photographs on-scene which are automatically
transmitted to the consultation center. In case of the
loss of the regular audio connection via the peeqBOX
during a case, the ambulance team can directly call
the tele-EMS-physician with this phone, increasing the
chance for safe termination of a consultation instead of
its interruption.
• A stethoscope (3M Littmann electronic stethoscope
3200, 3M, USA); this device’s integration is still in
its conception phase and is not used by the currently
running system.
In the consultation center a tele-EMS-physician’s work-
place is comprised of the following user-facing devices, as
shown in ﬁgure 4:
• A wireless headsets (Savi W710/W730, Plantronics,
USA); the tele-EMS-physician can choose out of two
available models which one to use or switch the headset
if the ﬁrst one runs out of battery power.
• A stethoscope (3M Littmann electronic stethoscope
3200, 3M, USA); this device’s integration is still in
its conception phase and is not used by the currently
running system.
• A desktop computer (OptiPlex 780 DT, Dell, USA
with main memory: 4GB; processor: Intel Core 2 Duo
real-time and recorded 
biomedical data
case documentation
support
applications
system control
telephony sytem 
control
Figure 4.
Photography showing a tele-EMS-physician workplace with
the three top monitors showing the main applications (besides video) used
during a consultation and the lower centered touch-monitor with the system
control interface and the integrated telephony system controls to the right.
Keyboard and mouse are connected to the desktop computer to interact
with its applications on the three top monitors.
E8400, Intel, USA; graphics-card: NVIDIA Quadro
NVS 420, NVIDIA, USA) with three monitors (Ultra-
Sharp 2007FP, Dell, USA) attached running Microsoft
Windows 7 operating system hosting the different ap-
plications used by a tele-EMS-physician during consul-
tation.
• A dedicated control computer (OptiPlex 780 USFF,
Dell, USA with main memory: 4GB; processor: Intel
Core 2 Duo E8400, Intel, USA) with a single touch
monitor (Elo 1900L APR, Elo, USA) attached which
is used to control the telemedicine system, shows data
for system diagnostics and offers an integrated user
interface for the telephony system.
C. Device and Service Integration
Classifying the devices by the Continua Alliance’s Refer-
ence Architecture, the monitoring device and stethoscope are
Peripheral Area Network (PAN)- or LAN-devices whereas
the on-scene peeqBOX is an Application Hosting Device
[14]. All services provided by the tele-EMS-physician relate
to WAN-devices. Storage of patient related information
could be delegated to a Health Record Device (HRD), but
such a service’s primary intend of ”... offering a broad
overview of a person’s health status in a central location
[18]” is out of the scope of the current system design.
Current state of the art would suggest realizing the
connection between said PAN-devices and the on-scene
peeqBOX by following IEEE 11073 family of standards
[15], [18]. Two current facts prevent this choice:
• Only a subset of the necessary device proﬁles exist as
approved standards: blood pressure monitor and pulse
oximeter, whereas basic electrocardiogram (ECG), us-
ing 1- to 3-leads, is still in ﬁnal draft status by ISO
[19]–[21]. Communication of 12-lead ECG or stetho-
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

scope connection has not been addressed by this family
of standards at all. (reason might be focus of use-case)
• None of the devices in question for use supports an
open standard for communication. The only way to
interface with them is by means of proprietary software
provided by the devices vendors.
Instead a common integration approach is used by build-
ing a message driven middleware layer following com-
mon Enterprise Integration Patterns [22] using individual
adapters to control the used third party applications. This
middleware layer is comprised of different Java services
hosted on a Java application server (Glassﬁsh v3.1.2, Oracle,
USA). Messaging is performed via the Advanced Message
Queuing Protocol using a single message broker (RabbitMQ
v2.7.1, VMware, USA), enabling service adapters to be
implemented in different programming languages. The sys-
tem’s user interface presented to a tele-EMS-physician is
composed of both preexisting local applications running on
the desktop computer and rich web applications speciﬁcally
implemented for this setting.
The web applications displayed in a special viewer appli-
cation instead of a regular browser, allowing tight control
over them and preventing the user from accidentally navi-
gating away from an application. These viewer applications
as well as the other local applications are controlled by
an application controller service running on the desktop
computer, allowing the middleware services to launch, close
or otherwise remote-control them.
All but the system’s audio communication functionality
uses IP network technology to connect the ambulance (in-
car) and on-scene location to the consultation center [23].
This IP network is provided by each of the peeqBOX-
devices, simultaneously using multiple third generation mo-
bile telecommunications network links, up to three on-scene
and up to ﬁve in-car to connect to a special router, called
Stationary Communication Unit (SCU), in the consultation
center. Additionally the in-car peeqBOX offers a Wireless
LAN (IEEE 802.11a) inside and close to the ambulance
which is used by the on-scene peeqBOX to relay all its IP
network trafﬁc via the in-car peeqBOX and its roof-mounted
antennas. All IP network trafﬁc between the peeqBOX-
devices and the SCU is distributed among the available
mobile network connections and encrypted using AES-265
encryption. This approach enables direct integration of IP
network capable services (video-camera, printer) and at the
same time ensures a high robustness against the full loss of
their network connection.
On top of the IP network each peeqBOX offers a ﬁle
transfer service using the standard File Transfer Protocol.
Via this service ﬁles are delivered to ambulance speciﬁc
inboxes where they are further processed by the middleware
layer and handed to consuming services in the consultation
center. Access to this ﬁle transfer service is offered by
additional peeqBOX service adapter:
• The photo adapter queries pictures taken with the smart-
phone via the Bluetooth File Transfer Proﬁle (Bluetooth
FTP), having the smartphone act as server. As soon as
the adapter has handed a picture to the ﬁle transfer
service, it deletes the picture on the smartphone.
• The biomedical signals adapter accepts Bluetooth FTP
connections from the monitor/deﬁbrillator-device which
uses this method to publish ﬁles containing periodic
trend data and recorded 12-lead ECGs, both in a
proprietary data format.
• System diagnostics data concerning a peeqBOX is
collected into a small sized (less than 600 Byte) XML-
ﬁle every ten seconds and handed to the ﬁle transfer
service. This data includes: battery level (only on-
scene), device temperature, voice and data connection
overview, detailed mobile connection link data, headset
status, time-stamp and global positioning system (GPS)
coordinates.
To enable continuous real-time biomedical signal trans-
mission from on-scene the peeqBOX uses an OSI Layer
two network bridge to connect the monitor/deﬁbrillator-
device to the clinical network provided by an IntelliVue
Information Center (Philips, Netherlands) in the consultation
center [23]. The monitor/deﬁbrillator-device’s integration
will be discussed in more detail in a future publication.
The audio communication between on-scene and a tele-
EMS-physician is realized in two stages. The on-scene
peeqBOX is used as multi-SIM mobile phone with additional
control logic. The user interfaces to this function only by
using the single button on its headset, which initiates an
emergency call to the consultation center via the best avail-
able, circuit switched network. In the consultation center a
private branch exchange based on the open-source Asterisk
framework answers the call by putting it into a separate
conference room. The tele-EMS-physician which accepts
such an incoming call is connected to this conference room
via a voice over IP client, remote-controlled via the sys-
tem’s middleware layer. Using the touch monitor’s telephony
interface, the tele-EMS-physician can itself initiate calls
either to an on-scene peeqBOX or to an external telephony
participant.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
A multifunctional telemedicine system using commercial
off-the-shelf medical devices, which is suitable for use by a
regular EMS team, has been presented in this paper. The lack
of existing standards for the required integration of medical
devices results in an interoperability issue which prevents
the creation of open systems and common frameworks or
platforms for such a telemedicine system. The current situa-
tion requires integrating each device or product line indepen-
dently. Solving this interoperability issue should therefore be
a primary target of future research and regulatory efforts.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The presented service integration approach using a simple
message broker enabled a rapid system implementation
and proved suitable for creating an integrated telemedicine
system. Its capability for delivering sophisticated, automated
workﬂows, e.g., for advanced reporting or data-exchange
with external entities, however is limited. The use of con-
cepts like Enterprise Integration Bus might be a viable option
to address this issue and is left for future work.
Integrated information exchange with receiving hospitals
or electronic health records is not covered by the scope of the
presented research. The IHE and Continua Alliance efforts
generally address this concern. Assessing their existing
guidelines regarding suitability for this integration use-case
remains for future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by NRW/EU Ziel 2-
Program (EFRE) 2007–2013, the RWTH Aachen University,
University Hospital Aachen, Philips HealthCare, 3M, and P3
communications.
REFERENCES
[1] B. C. Meyer, R. Raman, T. Hemmen, R. Obler, J. A. Zivin,
R. Rao, R. G. Thomas, and P. D. Lyden, “Efﬁcacy of
site-independent telemedicine in the STRokE DOC trial: a
randomised, blinded, prospective study,” Lancet neurology,
vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 787–795, 2008.
[2] V. N. Dhruva, S. I. Abdelhadi, A. Anis, W. Gluckman,
D. Hom, W. Dougan, E. Kaluski, B. Haider, and M. Klapholz,
“ST-Segment Analysis Using Wireless Technology in Acute
Myocardial Infarction (STAT-MI) Trial,” Journal of the
American College of Cardiology, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 509–513,
2007.
[3] S. Bergrath, A. Reich, R. Rossaint, D. R¨ortgen, J. Gerber,
H. Fischermann, S. K. Beckers, J. C. Brokmann, J. B.
Schulz, C. Leber, C. Fitzner, and M. Skorning, “Feasibility of
Prehospital Teleconsultation in Acute Stroke – A Pilot Study
in Clinical Routine,” PloS one, vol. 7, no. 5, p. e36796, 2012.
[4] O. Amft and P. Lukowicz, “From Backpacks to Smartphones:
Past, Present, and Future of Wearable Computers,” IEEE
Pervasive Computing, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 8–13, 2009.
[5] S. Pavlopoulos, E. Kyriacou, A. Berler, S. Dembeyiotis,
and D. Koutsouris, “A novel emergency telemedicine sys-
tem based on wireless communication technology - AMBU-
LANCE,” IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in
Biomedicine, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 261–267, 1998.
[6] E. Kyriacou, S. Pavlopoulos, A. Berler, M. Neophytou,
A. Bourka, A. Georgoulas, A. Anagnostaki, D. Karayiannis,
C. Schizas, C. Pattichis, A. Andreou, and D. Koutsouris,
“Multi-purpose HealthCare Telemedicine Systems with mo-
bile communication link support,” BioMedical Engineering
OnLine, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 7, 2003.
[7] LifeBot. (2012) LifeBot DREAMS: The Most Advanced
Telemedicine Systems. [09/27/2012]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.lifebot.us.com/dreams/
[8] C.-F. Lin, “Mobile telemedicine: a survey study,” Journal of
medical systems, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 511–520, 2012.
[9] S. Thelen, S. Bergrath, M.-T. Schneiders, J. C. Brokmann,
T. Brodziak, D. Schilberg, R. Rossaint, and S. Jeschke,
“Telemedizin
in
der
pr¨aklinischen
Versorgung
–
das
Forschungsprojekt TemRas,” in e-Health 2012, F. Duesberg,
Ed.
medical future verlag, 2011, pp. 241–244.
[10] S. Bergrath, M. Schneiders, F. Hirsch, B. Siegers, R. Ros-
saint, D. Wielp¨utz, M. Czaplik, S. Thelen, C. B¨uscher,
S. K. Beckers, and J. C. Brokmann, “Telemedizinische Un-
terst¨utzung von Rettungsassistenten – erste Ergebnisse aus
dem Forschungsprojekt TemRas,” in 1. Symposium ICT in
der Notfallmedizin, B. Bergh, A. Rashid, and R. R¨ohrig, Eds.
German Medical Science GMS Publishing House, 2012, pp.
83–86.
[11] I. Sommerville, Software-Engineering, 8th ed.
Addison-
Wesley, 2007.
[12] M. Skorning, S. Bergrath, D. R¨ortgen, J. Brokmann, S. Beck-
ers, M. Protogerakis, T. Brodziak, and R. Rossaint, “”E-
Health“ in der Notfallmedizin – das Forschungsprojekt Med-
on-@ix,” Der Anaesthesist, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 285–292, 2009.
[13] E. L. Siegel and D. S. Channin, “Integrating the Healthcare
Enterprise: a primer. Part 1. Introduction,” Radiographics :
a review publication of the Radiological Society of North
America, Inc, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1339–1341, 2001.
[14] R. Carroll, R. Cnossen, M. Schnell, and D. Simons, “Con-
tinua: An Interoperable Personal Healthcare Ecosystem,”
IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 90–94, 2007.
[15] Health informatics — Personal health device communication
— Part 20601: Application proﬁle — Optimized exchange
protocol, ISO/IEEE 11 073-20 601, Rev. 2010.
[16] Philips
Healthcare.
(2009)
Emergency
Care
Clinical
Data
Transmission
Networks.
[09/28/2012].
[Online].
Available:
http://incenter.medical.philips.com/doclib/enc/
fetch/2000/4504/577242/577243/577245/577817/577869/
Emergency Care Clinical Data Transmission Networks
- Preparing for Patient Arrival and Care (ENG).pdf\
%3fnodeid\%3d6356792\%26vernum\%3d1
[17] GS Elektromedizinische Ger¨ate G. Stemple GmbH. (2009)
corpulse.web: Telemetry in Emergency Care. [09/28/2012].
[Online]. Available: http://www.corpuls.com/ﬁleadmin/pdf/
broschueren/web 120328 bro cweb EN A.pdf
[18] F. Wartena, J. Muskens, and L. Schmitt, “Continua: The
Impact of a Personal Telehealth Ecosystem,” in Proceedings
of 2009 International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine,
and Social Medicine.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 13–18.
[19] Health informatics – Personal health device communication –
Part 10407: Device specialization – Blood pressure monitor,
ISO/IEEE 11 073-10 407, Rev. 2011.
[20] Health informatics – Personal health device communica-
tion – Part 10404: Device specialization – Pulse oximeter,
ISO/IEEE 11 073-10 404, Rev. 2010.
[21] Health informatics – Personal health device communication –
Part 10406: Device specialization – Basic electrocardiograph
(ECG) (1- to 3-lead ECG), ISO/IEEE 11 073-10 406, Rev.
2012.
[22] G. Hohpe and B. Woolf, Enterprise integration patterns:
Designing, building, and deploying messaging solutions.
Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2004.
[23] S. Thelen, M.-T. Schneiders, D. Schilberg, and S. Jeschke,
“Modular Software Architecture Approach for a Telematic
Rescue Assistance System,” in IADIS 2011 – Proceedings
of the IADIS International e-Health Conference, M. Macedo,
Ed., 2011, pp. 201–204.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

