The Value of Clinical Information Models and Terminology for Sharing Clinical
Information
Rune Pedersen
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research
University Hospital of North Norway
Telemedicine- and eHealth
University of Tromsø
Rune.pedersen@unn.no
Conceição Granja, Luis Marco Ruiz
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research
University Hospital of North Norway
Tromsø, Norway
[conceicao.granja, luis.marco.ruiz]@telemed.no
Abstract—This paper reports from the national strategy for
OpenEHR adoption in Northern Norway Regional Health
Authority encouraged by the unfolding of a national repository
for OpenEHR archetypes and a national initiative to integrate
clinical terminologies. The paper contributes to a qualitative
longitudinal interpretive study with an effort to increase the
possibility to obtain semantic interoperability (towards inte-
grated care) and discusses SNOMED-CT and other relevant
clinical terminology and Clinical Information Models (CIMs)
such as OpenEHR archetypes. Terminology and archetypes
are used to structure the EPR two-folded, and we discuss a
general use of information models to increase interoperability
extensively. A two-folded use of terminology where terminolo-
gy is integrated in archetypes, or where terminology is used to
structure the EPR system while using the hierarchical model of
the terminology is discussed. Secondly, we discuss for what
purpose OpenEHR is the choice of CIM to succeed in Norwe-
gian healthcare.
Keywords-eHealth
medical
records;
electronic
health
records; web technology; e-health; interoperability; semantics;
integrated care; OpenEHR; terminology; classification systems
I.
INTRODUCTION
The increased focus on process-oriented systems across
different health care organizations presupposes standardiza-
tion in the form of shared terminologies and information
models to enable semantic interoperability. Terminology
standards have significant importance in modern medicine,
and have been used to structure clinical information for dif-
ferent purposes [1]. Such standards also have the potential of
supporting nursing terminologies such as International Clas-
sification of Nursing Practice (ICNP) or Nursing Interven-
tion Classification (NIC) and The North American Nursing
Diagnosis Association (NANDA) [2][3]. These standards
have been developed, and used, to ensure consistency of
meaning across time and place. On one level, nursing classi-
fications enable day-to-day planning for local users (Primary
use) where clinical terminology is used to structure infor-
mation (standardized care-plans) using diagnosis and inter-
ventions from NIC and NANDA, for example. In practice,
this will generate an automatic and reliable use of terminolo-
gy for information that is sent and received between systems
or health care deliverers. Examples of terminologies are the
International Classification of Diseases (ICD), Systematized
Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms (SNOMED-CT),
and International Classification of Nursing Practice (ICNP)
[4][5][6].
Clinical Information Models (CIMs) [7] are models spec-
ified in some clinical information standard to express the
clinical data entities processed by Health Information Sys-
tems (HIS). CIMs are used to appropriately maintain the
consistency of clinical information structures inside a HIS,
and to enable semantic interoperability across different sys-
tems and organizations. This makes CIMs a basic component
for the appropriate management of patient data [8]. Moreo-
ver, with recent advances in data reuse strategies, CIMs are
also playing an important role in defining the clinical infor-
mation structures needed for secondary use of data [9][10].
OpenEHR is one of the specifications available to define
CIMs. It relies on a meta-model based on reference model
and constraint mechanisms to define formal specifications of
CIMs called archetypes. Archetypes are information ele-
ments of clinical concepts where observations, options, in-
structions, and actions form the iterative process of treatment
and care [11]. When using archetypes with a terminology
binding, it becomes possible to make Electronic Patient
Record (EPR) systems content structured in a multilevel
modelling approach enabling semantic interoperability and
the reuse of data. Using OpenEHR archetypes with a termi-
nology binding it is possible to structure Electronic Patient
Record (EPR) information models in a standard way. This
enables semantic interoperability among HIS compliant with
such standard [12].
For more than a decade, national initiatives towards
shared and integrated care have been a focus area for the
Norwegian health authorities [13][14]. This especially em-
phasizes the need to organize the clinical content of the EPR
system in a more structured manner, to ensure interoperabil-
ity across heterogeneous practices. Such need for contents
organization is due to an increasing demand for rapid feed-
back on results, and an urge to compare organizational and /
or clinical data. Structured data will allow clinicians to cate-
gorize variables in order to build meaningful reports, to ex-
tract data for quality registers and reuse EHR data in clinical
research.
The definition of archetypes requires governance organi-
zations that coordinate their definition on a broad scale. In
Norway, the national initiative that deals with the contents
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

organization has gradually gained a foothold. The OpenEHR
architecture has been used to build a national repository,
a.k.a. Clinical Knowledge Manager (CKM), of common
Clinical Information Models. CIMs are defined collabora-
tively in the CKM as OpenEHR archetypes to provide ven-
dors a library of common formal models to build their clini-
cal information systems on. CKM archives information
about how new archetypes are translated, modelled, and
shared, and is planned to contain between 1000 and 2000
archetypes. The target is to build an open source repository
of clinical content, based on the OpenEHR clinical infor-
mation model. A precondition for success is that clinicians
agree on the content of each archetype in the CKM consen-
sus processes. Clinicians from the four Regional Health
Authorities are active contributors in the process of develop-
ing archetypes. This process has been coordinated by the
national editorial group, and the National Administration
Office of Archetypes (NRUA).
This paper describes the national work accomplished to
support the new two-levelled modelling of EPR systems with
focus on the development of clinical value. We describe the
work performed in: a) CIMs definition as archetypes by
multidisciplinary teams of information architects and clini-
cians; b) the evaluation of the adequacy of adopting
SNOMED-CT as reference terminology to annotate CIM.
Based on this we present the following research questions:
How interconnected is the choice of OpenEHR as clinical
information model when the purpose is to have a library of
clinical data to share between systems and healthcare levels?
What is the adequacy of adopting clinical terminology to
annotate any CIM?
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section
two, we introduce the qualitative method used in the study,
in section three we describe the value of information models,
clinical terminology, the specifics of OpenEHR, and the
national work towards the use of archetypes to structure the
content of EPR systems. In section four the models used, and
actions considered are discussed, and section five concludes
based on the findings in the previous section.
II.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The research presented herein has mainly been developed
in the North Norwegian Regional Health Authority in coor-
dination with NRUA, and the Norwegian Directorate of
Health. Interpretive and ethnographically oriented qualitative
methods have been applied, grounded in participation and
contribution in the work accomplished [15]. Analysis of
longitudinal research is a continuous and iterative process
with an ever-changing intensity. The fieldwork has focused
on the regional/national work accomplished, and, secondly,
the forthcoming process where numerous archetypes will be
tested as structured elements in the new process oriented
EPR system. During the last seven years several meetings,
courses, and workshops with focus on archetypes and termi-
nology have been covered by observations, document analy-
sis, and interviews. Conversations, discussions, reflections,
and debates from these meetings are the foundation of this
work. The observations and description of on-going work
has been followed by the interviews with members of the
regional and national initiatives. This includes six interviews
on the archetype governance, 10 interviews and 180 hours of
observations on the use of clinical terminology, conversa-
tions with end users of the CKM while guiding them to be-
come users, and participants in national discussions on the
consensus of archetypes. The interviews includes as said 10
clinicians, doctors and nurses that are active users of the
CKM. The process of educating them to become CKM users
has given valuable knowledge on how to develop the learn-
ing and recruitment strategies.
TABLE I.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE DATA COLLECTION
Data source
Interviews with contributors to the work with arche-
types, and the development of new EPR.
18 open ended
interviews
Participatory observation
180 hours
Participation in meetings, workshops, and informal
discussions.
300 hours
Document studies: Documents from the CKM, con-
cerning archetypes in general.
III.
RESULTS
During the last three years, the use of OpenEHR arche-
types has grown with focus on a national anchorage in Nor-
wegian healthcare. The initiative has developed through
national ICT, and an EPR vendor that holds more than 80 %
of the secondary healthcare EPR systems. From the outset, a
national collaborating group is working, in coordination with
the aforementioned vendor, to build a national repository of
archetypes. Simultaneously, such work contributes to the
development of a structured EPR system that is based on
OpenEHR technologies. Still, OpenEHR is only one of sev-
eral comprehensive information models for standardizing
and sustaining clinical content for health care.
At the same time, the Norwegian Directorate of Health
has put focus on clinical terminology, and has engaged clini-
cians nationwide to explore the integration of SNOMED-CT
in the existing ICT portfolio.
A. The value of Clinical Information Models
The future of Norwegian healthcare depends upon com-
munication between ICT systems of different vendors, and
between the primary and specialist health systems. The
national CKM will contain the reference archetypes and
guidelines
to
help
implementers
in
the
adoption
of
OpenEHR and terminologies. This makes the Norwegian
CKM unambiguously unique based on the grade of consen-
sus. In order to define CIMs that are general enough to be
applied in different organizations and systems, it is neces-
sary to define them as a collaborative effort among domain
experts. The environments to carry out this work are the so
called CKMs. The definition of CIMs typically encom-
passes two main tasks. The first is the specification of the
information structure in a clinical information standard such
as OpenEHR. The second is the binding of the meaningful
sections of the CIM to a terminology to attach unambiguous
standard descriptions to them. In the last decade, the work
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

of initiatives to model CIMs is leading to the definition of
an extensive catalogue of models publically available, upon
which clinical systems implementations can be based. Now-
adays, there is a considerable diversity in the standards and
approaches available to define CIMs. Although most edito-
rial teams follow similar steps, there is no published unified
methodology or guideline for their definition [7]. The scope
of modelling initiatives varies significantly from the local to
the international level. For example, the international CKM
and the Clinical Information Model Initiative (CIMI) define
CIMs at an international level; the Norwegian CKM defines
them at a national level; and the Intermountain Clinical
Element
Models
(CEMs),
were
defined
at
intra-
organizational level. The work in parallel of different initia-
tives has led to semantically equivalent models expressed in
different information standards, a.k.a. iso-semantic models.
B. The use of terminology to standardize local practice
Since 2005, one of the largest hospitals in Norway,
Akershus University Hospital, has used an EPR that in-
cludes a module for nursing. Along the lines of standardiza-
tion, the nursing care plan, including nursing classification
systems were viewed as a mean for making nursing work
more effective and offering quality assurance. The classifi-
cation systems are ICT-based standards integrated with the
care plan. The diagnoses are represented by the international
classification system NANDA, consisting of 206 nursing
diagnoses [6]. The interventions are represented by the NIC
system, consisting of 486 interventions. Care plans are in-
creasingly made to replace the use of free text in the docu-
mentation, foremost to establish a common, formalized
language based on the best practices. Free text documenta-
tion is whatever information the nurses share about the
patient in the EPR in addition to, or without, writing formal-
ized care plans. However, the implementation of the EPR
led to a systematic use of standardized care plans. The care
plan has been organized in such a manner that each diagno-
sis, dimension, and action is firmly attached to the plan with
a start and a stop date. When standardizing these plans, the
nurse can easily choose several actions from a predefined
list for the applicable diagnosis. By doing this, the nurse
saves time, while the standardized sentences work as a qual-
ity indicator. The purpose of using terminology as a primari-
ly means to standardized EPR systems is challenging, still
terminology has been used to structure an unstructured EPR
system with success.
C. Clinical terminology, the national strategy
Terminology offers a common vocabulary for national
health authorities, local researchers, and quality registers. All
in all, this means that in addition to being a storing device for
free text data the EPRs are capable of encoding commonly
occurring data using fixed lists of multiple choices for cer-
tain purposes. Thus, data becomes more comparable and
computable than free text would be. Some key examples
may be found through the global World Health Organization
(WHO)-based ICD. There are also terminological standards
for more specific domains, such as the ICF (International
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health) for
rehabilitation. In the case of ICD-9 and -10, which has been
used in Norwegian healthcare systems from their origin, the
primary target could have been achieved: If the clinicians
had used the diagnosis codes from ICD-10 to categorize the
subscription of patients in the EPR, it would clearly be of
primary use (Clinical IT Manager). On the contrary, it is
difficult for clinicians to be explicit and specific early in the
trajectory of the patient, since diagnosis change throughout
the patient pathway. Diagnosis change and the IT systems in
use need to track and categorize these changes logically to
support the activity coding of clinical work. The coding of
activities reflects the focus of the clinical pathway, not the
diagnosis of the patient. In this sense, the archetypes become
valuable: as a quality assurance of the completeness of the
clinical terminology, to direct the clinical content of the EPR
systems and other integrated systems, and to identify rele-
vant information and give the clinicians access to this infor-
mation. On the contrary, to the local level the patient path-
ways fixed to clinical ICD diagnosis probably need to be
determined on a national level, and based on national direc-
tives. A member of the regional archetype group stated “The
archetype is not annotated but this is a subset of the
SNOMED concepts available for severities. As a maximum
data set, the archetype should not restrict the "standard" set
of terms agreed in terminologies. However, before doing so,
I think that the implications in term of SNOMED licenses
should be considered very carefully.” For instance, clinical
pathways for cancer diagnosis are today organized from
national cancer groups that have resulted in national guide-
lines that easily could be followed and connected to already
existing “Pakkeforløp” standardized packages to monitor
that cancer patients receive the right treatment at the applica-
ble time. Large scale Infrastructure projects, with increasing-
ly more focus on integrated care, put pressure on the Norwe-
gian Directorate of Health to focus on clinical terminologies
and archetypes. Recently, there has been a growing activity
in the section of e-health towards increased focus on termi-
nologies such as SNOMED-CT, and ICF, and how terminol-
ogy and archetypes fit together. A selected number of per-
sonnel has, through the last 6 months, gathered resource
personnel from all over the country. These are clinicians and
health informatics with special interest in the use of clinical
terminology. The work started in November 2015 with the
purpose to map SNOMED-CT towards the most commonly
used EPR functions. At the same time ICNP will be piloted
in the primary healthcare services, this has been organized by
the Norwegian Nursing Association that has translated the
terminology, and it is acknowledged by the Norwegian Di-
rectorate of Health. SNOMED-CT and ICNP are both dis-
cussed in the new national project.
Other Scandinavian
countries such as Sweden and Denmark have earlier allocat-
ed significant resources both to translate and get SNOMED-
CT operational for clinical practice.
The national project has focused on SNOMED-CT;
should Norway become an organized user of SNOMED?
How is the coverage of SNOMED-CT for the content of the
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

clinical pathway? How is the integration of SNOMED-CT
solved technically? The last question includes the use of
archetypes, but also the possibility to use SNOMED directly
to structure EPR content using the hierarchical model?
D. The national governance of archetypes
NRUA was established in 2013 by the National ICT with
the goal of producing high quality archetypes. The NRUA
has assigned six full/part time associates with an increasing
number of collaborators in the Regional Health Authorities.
There are between two and three members from each of the
four regions. As an example, there is an increasing number
of members from the North Norwegian Health Authority,
one physician with special interest in health informatics, one
nurse with a PhD in information Systems, one ICT-advisor,
two PhD students in part time possitions and one project
manager from the regional ICT development program where
the new process oriented EPR is developed. NRUA also
cooperates closely with global connections such as the
founder of archetypes, the international governed repository,
and vendors that cooperate with the Norwegian vendor. The
vendors are important contributors with a mutual interde-
pendency. In all, the governance work is important in local,
national, and global environments. The overall goal with
NRUA is to coordinate the development and use of arche-
types on a national level, both handling translations of inter-
national archetypes as well as handling local initiatives. It is
called “Do-ocracy” where doers make the decisions, but
where the reviews are initiated by the Editorial Group which
also covers the recruitment of the reviewers to the national
Clinical Knowledge Manager. The further approval is done
by the Editorial Group if the requirements are met. The re-
quirements are factors such as the right number of clinical
specialists for the right archetype (national level) where all
four regions are included. One of the leaders of the interna-
tional CKM stated, “the collaboration between the interna-
tional and the Norwegian CKM is unique and all activities
with archetypes in Norway is followed by the international
society and vice versa.” She continued by saying, “neither
the CKM nor the consensus process is perfect and adjust-
ments will be necessary along the way. Changes can be
related to open-Source and Web based CKM/process where
everything is stored open and is constantly evolving.”
Since the beginning in January 2014, NRUA first focused
on the translation of already existing archetypes and observa-
tion-archetypes like blood pressure, body weight, nutritional
risk, height, and temperature. During this period of time,
national consensus has for instance been reached for the
archetype Blood pressure, Screening of Nutritional Risk, and
Body weight. In 2015 and the beginning of 2016 more com-
plex archetypes like Evaluation and Cluster archetypes has
been defined. Clinicians have been invited to participate
through the national CKM after coordination between the
regional groups and the secretariat at NRUA. Archetypes are
used as standards for the clinical content of the EPR and it
was important for clinicians to have an essential role in de-
fining and designing them. One clinician said: “It is crucial
to include clinicians in this work; they have the clinical
knowledge and know what is important to focus on, for the
archetypes to be useful standards for clinical work.” The
same clinician commented, “If others than clinicians design
the archetypes, it will be troublesome to get clinicians to
accept and use them.
Other archetypes were also consid-
ered, all based on regional programs or initiatives such as a
specific nursing registration scheme in the West Norway
Regional Health authority, archetypes for national clinical
registers, archetypes ordered by clinical work-groups with
focus on the development of the new EPR system, and a
number of archetypes ordered by cooperating vendors on a
global level. In total, 39 archetypes have been approved in
national consensus processes, and more than 100 archetypes
are in process. The first archetype that reached national con-
sensus was the Observation archetype for blood pressure;
The clinical value of this archetype consists of all possible
clinical values for data (systolic), state (score), events (24
hour blood pressure), protocol (Type of equipment). The
archetypes in process are of different classes, observations,
Actions, Compositions, Evaluations, and Clusters.
E. Terminology binding of archetypes
A key aspect of archetypes is that they can be annotated
with terminological codes. Archetypes can be tagged with
SNOMED-CT codes adding a standard term to each of the
sections and nodes of the archetype. This includes, the arche-
type name to recognize it over organizational or even nation-
al borders. In turn, the information becomes interoperable for
multiple purposes, and over several boundaries. This makes
it essential that standardized terminologies for different do-
mains can be integrated either in the archetype or in the EPR
system. The use of a terminology like SNOMED-CT, which
is widely exploited, increases the semantic interoperability
on several levels, both for primary and for secondary use.
The tag/code of the SNOMED-CT is enclosed in different
systems and formats such as Medical Technical equipment
for use in Medical Chart systems, and clinical specialist
systems all bound to integrate with the EPR system of
choice. This makes the terminology a mediator both on the
national and global level. As an example; the Electronic
Chart systems used in Norway/Europe are mostly based on
structured data elements with a CIM, and the system needs to
integrate structured elements from integrated systems to
visualize the patient pathway, and for process and decision
support. The integration with co-existing EPR systems is
especially important. Medication, laboratory results, and the
care plan have to be integrated in the same view to visualize
the pathway. The Chart systems have a CIM for structured
data elements that differs from the OpenEHR/archetype CIM
intended to be used in Norway, and mapping between them
demands unknown resources. In practice SNOMED-CT or
other terminology can connect variables from the two sys-
tems to avoid problems with the mediation between the two
different reference models if both CIM had included termi-
nology.
An
internationally
viable
terminology
like
SNOMED-CT will make it possible to communicate infor-
mation globally as long as it is implemented. When a patient
contracts an illness when traveling abroad, healthcare per-
sonnel could get access to vital information by using the tags
of SNOMED-CT to vital parameters in for instance a core
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

health record. For secondary purposes, SNOMED-CT codes
increases the scope and interoperability for clinical research,
where a clinical trial could attract research communities
outside the consisting parameters.
IV.
DISCUSSION
Terminology standards are used on a daily basis in health
care work. Still, we know little about the processes of how
these terminologies come into being, and how they are co-
constructed with daily work, (for further information on:
how clinical terminologies are used to categorize/structure
nursing diagnosis and interventions in a standardized nursing
plan in Norwegian healthcare refer to [16]; the use of medi-
cal diagnosis through the use of ICD-9 to categorize medical
diagnosis refer to [4]). On the contrary, structured data for
secondary purposes has gained more attention, both for the
use of archetypes and terminology (See [3]). Structured EPR
data will make it possible for clinicians to categorize varia-
bles to build meaningful reports, to extract data for quality
registers, and for clinical research. Structured data elements
will also make it possible to organize information that sup-
ports process and decision support inside an integrated EPR
portfolio, and the use of OpenEHR will support clinicians
with a more open, adaptive, and collaborative system, which
enables modelling of clinical content. Structured data,
OpenEHR based, and tagged with Clinical terminology
codes is opening new possibilities to obtain integrated care.
Information becomes standardized and understandable be-
tween heterogeneous local practices, such as different wards
in the same hospital, nationally through the repository of
archetypes, and globally through primary or secondary use of
terminology and archetypes. Further, the use of clinical ter-
minology increases the semantic interoperability to integrate
different CIMs. The portfolio of different EPR systems in
Norwegian health care for instance needs to communicate
structured information. This regards both information be-
tween integrated systems at the hospital (between the EPR
and the electronic chart system), and between EPR systems
in the specialist and primarily health care services.
A. Primary use of terminology
The integration of clinical terminology for use in EPR
systems to support clinical practice has proven difficult to
accomplish. With the use of archetypes, and a national gov-
ernance of clinical variables through a common repository
for structured data elements, there are future advantages of
both semantic and interoperable character. Earlier research
elaborates on how the categorical use of clinical terminology
to structure nursing diagnosis and interventions in standard-
ized nursing plans has been a success for increased quality
and efficiency. However, the use of clinical terminology to
categorized clinical documentation for enabling process- and
decision support in the EPR portfolio is limited. In this sense,
clinical terminology is used to support the primary health
care process giving semantic meaning to the content of the
clinical processes. The use of standardized nursing plans at a
large scale in a Norwegian hospital showed clear advantages
both for quality and efficiency. Furthermore, when infor-
mation is tagged with the purpose to categorize such as with
ICD-10 and medical diagnosis, the same information be-
comes available for secondary purposes. On the next level,
any of these tagged nodes of information could be recirculat-
ed. Archetype based elements such as blood pressure, pulse,
temperature, and laboratory data can also be used for primary
purposes. Local, regional, or national coordinated process -
and decision support will in the future be based on templates
where these variables are put together, where mathematical
matrixes calculate the risk for a given condition/disease. The
national repository of archetypes is structured and standard-
ized so that terminology could become superfluous. For
instance, an archetype for use in a national clinical register is
harvested from different EPR systems and the nodes used,
such as diastolic and systolic for blood pressure, are pre-
fixed in a template that is produced for the register. In this
sense, the archetype could be used to solve a given interop-
erability challenge. Under conditions where the terminology
was lacking, the structure, the semantics, and the demarca-
tion of the archetype would cover the national requirements,
but all global advantages would be absent.
B. Secondary use of terminology
At the same time as the primary information becomes in-
teroperable, both as single archetype/terminology or inter-
vened, the information becomes semantically interoperable
for use in secondary settings. As an illustration, all infor-
mation that is tagged with the nursing classification ICNP,
both diagnosis and interventions, becomes sharable for sec-
ondary use. All the nursing diagnosis and interventions
would be an object for clinical research on a national or
global level which is a relatively unexploited research arena.
For patient safety when traveling abroad, specialists need to
view the core health record written in another language. For
this setting, the terminology for earlier diagnosis and inter-
ventions could be compared and used for treatment and care.
Another secondary use purpose is the integration between
the functioning EPR system and various specialist systems
and medical chart systems. The structured medical chart
system has for instance a CIM that differ a lot from
OpenEHR. To integrate values from the two systems clinical
terminology as SNOMED-CT can be used as a mapping
device. When all the systems are based on structured varia-
bles it becomes important that data elements with different
reference models can be shared and recognized between
them. For instance, the care plan is intended to be an inter-
disciplinary tool for categorizing documentation in the EPR.
For this to become a success it would be important that struc-
tured information from other applications is used in the care
plan even if the master system for the information is for
instance the medical chart.
Equal for both cases is that information used for any giv-
en purpose on a local or national level can be reused with
another purpose both locally, nationally, and globally. For
the archetypes that are approved in the national governance
processes, increasingly in number, and in the end a reposito-
ry that includes a number of archetypes that support clinical
work there will be a possibility for a terminology binding.
An increasing number of archetypes, more than 1000 will in
the end be accessible in an open repository, and each arche-
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

type that is translated or modelled will be compared or re-
viewed with the purpose of being added to the global reposi-
tory. For instance, the process of getting consensus on the
observation archetype blood pressure started with a transla-
tion of the global standard, and ended with a new version
that also is planned for the global or international repository.
C. The clinical information model
The diversity in standards, scope and methodology com-
plicates the decision about adopting one standard or another
for the definition of CIMs since it will influence the systems
that can be deployed in the health network. Now, the pre-
ferred standards to define clinical models according to the
literature are OpenEHR/ISO13606 archetypes, followed by
HL7 templates. Therefore, in the near future it is expected to
find an ecosystem where implementations based on different
standards coexist. This may add a burden for those imple-
menters that need to adapt from one standard to another.
However, it is important to notice that the most valuable
resource of a CIM is not the technical specification, but the
conceptual model that it contains. The reason is that a CIM
defines a way of combining clinical concepts together to
build more complex conceptual structures beyond providing
a format to express clinical information. For example, the
archetype
OpenEHR-EHR-CLUSTER.symptom_sign.v1
aggregates several granular concepts such as Body site, Epi-
sodicity, Impact etc. to build the more complex entity Symp-
tom/Sign. This aggregation of concepts is more evident when
the CIM is annotated with an international terminology.
Reaching a consensus about the conceptual model of the
CIM is the task that consumes most of the efforts of editorial
teams since they need to coordinate professionals from dif-
ferent domains. Nevertheless, if the modelling work is ap-
propriately performed, the conceptual model will be equiva-
lent in most iso-semantic models.
As a consequence, once CIMs are defined in a particular
standard, the conceptual model is clear and can be trans-
formed to other representations/standards. In fact, that is the
approach of openCIMI initiative which pursues the definition
of CIMs that can be expressed in several formats such as
CEMs, HL7 CDA or OWL by defining transformation func-
tions among them. These transformations, although complex,
are technical tasks that can be accomplished with much less
effort than the definition of stable conceptual models. Trans-
formations among standards vary in complexity, and the
easiest case is the transformation from OpenEHR to
ISO13606 that can be fully automated. In more difficult
scenarios, the EU project SemanticHealthNet has provided
insights to define an ontology based on the CIM conceptual
model that allows the access to equivalent information host-
ed in repositories expressed with disparate information
standards [16].
V.
CONCLUSION
Currently several standards and terminologies are availa-
ble for the specification and annotation of CIMs respectively.
openEHR, HL7 CDA and ISO 13606 are examples of stand-
ards to define CIMs which in most cases are annotated with
standard terminologies to enable their interoperability across
systems.
With the parallel national initiatives running at this time
in different countries, it is starting to become visible how the
organization and size of countries influences their standardi-
zation efforts. On one hand, large countries with very heter-
ogeneous health networks are aiming for the adoption of
standards that allow sharing EHR information documents
extracts. That is the case of Spain with ISO 13606 [17] or the
US with HL7 CDA [18][19].
On the other hand, Norway is heading to the adoption of
a nationwide EHR information architecture with openEHR
that defines not only some relevant CIMs but the whole EHR
information structure. Three are the factors that have influ-
enced this direction of work. The first is the homogeneity in
the market since only one vendor represents 80% of the
market share in hospital. The second is the close collabora-
tion between vendors and health authorities; this allows
coordinating the definition of the whole information model
of new systems. The third, and most determinant, is the body
of knowledge already available in the international CKM
that has fed the national CIMs definition pipeline with exist-
ing archetypes. This has accelerated their validation at a
national level avoiding their definition from scratch.
At the moment, the Norwegian eHealth strategy has es-
tablished a multidisciplinary community of vendors, gov-
ernmental agencies and health organizations collaborating in
order to define a nation-wide EPR information architecture.
The knowledge management framework of OpenEHR sup-
ports to manage the national CKM. The OpenEHR govern-
ance model and the collaboration between the international
and Norwegian CKM teams are proving to be effective to
manage the definition of CIMs for the national eHealth strat-
egy. On the technical side, the rich reference model provided
by OpenEHR acts as a powerful modelling tool for the defi-
nition of CIMs. On the organizational side, the collaborative
environment provided by the CKM is allowing to ensure the
validity of the CIMs generated. As a result the National
eHealth Department is providing the health informatics
community a body of standard clinical models which allows
implementers and researchers to define standard interopera-
ble implementations on them.
The semantic interoperability gained from the use of both
terminology and OpenEHR archetypes separately is a highly
valuable asset. For instance, earlier studies in Norway have
showed that clinical terminology has the potential to struc-
ture information of unstructured EPR systems. The ongoing
national work also suggests that the combined use of arche-
types and terminology further increases the semantic in-
teroperability for connecting EPR systems on different layers
of
healthcare.
Using
for
instance
SNOMED
“non-
hierarchical” to tag the nodes of archetypes is interesting,
and could be an integration advantage for vendors. It is a fact
that both subjects complement each other’s capacity to reach
semantic interoperable.
Another “feature” that could increase the semantic in-
teroperability is the growing possibility to use different Clin-
ical Information Models to extract and share information
from the National repository of archetypes/ clinical variables
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

and content. The Government and the National e-health
administration has decided to use different ICT systems in
the primarily and specialist healthcare for several years to
come. This requires a possibility to use clinical content from
the national repository using another CIM specification
standard than OpenEHR to extract and use semantic interop-
erable information. In this sense, the clinical model defined
by an archetype can be represented in another standard by
defining transformation rules among OpenEHR and the other
standard. This way, the archetype-based repository becomes
the reference common information ‘ontology’ or conceptual
model used by different vendors regardless the standard,
classes, and model they implemented.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Thanks to the people at North Norwegian Health Author-
ity, the NRUA, and the National ICT for contributing with
vital information to the project.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. C. Bowker and S. L. Star, Sorting Things Out: Classification and
Its Consequences: MIT press, 2000.
[2]
SNOMED-CT. Ihtsdo, Snomed-Ct®, the Organization. Available:
http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/
[3]
S. Garde, R. Chen, H. Leslie, T. Beale, I. McNicoll, and S. Heard,
"Archetype-Based Knowledge Management for Semantic Interoperability
of Electronic Health Records," The XXIInd International Congress of the
European Federation for Medical Informatics (MIE 2009), IOS Press,
2009, pp. 1007-1011.
[4]
G. Wade and S. T. Rosenbloom, "The Impact of Snomed Ct
Revisions on a Mapped Interface Terminology: Terminology Development
and Implementation Issues," Journal of biomedical informatics, vol. 42, pp.
490-493, 2009.
[5]
P. C. Dykes, H.-e. Kim, D. M. Goldsmith, J. Choi, K. Esumi, and H.
S. Goldberg, "The Adequacy of Icnp Version 1.0 as a Representational
Model for Electronic Nursing Assessment Documentation," Journal of the
American medical informatics association, vol. 16, pp. 238-246, 2009.
[6]
N. R. Hardiker, D. Hoy, and A. Casey, "Standards for Nursing
Terminology," Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
vol. 7, pp. 523-528, 2000.
[7]
A. Moreno-Conde, D. Moner, W. D. da Cruz, M. R. Santos, J. A.
Maldonado, M. Robles, and D. Kalra, "Clinical Information Modeling
Processes for Semantic Interoperability of Electronic Health Records:
Systematic Review and Inductive Analysis," Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, vol. 22, pp. 925-934, 2015.
[8]
V. Stroetman, D. Kalra, P. Lewalle, A. Rector, J. Rodrigues, K.
Stroetman, G. Surjan, B. Ustun, M. Virtanen, and P. Zanstra. Semantic
Interoperability for Better Health and Safer Healthcare [34 Pages].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.2759/38514
[9]
L. Marco-Ruiz, D. Moner, J. A. Maldonado, N. Kolstrup, and J. G.
Bellika, "Archetype-Based Data Warehouse Environment to Enable the
Reuse of Electronic Health Record Data," International journal of medical
informatics, vol. 84, pp. 702-714, 2015.
[10] J. Pathak, K. R. Bailey, C. E. Beebe, S. Bethard, D. S. Carrell, P. J.
Chen, D. Dligach, C. M. Endle, L. A. Hart, and P. J. Haug, "Normalization
and Standardization of Electronic Health Records for High-Throughput
Phenotyping: The Sharpn Consortium," Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, vol. 20, pp. e341-e348, 2013.
[11] R. Chen, P. Georgii-Hemming, and H. Åhlfeldt, "Representing a
Chemotherapy
Guideline Using
Openehr
and
Rules,"
The XXIInd
International Congress of the European Federation for Medical Informatics
(MIE 2009), IOS Press, 2009, pp. 653-657.
[12] T. Beale and S. Heard, "Openehr Architecture Overview. Openehr
Foundation," London, UK, 2008.
[13] Stortingsmelding
9,
"En
Innbygger,
En
Journal,"
Helse-
og
Omsorgsdepatementet,
Available:
http://www.regjeringen.no/nb/dep/hod/dok/regpubl/stmeld/2012-
2013/meld-st-9-20122013.html?id=708609 November 2014.
[14] Nasjonal IKT, "Tiltak 48 (2012). Klinisk Dokumentasjon for Oversikt
Og Læring," ed, 2009.
[15] H. K. Klein and M. D. Myers, "A Set of Principles for Conducting
and Evaluating Interpretive Field Studies in Information Systems," MIS
quarterly, pp. 67-93, 1999.
[16] C. Martínez-Costa, R. Cornet, D. Karlsson, S. Schulz, and D. Kalra,
"Semantic
Enrichment
of
Clinical
Models
Towards
Semantic
Interoperability. The Heart Failure Summary Use Case," Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 22, pp. 565-576, 2015.
[17] J. E. Huerta, C. A. Villar, M. C. Fernández, G. M. Cuenca, and I. A.
Acebedo, "Nhs Electronic Health Record," Ministerio de Sanidad y Politica
Social,
Available:
http://www.msssi.gob.es/organizacion/sns/planCalidadSNS/docs/HCDSNS
_English.pdf March 2014.
[18] D. Blumenthal and M. Tavenner, "The “Meaningful Use” Regulation
for Electronic Health Records," New England Journal of Medicine, vol.
363, pp. 501-504, 2010.
[19] Health Level Seven. Hl7 Standards Product Brief - Cda® Release 2.
Available:
http://www.hl7.org/implement/standards/product_brief.cfm?product_id=7
March 2015
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

