Proposal of a System for Intracranial Pressure Telemonitoring 
 
Gustavo M. Silva*;Marcelo B. Chioato**;Ângela A. R. de Sá*; Adriano O. Andrade*. 
*Faculty of Electrical Engineering,  
**Faculty of Medicine 
Federal University of Uberlândia 
Uberlândia, Brazil 
gustavomoreira87@gmail.com, mchioato1@gmail.com, angela@eletrica.ufu.br, aoandrade@yahoo.com.br. 
 
 
Abstract— The Intracranial Hypertension (ICH) is a 
neurological condition that affects patients with head injury, 
stroke and hydrocephalus. Currently, the most suitable 
treatment for this clinical condition requires continuous 
monitoring of cerebral function by the analysis of clinical 
parameters associated with cerebral perfusion. In this context, 
two parameters are relevant for clinical decision: the analysis 
of the waveform of intracranial pressure and the temperature. 
Ideally, a neurosurgeon should have access to this information 
during the whole period of treatment. However, in most cases 
this is not possible, because of the limited number of available 
professionals in this area. Possible consequences for this are 
delays in clinical interventions and the application of 
misleading procedures that may result in the death of patients 
or in worse prognostics. This research proposes the 
development of a system for temperature and intracranial 
pressure (ICP) monitoring. It will be developed a computer 
program that estimates and presents online and continuous 
relevant information regarding the ICP waveform and 
intracranial perfusion. This system will contain a remote 
evaluation module in addition to continuous monitoring at 
bedside, allowing the provision of periodic information about 
the evolution of the parameters of ICP, cerebral perfusion 
pressure (CPP) and intracranial temperature (ICT) via 
software application available in the mobile phone of the 
specialist. The software will be validated with synthetic and 
experimental data. Furthermore, it will be employed in a 
clinical study with 50 patients in order to compare the 
performance of two distinct types of equipment commonly 
used in the monitoring of the ICP. The results of this study will 
contribute to the improvement of current ICP monitoring 
systems, which may contribute to the reduction in morbidity 
and mortality of neurocritical patients. 
Keywords-Intracranial 
Pressure; 
Cerebral 
Perfusion; 
Telemonitoring. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
The Intracranial Pressure (ICP) is the measured pressure 
inside de skull that is influenced by the cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF), blood and cerebral tissue volumes, which are 
maintained at a constant rate under normal conditions. The 
ICP is the sum of the pressure on the internal wall of the 
skull. Any volume alteration in the brain and its structures 
may cause the raise of the ICP, and consequently, changes in 
the cerebral perfusion [1-3]. 
In 
this 
context, 
the 
assessment 
of 
intracranial 
hypertension is of paramount relevance. From literature, it is 
known that intracranial hypertension occurs when the ICP 
remains above 15 mmHg measured with the patient in supine 
position for a prolonged period of time [4].  
The ICP monitoring is an important parameter in the area 
of neurosurgery because in events such as head injury there 
is a large possibility of ICP increasing. This is proved by 
studies reporting that 40% of patients suffering from head 
injury and admitted in an unconscious state have an 
increased ICP. In addition, 50% of the patients die because 
of the raise of the ICP [5].  
Furthermore, ICP must be monitored because it provides 
a reliable way of confirming or excluding intracranial 
hypertension [6]. Unfortunately, the monitoring of the ICP is 
limited to hospitals that have access to advanced technology 
and multidisciplinary teams, making the process of ICP 
monitoring expensive.  
The high costs involved in continuous monitoring of ICP 
have called attention of a number of organizations in the area 
of telemonitoring, mainly, because it allows for a single 
professional, i.e., the neurosurgeon, to monitor a number of 
patients in distinct hospitals simultaneously and remotely. 
Thus, the telemonitoring of ICP in neurocritical patients 
is crucial because it promotes a fast and reliable assessment 
of the state of patients while reducing the cost of having the 
presence of a specialist in all locations. 
In this context, the main aim of this research is to 
develop a system for remote monitoring of ICP. This system 
should to be able to capture, process, monitor and send 
online information regarding the main parameters estimated 
from the ICP waveform to a remote device, i.e., a smart 
phone available to the professional. In addition the whole 
information will be stored in an online database for further 
analysis and visualization.  
The structure of this paper is as follows: In Section 2 we 
describe the methodology that will be used to develop the 
tool, including the block diagram of the project and the steps 
of development. In section 3 we discuss the system 
dependability of the system. In section 4 we outline the 
implications of this approach and the future directions of our 
research. 
 
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
METHODOLOGY
The methodology used in the execution of
will employ modern software engineering concepts and 
system design. The diagram depicted in Fig. 1 shows the 
main steps that will be applied in this project
to note that the system development process is iterative and 
non-sequential. In this way, the knowledge obtained in any 
of the stages shown in Fig. 1 can be used as feedback in the 
development of any of the steps. 
Figure 1.  
Main steps for developing the system for intracranial pressure 
telemonitoring. 
In the Requirement Analysis stage will be identified the 
specific 
requirements 
regarding 
the 
monitoring 
of 
neurocritical patients in a joint action between the 
groups in Neurosurgery and Biomedical 
Federal University of Uberlândia, Uberlândia, Brazil
results of this step will guide the development of 
computational tools. 
The Specification stage consists in the development of a 
documentation that describes as accurately as possible the 
architecture of the proposed system. Use
be used in order to assist the communication between the 
developers and the end user. These types of diagrams 
describe the scenario that shows the functional
system from the user's point of view. In addition the 
Modeling Language (UML) [7] will also be employed for the 
specification and documentation of the system. 
block diagram of the proposed system is 
The Design step consists in modeling 
for interaction with the user, as showed in Fig. 3, (ii) 
database (iii) reports, indicators and queries. 
information will be available in the conclusion of this step:
entity and relationship diagrams, data flow diagrams and 
Graphical User Interface (GUI) design, detailing menus and 
sub-menus as well as their sequence of operation.
The step Implementation is the use of computational
tools (e.g. compilers and programming languages) for the 
implementation of the system design as defined in 
"Design". 
The Validation will be focused on the following aspects: 
(i) validation of the graphical interface with the end user; (ii) 
validation of the information generated by the system
(iii) clinical validation of the system, i.e., the system will be 
used in a clinical study, with 50 patients, for comparing the 
performance of two distinct methods for measuring the ICP
Requirement
Analysis
Specification
Design
Implementation
DOLOGY 
in the execution of this research 
modern software engineering concepts and 
in Fig. 1 shows the 
in this project. It is important 
to note that the system development process is iterative and 
sequential. In this way, the knowledge obtained in any 
can be used as feedback in the 
 
Main steps for developing the system for intracranial pressure 
will be identified the 
requirements 
regarding 
the 
monitoring 
of 
neurocritical patients in a joint action between the research 
Biomedical Engineering of the 
, Uberlândia, Brazil. The 
results of this step will guide the development of 
consists in the development of a 
accurately as possible the 
Use-case diagrams will 
assist the communication between the 
These types of diagrams 
scenario that shows the functionality of the 
In addition the Unified 
will also be employed for the 
specification and documentation of the system. The main 
 shown in Fig. 2. 
onsists in modeling the (i) interfaces 
for interaction with the user, as showed in Fig. 3, (ii) 
database (iii) reports, indicators and queries. The following 
ilable in the conclusion of this step: 
entity and relationship diagrams, data flow diagrams and 
design, detailing menus and 
sequence of operation. 
is the use of computational 
tools (e.g. compilers and programming languages) for the 
implementation of the system design as defined in the step 
will be focused on the following aspects: 
(i) validation of the graphical interface with the end user; (ii) 
tion of the information generated by the system; and 
(iii) clinical validation of the system, i.e., the system will be 
used in a clinical study, with 50 patients, for comparing the 
performance of two distinct methods for measuring the ICP. 
Figure 2.  
General struct
Figure 3.  
Model of a possible graphical user interface of the system.
Figures 4 and 5 depict typical 
proposed system. When the ICP is normal
(Figure 4) and both the specialist and the staff are following 
the routine parameters of the patient. In contrast, when the 
ICP is abnormal (Figure 5), the firing of 
the alarm so that the specialist and staff can act promptly.  
Figure 4.  
User case scenario when the intracranial pressure is normal.
Implementation
Validation
 
General structure of the system. 
 
Model of a possible graphical user interface of the system. 
typical user case scenarios for the 
proposed system. When the ICP is normal, the alarm is off 
and both the specialist and the staff are following 
the routine parameters of the patient. In contrast, when the 
the firing of an event will set off 
the alarm so that the specialist and staff can act promptly.   
 
scenario when the intracranial pressure is normal. 
251
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 5.  
User case scenario when the intracranial pressure is abnormal. 
 
III. 
SYSTEM DEPENDABILITY 
Dependability assesses the quality and reliability in the 
service provided by a system [8]. This parameter is even 
more desirable when it comes to biomedical systems for 
monitoring or life support, due to stringent requirements 
regarding the availability and reliability of the system, as it is 
for health maintenance. 
It is known that failures are inevitable, but the 
consequences of the failures, the interruption in the supply of 
the service and data loss can be prevented by proper use of 
some techniques that tolerate failures [9]. It is important to 
note that these tools have a certain cost, thus, users and 
developers should assess the cost-benefit in each case [10]. 
The system proposed in this research provides the specialist 
with further mobility; however mobility can put the patient at 
risk in the event of a failure in the communication about the 
state of the patient to a specialist. 
For ICP monitoring is necessary a high reliability and 
availability of the system, in order to minimize the impact in 
the event of faults, e.g., loss of network connection. A 
possible mechanism to address these issues would be to 
include in the system additional alarms, and also distinct 
communication service providers, so that failures are 
perceived 
immediately, 
and 
communication 
can 
be 
guaranteed or reestablished as quick as possible. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
ICP monitoring is a very useful tool, particularly for 
patients suffering from head injury, mainly because, in this 
condition, a high measure of ICP reduces brain perfusion. 
For this reason, we propose to develop a tool for data 
processing, analysis and remote visualization of ICP 
parameters and waveform.  
The use of the proposed tool in clinical practice allows 
the continuous monitoring of the ICP and hence of the state 
of patients. This will be a relevant tool for both the clinical 
staff at bedside and also for the neurosurgeon that might 
assess the condition of the patient remotely.  
The next steps of the work will be: Finishing the 
conditioning system and digitalizing the analog signal of the 
ICP and posteriorly, the development of tools for the digital 
processing of information from ICP. After, will be 
implemented the databases. On the last stage, we will 
develop tools for communication between mobile systems 
and the bedside systems of information processing and 
storage. 
V. 
ACKNOWLODGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the Brazilian 
government (CAPES, CNPq and FAPEMIG) for supporting 
this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
N. Lundberg, "Continuous recording and control of ventricular fluid 
pressure in neurosurgical practice," in Neurosurgical Classics II, R. 
Wilkins and G. Wilkins, Eds.: THIEME, 1960, pp. 66-185. 
[2] 
I. Piper, "Intracranial Pressure and Elastance," in Head Injury - 
Pathophysiology and management of severe closed injury, P. Reilly 
and R. Bullock, Eds. London: Chapman & Hall, 1997, pp. 101-120. 
[3] 
R. Hamilton, P. Xu, S. Asgari, M. Kasprowicz, P. Vespa, M. 
Bergsneider, and X. Hu, "Forecasting Intracranial Pressure Elevation 
Using Pulse Waveform Morphology," in 31st Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE EMBS Minneapolis, Minnesota, 2009, pp. 
4331-4334 
[4] 
H. 
M. 
Shapiro, 
"Anestesia 
Neurocirúrgica 
e 
Hipertensão 
Intracraniana," in Tratado de Anestesia. vol. 2, R. D. Miller, Ed. San 
Francisco, Califórnia: Manole, 1989. 
[5] 
J. D. Miller, D. P. Becker, J. D. Ward, H. G. Sullivan, W. E. Adams, 
and M. J. Rosner, "Significance of Intracranial Hypertention in 
Severe Head Injury," Jornal of Neurosurgery, 1997, pp. 503-516. 
[6] 
B. North, "Intracranial Pressure Monitoring," in Head Injury - 
Pathophysiology and management of severe closed injury, P. Reilly 
and R. Bullock, Eds. London: Chapman & Hall, 1997, pp. 209-216. 
[7] 
R. S. Pressman, Software Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach, 6 
Edition ed.: McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math, 2004. 
[8] 
D. K. Pradhan, Fault-Tolerant  System  Design. New Jersey: Prentice  
Hall, 1996. 
[9] 
F. L. Vargas, D. V. Lettnin, D. B. d. Brum, and D. P. Prestes, "A New 
Learning Approach to Design Fault Tolerant ANNs: Finally a Zero 
HW-SW Overhead.," in Proceedings of the 11th IEEE Asian Test 
Symposium - ATS’02, Los Alamitos - CA, USA, 2002, pp. 218-223. 
[10] T. S. Weber, Tolerância a falhas: conceitos e exemplos. Porto Alegre 
- RS, Brazil. Editora da Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 
2000. 
 
 
252
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

