Filling a Gap in eHealth Records: 
The Development of a Home Care Records System 
 
 
Anthony P. Glascock, Ph.D. 
Department of Culture and Communication 
Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, 19104 
 
                              glascock@drexel.edu 
 
 
Abstract—The process of developing an eHealth records system 
over the last six years is described. The work took place at 
seven care organizations in the United States, the United 
Kingdom and the Netherlands and was part of a series of pilot 
studies assessing the effectiveness of a behavioral monitoring 
system in the delivery of care to at-risk elderly. A research tool 
created to systematically collect data on alerts, care actions and 
health outcomes evolved into a home care electronic records 
system. The system is fully functional on any smart mobile 
device and can be used with a wide variety of pervasive health 
care applications or as a stand-alone. Five essential design 
features that impact the future of such home care electronic 
records system are discussed. 
 
Keywords—eHealth medical records; home care; mobile devices; 
self-management 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Over the last decade, there has been a general 
acceptance of the need for and use of electronic health care 
records, first in the hospital setting and later within 
physician practices. Initially in the United States, because of 
the cost, in time and money and disruption in the normal 
care delivery model, there was little enthusiasm for the use 
of electronic records. However, a combination of 
“encouragement” from the insurance industry and the 
insistence by government, the use of electronic records 
inexorably came to be the norm within hospitals, other 
institutional settings and physician practices. Even though 
the use of electronic records is not 100%, there is little 
doubt that the greater reliability of electronic records, the 
ease of storage and access and cost savings, will eventually 
achieve close to universal usage within institutions and 
among physicians [1, 2]. 
The home, however, is a different matter all together. 
Although delivery of care and services in the home has 
increased significantly and, if projections are correct, will 
accelerate at an ever more rapid pace over the coming 
several decades, the development and use of electronic 
systems to record the care and services has lagged behind 
the institutional sector. The acceleration of the delivery of 
care and services in the home is being driven by two main 
factors: demography and cost. The demographic trends are 
well known: dramatic increase in the number of elderly, 
especially the oldest-old; a concomitant increase in chronic 
diseases associated with aging, e.g., congestive heart failure 
(CHF), diabetes, dementia; and a decline in the number of 
informal carers—family members—who can provide care to 
the expanding elderly populations. Cost projections are 
similarly daunting: increasing cost for care delivery within 
the 
institutional 
setting; 
insufficient 
number 
of 
institutions—hospitals, 
nursing 
homes, 
rehabilitation 
facilities—to provide the care required for the elderly 
population and insufficient funds to build the large number 
of additional institutions; and prohibitive costs to 
government to provide care and services through current 
care delivery models. 
It is generally agreed upon that the only way to meet 
the increasing needs brought about by the demographic 
trends, while at the same time not bankrupting national 
treasuries, is to provide more care and services in the home 
[3]. This is not a new idea, nor particularly radical, but as 
more care and services are being delivered in the home, 
several issues have emerged that raises serious concerns. In 
the first place, the care being delivered had steadily become 
more extensive. Whereas ten years ago rehabilitation after a 
serious illness or accident would have been undertaken in a 
specialized facility, increasingly these services are being 
provided in the home on an outpatient basis. But 
rehabilitation is just one of an escalating number of care 
services being provided in the home: nutritional counseling; 
wound care; psychological therapy; and medication 
adherence, to name several of the major ones. Additionally, 
the range of products and non-care services supplied to 
individuals in their own homes has increased significantly 
over the last few years: oxygen; specialized beds; 
monitoring systems—behavioral, vital signs, environmental 
extremes; meals; housekeeping; shopping; companion 
services. As the care and services have multiplied, so have 
the number of people providing the services, as well as the 
number of companies and agencies overseeing the provision 
of this care and services. Some of these companies/agencies 
may provide several services and products, but in most 
cases there are multiple providers and certainly multiple 
people providing the different services and products. These 
companies/agencies are, of course, in addition to any 
services provided by informal carers—family members, 
neighbors, friends. 
Thus, the need for a means of recording and tracking 
the care and services provided in the home are essentially 
the same as for institutions: increased reliability; better 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

coordination; appropriate level of care; and cost savings.  As 
more care and services are delivered by more people 
representing different companies and agencies, just keeping 
track of who is providing what becomes increasingly 
difficult, especially if the individual receiving the care lives 
alone in her home and is experiencing cognitive decline or 
other impairments. Scheduling of visits and deliveries, 
ensuring the correct product or service, avoiding duplication 
all become difficult if records are scattered among various 
agencies, companies and individuals and are rarely, if ever, 
shared. It is also extremely difficult to evaluate if the care 
and services are having the desired impact on the individual 
if there is no systematic way to track the care and services. 
In other words, if records are non-existent or scattered there 
is no way to measure outcomes resulting in the inability to 
determine if the care and services are appropriate. The lack 
of systematic and comprehensive records also makes it 
difficult for other care providers, e.g., physicians, 
specialists, to make informed care decisions, since the 
reliance on the patient to remember specifics about the care 
and services in the home has proven to be suspect at best. In 
addition, if electronic records of care and services in the 
home do not exist, it is obvious that they cannot be linked 
with the records that have been created in the hospital and 
the physician practice, resulting in an incomplete record of 
care. Finally, even though delivering care and services in the 
home is more economical than in institutions, it still costs 
money and someone has to pay for it. As a result, from the 
point of view of the client receiving the care and services, as 
well as the insurance company and the government, there is 
a discernable need to track the care and services to ensure 
that what is paid for is provided and that everyone was paid 
appropriately. 
This 
paper 
reports 
on 
the 
inception, 
design, 
development, implementation, testing and evaluation of an 
electronic records system developed for care and services 
delivered in the home: the Home Care Informatics System 
(HCIS). The first iteration of the HCIS was developed in 
2006 and in the last six years three separate iterations have 
been used within seven different care delivery organizations 
in three countries—the United States, the United Kingdom 
and the Netherlands. As of September 1, 2012, the HCIS, in 
one of its iterations, has been used for over 400 clients 
receiving care and services in their own homes. Although at 
present the HCIS has only been used in conjunction with a 
behavioral/lifestyle monitoring system, it is designed to be 
used independently of any monitoring system. 
II. 
THREE STAGES OF DEVELOPMENT 
The HCIS developed out of a comparative research 
project on the effectiveness of a particular behavioral 
monitoring system—QuietCare®— as a passive emergency 
response system within different care delivery models. The 
sequential research began in 2003 and eventually 
encompassed 14 care organizations in three countries [4, 5, 
6]. As part of the research, it was essential to track the care 
actions taken in response to an alert generated by 
QuietCare® in order to evaluate if the particular alert 
brought about an appropriate response by the care provider. 
Until 2006, the research had relied primarily on anecdotes 
(case studies) to understand how QuietCare® was used to 
help provide information to care givers on the needs of their 
clients. Although hundreds of such case studies had been 
collected and analyzed over the first four years of the 
research, there was no systematic means for the collection 
of data on the alerts, care actions and the health outcomes 
that could be subjected to a more rigorous analysis. A 
thorough review of the literature indicated that no such 
research tool existed that could automatically accomplish 
the goal of collecting such data and thus, a new research 
instrument had to be developed. 
A. Stage 1—2006-2007 
Research at Selfhelp Community Services, Inc. was 
undertaken on the use of QuietCare® within a care 
management model in a Naturally Occurring Retirement 
Community (NORC) in Queens, New York. In this care 
model, eleven geriatric social workers provided care 
management services to over 200 residents within the three 
buildings of the NORC. Twenty-seven of these clients 
agreed to have QuietCare® installed for a six month period 
and to have the social workers use the resultant data in care 
management decisions [7]. The first iteration of the 
instrument was labeled the TAO: standing for Trigger, the 
QuietCare® alert; Action, the care action taken by the social 
worker in response to the alert; and Outcome, the health or 
care outcome brought about by the care action. A brief 
example illustrates the initial design of the TAO:  
QuietCare® sends to the geriatric social worker an alert 
indicating an increase in overnight toileting for a 
particular client—the Trigger;  
The social worker who receives the alert, phones the 
client to inquire about the client’s behavior—the 
Action;  
Finding out that the client was frequently in the 
bathroom because of a stomach flu, the social worker 
contacts the client’s physician to obtain a prescription 
for medication—the health Outcome.  
 
For the first month of the study, even though the social 
worker received the alert on her computer, she filled out a 
paper form with the relevant information, which was then 
entered into a computer data base for analysis. At the initial 
meeting of the study team, it was agreed that the paper 
version of the TAO was time-consuming to fill out, 
redundant with other forms that had to be filled out by hand 
and could not be easily shared with co-workers and 
supervisors. Thus, a computerized web-based version of the 
TAO was created and put in operation in the sixth week of 
the study. (See Fig.1) 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1.     Web-TAO 
The Web-TAO form took about five minutes to fill out, 
could be easily shared with others and, most importantly, 
could be updated as more actions and outcomes occurred. In 
the short run, this last feature proved beneficial for the 
social workers as they could quickly and almost effortlessly 
update the Web-TAO records for individual clients. In the 
long run, the need to have an update capability proved 
essential in the development of the HCIS. This is because, 
although the alert is a discrete event, care actions and health 
outcomes are not discrete, but instead roll out over time. 
The previous example of the TAO narrative has all three 
elements as discrete events—one Trigger, one Action, one 
Outcome—and this example corresponds to approximately 
40% of the TAOs collected at Selfhelp Community 
Services. However, a majority of the TAOs corresponded 
more to the following example: 
QuietCare® sends to the geriatric social worker an alert 
indicating an increase in overnight toileting for a 
particular client—the Trigger;  
The social worker who receives the alert, phones the 
client to inquire about the client’s behavior—the 
Action;  
Finding out that the client was frequently in the 
bathroom because of a stomach flu, the social worker 
contacts the client’s physician to obtain a prescription 
for medication—the health Outcome;  
The social worker phones the client’s daughter to report 
that her mother has the flu—Second Action;  
Daughter visits her mother the next day finding out that 
her mother is no better—Third Action, Second 
Outcome;  
Daughter phones social worker reporting on mother’s 
condition—Fourth Action; social worker visits client, 
determines that she is dehydrated, phones physician—
Fifth Action; 
Physician decides to have client admitted to hospital—
Sixth Action, Third Outcome; 
Client is discharged after two days in hospital—
Seventh Action, Fourth Outcome. 
 
All of the above actions and outcomes were the result of the 
single alert and could now be entered into the Web-TAO as 
the events rolled out over time. As a record of care provided 
and outcomes generated, the Web-TAO proved extremely 
helpful to the geriatric social workers as they could more 
systematically track the progression of care and outcomes. 
However, the realization of how multiple care actions and 
outcomes could be gathered together in a single record 
proved invaluable for the future development of the 
informatics system that eventually became the HCIS.  
The quantitative results, e.g., number and type of alerts 
over the six months, number and type of actions and health 
outcomes, of the study have been reported elsewhere [5, 7], 
and even though these quantitative results are interesting, 
they did not drive the development of the informatics 
system as much as monthly care review meetings with 
geriatric social workers, supervisors, administrators and 
researchers at which the entire study was discussed, in 
general, and the Web-TAO, in particular.  
It was at the first of these meetings that the social 
workers strongly suggested that the TAO be put on the 
Web. At subsequent meetings suggestions were made to: 
add auto-populated fields to the Web-TAO; use check-boxes 
whenever possible; allow for easier follow-up entries; allow 
access to individual records by other social workers and 
supervisors. It was at the second meeting that two issues 
that would drive much of the development of the TAO came 
to light: 1) how could the information contained in the Web-
TAOs be most effectively used in the delivery of care to 
clients; and 2) should the Web-TAOs be used by 
supervisors to evaluate the work performed by the social 
workers? Since the objective for these meetings was to 
review what had happened to each of the clients over the 
previous month in order to assess how QuietCare had 
impacted the delivery of care, it was not surprising that the 
TAOs were the focus of the discussions—the TAOs did 
contain a comprehensive record of each alert, care action 
and outcome for each of the clients— but it was surprising 
how the social workers utilized the TAOs during the 
reviews. They placed the TAOs for each of the clients 
together and then worked their way chronologically through 
the TAOs. (All of the TAOs had been printed and each 
social worker brought the TAOs for their clients to the 
meeting.) By their actions, the social workers were 
constructing an on-going record for each of the clients by 
putting TAOs for the particular client together into a single 
“pile”. This is what gave me the idea that the information 
contained in the TAO could be put together into an 
electronic record. This transition from a research instrument 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to an electronic record did not take place during the Selfhelp 
Community Services pilot, but the idea was planted and 
germinated quickly in the second stage of the development.  
Another issue of concern on the part of the social 
workers over the use of the Web-TAO is the evaluation of 
their jobs. However, it was apparent after that second 
meeting that the information within the records could be 
used to evaluate work performance: how quickly did the 
social worker respond to the alert; how effective were the 
actions she took; did she follow up to determine the 
outcome of the action; did she recommend services 
provided by Selfhelp Community Services to the client—
increasing revenue for the organization. For the supervisors, 
the Web-TAO provided an objective basis on which to 
evaluate the work performed by the social workers; for the 
social workers, the Web-TAO allowed supervisors to 
question their actions and professional conduct using 
information that had not been available previously. These 
issues were not resolved before the study ended, but as 
discussed subsequently, it remained a vexing problem for 
the future development of the TAO/HCIS. However, 
perhaps the most important thing that we learned from both 
sources was that just because “rules” for the use of the TAO 
are created at one care organization does not mean that the 
rules will 
transfer 
to 
another organization. 
Every 
organization’s culture is different, meaning that the process 
of rule creation, as well as the rules themselves, will be 
different. 
B. Stage 2—2007-2008 
 
As the Selfhelp Community Services study was 
concluding, a new study commenced in London. Once 
again, the study consisted of the installation of QuietCare® 
in the residences of elderly individuals who were at risk for 
a variety of health and functional reasons and who were 
provided services by a care organization. However, unlike 
the Selfhelp Community Services study in which all clients 
lived independently and had their care managed by a single 
care organization, the London study involved several 
residential types and more than one care organization. All 
residents lived in Southwark, an area of Central London 
south of the Thames, and were provided services from one 
of three care organizations—Southwark Falls, Oasis and 
Hyde 
Housing. 
Although 
the 
organizations 
were 
“independent”, they all operated under the broad umbrella 
of the Southwark Local Authority. Thus, the work 
undertaken by “carers” in these organizations was much 
more coordinated than would be found in three independent 
organizations in the United States. Each organization did 
provide services to a well-defined population: Southwark 
Falls, individuals living independently requiring a moderate 
level of care and services; Oasis, individuals living 
independently requiring a more intensive level of care and 
services; and Hyde Housing, individuals living in 
congregate housing requiring a very high level of care and 
services provided by residential staff. However, even though 
these organizations were “independent” and served distinct 
populations, for the discussion of the development of the 
TAO/HCIS it makes sense to view them as a single entity 
and to aggregate their clients. Therefore, the following 
discussion will refer to the Southwark Study and 97 clients 
rather than the individual care organizations and their 
clients: Southwark Falls—45; Oasis—16; Hyde Housing— 
36. 
Based on the development work undertaken at Selfhelp 
Community Services, the Southwark Study began with a 
fully operational Web-TAO that had the ability to easily 
update a report as care actions and outcomes rolled out over 
time. Some changes had to be made in the Web-TAO’s 
check-boxes and auto-populated fields to conform to the 
particular care management models used in Southwark and 
to make the Web-TAO more “British”, e.g., English English 
rather than American English. Also based on development 
decisions made at Selfhelp Community Services, the Web-
TAO implemented at Southwark had slightly enhanced 
information sharing ability which allowed easier access to 
individual client’s records by authorized personnel.  
The quantitative results from the Southwark Study, e.g., 
number and type of alerts over the eight months, number 
and type of actions and health outcomes, have been 
published elsewhere [4, 8, 9]. Also similarly, even though 
the quantitative results from Southwark are interesting, they 
did not drive the development of the electronic records 
system, but instead, it was findings from other sources, 
primarily a series of three meetings in London with carers 
from the three organizations and discussions by email and 
phone with carers about their usage of the Web-TAO. 
Within the first six weeks of the study, it became 
apparent from the analysis of the material being entered into 
the Web-TAO that the carers were using the system much 
differently than the social workers at Selfhelp Community 
Services. This was due, in the first place, to the fact that the 
carers at Southwark had a working Web-TAO from “day 
one” and there were no delays in implementation. Second, 
the nature of the culture of care at Southwark was different 
from at Selfhelp Community Services. At Southwark, the 
culture was extremely collaborative and although particular 
carers had primary responsibility for specific clients, all 
carers engaged with all clients in some fashion. The Web-
TAO was immediately conceived by these carers as a tool to 
allow for easier sharing of information among all carers 
rather than just a record of responses—actions and 
outcomes— to triggering alerts. Therefore, the ability for all 
members of the care team to not only see the information, 
but to contribute to the information stream became 
paramount. Additionally, by the end of the study, the carers 
were, on a regular basis, sharing information from the Web-
TAO with family members of several of the clients.  
The cultural imperative to share and contribute to the 
information of clients was very quickly reflected in the 
Web-TAOs. Instead of discrete, although often lengthy 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

records of actions and outcomes, the Southwark Web-TAOs 
took on the appearance of “blogs” in which numerous carers 
listed their actions and the subsequent outcomes for 
particular clients. On the surface, this change appeared to be 
trivial, but in actuality it altered my entire thinking about the 
structure of the Web-TAO. The Web-TAO had already 
mutated from a research tool to a care provision tool that 
tracked responses to QuietCare® alerts, and now it had 
transformed again from a limited record of what transpired 
when an alert occurred, to a more comprehensive electronic 
record of all care being delivered to a specific client over 
time. Fig. 2 is an example of a typical “blog” for a single 
client. 
This 
example 
page 
not 
only 
shows 
the 
comprehensive nature of the information recorded, but also 
illustrates how many carers became involved in contributing 
care for this client, including specialists from outside the 
original set of carers. 
Figure 2.     Web-TAO blog narrative 
 
It also became apparent that the “Smart Team”—the 
newly formed group of carers at Southwark who were now 
charged with making full use of the Web-TAO as a care 
tool—had other ideas for the use of the Web-TAO. One was 
to be able to send the “blog” to a client’s physician prior to 
an appointment in order for the physician to have all 
relevant care information. This required no modification in 
the Web-TAO and was implemented before the mid-point of 
the study. Another idea was to allow the “blogs” to be 
sorted by alert, particular carer, type of care actions and date 
of entry. Although technically not a complex undertaking, 
the challenge was to understand the use to be made of such 
a sorting feature, before creating it. Unfortunately, the 
sorting feature was developed too late for it to be fully 
implemented in Southwark, but it became a key feature of 
the next iteration in the Netherlands. Unlike at Selfhelp, the 
fear that the information stored in the Web-TAO could be 
used to evaluate the work performed by the carers was not 
raised at Southwark, but this issue resurfaced in the 
Netherlands. 
 
C. Stage 3—2008-2012 
 
Work in the Netherlands began in late 2007 as part of a 
demonstration project to evaluate the role of behavioral 
monitoring in the delivery of care both in the home of at-
risk elderly and within an institutional setting in the 
Limburg Province. The initial demonstration project ran for 
six months during which time QuietCare® was installed in 
the residences of 12 individuals living independently and 13 
individuals living within a sheltered housing facility. The 
success of the demonstration project led to a much larger 
study that began in 2008 and is scheduled to end at the end 
of 2012. As of September 1, 2012, QuietCare® units had 
been installed in the residences of 192 individuals living 
independently throughout the largely rural Limburg region. 
The lead care organization for both the demonstration 
project and the larger study is Proteion Homecare North 
Limburg, a full service care organization that provides both 
services and care in the home and within institutional 
settings. A second care organization, Zorgroep, which 
provides similar services and care as Proteion, is involved in 
the larger study, but its role is secondary to Proteion both in 
the number of clients served—128 clients for Proteion and 
only 64 for Zorgroep—and administrative responsibilities. 
Thus, similarly to how the three London organizations were 
combined, it makes sense to view these organizations, as 
well as the demonstration project and larger study, as a 
single entity and to aggregate the clients. Therefore, the 
following discussion of the development of the TAO/HCIS 
will refer to the Dutch Study with a total of 192 clients, 
rather 
than 
making 
reference 
to 
individual 
care 
organizations or differentiating between the demonstration 
project and the larger study. 
Since the demonstration project in the Netherlands 
began as the London Study was winding down, it was 
possible to provide the Dutch with an enhanced Web-TAO 
which had the ability to produce “blogs”, which we renamed 
the “Client’s Journal”, as well as a means of sorting the 
information by type of alert, date, client, care worker and 
type of care action. Of course, the content of the Web-TAO, 
e.g., check-boxes, auto-populated fields, instructions, had to 
be translated into Dutch. The care delivery model at 
Proteion and Zorgroep required their care workers to spend 
a considerable amount of each day traveling to and from the 
residences of clients throughout Limburg Province and they 
spent little time at the two organizations’ administrative 
headquarters. In addition, few of the care workers had 
access to laptop computers and therefore their ability to both 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

access the Web-TAO and to enter information became a real 
concern. This problem was solved by developing the 
capability for the Web-TAO, renamed the Home Care 
Informatics System (HCIS), to be accessed on any smart 
mobile device. Since each of the care workers had a smart 
phone, this solved the problem of access and entry of 
information. However, it also raised other challenges. First, 
everything had to be reformatted so that it could fit the small 
screen of the mobile devices. This led to an even greater 
reliance on check boxes and auto-populated features and to 
the development of more efficient scrolling features. 
Second, there was the challenge of making the HCIS display 
properly on the various smart devices used by the care 
workers. By the end of the demonstration project in the late 
summer of 2008, a fully functional HCIS was being used by 
the care workers. (See Fig. 3) 
 
 
Figure 3.     HCIS on smart mobile device 
Similarly to both the Selfhelp Community Services and 
London studies, the quantitative results from the Dutch 
Study have been published elsewhere [4, 6, 10]. Also 
similar to the two previous studies, although the quantitative 
results from the Dutch Study are important for developing 
the HCIS, they did not prove as valuable as findings from 
other sources: direct interaction with care workers and 
administrators at Proteion and with the Dutch research team. 
This interaction allowed for the direct observation of the 
HCIS “in-the-field” which aided in modifying the system to 
operate efficiently on smart devices. By February 2009, a 
fully functional HCIS was operational for use by care 
workers at Proteion and Zorgroep. This iteration included all 
the features that had been developed during the Selfhelp 
Community Services and London Studies and the Dutch 
Demonstration Project: 1) wherever possible the HCIS used 
check-boxes and auto-populated fields; 2) the Client’s 
Journal feature was fully operational and allowed entries by 
any authorized personnel; 3) the Journal could be sorted by 
alert, date, care worker, type of care delivered and outcome; 
4) there was a new feature that allowed additions to a 
previous entry, but not the elimination of the original entry; 
5) it was fully operational on a wide variety of mobile 
devices; 6) a series of pop-up prompts helped the user 
navigate through functions and avoid common errors; 7) 
additional security features had been developed to ensure 
that only authorized individuals could access and contribute 
to a client’s record; and 8) a read-only feature had been 
made operational. 
During the next few months several issues were raised 
by the care workers and administrators at Proteion and 
Zorgroep; some of which were not easily resolved. The first 
issue revolved around how care was provided on weekends 
and holidays. At both organizations, a team of care workers 
provides a range of services to a particular client, e.g., 
nursing care, rehabilitation services, shopping, house 
cleaning. One member of the team, usually, but not always a 
nurse, is designated the primary care worker. Although all 
team members have the ability to access and contribute to 
the HCIS, it is the primary care worker who is chiefly 
responsible for maintaining the HCIS record. The problem 
arises when the primary care worker, or for that matter any 
member of the team, is not on duty, i.e., weekends and 
holidays, and services are provided in the client’s residence 
by a care worker who is not on the team. Since only a small 
percentage of care workers at the two organizations are 
participating in the Study, these substitute care workers are 
often unfamiliar with the HCIS and lack access. Thus, care 
is being delivered, but the HCIS record is not being updated. 
Although this issue does not directly concern the technical 
development of the HCIS, it certainly impacts the 
implementation of the HCIS.  
A second issue that impacts directly on the 
implementation of the HCIS concerns the use of the HCIS 
record during care review meetings. These meetings 
included both individuals who have knowledge of and 
access to the HCIS and others who have neither. Since the 
client reviews are more thorough when everyone at the 
meeting has access to the information stored in the HCIS 
record, the question arose as to who should have access, 
how should they obtain access and who was in charge of 
making access happen? Once again, not a technical but, 
instead, a work rule issue. Ultimately, issues like these will 
only be solved when the care organization fully adopts the 
HCIS and all care workers, supervisors and administrators 
use the system. Until this occurs, ad hoc actions that attempt 
to solve the problems in the short run with the least 
disruption to normal work flow are the only recourse [4]. 
Perhaps the most vexing concern with the use of the 
HCIS in the Netherlands was over how the information 
stored in the records could be used by supervisors and 
administrators in the evaluation of work performance. On 
the surface, the concern expressed by the care workers in the 
Netherlands was similar to those raised by the social 
workers at Selfhelp Community Services. It was believed 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

that these concerns could be fairly easily resolved by 
discussions of interested parties. This did not happen. This 
is such a serious issue for the Dutch that there have been 
discussions about the need for national legislation that 
would prevent the information stored in the records from 
being used to evaluate the performance of carers.  
III. 
DISCUSSION  
Six years of development of the TAO/HCIS has resulted 
in a journey from a technology that was initially envisioned 
and implemented as a research tool (TAO), to a web-based 
care 
provision 
tool 
(Web-TAO), 
to 
an 
interactive 
journal/blog that can be used on a smart device, to a full-
fledged electronic records informatics system (HCIS).  
The system that is currently in use in the Netherlands is 
significantly different in scope, operation and potential 
customers than the one envisioned six years ago. In fact, it 
was only a little over two years ago that I fully recognized 
that the HCIS is, in actuality, an Electronic Medical Records 
System (EMR), similar to those employed in hospitals and 
general medical practices. Thus, the HCIS has many 
features in common with these institutionally based 
systems:  it allows for the creation of interactive records of 
care that can be accessed by any number of authorized 
individuals; the records can be sorted by any number of 
domains; the HCIS can be easily integrated with any other 
electronic records system; and it can be used as a billing 
tool. However, there are features that differentiate the HCIS 
from these other systems: 1) it was specifically created to be 
used to record the delivery of care and services in the home; 
2) it can be used on any smart mobile device; 3) it can be 
seamlessly integrated with any residential monitoring 
system, e.g., behavioral, vital signs, environmental; and 4) it 
can be used either as a stand-alone system or with other 
pervasive health care applications.  
Although it was not my intention in 2006 to produce an 
electronic medical records system, this was the result of six 
years of work with the seven different care organizations. In 
retrospect, the transition from a web-based research 
instrument (TAO) to an electronic records system (HCIS) 
appears intentional, but it wasn’t. The transition was driven 
by the needs of the individuals within the care organizations 
(end-users), who kept asking for new features and used the 
existing features in ways that I had not anticipated. Again in 
retrospect, it is clear that, not being researchers, these carers 
were much less interested in systematically collecting data 
on which to assess the effectiveness of behavioral 
monitoring than in using the newly available tool—the 
TAO/HCIS—to provide more effective care to their clients.  
As a result, I relinquished a degree of control over the 
development process, which at times was both frustrating 
and difficult, but it was the only way that my overall goal—
to produce a system that the caregivers would use, rather 
than something we thought the caregivers should use—
could be accomplished.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Based upon the six years of working on various 
iterations of the TAO and HCIS, the main conclusion is that 
it is possible to create an eHealth system for home care and 
that such a system can be used effectively to coordinate care 
and services and contribute to the maintenance of 
independent living. However, five key design issues appear 
to underlie the successful development and implementation 
of such an electronic records system for the home. First, the 
records system must be usable on smart mobile devices. 
Experiences, in both London and the Netherlands, make 
clear that any electronic records system must be able to be 
accessed and updated on a wide range of smart mobile 
devices, because by definition, providers of care and 
services are constantly traveling and rarely have timely 
access to computers. If the HCIS had not been “made” 
mobile, the Dutch carers would not have used it.  
Second, any home care electronic records system must 
be able to be seamlessly integrated with other electronic 
health care records systems, e.g., hospital and physician 
practices. Although the information contained in the HCIS 
has been provided to physicians and other health care 
specialists in both the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, 
the system itself has not been linked to other electronic 
records systems. Discussions were held in 2009 with 
representatives of the participating care organizations about 
developing, if not full integration, linkage between various 
electronic records systems—health and fiscal—and the 
HCIS. At this time, such linking was premature, but it is 
clear that the full potential of any home care electronic 
health record system will not be achieved without its 
integration with other electronic health records. How and 
when this will occur depends largely on the wider 
acceptance of systems such as the HCIS. Once home care 
systems are widely used their integration with other 
electronic systems will take place rather quickly. 
Third, any home care electronic records system must be 
flexible enough to be used with a variety of pervasive health 
care applications. The HCIS has been completely integrated 
with QuietCare®, a behavioral monitoring system, in the 
Netherlands and, although the project did not materialize, it 
was designed to be used with a vital signs monitoring 
system. The value of the HCIS as a means of recording the 
care actions and health outcomes brought about by alerts 
generated by QuietCare® indicate that the full potential of 
any monitoring system will not be achieved without some 
type of electronic records component. Consequently, the 
further development of pervasive health care applications 
for use in the home must incorporate some type of 
electronic records system or they will remain little more 
than passive emergency response systems [6, 11]. 
However, if home care electronic record systems are to 
achieve their full potential their use cannot be restricted to 
only pervasive health care applications, but they must be 
able to function as stand-alones. Demographics clearly 
indicate that the population that can benefit significantly 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

from the use of pervasive health care applications is 
relatively small and that the vast majority of individuals 
receiving care and services in their homes will never have 
the need for such systems. And yet, the amount of care the 
majority of individuals living in their own homes needs will 
continue to increase and thus, the need to have a means of 
recording the care and services continues to grow. The need 
for any home care electronic records system to be able to 
stand alone became apparent during my work in the 
Netherlands and the HCIS has been modified so that it can 
be used without a monitoring system being installed. As yet, 
no test of the stand-alone capability of the HCIS has been 
undertaken, but discussions with several potential partners 
are on-going. 
Finally, the need for any home care electronic records 
system to operate as a stand-alone raises the final design 
issue—the requirement that any system be able to be used 
for self-management, especially the self-management of 
chronic diseases. Once again, the demographic trends 
indicate that as the populations of all industrial societies 
increase, the number of individuals with chronic diseases, 
e.g., congestive heart disease, diabetes, will skyrocket. The 
need for these individuals, particularly at the early stages of 
the disease, to manage their health while living at home, is 
essential for the financial stability of every national health 
care system. An at-home electronic health care record is 
ideally suited for this purpose because, not only can it be 
used to track the disease state itself by recording and 
analyzing essential conditions, i.e., blood glucose level, it 
also can be used to chronicle specifics about care provided 
by both informal and formal carers. These issues have been 
discussed elsewhere [6], how the use of the HCIS has 
brought about a coordination of care among different formal 
and informal carers in studies in the United States, the 
United Kingdom and the Netherlands. These findings 
suggest that one of the more significant contributions of 
electronic home care records systems will be their ability to 
adapt to the ever changing care needs of individuals.  
Although achieving the above design imperatives does 
not guarantee the successful creation and use of home care 
electronic records systems, ignoring these issues certainly 
increases the probability of failure. Unfortunately, there is 
no single road map to developing a successful home care 
electronic records system, but if one can learn from the 
adoption process of institutional and physician practice 
systems, the path will be long, expensive and difficult. 
However, as the past has also shown, the gains from 
undertaking the effort to create and implement electronic 
records systems are well worth the effort. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. Ashish, C. DesRoches, E. Campbell, K. Doneian, S. Rao, 
and T. Ferris, “Use of electronic health records in U.S. 
hospitals”, NEJM, vol. 360, pp. 1628-1638, 2009. 
[2] D. Ludwick and J. Doucette, “Adopting electronic medical 
records in primary care: Lessons learned from health 
information systems implementation experience in seven 
countries”, International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 
78, pp. 22-31, 2009. 
[3] National Association for Home Care & Hospice, “Basic 
statistics 
about 
home 
care 
updated 
2010”, 
http://www.nahc.org, 2010. 
[4] A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, “A care informatics approach to 
telehomecare applications”, in The Handbook of Research on 
IT Management and Clinical Data Administration in 
Healthcare, A. Dwivedi, Ed., Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing, 
2009, pp. 368-382. 
[5] A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, “The impact of behavioral 
monitoring technology on the provision of health care in the 
home”, JUCS, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 59-79, 2006. 
[6] A. Glascock, “A conflicted view of telehomecare after a 20 
year journey”,  Amsterdam: IOS Press, in press. 
[7] D. Kutzik and A. Glascock, “An Evidentiary Report of 
QuietCare®: Selfhelp Community Services”, unpublished. 
[8] A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, “An Evidentiary Study of the 
Uses of Automated Behavioral Monitoring”, in Conference 
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Advanced 
Information Networking and Applications, Niagara Falls, 
Ontario, Canada, vol. 2, pp. 858–862, 2007. 
[9] A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, “From Sensors to Informatics: 
Creating Communication Protocols for Caregiving, in 
Proceedings of the 3rd IET Conference on Intelligent 
Environments, Ulm, Germany, pp. 325-332, 2007. 
[10] C. Willems, M. Spreeuwenberg, L. Heide, A. Glascock, D. 
Kutzik, and L. de Witre, “Activity monitoring to support 
independent living in Dutch homecare support”. Everyday 
Technology for Independence and Care, G. Gelderblom, et 
al., Ed., Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2011, pp. 145-151. 
[11] A. Glascock, “Moving beyond technology: The dispatcher, 
responders and informatics”. Essential Lessons for the 
Success of Telehomecare, A. Glascock and D. Kutzik, Eds., 
Amsterdam: 
IOS 
Press, 
2012, 
pp. 
45-62.
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

