Personas: The Linking Pin in Holistic Design for eHealth 
 
Lex van Velsen, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen, Nicol 
Nijland 
Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
{l.s.vanvelsen; j.vangemertpijnen; 
n.nijland}@utwente.nl 
Desirée Beaujean, Jim van Steenbergen 
Centre for Infectious Disease Control 
National Institute for Public Health and the 
Environment 
Bilthoven, the Netherlands 
{desiree.beaujean; jim.van.steenbergen}@rivm.nl
 
 
Abstract— Personas, lively descriptions of distinctive user 
groups for a technology, have the potential to be a useful tool 
for designing useful and usable eHealth services. In this paper 
we discuss the role of personas in a holistic design approach for 
eHealth: the CeHRes roadmap. We show, using the case of a 
mobile tick and Lyme tool, how one can develop personas and 
how one can use these personas in future design efforts. We 
argue that they can be useful for creating requirements and 
eHealth design, can be the basis for the development of 
scenarios that guide problem analysis with stakeholders, and 
finally, can inform both formative and summative evaluations. 
Keywords-Personas; 
Holistic 
Design; 
Human-Centered 
Design; Business Modeling 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since their introduction, personas have rapidly gained 
popularity as an important tool for inspiring technology 
design. Originally, personas have been defined as 
“hypothetical archetypes of actual users” [1]. They are a set 
of fictitious persons, each one typical for a group of people, 
who will, potentially, use a new technology. Traditionally, 
personas are presented by means of a short biography with a 
photo and the goals they hope to achieve by means of the 
technology. Such descriptions can be quite detailed, 
including, for example, hobbies and the breed and name of 
the dog that the persona has for a pet. They are used by a 
technology development team to get a good grasp of the 
different user groups (in a way they are a short 
summarization of a user group’s distinctive characteristics), 
as inspiration for design and, finally, to engage the design 
team members [2]. 
Within the context of electronic health (eHealth) design, 
personas have been used in several projects, including the 
development of electronic patient records [3], a public 
website with cancer-related information [4], a digital 
assistant for nurses [5], and a handheld device to monitor 
chronic heart failure [6]. These publications, however, do not 
provide detailed, hands-on guidance for developing and 
utilizing personas for eHealth. An important step forward in 
systematic use of personas in eHealth was made by LeRouge 
and colleagues [7]. Illustrated by the design process of a 
mobile self-management tool for diabetes patients, they 
document the development, use and usefulness of personas 
for eHealth in detail. However, all the aforementioned 
studies focus only on the use of personas in a human-
centered approach towards design, thereby ignoring the 
business model that needs to be created if one wants an 
eHealth technology to be sustainable as well. In this paper, 
we discuss the development, use and usefulness of personas 
in a holistic design approach towards eHealth, which 
incorporates both human-centered design and business 
modeling. 
We 
illustrate 
this 
discussion 
using 
the 
development of a mobile tool for preventing and treating tick 
bites, in order to prevent Lyme disease. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
2, we discuss the CeHRes (center for eHealth research) 
roadmap, a holistic design approach for eHealth, which will 
form the basis of the mobile ‘tick tool’ development, and in 
which we embed the use of personas. In Section 3 we 
introduce the design case used to illustrate our use of 
personas, followed by the procedure we applied to determine 
and understand the most prominent user groups, and to 
create personas. To conclude this section, we outline how we 
have used these personas and will use them in future design 
activities. We complete this paper with a reflection on the 
use of personas in the development process and an outline of 
future work. 
II. 
HOLISTIC DESIGN FOR EHEALTH 
A. CeHRes Roadmap 
The development of technology (be it in the context of 
health, government, or somewhere else) can be guided by 
means of several design approaches. Human-centered 
design, which advocates the systematic, continuous 
consultation of potential users, from as early in the design 
process on [8], is one such approach. It has been found to 
have positive effects on the final system; for example, it 
prevents the inclusion of superfluous features and increases 
user acceptance [9]. Another approach, business modeling, 
focuses on generating a good fit between the technology in 
development on the one side, and organizational resources 
and capabilities on the other side, in order to create a viable 
technology [10]. 
The CeHRes roadmap is a framework that guides the 
design of eHealth applications [11]. It incorporates both a 
human-centered design, and a business modeling approach. 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 1 displays the roadmap and shows the five main 
phases in the development process: 
1. Contextual inquiry. In the first phase, the design team 
must get an understanding of prospective users and 
their context, and analyze the strong and weak points of 
the current provision of care. 
2. Value specification. Next, it is determined which 
values the different stakeholders deem important. These 
values and prospective users’ needs and wishes need to 
be translated into functional, organizational and 
technical requirements 
3. Design. Based on the requirements, (a prototypical 
version of) the technology is developed. The 
framework advocates the application of cooperative 
design in which the design team creates the technology 
with prospective users and stakeholders together. 
4. Operationalization. At this moment the technology is 
launched, marketing plans are set into motion, and 
organizational working procedures are put into practice. 
5. Summative 
evaluation. 
Finally, 
the 
eHealth 
technology is evaluated: How is it being used and what 
is its effect on patients and healthcare? 
The CeHRes roadmap should not be seen as a waterfall 
process, but is iterative in nature: formative evaluations 
should be conducted continuously. Each phase comes with a 
set of design and evaluation tools that can be deployed, but 
their suitability depends on the situation at hand. A complete 
overview of these tools and their uses can be found at [12]. 
B. Personas as Linking Pin in the CeHRes roadmap 
Within the holistic approach to eHealth design that the 
Figure 2.  CeHRes roadmap 
Figure 1.  Personas in the CeHRes roadmap 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I.  
EXCERPTS OF TABLE DESCRIBING INTERVIEW RESULTS AND TRANSLATION TO PERSONA: THE ONE THAT DOESN’T CARE 
Interview segment 
The one that doesn’t care 
Sample quote 
Translation to persona 
Knowledge of ticks and 
Lyme disease 
Widespread: some people 
know nothing, some people 
know a lot. For persona 
‘medium knowledge’ is used. 
Woman: “yes, a bug that sucks blood out of 
you. It will get stuck to your skin and then it 
will suck your blood I believe.” 
Daughter: “And then it squirts something 
back and then you become ill from that. 
Then you get Crohn’s disease? [interviewee 
thinks] No, Lyme disease.” 
Woman: “It will probably have something 
like clawlike teeth. And I think something’s 
in there. […] It’s about the head, that should 
come out. Because there’s something in it. 
And when you’ve done that, you have to 
see whether you get this little circle. You 
have to keep an eye on it. And when this 
little circle turns up you have to go your GP 
immediately.” 
But he does know some things about the 
bug. He knows that it’s an insect that bites 
and sucks your blood. He also knows it can 
give you Lyme disease. Finally, he thinks 
that ticks fall down on you from trees 
Dealing with tick bites 
Have different strategies for 
dealing with tick bites: 
 
Removing themselves 
with (tick)pliers 
 
Visiting a doctor 
Man: “Well, we have these tick pliers, so I 
think I’d give it a shot. To get it out.” 
Interviewer: “Do you have these?” [shows 
tick pliers] 
Man: “Yes. Although I’d need the 
description to find out what is the best way 
to do that.” 
 
Man: “yes, I’ve understood that you need to 
visit your GP then.” 
Interviewer: “So you’d call your GP?” 
Man: “Yes. Not at first of course. When 
you’re bitten you’re not sure. It could of 
course also be a mosquito bite.” 
and that if you’re bitten you should visit 
your GP to get the tick removed. 
 
CeHRes roadmap is, personas can play an important role. 
They can serve as inspiration for functional design and 
interface & interaction design, but they can also be used to 
reflect on the existing organizational structures behind care 
(e.g., by letting stakeholders discuss a persona’s journey 
through healthcare for a given situation, thereby identifying 
weak and strong points). As such, the use of personas and the 
CeHRes roadmap to develop eHealth technology serve as a 
catalyst for change in health care: New care through new 
technology. 
Figure 2 shows how we have embedded personas within 
the CeHRes roadmap. We would like to stress that this is not 
the only possible strategy for using personas, nor is it 
necessarily the best way for doing so. Whether and how one 
should use or develop personas depends on the design 
context and the means available to the design team. That 
being said, we think that the role we have assigned to 
personas, both in the roadmap and the case study, ensures 
that the resulting personas are valid and that their usefulness 
is maximized. 
The development of the personas is based upon a risk 
analysis to determine the most important user groups for the 
new eHealth technology, and interviews with members from 
these user groups. These personas, combined with scenarios 
(fictitious anecdotes of a persona experiencing an illness and 
the associated healthcare) will then be used as input during a 
stakeholder session that has the goal to reflect on the existing 
care delivery process and to eventually alter this practice. 
They also serve as input for the requirements engineering 
and actual design of the new eHealth technology and the 
evaluation thereof. 
III. 
FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE: THE CASE OF DESIGNING 
A MOBILE TICK TOOL 
Lyme Borreliosis is an infectious disease caused by Borrelia 
spp. and transmitted to humans by a bite from an infected 
tick. In 2006-2007, 1.1 million citizens (out of a population 
of 16 million) in the Netherlands were bitten at least once by 
a tick [13]. This number is in line with a trend that shows 
that the number of tick bites and infections with tick-borne 
diseases is increasing in the last decades. 
In order to end this trend and to prevent the contraction 
of Lyme disease, a novel approach to alerting citizens to the 
dangers of tick bites, and how to deal with these insects was 
needed. It was decided to create a new intervention by 
following the CeHRes roadmap. The use of mobile 
technology was introduced as a technology push. As people 
are mostly confronted with ticks on locations away from 
home (e.g., forests or dunes), it was posited that people 
would benefit from information and instructions provided on 
site. 
The design team consisted of two experts on eHealth 
development and two experts in the field of infectious 
disease control. Furthermore, four local health authorities (in 
Dutch: GGD) were committed to the project and invested 
time and effort in the recruitment of participants and 
contributed their thoughts during the development process.
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
TABLE II.  
EXCERPTS OF TABLE DESCRIBING INTERVIEW RESULTS AND TRANSLATION TO PERSONA: THE ONE THAT CHECKS 
Interview segment 
The one that checks 
Sample quote 
Translation to persona 
Knowledge of ticks and 
Lyme disease 
Medium to high knowledge 
of ticks and Lyme disease 
Woman: “They are these little bugs. You 
don’t see them very well. You have a 
chance of being bitten by one when you go 
walking in the forest. I don’t know whether 
there are any other places […] but for sure 
where there are trees. So you can be bitten 
by one. Not only humans, animals as well. 
And if it stays stuck for too long, then 
there’s a chance you become ill. Then you 
get Lyme disease and that’s a big drama. So 
you have make sure you get it out on time.” 
By now, Anouk also knows some things 
about ticks. She knows that you can get a 
tick bite when walking in the forest and that 
it can make you very ill. So she thinks it’s 
very important to find a tick bite as soon as 
possible. 
 
Dealing with tick bites 
Will remove the tick 
themselves with (tick)pliers 
Woman: “Remove them myself” 
Interviewer: “And how would you do that?” 
Man: “You have these special devices you 
can put on them.” 
Interviewer: “Do you have one of those at 
home?” 
Man: “My parents used to have one. But 
since I live together we don’t have those. 
Maybe a good idea to get one of those 
sometime.” 
Should she find a tick that has bitten, then 
she would remove it herself using tick 
pliers. 
At the moment of writing, the development process for 
the mobile tick tool has not been completed. We have 
completed the development of the personas and are 
preparing the stakeholder meeting which will use the 
personas as input for rethinking the prevention and care 
activities for Lyme disease. We will discuss this in more 
detail in Section III D. 
A. Determining user groups 
The first step in the development of our personas was to 
determine the primary user groups for the mobile tick tool. 
Therefore, the four Local Health Authorities conducted a risk 
analysis: they identified the groups of people that were most 
at risk of contracting Lyme disease as a result of a tick bite 
and that would be most susceptible towards persuasive 
efforts. The risk analysis was based upon a systematic 
procedure for risk determination for infection prevention 
[14]. This procedure, on its turn, was developed using a 
literature review, Dutch national infection prevention 
guidelines, practical experience, and previously published 
procedures for risk determination. 
The risk analysis identified three primary user groups: 
Recreationists, children, and green professionals (e.g., 
gardeners and foresters). We decided to create one mobile 
application for recreationists and children, as these groups 
partly overlap (people that spend a lot of time outdoors may 
do this with their children). For green professionals we will 
develop a separate specific mobile tick application in 
collaboration with occupational health experts. In this paper, 
we will now focus on the development of the personas for 
the primary user group ‘recreationists’ only. 
B. Interviewing the primary user group 
In 
order 
to 
understand 
our 
primary 
user 
group 
‘recreationists,’ and the designated context of use, we 
conducted 15 semi-structured interviews. The interview 
protocol was based upon the overview of persona attributes 
by [7]. It consisted of three main parts. The first part, 
demographics focused on interviewee characteristics, such 
as age, family situation, etc. The second part, healthcare 
specifics, zoomed in on the interviewee’s knowledge of 
ticks and Lyme disease, how they deal with ticks and tick 
bites (including checking for tick bites), their attitudes 
towards possible information sources for tick- and Lyme 
related information, their stance towards preventive 
measures, and finally, the frequency with which they visit 
risk areas. The last issue was questioned by asking 
interviewees to state how often they visited risk areas, 
identified in [15, 16]. In the last part of the interview, 
technical specifics were discussed. Interviewees were asked 
about their skills, possession of mobile technology, wishes 
and expectations regarding a mobile tick tool and a web-
based variant, and finally, in which situation they would use 
these technologies. As the interviews were semi-structured, 
the interviewer was allowed to discuss interesting issues that 
came up during the interview. 
The interview participants were recruited by two Local 
Health Authorities (one in a high endemic, and one in a low 
endemic area) and consisted of persons receiving 
vaccinations for international travel. This group of people 
can be assumed to be frequent recreationists. All interviews 
took place at the Local Health Authority office; right before 
or after the interviewees received their vaccinations. Some 
interviews were conducted with individuals, some with pairs 
of people (e.g., husband and wife). Each interviewee 
received a gift voucher for their participation. Prior to the 
interview, the interviewer explained the goal of the 
interview, explained that the interviewee would remain 
anonymous, and obtained permission for making an audio 
recording. Each interviewee then signed an informed 
consent form. An average interview lasted 30 minutes. 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

There is no set procedure for translating interview data 
into personas. We transcribed the interviews and then 
analyzed using Atlas.ti 6.2 by classifying each comment 
under the applicable category in the persona attributes 
overview, as suggested by [7]. Then, we created an 
overview, displaying each interviewee’s response to the 
most important attributes.  
C. Personas for a public mobile Lyme tool 
From the overview with interviewees’ responses it became 
clear that there were two distinctive groups of people and 
that we should create two personas. The first persona we 
called the one that doesn’t care. This persona 
corresponded with the answers of 12 interviewees, making it 
our primary persona. In short, this persona is not really 
concerned about ticks or Lyme disease, does not visit risk 
areas often, does not check for ticks, and intends to use 
technology only when being confronted with a tick bite. Our 
second persona, the one that checks, was represented by 3 
interviewees, making it our secondary persona. This person 
has experience with being bitten by a tick, often visits risk 
areas, (almost) always checks for ticks, and will use 
technology to read about ticks out of curiosity. 
In order to create the persona biographies, we created 
two tables (one for each persona) in which we listed relevant 
interview segments, how the group of interviewees 
representing a persona responded, typical quotes, and finally, 
the section of the persona biography that represents this 
interview result. In Table 1 and 2 we provide excerpts from 
these tables for the two different personas. 
Figure 3 shows our persona for the one that doesn’t care. 
We have given this persona a name, Mark, and added a 
picture to the biography to make it livelier. Each sentence in 
the persona description corresponds to a finding from the 
interviews. 
 
D. Using personas in the development process 
Writing the biographies of our personas marked the end of 
persona development. At the moment of writing, we now 
enter the stage of utilizing personas in our holistic design 
process. There are, in our view, a variety of ways for 
benefiting from these user representations which we will 
use in the design of our mobile tick tool. 
First, personas will be used to inspire the creation of 
requirements, as well as functional and interface & 
interaction design of prototypical versions of the mobile 
tick tool. The design team must question the usefulness 
and appearance of the design with the different personas 
in mind. Is this function one Mark or Anouk (the 
secondary persona) would use? Will Mark and Anouk 
understand the explanations about Lyme disease that are 
published on this website? Furthermore, the personas, and 
especially their disposition towards preventing tick bites 
and checking for tick bites, will be used as a basis for 
persuasive design. It is towards these attitudes that 
Figure 3. Persona Mark 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

persuasive strategies, as implemented in the mobile tick 
tool need to be geared [17]. 
Second, personas will serve as the basis for the 
creation of scenarios describing a typical case of getting a 
tick bite and consequently, contracting an Erythema 
Migrans (a frequent first, innocent sign of Lyme disease). 
These scenarios will also be inspired by interviews we 
held with people that contracted Lyme disease, and their 
stories. These scenarios will be presented to stakeholders 
(identified on the basis of the prevention and care protocol 
for Lyme disease in the Netherlands) such as GPs, Local 
Health Authorities and tourist services in high endemic 
areas. By means of these scenarios we wish to stimulate a 
discussion about the strong and weak points of the current 
prevention and care path for tick bites and an Erythema 
Migrans (problem analysis in Figure 2). The identified 
problems can then be tackled through the design of the 
mobile tick tool and the business model that accompanies 
it. As a result, personas will also serve a role in the 
business modeling track of the design process. 
Third and finally, personas will influence the design 
of the evaluations that will be conducted throughout the 
design process. During formative evaluations (conducted 
in order to receive redesign input), personas will be used 
when recruiting evaluation participants, as suggested by 
[2]. It is also possible to use personas for cognitive 
walkthroughs. In this case, experts can be asked to look at 
a prototype and to determine whether they can find 
redesign issues, asking themselves questions like: Would 
Mark understand what he is looking at? Could Anouk use 
this function successfully and satisfactorily? With regard 
to the summative evaluation of the mobile Lyme tool, the 
personas will be used to select the proper evaluation 
criteria, especially when it comes to the persuasive effect 
of the mobile tick tool. Persuasive goals and strategies 
need to be set according to each persona and need to be 
evaluated accordingly. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper we have discussed how one can develop and 
utilize personas for eHealth within the context of an 
holistic design approach. Personas can be the linking pin 
in the development process of eHealth. They serve as 
lively summarizations of user groups, can inform design, 
and finally, inspire problem analysis activities with 
stakeholders. Therefore, we can only encourage eHealth 
developers to look seriously into the possibilities for 
utilizing personas in their development processes. In the 
future, we will complete the design of the mobile Lyme 
tool, following the CeHRes roadmap and utilizing the 
personas where applicable.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the local health authorities of 
West-Brabant and Zeeland for their cooperation. We 
especially want to thank Angelique Maat for her 
enthusiasm and great help during the recruitment of 
participants. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Cooper, The inmates are running the asylum. Why high-tech 
products drive us crazy and how to restore the sanity. Indianapolis: 
SAMS, 1999. 
[2] 
J. Pruitt and T. Adlin, The persona lifecycle. Keeping people in 
mind throughout product design. Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, 2006. 
[3] 
K. Bredies, "Using system analysis and personas for e-Health 
interaction design," presented at the Design research society 
conference, Sheffield, UK, 2008. 
[4] 
L. Goldberg, et al., "Usability and accessibility in consumer health 
informatics," American Journal of Preventive Medicine, vol. 40, 
pp. 187-197, 2011. 
[5] 
L. Spinhof and L. Calvi, "User and task analysis in a home care 
environment," presented at the 20th international symposium on 
human factors in telecommunication, Sofia Antipolis, France, 
2006. 
[6] 
E. Villalba, et al., "User interaction design for a wearable and IT 
based heart failure system," presented at the 12th international 
conference on human-computer interaction, Beijing, China, 2007. 
[7] 
C. LeRouge, et al., "User profiles and personas in the design and 
development of consumer health technologies," International 
Journal of Medical Informatics, in press. 
[8] 
J. D. Gould and C. Lewis, "Designing for usability: key principles 
and what designers think," Communications of the ACM, vol. 28, 
pp. 300-311, 1985. 
[9] 
S. Kujala, "User involvement: a review of the benefits and 
challenges," Behaviour & information technology, vol. 22, pp. 1-
16, 2003. 
[10] T. Spil and B. Kijl, "E-health business models: From pilot project 
to successful deployment," IBIMA business review, vol. 1, pp. 55-
66, 2009. 
[11] N. Nijland, "Grounding eHealth: Towards a holistic framework for 
sustainable eHealth technologies," Dept. of Psychology, Health 
and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands, 
2011. 
[12] Center for eHealth research and disease management. (2011). 
eHealtwiki. Available: http://www.ehealthwiki.org 
[13] A. Hofhuis, et al., "Ziekte van Lyme in Nederland 1994-2009 
[Lyme disease in the Netherlands 1994-2009]," Infectieziekten 
bulletin, vol. 21, pp. 84-87, 2010. 
[14] F. Konings, "Risico-inventarisatie bruikbaar instrument voor 
infectiepreventie [Risk inventory useful instrument for infection 
prevention]," Infectieziekten bulletin, vol. 21, pp. 124-127, 2010. 
[15] P. R. Wielinga, et al., "Longitudinal Analysis of Tick Densities and 
Borrelia, Anaplasma, and Ehrlichia Infections of Ixodes ricinus 
Ticks in Different Habitat Areas in The Netherlands," Applied 
environmental Microbiology, vol. 72, pp. 7594-7601, 2006. 
[16] F. Konings, et al., "Effectieve preventie van tekenbeten [Effective 
prevention of tick bites]," GGD West-Brabant, Breda2009. 
[17] H. Oinas-Kukkonen, "Behavior change support systems: The next 
frontier for web science," presented at WebSci10: Extending the 
frontiers of society on-line, Raleigh, NC, USA, 2010. 
 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

