Patient-Centred Healthcare Team 
Work Practice, Experiences, and Estimated Benefits
Trine S Bergmo 
Norwegian Centre for e-Health Research  
University Hospital of North Norway  
Tromsø, Norway  
Email: Trine.Bergmo@telemed.no  
Anne Grethe Olsen, Johanne Aasen, Monika Dalbakk 
Grete Jakobsen, Torunn I Johansen, Stian 
Kristoffersen, Veronica Sørensen 
Division of Internal Medicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
Email: {Anne.Grethe.Olsen, Monika.Dalbakk, 
Johanne.Aasen, Grete.Jakobsen, Torunn.Irene.Johansen, 
Stian.Kristoffersen, Veronica.Sørensen}@unn.no 
Birgitte Aabotsvik, Monika Eriksen, Elisabeth Kollnes 
Marte F Larsen, Hege Mathisen 
Community Nursing Service  
Tromsø Municipality  
Tromsø, Norway 
Email: {Birgitte.Aabotsvik, Monika.Eriksen, 
Elisabeth.Kollnes, Marte.Finanger.Larsen, 
Hege.Mathisen}@tromso.kommune.no 
Stine Haustreis  
Hospital Pharmacy North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
Email: Stine.Haustreis@sykehusapotek-nord.no 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The University Hospital of North Norway and 
the Community Nursing Service in Tromsø Municipality 
established an integrated patient-centred care model to 
improve the continuity and quality of care for multimorbid 
older patients living in the region. The model includes a 
proactive interdisciplinary team providing outreach services 
supported by m-health technologies. The team consists of 
healthcare personnel from the Community Nursing Service 
and the hospital. The main aim is to help the patients get the 
needed hospital care, ensure safe discharge, provide support in 
the home environment, and prevent unnecessary hospital 
admissions. This paper describes the mobile team’s work 
practices and the information exchange process across two 
different levels of care. Furthermore, we analysed changes in 
treatment plans and estimated avoided hospitalisations. This is 
a prospective registration study supplemented with focus 
group discussions. This paper reports preliminary results from 
the first 98 patients the team handled. 
 
Keywords—Geriatrics, 
integrated 
care, 
patient 
centeredness, interdisciplinary teamwork, e-health, mobile 
health, safe discharge, avoided hospitalisation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Division of Internal Medicine at the University 
Hospital of North Norway (UNN) and the community 
service providers at the administration in the municipality of 
Tromsø initiated an integrated patient-centred outreach 
service to improve the continuity and quality of care for 
multimorbid older adults in the region. Mobile, proactive, 
and patient-centred interdisciplinary teams were established, 
which include personnel from the Community Nursing 
Service and the hospitals in Tromsø and Harstad. Their main 
task is to follow patients through the system, helping them 
receive appropriate, patient-centred, and timely healthcare 
services when needed at the most appropriate location. This 
also includes providing support at home to minimise hospital 
admissions. The patient-centred healthcare team (hereafter 
“the team”) is funded as a cost-sharing collaboration between 
the municipalities and hospitals. As part of this large-scale 
intervention, a project evaluating effectiveness and cost 
effectiveness in a prospective matched control before-and-
after study is underway. This study will start recruiting 
patients in June 2016. The protocol describing this research 
study is published elsewhere [1]. 
In this paper, we focus on the team established in 
Tromsø. The first test patients were referred to the team in 
October 2014. Approximately 300 patients were referred to 
the team in 2015. The team is now part of the everyday 
clinical practice. The team’s work represents a new service 
model that is organised and works between primary and 
secondary care, producing new relations and work practices. 
The service model is not built around and driven by e-health 
technologies; rather, it uses ICT and mobile devices 
extensively 
to 
support 
team 
work 
by 
improving 
communication and facilitating information exchange 
between health providers and between patients and providers. 
We will describe the patient-centred outreach model, 
including the team’s work practice, experiences, and 
challenges during its first year. Furthermore, we will report 
some preliminary results for the first 98 patients.  
This paper is structured as follows: Section II provides 
the background and includes an overview of the local context 
and use of an interdisciplinary team in clinical work. Section 
III outlines the material and research setting. Section IV 
describes the method used in this study. Section V reports 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

some preliminary results. Section VI discusses implications 
and limitations. Finally, conclusions and future work are 
discussed in Section VII.  
II. 
BACKGROUND  
The proportion of older people is rapidly increasing. It is 
estimated that the number of people over 67 years old in 
Norway will continue to increase by 13 000 annually. This 
demographic will nearly double from 624 000 in 2010 to 1.5 
million in 2060, accounting for 22% of the total population 
[2]. The older population tends to have more health 
problems. More than 80% of individuals over 65 years old 
have one or more chronic conditions [3]. Individuals with 
multiple chronic conditions are also more likely to be 
hospitalised [4]. 
The effective management of acutely ill and complex 
patients with multiple conditions poses one of the greatest 
challenges in current hospital care [5]. Furthermore, 
healthcare utilization and costs increase significantly with an 
increasing number of chronic conditions [6]. One way to 
improve the management of multimorbid older adults is to 
implement integrated care models. Integrated care models 
were developed in response to fragmented and reactive care 
systems and a lack of patient involvement. One way to 
improve patient involvement and achieve more patient-
centred care is to establish interdisciplinary teams [7]. 
Interdisciplinary teamwork offers an integrated approach 
to providing coordinated healthcare patients with complex 
long-term needs. This has been considered a good practice 
for more than two decades [8]. Evidence also suggests that 
interdisciplinary teamwork can improve the quality of care 
[9-13]. Well integrated models have been found to improve 
the process of care and could reduce hospitalisation and 
community service use [9]. Teamwork may also improve 
prescription and medication adherence [10].  
The UNN and the community service providers at the 
municipality have jointly established an interdisciplinary 
patient-centred team to improve the quality of care for older 
multimorbid patients in the Tromsø area. This was mainly to 
improve the quality of care, reduce hospitalisations and cut 
costs. The team includes personnel from the Community 
Nursing Service and the hospital.  
 
 
Figure 1. The University Hospital of North Norway 
 
The UNN is the leading healthcare provider and health 
trust in North Norway. It serves as the local hospital for 
Troms County residents and other parts of Nordland, 
providing a full range of hospital functions (see Figure 1). 
The Municipality of Tromsø, which is the host for the 
hospital, is the largest in the area. It has a population of 
72 000. The Municipality is responsible for ensuring good 
and proper health and care services at the primary care level 
to all its residents. These health and care services include 
childcare, preventive healthcare, nursing care, medical 
services, rehabilitation, and social services. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND RESEARCH SETTING 
 
In this section, we present the integrated patient-centred 
care model, its structure, and the team’s work practice. 
A. The patient-centred healthcare team model 
The patient-centred healthcare team represents a mobile, 
seamless, and proactive model that aims to ensure safe 
discharge and prevent hospital admissions for older patients 
with multiple conditions. The team’s main task is to follow 
patients through the system and help them receive 
appropriate and timely healthcare services when needed at 
the most appropriate location. The team identifies and 
assesses care needs early, provides support during discharge 
and follow-up, facilitates coordination and integrated 
services, and provides home-based services by actively 
monitoring, supporting, and caring for patients outside the 
hospital until adequate follow-up services are in place. This 
could reduce unplanned hospital admissions, reduce the need 
for community services, and improve or prevent deterioration 
in health and functional outcomes.   
The patients will actively be involved in the care and self-
management process. The team will identify patient goals, 
assess home situations, and facilitate individual tailored care 
plans and follow-up protocols. Such patient involvement and 
engagement in care has been shown to improve health and 
functional outcomes [14].  
B. The team structure 
The interdisciplinary patient-centred care model is a 
complex intervention that delivers collaborative care focused 
on care coordination. The team has two separate focus areas: 
a pre-hospital focus and a safe discharge focus. The former 
targets patients living at home. The latter addresses 
hospitalised patients. The core team consists of the team 
leader and two full-time coordinators (both geriatric nurses). 
One coordinator comes from the hospital, and the other is 
selected from the Community Nursing Service. The core 
team is responsible for daily teamwork management and 
ensuring patients receive appropriate and timely support and 
services. The core team seeks to:  
• 
Understand which professionals providing care and 
services are currently available, 
• 
Develop joint work to enable services integration, 
• 
Encourage a proactive and structured assessment of 
patients goals and needs, 
• 
Facilitate understanding and ensure the use of 
personal and advance care plans, 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

• 
Act as a central resource for the health and social 
care professionals, both within the team and across 
the municipality and hospital sectors. 
 
The wider interdisciplinary team includes hospital and 
community personnel and consists of ten positions. These 
include one geriatric specialist (senior consultant), two 
nurses, two district nurses, two physiotherapists, two 
occupational therapists, and one pharmacist. Four of these 
are part-time positions. 
C. Team work practice 
The structure and organisation of the service model cover 
complex areas, such as patient and information logistics. 
Patient logistics include regulating the patient flow through 
the system, knowing when and how blockages occur and 
resolving them, using various instruments (such as case 
management, discharge protocols, capacity constraints, and 
home monitoring). Information logistics includes team 
communication, 
information 
exchange, 
and 
patient 
communication.  
The patient-centred model includes four main tasks: to 
identify the patients with special needs for coordinated care; 
to conduct patient-centred need assessments; to facilitate 
individualised care plans and follow-up protocols; and to 
initiate meetings for the coordination and integration of 
patient care across service providers. 
In the first phase after the start-up, the team actively 
promoted its existence and services by visiting GPs, district 
nurses, other community service providers, and hospital 
wards and clinics. The team has been assigned office space at 
the hospital and scheduled two daily meetings to plan 
activities and discuss patients. Between team meetings, the 
team conducts home visits, visits hospitalised patients, 
attends coordination meetings, assesses patients, and plans 
follow-up activities, writes case reports, and updates patient 
records. The patients are referred to the team by phone, 
electronic referrals, and ordinary mail. Most are inpatients at 
the hospital when they are referred to the team (see Table I). 
The team assesses each patient’s needs based on what the 
patients view as important. The team also assesses the fall 
risk and the need for special aid, reviews medication lists, 
and ensures that the patients’ GPs are informed. Furthermore, 
the team ensures continuity of care in the hospital setting and 
during the transition phase from hospital to home. The team 
is responsible for the patients until adequate follow-up 
services are in place. Figure 2 illustrates the main steps in the 
patient-centred model.  
D. Communication and information exchange  
The team works with hospital inpatients, patients in nursing 
homes, and individuals living at home supported by home 
care. In Norway, the community services and the hospital 
sector have two distinct and separate patient information 
systems. Therefore, the patients referred to the team have 
two different patient records: the hospital’s Distributed 
Information and Patient System for Hospitals (DIPS in 
Norwegian) and Profil, the community services’ patient 
records. 
 
 
Figure 2. The main steps in the patient-centred model. 
 
Ensuring effective day-to-day information exchange 
between team members across these sectors is one of the 
challenges in the project thus far. The team uses two 
different systems to access patient records. Two desktop 
computers are connected to the community service network 
and are used to access patient information in Profil. Three 
computers are connected to the hospital network and are used 
to access the hospital records. All team members have login 
credentials for both systems. To get all the needed patient 
information on one specific patient the team must log on to 
both systems. The team also employs laptops.  
Furthermore, 
the 
team 
uses 
information 
and 
communication technologies to support patient treatment and 
follow-up outside of the hospital. The team members use 
mobile devices (phones and tablets) to communicate outside 
the office. The data security system does not allow them to 
include patient records on the tablets so they must be in 
regular contact with the office to receive updated patient 
information. The tablets are also used to film physiotherapy 
sessions. This facilitates patient exercises at home without in-
person supervision. The films are also used for team 
education and training. The patients can contact the team 
through tablet videoconferences, as well. They make the calls 
through the secure health network using WebRTC 
technology. 
IV. 
METHODS AND RESEARCH APPROACH  
We used a multi-method research approach to evaluate 
the first 98 patients referred to the team. The patients 
included were over 60 years of age with multiple conditions, 
in need of coordinated care and considered to be at risk of 
experiencing adverse health outcomes. Data were gathered in 
a prospective registration study and in focus group 
discussions. For each patient referred to the team, changes in 
treatment plans and services offered were logged. Data were 
also collected from the electronic patient records. Group 
discussions with team members were conducted to support 
and deepen the understanding of the data and how the team 
works. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

A. Registration of the descriptive data 
The descriptive data used in this study were registered in 
two ways:  
1. Each team member consecutively logged data by 
entering information about patients into a pre-
defined registration form. Background variables 
(such as age, sex, total diagnoses, and number of 
hospital admission in the last 12 months), date of 
referral to the team and discharge from the team, 
services provided, and estimated benefits were 
registered in the case form. 
2. The patient records, both from the hospital and the 
community service records, were then used to verify 
the registered data and to include additional missing 
data. Data on re-hospitalisations within 30 days were 
also included. Two of the authors extracted data 
from 
the 
two 
electronic 
record 
systems 
simultaneously, while a third author updated and 
included new data in the registration form.  
B. Focus group discussions 
Focus group discussions can be a useful way to learn 
about the team’s everyday practices. They are helpful in 
reviewing the team’s role as well as technological and 
organisational barriers. Lastly, they can reveal work practice 
dynamics and pinpoint common and different experiences 
among members [15]. Two focus group discussions were 
conducted including all team members. At the first meeting, 
eight team members were present. Nine attended the second 
meeting. Seven attended both meetings. Themes discussed 
included patient integration, case histories, tasks, perceived 
benefits, and the main challenges the team experienced. The 
first discussion lasted approximately one hour; the second 
ran about two hours. The discussions were audio recorded 
and then transcribed.  
C. Ethics  
The implementation of the new team model was defined 
and registered as a quality improvement project at the UNN 
and falls outside the Health Research Act. No approval from 
a regional ethics committee is therefore required. Evaluating 
resources used in such projects do not require patient 
consent. However, the local data protection supervisor did 
approve the project. All data are temporarily stored on a 
secure research server at the UNN. 
 
 
        TABLE I     PATIENTS LOCALISATION AT REFERAL DATE  
Where the patients are located when referred to the team 
Description  
No 
% 
Hospital  
62 
63.3 
Home  
26 
26.5 
Nursing home 
8 
8.2 
Rehabilitation centre 
2 
2.0 
 
 
TABLE II   CHANGES MADE IN TREATMENT AND PLANS 
Changes and plans  
Description  
No 
% 
Increased community services  
70 
71.4 
Offered rehabilitation  
18 
18.4 
Clarified home situation/nursing home  
55 
56.1 
Rapid and complete hospital review  
16 
16.3 
Written follow-up plan completed 
53 
54.1 
     
V. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
In total, 101 patients were included in this study. Three 
did not want to receive services from the team, which left 98 
for analysis. 
The mean age was 80 years, ranging from 54 to 95. The 
patients had 3.5 diagnoses (ranging 0-7 per patients), and 
they had been hospitalised 0 to 9 times (mean 2.5) during the 
last 12 months. Of the patients, 41 were male. Hospital staff 
referred most of the patients to the team (62%). GPs and 
healthcare personnel in the municipality referred the 
remaining patients. Most were inpatients at the time of 
referral (see Table I). 
The team initiated an increase in community services for 
more than 70 percent of the patients. Of these patients, 25% 
were offered rehabilitation. For more than half of the 
patients, the team clarified the home situation and made the 
transition process from the hospital feel safer for the patient. 
Table II shows the changes the team made.  
The team estimated that some of the patients who 
received services avoided a hospital admission (15%) or 
shortened their lengths of stay (15%). Data from the 
electronic patient records at the hospital showed that only 3% 
of the patients handled by the team were readmitted within 
30 days.  
The team members agree that coordination is the most 
important part of their work, which is a service that did not 
exist prior to the team’s establishment. This involves 
engaging the appropriate professionals as soon as possible, 
initiating 
and 
arranging 
meetings, 
and 
creating 
communication channels that include personnel from 
community care services and the hospitals. The first couple 
of days after discharge are critical for positive patient 
outcomes. It is also important that the patients take part in the 
planning process and are informed about available follow-up 
services.  
Some patients are anxious about how they will manage 
on their own after a hospital stay. In situations where they 
have simple and specific needs, one home visit and one 
phone call to the nursing services can be enough to reassure 
the patients. The team emphasised the importance of being 
“interdisciplinary.” The combined expertise that the team 
possesses enables a broad approach to the geriatric field. This 
was essential to ensuring high quality and effective 
integrated and patient-centred services. 
Organisational barriers and the lack of information 
systems between the two levels of care were reported as the 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

main challenges of working in a mobile patient-centred team. 
The team worked across the primary and secondary health 
systems, and this caused some challenges due to the different 
organisational cultures. Existing guidelines and procedures 
within each unit and defined meeting structures did not 
match well with the mobile patient-centred approach. 
Furthermore, two separate EPR systems limited the 
information exchange within the team and between the 
different units and departments. Another challenge was that 
the team could not access the patient records outside the 
office. The team members agreed that resolving some of 
these technical issues would make everyday teamwork more 
effective. 
The smartphones and tablets were in regular use to 
contact the office for information during home visits and 
meetings. Videoconferencing was also used to communicate 
directly with patients. In one situation, videoconferencing 
was used to assess a patient whose condition had 
deteriorated. The team medical doctor spoke directly to the 
patient, and based on this exchange, pursued further action. 
Videoconferencing was also used in leg ulcer treatment, 
where the patient was at home with one of the team nurses 
and consulted an ulcer specialist at the hospital via video 
link. However, most videoconferences have been to 
coordinate health personnel across the different sectors.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION  
In this paper, we described an integrated care model that 
includes 
mobile 
and 
proactive 
patient-centred 
interdisciplinary teamwork. We focused on the team’s work 
practice as well as roles, experiences, and challenges during 
the first year. Furthermore, we analysed changes in treatment 
plans and reported some preliminary results for the first 98 
patients.  
These results show that the team initiated an increase in 
community services for more than 70 percent of the patients. 
Of these patients, 25% were offered rehabilitation. For more 
than half of the patients, the team clarified the home situation 
and thereby made the transition process from hospital to 
home feel safer. Furthermore, we found that only 3% of the 
patients handled by the team were readmitted within 30 days. 
Official statistics from 2013 report that 12.7% of the patients 
over 67 years old were readmitted after a hospital stay in 
Tromsø [16].  
These positive results correspond to other findings 
reported in the literature. One study, for instance, reported 
that multidisciplinary patient-centred intervention offered to 
all patients 60 years or older reduces hospital readmissions 
for the patients who received the service [17]. Another study 
from Sweden reported that patient-centred care is associated 
with reduced the length of hospital stay [18] [19], reduced 
patient anxiety and uncertainty [20], reduced medical 
complications following surgery [21], and cost savings [22].  
To understand the mobile patient-centred team described 
in this paper, it is important to assess how organisational 
issues and communication patterns in two different 
organisational cultures affect the team’s work practice. The 
team realised that working across two different healthcare 
organisations made effective collaboration difficult. To 
facilitate such a change, a new culture must be created that 
supports an integrated patient-centred approach to patient 
care [23]. 
The strengths of the present study are its real-world 
setting 
and 
the 
involvement 
of 
designated 
health 
professionals in designing and developing a patient-centred 
team model. The model was initiated and is solely driven by 
clinical personnel at the hospital and the community services. 
The structure and organization of the team is continuously 
adapted to the clinical and everyday routines at the hospitals 
and in the home care settings. This might increase the 
probability of sustaining the mobile teamwork after the 
project has ended. 
Furthermore, 
the 
project 
boasts 
the 
committed 
engagement of leaders and managers from all three 
healthcare organisations in the area. The community 
services, the GPs, and the hospital are all involved and 
collaborating to improve service integration. This might also 
increase the likelihood of sustaining the team, to expand the 
service to include more municipalities in the region and to 
adapt the service to other patient groups.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
 In this paper, we described an integrated patient-centred 
model that aims to improve the continuity and quality of care 
for multimorbid older patients. The practice model consists 
of a proactive interdisciplinary outreach team, which 
includes personnel from the Community Nursing Service and 
the hospital. The team’s main task is to follow patients 
through the system and help them receive appropriate, 
patient-centred, and timely health services. Preliminary 
results indicate that the team can improve care, shorten 
hospital stays, and reduce hospital admissions.  
At the time of writing this paper, more than 300 patients 
received services from the team. The next step is to further 
develop and adapt the integrated care model and evaluate 
work practices. Specifically, we will evaluate the use of 
tablets in a home setting, both from the patients’ and the 
providers’ perspective. Future work will also include 
analysing effectiveness and cost effectiveness using matched 
controls from two separate hospitals in the region. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We thank the management at the UNN and the 
administration in the Municipality of Tromsø for funding this 
project. The EU-project RemoAge funded the tablets. We 
also thank Markus Rumpsfeld, Gro Berntsen, and Johan 
Gustav Bellika for their contribution to realising the patient-
centred model. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. S. Bergmo, G. K. Berntsen, M. Dalbakk, and M. 
Rumpsfeld, "The effectiveness and cost effectiveness of the 
PAtient-Centred Team (PACT) model: study protocol of a 
prospective matched control before-and-after study," BMC 
Geriatr, vol. 15, p. 133, 2015. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

[2] K. 
K. 
Andreassen, 
"Befolkningens 
størrelse 
og 
aldersfordeling," in Seniorer i Norge, E. Mørk, Ed., ed Oslo: 
Statistics Norway 2010. 
[3] C. Hoffman, D. Rice, and H.-Y. Sung, "Persons with chronic 
conditions: their prevalence and costs," Jama, vol. 276, pp. 
1473-1479, 1996. 
[4] J. L. Wolff, B. Starfield, and G. Anderson, "Prevalence, 
expenditures, 
and 
complications 
of 
multiple 
chronic 
conditions in the elderly," Archives of internal medicine, vol. 
162, pp. 2269-2276, 2002. 
[5] A. Mudge, S. Laracy, K. Richter, and C. Denaro, "Controlled 
trial of multidisciplinary care teams for acutely ill medical 
inpatients: enhanced multidisciplinary care," Intern Med J, 
vol. 36, pp. 558-63, Sep 2006. 
[6] L. G. Glynn, J. M. Valderas, P. Healy, E. Burke, J. Newell, P. 
Gillespie, et al., "The prevalence of multimorbidity in primary 
care and its effect on health care utilization and cost," Family 
Practice, vol. 28, pp. 516-523, Oct 2011. 
[7] T. Richards, A. Coulter, and P. Wicks, "Time to deliver 
patient centred care," BMJ, vol. 350, p. 530, 2015. 
[8] D. P. Baker, R. Day, and E. Salas, "Teamwork as an essential 
component of high-reliability organizations," Health Serv Res, 
vol. 41, pp. 1576-98, Aug 2006. 
[9] D. Trivedi, C. Goodman, H. Gage, N. Baron, F. Scheibl, S. 
Iliffe, et al., "The effectiveness of inter-professional working 
for older people living in the community: a systematic 
review," Health Soc Care Community, vol. 21, pp. 113-28, 
Mar 2013. 
[10] S. M. Smith, H. Soubhi, M. Fortin, C. Hudon, and T. O'Dowd, 
"Interventions for improving outcomes in patients with 
multimorbidity in primary care and community settings," 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev, vol. 4, p. Cd006560, 2012. 
[11] K. M. Ke, J. M. Blazeby, S. Strong, F. E. Carroll, A. R. Ness, 
and W. Hollingworth, "Are multidisciplinary teams in 
secondary care cost-effective? A systematic review of the 
literature," Cost Eff Resour Alloc, vol. 11, p. 7, 2013. 
[12] S. Conroy, C. Ferguson, J. Woodard, and J. Banerjee, 
"Interface geriatrics: evidence-based care for frail older 
people with medical crises," British journal of hospital 
medicine (London, England: 2005), vol. 71, pp. 98-101, 2010. 
[13] F. C. Bakker, S. H. Robben, and M. G. Olde Rikkert, "Effects 
of hospital-wide interventions to improve care for frail older 
inpatients: a systematic review," BMJ Qual Saf, vol. 20, pp. 
680-91, Aug 2011. 
[14] A. Coulter and J. Ellins, "Effectiveness of strategies for 
informing, educating, and involving patients," British Medical 
Journal, vol. 335, p. 24, 2007. 
[15] A. Bowling, Research methods in health: investigating health 
and health services: McGraw-Hill Education (UK), 2014. 
[16]"Kvalitetsindikatorrapport,Helsenorge.no.https://helsenorge.no
/kvalitet-seksjon/Sider/Kvalitetsindikatorer-
rapporter.aspx?kiid=sannsynlighet_for_reinnleggelse_av_eldr
e. Accessed January 2016. " 
[17] P. M. Stranges, V. D. Marshall, P. C. Walker, K. E. Hall, D. 
K. Griffith, and T. Remington, "A multidisciplinary 
intervention for reducing readmissions among older adults in 
a patient-centered medical home," Am J Manag Care, vol. 21, 
pp. 106-13, Feb 2015. 
[18] L. E. Olsson, J. Karlsson, and I. Ekman, "The integrated care 
pathway reduced the number of hospital days by half: a 
prospective comparative study of patients with acute hip 
fracture," J Orthop Surg Res, vol. 1, p. 3, 2006. 
[19] I. Ekman, A. Wolf, L. E. Olsson, C. Taft, K. Dudas, M. 
Schaufelberger, et al., "Effects of person-centred care in 
patients with chronic heart failure: the PCC-HF study," Eur 
Heart J, vol. 33, pp. 1112-9, May 2012. 
[20] K. Dudas, L. E. Olsson, A. Wolf, K. Swedberg, C. Taft, M. 
Schaufelberger, et al., "Uncertainty in illness among patients 
with chronic heart failure is less in person-centred care than in 
usual care," Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs, vol. 12, pp. 521-8, Dec 
2013. 
[21] L. E. Olsson, J. Karlsson, and I. Ekman, "Effects of nursing 
interventions within an integrated care pathway for patients 
with hip fracture," J Adv Nurs, vol. 58, pp. 116-25, Apr 2007. 
[22] L. E. Olsson, E. Hansson, I. Ekman, and J. Karlsson, "A cost-
effectiveness study of a patient-centred integrated care 
pathway," J Adv Nurs, vol. 65, pp. 1626-35, Aug 2009. 
[23] C. A. Orchard, V. Curran, and S. Kabene, "Creating a culture 
for interdisciplinary collaborative professional practice," 
Medical Education Online, vol. 10, 2009. 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

