The Patient Summary Case: Challenges in Archetypes Terminology Binding Using 
SNOMED-CT Compositional Grammar  
Luis Marco-Ruiz 
Norwegian Centre for e-healthresearch 
Tromsø, Norway 
Luis.marco.ruiz@ehealthresearch.no 
Rune Pedersen 
Norwegian Centre for e-healthresearch 
Tromsø, Norway 
Rune.pedersen@ehealthresearch.no
 
Abstract— 
In 
order 
to 
cover 
the 
requirements 
of 
interoperability in the Norwegian context, we studied the 
adequacy of expressing the clinical semantics contained in 
archetypes as terminology expressions using SNOMED-CT´s 
compositional grammar. As a result, we identified important 
challenges categorized as technical, expressivity, human, and 
models mismatch related. Technical challenges include the 
binding of archetype elements to sections of the SNOMED-CT 
expressions that are semantically equivalent, lack of tooling for 
performing guided binding based on pre-defined semantic 
patterns, and lack of guidance about the infrastructure to use 
ontology-based terminologies. Expressivity challenges include 
variations in the precision of the semantics expressed by the 
archetype and the SNOMED-CT models, challenges expressing 
temporal semantics in SNOMED-CT, and lack of mechanisms 
for specifying expressions whose values are only known at 
runtime. Human challenges include lack of guidance to discern 
what to leave represented at archetype level and what to 
project as a terminology expression depending on the 
expressivity requirements, and the need for more clarity about 
which hierarchies and attributes to use when several options 
are available for expressing the same concept.  Model 
mismatch issues were related to the issue of grounding 
(referencing) the sections of one model to the other and clarify 
the role of the context model and in which situations it makes 
sense to annotate archetypes using its verbose expressions. The 
challenges detected show a pressing need for the collaboration 
between 
the 
openEHR 
community 
and 
SNOMED 
International 
for 
providing 
better 
guidelines 
about 
terminology binding, better tooling for facilitating the binding 
process, and developing mechanisms that allow for extending 
SNOMED-CT with other biomedical ontologies in order to 
increase the coverage of archetypes semantics for scenarios 
with high expressivity requirements such as data reuse ones.  
Keywords-openEHR; SNOMED-CT; archetype; terminology 
binding; biomedical ontology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Over more than a decade, health authorities worldwide 
have faced a growing pressure to accomplish smooth 
information flow between systems of health organizations. 
This has led to the adoption of clinical information standards 
and 
their 
use 
in 
combination 
with 
terminologies. 
Terminologies are used both to specify the meaning of the 
sections inside clinical information models (semantic 
binding), and to specify the content of the information 
recorded inside these sections (content binding). However, 
the effort in annotating clinical information models with 
terminologies is often underestimated [1]. In fact, few 
guidelines are available with clear instructions on how 
terminologies should be used in combination with clinical 
information models [2]. For example, when one faces the 
terminology binding of an openEHR archetype, it is not clear 
what elements of the archetype should be coded and which 
should not; when to use a pre- or a post-coordinated 
expression; or how to proceed when several terminology 
concepts are available. In fact, terminology binding 
guidelines often focus on the annotation of just the main 
sections of clinical documents, but they do not concern 
aspects related to the consequences of choosing an ontology-
based terminology, the granularity that should be pursued 
when annotating archetypes, or the requirements that 
advanced phenotyping queries used in clinical research may 
pose in the terminology binding of archetypes [1][2]. These 
are issues that need to be carefully addressed since they will 
have a major impact on the interoperability of clinical data 
extracts, thus determining the limitations of eHealth 
infrastructures. For example, the needs for harmonizing 
primary care and secondary care health information if only 
openEHR is used differ from the needs when SNOMED-CT 
is also used as reference terminology. One could only use 
SNOMED-CT for semantic tagging, i.e., indicate the 
meaning of each section in a clinical document (e.g., “this 
section contains vital signs”). Or one could decide to use the 
terminology to actually specify content abstracting the 
information shared from the syntactic representation format 
of one of the systems. For example, an archetype 
measurement of 155 mmHg systolic blood pressure could be 
shared just as the SNOMED-CT concept "On examination - 
blood pressure reading very high (finding) 163028000". 
Also, depending on the type of terminology selected, it may 
be possible to perform filtering operations based on its 
structure and hierarchy (e.g. which patients in treatment with 
anticoagulants suffered from a major bleeding event last 
year?).  
Adopting openEHR in combination with SNOMED-CT 
raises questions such as: which sections of archetypes should 
be bound to the reference terminology? Is there any benefit 
in fine-grained terminology binding of archetypes items? 
Should we use SNOMED-CT as a vocabulary or do we need 
to deal with its formal ontological nature to maximize the 
benefits?  
These research questions have been a matter of 
discussion among the Norwegian Centre for E-health 
Research, the Norwegian Directorate of eHealth (sub- 
ordinate institution of our Ministry of Health and Care 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Services), and the national and regional comities for 
standardization (Nasjonal IKT). In addition, the Norwegian 
Agency for eHealth considers the adoption of a common 
reference terminology a long-term commitment. 
In the Norwegian context there has been a growing 
interest about the implications derived from ontology-based 
terminologies (e.g. SNOMED-CT) and the impact on present 
and future health information systems. As a result, the 
Directorate of eHealth decided the enrollment in SNOMED 
International and advised the acquisition and use of 
SNOMED CT at national level for a three-year period. 
In November 2015 several projects started exploring the 
mapping of SNOMED-CT towards the most commonly used 
Electronic Medical Record (EMR) functionalities (e.g., 
critical information, clinical findings, the patient pathway for 
chronically ill patients, and the patient summary). Among the 
suggestions of the directorate is the elicitation of clinical 
information models (archetypes) and terminology value sets 
for building the patient summary for continuity of care. 
A. The national work with openEHR archetypes in Norway 
Throughout the last four years OpenEHR has grown to 
gain a national anchorage in Norwegian healthcare. From 
2008 to 2012, the National ICT Health Trust conducted 
projects using archetypes for clinical chart systems, which 
resulted in a recommendation to build an openEHR-based 
infrastructure for specialized healthcare. In 2013 the National 
ICT Health Trust, decided to establish the National Editorial 
Group for Archetypes (NRUA) for coordinating the 
development of the national repository of clinical models 
(archetypes). NRUA also established a close collaboration 
with the openEHR foundation and the international 
openEHR Clinical Knowledge Manager (CKM). Through 
this collaboration, NRUA has translated and reviewed 
existing archetypes from the international CKM into the 
Norwegian national CKM [27]. Currently, the Norwegian 
CKM includes circa 400 reviewers of which around 30% are 
clinicians. The review process is being conducted at a 
national level [8] with the collaboration of contributors from 
all health regions. The number of archetypes approved in 
Norway in October 2018 was 80, and over 100 more are in 
process. The most immediate goal is to have 200 nationally 
approved archetypes by the end of 2019 to represent the 
EMR core content. 
B. Archetypes binding to SNOMED-CT 
Archetypes terminology binding is a complex, time-
consuming task. Such task is even more challenging when 
the terminology used is an ontology-based terminology such 
as SNOMED-CT. In that case, both the semantics contained 
in the archetype and the terminology conceptual models need 
to be carefully analyzed. For example, when an archetype 
element is bound to a terminology code, clinical modelers 
need to consider not only the name of the code but also the 
hierarchy of SNOMED-CT that contains that code to 
determine if it is appropriate to use it or not. For example, 
concepts to represent the blood pressure are available in the 
Observable Entity and Clinical Finding hierarchies. The 
different choices available when binding archetypes to 
terminologies need to be carefully addressed since they will 
impact interoperability [5]. Actually, several levels of 
interoperability are possible: syntactic interoperability using 
common data schemas, partial semantic interoperability 
(SIOp) where some sections of clinical statements are bound 
to terminologies, or full SIOp based on machine-
understandable models [2]. Therefore, it is important to 
determine several factors to design a roadmap towards 
interoperability. The first factor is to determine why 
interoperability is desired, i.e., what are the requirements that 
need interoperable clinical data. The second factor is to 
determine what level of interoperability is needed to cover 
those requirements. The third factor is to determine what are 
the tools needed to grant the level of interoperability desired. 
These determinants may vary from one application context 
to another, and from one country to another. In the case of 
Norway the interoperability of clinical data pursues three 
main objectives: 
•Develop semantically enriched clinical information 
models that implementers can use to drive the 
development of health information systems. 
•Facilitate mappings across different information models 
based on the archetypes provided. 
•Facilitate the secondary use of clinical data by providing 
a 
standard 
format 
for 
clinical 
information 
representation and expressive queries based on 
standard terminologies. 
In most cases the approach followed to bind archetypes 
to terminologies relies on assigning a terminology code to 
the main sections of the archetype. For example, a 
SNOMED-CT binding allows for specifying that the number 
set in the element at0078.13 of the archetype openEHR-
EHR-OBSERVATION.lab_test-full_blood_count.v1 
refers 
to the SNOMED-CT concept 250271003 /White blood cell 
finding. This approach endows the archetype with certain 
level of semantics by attaching a code that refers to a concept 
in the terminology. However, these semantics correspond to 
concepts framed within an external ontology (i.e. SNOMED-
CT concept model) and may not suffice to cover the 
requirements previously described. 
In the Norwegian case, the first requirement described 
(i.e. provide semantically enriched clinical information 
models) can be covered with that approach, however the 
second and third requirements cannot. When it comes to 
facilitating mapping tasks across different information 
models, the approach of binding independent terminology 
codes has been related to SIOp challenges. For example, 
Dixon et al. documented problems when establishing SIOp 
across 
organizational 
boundaries 
caused 
by 
issues 
interpreting the meaning of the terminology codes even 
when the same terminology was used by all organizations 
[9]. Clinical information models define a syntactic schema 
with rich data constraints definitions. However, the 
information model does not specify the semantics of 
concepts and relationships explicitly beyond the description 
associated to the code. When SNOMED-CT is used, the 
ontology that unambiguously defines the semantics of the 
concept is detached and external to the conceptual model that 
the archetype conveys. This also affects the third 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

requirement since secondary use of clinical data requires 
running expressive queries. These queries require the 
machine-interpretation of semantic relations such as 
subsumptive or equivalence ones to manage the complexity 
of clinical information. Markwell documented the problems 
of interdependencies among the semantics of the archetype 
elements when they are annotated using independent 
terminology concepts [1]. For example, let us consider the 
archetype family_history  whose root element is coded as 
57177007 /Family history with explicit context and one of 
the internal nodes is coded as 73211009/Diabetes mellitus. 
The intended semantics are that a family member of the 
patient had diabetes. However, that is not unambiguously 
described following any formal model. Therefore, if a query 
returns the diabetes value one may interpret that the patient 
has the disease. This mismatch may cause wrong inferences 
and erroneous (or at least confusing) queries results if both 
the archetype and the terminology bindings are not analyzed 
carefully [10]. Another problem related to this mismatch 
between models is not purely technical but related to the 
human interpretation. Sometimes organizations using the 
same terminology decide to use different codes to identify 
the same concept, thus hampering SIOp [5][9]. 
Aiming to overcome these challenges and to cover the 
requirements set by NRUA, we determined that we needed a 
machine-interpretable 
representation 
of 
the 
clinical 
semantics carried by archetypes. We considered that the full 
expression of archetypes (including data constraints) as 
ontologies is not scalable due to computational restrictions 
[11], nor necessary to accomplish the requirements 
presented. Therefore, we opted for using SNOMED-CT 
compositional grammar to build semantic models that 
distilled the clinical semantics contained in archetypes 
(leaving data constraint aside). This way, each of the 
elements of the archetype can be represented within an 
ontology 
that provides unambiguous semantics and 
reasoning. 
Previous studies have covered these issues for a specific 
set of clinical models [1], [3]-[5]. However, these studies 
focused mainly on other standards than openEHR and they 
did not consider the expressivity requirements that data reuse 
scenarios introduce. Many of the scenarios for data reuse and 
decision support requires a more complete terminological 
projection in order to ensure that the meaning of clinical 
information is preserved across systems. That is actually the 
case of several projects in Norway that aim to enable data 
reuse [6][7]. The objective of this paper is to report about the 
main challenges found in our evaluation for introducing 
SNOMED-CT in combination with the openEHR-based 
infrastructure for fulfilling the requirements of the 
Norwegian context. 
II. 
METHOD 
In order to specify the archetype clinical semantics as an 
unambiguous 
ontology 
model, 
the 
SNOMED-CT 
compositional grammar was used. Together with NRUA we 
selected the most representative archetypes of each of the 
sections contained in the Norwegian patient summary. The 
archetypes selected are archetypes reviewed nationally and 
published enabling interoperability at a national level. The 
sections of the patient summary correspond to those 
specified in epSOS [28].  Archetypes were downloaded from 
the Norwegian CKM and their estate was either published or 
in review. For each archetype, terminology binding was 
attempted by creating a projection of the archetype clinical 
semantics using the SNOMED-CT compositional grammar. 
We tried to maximize the coverage of the elements 
represented. The binding was performed from the root to the 
leaves. When some element/section of the archetype could 
not be represented using a SNOMED-CT expression for the 
whole archetype, we defined a new expression and tagged 
the reason for using several expressions to represent one 
archetype. Additionally, when a blocker caused by the 
complexity of the process, lack of tooling etc. was found, we 
tagged it. When we had doubts about the specific meaning of 
an archetype element we asked NRUA for clarification. 
Afterwards we reviewed all the tags and classified them into 
categories of challenges. Table 1 contains the set of 
archetypes used in the study. 
TABLE I.  
SET OF ARCHETYPES COVERED. 
Archetypes analyzed 
openEHR-EHR-OBSERVATION.blood_pressure.v1  
openEHR-EHR-EVALUATION.tobacco_smoking_summary.v0  
openEHR-EHR-EVALUATION.immunisation_summary.v0 
openEHR-EHR-EVALUATION.problem_diagnosis.v1 
openEHR-EHR- openEHR-EHR-EVALUATION.adverse_reaction_risk.v1 
openEHR-EHR-INSTRUCTION.medication_order.v0  
 
III. 
RESULTS 
After reviewing all tags four categories of challenges were 
identified: 1) technical, 2) SNOMED-CT expressivity 
related, 3) human, and 4) mismatch between models. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Adverse reaction archetypes and their projection into 
SNOMED-CT. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Technical challenges 
Technical challenges are associated to limitations or 
barriers found when using current technologies. The first 
technical challenge is associated with limitations to link the 
archetype and the SNOMED-CT expression due to a lack of 
available tooling. The main technical challenge found was 
the lack of support of archetypes to include verbose post-
coordinated expressions in their term_bindings section. This 
could be solved by using proper URLs pointing to an 
external server that contains the expression provided that 
URIs have been recently accepted as the best approach for 
annotating archetypes. However, in that case, another 
limitation appears related to SNOMED-CT tooling. We did 
not find any mechanism to reference different sections of the 
expression. Therefore if the entire archetype is linked to a 
terminology expression that represents its meaning at an 
ontology level, it is not possible to specify to which concept 
or attribute of the expression the archetype element refers to. 
For example, in Figure 1 black arrows shows the need for 
establishing 
references 
from 
the 
archetype 
adverse_reaction_risk elements to the parts of the expression 
on the right. Other studies have proposed the use of linked 
data principles and W3C standards for referencing different 
ontology sections [12][13]. However, appropriate tooling to 
make that process transparent to clinical modelers is 
necessary. These referencing mechanisms are something 
that, to our knowledge, have not been covered in the medical 
informatics literature and, in many cases, have been 
considered too complex to achieve. However, it is a common 
and necessary operation named “grounding” in semantic web 
programming [12]-[14]. Such operation is necessary for 
establishing mappings and transformation mechanisms 
between the syntactic and ontological layers in semantic web 
applications. In fact, recent projects such as the Yosemite 
Project [15] and HL7 FHIR RDF [16] are pursuing the 
serialization of information models into RDF(S) for 
facilitating clinical information mapping, retrieval, and 
management. 
The second limitation is related to the lack of tooling to 
assist the binding process. The SNOMED-CT compositional 
grammar contains a huge variety of attributes and 
hierarchies. The correct specification of semantics depends 
on choosing the correct hierarchy and attribute. However, at 
the moment, this is an extremely difficult task since one 
needs to check continuously the compositional grammar and 
the semantics of each attribute. Tooling to support this 
process by offering guidance in choosing the appropriate 
elements/attributes is needed. Those tools should guide 
clinical modelers not only by restricting the set of values that 
can be assigned to an attribute, but also by informing about 
the exact meaning and provide examples during the coding 
workflow. 
The last technical challenge identified is the information 
about 
the 
infrastructure 
to 
process 
SNOMED-CT 
expressions. Although some examples of reasoners are 
mentioned, exploiting the expressivity of SNOMED-CT in 
large deployments may impose high demands on the 
hardware infrastructure required. Guidelines for software 
architects should be provided to allow them planning 
enterprise deployments. 
B. Expressivity challenges 
Challenges in expressivity relate to those concepts which 
semantics cannot be fully expressed with the compositional 
grammar. Some occur because the archetype element coded 
has a candidate in SNOMED-CT that introduces a slight 
variation in the semantics originally intended in the 
archetype. That is the case of “reaction mechanism” 
(archetype element) vs. “Immune hypersensitivity reaction 
by mechanism (disorder)” (SNOMED-CT concept). This 
problem has been approached elsewhere by extending 
SNOMED-CT [14]; however, since nationally approved 
archetypes intend to be as generic as possible, divergences 
between the SNOMED-CT implementation used for coding 
and the standard release should be avoided. 
Sometimes the variation in semantics occurred as a 
consequence of relying on a SNOMED-CT attribute that has 
a broader meaning. An example is displayed in Figure 1 
where the element substance can be mapped to the attribute 
“due to” of the SNOMED-CT expression, which has a wider 
range than substances (any ClinicalFinding; any Procedure 
etc.) Another loss of meaning occurs in the example where 
the archetype element “onset of reaction”, with an openEHR 
data type Date/time, acquires the meaning “date and time of 
the onset of reaction”. However, the SNOMED-CT 
candidate for matching is “Date of last episode”. One should 
note that it is unknown if it refers to the onset, end etc. Other 
expressivity problems occur for not being able to express 
contextual semantics. The SNOMED-CT context model does 
not allow expressing temporal orders. This was expected 
since archetypes typically provide much more contextual 
information (epistemology) than biomedical ontologies [18]. 
This can be seen in Figure 1 where the section Reaction 
event (with meaning previous adverse events) is mapped the 
expression section with the Event that wraps the finding 
adverse reaction. We did not find the way to specify this kind 
of semantics that often occur in patient summaries of drugs, 
allergies etc. The time context SNOMED-CT attribute 
allows expressing if the situation occurred in the present or 
past but not order of events. Besides, in the compositional 
grammar, the time context attribute cannot be used as a valid 
attribute of an event. Other type of expressivity problems are 
those related to the restrictions that the compositional 
grammar imposes. For some nodes there exists a valid 
candidate in SNOMED-CT. However, it is not possible to 
include it using the compositional grammar or the expression 
needs to be overcomplexified for including it. In some cases, 
we found elements that cannot be coded due to a total lack of 
candidates available. Examples are “Duration of exposure” 
or “initial exposure” element in Figure 1. This is usual in 
concepts whose semantics are purely contextual such as time 
related properties. 
Other expressivity challenge concerns the need for leaving 
the terminology projection incomplete. Marked with green 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

italics in Figure 1. This situation is common when the 
expression should contain a Qualifier Value after an 
attribute. In Figure 1 it is seen how the substance that causes 
the adverse reaction should map to the attribute “due to” that 
may contain a substance such as penicillin. However, this 
value is unknown at archetype design time and will only be 
determined in runtime for each instance. In order to 
overcome these situations a mechanism to indicate that the 
value is available at instance level would be needed. 
Although SNOMED-CT is not intended to manage instances, 
it would be appropriate to provide guidelines for determining 
how expressions that have a dependence on the archetype 
instance values should be managed. Finally, we detected 
problems related to differences between the semantics of the 
conceptual model carried by the archetype and the semantics 
that can be expressed with SNOMED-CT. This becomes 
evident 
in 
the 
archetype 
openEHR-EHR-
EVALUATION.problem_diagnosis.v1 that uses the same 
clinical model for expressing both the Problem (Disorder) 
and the Diagnosis, whereas in SNOMED-CT these are 
separated concepts. A solution for this could be to use the 
compositional grammar to specify a concept that inherits 
from 
two 
similar 
concepts 
such 
as 
“Clinical 
finding+Disorder” (or in this case clinical finding only). 
However, the archetype semantics have a wider meaning that 
includes concepts such as Diagnosis (439401001) that may 
belong to a different hierarchy in SNOMED-CT. In that case 
it is not possible to build concepts such as “Clinical 
finding+Diagnosis” since the compositional grammar 
discourages the combination of concepts that come from 
different hierarchies [19]. 
 
C. Human challenges 
Human challenges relate to the difficulties found by 
clinical modelers inherent to the complexity of the process. 
First, we had many doubts in determining what to represent 
in the SNOMED-CT expression and what to leave 
unrepresented. Although we had determined that we should 
aim for a maximum representativeness to grant SIOp and 
enable expressive queries for clinical research, it became 
clear that we had not specified use cases with the appropriate 
level of detail to determine what sections should be 
represented with the terminology expression. To avoid this 
challenge it is needed to have a clear set of representative use 
cases related to the scenarios that will exploit the 
terminology. We acknowledge that anticipating that use is 
somehow idealistic at a national level. However, a set of use 
cases related to each of the requirements explained would 
help to narrow down the binding task. 
 The second human challenge is related to the one just 
described and is the lack of guidance about what can be 
expressed in the terminology; i.e. guidance on what to 
represent. This has been already reported by studies using 
independent codes for the sections of the clinical model [1]. 
However, it is needed that both SNOMED-CT implementers 
and archetype editors define general directives on what will 
be the minimum set to code and provide guidelines with 
examples for that. This is extremely important when the 
SNOMED-CT context model is used since it opens the door 
to terminology projections of a high percentage of the 
information model elements that previously were maintained 
only at the syntactic level. Finally, another aspect linked to 
the need of guidance is how to choose the appropriate 
attributes. Previously it was mentioned the need of tooling, 
but also guidelines are needed. An example is found when 
deciding on expressing the blood pressure using the 
Observable Entity hierarchy or the Clinical Finding 
hierarchy. Some studies have analyzed this issue [5], but this 
knowledge needs to be translated into pragmatic terminology 
binding guidelines. 
D. Model mismatch 
This category identifies the challenges related to 
structural differences between the archetype and the 
expression created with the compositional grammar. A first 
structural challenge comes from the fact that the context 
model sets many of the contextual information wrapping 
clinical statements. However, in the archetype this is in many 
cases the opposite complicating to establish equivalences 
between the archetype and the SNOMED-CT representation 
of the clinical concept (i.e. grounding operation). Again 
SNOMED-CT and archetype editors should provide 
guidelines about the alignment of both models and the way 
of referencing one to the other. Finally, we found that the 
attributes of the protocol section had a very low coverage. 
Examples appear, for example, in the blood_pressure 
archetype for cuff size or systolic pressure formula. This was 
expected since they refer mainly to contextual information, 
but we found that it is necessary to clarify the use of 
SNOMED-CT context model with regards to clinical 
information models in general, and archetypes in particular.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The long term needs of semantic interoperability across 
EHRs and secondary use of data in the Norwegian context 
need the representation of 
archetype semantics as 
expressions that allow for defining them unambiguously and 
performing expressive queries over data sets. Terminology 
binding of only some archetype sections does not provide 
that level of expressivity. Expressing them by using the 
ontology of the terminology becomes necessary. We have 
coded terminological expressions using SNOMED-CT´s 
compositional grammar using the archetypes that shape the 
Norwegian patient summary. Technical, expressivity, human 
and models mismatch challenges have been identified. The 
first challenge found is that currently SNOMED-CT 
expressions cannot be referenced from archetypes. On the 
one hand, it is not possible to include long post-coordinated 
expressions. Thus, the use of URLs to reference the 
expression 
should 
be 
recommended. 
This 
is 
a 
recommendation that has currently be taken into the 
openEHR specifications. The second challenge found is the 
lack of tooling available to guide the definition of 
expressions, 
not 
only 
validating 
post-coordinated 
expressions, but also assisting modelers while using the 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

compositional grammar. In many cases, the need for 
continuously checking SNOMED-CT guidelines made us 
lose track of our own work. Nowadays, the availability of 
published archetypes is growing [6].  Tools that define 
general use cases to represent different types of archetypes 
would be very useful. For example, there are tools to guide 
clinical modelers in coding archetypes with graphical 
representations and powerful matching techniques [20]. This 
kind of tools may consider incorporating the functionality to 
guide users for building expressions using SNOMED-CT´s 
compositional grammar.   Another challenge is related to the 
expressivity of SNOMED-CT. For simple archetypes that 
relate to readings such as blood pressure, it is possible to 
create terminology projections of archetypes´ semantics 
using the compositional grammar. However, for more 
complex archetypes such as the adverse_reaction or 
medication_order ones, the context model does not allow 
defining the relations that are needed to express them at a 
semantic level. This problem varied from issues related to 
the inability to include a concept in the compositional 
grammar, loss of semantics due to the variation of meaning 
and, in the worst case, not been able to express relations 
between archetype sections. This may influence the patterns 
that archetypes follow. We are aware that previous 
experiences show that the best 
way 
to approach 
interoperability is to annotate just some sections of the 
clinical information models (archetypes) [3]. However, for 
the national interoperability program it is important to 
determine until what extent the expressivity of SNOMED-
CT can be used to define the semantics covered by 
archetypes and the implications of adopting ontology-based 
terminologies. This was part of the national project to study 
the use of formal ontologies for healthcare and the impact 
and possibilities regarding their adoption [2]. In that work we 
determined that there is not only one way to approach this 
challenge since determining the level of semantic enrichment 
of archetypes depends highly on each use case. For EHR 
interoperability it may suffice binding just the main sessions 
of the EHR, whereas for performing deep phenotyping [21], 
it would be necessary to define fine-grained annotations with 
several biomedical ontologies [2]. 
Both terminology and archetype experts should agree on 
a minimal set of recommendations for different purposes and 
agree on some design patterns for terminology binding that 
facilitate the scalability of semantic infrastructures for 
healthcare and research. This scalability principle should 
allow for starting with basic semantic annotations and 
progressing towards more complex semantic infrastructures 
on “as-needed” basis as recommended in other domains[22]- 
[24]. At the moment, when we reviewed the guidelines for 
SNOMED-CT adoption and compared them with the 
development of archetypes we detected an important lack of 
coordination between the guidelines from the archetype 
design point of view and the terminology point of view (e.g., 
SNOMED-CT guidelines). For example, the SNOMED-CT 
context model clearly overlaps with the function of the 
archetype but does not have enough expressivity to allow for 
projecting archetypes at a semantic level. Both openEHR and 
SNOMED International should agree on a minimal set of 
patterns as mentioned above. We do understand that the 
compositional grammar (and expressions like those created 
using the context model) may be necessary for some 
scenarios, but then they need to provide means for aligning 
SNOMED-CT expressions with archetypes. In order to 
enable a more complete representation of the semantics 
included in the archetypes at a terminology level, a more 
complete context model would be necessary. For example, 
approximately half of the concepts in the protocol section of 
archetypes could not be represented. However, extending the 
context model would lead to a mix of ontological and 
epistemological aspects. Even when both aspects are 
represented at a semantic level, it is appropriate to keep the 
models of meaning and information separated to enable 
separate scalability and reasoning [25]. An option to avoid 
mixing different models may be to maintain a context model 
ontology outside the medical terminology (SNOMED-CT). 
Approaches to develop parallel context models have been 
defined by relying on more expressive logics (OWL DL) 
[26]. However, these kind of logic leads to models that are 
not tractable [11], thus they may jeopardize large enterprise 
deployments. Experiences in Semantic Web development 
have shown that in many cases it is better to sacrifice 
expressiveness in order to gain scalability [12][23]. If those 
context models evolve into lighter models and define clear 
extension mechanisms to use other ontologies, they may be 
very useful to provide machine-interpretable representations 
of archetypes clinical semantics.  
Finally, implementers must be aware that projecting most of 
the archetype as a formal ontology is expensive in terms of 
computational demands and models definition. Therefore, as 
mentioned before, semantic infrastructures should aim to 
follow a bottom-up approach starting by adopting a reference 
ontology and slowly evolving their semantic infrastructure as 
new requirements for higher expressivity arise. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The 
long-term 
requirements 
of 
the 
national 
interoperability frameworks in Norway need explicit 
representations of archetype semantics. We studied if 
SNOMED-CT´s compositional grammar can provide the 
level of expressiveness needed for covering these 
requirements. Technical, expressivity, human, and models 
mismatch challenges are present when defining archetype 
semantics as SNOMED-CT expressions. These challenges 
show a pressing need for the collaboration between 
archetypes and SNOMED-CT editors so both become aware 
of each other´s challenges. Future collaboration should: 
provide better guidelines for archetypes terminology binding 
assessing the best approach to follow depending on the 
interoperability needs; set the requirements for better tooling 
to ease the binding process; and work towards developing 
mechanisms that allow for improving expressivity, alignment 
between models, and extensibility of the SNOMED-CT 
concept model with other biomedical ontologies. 
  
 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was funded by the Norwegian Centre for E-
health Research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Markwell, L. Sato, and E. Cheetham, “Representing Clinical 
Information using SNOMED Clinical Terms with Different 
Structural Information Models.,” in Proceedings of the 3rd 
International Conference on Knowledge Representation in 
Medicine, Phoenix, Arizona, 2008, vol. 410, pp. 72–79. 
[2] L. Marco-Ruiz, K. Nicolaisen, R. Pedersen, A. Makhlysheva, 
and P. A. Bakkevoll, Ontology-based terminologies for healthcare 
- 
Impact 
assessment 
and 
transitional 
consequences 
for 
implementation, 1st ed., vol. 1. Tromsø: Norwegian Centre for E-
health Research, 2017. 
[3] 
“HL7 
TermInfo 
Project.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://wiki.hl7.org/index.php?title=TermInfo_Project#. [Accessed: 
01-Jan-2019]. 
[4] T. A. Oniki, J. F. Coyle, C. G. Parker, and S. M. Huff, 
“Lessons learned in detailed clinical modeling at Intermountain 
Healthcare.,” J Am Med Inform Assoc, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1076–
1081, Nov. 2014. 
 [5] 
A. R. Rasmussen and K. Rosenbeck, “SNOMED CT 
implementation: implications of choosing clinical findings or 
observable entities,” Stud Health Technol Inform, vol. 169, pp. 
809–813, 2011. 
[6] 
A. Budrionis , l. Marco-Ruiz , KY. Yigzaw, and JG. 
Bellika . Building a Learning Healthcare System in North Norway. 
Proceedings from The 14th Scandinavian Conference on Health 
Informatics 2016, Gothenburg, Sweden, April 6-7 2016, Linköping 
University Electronic Press; 2016, p. 1–5. 
[7] 
L. Marco Ruiz, JA. Maldonado, R Karlsen, and JG. 
Bellika. Multidisciplinary Modelling of Symptoms  and Signs  
with Archetypes and SNOMEDCT for Clinical Decision Support. 
Stud Health Technol Inform., Madrid: IOS press; 2015. 
[8] H. Lærum, S. L. Bakke, R. Pedersen, and J. T. Valand, “An 
update on OpenEHR archetypes in Norway: Response to article 
Christensen B & Ellingsen G: ‘Evaluating Model-Driven 
Development for large-scale EHRs through the openEHR 
approach’ IJMI May 2016, Volume 89, pages 43-54,” Int J Med 
Inform, vol. 93, p. 1, Sep. 2016. 
[9] 
B. E. Dixon et al., “A pilot study of distributed 
knowledge management and clinical decision support in the 
cloud,” Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 45–
53, Sep. 2013. 
[10] 
A. L. Rector, “The Interface between Information, 
Terminology, and Inference Models,” in Proceedings of the 10th 
World Congress on Medical Informatics, London, UK, 2001, vol. 
84, pp. 246–250. 
[11] 
D. Karlsson, M. Berzell, and S. Schulz, “Information 
Models and Ontologies for Representing the Electronic Health 
Record.,” in International Conference on Biomedical Ontology, 
Buffalo, NY, 2011, p. :153–157. 
[12] 
L. Marco-Ruiz, C. Pedrinaci, J. A. Maldonado, L. 
Panziera, R. Chen, and J. G. Bellika, “Publication, discovery and 
interoperability of Clinical Decision Support Systems: A Linked 
Data approach,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 62, pp. 
243–264, Aug. 2016. 
[13] 
C. Pedrinaci, J. Domingue, and A. P. Sheth, “Semantic 
Web Services,” in Handbook of Semantic Web Technologies, J. 
Domingue, D. Fensel, and J. A. Hendler, Eds. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 977–1035. 
[14] 
P. D. Fensel, D. F. M. Facca, D. E. Simperl, and I. Toma, 
“Web Service Modeling Ontology,” in Semantic Web Services, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 107–129. 
[15] 
D. Booth, “Yosemite Project | Comparing the Yosemite 
Project and ONC Roadmaps for Healthcare Information 
Interoperability,” Yosemite Project, 02-Apr-2015. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://yosemiteproject.org/comparing-the-yosemite-
project/. [Accessed: 01-Jan-2019]. 
[16] 
“Rdf 
- 
FHIR 
v3.0.1.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.hl7.org/fhir/rdf.html. [Accessed: 01-Jan-2019]. 
[17] 
C. Soguero-Ruiz et al., “Ontology for heart rate 
turbulence domain from the conceptual model of SNOMED-CT,” 
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 1825–1833, Jul. 2013. 
[18] 
C. Martínez-Costa, R. Cornet, D. Karlsson, S. Schulz, 
and D. Kalra, “Semantic enrichment of clinical models towards 
semantic interoperability. The heart failure summary use case,” J 
Am Med Inform Assoc, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 565–576, May 2015. 
[19] 
IHTSDO, “SNOMED CT  Compositional Grammar  
Specification 
and 
Guide.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCSCG. 
[Accessed: 
01-Jan-2019]. 
[20] 
E. Sundvall et al., “Integration of tools for binding 
archetypes to SNOMED CT,” BMC Med Inform Decis Mak, vol. 8, 
no. Suppl 1, p. S7, Oct. 2008. 
[21] 
P. N. Robinson, “Deep phenotyping for precision 
medicine,” Human Mutation, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 777–780. 
[22] 
“Semantic Annotations for WSDL and XML Schema.” 
[Online]. Available: http://www.w3.org/TR/sawsdl/. [Accessed: 
01-Jan-2019]. 
[23] 
J. Kopecký and T. Vitvar, “MicroWSMO,” WSMO 
Working Draft - D38v0.1 MicroWSMO, 19-Aug-2008. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.wsmo.org/TR/d38/v0.1/. [Accessed: 01-Jan-
2019]. 
[24] 
K. Gomadam, A. Ranabahu, and A. Sheth, “SA-REST: 
Semantic Annotation of Web Resources,” SA-REST: Semantic 
Annotation 
of 
Web 
Resources. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.w3.org/Submission/SA-REST/. [Accessed: 01-Jan-
2019]. 
[25] 
A. L. Rector, R. Qamar, and T. Marley, “Binding 
ontologies and coding systems to electronic health records and 
messages,” Applied Ontology, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 51–69, Jan. 2009. 
[26] 
C. Martínez-Costa and S. Schulz, “Ontology-based 
reinterpretation of the SNOMED CT context model.,” in 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Biomedical 
Ontology, Montreal, Canada, 2013, pp. 90–95. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    [27] 
    https://arketyper.no/ckm/ (15.02.2019) 
 [28] 
    https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/cross-
border-health-project-epsos-what-has-it-achieved (15.02.2019) 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

