Telestration in Mobile Telementoring 
Andrius Budrionis1,2, Johan Gustav Bellika1,2 
1Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Science and 
Technology, University of Tromsø 
Tromsø, Norway 
E-mail: {Andrius.Budrionis, 
Johan.Gustav.Bellika}@telemed.no 
 
Abstract—The paper analyses the domain of modern video 
conferencing-based mentoring systems applied in surgery. We 
aim to introduce mobility to telementoring, accompanied with 
telestration as an obligatory feature for telementoring systems. 
A detailed outlook to the domain resulted in encountering the 
camera movement problem, reported in the paper. As no 
direct solution was identified, a set of ideas towards the 
resolution of the problem is presented for further discussion 
and research.  
Keywords-telementoring, telestration, annotation, camera 
movement 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Telemedicine is defined as a set of medical practices, 
without direct physician-patient interaction, via interactive 
audio-video communication channel [1]. The advances of 
Information Communication Technologies (ICT) created a 
fertile ground for rapid development of software and 
hardware systems for telemedical purposes. Reported 
shortage of general practice surgeons with even higher 
deficit predicted for the future [2] is the main reason for the 
expansion of the domain of telemedicine. Advances and 
spread of the technology may be the way for mitigating the 
consequences of the lack of specialists in this field.  
The research explores the field of telementoring.  The 
initial purpose of telementoring is to provide assistance for a 
less experienced specialist (in our case - a surgeon), when a 
local expert is unavailable. This traditional approach offers 
high benefits concerning improved outcome of the 
procedure, lower time expenditures and reduced cost 
regarding the relocation of an expert. Moreover, the 
educational side of telementoring is also of high importance, 
since the remote expert acts as a personal tutor for the 
surgeon performing the operation. 
 The paper is structured as follows: after a brief 
introduction and motivation for the expanding domain of 
telemedicine, the reader is provided with an overview of 
current telementoring systems and challenges they are 
facing. Moreover, ideas of mobility in the domain are 
introduced. Together with the new features, new challenges 
are presented. Section III explores the camera movement 
problem in detail, while possible solutions and questions for 
further research are formulated in Section IV. 
 
Knut Magne Augestad2 
2Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of Northern Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
e-mail: Knut.Magne.Augestad@telemed.no 
 
II. 
AN OVERVIEW OF CURRENT TELEMENTORING 
SYSTEMS 
Video conferencing based tools are no longer a novel 
technology in medicine. Reviews by Augestad et al. [3] [4] 
summarize the benefits of using video conferencing in 
surgery 
during 
the 
past 
decade, 
highlighting 
the 
improvements in clinical and educational outcomes. When it 
comes to telementoring, the solutions are repeatedly 
demonstrated for laparoscopic surgery [5] [6] due to the 
simplicity of adopting this technological approach. However, 
current researches still limits telementoring to PCs/Laptops 
[7] at predefined “stations” or sites. We identified a general 
lack of studies exploring surgical telementoring from the 
mobile perspective. The limitations associated with mobile 
environments are gradually decreasing and disappearing due 
to rapid technological advances. Moreover, the fact that 
remote medical experts who are on call are likely to be 
moving around and almost always have their mobile phone 
(or a tablet computer) within reach, provides enough impetus 
for further exploration of mobile platforms. We believe that 
introducing mobility to the field of telementoring has 
potential waiting to be explored.  
The use of mobile platform as a medium for 
telementoring systems introduces new challenges to be 
considered. As the mentor becomes mobile, dealing with 
possibly unreliable wireless Internet connectivity, varying 
bandwidth and limited battery power are the cases that 
require 
extra 
attention 
[8] 
[9]. 
However, 
limited 
computational power, available on mobile devices, is the 
most important constraint, as we are dealing with 
computationally intensive data processing. The mentioned 
hazards form a different angle for the analysis of current 
telementoring systems and telestration techniques towards 
possible adaptation and reusability.    
Telestration (a technique, enabling drawing of freehand 
annotations over a still image or video) is not a very new 
approach to medical domain [9]. We argue that the 
telestration feature is an obligatory functionality of 
telementoring systems due to the increased accuracy of 
pointing actions. However, no analysis of the impacts of this 
feature to the workflow of the procedure was identified. This 
fact draws the guidelines for further research.  
307
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
CAMERA MOVEMENT PROBLEM  
As mentioned before, we are focusing on telementoring 
for minimally invasive (laparoscopic) procedures. The 
selection was made due to technological aspects: as only 
camera-based representation of the operative field is 
available for onsite surgeon, sharing it with the remote expert 
is highly feasible.  
After an analysis of a set of laparoscopic videos (N = 10 
laparoscopic sigmoidectomy procedures) and discussions 
with domain experts (experienced surgeons from University 
Hospital of Northern Norway having previous experience in 
telementoring), we came to a conclusion, that movement of 
the camera is an integral part of the procedure. However, it 
may lead to the decreased accuracy of mentoring. Looking 
from the point of telestration, camera movement results in 
repositioning of annotations, which are supposed to be fixed 
on a particular anatomical landmark. As camera movement 
cannot be omitted, a technological solution towards 
maintaining constant position of the annotations should be 
identified. It has to be resistant to homogenous tissue 
representation, 
reflections, 
catheterization 
smoke 
and 
accidental emergence of body liquids. The complexity of this 
task requires a detailed research towards determining an 
appropriate solution, especially having the limitations of 
mobile platforms in mind [10].   
IV. 
DISCUSSION: IDEAS FOR SOLVING THE CAMERA 
MOVEMENT PROBLEM 
In this section some ideas for solving the camera 
movement problem are presented. The main focus is to 
analyse the problem by looking from the software 
perspective in order to use computational techniques towards 
the solution.  
A. Combination of  video and still images 
Notwithstanding the moving camera, the operative field 
is also in motion. The deformation of soft tissues responding 
to the changing pressure inside the cavity and moving 
surgical tools contributes to the complexity of the 
representation. A set of stable reference points are needed 
not only for fixing the annotations, but even for ensuring the 
required accuracy of mentor’s commands. The tissues should 
not be moving at least while the annotations are made by the 
mentor and observed by the mentee. This claim transforms 
the moving operative field into a still image for a discussion.  
The described situation offers a direct work-around 
instead of solving the camera movement problem – 
combination of laparoscopic video stream and still images at 
the point when the advices from the remote mentor 
(including telestration) are necessary. The increased 
accuracy of annotations should be sufficient impetus for 
supporting 
this 
idea. 
Moreover, 
relatively 
simple 
implementation and low demand of computational resources 
are advantages 
looking 
from 
the 
mobile 
mentor’s 
perspective. However, the image based representation loses 
the interactive component, meaning that the actual operative 
field may change while the surgeons are discussing the still 
scene. Notwithstanding this disadvantage, the solution offers 
an improvement to conventional telementoring systems 
(audio and video conferencing) supporting the mobile 
mentor approach.  
B. 3D models for laparoscopic surgery 
3D modelling techniques are one more direction for 
improvement. Su et al. presented a novel approach of 
combining Computed Tomography (CT) or magnetic 
resonance (MR) images and laparoscopic video. It resulted in 
live 3D model representing not only the surface of a 
particular organ, but also its inner structure [11].  
The described approach becomes handy when solving the 
camera movement problem. The CT/MR based 3D model is 
aligned according to the reference points tracked on the 
surface of a tissue (organ) to ensure accuracy in case of 
deformations. This step establishes sufficient number of 
reference points which can be continuously reidentified and 
used as anchors for fixing the annotations. Moreover, the 
elements of 3D model also represent stable structures which 
may be used towards the solution. We see this solution as a 
long term goal for laparoscopic surgery and telementoring 
due to extremely high demand of computational power and 
complexity of the algorithms. Further research is required 
towards simplifying the computations towards applications 
in current mobile environments. 
C. Other approaches 
The core of the problem we are solving is continuous 
reidentification of fixed reference points in order to maintain 
constant position of the annotations. Computer vision 
techniques may also be used for tracking anatomical 
landmarks, for instance blood vessels [12] [13] [14]. 
Unfortunately, all studies dealing with blood vessel tracking 
use still images as an input. However, we hypothesize about 
extending the functionality of the algorithms for analysing 
video content. Of course, the techniques have a high demand 
of computational power, therefore, further research is needed 
to ascertain the feasibility processing live video stream and 
the use of a mobile device on the client side. 
Researches on soft tissue deformation tracking also offer 
a solid basis for fixing the annotations [15].  The approaches 
focus on capturing the reference points on the surface of the 
tissue in order to create an accurate representation. As the 
captured reference points are sufficient for solving the 
camera movement problem, the solution looks promising. 
Nevertheless, the algorithms are computationally intensive, 
positive results in processing live video stream were 
presented [15] [16]. Of course, the sufficient computational 
resources are not provided by mobile devices yet, but it is 
only a matter of time until the required improvement of ICT 
will be ensured.  
 
308
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
The work presented in the paper is in progress towards 
improving surgical telementoring. Most of the researchers in 
this field looked at the problems and future tendencies from 
the stationary point of view (stationary hardware and 
working position of the mentor). A new mobile approach 
introduces the challenges that were not considered before. 
However, we believe, that the potential of mobile platforms 
and its application in medical domain is still to be revealed. 
The new perspective leads to encountering the problems that 
have no direct solution yet. Our case reports the camera 
movement problem, preventing from maintaining constant 
position of the annotations and ensuring the required 
accuracy of mentoring. Ideas for possible solutions were 
directed towards further discussion and research.  
Looking at the presented solutions, we hypothesize that 
3D modeling approach (Section IV.B) has the most potential 
to become the overall direction for laparoscopic surgery and 
telementoring. The possibilities of advances in 3D modeling 
are close to unlimited. For instance, it allows having an 
accurate model of a particular organ, containing its inner 
structure which would make the surgeon aware of the 
internal elements of the tissue (blood vessels, nerves, etc.) 
before the cut is made. If we add live tracking of 
laparoscopic tools to the model [17], the system may grow to 
surgical action advice system, alerting the surgeon before the 
particular move which could harm an element of the inner 
structure (for example a cut of a blood vessel). In this case, 
the model of the particular tissue should be extended to the 
model of the entire operative field, including the surgical 
tools and the internal structure of the surrounding tissues. 
It is not possible to solve the problems we are facing by 
looking at them from the theoretical point of view only. 
Therefore, to result in a prototypical implementation a design 
phase for mobile mentoring software is in progress.  It will 
provide a more solid support for the claims made in the 
paper. However, to generate sound results, impact 
measurement scale should be established. It also requires a 
separate study, followed by trials and data collection.  
Looking at all the presented solutions, the main obstacle 
for the mobile telementoring is the limited computational 
power provided by mobile devices. Fortunately, the 
technology moves forward, making this limitation to 
gradually decrease and disappear. It is only a matter of time 
until advances in mobile technology ensure the required 
characteristics for data processing. However, together with 
technological advances, the expectations of potential users 
evolve, creating new challenges and directions for further 
research.  
VI. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons 
SAGES. (2004) Guidelines for the Surgical Practice of Telemedicine. 
[Online]. http://www.sages.org/publication/id/21 [Feb 28, 2012] 
 
[2] T. E. Jr. Williams and E. C. Ellison, "Population analysis predicts a 
future critical shortage of general surgeons," Surgery, vol. 144, no. 4, 
2008. 
[3] K. M. Augestad, T. Chomutare, J. G. Bellika, A. Budrionis, R. O. 
Lindsetmo, and C. P. Delaney, "Clinical and educational benefits of 
surgical telementoring," in Simulation Training in Laparoscopy and 
Robotic Surgery.: Springer London, 2012. 
[4] K. M. Augestad and R. O. Lindsetmo, "Overcoming distance: video-
conferencing as a clinical and educational tool among surgeons," 
World J Surg, vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 1356-65, 2009. 
[5] S. Rothenberg, S. Yoder, S. Kay, and T. Ponsky, "Initial experience 
with surgical telementoring in pediatric laparoscopic surgery using 
remote presence technology," J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A., 
2009. 
[6] L. J. 2nd. Damore, J. A. Johnson, R. S. Dixon, M. A. Iverson, E. C. 
Ellison, and W. S. Melvin, "Transmission of live laparoscopic surgery 
over the Internet2," American Journal of Surgery, vol. 178, no. 5, pp. 
415-417, 1999. 
[7] P. Gambadauro and A. Magos, "NEST (network enhanced surgical 
training): a PC-based system for telementoring in gynaecological 
surgery," European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and 
Reproductive Biology, vol. 139, no. 2, pp. 222-5, 2008. 
[8] D. C. Baumgart, "Personal digital assistants in health care: 
experienced clinicians in the palm of your hand?," Lancet, vol. 366, 
2005. 
[9] A. Budrionis, K. M. Augestad, H. R. H. Patel, and J. G. Bellika, 
"Towards requirements for telementoring software," in Scandinavian 
Conference on Health Informatics 2012, Linköping, Sweden, 2012. 
[10] Budrionis A., Augestad K. M., Patel H. R. H., Bellika J. G., "Towards 
Requirements for Telementoring Software," in 
Scandinavian 
Conference on Health Informatics 2012, Linköping, Sweden , 2012. 
[11] Laparoscopic 
cholecystectomy 
procedure. 
[Online]. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7tTGfYCqH5w [Aug 21, 2012] 
[12] L. M. Su, B. P. Vagvolgyi, R. Agarwal, C. E. Reiley, R. H. Taylor, 
and G. D. Hager, "Augmented reality during robot-assisted 
laparoscopic partial nephrectomy: toward real-time 3D-CT to 
stereoscopic video registration," Urology, vol. 73, no. 4, 2009. 
[13] C. Kirbas and F. Quek, "A review of vessel extraction techniques and 
algorithms," ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 36, no. 2, 2004. 
[14] Y. Yin, M. Adel, M. Guillaume, and S. Bourennane, "Bayesian 
tracking for blood vessel detection in retinal images," in 18th 
European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO-2010), Aalborg, 
Denmark, 2012. 
[15] Y. Jiang, A. Bainbridge-Smith, and A. B. Morris, "Blood vessel 
tracking in retinal images," in Proceedings of Image and Vision 
Computing, New Zeland, 2007. 
[16] M. Visentini-Scarzanella, R. Merrifield, D. Stoyanov, and G. Z. Yang, 
"Tracking of irregular graphical structures for tissue deformation 
recovery in minimally invasive surgery," in Proceedings of the 13th 
international conference on Medical image computing and computer-
assisted intervention: Part III (MICCAI'10), 2010. 
[17] M. C. Yip, D. G. Lowe, S. E. Salcudean, R. N. Rohling, and C. Y. 
Nguan, "Real-time methods for long-term tissue feature tracking in 
endoscopic scenes," Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 
7330/2012, pp. 33-43, 2012. 
[18] R. Wolf, J. Duchateau, P. Cinquin, and D. Voros, "3D tracking of 
laparoscopic instruments using statistical and geometric modeling," 
Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv, vol. 14, no. 1, 2011. 
 
 
309
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

