Towards Integrated Analysis of Risk Factors and Diabetes Prevention
using Big Data and Natural Language Processing
Dimitar Tcharaktchiev
Medical University Soﬁa,
University Specialised Hospital
for Active Treatment of Endocrinology
Soﬁa, Bulgaria
Email: dimitardt@gmail.com
Svetla Boytcheva
American University in Bulgaria
Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria
Email: svetla.boytcheva@gmail.com
Zhivko Angelov
Adiss Lab Ltd.
Soﬁa, Bulgaria
Email: angelov@adiss-bg.com
Ivelina Nikolova
Institute of Information
and Communication Technologies,
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
Soﬁa, Bulgaria
Email: iva@lml.bas.bg
Galia Angelova
Institute of Information
and Communication Technologies,
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
Soﬁa, Bulgaria
Email: galia@lml.bas.bg
Abstract—This paper demonstrates the potential of natural lan-
guage processing for extracting patient-related data from very
big repositories of semi-structured patient records. We mine 37.9
million outpatient records, extract risk factors and show how to
integrate the ﬁndings in a system that enables effective diabetes
prevention. The ﬁndings show the weak points in the organisation
of primary care and specialised outpatient care in Bulgaria.
Keywords–Diabetes prevention; Discovery of risk factors; Au-
tomatic text analysis; Entity extraction; Outpatient record; Data
integration, analytics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Automatic text analysis is applied to clinical narratives
since decades. Many researchers work on this hot topic, de-
veloping Natural Language Processing (NLP) algorithms and
experimental prototypes in various natural languages. Recently,
the NLP tools reached such a level of maturity that one can
think about their integration in real software systems, i.e.,
outside the academic settings, in order to improve knowledge
discovery and support decision making. Usually only certain
events are extracted from the analysed clinical texts since
full ”understanding” is hard to achieve; and in general NLP
tools deliver a small percentage of erroneous results. But these
shortcomings are somehow compensated by the NLP ability
to process big repositories of clinical records [1]. The results
of automatic information extraction from patient records are
relatively good and can be compared with other systems that
solve similar tasks, such as CLEF (Clinical E-Science Frame-
work) that retrieves data for cancer patients [2] and AMBIT
that retrieves information from biomedical text [3]. Another
successful platform is the Mayo Clinic NLP System [4] for
structured retrieval of patient records taking into consideration
patients’ smoking status.
In this way, NLP turns to be an integral component in
the initiative for Secondary Use of Electronic Health Records
(EHR) data and one of the few technologies that enable
tackling of unstructured big data in medicine. In principle, its
application is evaluated in terms or precision and recall; these
indicators give hints about possible erroneous results.
One of the most important tasks is to extract patient status
in structured format (Attribute–Value). The ”attributes” can
be for instance anatomical organs, major anatomical systems,
their characteristics, physician examinations performed during
the admission etc. The ”values” describe the actual condition
of the patient. Thus, structured representation of the patient
status can be viewed as a set of ”attribute-value” tuples. To
solve this task NLP uses Support Vector Machines and related
unsupervised and supervised approaches to machine learning.
For example [5] presents classiﬁers based on supervised meth-
ods; [6] applies Maximum Entropy classiﬁers; and [7] uses
semi-supervised relation extraction.
Analysing patient records in order to reveal the diabetic
patient status or prevent diabetes is a particularly challenging
task. NLP tools that extract entities from patient-related docu-
mentation can help to optimise the treatment, reduce its costs
or deliver early alerts about potential diabetes by identiﬁcation
of high risk factors. For instance, the paper [8] presents
prototypes that (i) analyse discharge summaries for evidence
indicating a presence of diabetes, (ii) assess diabetes protocol
compliance and (iii) identify high risk factors. The tools extract
entities like assertion of the disease and associated ﬁndings in
the text, numerical clinical data and prescribed medications.
The classiﬁer analyses reports for the presence and absence of
diabetes and recognises the status with accuracy higher than
97%. The evaluation was done for 444 discharge summaries.
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The high risk factor classiﬁer extracts the blood pressure values
and cholesterol values; it works with accuracy exceeding 90%.
The tools also estimate the record’s adherence to quality of care
protocols for indicators such as ABCS (i.e., A1c-glycosylated
hemoglobin, Blood pressure, Cholesterol, Smoking). This clas-
siﬁcation is also done with accuracy exceeding 90%.
Here we present results of large-scale NLP applied to a
big repository of outpatient records. Big Data pose special
requirements to NLP, for instance one cannot inspect manually
the corpus that is processed. Our objective in this study is
to mine records submitted to the Bulgarian National Health
Insurance Fund (NHIF) and, despite their primary accounting
orientation, to discover patients with risk factors that are
potentially related with development of diabetes. In Bulgaria,
there are no established programs for prevention of socially
important diseases. An automated system discovering the cit-
izens with increased risk to develop diabetes represents an
important contribution for the amelioration of public health
system. Having in view all the patients’ pathways, including
reports of the General Practitioners and all frequently visited
specialists, the proposed system can analyse more risk factors
than one single doctor, who has no access to all the data
obtained in various clinical examinations and reported to NHIF
by different specialists.
This paper is organised as follows: Section 2 describes the
project objectives and sketches the previously developed mod-
ules, which are improved and integrated in the current system.
Section 3 discusses data formats and overviews the repository.
The results obtained in the present study are reported in Section
4. Sections 5 and 6 contain a brief discussion, the conclusion
and further work.
II.
PROJECT CONTEXT AND AVAILABLE TOOLS
The ultimate objective of our project is to accelerate the
construction of the Register of diabetic patients in Bulgaria by
integration of language technologies and business intelligence
tools [9]. Today the growing administrative burdens and mul-
tiple registrations are considered as a major obstacle for the
development of the Register. However, advanced information
technologies would enable to: (i) keep the established practice
of patient registration without overloading the medical experts
with additional paper work; (ii) reuse the existing standard
records in compliance with all legal requirements for safety
and data protection; (iii) save time and resources by avoiding
multiple patient registrations and disturbance of the diagnostic
and treatment process. Practically, once entered in the health-
care system, the patient data might be reused in multiple
aspects. A web-interface for self-registration to the Bulgarian
Diabetic Register is foreseen as well.
The Register contains 28 indicators of diabetic patients’
status, including age, sex, ICD-10 codes of diagnoses of
diabetes and its complications, diabetes duration, risk factors,
data about compensation, laboratory results, hospitalisations
and prescribed medication. Manual collection of data proved
to be impractical during the last ten years; in addition there
are many diabetic patients who are not formally diagnosed and
not treated at all. In the case of diabetes, a progressive chronic
disease with serious complications, it is highly desirable to
develop a system for early alerts that might signal eventual
diabetes symptoms.
It turns out that all the information needed for the Register
is available in the outpatient records, collected by the Bulgarian
NHIF. There are multiple records stored for the same patient
along the months and the years. Thanks to the support of
the Bulgarian Ministry of Health and the NHIF, the Medical
University - Soﬁa has received for research purposes a large
collection of outpatient records. The data repository currently
contains more than 37.9 million pseudonymised reimburse-
ment requests (outpatient records) submitted to the NHIF in
2013 for more than 5 million patients, including 436,000
diabetic ones. In Bulgaria the outpatient records are produced
by the General Practitioners (GPs) and the Specialists from
Ambulatory Care for every contact with the patient.
We have previous experience in automatic analysis of
diabetic patients’ discharge letters in Bulgarian language. In
2010-2011 a drug extractor has been developed, based on
algorithms using regular expressions to describe linguistic
patterns [10]. There are more than 80 different patterns for
matching text units which deal with the ATC and NHIF drug
codes, medication name, dosage and frequency. Currently, the
extractor is elaborated and handles 2,239 drugs names included
in the NHIF nomenclatures. Recent extraction evaluation has
been performed with large-scale analysis of the outpatient
records of 33,641 diabetic patients for 2013. The precision
is 95.2% and the recall - 93.7%. This result is slightly better
than the accuracy reported in 2011 [10] when the extractor
was a (research) prototype dealing with less than 500 drugs.
The performance of the module is evaluated manually. The
labelled data is split to 20 equal subsets and randomly selected
records are evaluated by an expert (about 40% of each subset).
The average of the subset evaluation is the ﬁnal score of the
module.
The major reasons for incorrect recognition of drug events
are: (i) misspelling of drug names; (ii) drug names occurring in
the contexts of other descriptions; (iii) undetected descriptions
of drug allergies, sensibility, intolerance and side effects; (iv)
drug treatment described by (exclusive) OR; (v) negations and
temporally interconnected events of various kinds: undetected
descriptions of cancelled medication events; of changes or
replacements in therapy; of insufﬁcient treatment effect and
change of therapy. About 30% of the medication events in the
test corpus were described without any dosage. Lack of explicit
descriptions occurs mostly for treatment of accompanying
diseases. After applying the recognition algorithm and default
daily dosage, the number of records lacking dosage has been
reduced to 15.7% in the ﬁnal result.
Another extractor that has been developed in 2010-2011
identiﬁes values of clinical tests and lab data in the free text
[11]. In 2011, the extractor recognised more than 90 types
of laboratory tests, some of them with accuracy higher than
98%. The evaluation was done on 6,200 discharge letters of
diabetic patients. Today the extractor is extended to cope with
the clinical test values in the NHIF repository of outpatient
records. In particular, our current study is focused on the
indicators: age, body mass index (BMI), waist circumference,
triglycerides, cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, blood glucose on
fasting, and blood glucose on the 120-th minute of the glucose
tolerance test.
Moreover, we invested efforts in automatic recognition of
temporal markers in discharge letters. In 2011, we proposed an
algorithm and tool that recognised drugs taken by the patient at
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the moment of hospitalisation (day 0) [12]. This tool analysed
the Case History section of hospital discharge letters. In 2012,
we did a more systematic study of the temporal information in
diabetic patients’ discharge letters and proposed an algorithm
for splitting the case history into episodes [13]. The temporal
markers, which refer to the absolute or relative moments of
time, are identiﬁed with precision 87% and recall 68%. The
direction of time for the episode events: backwards or forward
(with respect to certain moment orienting the episode) is
recognised with precision 74.4%.
To tackle the Repository of outpatient records, we use a
Business Intelligence tool (BITool) that processes the database
of extracted entities. In principle the BITool can deliver various
types of ﬁndings to decision makers in order to improve
the public health policy and the management of Bulgarian
healthcare system. The tool is useful anyway because the
Health Insurance Fund data contains a lot of information
that is structured using codes of medical classiﬁcations and
nomenclatures. However, we are interested in the analysis
of free text sections and capturing some essential entities
described there. By means of NLP techniques integrated with
the BITool we discover the potential diabetic patients, which
were not formally diagnosed with diabetes. The paper [9]
presents the study and more especially, how we classify with
precision 91.5% the records according to the hypothesis ”hav-
ing diabetes” using only text comments in the sections with
unstructured content. The experiment was run on 1,206,276
records of 156,000 patients who are not formally diagnosed
with diabetes but the word “diabetes” (in Bulgarian “diabet”)
occurs in their records. In total, there are 190,189 such records
for 156,310 patients in our dataset.
III.
MATERIAL
The outpatient records are semi-structured ﬁles with prede-
ﬁned XML-format. Despite their primary accounting purpose
they contain sufﬁcient text explanations to summarise the
case and to motivate the requested reimbursement. The most
important indicators like Age, Gender, Location, Diagnoses are
easily seen since they are stored with explicit tags. The Case
history is presented quite brieﬂy in the Anamnesis as free text
with description of previous treatments, including drugs taken
by the patient beyond the ones that are to be reimbursed by
the Insurance Fund. Family history and Risk factors are often
included in the Anamnesis. Patient status is another section
containing free text. It includes a summary of the patient state,
symptoms, syndromes, patients’ height and weight, body mass
index (BMI), blood pressure and other clinical descriptions.
The values of Clinical tests and lab data are enumerated in
arbitrary order as free text in another section. A special section
is dedicated to the Prescribed treatment. Only drugs prescribed
by the GPs and reimbursed by the NHIF are coded, using the
speciﬁc NHIF nomenclatures. All the other medications and
treatment procedures are described as free text. In contrast to
clinical discharge letters that might discuss treatments in longer
past and future periods, the Prescribed treatment section in
the outpatient records is more focused on the context at the
moment when the record is composed.
The repository given to the Medical University - Soﬁa is
pseudonymised by NHIF which has the keys for mapping the
records to the original patients. Our experiments use a com-
pletely anonymised data set. Fortunately, the pseudonymised
patient identiﬁer helps to track automatically the multiple visits
of the same patient to GPs and Ambulatory Care, which is
important for a chronicle disease like diabetes.
An outpatient record includes up to 160 tags. The average
length of the ﬁles is about 1MB. Here, we work with 20-30
tags and consider the unstructured content of four sections.
Our ﬁndings are obtained after the extraction of the patient
age and seven risk factors. Our source repository for the
present study consists of 1,206,276 records of 156,310 patients
who are not formally diagnosed with diabetes but the word
’diabetes’ occurs in at least one of their outpatient records.
IV.
RESULTS AND FINDINGS
We studied the inter-dependences of the age (40+ years),
the seven risk factors, drugs taken by the patients and phrases
suggesting diabetes in the free text of the outpatient records.
A. Extraction of Lab Test Values
At ﬁrst we extracted automatically the values of all tests
related to the risk indicators enumerated on Table I. The total
number of patients having two and more risk factors (being
older than 40 years is one of the risk factors) is 68,681. The
records of these patients are mined for extracting the values
of BMI, waist circumference, triglycerides, cholesterol and
the blood glucose tests. The number of patients having the
different risk factors is given on Table I. We consider only the
records of patients who have at least one risk factor.
TABLE I. NUMBER OF PATIENTS WITH DIFFERENT RISK FACTORS.
Age > 40 years: 68,681 patients with Risk Factors
Indicators
Number
Body mass index (BMI) a
49483
Waist circumference
47921
Triglycerides
6834
Cholesterol
9063
HDL-cholesterol
1226
Fasting blood glucose
8020
Combination of 2 factors
27773
Combination of 3 factors
31009
Combination of 4 factors
7173
Combination of 5 factors
2271
Combination of 6 factors
437
Combination of 7 factors
18
When the results of fasting blood glucose are uncertain the
diagnostic of diabetes should be conﬁrmed by the oral glucose
tolerance test (OGGT). The fasting blood glucose for 8,020
patients, aged 40+, exceeded 6,1 mmol/l and the diabetes was
not registered in their records. So, we searched for patients
having more than 2 risk factors who have accomplished a
OGGT. We discovered that only 1,103 OGTTs were executed,
in 687 cases the patient age exceeded 40 years. In 102 cases the
diagnostic of diabetes was conﬁrmed. We note that 687 cases
represent only 8.56% of the 8,020 patients with risk factors.
B. Analytics on the Outpatient Records’ Database
A key ﬁnding that is easily seen in the NHIF repository
using our Business Intelligence tool is the heterogeneous
source of the submitted outpatient records. An outpatient
record is created for each visit to the GP or to Specialists from
Ambulatory Care, in doctor’s ofﬁce or patient home. Figure 1
summarises the number of visits of the ”risky” patients to 24
types of medical experts in the primary and the specialised
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

outpatient care. Column 2 at Figure 1 means that 10,878
citizens had only one visit to the GPs (row 1), 3,217 citizens
had a single visit to Gynecologists (row 2), 313 citizens visited
an Allergist only once (row 3) and so on. Column 3 presents
the number of citizens who visited the corresponding medical
experts 2-5 times; Column 6 - the number of citizens who
visited the respective medical specialists 16-42 times.
Figure 1 shows that the citizens aged 40+ visited often
their GPs (38.72% of all visits) but also had consultations
with other specialists. In Bulgaria one specialist can send a
patient to another specialist without obligation to inform the
GP about this. The clinical information systems of the GPs
and the specialists cannot exchange any information among
them and this is not required by the health authorities. The
only obligation of the specialists is to provide information
in xml-format to NHIF. Therefore the GPs, in general, have
no access to all the information concerning the patient. In
this way, the collection of all relevant documents in the GP’s
archives depends only on the good will of the patient, who
needs to bring the documentation to his/her GP as paper copy
(and therefore, the GP has to store a paper archive). Thus, the
GPs have a rather partial view to the patient status.
Figure 1. Number of visits (1, 2-5, 6-10, 11-15, 16-42) of citizens to
specialists
C. Extraction of Drugs
We have extracted the drugs from the outpatient records
that are considered in the present experiment. Please note that
the records contain a variety of drug presentation formats:
from free narrative in the text to fully structured information in
XML, from partial to complete details, in Bulgarian language
only or as a mixture of English and Bulgarian language. To
illustrate the varieties we present here three examples:
1)
Drug names in Cyrillic immediately followed by the
dosage daily scheme:
NovoRapid 20/19/ +15+12+18 i Levemir 10+22 E
(in English: NovoRapid 20/19/ +15+12+18 and Lev-
emir 10+22 E)
2)
Drug name in English language with information
about the NHIF registration code for this drug -
AF433, and description in Bulgarian language about
the dosage 20E and the scheme:
AF433 Levemir (300 UI x10) - doza: 20E v 22
qasa, podkono
(in English: AF433 Levemir Penﬁll (300 UI x10) -
dosage: 20E at 22 o’clock, subcutaneously)
3)
Drug information about Levemir Penﬁll structured
in XML format with NHIF registration code:
<DrugCode>AF433</DrugCode>
<DrugICD10>E10.9</DrugICD10>
<Quantity>4</Quantity>
<Day>30</Day>
Some 30,486 patients (out of the 68,681 patients we deal
with) admit drugs. Drug names occur in 117,798 outpatient
records. The 7-digit ATC codes, identiﬁed in the outpatient
records, are 306. The identiﬁed 3-digit ATC codes are 47. The
drug trade names are 356. Having in mind the risks for diabetes
developments, we have analysed the number of patients that
use glucocorticoides (H02), hydrochlorothiazide (C03AA03)
and combinations of thiazides with other diuretics (C03EA01-
hydrochlorothiazide and potassium-sparing agents).
Analysing the prescription of thiazides and their combi-
nations at Figure 2, we notice that the percentage of patients
taking thiazides (2%) is higher than the number of outpatient
records containing thiazides (1%). This means that in general,
the prescription of thiazides is not multiple so the medication is
taken in short periods only. It can be assumed that the doctors
are careful when prescribing thiazides to patients with risk
factor for diabetes.
In Figure 3, we present the inter-dependencies of the
risk factors and the number of patients aged 40+ who use
glucocorticoids and thiazides. We note that the C03AA03
hydrochlorothiazide is most often prescribed to patients with
high BMI and high waist circumference. The combination of
hydrochlorothiazide and potassium-sparing agents C03EA01
are also often prescribed for these patients. Figure 3 supports
the ﬁnding in Figure 2 that thiazides are prescribed relatively
rare.
D. Mining Free Text for Opinions of Medical Experts
In addition to the extraction of Lab data and Drugs, we
process the doctors’ utterances to discover phrases that poten-
tially signal risk factors. To conﬁrm/reject the hypotheses of (i)
having diabetes and (ii) family heredity, we apply a hybrid
approach of rough rule-based pre-ﬁltering followed by training
of machine learning models. For testing both hypotheses we
use text chunks extracted from a concordancer around the
string “diabet” (diabetes). The data set consists of 67,904
distinct chunks extracted from the records of 156,310 patients
who are not formally diagnosed with diabetes. Each chunk
contains the string “diabet” (diabetes) and a 6-token window
of its left and right context. The text is only tokenised (i.e., split
to words and meaningful strings) and stemmed (word endings
are deleted). Figure 4 shows 2 examples from the manually
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. Statistics about using Thiazides, Beta Blocking Agents and other
drugs
Figure 3. Drug Prescription to Patients Aged 40+ with Risk Factors
(i) NEG-diabetes; POS-familyHeredity
Familnost - obremenen/a - diabetici
po ma$iqina lini.
Family - heredity - diabetic on maternal line.
(iii) NEG-diabetes; NEG-familyHeredity
Lipsva familna obremenenost za zaharen diabet.
No family heredity for diabetes mellitus.
Figure 4. NEGative and POSitive chunks examples from free text
descriptions
annotated training data prepared in order to train the classiﬁer.
The last example is negative to both hypotheses whereas the
ﬁrst one is positive to family heredity and negative to having
diabetes. These chunks come from records of patients who are
not formally diagnosed with diabetes so, in principle there are
more negative examples to our hypotheses.
1) Rule-based rough pre-ﬁltering: In ﬁrst place we do
rough pre-ﬁltering of the data in order to reduce its size.
The expressions we used for ﬁltering were manually selected
by analysing the data, they are such as ”no evidence about
diabetes”, ”no diabetes in the family” etc., and for the second
experiment ”no family heredity”, ”no heredity” etc. After
applying the rules in the ﬁrst experiment the data reduced to
almost 1/3 of its initial size while in the second case about 7%
were reduced.
2) Supervised classiﬁcation of positive/negative examples:
In the second phase we apply a number of machine learning
techniques on the reduced datasets. We create datasets of
randomly extracted records from the full set and manually
annotate them. The dataset used for testing the hypothesis
“having diabetes” has two subsets – one of 282 documents and
one of 1,000 documents. The ﬁrst one is our development set,
it is used for selecting features and for initial tests. It contains
74 positive and 208 negative examples whereas the second one
(our test set) contains 187 positive and 813 negative examples
respectively. By using various features and classiﬁcation algo-
rithms we check the applicability of machine learning to the
automatic extraction of records referring to ”having diabetes”
(similarly to [4], [12], [14]) and set a reasonable baseline for
this task. We tried several algorithms on the same dataset:
NaiveBayes, J48, SMO and JRip and MaxEnt, all with boolean
features. JRip, J48 and MaxEnt performed best and MaxEnt
algorithm outperformed all. We measure the performance of
the models in terms of precision (percentage of true positive
examples in all extracted examples), recall (percentage of the
true positive examples in all available positive examples) and
their harmonic mean f − measure.
The features we used were - words’ stems, bigrams
and trigrams. The classiﬁcation with MaxEnt reached 91.5%
precision on the positive examples and 88.55% on average
(positive/negative). The recall was comparatively low (52.1%
on average) but for us precision is of major importance
here because we want to select potential diabetic patients
with high certainty. Some 37-42 phrases (depending on the
selected model) were extracted as positive examples out of
1000 randomly selected test documents with precision higher
than 91%. This suggests that several thousands of positive
assertions would be found in the free texts of the original data
set. We consider this number signiﬁcant given that the patients
we deal with were not diagnosed with diabetes.
The dataset for classiﬁcation of records according to the
hypothesis “family heredity” has the following subsets: devel-
opment subset - 600 documents (300 positive and 300 negative
examples) and test set with 1,727 documents (915 positive
and 812 negative examples). As features we use the words
stems and bigrams and trigrams available in the development
set (including punctuation). We use the same classiﬁcation
algorithms as in the ﬁrst experiment, with boolean vectors. The
best performance was achieved with MaxEnt algorithm using
all features without feature selection - 93.8% f − measure.
This means that out of 600 records, 276 were selected as
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

approving the risk factor “family heredity” with precision
over 95% (we keep in mind that the class distribution in the
development and test sets may differ from the distribution in
the original data). For comparison in [15] is achieved 100%
f − measure on extracting the “experiencer” feature of an
event (whether the event is experienced by the patient or by
other person). The experiment which is closest to ours is
done on discharge letters and the authors report that there
was insufﬁcient data for thorough testing of the “experiencer“
feature extraction.
V.
DISCUSSION
The results presented here clearly conﬁrm the lack of
prevention-orientated thinking of the general practitioners and
the specialists. The organisation of primary care and the
specialised outpatient care in Bulgaria do not stimulate the
doctors to do the prevention. The preventive measures are not
systematic and are not adequately reimbursed. In addition the
specialists have no access to the complete adequate information
concerning all Lab data, clinical examinations and consulta-
tions made by the patients.
VI.
CONCLUSION
Information extraction from clinical texts matures only
recently but its performance gradually improves and often
exceeds 90% [16]. Our experience shows that in a rapid
development process, one can achieve good performance in
separate extraction tasks within 2-3 years. The review [16]
however states that ”current applications are rarely applied
outside of the laboratories they have been developed in, mostly
because of scalability and generalisability issues”. We would
add here that the negative results are partly due to the incon-
sistency, incompleteness and fragmentariness of the medical
documentation per se; these shortcomings become obvious in
the computer age when ambitious goals like the Secondary
Use of EHR data are set.
The erroneous results that might include also over-
generation (false positive indications) are an inevitable part
of the NLP technologies. They might be dangerous for further
use unless the applications are based on very large resources.
In these cases the small percentage of false positive entities
is statistically insigniﬁcant and practically negligible. Human
recognition of entities might also include some erroneous
choices. We test carefully our extractors and integrate them
only in scenarios where their role is to deliver primarily
supporting evidence.
From the social medicine perspective the present system
is an important achievement. It enables to develop a diabetes
prevention procedure after the analysis of the risk factors and
delivering the codes of the “risky patients” to the National
Health Insurance Fund. In this way the National authorities can
send alerts to the GPs and also to the patients, informing them
electronically about risk factors and the necessity to implement
active prophylactic measures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research work presented in this paper is partially
supported by the FP7 grant 316087 AComIn ”Advanced Com-
puting for Innovation”, funded by the European Commission
in the FP7 Capacity Programme in 2012–2016, the project
BG161PO003-1.1.06-0023-C0001 ”Analysing and identifying
dependencies in big data repositories - application for eco-
nomic and technological analyses” funded by the Competi-
tiveness Operational Programme in 2012–2015 and the project
D01-192/2014 funded by the Bulgarian Ministry of Education
and Science. The authors also acknowledge the support of the
Bulgarian Health Insurance Fund, the Bulgarian Ministry of
Health and the Medical University - Soﬁa.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Demner-Fushman, W. W. Chapman, and C. J. McDonald, “Method-
ological Review: What can natural language processing do for clinical
decision support?” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 42(5), 2009,
pp. 760–772.
[2]
H. Harkema, A. Setzer, R. Gaizauskas, M. Hepple, R. Power, and
J. Rogers, “Mining and modelling temporal clinical data,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 4th UK e-Science All Hands Meeting, S. Cox, Ed.,
Nottingham, UK, 2005, pp. 507–514.
[3]
R. Gaizauskas, M. Hepple, N. Davis, Y. Guo, H. Harkema, A. Roberts,
and I. Roberts, “AMBIT: Acquiring Medical and Biological Information
from Text,” in S.J. Cox (Ed.) Proceedings of the 2nd UK e-Science All
Hands Meeting, 2003, pp. 370–373.
[4]
G. Savova, P. Ogren, P. Duffy, J. Buntrock, and C. Chute, “Mayo
Clinic NLP System for Patient Smoking Status Identiﬁcation,” Journal
of American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 15(1), 2008, pp.
25–28.
[5]
M. Poesio and A. Almuhareb, “Identifying concept attributes using
a classiﬁer,” in Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Deep Lexical
Semantics, 2005, pp. 18–27.
[6]
B. Kedar, P. P. Talukdar, G. Kumaran, O. Pereira, M. Liberman, A. Mc-
callum, and M. Dredze, “Lightly Supervised Attribute Extraction,” in
The SelectedWorks of Andrew McCallum.
[7]
Y. W. Wong and K. N. D. Widdows, T. Lokovic, “Scalable Attribute-
Value Extraction from Semi-Structured Text,” in Proceedings of ICDM
Workshop on Large-scale Data Mining: Theory and Applications, 2009.
[8]
N. K. Mishra, R. Y. Son, and J. J. Arnzen, “Towards Automatic Diabetes
Case Detection and ABCS Protocol Compliance Assessment,” Clin.
Med. Res., vol. 10(3), August 2012, pp. 106–121.
[9]
I. Nikolova, D. Tcharaktchiev, S. Boytcheva, Z. Angelov, and G. An-
gelova, “Applying Language Technologies on Healthcare Patient records
for Better Treatment of Diabetic Patients,” in Proceedings of AIMSA
2014.
Springer, Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 8722, 2014,
pp. 92–103.
[10]
S. Boytcheva, “Shallow Medication Extraction from Hospital Patient
Records,” in Studies in Health Technology and Informatics series.
IOS Press, 2011, pp. 119–128, Koutkias, V., J. Nies, S. Jensen, N.
Maglaveras, and R. Beuscart (Eds.).
[11]
D. Tcharaktchiev, G. Angelova, S. Boytcheva, Z. Angelov, and
S. Zacharieva, “Completion of Structured Patient Descriptions by Se-
mantic Mining,” in Studies in Health Technology and Informatics series.
IOS Press, 2011, pp. 260–269, Koutkias, V., J. Nies, S. Jensen, N.
Maglaveras, and R. Beuscart (Eds.).
[12]
S. Boytcheva, D. Tcharaktchiev, and G. Angelova, “Contextualization in
automatic extraction of drugs from Hospital Patient Records,” in Studies
in Health Technology and Informatics series.
IOS Press, 2011, pp.
527–531, a. Moen at al. (Eds).
[13]
S. Boytcheva, G. Angelova, and I. Nikolova, “Automatic Analysis of
Patient History Episodes in Bulgarian Hospital Discharge Letters,” in
Proceedings of the Demonstrations at EACL 2012, 2012, pp. 77–81.
[14]
I. Nikolova, “Uniﬁed Extraction of Health Condition Descriptions,” in
Proceedings of the North America ACL HLT 2012 Student Research
Workshop, 2012, pp. 23–28.
[15]
H. Harkema, J. Dowling, T. Thornblade, and W. Chapman, “ConText:
An Algorithm for Determining Negation, Experiencer, and Temporal
Status from Clinical Reports,” J Biomed Inf, vol. 42(5), 2009, pp. 839–
851.
[16]
S. Meystre, G. Savova, K. Kipper-Schuler, and J. F. Hurdle, “Extracting
Information from Textual Documents in the Electronic Health Record:
A Review of Recent Research,” in Yearbook of Medical Informatics,
2008, pp. 128–144.
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

