Long Term Monitoring of Breathing Pattern Parameters by a Wearable System at 
COPD Patient's Home 
 
Leonardo Govoni 
Politecnico di Milano, 
Dipartimento di Elettronica Informazione e 
Bioingegneria, TBM-Lab 
Milano, Italy 
leonardo.govoni@mail.polimi.it  
Valentina Isetta 
University of Barcelona-CIBERES, 
Faculty of Medicine 
Unit of Biophysics and Bioengineering 
Barcelona, Spain 
valentina.isetta@ub.edu
Piero Giacomelli 
TESAN Spa, 
Vicenza, Italy 
giacomelli@tesan.it 
Roberto Rosso 
TESAN Spa, 
Vicenza, Italy 
rosso@tesan.it 
Ramon Farré 
University of Barcelona-IDIBAPS-CIBERES, 
 Faculty of Medicine, 
Unit of Biophysics and Bioengineering 
Barcelona, Spain 
rfarre@ub.edu 
Raffaele Dellacà 
Politecnico di Milano, 
Dipartimento di Elettronica Informazione e 
Bioingegneria, TBM-Lab 
Milano, Italy 
raffaele.dellaca@polimi.it 
 
 
Abstract—Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is 
a very prevalent disease which causes the deterioration of 
patient’s quality of life and frequent hospitalizations. 
Telemedicine can be a valid tool to reduce this burden. 
CHRONIOUS is a FP7 EU project aimed to create a platform 
for home monitoring of chronic ill patients.. It is composed of a 
wearable system which is a sensorized T-shirt which collects 
and transmits data coming from various sensors, among which 
chestwall and abdomen respiratory volumes by means of two 
inductive bands sewn into the T-shirt, a technique called 
respiratory inductive plethysmography (RIP). The aim of this 
study was to assess the functionality and stability of the RIP 
included in the CHRONIOUS system for tidal volume (Vt) 
measurement on home long term setting. COPD patients were 
equipped with the CHRONIOUS system and were asked to 
wear the T-shirt for 1 hour per day, 3 days a week, for 2 
months. We analyzed the data of one COPD patient (72 years 
old, BMI = 23 kg/m2, COPD stage III, FEV1% = 49%, 
FEV1/FVC = 40%) who used the CHRONIOUS system for a 
total of 40 days, performing a total of 17 acquisitions of one 
hour each. We computed the average of Vt for each acquisition 
session. Normalized Vt showed good stability in terms of 
mean±sd during the whole period of acquisitions (1±0.3). 
Moreover it has been possible to discriminate the breathing 
activity in terms of compartmental contributions (abdominal 
or thoracic). The preliminary results presented in this study 
show the potential usefulness of this new telemedicine 
approach for the long term monitoring of breathing pattern 
parameters. 
Keywords-eHealth; telemedicine; home monitoring; chronic 
diseases; COPD; respiratory inductive plethysmography. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
Chronic diseases are the main cause of death in almost 
every developed country, and deaths from chronic 
respiratory diseases are second only to those from 
cardiovascular diseases (1). Chronic pathologies like Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), which the World 
Health Organization has predicted to become the third 
leading cause of death throughout the world by 2030 (2), 
determine a serious burden on patients and health care 
systems because of low quality of life and frequent and 
expensive hospitalizations. 
The need to reduce this burden brought health care 
providers to promote national and international initiatives 
based on telemedicine services, which on one hand can 
perform a better follow-up of the patient at home and on the 
other aim to provide health domiciliary services and to 
prevent acute events that can lead to the hospitalization of 
the patient. 
CHRONIOUS is a FP7 European project concluded in 
May 2012 that aimed to create a home platform for a generic 
health status monitoring schema, addressing people at risk or 
with chronic health conditions (3).  
CHRONIOUS addresses a smart wearable platform, 
based on multi-parametric sensor data processing and fusion 
for monitoring people suffering from chronic diseases in 
long-stay setting. CHRONIOUS provides a continuous 
monitoring of the patient’s parameters using audio 
observation methods and selected environmental and social 
327
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

context sensors while at the same time tracking their medical 
condition via vital signs sensors. In addition, the platform 
offers a touch screen interface for monitoring drug intake, 
dietary habits, weight and glycaemia values. All the acquired 
data are sent, through a mobile network connection to the 
Internet, to a central server, on which a Central Decision 
Support System (CDSS) addressed data analysis (5) (see 
Figure 1). Healthcare professionals are provided with full 
access to the patient’s information and data continuously 
stored in the CHRONIOUS central server coming from the 
patient’s wearable devices, in order to perform the offline 
remote monitoring of patient’s conditions. 
The CHRONIOUS wearable system (CWS) (see Figure 
2) is composed of a T-shirt, made of washable stretch-
material, into which are sewn several sensors that are 
connected to a microcontroller based concentrator. This 
device collects and transmits all data coming from the 
sensors via a Bluetooth wireless connection to a PDA or a 
personal computer. The CHRONIOUS wearable sensing 
framework 
provides 
a 
continuous 
acquisition 
of 
electrocardiographic 
signals, 
arterial 
blood 
oxygen 
saturation, heart rate, cough, posture, skin and ambient 
temperature. To evaluate the patient’s breathing, the 
wearable platform acquires respiratory movements and 
volumes by means of two conductive bands sewn into the T-
shirt which measure the movements of the chest and 
abdominal walls. This technique is called respiratory 
inductive plethysmography (RIP) and is well-known for its 
capacity of assessing the patient’s pulmonary ventilation in a 
completely no-invasive way (4). RIP technique can provide 
information about respiratory volumes, timings, breathing 
frequency and asynchronies between chest-wall and 
abdomen. 
The aim of this study was to assess the functionality and 
stability over time of the measurements provided by the RIP 
included in the CHRONIOUS system installed at patients’ 
home, without any supervision of health care professional 
and in a long term setting. 
In this work-in-progress paper the methods and some 
preliminary results of the first patient data analysis will be 
presented and plans for the whole data set analysis will be 
mentioned. 
 
II. 
METHODS 
A. The CHRONIOUS System at Patient’s Home 
Patients were equipped at home with a touchscreen 
computer (TC) which is connected through an USB cable to 
a device for air quality control. The TC has the possibility to 
connect to the Internet through a mobile phone network 
adapter. 
Patients at home were also provided with the wearable 
platform (see Figure 2), which is the result of different test 
phases performed during the project in which a number of 
parameters have been considered both for best quality data 
acquisition and patient’s comfort. The platform is equipped 
with two bands for the RIP, which is a system composed of 
two inductive bands, one positioned around patient’s chest-
wall and one around the belly, used to measure volume 
displacements of the two body compartments during 
breathing movements. Each band is composed of a 
conductive wire, the inductance value of which depends on 
its section area. As the patient breaths chest-wall and 
abdomen sections change and so its inductance values which 
are proportional to the volume of inhaled and exhaled air. 
 
 
Figure 1. The CHRONIOUS system provided at patients’ home. It is 
composed of a touchscreen computer, a wearable device, an air quality 
control device and some external devices, a weight scale, a glucometer and a 
blood pressure meter. All the data were acquired by the touchscreen 
computer and sent to a central decision support system for data analysis. 
 
A microcontroller based device called Data Handler 
(DH) was designed and produced specially for the 
CHRONIOUS project. Once connected to the T-shirt it 
continuously samples incoming data from all the sensors and 
RIP signals in particular at a sampling frequency of 12.5 Hz, 
and communicate them through a Bluetooth wireless 
connection to a devoted software installed on the TC. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The CHRONIOUS wearable system (CWS) composed of the T-
shirt equipped with the SpO2 sensor, the activity and temperature sensors, 
the microphone, the four ECG electrodes and the two RIP bands for 
respiratory movements. 
 
The software installed on the TC acts as a reminder and 
periodically asks the patient to wear the T-shirt and to switch 
the 
DH 
on. 
It 
automatically 
starts 
a 
Bluetooth 
communication with the DH and stores all the incoming 
traces of the sensors included in the T-shirt. After one hour 
the TC ends the data acquisition and automatically transmits 
the raw traces to the CHRONIOUS central server through an 
Internet connection enabled on purpose through a mobile 
328
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

phone modem. At the end of the acquisition session the 
patient can switch off the DH and undress the CWS. 
 
B. The Acquisition Protocol 
The CHRONIOUS system was provided to COPD 
patients for a period of four months and they were asked to 
perform three acquisition sessions per week wearing the 
CWS, specifically on Monday, Wednesday and Friday of 
one hour each during which all parameters were sampled 
continuously and RIP signals in particular. 
During each acquisition session patients were asked to 
sit, relax and breath normally during the whole hour, 
preferably while watching television or reading a book. 
 
C. RIP Calibration 
The data traces acquired through the RIP device 
represent the volume displacement of rib cage (VRC) and 
abdomen (VABD) during spontaneous breathing. The 
acquired data are not calibrated in terms of liters of breathed 
air as there were no devices at patient’s home used as 
volume reference for calibration. 
It is possible to perform a calibration of the volume traces 
in order to counterbalance the different contribution of the 
electronic gains on the sampled traces of VRC and VABD. 
This is done through the Qualitative Diagnostic Calibration 
(QDC) method (5), which states that variations of VRC and 
VABD during breathing occur from breath to breath even 
with breaths of equivalent volume (VT). These variations are 
reflected in the breath-to-breath standard deviation (SD) 
which can be used to compute a calibration coefficient. 
Calibrated Tidal Volume (VTcal) can be computed as 
follow: 
VTcal = M[K(VRC)+VABD] 
 
where M is a coefficient that we cannot obtain as we did 
not provide any reference device for volume measurements 
to the patient. The coefficient K is a gain coefficient that 
compensates for sampling circuit asymmetries and can be 
computed as follow: 
 
K = SD(VAB) / SD(VRC) 
 
where SD(VAB) and SD(VRC) are respectively the 
standard deviation of the acquired not calibrated abdominal 
volume and rib cage volume. 
We computed Tidal Volume (VT) using the following 
equation: 
VT = K·VRC + VAB 
D. Data Analysis 
For each acquisition the normal breaths were selected in 
order to exclude artifacts due to the T-shirt movements not 
related to breaths, and to exclude deep breaths, cough and 
other extemporary breathing events that might affect 
analysis. 
For each breath we selected end-inspiration and end-
expiration points on the VT trace in order to compute the not 
calibrated tidal volume (∆VT) breath by breath. We 
computed mean (∆VTm’) and standard deviation (∆VTsd’) 
of the VT breaths for each acquisition session. We filtered 
further the selected breaths excluding the outliers according 
to the following equation: 
 
∆VT > ∆VTm’ + 1.5·∆VTsd’  or  ∆VT < ∆VTm’ - 1.5·∆VTsd’ 
 
After the filtering we computed the new mean and 
standard deviation values of the VT: ∆VTm± ∆VTsd. Finally 
we computed the average value (∆VTav) of the ∆VTm of all 
acquisitions and used it to obtain the normalized tidal 
volume ∆VTn of each acquisition. 
As the sampling frequency is known, 12.5Hz, it was 
possible to compute for each breath some breathing pattern 
parameters, such as inspiratory time (IT), expiratory time 
(ET) and respiratory rate (RR), which together with tidal 
volume can provide minute ventilation (VENT), which is the 
volume of air breathed during one minute: 
 
VENT = RR · ∆VTn 
III. 
RESULTS 
 
For this preliminary study we considered a COPD patient 
(72 years old, BMI = 23 kg/m2, COPD stage = III, FEV1% = 
49%, FEV1/FVC = 40%) who used the CWS for a total of 
40 consecutive days, performing a total of 17 acquisitions, 
about 1 acquisition every 2 days. We considered a total of 
6640 breaths, an average of about 300 breaths per 
acquisition. 
We computed the ∆VTn for each acquisition (i.e. the 
normalized tidal volume computed as an average of all the 
breaths in each acquisition session) and plotted the results as 
shown in Figure 3. The mean value of the plotted values was 
1 and the standard deviation was 0.3. 
As we were able to discriminate the two volume 
compartments, we computed the contribution of both to the 
normalized tidal volume during each acquisition session (see 
Figure 4). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The CHRONIOUS system is a complex and complete 
telemedicine system that as a whole should provide very 
useful information about chronic patient’s health conditions 
and breathing activity at home, and would allow clinicians 
to monitor the chronic disease progression in normal 
conditions and during normal patient’s activities. 
The CHRONIOUS system aims at monitoring chronic ill 
patients, in particular COPD patients. It gathers different 
patient’s information and physiological parameters in order 
to combine them and be able to automatically monitor 
patient’s conditions and disease evolution. 
This study was aimed at the evaluation of the wearable 
system and in particular of the breathing activity of COPD 
patients. Indeed, the CHRONIOUS wearable system allows 
the sampling of a number of parameters through the use of a 
329
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

sensorized T-shirt which, once worn, continuously samples 
volume displacement data during spontaneous breathing 
thanks to the integrated RIP system. 
 
Figure 3. Normalized Tidal Volume (∆VTn) computed for every acquisition 
session. 
 
Figure 4. Contribution of the abdominal volume (VAB) to the Normalized 
Tidal Volume (∆VTn) computed for every acquisition session. The 
contribution of the rib cage volume (VRC) can be obtained by subtraction  
(VRC = 1 – VAB). 
 
The CHRONIOUS wearable system is the result of 
various tests with patients which highlighted different 
issues, both technical and of wearability and usability of the 
system. Each test allowed us to realize the final version of 
the T-shirt which has been used in the study described in 
this paper without any complain of the patients, and with 
their satisfaction in terms of wearability, which was 
evaluated through special questionnaires at the end of the 
project. As there were not usability problems, measurements 
have not been affected by this aspect. 
This first analysis allowed us to determine whether the 
RIP system was able to measure breathing volumes during a 
long period without any supervision. The CHRONIOUS 
wearable system was left at patient’s home for a period of 
40 days, during which he could perform himself the 
measurement while no technical interventions were done. 
Tidal volume measurements showed good stability in 
long period of time, as shown in Figure 3, taking into 
account that the system has been used only instructing the 
patient at the beginning of the study, without any further 
supervision at home. Patients were asked to wear the T-shirt 
day by day by themselves, and they were only instructed to 
perform some peaceful activity, like watching television or 
reading a book. 
Moreover the RIP system allows the analysis of 
breathing of the two different compartments, rib cage and 
abdomen (Figure 4), and this is very important in COPD 
patients. Future work and further analysis will allow us to 
investigate about the implications of the contribution of one 
compartment over the other, also related to the position of 
the breathing patient. Asynchronies will be deepened, as 
these events are very frequent in COPD patients and 
indicative on patient’s conditions. 
Furthermore a wider and more comprehensive analysis 
need to be made including more patients enrolled in the 
study and cross-checking patients’ conditions based on 
others sensors data. 
AKNOLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank Fabio Ciancitto for the 
collaboration in the CHRONIOUS wearable platform 
development. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Bartoli L, Zanaboni P, Masella C and Ursini N. Systematic 
review of telemedicine services for patients affected by 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Telemedicine 
and e-health 2009;15(9):877-84 
[2] www.who.int/respiratory/copd/en/index.html (Last accessed 
December 14 2012). World Health Organization. Chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).  2012.  
[3] www.chronious.eu/, (Last accessed October 22 2012). 
CHRONIOUS: An Open, Ubiquitous and Adaptive Chronic 
Disease Management Platform for COPD and Renal 
Insufficiency.  2012.  
[4] Konno K and Mead J. Measurement of the separate volume 
changes of rib cage and abdomen during breathing. J Appl 
Physiol 1967 March;22(3):407-22. 
[5] Colantonio S; Dellacà RL; Govoni L; Martinelli M; Salvetti O 
and Vitacca M. A Decision Making Approach for the Remote, 
Personalized Evaluation of COPD Patients' Health Status, BSI 
2012 Proceedings. 
[6] Sackner MA, Watson H, Belsito AS, Feinerman D, Suarez M, 
Gonzalez G, Bizousky F and Krieger B. Calibration of 
respiratory 
inductive 
plethysmograph 
during 
natural 
breathing. J Appl Physiol 1983;66:410-20. 
 
330
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

