Technological Changes in High Reliability Organization:  
Implementation  
of a Telematic Rescue Assistance System  
into German Emergency Medical Services 
Marie-Thérèse Schneiders, Daniel Schilberg, Ingrid Isenhardt, Sabina Jeschke 
Institute of Information Management in Mechanical Engineering (IMA)  
RWTH Aachen University 
Aachen, Germany 
 
Email: {marie.schneiders, daniel.schilberg, ingrid.isenhardt, sabina.jeschke}@ima.rwth-aachen.de 
 
 
 
Abstract- The introduction of a Telematic Rescue Assistance 
System into the German Emergency Medical Services aims 
at the enhancement of treatment quality and efficiency of 
rescue operations. Rescue teams are supported on site by a 
specialized emergency physician in a remote Competence 
Centre. Using mobile radio networks the Telematic Rescue 
Assistance System enables real time transmission of voice 
communication, vital parameters, pictures and videos from 
any emergency site. The successful and sustainable operation 
of a Telematic Rescue Assistance System in German 
Emergency Medical Services organizations requires the 
elaboration of a context and object adjusted implementation 
strategy. Dealing with technology change in a so called High 
Reliability 
Organization, 
organizational 
culture 
and 
structure 
affect 
primarily 
the 
design 
of 
available 
implementation instruments. Further requirements to the 
arrangement of an implementation process result from the 
sociotechnical 
specificities 
of 
the 
Telematic 
Rescue 
Assistance System. 
The 
present 
work 
presents 
the 
methodology used within the research project to develop an 
adequate implementation strategy, pointing out the relevant 
requirements and the chosen instruments to implement the 
system within five different Emergency Medical Services 
departments in 2012.  
Keywords - Telematic Rescue Assistance System; German 
Emergency 
Medical 
Services; 
High 
Reliabilty 
Organizations; 
Technology 
Implementation; 
Implementation Management  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Within the German research project Med-on-@ix 
(2007-2010) engineers, researchers and physicians from 
Aachen developed a preliminary model of the Telematic 
Rescue Assistance Systems (TRAS) and evaluated the 
prototype for 10 months within a trial run in the 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) of the city of Aachen. 
The evaluation of the system revealed the potential of 
telemedical support during EMS missions regarding high 
quality treatment of emergency patients and the 
enhancement of information and time management.  
The TRAS allows the immediate support by EMS 
teams during an emergency operation by a tele-EMS 
physician in a remote Competence Center (CompC). Not 
only the real-time transmission of vital data and pictures 
from the emergency site but also the video footage out of 
the Mobile Intensive Care Unit (MICU) via 3G mobile 
radio networks, provide the necessary information basis 
for the qualified telemedical support. Via mobile 
communication the tele-EMS physician is connected with 
the team on site and provides the necessary medical know-
how and decision authority in terms of adequate diagnosis 
and treatment. The CompC serves as an information 
crosspoint between prehospital, clinical and related health 
care facilities along the medical supply chain [1].   
The project work pursued a joint organizational and 
technical development approach [2] to guarantee a user-
centered requirement management and a continuous 
process improvement in line with the development.  The 
constant involvement of EMS physicians and paramedics 
into the design and development process as well as trials at 
different levels of development (simulation studies in 2008 
and 2009) and the final trial run in regular operations of 
the fire department in Aachen aimed at a wide scope of 
requirements regarding the implementation of the TRAS in 
German EMS organizations.  
 The follow-up project “TemRas – Telemedical Rescue 
Assistance System” started in 2010 faces the challenge to 
establish the TRAS at a broader level to be used in five 
different EMS departments in Western Germany. The 
research action is funded by the Ministry of Innovation, 
Science and Research of the state of North-Rhine 
Westphalia (MIWF) and the European Union for three 
years. At a technical level the roll-out of the TRAS 
requires the adaption of the software architecture to enable 
simultaneous support of multiple MICUs. The adapted 
software architecture overcomes the absence of standards 
for data exchange, integrates the existing devices used by 
MICUs and manages the communication for different 
applications [3]. The telematic network connects the 
MICU, the EMS team on site and the CompC. The long 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

distance communication is based on 3G mobile networks. 
Bluetooth and wireless transmission both enable the real 
time data transmission in the near area from the 
monitor/defibrillator unit, a Bluetooth stethoscope and a 
digital camera as well as a video life stream from a 
network camera in the MICU to the CompC (Figure 1. ).     
 
 
Figure 1.  The optimised Telematic Rescue Assistance System  
Besides the technical optimization of the TRAS, the 
main challenge is the implementation of the system in 
rural and urban areas with heterogeneous initial conditions 
in terms of resources, operating standards as well as user 
groups with different level of qualification and motivation.  
The use of the TRAS implies a perceptible impact on 
communication structures and team processes 
[2]. 
Therefore the introduction into EMS organizations 
requires an implementation strategy considering system-
related requirements as modified working processes, new 
working environments and new equipment. Furthermore 
organization-related requirements have to be considered to 
design the necessary actions. The implementation context 
is characterized by existing working conditions, cultural 
specification of the organization and structural conditions 
of the EMS department.  
This paper offers an insight into the design of the 
implementation strategy pursued in the project TemRas. 
Starting with a literature review on the state of the art 
(section II), section III offers an insight into the 
characteristics of EMS as target organization of 
technology change. The methodology presented in section 
IV is partly borrowed from sociological and management 
theories. Whether sociological technology acceptance 
models 
underline 
the 
necessity 
of 
participatory 
implementation approaches, economical and marketing 
methods turn the gaze on the possibilities to bring about 
the organizational adoption and the long-term use of new 
technologies. Based on empirical values from the final 
evaluation results of the former project and scientific 
findings about EMS as a High Reliability Organization 
(HRO), an implementation strategy is developed relying 
on organization-related and object-related requirements 
(section V). The paper finally concludes with the idea how 
to learn from high reliability theory to design successful 
implementation processes.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
To achieve the intended results by introducing new 
technologies a careful design of the implementation 
process is almost as relevant as the system design itself 
[4]. Since the decision to adopt a new technology does not 
online depend on the character of the product but goes in 
line with the first impression of its usefulness and the 
measures aiming at familiarizing the user with the changed 
working processes. The proper use of telemedical 
applications and the embedment into approved working 
routines affect the dissemination of the innovation through 
the 
healthcare sector. 
The 
aim 
of 
implementing 
telemedicine into healthcare organizations is to generate 
improved working processes with recourse to telemedical 
assistance. Care organizations develop routines around the 
use of 
new 
technologies 
and 
thereby 
create 
a 
selfreinforcing cycle of stability [4].  
Following 
Gersick 
and 
Hackman 
routines 
are 
“functionally similar pattern of behavior in a given 
stimulus situation without explicitly selecting it over 
alternative ways of behaving” [5] . Current organizational 
routines can therefore be a source of organizational 
resistance against implementation of new technology 
combined with unknown working procedures. 
 Although past research has discovered that the 
decision to adopt a new technology does not guarantee its 
successful implementation [6] there has been only a few 
empirical studies on how to manage the group and 
interpersonal process to make implementation happen [7]. 
The organization’s willingness to adopt a new technology 
is a basic condition for successful implementation 
depending besides the user acceptance on the attitudes of 
managers towards technological change [8]. Research on 
technology acceptance revealed the necessity to consider 
not only the decision to adopt as a punctual event but to 
make a distinction between the classical terms of attitude, 
adoption or diffusion. Kollmann [9] recommends a gradual 
construct of acceptance considering user attitudes in a first 
phase, the willingness to try out a technology and in the 
end the long-term incorporation of a technology into 
organizational routines. Implementation measures aim at 
the creation of new organizational routines around the 
technology use, requiring a positive attitude and the 
readiness to try out something new. The success of the 
implementation process thus depends on the creating 
positive acceptance from the first user contact on. The 
closeness to the organizational environment encourages 
the consideration of cultural and structural particularities 
of the target organization. 
Studies on adoption of new technologies in healthcare 
organizations underpin that technology implementation is 
a process during which new beliefs, new skills, and new 
collaborative routines are simultaneously developed [7]. 
Edmonson et al. [7] found out that “organizational 
differences in size, resources, academic status, innovation 
history, and senior management support were not 
primarily associated with implementation success” but 
ascribe these results to the unusual degree of homogeneity 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

across 
the 
observed 
cardiac surgery departments, 
introducing minimal invasive cardiac surgery. The authors 
point out the importance of collective learning processes 
and the role of team leaders as innovation drivers. It is 
decisive to foster open communication and mutual trust 
within the teams, “reinforcing a particular technological 
frame, which affects how others think about a new 
technology and the nature of the challenge it presents” [7]. 
Edmonson et al. [7] suggest a four-step process to establish 
new working routines: enrollment, preparation, trials, and 
reflection. The process model that emerged from these 
data is mundane: (1) carefully select a team, (2) practice 
and communicate, (3) work to encourage communication 
while experimenting with new behaviors in trials, and (4) 
take time to reflect collectively on how trials are going so 
that appropriate changes can be made [7].  
Similar studies and observations in EMS organizations 
have not yet been carried out. The remarks made so far 
show the necessity to take a closer look at the 
organizational culture to design an implementation 
strategy, along with stimulating of positive technology 
acceptance as a prerequisite for organizational adoption. 
III. 
TECHNOLOGY CHANGE  IN HIGH RELIABILITY 
ORGANIZATIONS 
As EMS teams are able to balance effectiveness and 
safety despite the complexities of the environment 
regarding uncertainty of the situation, time pressure and 
restricted available resources, EMS organizations are 
considered High Reliability Organizations (HRO). Risky 
environment and the fact of facing partly insoluble tasks 
make human errors practically inevitable in these 
organizations; nevertheless fewer mistakes are made than 
expected, as problems are identified at an early stage. 
These organizations do this by consistently noticing the 
unexpected and reacting in a very flexible way. 
Following the HRO model by Weick and Sutcliffe [10] 
these organizations have a collective state of mindfulness 
in common. Five principles of acting and organizing create 
a mindful way of behaving:  
1. preoccupation with failures rather than successes,  
2. reluctance to simplify interpretations,  
3. sensitivity to operations,  
4. commitment to resilience and  
5. deference to expertise.  
 
Members of mindful organizations pay attention to 
small deviations from regular operations and consider even 
small failures as a potential cause for bigger problems. 
They do not try to overlook mistakes to focus on successes 
but take failures as learning moments. HRO avoid the 
human tendency to oversimplify the world around us. In 
order to create more varied and differentiated expectations 
of what could happen HRO build diverse teams and 
welcome a wide variety of perspectives that challenge the 
conventional wisdom.  
The concentration on things that disconfirm, are 
uncertain or implicit creates a so called “mindful culture” 
[11] that Weick describes as an informed culture creating 
and sustaining continuously intelligent wariness. A 
mindful organization culture provides a basic framework 
for the capability to discover and to manage unexpected 
events, to create high reliability.   
Paulina and Callois [12] showed by analyzing 
reliability 
strategies 
in 
the 
military, 
space 
and 
semiconductor industries that HRO tend to limit their 
speed of technological innovation in order to preserve their 
level of reliability. LaPorte [13] explains this phenomena 
with the risky environment in which HRO operate “in 
wich any change in circumstances, internal processes or 
technical innovation is more likely to degrade than to 
improve existing operations”. These assumptions have so 
far not been transferred to the analysis of EMS 
organizations; 
however 
no 
successfully 
realized 
widespread innovations in EMS are observable within the 
last decades.   
IV. 
METHODOLOGY - DEVELOPMENT  OF A 
IMPLEMENTATION CONCEPT  
Contrary to the traditionally interpretation of the 
implementation as a closed stage of development within a 
engineering process, current approaches dealing most with 
strategy implementation processes foster a new point of 
view. Instead of splitting the development process into a 
planning, an implementation and an evaluation phase, 
implementation activities refer to change tasks realized at 
different stages of development. Daniel [14] defines 
implementation as all activities that ensure the future 
success of the application deployment object in the 
implementation context, regardless in which phase of the 
development the corresponding activities take place. Those 
activities target both person- and object-related objectives 
concerning then the two reference planes ‘result-related 
objectives’ and ‘process objectives’.  Figure 2.  shows the 
defined objectives in line with the implementation of the 
TRAS.   
 
 
Figure 2.  Objectives of the implementation activities 
Beside the positive user acceptance in view of an 
organizational adoption of the system, best quality of the 
TRAS and the implementation process as well as an early 
and brief introduction of the TRAS is intended.  
To achieve the defined context- and object-objectives 
(Figure 
2. 
) 
requirements 
towards 
a 
successful 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

implementation strategy were identified on both sides by 
referring scientific findings from the project itself and 
external theoretical and empirical research work.       
Context-oriented implementation is focusing primarily 
on overcoming personnel and organizational barriers of 
implementation. Approved instruments originate from the 
categories information, qualification, motivation and 
organization [15]. Applied measures concerning these 
categories can have cross-sectional effects such as 
informational 
and 
qualifying 
measures 
can 
have 
motivational impact on the target group. The success of all 
implementation measures depends on the acceptance by 
the affected persons and their willingness to take part in 
the change process. In this regard information and 
communication actions have a direct link to technology 
acceptance.  
As Chau and Hu [16] showed in their study upon 
telemedicine acceptance by physicians the main task of 
management in technology change process consists in 
demonstrating and communicating the technology’s 
usefulness to the routine tasks and services [16]. To avoid 
the so called “Not invented here” syndrome [17] the 
design of the TRAS has to fully recognize the needs of the 
user groups. The early involvement of paramedics and 
physician into the development process had the most 
important impact on the user acceptance. The consequent 
dialog and the constructive way of dealing with feedbacks, 
fears and inhibitions paved the way to a user-centered 
technology creation.   
Object-related requirements were derived from several 
evaluations of the previous project Med-on@ix. The use of 
the TRAS was evaluated during a one-year trail from 
different perspectives. Besides the quality of treatment, 
focusing on time management and the appropriateness of 
the treatment process, the user acceptance of the TRAS 
was evaluated to gather potential for improvement of the 
system. By analyzing the impact of the TRAS on working 
routines of EMS teams several requirements were 
identified aiming at the elaboration of working and 
communication rules to be considered in telemedically 
supported missions [18]. Change tasks where identified 
concerning the use of checklists to guarantee a necessary 
level of standardized working procedures and the training 
of users in using the TRAS properly.  
Bergrath et al. [19] evaluated the technical and 
organizational feasibility of the pilot TRAS based on 157 
EMS missions in the city of Aachen, concluding that the 
use of the TRAS is feasible even if technical reliability and 
availability has to be improved in the future. The authors 
reported 
technical 
problems 
caused 
by 
network 
disconnections especially inside buildings. Evaluation of 
organizational 
implementation 
revealed 
successful 
cooperation between the EMS team on site and the tele-
EMS physician in terms of ECG interpretation, diagnosis 
and treatment decisions.  
To achieve the implementation objectives (Figure 2. )   
context and technology related requirements are describe 
in the following section and the implementation strategy is 
drawn to meet cultural and structural particularities of the 
implementation project. The morphological box in Figure 
3. modeled after Baumgartner and Schneeberger [20] 
offers an insight into the range of strategic design 
parameters.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Development of an implementation strategy 
The implementation of the chosen strategy is finally 
realized through different implementation measures. As 
mentioned above implementation instruments belong to 
the categories information, qualification, motivation and 
organization.  
V. 
RESULTS – THE IMPLEMENTATION STARTEGY 
A. Organization-related requirements 
The implementation of new technologies into German 
EMS organizations underlies the barriers of the federal 
healthcare system. State specific EMS legislations bring 
about different structures of service, working practices, 
level of qualification and various allocations of rights and 
duties. The introduction of technological assisted working 
procedures has therefore to meet shared needs of EMS 
organizations, avoiding conflicts with structural conditions 
by adapting the TRAS at the prevailing conditions. As for 
example the training of paramedics is integrated into 
weekly standard on-the-job training. For same reasons the 
application of the TRAS does not explicitly interfere in the 
handling of emergency calls and the working processes of 
the dispatch center for rescue services.  
As the impact of the TRAS is particularly connected to 
the performance of teams on site, the implementation 
efforts focused the operational capability. The TRAS has 
to be easily integrated as an add-on solution to regular 
operational processes. The evaluation of the Med-on-@ix 
System by paramedics showed the necessity to accompany 
the introduction of the TRAS by intensive training to 
generate qualified working routines in view of failure-free 
communication and teamwork processes. Users pointed 
out the importance of open communication and feedback 
possibilities. Regular debriefings and feedback between 
the users on site and the tele-EMS physicians constitute 
further important implementation measures.  
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Besides the importance of teamwork and open 
discussions for HRO [21][22], strong internal leadership is 
accounted within the implementation process by an 
elaborated role concept regarding both the operation of the 
TRAS during emergency missions and the implementation 
process itself realized by the project team. The 
implementation of the TRAS requires the support by 
authorities to foster the dissemination and consequent use 
of the new technology by the whole organization. 
Therefore the pre-information of authorities and the 
participatory design of the organizational implementation 
are decisive.  
Research findings about HRO [23] bring about further 
requirements to be considered:  
 
well-defined project objectives  
 
target-orientation within the project 
 
team-orientation  
 
definition of roles  
B. Object-related requirements 
The development of the TRAS as a sociotechnical 
system faces beside technological challenges particularly 
many organizational challenges, critical in view of a 
successful implementation of the TRAS into daily work of 
EMS. The implementation builds on a joint technical and 
organizational development [2] aiming at an optimized 
user-centered design of the technical system as well as the 
organizational concept enabling the operation of the 
TRAS. The design of the TRAS requires the consequent 
adaption of the system upon the organizational conditions 
of use. The modular architecture of the system offers the 
possibility to implement different functionalities and 
various complexity levels, enabling an organization 
specific implementation effort. 
The scope of the implementation constitutes a more 
challenging characteristique of the implementation object. 
On the one hand various divisions of the EMS department 
as well as the dispatch center, municipal administration 
and clinic workers are involved into the change project. On 
the other hand the involved paramedics and physicians 
have different needs, qualifications and levels of technical 
affinity.  
The use of the TRAS implies beside specific 
organizational procedures, legal regulations concerning the 
delegation of medical treatment and technical complexity. 
In the consequence the implementation of the TRAS is 
confronted 
with 
a 
difficult 
communicability. 
In 
combination with the necessity of training mentioned 
above the implementation requires extensive measures of 
preparation. 
Bergrath et al. [19] showed the failure-free use of the 
TRAS depends on the reliability of mobile radio networks. 
As these technologies remain instable inside buildings and 
in rural areas and as the context of use requires high 
reliability the implementation of such a system has to be 
realized as an add-on to traditional EMS working 
procedures.    
C. Implementation strategy  
Analyzing the described requirements success criteria 
for the adoption of a TRAS can be derived. Information 
and communication instruments avoid misunderstanding 
and miscommunication about the implementation project. 
It is therefore decisive to look for an early opportunity to 
inform the members of the organization. Starting with a 
roadshow in every EMS department with possibilities for 
an open discussion, regular meetings in line with training 
units and feedback meetings scheduled along with the 
TRAS operation.    
By identifying promoters of the implementation project 
at various hierarchy levels and within the different 
involved divisions of the 
EMS organization the 
information flow and the diffusion of the TRAS within the 
implementation context is raised. To gather current moods 
or hidden rumors internal contact persons act as mediators 
and opinion-formers to intensify the harmonization 
between user needs and system design. Thereby the 
designated mediators play an important role in fostering 
positive user acceptance, reporting everyday experiences 
with the system to the system developers. 
Referring to Figure 3. the main design elements of the 
developed implementation strategy are showed in Figure 
4.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Implementation strategy for the introduction of a TRAS 
The chosen strategy to implement a TRAS into a German 
EMS organization is characterized primarily on a cultural 
level by a top down strategy concerning the initialization 
of the implementation project. Authorities of the EMS 
department and municipal administration have to drive the 
adoption by legitimating the use of the TRAS in regular 
operations.  
As the decision to adopt the technology is first of all 
taken on a team level several measures have to be taken to 
encourage the involvement of paramedics and physicians 
as primary user groups. The participatory approach is 
realized through feedback and communicative instruments. 
By the involvement of users into the development of 
technical and organizational system components user 
acceptance is achieved and a common goal comprehension 
is generated through consequent dialogue. The latter 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

fosters in combination with extensive training on the job 
the mindful culture needed to achieve high reliability. 
The extent of implementation is defined by the 
modular character of the TRAS. The gradual introduction 
of system components reduces the complexity of the 
implementation. To foster the user involvement regarding 
the adjustment of the system the TRAS is initially operated 
within a small team of users or rather by running only one 
equipped MICU.  
As the TRAS is used within a heterogenic flied of 
applications facing different infrastructural conditions the 
system is based on a modular architecture facilitating the 
implementation of approximate solution with rework 
options.  
Furthermore the implementation is relieved by the 
stepwise extension of the user group. The involvement of 
selected EMS teams at a first level of the roll-out 
stimulates the organizational adoption.  
The TRAS is implemented as an add-on solution for 
EMS missions. The parallel running of the traditional and 
the innovative way of treatment underpin the fall-back 
character of the tele-EMS physician. The implementation 
of the TRAS aims at reducing the time period when no 
EMS physician is available on site.  
To reduce the procurement costs the implementation 
date is matched with the tendering of new MICU by the 
EMS 
departments. 
Considering 
these 
favorable 
opportunities the necessary conversion work is combined 
with the regular construction of the MICU.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK  
The successful use of a TRAS in EMS missions 
requires an elaborated implementation approach starting 
already in the first development phase. Implementation 
research offers several starting point to successful 
technology introduction, lacking at the same time of 
practicable models to elaborate an implementation project. 
The present paper suggests a methodology to design a 
context and object oriented implementation strategy. We 
pointed out the importance of user involvement within the 
design of organizational and technical aspects of the TRAS 
to gain the necessary acceptance and finally to reach the 
organizational adoption. Regarding the here considered 
use case, the characteristics of an EMS organization as a 
HRO play a significant role 
in the choice of 
implementation instruments. Learning from HRO theories 
we considered organizational conditions producing high 
reliability into the technology change strategy.  
As information technology is more and more adopted 
within the healthcare sector research on best practice 
implementation projects are needed to foster the capacity 
for innovation also in prehospital healthcare organizations. 
Current research activities might take into account the 
importance of planned implementation to achieve 
marketable 
technical 
innovations. 
Furthermore 
the 
scientific discourse on learning from high reliability 
organizations to design efficient and well-accepted 
technology 
changes 
might 
radiate 
on 
various 
interdisciplinary research areas.    
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was funded by the Ministry of Innovation, 
Science and Research of the state of North-Rhine 
Westphalia (NRW). The project TemRas is realized in 
cooperation with the University Hospital Aachen, Philips 
HealthCare, P3 communications GmbH, 3M GmbH. 
All authors are members of the Institute of Information 
Management in Mechanical Engineering of RWTH 
Aachen University, Germany. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Protogerakis, A. Gramatke, and K. Henning, “A System 
Architecture for a Telematic Support System in Emergency 
Medical Services.”, IEEE, Proceedings of The 3rd International 
Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering, 2009, 
pp. 1–4. 
[2] 
M. Schneiders, D. Schilberg, and S. Jeschke, A Joint 
Organizational and Technical Development of a Telematic Rescue 
Assistance System for German Emergency Medical Services. In: 
Proceedings of eTELEMED 2011, The Third International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine 2011/ 
DigitalWorld 2011. Hrsg. v. (c) IARIA: Gosier, Guadeloupe, 
France, 2011, pp. 150-155. 
[3] 
S. Thelen, M. Schneiders, D. Schilberg,  and S. Jeschke, “Modular 
Software Architecture Approach for a Telematic Rescue 
Assistance System”. In: Proceedings of the IADIS International 
Conference E-Health 2011. Hrsg. v. Macedo, Mário: Rom, 2011, 
pp. 201-204. 
[4] 
B. T. Karsh, „Beyond usability: designing effective technology 
implementation systems to promote patient safety“, Quality and 
Safety in Health Care, vol. 13(5), 2004, pp. 388-94.  
[5] 
C. J. G. Gersick and J. R. Hackman, „Habitual routines in task-
performing groups* 1“, Organizational behavior and human 
decision processes, vol. 47(1), 1990, pp. 65-97. 
[6] 
W. J. Orlikowski, „Using technology and constituting structures: A 
practice lens for studying technology in organizations“, Resources, 
Co-Evolution and Artifacts, 2008, pp. 255-305. 
[7] 
A. C. Edmondson, R. M. Bohmer, and G. P. Pisano, „Disrupted 
routines: Team learning and new technology implementation in 
hospitals“, Administrative Science Quarterly, 2001, pp. 685-716. 
[8] 
D. Leonard-Barton and I. Deschamps, „Managerial influence in the 
implementation of new technology“, Management Science, 1988, 
pp. 1252-1265. 
[9] 
T. Kollmann, „Attitude, adoption or acceptance? Measuring the 
market success of telecommunication and multimedia technology“, 
International Journal of Business Performance Management, vol. 
6( 2), 2004, pp. 133-152. 
[10] K. E. Weick and K. M. Sutcliffe, Managing the unexpected: 
Assuring high performance in an age of complexity. Jossey-Bass, 
2001. 
[11] K. E. Weick and T. Putnam, „Organizing for mindfulness“, Journal 
of Management Inquiry, vol. 15( 3), 2006,  pp. 275-287. 
[12] V. D. S. Paulino and M. Callois, „Innovation and reliability 
strategies in the military, space and semiconductor industries: a 
comparative analysis“. International Journal of Innovation 
Management (ijim), World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., vol. 
14(05), 2010, pp. 795-821.  
[13] T. R. La Porte, „High reliability organizations: unlikely, 
demanding and at risk“, Journal of Contingencies and Crisis 
Management, vol. 4(2), 1996, pp. 60-71. 
[14] A. Daniel, „Implementierungsmanagement“, Ein anwendungs-
orienterter Gestaltungsansatz, Wiesbaden, 2001. 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[15] U. Zeyer, Implementierungsmanagement: ein konzeptioneller 
Ansatz am Beispiel der Implementierung von Lean Management. 
Hampp, 1996. 
[16] P. Y. K. Chau and P. J. H. Hu, „Investigating healthcare 
professionals’ decisions to accept telemedicine technology: an 
empirical test of competing theories“, Information & management, 
vol 39(4) , 2002, pp. 297-311. 
[17] R. Katz and T. J. Allen, „Investigating the Not Invented Here 
(NIH) syndrome: A look at the performance, tenure, and 
communication patterns of 50 R & D Project Groups“, R&D 
Management, vol. 12(1) , 1982, pp. 7-20. 
[18] M. Schneiders, M. Protogerakis, and I. Isenhardt, „User acceptance 
as a key to success for the implementation of a Telematic Support 
System in German Emergency Medical Services“, Automation, 
Communication and Cybernetics in Science and Engineering 
2009/2010, 2011, pp. 563-568. 
[19] S. Bergrath, D. Rörtgen, R. Rossaint, S. Beckers, H. Fischermann, 
J. Brokmann, M. Czaplik, M. Felzen, M. Schneiders, and M. 
Skorning, 
„Technical 
and organisational feasibility of a 
multifunctional telemedicine system in an emergency medical 
service – an observational study “, Journal of Telemedicine and 
Telecare, 2011, in press. 
[20] R. Baumgartner and T. Schneeberger, „Generic Management: 
Unternehmensführung in einem komplexen und dynamischen 
Umfeld“, Duv, 2006. 
[21] D. P. Baker, R. Day, and E. Salas, „Teamwork as an Essential 
Component of High Reliability Organizations“, Health Services 
Research, vol. 41(4) , 2006, pp. 1576-1598. 
[22] A. S. Frankel, M. W. Leonard, and C. R. Denham, „Fair and just 
culture, team behavior, and leadership engagement: the tools to 
achieve high reliability“, Health Services Research, vol. 41(4), 
2006, pp. 1690-1709. 
[23] Shortell, S. M, J. Schmittdiel, M. C Wang, R. Li, R. R Gillies, and 
L. P Casalino „An empirical assessment of high-performing 
medical groups: results from a national study“, Medical care 
research and Review, vol. 62(4) , 2005, pp. 407. 
 
 
 
 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

