FUNNKe – A Norwegian Large Scale Implementation Project 
Experiences From the Implementing Process in the Light of the Normalization Process Theory 
 
Eirin Rødseth 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
eirin.rodseth@telemed.no 
Gerd Ersdal, Anne Granstrøm Ekeland 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
{gerd.ersdal, anne.granstrom.ekeland}@telemed.no
 
 
Abstract—The paper presents a case study describing and 
analyzing a large scale implementation project taking the 
sociological model Normalization Process Theory (NPT) into 
consideration. Two of the authors of the article are also 
managers of the implementation project, and the article 
summarizes the experiences made in the project period. NPT 
can help understand the challenges the implementation project 
met in the last phase of the project period. The NPT focus on 
what people actually do and how they work, aligns with the 
experiences made in the project. Although partners say they 
will start implementing e-health technology, it does not 
necessarily mean they will start the work immediately. An 
implementation project must plan for this and adapt the 
implementation strategy accordingly.   
Keywords; implementation; large scale implementation project; 
electronic exchange of health information; electronic messaging; 
e-health; Normalization Process Theory. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
FUNNKe is a large-scale implementation project in the 
health region of Northern Norway. The project period was 
2010 - 2014. The main objective of FUNNKe was to 
establish electronic exchange of health information in all 
sectors of the health service delivery in the region. By 
electronic exchange of health information, we mean 
electronic messaging. Such messages include referrals, 
discharge summaries, requisitions, test results and dialogue-
based messaging between health personnel. The project 
supports all levels of the health sector - general practitioners 
(GPs), community care and nursing homes, and hospitals - in 
taking electronic messaging in use.  
We will address certain elements of the processes of 
implementation and discuss empirical experiences in the 
light of the Normalization Process Theory (NPT) [3].  
The project reached its goal within the planned project 
period. We did however meet some challenges in the last 
period of the project. Many of the small municipalities were 
reluctant to implement electronic messaging, and the project 
had to spend quite an amount of time persuading and 
teaching the local ICT- and health personnel.  
NPT can help us understand the challenges met in the last 
phase of the project period. NPT focuses on the work that 
individuals and groups have to do for a new technology or 
practice to become embedded and sustained in routine 
practice. The paper is structured as follows: First the 
background of the project is presented, then the method, 
followed by discussions and conclusions.  
II. 
BACKGROUND 
FUNNKe was part of a National program owned by the 
Ministry of Health and managed by the Norwegian Health 
Network. This program implemented electronic messaging in 
the other regions of Norway. The Norwegian Centre for 
Integrated Care and Telemedicine (NST) ran FUNNKe’s 
project management.  
The purpose of FUNNKe has been quality and efficiency 
in the health service delivery in Northern Norway.  The main 
objective of FUNNKe was; “a public health service sector in 
Northern Norway communicating electronically by the end 
of 2014”.  
By the end of the project period, 85 of 87 municipalities, 
Over 400 GPs and all four hospitals in the region had 
implemented 
electronic 
messaging 
as 
their 
main 
communication tool. The two missing municipalities will 
start up in February 2015. The project therefore reached its 
goal.  
The challenges of implementing use of electronic 
messaging are connected to the fact that only nine of the 87 
municipalities in Northern Norway have a population above 
10 000, and 65 of the municipalities have a population under 
5000. Remotely situated municipalities with a small 
population size often lack personnel in sectors like ICT and 
health care personnel. Many of these municipalities also 
have outdated and insufficient ICT equipment. The situation 
when it comes to updated ICT equipment is better at the four 
hospitals in the region.  
Hospitals and GPs in the region started using Electronic 
Patient 
Record 
(EPR) 
earlier 
than 
many 
of 
the 
municipalities. A survey from 2012 [2] shows that 26 of the 
87 municipalities in the region used EPR to little or some 
extent, or not at all. The leap from this to taking electronic 
messaging 
in 
use 
required 
extensive 
resources, 
organizational changes and new ways of working. 
The hospitals, municipalities and GPs in the region use 
several EPR systems. All hospitals use the same system 
delivered by one vendor, while other vendors serve the 
municipalities and GPs. All EPR-systems can communicate 
and the actors use standardized messages. The electronic 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

traffic goes on the Norwegian National Health Network 
(NHN), which is the national infrastructure for the electronic 
interchange of individual health data.  
III. 
METHOD 
Two of the authors are the Project Managers of the 
implementation project. The article and poster summarize 
the experiences made in the project period, from the point of 
view of the project managers. We use minutes from 
meetings, strategy documents and internal discussions as our 
data. We will not address to what extent electronic 
messaging as such is part of regular routine in the health 
sector. An evaluation is under development, in which 
municipal personnel is asked to evaluate the implementation 
process. Research is also going on to analyze the potential 
for time saving and perceived changes in the quality of care 
[1]. We will discuss the large-scale project’s implementation 
methods.  
IV. 
DISCUSSIONS  
The idea behind FUNNKe’s strategy for implementation 
has been to support the municipalities and hospitals towards 
expertise. The FUNNKe strategy has six characteristics, 
developed and initiated by the project management: 
 
1. Information work to attain management and users’ 
commitment.  
2. Free access to guidance and support from the project 
organization. 
3. Network building and establishing local networks.  
4. Sharing experience and expertise among all parties.  
5. Small financial contributions to municipalities as a 
start-up support. 
6. Purchasing of services from local expertise (often 
nurses working as ICT advisors) and offering their 
assistance to other municipalities, 
According to our experience, the implementation strategy 
has worked well.  
The NPT explanatory model builds upon four constructs: 
Coherence, Cognitive participation, Collective action and 
Reflexive monitoring.  
We delimit our focus to one of these constructs, 
Cognitive Participation, which is about the “work that 
defines and organizes the enrolment of participation in 
practice” [3:2]. Key questions in this construct are: Does key 
participants initiate, in the work to drive the implementation 
of electronic messaging forward? Do the health and ICT-
personnel enroll and buy into the idea of electronic exchange 
of health information? Do the participants believe it is right 
for them to be in involved in the new practice (legitimation)? 
Will the users of the electronic messaging system involve 
and activate in the sustaining of the practice? [4]. 
The NPT’s foci on what people actually do and how they 
work as a crucial starting point for implementation align with 
our experiences. In the project period of FUNNKe we have 
learnt that although municipalities tell us they will start 
implementing electronic messaging, it does not necessarily 
mean they will start the work immediately.  
The FUNNKe project management spent much time on 
attaining commitment to the project from the municipal 
management since we needed consent from the decisions 
makers to a starting up of the process. Our experiences show 
us, however, that in the last phases of the project lack of 
commitment from the user level caused delays in the project. 
The personnel were not enthusiastic about the idea of 
electronic messaging. In some of the municipalities health- 
and ICT-personnel were worried about the responsibility 
following the new system, and wanted to postpone the 
implementation because of this. The project management 
realize that more inspirational work targeting the users, could 
have been of help. We believe that the NPT’s construct 
“Cognitive Participation” could have helped us with a more 
thorough focus on the commitment from health- and ICT 
personnel.  
However, management support is also crucial for e-
health initiatives like this. Lacking support from the city 
managers would have hampered the implementation process, 
and we miss a focus on this aspect in the NPT model.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The FUNNKe project’s strategy for implementation 
aligns with the NPT theory. Our analyses indicate that the 
health- and ICT personnel’s lack of enthusiasm can explain 
some of the problems the implementation project faced in the 
last period of the project.  
Electronic messaging in the health sector is now 
implemented in the northernmost region of Norway. 
Challenges for the future will be developing the electronic 
messaging system and commissioning support to the service 
and. The municipalities together with the hospitals will 
address this.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Bergmo TS, Ersdal G, Rødseth E, Berntsen G. Electronic 
Messaging 
in 
Primary 
Care 
– 
Reporting 
from 
an 
Implementation and Evaluation Project in Northern Norway. 
eTELEMED 2013, The Fifth International Conference on 
eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine. International 
Academy, Research and Industry Association (IARIA) 2013 
ISBN 978-1-61208-252-3. p 172-177. 
[2] Norsk 
Helsenett. 
Meldingsutbredelse 
i 
kommunehelsetjenesten. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.nhn.no/oppgaver-og-prosjekter/digital-
samhandling/Documents/Rapport-om-meldingsutbredelse-i-
kommunehelsetjenesten.pdf [Accessed 5 Feb 2015]. 
[3] May C, Mair F, Finch T, MacFarlane A, Dowrick C, Treweek 
S, Rapley T, Ballini L, Nio Ong B, Rogers A, Murray E, 
Elwyn G, Légaré F, Gunn J, Montori V Implementation 
Science. (2009) BioMed Central: Development of a theory of 
implementation 
and 
integration:Normalization 
Process 
Theory. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/pdf/1748-5908-4-
29.pdf [Accessed 9 Jan 2015]. 
[4] May, C., Murray, E., Finch, T., Mair, F., Treweek, S., Ballini, 
L., Macfarlane, A. and Rapley, T. (2010) Normalization 
Process Theory On-line Users’ Manual and Toolkit. Available 
from http://www.normalizationprocess.org [Accesse 9 Jan 
2015].  
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

