Electronic Patient Communication in Norwegian Municipal Health Institutions  
 
Halgeir Holthe  
Norwegian Center for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
e-mail: Halgeir.holthe@ehealthresearch.no 
Rune Pedersen  
Norwegian Center for eHealth Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
e-mail: Rune.pedersen@ehealthresearch.no 
 
 
Abstract— During 2017, the Norwegian center for e-health 
research (NSE) conducted a national survey of the extra labor 
generated by incompatible Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) systems in municipal health institutions. We 
sent out an electronic questionnaire to 283 Norwegian 
municipalities and addressed 5 types of health service in each 
community during the spring of 2017. In this paper, we 
describe and analyze parts of our national survey, focusing on 
the answers given to questions concerning direct electronic 
communication between the different health services and their 
clients. We focus on the part of the investigation concerning 
the 
municipal 
health 
services’ 
and 
GPs’ 
electronic 
communication with their target populations. We are 
primarily interested in mapping to which extent the 
municipalities 
at 
present 
use 
electronic 
means 
for 
communicating with their health service clients, and which 
ICT systems are applied to facilitate such communication. In 
our material, we are able to distinguish between 5 main 
municipal health services, staff work roles, and size of 
municipalities in terms of population. Our results suggest that 
around one third of the Norwegian health institutions in 
primary care apply electronic equipment for some of their 
communication with the patients. SMS for reminders has the 
highest score, but also appointment and prescription 
reservations are in common use.  
Keywords-Telemedicine; 
Primary 
care; 
Electronic 
communication. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
It is a national ambition in Norway to build a new 
common electronic communication infrastructure [1][2], 
which can ease the information exchange between hospitals, 
GPs, municipal health institutions and the public. The 
objective is to secure a smooth electronic dialogue between 
all the involved parties throughout entire patient pathways 
[3]. Guaranteed access to relevant and updated patient 
information to health professionals involved in treatment and 
rehabilitation is a central concern. At the patient’s side of the 
table, access to own health information will be facilitated, at 
the same time as the patient is given a say in own treatment 
and being provided opportunities for an electronic dialogue 
with the professional caregivers [4]. Also, the new 
infrastructure is hoped to facilitate automatic extraction of 
data into central registers which will allow for quality 
surveillance, enable new research strategies, and promote 
health care innovations [1]. However, national ambitions are 
one thing, and on the ground, reality usually takes on a 
different complexion [5]. At present, a variety of ICT 
systems are in use at different levels of health care and in 
different institutions and geographic locations. These 
systems sometimes form information silos [6][7], which in 
turn produces extra work since the same information has to 
be entered into different ICT systems several times. During 
2017, NSE conducted a national survey of the extra labor 
caused by incompatible ICT systems in municipal health 
institutions. We sent out an electronic questionnaire to 283 
municipalities and addressed 5 types of health services in 
each community. During the spring of 2017, we also carried 
out in-depth interviews with health professionals working in 
Trondheim. 
In this paper, we describe and analyze parts of our 
national survey, focusing on the answers given to questions 
concerning direct electronic communication between the 
different health services and their clients. Qualitative data 
from Trondheim tend to support our main conclusions from 
the quantitative survey. We were primarily interested in 
mapping to which extent Norwegian primary care services 
currently apply electronic tools to communicate with their 
clients and their families. The patients are at present 
provided access to own health data primarily through a 
central portal (helsenorge.no). However, only hospital 
records are accessible through helsenorge.no, while primary 
care health information is maintained locally. The patient 
centric care [8] model is still in its infancy in Norway, and 
our results shows that the patients’ opportunities for an 
electronic dialogue with the health professionals are still 
limited. 
In the introduction of this paper, we cite the relevant 
policy documents describing a new electronic infrastructure 
for primary care in Norway.  In these policy documents the 
patients' access to own health data is emphasized. We have 
investigated quantitatively as well as qualitatively how 
health information at present is exchanged between health 
professionals of primary care and their clients.  Our main 
methods as well as the materials are described in the section 
methods and materials. 
Our main findings as described in the result section are 
that SMS for reminders has the highest score, but also 
appointment and prescription reservations are in common 
use. However, of the more than 1000 service institutions in 
Norwegian municipalities investigated in our study, only 30 
% apply direct electronic communication with their clients. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
METHODS AND MATERIALS 
NSE has during 2017 together with the Norwegian 
directorate for e-health conducted a survey of electronic 
communication between municipal health institutions, GPs, 
and their clients. The aim of the project was to study the 
electronic communication flow 
within and between 
municipal health institutions, and to estimate the time spent 
on double work generated by information silos. In this paper, 
we primarily focus on two objectives of the investigation: 
1. 
To which extent do the health professionals provide 
updated health information to their clients by 
electronic means? 
2. 
Brief mapping of ICT systems for communication with 
the patients currently in use in Norwegian primary 
care. 
The investigation was divided into three phases: 
1. 
An observational/interview phase in Trondheim to get 
an overview of work routines in the municipality and 
to learn the language by which the professionals 
described their own work. 
2. 
Development and distribution of a questionnaire in 
accordance with the objectives of the study. The 
questionnaire was tested against an expert panel of five 
health professionals at NSE prior to distribution. We 
used a Questback form of around 100 questions, which 
was sent to key health personnel within NSE’s network 
in each municipality. These key persons in turn 
distributed the questionnaire to subordinate personnel 
in their own community. Five municipal service areas 
were targeted, including nursing homes, in home care 
services, maternity and child services, municipal IT 
departments and GPs. The questions regarding direct 
communication between health services and clients 
were divided into two parts: 
      a) Has your institution established routines for direct 
electronic communication with the patients/close persons in 
your municipality? If so, who is involved in the electronic 
communication (clients, close persons or both parties)?  
     b) If you don’t apply electronic tools for direct 
communication with the patients, do you have plans about 
implementing such services? What are the most important 
obstacles on the way to establishing communication with 
patients in your institution/municipality (lack of resources, 
lack of priority, legislation barriers)? The second project 
phase was primarily conducted during the fall of 2017. 
3. 
Analysis and reporting of results. The work was 
carried out during the spring of 2018. 
Trondheim is a municipality of about 220.000 
inhabitants, one of the largest in Norway. We regard this fact 
as important, since health information handling may vary 
according to community size. In small municipalities (less 
than 5000 inhabitants), different health services are often 
localized within the same building. Personnel of different 
services often meet, and they know each other personally. In 
larger communities (more than 20.000 inhabitants), different 
services are usually located in different buildings, and 
personnel of different services meet less frequently face-to-
face. 
The transcriptions were encoded according to our 
checklist by several members of the staff, and the coding 
discussed and refined in a cyclic process during several 
project meetings in early 2018. 
Obviously, a handful of informants cannot yield 
quantifiable results valid for all Norwegian municipalities. 
However, during our field investigation, we engaged in 
lengthy discussions with health personnel of all types 
working in our targeted institutions. All in all, we talked with 
around 15 people during our study, and we find it plausible 
that the suggestions given by them point to important aspects 
of the workings of electronic communication in Norwegian 
health care in general. 
The net questionnaire of the quantitative investigation 
was distributed to all Norwegian municipalities (283 
entities), except for municipalities in Trøndelag and Møre- 
and Romsdal counties. The investigation was closed on 
October 20, 2017, and we received 1245 answers. After 
cleaning of the resulting forms, a total of 1022 responses 
were kept for further analysis. 
The compiled material about direct communication 
between health professionals and their clients collected for 
the first part of the investigation 324 responses (698 nan-
values), while the second part yielded 614 (408 nan-values) 
and 127 (895 nan-values) responses for the last question 
block. In our total material 431 responses come from the 
larger municipalities, and 335 and 291 from medium-sized 
and small communities respectively (n = 1015, indicating 
that 7 respondents failed to fill in information about the size 
of their municipality). In this paper, we focus on the part of 
the investigation concerning the municipal health services’ 
and GPs’ electronic communication with their target 
populations. We are primarily interested in mapping to 
which extent the municipalities at present use electronic 
means for communicating with their health service clients, 
and which ICT systems are applied to facilitate such 
communication. In our material, we are able to distinguish 
between 5 main municipal health services, staff work roles, 
and size of municipalities in terms of population. A summary 
of the incoming responses showed that municipalities of 
different sizes are well covered, and that all health service 
types are represented in the materials (Table 1). 
The Number of responses regarding use of electronic 
tools for direct communication with the clients are more 
frequent from large and medium size communities as 
compared with the small ones. The number of responses 
from small municipalities is only half of what we got from 
large and medium sized municipalities in our material (table 
2). This of course has consequences when we compare 
number of answers to the specific questions in our Questback 
[10] form. 
The second part of our question concerning direct 
communication between the municipal health services and 
their 
patients 
regarding 
who 
the 
partner 
in 
the 
communication with the professionals is, gave no responses. 
Question about plans for further implementation, and which 
barriers hamper such implementations, yielded 614 and 127 
answers respectively. Of the 614 answers, 46 are positive 
responses (1-values). Hence, our material is missing or 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

sparse for two of the questions for the rest of the material the 
responses are distributed as shown in table 3. Roman number 
I is the numbers from the first question block of the 
investigation, while II and III are the numbers given in the 
second block. 
 
Table 1 TOTAL NUMBER OF RESPONSES IN ABSOLUTE 
FIGURES WITH REFERENCE TO SERVICE 
 
Health 
services 
Large 
communities 
Medium-
sized 
communities 
Small 
communities 
Total 
In 
home 
service 
107 
72 
58 
237 
Maternity and 
child service 
89 
69 
54 
212 
Nursing 
homes 
85 
56 
60 
201 
GP 
73 
57 
47 
177 
IT department 
55 
60 
21 
136 
Administrative 
14 
17 
9 
40 
Emergency 
room 
8 
4 
0 
12 
Total  
431 
335 
249 
1015 
 
TABLE 2 NUMBER OF RESPONSES REGARDING USE OF 
ELECTRONIC TOOLS WITH RESPECT TO COMMUNITY SIZE 
 
Electronic tools 
Large 
communities 
Medium sized 
communities 
Small 
communities 
SMS 
144 
111 
69 
Online booking of 
appointments 
144 
112 
68 
Online prescription 
order 
144 
111 
68 
 
TABLE 3 NUMBER OF RESPONSES IN TOTAL NUMBERS WITH 
RESPECT TO HEALTH SERVICE CATEGORY.  
 
 Service name
 I
 II
III
 
GP 
152 
22 
4 
Maternity and child service 
118 
88 
12 
In home services 
30 
201 
36 
Nursing homes 
15 
180 
42 
IT department 
9 
123 
33 
Total 
324 
614 
127 
 
The results were exported from Questback to excel in a 
full text version, but also a numeric excel report was 
generated. We primarily used Python 3.6 with NumPy and 
Pandas [11] for the numeric analysis. Python was installed 
by applying Anaconda 5.0.1 from Anaconda Inc. [12], on an 
arch Linux desktop computer, and the software read the 
original excel files out of the box. Python’s scientific stack 
[13][14] represents an easy applicable and free tool for the 
analysis we are carrying out here. We provided access to the 
data for the research team via Jupyter hub. A preliminary 
description of the overall material is provided on the basis of 
the xlsx-files by Eli Kristiansen (E. Kristiansen 2018, oral  
communication, 5th January, NSE). 
III. 
RESULTS 
Our qualitative data suggest that direct communication 
with the patients by electronic means is still in its infancy in 
Norway. 31 per cent of our respondents to our net-form said 
they were currently applying electronic routines for direct 
communication with their clients. Of the tools in use, SMS 
has the highest score, followed by appointment reservation 
and prescription reservation on the net (table 4). 
The centralized electronic services, such as helsepost.no 
and consultations via helsenorge.no are currently little used. 
Only 13% and 10% respectively of the informants saying 
they applied direct communication with their patients (n = 
324) using these services. Looking closer at the responses 
explicatively saying they are applying SMS as a 
communication tool, the GPs and the maternity and child 
services use this routine most frequently (table 5).  The other 
health services to some extent apply SMS to communicate 
with their clients. The figures of table 5 show that when 
adjusting for sample size there is no difference in the 
application of SMS in large versus medium-sized/ small 
communities. 
Also, GPs apply online booking most frequently, again 
municipal size does not seem to influence on these work 
routines (table 6). The other municipal health services do not 
apply online booking to any extent. During our fieldwork, 
the GPs stated that as private enterprises GP offices often 
have a home site for their private enterprise up and running. 
Hence, online booking routines are fairly easy to implement. 
On the other hand, municipal health services have to work 
via their communities’ common net pages, which might 
make it more difficult to implement service- specific routines 
for direct communication with the clients. 
The numbers for online prescription order show that this 
routine is little used by municipal health services (table 7). 
Only GPs use online prescription order as a routine. The 
figures for the GPs’ application of online prescription order 
is evenly distributed regarding community size, taking into 
account that the sample size in small communities is half of 
the sample sizes in large and medium sized communities. 
 
TABLE 4 NUMBER OF RESPONDENTS (IN ABSOLUTE NUMBERS 
AND PERCENT) APPLYING ELECTRONIC ROUTINES FOR DIRECT 
COMMUNICATION WITH THEIR CLIENTS (N = 324). 
 
Service name 
Total number 
Percent 
SMS 
266 
82% 
Online prescription order 
122 
37% 
Online booking of appointments  
116 
35% 
Other communication channels 
53 
16% 
E-consultation 
43 
13% 
Patientpost.no 
34 
10% 
 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
TABLE 5 USE OF SMS COMMUNICATION IN MUNICIPAL HEALTH 
SERVICES WITH RESPECT TO COMMUNITY SIZE 
 
Health 
Services 
Large 
community 
Medium 
sized 
community 
Small 
community 
Total 
GP 
49 (42%) 
44 (37%) 
25 (21%) 
118 
(100%) 
Maternity and 
Child services 
51 (45%) 
42 (37%) 
21 (18%) 
114 
(100%) 
In home 
Services 
13 (59%) 
7 (32%) 
2(9%) 
22 
(100%) 
Nursing home 
4 (67%) 
1 (16,67%) 
1 (16,67%) 
6 
(100%) 
IT department 
3 (50%) 
2 (33,33%) 
1 (16,67%) 
6 
(100%) 
 
TABLE 6 USE OF ONLINE BOOKING OF APPOINTMENTS IN 
MUNICIPAL HEALTH SERVICES WITH RESPECT TO COMMUNITY 
SIZE 
Health 
Services 
Large 
commun
ity 
Medium 
sized 
community 
Small 
community 
Total 
GP 
46 (43%) 
38 (35%) 
24 (22%) 
108 
(100%) 
Maternity and 
Child services 
1 (25%) 
2 (50%) 
1(25%) 
4 
(100%) 
In home 
Services 
1 (33%) 
1(33%) 
1(33%) 
3 
(100%) 
Nursing home 
1(100%) 
0 (0%) 
0 (0%) 
1 
(100%) 
 
TABLE 7 USE OF ONLINE PRESCRIPTION ORDER IN MUNICIPAL 
HEALTH SERVICES WITH RESPECT TO COMMUNITY SIZE 
 
Health 
Services 
Large 
commun
ity 
Medium 
sized 
community 
Small 
community 
Total 
GP 
46 (43%) 
38 (35%) 
24 (22%) 
108 
(100%) 
Maternity and 
Child services 
1 (25%) 
2 (50%) 
1(25%) 
4 
(100%) 
In home 
Services 
1 (33%) 
1(33%) 
1(33%) 
3 
(100%) 
Nursing home 
1(100%) 
0 (0%) 
0 (0%) 
1 
(100%) 
 
The general practitioners are the pivot of Norwegian 
primary health care, and to some extent they use electronic 
tools for direct communication with their patients. Working 
as 
emergency 
room 
or 
nurse 
home 
staff, 
direct 
communication with external clients is handled by other 
personnel. The same is true when the doctor work in 
maternity and child services. The in-home care services 
stated during our field investigation that one of their primary 
goals when rebuilding their ICT systems is to stablish direct 
contact with the patients’ EPR when being out of office. 
This way, much of the documentation required in 
healthcare might be down before returning to the office, i.e., 
the documenting tasks may be performed in the clients’ 
home. The in-home care services, to any extent, do not 
communicate directly with their clients by electronic means, 
even if this was regarded as a constructive opportunity when 
rescheduling appointments. Nurse home personnel told us 
during qualitative interviews they primarily use telephone for 
direct communication with the families of their clients. 
Direct electronic communication with the public is hardly 
used, and in our quantitative material, the nurse home 
constitutes 19.8 % of the answers. 
Maternity and child services personnel told us during 
qualitative interviews that in general, they used their own log 
systems, often in written form. In their daily routines, they 
need to collect written consent forms with signatures from 
children, as well as from adults. Today, these tasks are 
performed through regular mail, and hence is time- and labor 
consuming. An electronic system for document exchange 
with the clients would be more efficient than the current 
procedures, according to the staff. 
We finally asked our informants about possible reasons 
for not applying direct electronic communication with their 
clients. Among the suggested reasons in the questionnaire 
was 1) lack of priority among the leaders, 2) lack of 
resources/competence 3) lack of technical equipment. We 
got 127 answers (response rate 12%) of which 895 were nan-
values. Of the answers pointing to specific reasons for not 
applying electronic tools for direct communication with the 
patients 33 per cent pointed at lack of priority and 37 % 
pointed to lack of economic resources. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The nursing homes are marked by several professions 
working together to provide care to their clients. Our 
informants told us that much of the communication with 
external colleagues is carried out by telephone, and the same 
also goes for communication with their clients’ families and 
close persons. Some of our informants told us about 
communication bottlenecks due to incompatible electronic 
systems in different community health care institutions, and 
this potentially generates a lot of double work when care is 
to 
be 
coordinated 
with 
external 
parties. 
The nursing homes did not communicate with their clients’ 
families electronically and usually applied telephone for this 
task. Our quantitative results show that the nursing homes 
have a lower score for all of the communication routines 
investigated regardless of community size. A lack of priority 
among municipal leaders and lack of resources seem to be 
the reasons for this state of affairs. In the literature, 
electronic communication with patients is suggested to 
secure continuity in the care provided [15][16].  
The in-home care services’ personnel focused on the lack 
of integration between mobile and stationary ICT systems as 
a main barrier to efficient digital communication at the 
workplace. Updated medication lists were of central concern, 
and our informants did not to any extent use electronic 
communication with their clients in their daily work. The 
focus is still on enhanced information exchange with 
professional partners, and this has to be resolved first, our 
informants told us. Like in the nursing homes, the in-home 
care services have a low score for all of the communication 
routines investigated, regardless of community size [17].  
The Norwegian maternity and child services serve nearly 
all children and mothers in the communities. They are 
involved in general health checkups for all of their clients, 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

vaccination programs and proactive medicine. The stations 
also collaborate closely with the schools. Hence, the staff 
reach patient categories which other health personnel may 
infrequently meet. The maternity and child services seem to 
apply means of electronic communication slightly more than 
nursing homes and in-home services [18]. The collaboration 
with municipal school may be the reason for high score on 
SMS. A considerable portion of the communication with 
other professionals and the clients is performed by written 
documents sent by post. Our informants told us that 
casework for schoolchildren is slowed down if written 
consent is required from the parents on behalf of their 
underaged children. 
The GPs are the pivot of Norwegian health care, and any 
restriction of communication at this level has consequences 
for the entire patient pathway. GPs communicate extensively 
with patients, primary care institutions and hospitals 
[19][20]. According to our informants, much of the 
communication with other professionals in municipalities 
and in hospitals is conducted by telephone. In particular, the 
exchange of medication lists between GPs and the municipal 
home care services were considered as bottlenecks in the 
information exchange. Some of our informants claimed that 
restrictions in communication across municipality borders, 
and when patients consult different GPs constitute potential 
blocking of patient information exchange. Documents 
frequently have to be scanned, which results in data that are 
not electronically searchable. Some of the GPs requested a 
better national coordination of electronic health record 
systems. The GPs conducted the bulk of direct electronic 
patient communication which we observed in this 
investigation. Especially SMS reminders and online booking 
services were in frequent use, and more so than in the rest of 
primary care. This may be due to a smoother process of 
decision making within small work organizations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We will like to thank our informants for taking part in 
our interviews without compensation. Also, we thank the 
personnel of Helseplattformen for providing valuable 
information. In particular, we thank Trine Hansen for 
scheduling the fieldwork in Trondheim during the spring of 
2017.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Norwegian Ministry of health and care services, One citizen- 
One Health Record. Whitepaper 9,Oslo, 2012-2013. 
[2] The Norwegian Directorate of Health and The Norwegian 
Directorate of eHealth, Investigation of One citizen- One 
HealthRecord;(Norwegian), 
https://ehelse.no/Documents/En%innbygger%20%en%20jour
nal/sammendrag%Utredning%av%20%C3%89n%20innbygge
r%20%20%C3%A9n%20jiurnal_1.0.pdf 2018.10.02.  
[3] Ministry of Health and Care Services, “The basic structure of 
the 
health 
service,” 
(Norwegian), 
https://www.regjeringen.no/no/tema/helse-og-
omsorg/sykehus/vurderes/grunnstrukturen-i-
helsetjenesten/id227440/  2018.09.15 
[4] H. Slagsvold, and L. Guttormsen, “Message distribution in the 
municipal health service,” Status report. (Norwegian), 
2018.10.02 
https://nhn.no/media/1160/2013-statusrapport-
meldingsutbredelse-i-kommunehelsetjenesten.pdf  
[5] L. W. Peute, J. Aarts, P. J. M. Bakker, and M. W. M. Jaspers, 
"Anatomy of a failure: A sociotechnical evaluation of a 
laboratory physician order entry system implementation," 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 79, no. 4, 
pp. e58-e70, 2010. 
[6] L. C. Miller, B. B. Jones, R. S. Graves, and M. C. Sievert, 
"Merging silos: collaborating for information literacy," 
Journal of continuing education in nursing, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 
267-72, 2010. 
[7] A. R. Miller, and C. Tucker, “Health information exchange, 
system size and information silos,” Journal of Health 
Economics, vol. 33, pp. 28-42, 2014. 
[8] E. H. Waagner, et al., “Improving Chronic Illness Care: 
Translating Evidence Into Action,” Health Affairs, vol.  20, 
no. 6, pp. 64-78, 2001 
[9] M.Bambling, et al., "Challenges faced by general practitioners 
and allied mental health services in providing mental health 
services in rural Queensland, " The Australian journal of rural 
health, vol.15, no. 2, pp. 126-30, 2007. 
[10] Questback. https://www.questback.com/ 2018.10.02. 
[11] W. McKinney, Python for Data Analysis: Data Wrangling 
with Pandas, NumPy, and IPython,” O'Reilly Media, 2017. 
[12] Anaconda Inc. https://www.anaconda.com/ 2018.10.02. 
[13] F. Perez, B. E. Granger, J. D. Hunter, Python: “An Ecosystem 
for Scientific Computing,” Computing in Science & 
Engineering, vol.13, no. 2, pp. 13-21, 2011. 
[14] K. J. Millman, and M. Aivazis, “Python for Scientists and 
Engineers. Computing in Science & Engineering,” vol. 13, 
no. 2, pp. 9-12, 2011. 
[15] E. Balas, et al., “Electronic communication with patients: 
Evaluation of distance medicine technology,” JAMA, vol. 
278, no. 2, pp. 152-9, 1997 
[16] A. A. Vogelsmeier, J.R.B. Halbesleben, J.R. Scott-Cawiezell, 
“Technology Implementation and Workarounds in the 
Nursing Home,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association, vol.15, no. 1, pp. 114-9, 2008. 
[17] B. Lindberg, C. Nilsson, D. Zotterman, S. Söderberg, L. Skär, 
“Using Information and Communication Technology in Home 
Care for Communication between Patients, Family Members, 
and Healthcare Professionals: A Systematic Review,” 
International Journal of Telemedicine and Applications, vol. 
31, 2013 
[18] A. Austin, et al., “Approaches to improve the quality of 
maternal and newborn health care: an overview of the 
evidence,” Reproductive Health, vol. 11, no. 2, 2014. 
[19] S. Kripalani, F. LeFevre, C. O. Phillips , M. V. Williams, P. 
Basaviah, and D. W. Baker, “Deficits in communication and 
information transfer between hospital-based and primary care 
physicians: Implications for patient safety and continuity of 
care,” JAMA, vol. 297, no. 8, pp. 831-41, 2007. 
[20] “Primary Care Physician Shortages Could Be Eliminated 
Through Use Of Teams, Nonphysicians, And Electronic 
Communication,” Health Affairs, vol.32, no.1, pp. 11-9, 2013. 
 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

