Identifying Important Components for Life Style Changes
Using an Online Complex E-health Intervention in General Practice
a qualitative interview study
Carl J. Brandt
Research Unit of General Practice, Dept. of Public Health
University of Southern Denmark
Odense, Denmark
e-mail: cbrandt@health.sdu.dk
Jane Clemensen
CIMT- Centre for Innovative Medical Technology
University of Southern Denmark
Odense, Denmark
e-mail: Jane.Clemensen@rsyd.dk
Jesper Bo Nielsen
Research Unit of General Practice, Dept. of Public Health
University of Southern Denmark
Odense, Denmark
e-mail: jbnielsen@health.sdu.dk
Jens Søndergaard
Research Unit of General Practice, Dept. of Public Health
University of Southern Denmark
Odense, Denmark
e-mail: jsoendergaard@health.sdu.dk
Abstract-In a prospective pilot study, we recently found a 7.0
kg mean weight loss within a 20 months’ intervention period
using an online complex e-health approach. In order to tailor a
randomized controlled trial testing an online platform with
app technology, accelerometers etc., we conducted a qualitative
interview study to identify important determinants for weight
loss
management
using
digital
solutions.
Results showed that the main themes for incitements identified
were life events in close family, the establishment of support, a
honest and trustworthy relationship with health professionals,
and/or supportive peers and ways to monitor the behavioral
change with nudging from a reference person. The primary
barriers were self-inflicted obstacles, an experience of lack of
self-efficacy and ways to keep up appearances when discussing
personal health issues with peers. The primary roles of the
referents were the experience of honest and trustworthy
forums to discuss personal challenges. We can conclude that
the important factors are the availability of behavioral change
monitoring and empathic relevant feedback. The opinions of
referents matter, and long-term success depends on the ability
to establish a strong positive support online and/or offline. E-
health solutions can support healthy living, but further
investigations
are
needed
to
establish
updated
relevant
solutions that can be used in daily practice.
Keywords:
obesity;
internet
community;
e-health;
self-
efficacy; patient empowerment
I.
INTRODUCTION
Obesity is an increasing problem, and more than 30% of
the European population is obese, with a body mass index
(BMI) > 30 kg/m2. It is well documented that obesity
increases the risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases,
and joint and musculoskeletal diseases, and that it decreases
fertility and increases the risk of spontaneous abortion.
In a prospective pilot study, we investigated the effect of
online dietician advice combined with access to an Internet
community using the existing commercial online Internet
weight loss management program not using app technology
[1]. We have previously described the usability of this
platform and found a mean weight loss from baseline of 7.0
kg. (95 % CI: 4.6 - 9.3 kg) after a mean maintenance period
of 20 months among 21 patients with an initial BMI of 36.4
kg/m2 [2].
We now plan to perform a Randomized Controlled Trial
(RCT) based on an updated online platform using app
technology, accelerometers etc. [3]. Prior to this RCT study,
we here report a qualitative interview study designed to
identify issues of importance for weight loss management
using digital solutions today. We interviewed patients who
have previously successfully participated in an online
complex e-health intervention by exploring: 1.What is the
experience using supportive e-health solutions offered in
relation to a healthier life style? 2. What are the incitements
and barriers for personal life style changes in general and
when using e-health solutions? 3. What is the role of peers
and health professionals when changing life style in general
and
when
using
e-health
tools
seen
from
a
patient
perspective?
II.
METHOD
A.
Design
Qualitative, semi-structured, individual interviews.
B.
Setting
General practice in the Southern Region of Denmark.
C.
Participants
Ten overweight patients who had previously used an
online complex Internet e-health intervention successfully.
The intervention tool was used as a supplement to a dietician
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

working in the general practice while making sure that the
relationship was established in person before beginning the
online communication. The same dietician met the patient in
the clinic and handled the online communication with the
patient. Apart from the dietician, the patients could meet and
share health data/information with other patients in online
forums. This developed to become a strong community,
where it was possible to discuss many personal issues as well
[2].
D.
Analysis
Interviews were transcribed as soon as possible after each
interview and uploaded to a common database. Anonymous
transcripts were analyzed by the researchers (CJB, JC, JBN
and JS) using thematic analysis. The identified themes were
compared between the different researchers. Overlap and
consistency were reached. The findings were then related to
the Social Action Theory (SAT)[4], the Theory of Triatic
Influence (TTI) [5] and the Social Cognitive Theory (SCT)
[6].
III.
RESULTS
All but one of the participants used smartphones; the last
one used a tablet. They all used apps and the Internet, but
had no longer access to the Internet support system [1]. Five
years after the initial intervention, they all still used Internet
or apps to benefit their health. Everyone looked up recipes,
some had joined weight loss Facebook groups, and some
used an app service monitoring their physical activity. They
were not aware of all the functionality that could support
them for free using their smartphones, but the majority
acknowledged that the provided e-health solution had helped
them. Following the two years intervention study five years
ago, they have all gained weight, but not to the level before
the intervention.
A.
The main themes for incitements identified were:
1)
The establishment of an honest and trustworthy
relationship with a health professional with whom it was
possible to talk about everything and to be heard:
a) Offline: ”I think it was really nice to see CA (the
dietician), also because she could see it was my head that
controlled me a lot”
b) Online: “I don’t know if I would always use it
(report my diet intake) because sometimes I would just not
report anything… to help me not being confronted with the
fact that I had eaten more than I should”
c) Miscellaneas: Some of the patients revealed that
they did not trust the dietician who had been assigned to
them, and they stated the lack of trust as the main reason for
them to discontinue the intervention. One of the participants
then established a contact to another health coach that
helped him along with significant weight loss without a
single face to face meeting.
2)
Find ways to monitor the behavioral change with
nudging from a referent person:
a) Offline: ”One who had to see that I kept my weight.
If not, I would have said I had done it without having done
it….. to satisfy others”.
b) Online: “and I can’t cheat it (An objective activity
monitoring fitness app: “Endomondo”). It is not possible for
me to pretend I have gone for a walk when I haven’t”.
3)
Goal setting:
a) Online: “Today, when I have to go to work at noon,
then I go for a walk during the morning. Sometimes I walk
four times a week, but it should be at least 15 km per week.”
4)
Support from partner:
a) Offline: “I do have support from home – from my
husband. Many times he has encouraged me to stop
smoking”.. “This thing with saying: “hey we have to
remember vegetables””…”He may also say: “Do you really
have to eat that?”.. He is very observant to what I eat. A
little judgmental if I eat something that is not healthy”
5)
Life events in close family have a strong impact for a
majority of the participants:
a) Offline: ”My husband got type 2diabetes, and then I
also lost 10-12 kg in the spring….”
B.
For barriers the main themes were:
1)
Self-inflicted obstacles:
a) Offline: ”I had this knot under my left foot removed
in surgery two years ago. Three months ago, I had the same
operation in the other foot. So I’m not able to do it
(exercise), and I still can’t use regular foot wear. I still use
sandals”.
2)
Experience of lack of self-efficacy:
a) Offline: ”It is probably because I can eat a little
candy again or buy a chocolate bar when I’m out
shopping…. And I have problems saying no thanks”.
3)
Keeping up appearances when discussing personal
health issues and about lying to referent others to avoid
judgmental behavior:
a) Offline: ”Yes, if someone says: “Well, wouldn’t you
like to lose weight?”, then I say: ”Yes, but it is very hard
because bla, bla, bla, and then the same story goes. So it is
an excuse for not losing weight”
b) Online: “If it is someone I would never meet, then I
could be honest, but as soon I know that it is someone I am
going to meet, then I add to the story”.
C.
The main themes for the role of peers were:
1)
The experience of honest and trustworthy forums to
discuss personal challenges, in relation to peers:
a) Offline: ” Then I have my friend, who I met when I
joined weight watchers. She has all these ideas as to how to
combine different food ingredients….. and that has my other
friend as well, but she has now joined this low fat high
something……”.
b) Online: “…I’m more in need for a closed group of
people who have the same problems as me or at least are in
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

the same position as me” and “I could do it (be honest), if it
was online, but not if I had to look them in the eyes.”
2)
The need for acknowledgement from referent others:
a) Offline: ”The worst thing was that nobody called me
up” and said: “Why is it you have not scheduled a new
appointment?”
b) Online: “It is the same with Endomondo. I have
friends there. And then I have to show I walk. Not to have
them believe I’m not active”
IV.
DISCUSSION
To our knowledge, this is the first qualitative interview
study among the users of a successful weight loss Internet
platform showing what elements are important for success
in an updated e-health solution. Establishing an honest and
trustworthy space is important. This matches the social
ecological
point
of
view
that
establishing
a
good
relationship to the patient is of paramount importance for
coaching patients to make difficult decisions [6]. To
establish an honest space with your health professional can
be difficult in a 100% online solution. The provided solution
delivered a combination that seemed to strengthen the
relationship even though not all patients seemed to have that
need. Goal setting and monitoring the behavioral change are
important for many patients. Goal-directed action is the
basis of the social action theory [4] and, by using e-health
solutions, this can be done in real time both objectively
(Endomondo/accelerometers)
and
subjectively
through
reporting. The spouse plays an important role for all our
participants. The participants all experienced support from
their spouse during their weight loss, which is in accordance
with the social cognitive theory underlying the importance
of the opinion of others [6]. This was also the reason why
life events in close family could move the patients to decide
that weight loss or other life style changes were important
enough to do something about. Barriers centered around
self-inflicted obstacles, lack of self-efficacy and keeping up
appearances, which very much related to the intrapersonal
stream described in the Theory of Triatic Influence (TTI)
[5]. To close the gap patients could describe how the
supportive role they experienced both offline and online
from referent others made a difference. This interpersonal
aspect is the second stream in TTI and confirms that
meeting others in the same situation is important. The third
stream in TTI is the sociocultural environment that changes
to some extent when a person meets up online with new
people who also want to loose weight or stop smoking.
Basically, you can change your referent others online,
something
that
might
be
of
paramount
importance,
especially for people with little support from home [7].
Offline, many of the same psychological elements are found
in anonymous forums like Alcoholics Anonymous. The
findings can be included in the complex e-health solutions
used in the future RCT study [3]. The study will be
conducted in a general practice setting using local dieticians
out of respect for the importance of a good relation to the
patients found in this article. Patients will monitor activity,
diet and sleep through simple monitoring features in
combination with an online community [3].
V.
CONCLUSION
The major findings were that many of the important
issues addressed by the participants can be supported online.
Patients
need
to
have
a
personal
and
trustworthy
relationship to at least one health professional who can
boost their self-efficacy when needed. Another important
factor is the availability of behavioral change monitoring
and empathic relevant feedback. The opinions of referents
others matter, and long-term success depends on the ability
to establish a strong positive support. E-health solutions can
support healthy living, but further investigations are needed
to establish updated, relevant, and complementing solutions
that can be used in daily practice.
VI.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Thanks to Public Health students Betina Bruun and
Merete Moll for editorial contributions to this paper. Thanks
to the staff at Stenstrup Lægehus for making this study
possible. Thanks to Region Syddanmark.
REFERENCES
[1]
www.SlankeDoktor.dk [accessed March 2016]
[2]
Brandt, V., Brandt, C. J., Glintborg, D., Arendal, C., Toubro,
S., & Brandt, K. (2011). Sustained weight loss during 20
months
using
a
personalized
interactive
internet
based
dietician advice program in a general practice setting.
International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences, 3(1&2),
23-28.
[3]
Brandt, C. J., Brandt, V., Pedersen, M., Glintborg, D.,
Toubro, S., Nielsen, J. B., Eysenbach, G., Brandt, K.,
Søndergaard, J. (2014). Long-term effect of interactive online
dietician weight loss advice in general practice (LIVA)
protocol for a randomized controlled trial. International
journal of family medicine, 2014.
[4]
Ewart, C. K. (2009). Changing our unhealthy ways: Emerging
perspectives from social action theory. Emerging theories in
health promotion practice and research, 2, 359-389.
[5]
Flay, B. R., Snyder, F., & Petraitis, J. (2009). The theory of
triadic influence. Emerging theories in health promotion
practice and research, 2, 451-510.
[6]
Bandura, A. (2004). Health promotion by social cognitive
means. Health education & behavior, 31(2), 143-164.
[7]
Winzelberg, A. J., Classen, C., Alpers, G. W., Roberts, H.,
Koopman, C., Adams, R. E., Heidemarie, E., Parvati, D.,
Taylor, C. B. (2003). Evaluation of an internet support group
for women with primary breast cancer. Cancer, 97(5), 1164-
1173
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

