 
 
 
 
Use of Mobiles for Reducing Infant Mortality by Increasing Adherence to 
Vaccinations in a Low Resource Setting 
 
Saurav Gupta, D. K. Jain 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
Mohali, Punjab India 
saurav@cdac.in, dkjain@cdac.in 
 
 
Abstract— Infant mortality is inversely proportional to 
immunisation. In India, due to lack of awareness and 
knowledge about the benefits of immunisation, the infant 
mortality stands at 61%. With the need to reduce this high 
percentage, the use of technology has proved to be beneficial. 
The growing penetration of mobile technologies and the 
sending of alerts over mobile devices has helped extend the 
reach of healthcare services to resource limited settings. 
mHealth has numerous applications in child healthcare and 
one such mobile application that aims to address a long 
standing issue of high infant mortality rate is Child 
Immunisation Alert System (CIAS).  This paper highlights 
the design and outcome of CIAS, which uses various 
communication modalities to send vaccine alerts to the 
parents for high vaccine adherence. 
Keywords-mhealth; 
child 
immunization; mobile health; 
vaccination; CIAS; infant mortality rate. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Infant mortality has been inversely associated with 
the immunisation given to children [1][2]. In 2008, WHO 
estimated that 1.5 million deaths of children under the age 
of five were due to diseases that could have been 
prevented through vaccinations. In India, for the year 
2012, the immunization coverage in the rural areas stood 
at 58.5% whereas the national average was 61% [3]. The 
major reasons for such dismal indicators are: 
a) Lack of awareness: Majority of the mothers are not 
aware about the vaccines and its benefits [2][3]. 
b) Lack of knowledge: With the prevalence of traditional 
beliefs, people feel that their child should develop 
‘natural immunity’[4] 
c) Lifestyle: Owing to frenetic lifestyles in an urban 
setting, parents tend to forget. 
 
Numerous studies by healthcare providers indicate 
that technology enabled methods could be adopted to 
overcome the apprehensiveness of parents and prevent 
diseases from spreading [5]. For increasing awareness 
about vaccines, the use of mobile technology and text 
messages have achieved success in different parts of the 
world [6][7][8]. Given the scope and penetration of 
mobile technologies and its advantages in improving 
healthcare services, Child Immunization Alert System 
(CIAS), a mobile application was conceptualised to 
reduce infant mortality. For each registered child up to the 
age of five years, the application displays a set of 
immunisations along with its benefits, as recommended by 
India’s Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW). 
Alerts about the vaccines to be administered to the child 
are sent using either emails or SMS or push messaging 
(instant notifications). Key reasons for selecting these 
modalities are: 
a) High penetration: In India, mobile communications 
services are amongst the cheapest in the world. As a 
result, in India, mobile phone’s penetration is 70%+ and 
the market share of smartphones is increasing at a 
noteworthy rate [9].  
b) Affordability: the three modalities for alerting users 
are cost effective and encourage higher adoption rates 
and speedier diffusion of the application. 
 
This paper brings out the design of the system CIAS 
that was deployed in the Indian landscape. Section II of 
the paper describes the requirements taken from the 
doctors while designing CIAS. Section III, highlights the 
CIAS system design and its key components. Section IV, 
discusses the methodology adopted for deploying the 
mobile app CIAS. Section V, highlights the outcome of 
the CIAS system and discusses the feedback received 
from the users. Section VI, brings forth the future work to 
be done as part of CIAS and section VII concludes the 
paper. 
II. USER REQUIREMENTS 
The user requirements for preparing the functional 
specifications requirement (FRS) were gathered by having 
detailed discussions with 09 paediatricians from various 
healthcare delivery institutes in and around Chandigarh, 
India. The average experience of these medical experts 
was 11.77 years with a high of 28 years of experience and 
a low of 06 years of experience. The post-graduate work 
experience of the paediatricians was considered. Post 
discussions, the following user requirements were 
compiled: 1) it was felt that regular alerts along with the 
importance of vaccines be sent to the users by exploring 
maximum possible communication modalities available; 
2) most of the clinicians highlighted the need to have a 
parallel web based system. This was required mainly to 
address the users who did not use smartphones but had 
access to internet for which the users are increasing at a 
significant rate [9]; 3) system to include sending of alerts 
for non-smart-phone users as the majority of the 
population uses such phones. 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. CIAS Architecture 
User requirements lead to FRS, which were then 
transformed into CIAS system requirements and based on 
these, CIAS architecture was conceptualised (see Figure 
1).   
III. DESIGN 
The application CIAS is designed based on open 
source technology. The key features of CIAS are: 
 
A) Access:  
CIAS has been designed both as a mobile 
application and a web based application. The data is 
stored in a web-based database for various advantages. 
These advantages include the provision of updated 
information, enabling real time alerts and easy retrieval 
of information anytime and anywhere. Also, for 
program managers, the collective data provides an 
effective source for some trend visualisations. 
 The mobile application is developed on Android OS 
version 2.3 and provides upward compatibility [10]. 
Using the mobiles’ internet connection (4G-LTE/ 
3G/ 2G/ GPRS/ Wi-Fi), the child details including 
vaccine information is stored on the web server..  
 The web based application has been designed using 
HTML5 as it helps to render the content according to 
the screen size of the device, which may be a mobile, 
tablet or a workstation [11]. 
 The database selected for CIAS is MS-SQL. To 
enable the exchange of information, web services 
were deployed. The web service was called in the 
mobile app and the mechanism for the exchange of 
data was established. 
 For non-smart-phones users, the pull-SMS feature 
was introduced in which the user could text the name 
and date of birth of the child to a pre-defined number 
(51969) for receiving SMS-based alerts on their non-
smart phones. 
 
Apart from the parents, CIAS addresses the needs of 
field healthcare professionals who can type-in the 
details of the children born without having their parents 
need to register. This feature was enabled in 
concordance to the users’ requirement. 
B) Alert Control 
The Alert Control mechanism comprises of two 
components: a) the alert type and b) the alert 
configurations. 
 Alert type:  
i. SMS: The Mobile Service Delivery Gateway 
(MSDG) of the Government of India, was 
integrated with CIAS and is being utilised for 
sending free SMSes to the users [12]. 
ii. Emails: Numerous studies have indicated that 
people who prefer emails feel that it provides a 
quick and convenient access to healthcare 
information [13]. Hence, this communication 
modality was also integrated in CIAS to send 
alerts. 
iii. Real time notifications: ‘Push Messages’ in 
Android makes use of Google Cloud Messaging 
service, which enables the sending of real-time 
notifications directly to the user [14].  
 Alert Configuration: In CIAS, the users can select as 
per their convenience the different communication 
modalities for receiving alerts and also customise the 
periodicity of the alerts. The users can opt for either or 
a combination of sms, email and push notifications as 
the medium of receiving the alerts. Further, the alerts 
sent have been classified into three categories: 
upcoming-vaccine, vaccine-due and vaccine-overdue. 
Users can configure the upcoming vaccine alert 
according to their convenience. By default, alert for 
‘upcoming-vaccine’ is sent one-day ahead of the date 
of vaccination and alert for ‘vaccine-due’ is generated 
on the day of vaccination. If the vaccination is not 
done on the due date then a one-time ‘vaccine-
overdue’ alert is sent the following day. In this case, 
the parent is prompted to provide the reason for the 
delay, as this would help to design suitable 
interventions to plug the gaps. Another configurable 
option is the schedule of vaccines. Though CIAS 
displays the schedule of the vaccines as recommended 
by MoHFW, however, in certain cases where the need 
is felt, the parents can alter/ configure the schedule of 
vaccines as recommended by their consulting doctor. 
All these configurations can be done on the mobile 
application, CIAS. Figure 2 shows the user interface 
for configuring the vaccination schedule. 
All these alerts are sent through a batch job 
configured in the Task Scheduler, which calls a web 
service. This web service compiles the lists of alerts to 
be sent for that particular day from the database and 
then triggers the alerts.  
 
C) Linkage to State Resident Data Hub (SRDH) 
Unique Identification (UID) project is a biometric 
project being implemented by the Government of 
India, which uniquely identifies an Indian citizen and 
captures information such as their biometrics and 
demographic details [15]. For using UID, State 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
Resident Data Hub (SRDH) is the application 
framework being created by UID Authority of India 
(UIDAI) having the resident’s data for each state at the 
State Data Centres (SDCs). Linking of CIAS to SRDH 
would enable child’s information to be mapped with 
the parents (UID) so that timely interventions could be 
designed. 
IV. METHODOLOGY 
The mobile app ‘CIAS’ has been developed 
indigenously by Centre for Development of Advanced 
Computing (C-DAC) at Mohali. The initial version of the 
mobile app CIAS, was released in December 2013 on the 
mGov mobile app store. mGov app store has been 
provisioned by the Government of India to provide 
various citizen centric mobile applications. This app store 
is available at apps.mgov.gov.in. CIAS was made 
available free of charge to the end users. Also, various 
camps were held in Post Graduate Institute of Medical 
Education and Research (PGIMER) Chandigarh, Civil 
Hospital, Mohali and dispensaries in Mohali district of 
Punjab state to create awareness amongst the citizens and 
encourage them to download and use the mobile app. 
Vaccinations in these hospitals are administered only on 
Wednesdays and Saturdays during the week, hence the 
camps were held accordingly. During the camp, 
interactions were held with the parents to increase the 
adoption of the CIAS mobile application. Based on the 
inputs, the application was enhanced with a user friendly 
and an intuitive interface using ‘material design’ 
technology. Figure 2 shows the user interface of the CIAS 
application. 
V. RESULTS 
CIAS was made available in December 2013, and by 
December 2014, the mobile app had been downloaded by 
1314 users from the mGov store. Table 1 shows the count 
of SMS and emails sent as alerts to the users. Push 
notifications are managed by Google, hence, its count was 
not available. A look at the figures in the table indicate 
that users have opted for SMS as a preferred means for 
receiving vaccine alerts.  
TABLE 1: COUNT OF ALERTS SENT 
Sr. No. 
Modality 
Total sent 
1 
SMS 
1641 
2 
Email 
929 
 
TOTAL 
2570 
A feedback was taken from 134 randomly selected 
users. Their responses are shown in Table 2. The 3.74% of 
the users who did not get information on time, were 
inquired upon to get the reason. These specific users had 
opted for push notifications and did not receive those 
alerts because of intermittent internet connectivity. Hence, 
information could not be received on their mobile devices. 
TABLE 2: USER FEEDBACK 
No. 
Question 
Agree 
1 
CIAS is a useful service 
94.02% 
2 
CIAS provided information on time 
and has helped improve vaccine 
adherence 
96.26% 
3 
CIAS was easy to use 
82.83% 
4 
I’m satisfied with the use of CIAS 
78.35% 
The data before the introduction of CIAS application 
could not be recorded as the mGov store does not have the 
option to register the users. Hence, the demographic 
details of the users also could not be obtained. Also, the 
feature ‘overdue-alert’ was introduce at a later stage and 
was not a mandatory field.  
With the application being user-centric, the users 
highlighted the need to have local language support for 
deeper diffusion. Another feedback received, was the need 
of information of nearby hospitals where vaccinations 
could be administered. For this, CIAS was made context-
aware and the list of hospitals was included based on the 
users’ current location. A screen in Figure 2 shows the list 
of nearby hospitals. Also, in order to increase the 
penetration of CIAS amongst the public, the mobile 
application has also been published on the Google Play 
Store. 
VI. FUTURE SCOPE OF WORK 
The scalability of the CIAS system would need to be 
considered for a nation-wide deployment. Also, the 
integration of CIAS with the Mother and Child Tracking 
System (MCTS), a program of the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Government of India, would include 
detailed information about the pre-natal and post-natal 
care. The addition of voice based alerts in CIAS would 
enable speedier and deeper diffusion. Also, the inclusion 
of the child’s growth and development patterns would 
make the system more comprehensive. Sending alerts for 
administering polio drops during the Indian Government’s 
Pulse Polio Campaign, which is held twice a year, is also 
being considered. 
With India having vast regional diversity, the CIAS 
system could be made multilingual. This would make the 
system more customised to the local requirements of the 
citizens and would help in bringing down the infant 
mortality rate.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
With the developing countries looking at a large 
infant mortality rate, the use of mobiles and associated 
technologies have certainly brought a positive change. 
With CIAS, it can be concluded that cost effective alerts, 
such as emails and SMS, can be introduced to provide 
timely vaccination alerts. However,for deeper penetration, 
the system needs to be made available across platforms. 
For the section of populace that still uses traditional 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
phones, a web based system and pull-sms facility is 
provisioned. Also, efforts are being made on the 
localisation factors like support for regional languages, 
training, and empowerment of local experts to achieve 
speedier and deeper diffusion [8].         
    
 
     
 
      
 
Figure 2. CIAS User Interface 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
CIAS has been developed by CDAC Mohali as part 
of 
its 
mobile 
health 
project, 
‘mSwasthyaTM’ 
(www.mswasthya.in). This project has been funded by the 
Department of Electronics and IT (DeitY), Ministry of 
Communications and IT, Government of India. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] UNICEF ‘Progress on Children’, a report card on 
immunisation, , Number 3, September 2005 
[2] WHO, UNICEF, World Bank, Report: State of the world’s 
vaccines and immunization, 3rd edition. 
[3] Coverage Evaluation Survey 2009, All India Report by 
UNICEF;  
[4] K. E. Luthy et al, “Reasons parent’s exempt children from 
receiving immunizations”, The Journal of School Nursing, 
2012, 28(2), 153-160,  
[5] S. Patel, “The fear of vaccinating children in the  20th 
century: Struggle between healthcare providers and 
parents”, 
December 
2013, 
link: 
http://bernard.pitzer.edu/~hfairchi/Writing/Exemplary%20P
aper%20Psy%2010%20Fall%202013.pdf. Last accessed on: 
19-01-2015 
[6] M. Annikaet al, “Parental and provider preferences and 
concerns regarding text message reminder/recall for early 
childhood vaccinations”, Preventive Medicine Volume 57, 
Issue 2, August 2013, Pages 75–80. 
[7] A. E. Sadoh  and E. Okungbowa, “Nigerian Mothers opinion 
of reminder/ recall for immunization”, Nigerian Journal of 
Pediatrics, June 2013. 
[8] N. Willis et al, “Communicate to vaccinate: the development 
of a taxonomy of communication interventions to improve 
routine childhood vaccination”, BMC International Health 
and Human Rights 2013, 13:23 
[9] World 
Bank 
Database 
for 
the 
year 
2012, 
url: 
databank.worldbank.org; last accessed on 19-01-2015 
[10] Android 
developer, 
link: 
http://developer.android.com/develop/index.html; 
last 
accessed on 19-1-2015 
[11] K. Anderson and D.  Johansson, “Mobile e-Services Using 
HTML5”, 6th IEEE Workshop on User Mobility and 
Vehicular Networks 2012. 
[12] Mobile Seva, link: mgov.gov.in, last accessed on 19-1-2015 
[13] J. Car and A. Sheikh, “Email consultations in health care: 
2—acceptability and safe application”, BMJ 2004;329:439 
[14] J. Hansen, T. Morten, and G. Ghinea, “Cloud to Device 
Push Messaging on Android: a Case Study”, International 
Conference on Advanced Information Networking and 
Applications Workshop, 2012 
[15] UIDAI, url: http://uidai.gov.in/; last accessed on 19-012015 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

