 
1 
Unintended Consequences of Telemedicine Implementation 
 
Hege Kristin Andreassen 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
UNN 
Tromsø, Norway 
hege.andreassen@telemed.no 
 
Abstract— This poster present preliminary findings and 
research questions from an ongoing sociological research 
project on Norwegian telemedicine. The aim is to illuminate 
unintended 
consequences 
of 
implementing 
telemedicine 
technology, and to raise the question if these unintended 
consequences can explain the slow diffusion of telemedicine in 
routine clinical care. 
Keywords - Telemedicine; health care innovation; Norway 
I. 
 BACKGROUND 
Norway´s application of telemedicine has been in the 
international front [1]. Still, as in other countries, the 
digitalizing of Norwegian health care takes time. During the 
more than 20-year history of Norwegian telemedicine the 
field has met unexpected barriers. Internationally both policy 
makers and medical expertise now ask for large-scale 
implementation of standardised systems, whereas most 
services that exist are local and small-scale [2]. This has 
caused claims that the diffusion of telemedicine is too slow 
[3].  
The aim of this poster presentation is to illuminate 
unintended consequences of implementing telemedicine, and 
raise the question if these can explain the slow diffusion of 
telemedicine in routine clinical care.  
We have conducted a literature review, as well as 10 in-
depth interviews with key informants from the Norwegian 
telemedicine and e-health sector.  
 
II. 
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS, NEW QUESTIONS AND 
DISCUSSION 
According to preliminary analysis of existing literature 
and our interview material, there are at least three unintended 
consequences of telemedicine that actors in the field are 
aware of, but that receive little attention in implementation 
processes.  
• 
First, on a micro level: the very access to 
telemedicine (for expert advice and second opinion) 
adds to patients and professionals feelings of trust 
and reassurance weather it is used or not [4][5]. This 
implies telemedicine has consequences also when it 
is not used, and thus that decisions on weather to 
continue or close down telemedicine services cannot 
be based on frequency of use - evaluations.  
• 
Second, on an organisational level: as intended the 
implementation 
of 
telemedicine 
affects 
work 
procedures 
in 
health 
care 
organisations. 
An 
unintended consequence of this is that new work 
procedures often ends up altering previously 
established structures of power and responsibility as 
well, and thus lead to organisational disturbance [6]. 
It is very rare that all actors in an organisation 
welcome the disturbance of established structures. 
We ask if the opposition towards the organisational 
changes that comes along with new technologies 
might represent a main barrier for the successful 
implementation of telemedicine systems.  
• 
Third, in health care policy telemedicine is often 
suggested as a practical means for a more efficient, 
improved and equal health care service. Our study 
revealed that actors in administration, management 
and politics also ascribe symbolic value to 
telemedicine: and we ask if telemedicine can become 
symbolic politics [7]. If so, this indicates that 
telemedicine implementation can be slowed down by 
local, regional and national disputes on health 
politics and the organising of health care. We 
therefore argue that on-going local and national 
political battles in the health care area need to be 
assessed as part of telemedicine feasibility and 
process evaluation studies.  
III. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The preliminary findings from our sociological research 
reveal that there are at least three unintended consequences 
of telemedicine implementations that in different ways can 
explain slow diffusion. On a micro level both patients and 
professionals can be content with the technology ensuring 
their access to expert advice and second opinion. This 
implies that actual use is not always the outcome of 
implementing a telemedicine service. On an organisational 
level telemedicine brings with it organisational disturbance. 
Opposition towards the new structures of power and 
responsibility that comes with telemedicine systems might 
be a part of the explanation for slow diffusion. On a macro-, 
or policy level, telemedicine can become symbolic politics; 
the implementation of new technologies in clinical work is 
linked to on-going political disputes in health care. This can 
slow the processes of implementation in local, regional and 
national contexts. There is need for awareness of intended 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
2 
and 
unintended 
consequences 
of 
telemedicine 
in 
implementation processes. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to thank the informants who shared their 
insights and experiences with me. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
G. Hartvigsen, M. A. Johansen, P. Hasvold, J. G. Bellika, E. 
Arsand, E. Arild, D. Gammon, S. Pettersen, and S. Pedersen, 
“Challenges in telemedicine and eHealth: lessons learned from 
20 years with telemedicine in Tromsø,” Studies in Health 
Technology and Informatics, vol. 129 (Pt 1), pp. 82-86, 2007 
[2] 
J. C. Wyatt, and F. Sullivan, “eHealth and the future: promise or 
peril?,” BMJ, vol. 331, pp. 1391-1393, 2005. 
[3] 
P. Zanaboni, U. Knarvik, and R. Wootton, “Adoption of 
telemedicine in Norway: the current picture,” Global Health 
Action, vol. 7, 2014, doi: 10.3402/gha.v7.22801 
[4] 
H. K. Andreassen, and K. Dyb, “Differences and Inequalities in 
Health,” Information, Communication & Society, vol. 13, pp. 
956-975, 2010 
[5] 
H. K. Andreassen, M. Trondsen, P. E. Kummervold, D. 
Gammon, and P. Hjortdahl, “Patients who use e-mediated 
communication with their doctor: new constructions of trust in 
the patient-doctor relationship,” Qualitative Health Research, 
vol. 16, pp. 238-48, 2006. 
[6] 
B. Farbey, D. Targett, and F. Land, “The great IT benefit hunt”, 
European Management Journal, vol 12, pp. 270-279, 1994. 
[7] 
U. Sarcinelli, “Symbolic politics” in W. Donsbach (edt.), “The 
International Encyclopedia of Communication”, 2008, eISBN: 
9781405131995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

