Identification of User Requirements for Assistive Technology for Support of Upper 
Limb Daily Life Interactions from Stroke and Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy 
Patients 
Anne L van Ommeren1,2, Mario Iodice3,4, Marion Main3, Jackie M Pitchforth3,4, Franscesco M Muntoni3,4, 
Gerdienke B Prange-Lasonder1,2, Johan S Rietman1,2, Jaap H Buurke1,2 
 
1Roessingh Research and Development 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
 
2University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
3Great Ormond Street Hospital  
London, the United Kingdom 
 
4University College London 
London, the United Kingdom
 
Email: a.vanommeren@rrd.nl, mario.iodice@ucl.ac.uk, marion.main@gosh.nhs.uk, j.pitchforth@ucl.ac.uk, 
f.muntoni@ucl.ac.uk, g.prange@rrd.nl, j.s.rietman@rrd.nl, j.buurke@rrd.nl 
 
Abstract— The uptake of assistive technology to improve the 
functionality of the upper limb in people with disorders 
affecting the neuromuscular system, such as stroke and 
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, is often limited by a gap 
between the users’ needs and the design of the technology. This 
study aims to identify the technology-specific end-users’ 
requirements for the development of upper limb assistive 
technology to support daily life activities, and thereby 
supporting 
self-management, 
in 
stroke 
and 
Duchenne 
Muscular Dystrophy, based on the results of disease-specific 
focus groups and specialist consultation. The focus group 
results showed that: unobtrusive support, intuitive use, and 
adaptiveness to an individual and disease progression are key 
for both stroke and Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy patients. 
The technology-specific end-user requirements identified in 
this study can be used to supplement general user 
requirements identified in the literature, in order to improve 
the design of assistive technology for support of upper limb 
daily activities. 
Keywords- DMD; Stroke; Assistive Technology; User 
Requirements; Upper Extremity. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
People with disorders that affect the neuromuscular 
system, such as Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) and 
stroke, often suffer from difficulties in performing activities 
of daily living (ADL) due to reduced functionality of the 
upper limb (UL) [1]-[3]. Decreased functionality of the UL 
leads to a decrease in independence and impacts quality of 
life [4][5].  
The demand for technological solutions, which can 
support or compensate for loss of functionality in motor 
function, increases with reduced level of independence and 
UL function [2][6][7]. Nowadays, numerous technological 
solutions are available ranging from simple assistive tools 
(e.g., adapted cutlery) to robots that entirely substitute 
human movements in very severe cases [7]-[9]. In theory, 
personal assistance or (in)formal care can be reduced by 30-
42% 
through 
use 
of 
assistive 
technology 
[8][9]. 
Unfortunately, the preferences and needs of end-users and 
their environment are often not met in the technical design of 
the device which results in many users abandoning these 
devices [6][10]-[14]. In order to bridge the translational gap 
between the users’ needs and the design of the technology, a 
user-centred design needs to be used in the development of 
the UL assistive technology [15]. Input from end-users from 
the beginning of the design, as done in a user-centred design, 
is regarded as effective to enhance the chance for uptake 
[16].  
In the literature, focus is placed on general end-user 
perspectives for UL assistive technology. If assistive 
technologies are to be used to support independence during 
daily life activities, they need to be simple to apply [13]-
[15][19], easy to use [11][12][17][18], safe [12], pleasurable 
[17][19][20], of reasonable cost [17][19][21][22], motivating 
and should be able to provide feedback [13]. The time taken 
to prepare, set up and maintain assistive devices are key 
issues for all stakeholders [11][12][17][19]. For stroke 
patients and carers the device needs to be easy to get on and 
off a weak, contracted hand/arm as well as intuitive in terms 
of correctly positioning the device [11][17]. Also, concerns 
about devices which are time consuming to clean and 
difficult to store are expressed [11][17]. The appearance of 
the device is not seen as important factor for either stroke 
patients nor healthcare professionals [12]. Conversely, for 
DMD patients, having a mobile device which is also 
attractive in appearance is an important issue because of the 
age related social needs. Thus, for self-management it is 
critical to incorporate the above mentioned features in the 
design of a device. 
Nowadays, designers are focusing more and more on 
innovative and technically complex assistive technology, and 
a user-centred design is increasingly adopted. The People, 
Activities, Contexts and Technologies (PACT) framework 
was invented to cover all aspects of user-centred design 
including social and technological aspects. Although, 
eliciting end-user input through analysis of the PACT 
aspects is considered as a useful starting point for design 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[23], the technological aspect is often neglected. In stroke 
and DMD populations, gathered end-user-input is often still 
targeted at rather generic information about the envisioned 
use of the assistive technology, for instance as reflected by 
the People, Activity and Context domains of the PACT 
framework [11][12][20][23]. There is little emphasis on end-
users’ views towards specific technical aspects, such as 
intention detection, options for support, and feedback.  
The eNHANCE project aims to assist people with DMD 
and stroke in performing UL daily life activities with the 
environment. The focus of this project is on innovative 
aspects of the technology such as intention detection, 
performance 
assessment, 
and 
behavioural 
modelling. 
Therefore, the aim of this paper is to identify end-user 
requirements, specifically addressing the technical features, 
for the development of UL assistive technology. This project 
used questionnaires and focus groups in two target groups, 
namely stroke and DMD to determine these end-user 
requirements. The results are outlined in Section III and will 
be discussed in Section IV. 
II. 
METHODS 
To elicit user input, the PACT framework [23] was used 
to design questions to be addressed during disease-specific 
questionnaires and focus groups with patients, carers and 
clinicians. To determine the starting point for the 
technology-specific questions to be discussed during the 
focus groups, a questionnaire addressing the People, 
Activity and Context domains of the PACT framework was 
set up. 
A. Questionnaire 
In order to develop the questionnaire, a literature survey 
was performed in stroke, to determine the existing body of 
knowledge regarding user input for UL supporting assistive 
technologies. The design of the questionnaire was based on 
published literature on questionnaire design [24][25]. 
Questions relating to the People (patient characteristics, 
technological affinity and hand function), Activity (Usage 
of hand, and which preferred activities) and Context (Table 
I) were addressed in the questionnaire. Although no paper-
based questionnaire was performed in DMD, questions with 
regard to the People, Activity and Context domains were 
asked during the DMD focus group.  
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONNAIRE STATEMENTS, ANSWERED ON A 5-POINT 
LIKERT SCALE (FROM STRONGLY DISAGREE TO STRONGLY AGREE) 
The device must be wearable 
Storage of the device must be easy 
The device must be lightweight 
I want to don and doff the device myself 
I would lack the confidence to use assistive technology at home 
Support of my caregiver is important to use assistive technology 
I want to wear the device under my clothes 
In order to ensure consistency in the analysis of the user 
requirements, the design was kept as similar as possible for 
DMD as for stroke. Yet, the questions were modified for the 
DMD population, tailoring it to their specific pediatric 
needs. Further information was sourced from experience in 
previous related projects (e.g., FlexTension) and DMD 
healthcare professionals. 
B. Focus Groups 
Two focus groups, one with stroke survivors and carers, 
and the other with boys with DMD, aged between 15 and 16 
years old, and their parents were held in July 2015. Stroke 
participants 
were 
recruited 
from 
the 
Roessingh 
Rehabilitation Centre, the Netherlands, and the focus group 
for DMD was publicised in the UK by the Action Duchenne 
DMD Advocacy group called “Taking Charge”. During the 
focus groups more specific information with regard to the 
technology was represented by the following themes: 
support 
options, 
intention 
detection, 
personalization, 
feedback and motivational aspects (Table II). Several 
technical and biomedical experts were present to provide 
feedback about the use of the state of the art technology in 
the robotic arm.  
TABLE II.  
MAIN QUESTIONS DISCUSSED DURING FOCUS GROUPS 
Introduction project, participants and focus group 
Support options 
- 
How would you like to be supported by the system? 
1. 
System takes over entire movement 
2. 
System compensates for gravity 
3. 
System supports as needed 
Intention detection 
- 
Can you imagine in which way a system could detect your 
movement intention? 
 
Which of the following options would you find best, acceptable and 
unacceptable: 
A. Subconscious                                          B. Conscious 
1. Eye-tracking                                             1. Voice recognition 
2. Sensors (movement/pressure/force)         2. Joystick 
3. Muscle activation                                     3. Pushing a button 
Personalization 
- 
Would you like to have a system that can adapt itself to your 
personal preferences? 
- 
Can you imagine examples of how such a system could be 
personalized? 
- 
Would you like the system to detect the activity you are 
performing? 
- 
How much time is acceptable for the system to get used to your 
preferences? 
Feedback and motivation 
- 
Would you like to receive feedback from the system? If so, 
about ‘how well’ and/or ‘how much’ you performed? 
- 
What kind of feedback would you like to receive? 
Audio, visual, graphs and tables or vibrotactile? 
- 
Would you like to be encouraged by the system to use your 
upper limb? 
The focus group with DMD took place in the United 
Kingdom (UK), while the focus group with stroke survivors 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

took place in the Netherlands. Prior to the start of the study, 
written informed consent, and agreement for audio-
recording of the focus group was obtained from all 
participants and if needed in case of DMD, their parents. 
The DMD focus group was conducted as part of a larger 
project run by the Action Duchenne DMD Advocacy group 
called “Taking Charge” which obtained consent for 
videoing and recording. No ethical approval was required 
for focus groups in this context. In the Netherlands, ethical 
clearance was obtained from the medical ethical committee 
Twente, Enschede, the Netherlands, in May 2015. 
1) Stroke Focus Group 
All topics were accompanied by examples (visual where 
possible) so that the participants could envisage the options 
more easily. Using an interactive presentation, those items 
were put up for discussion by asking the participants input 
via a variety of user interactions, such as voting and 
ranking, combined with plenary discussions between all 
participants 
about 
their 
thoughts, 
ideas, 
opinions, 
experiences and expectations.  
2) DMD Focus Group 
The format of the DMD focus group differed slightly 
from the stroke group, to accommodate expression of 
individual opinions in this group of younger participants. 
Following preliminary introductions and completion of a 
baseline questionnaire, an interactive presentation on the 
eNHANCE project was given. Once the presentation was 
completed, the end-users gathered together as a group to 
discuss the presented questions without the presence of the 
technical and medical experts. This was done to promote 
participation from young adults who may not voice opinions 
in the presence of adult experts. The group answers were 
then presented to the technical and medical attendees. Group 
ideas and suggestions were recorded by Dictaphone and 
video for later analysis. 
C. User Requirement Identification 
The qualitative data coming from audio-recordings and 
notes from the focus groups was elaborated. Transcripts were 
discussed between researchers and direct comments were 
subsequently grouped together. From this, common topics 
were identified to describe the user perspectives per 
predefined theme. Thereafter, user requirements were 
compiled according to preferences expressed by the majority 
of the participants in each focus group. Subsequently, user 
requirements were discussed between clinical experts for 
DMD and stroke separately, involving rehabilitation 
physicians, physiotherapists and clinical researchers. All 
requirements were independently prioritized by at least three 
clinical experts per target population using the MoSCoW 
method; Must have (M), Should have (S), Could have (C), 
Won’t have (W) [26]. The MoSCoW method is a technique 
used for prioritization of requirements with stakeholders to 
highlight the importance placed on each requirement. The 
final priority was based on most votes given for the 
corresponding user requirement.  
III. 
RESULTS  
 In the result section, the findings from the questionnaire 
in stroke and the end-user requirements as derived from the 
focus groups in stroke and DMD are presented.  
A. Findings from the Questionnaire in Stroke 
Findings from the questionnaire in stroke from the 
People Activity and Context domains of the PACT 
framework are presented separately. 
1) People Domain Findings from the Questionnaire 
In total, seven stroke survivors filled out the 
questionnaire. Most of the questionnaire respondents were 
male, above the age of 60 and in the chronic phase after 
stroke (Table III). Main problems in functional use of the 
hand and arm were a lack of fine motor skills and control of 
the hand. 
2) Activity Domain Findings from the Questionnaire 
The majority of the respondents used their affected hand 
and arm at least sometimes. Dressing and undressing, biking 
and using the affected hand as supporting hand were the 
activities in which the most respondents used their affected 
hand and arm. With regard to activities in which they would 
like to use their affected arm; domestic chores, eating, 
drinking and cooking and dressing/grooming were reported 
most often. Personal hygiene, outdoor activities, mobility but 
also fine motor skill activities and hobbies were mentioned.  
3) Context Domain Findings from the Questionnaire 
Findings answering the questions of the ‘Context’ 
domain of the PACT framework are summarized in Figure 1. 
The majority of the respondents either agreed or strongly 
agreed that assistive technology should be easy to don and 
doff, wearable and light weight, and easy to store. All 
participants would be confident to use assistive technology 
independent at home. However, opinions about the amount 
of support needed from the caregiver and whether the device 
should be worn under the clothes or not were more 
diversified.  
   
TABLE III.  
PRIMARY END-USER CHARACTERISTICS 
Table Head 
Table Column Head 
 
 
Target population 
% Male  
Mean age (range) 
% Wheelchair user?  
Stroke: Onset since disease in years (range) 
Questionnaire 
Stroke (n=7) 
71% 
 66 (45-78) 
0% 
3.4 (2.5-4.5) 
Focus group 
Stroke  (n=3) 
100% 
70 (67-75) 
0% 
3.3 (2-4.5) 
DMD (n=6) 
100% 
15.2 (15-16) 
100% 
Not Applicable 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1.  Perceptions of stroke survivors on contextual questions with regard to assistive technology, expressed in percentages
B. Focus Group Derived End-user Requirements Focused 
on Technological Aspects  
Nine primary end-users (DMD boys and stroke 
survivors) and eleven secondary end-users (partners and 
parents) were included in the focus groups. Patient 
characteristics can be found in Table III. 
TABLE IV.  
USER REQUIREMENTS WITH CORRESPONDING PROIRITY. 
M = MUST HAVE, S = SHOULD HAVE, AND ‘-’= NOT RRIORITIZED OR NOT 
APPLICABLE 
User requirement 
Priority 
 
DMD 
Stroke 
Support options 
The system must allow the user to move actively 
without replacing human function 
- 
M 
The amount of the support must consider the 
existing contractures on the upper limb 
M 
M 
The system must support arm function during 
reaching and fine motor control of the hand 
- 
M 
Intention detection 
The system must subconsciously detect the 
intention of the user 
M 
S 
The system must have the possibility to switch to 
conscious control of the user 
S 
S 
Personalization 
The system must be adaptable to personal 
limitations and needs 
M 
M 
The system must be able to learn user preferences 
within one week 
- 
S 
The system must be adaptable to different kind of 
movements in tasks related to activities of daily 
life 
- 
M 
The system must consider the eventual users' 
deteriorating condition overuse, pain and muscle 
deterioration 
M 
- 
Feedback and motivation 
The system must provide feedback during the 
daily tasks (quality and quantity of movement) 
M 
- 
The system must not overproduce feedback 
S 
M 
The system must keep track of performance 
based on personal capacity and should use that to 
motivate the user 
- 
M 
The system must motivate the user to be active 
during the movements 
S 
M 
In Table IV, a list of user requirements resulting from the 
translation of user expressions from end-users gathered 
during the focus groups can be found. In summary, both 
groups favoured assistance only as needed. The DMD group 
favoured subconscious control (e.g., eye-tracking, movement 
sensors, muscle activation) with an option to switch off the 
subconscious control. The stroke group was more divided 
with some favouring conscious (e.g., voice, joystick, button 
pressing) over subconscious control. Both groups wished for 
personalization of the system but differed with regard to 
individual characteristics, which should take into account 
mainly disease-specific aspects related to nature and severity 
of motor and/or cognitive limitations, as a basis for 
personalization. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Reduced function of the upper limbs in both people with 
DMD and stroke impacts their functional independence and 
quality of life [1]. Although the use of assistive technology 
is promising, user-centred design methods are needed to 
include end-users in the design process and to enable 
development of devices that better suit the needs of the 
users [15]. Findings from the questionnaire and the user 
requirements gained from focus groups in the two selected 
target populations, DMD and stroke, provided useful and 
specific information on the technological features of 
assistive technologies for the UL from an end-users’ 
perspective.  
Remarkably, the themes and related topics identified by 
end-users as being essential requirements for the design of an 
intelligent UL supporting assistive technology were 
comparable between DMD and stroke participants. Despite 
these similarities, there were substantial differences between 
specific requirements between populations for each of those 
themes (see Table IV for examples) attributable to 
differences in the two populations (Table V). Unlike the 
DMD population, both men and women are affected by 
stroke, yet only men participated in the focus group. 
However based on findings of former focus groups including 
both women and men, no different outcomes are expected 
when women would have been included [15][27]. 
The functional benefit of a device must be balanced with 
its burden of use [7]. Minimization of the burden must result 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

from including end-users in the design of the device. In 
addition to the end-user requirements about technological 
aspects of assistive technology gained from this study, there 
are a number of other aspects that are important for the 
adoption of assistive technology. In line with the findings 
from the questionnaire performed in this study, assistive 
technologies need to be: easy to use, portable, safe, and easy 
to don and doff during daily activities such as 
eating/drinking, preparing food, personal hygiene, as well as 
supporting hand in stroke in order to gain more 
independence 
and 
perform 
desirable 
activities 
[11][12][15][17][18][20][22][27].  
As stroke survivors prefer to use assistive technology at 
home, storage of assistive technology must be easy. In 
DMD, assistive technology must be able to be attached to 
the wheelchair and to be used during the entire day [19], 
whereas in stroke an assistive technology can preferably be 
used several times a day depending on the easiness with 
which the system can be put on by the patient. 
 In stroke, accessibility or knowledge about the device is 
also identified as important factor for the uptake of UL 
assistive technology [28]. In general, the results of the 
questionnaire of this 
study and previous research 
incorporating input from both primary and secondary end-
users are consistent with the 17 design and engineering 
criteria as set up by Batavia et al. [29]. Those criteria are 
applicable in both stroke and DMD.  
TABLE V.  
PRIMARY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TARGET POPULATIONS 
Stroke 
DMD 
Static 
Progressive 
Male and female 
Male 
Unilateral involvement 
Bilateral involvement 
Predominantly older adults 
Difficulties begin in early teens 
Increased muscle tone 
(spasticity) 
Spasticity not involved 
Pain 
Pain rarely present 
Generally ambulant 
Non-ambulant 
 
Although previous research has identified a need for 
feedback, (mechanical) adjustment to patients and the ease 
of use, there has not been a specific focus on the 
technological aspects of assistive technology [11][12][22]. 
During the focus groups, almost every participant, both 
stroke and DMD, pointed out that it is important that their 
own existing power, movement and function must be 
enhanced, rather than replaced, by the system in order to be 
as independent as possible. Within both populations, highly 
individual aspects such as variety in disease severity, in 
addition to personal preferences and interests, needs to be 
taken into account during the personalization of interfaces. 
Furthermore, the differences between target populations as 
highlighted in Table V, resulted in different requirements. 
Whereas stroke survivors stated they always want to regain 
more functionality, regardless of the severity, in DMD, the 
primary concern is to fight deterioration at every stage of 
the disease. Therefore, it is of great importance that a 
system can be personalized not only to the personal 
preferences and interests of the user, but also to disease-
specific needs in the motor and cognitive domains [28]. 
With regard to detection of the movement intention of the 
user, our participants predominantly preferred sub-
conscious control, with the possibility to switch to or 
combine it with conscious control. In DMD, eye-tracking 
was favoured by all the boys and their parents. Although 
subconscious was most preferred in stroke, there was 
difference between participants in the preferred option (e.g., 
movement sensors, eye-tracking, muscle activation).  
In order to reduce or reverse functional decline in motor 
function, active engagement during movement and intensive 
use of the arm of hand are crucial [30]. Although stroke 
survivors do not feel the urge to receive direct feedback 
from an assistive technology, boys with DMD would like to 
receive feedback about both quality and quantity of their 
movements. However, concerns were raised by the DMD 
group that the system needed regular reassessment in order 
to compensate for the deteriorating nature of the disease and 
the avoidance of overuse and pain.  
In order to improve, people with stroke would like to be 
motivated by the system. In stroke, people can usually use 
their unaffected arm and hand unobtrusively to perform 
complex movements [31], which demotivates them to use 
their affected hand. Awareness of their movements and 
(possible) non-use of the affected side during daily life 
activities is important to them.  
All 
patients, 
family 
caregivers 
and 
healthcare 
professionals were positive regarding the potential of 
assistive technologies to facilitate self-management and 
independence. Although the present study highlighted many 
similarities in essential topics to be covered in the design of 
an intelligent UL supporting assistive technology between 
DMD and stroke, interpretation of some of the specific 
requirements involved was different due to the differences 
in the target populations. Although differences in focus of 
the user perspectives may also be due to slight differences in 
information collection and participants between both 
groups, this study provides valuable information about 
users’ views regarding technology aspects of an assistive 
technology, and relevant insights into the most population-
specific topics. In this study, healthcare professionals were 
included in the prioritization of the user requirements 
afterwards, but they did not take part in the focus groups. 
Therefore, our findings as presented in this paper may be 
different if healthcare professionals were included earlier on 
in the process. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Actual use of a device can be related to the perceived 
usefulness and ease of use [32]. In order to improve the 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

chance of acceptance, specific attention needs to be paid to 
ease of use and usefulness as well as a high priority should 
be given to accessibility and personalization of both 
hardware and software aspects of assistive technology [27]. 
The user requirements from this study, focused on technical 
domains, can be used to complement the existing 
information on user perspectives identified as important 
barriers and facilitators for UL assistive technology. End-
user input from this study has highlighted differences in 
end-user preferences and needs between and within 
populations, which have to be taken into account into the 
future design of an UL supporting assistive technology. 
Currently, the identified user requirements are being taken 
into account during the design of an intelligent, adaptive, 
unobtrusive UL supporting assistive technology within the 
eNHANCE project, aimed at assisting people with DMD or 
stroke in independently performing UL daily life activities. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
under grant agreement No 644000. This result reflects only 
the author’s view and the Commission is not responsible for 
any use of the information in this result. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Balasubramanian, J. Klein, and E. Burdet, “Robot-assisted 
rehabilitation of hand function,” Current opinion in neurology, vol. 
23, pp. 661-670, 2010. 
[2] J. L. Herder, N. Vrijlandt, T. Antonides, M. Cloosterman, and P.L. 
Mastenbroek, “Principle and design of a mobile arm support for 
people with muscular weakness,” Journal of rehabilitation research 
and development, pp: 591-604, 2006. 
[3] P. N. Kooren et al.,”Design and pilot validation of A-gear: a novel 
wearable dynamic arm support,” Journal of neuroengineering and 
rehabilitation, 2015. 
[4] D. S. Nichols-Larson, P. C. Clark, A. Zeringue, A. Greenspan, and S. 
Blanton, “Factors influencing stroke survivors’ Quality of life during 
subacute recovery,” Stroke, pp. 1480-1484, 2005. 
[5] A. G. Dunning and J. L. Herder, “A review of assistive devices for 
arm balancing,” IEEE International Conference on Rehabilitation 
Robotics, pp. 1-6, 2013. 
[6] P. Maciejasz, J. Eschweiler, K. Gerlach-Hahn, A. Jansen-Troy, and S. 
Leonhardt, “A survey on robotic devices for upper limb 
rehabilitation," Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation vol. 
11, 2014.  
[7] L. A. Van der Heide et al., "An overview and categorization of 
dynamic arm supports for people with decreased arm function," 
Prosthetics and Orthotics International, pp. 287-302, 2013. 
[8] J. Frappier, "Clinico-economic study of the JACO robotic arm for 
powered wheelchair users with upper-extremity disabilities,” By 
Data4Actions inc. for Kinova, Canada, pp. 1-5,  2011. 
[9] G. R. B. E. Romer, H. J. Stuyt, and A. Peters, "Cost-savings and 
economic benefits due to the assistive robotic manipulator (ARM),” 
Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE 9th International Conference on 
Rehabilitation Robotics, pp. 201-204, 2005. 
[10] L. N. Gitlin, "Why older people accept or reject assistive technology," 
Generations, vol. 19, pp. 41-46, 1995. 
[11] S. Demain et al., “Assistive technologies after stroke: self-
management or fending for yourself? A focus group study,” BMC 
Health Services Research¸ vol. 13, 2013. 
[12] A. M. Hughes et al., “Translation of evidence-based assistive 
technologies into stroke rehabilitation: users’ perceptions of the 
barriers and opportunities,” BMC Health Services Research¸ 2014. 
[13] R. Haworth, S. Dunscombe, and P. J. R. Nichols, “Mobile arm 
supports: an evaluation,” Rheumatology, pp. 240-244, 1978. 
[14] A. Kumar and M. F. Philips, “Use of powered mobile arm supports 
by people with neuromuscular conditions,” Journal of rehabilitation 
research and development, pp. 61-70, 2013. 
[15] B. Radder et al., “User-centred input for a wearable soft-robotic glove 
supporting hand function in daily life,” IEEE International 
Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), pp. 502-507, 2015. 
[16] C. Abras, D. Maloney-Krichmar, and J. Preece, “User-centered 
design,” W. Encyclopedia of Human-Computer Interaction. Thousand 
Oaks: Sage Publications, vol. 37, pp. 445-456, 2004. 
[17] C. Stehle and C. Albrecht-Buehler, “Developing more desirable 
products for stroke survivors,” Topics in stroke rehabilitation, 15(2), 
pp. 109-117, 2008. 
[18] J. He, et al., “RUPERT: a device for robotic upper extremity 
repetitive therapy,” Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 
27th Annual International Conference of the IEEE, pp. 6844-6847, 
2005.  
[19] S. Landsberger et al., “Mobile arm supports: history, application, and 
work in progress,” Topics in Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation, pp. 
74-94, 2005. 
[20] Y. L. Yasuda, K. Bowman, and J. D. Hsu, “Mobile arm supports: 
criteria for successful use in muscle disease patients,” Archives of 
physical medicine and rehabilitation, 67(4), pp. 253-256, 1986. 
[21] E. C. Lu et al., “The development of an upper limb stroke 
rehabilitation robot: identification of clinical practices and design 
requirements through a survey of therapists,” Disability & 
Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 6(5), pp. 420-431, 2011. 
[22] Y. Shakya, and M. Johnson, “A mobile robot therapist for under-
supervised 
training 
with 
robot/computer 
assisted 
motivating 
systems,” Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society30th Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE, pp. 4511-4514, 2008.  
[23] D. Benyon, P. Turner, and S. Turner, “Designing interactive systems: 
People, activities, contexts, technologies,” Pearson Education, 2005. 
[24] P. M. Boynton, T. Greenhalgh, “Selecting, designing, and developing 
your questionnaire,” BMJ, pp. 1312–1315, 2004. 
[25] P. M. Boynton, “Administering, analysing, and reporting your 
questionnaire,” BMJ, pp. 1372–1375, 2005. 
[26] D. Clegg, and R. Barker, “Case method fast-track: a RAD approach,” 
Addison-Wesley ISBN 978-0201624328, 2004.  
[27] G. B. Prange et al., “User requirements for assistance of the 
supporting hand in bimanual daily activities via a robotic glove for 
severely affected stroke patients,” IEEE International Conference on 
Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), pp. 357-361, 2015. 
[28] A. L. van Ommeren, G. B. Prange-Lasonder, J. S. Rietman, P. H. 
Veltink, and J. H. Buurke, “Preliminary extraction of themes from a 
review about user perspectives on assistive technology for the upper 
limb after stroke,” Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on 
Neurorehabilitation, pp.323-327, 2016. 
[29] A. I. Batavia and G. S. Hammer, “Toward the development of 
consumer-based criteria for the evaluation of assistive devices,” 
Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development, vol. 27, pp. 
425-436, 1990. 
[30] H. W. Mahncke, Bronstone, A., and Merzenich, M. M., "Brain 
plasticity and functional losses in the aged: scientific bases for a 
novel intervention,” Progress in Brain Research, pp 81- 109, 2006. 
[31] I. M. Bullock, J. Z. Zheng, S. De La Rosa, C. Guertler, and A. M. 
Dollar, "Grasp frequency and usage in daily household and machine 
and shop tasks,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 6, pp. 296-308, 
2013. 
[32] F. D. Davis, "User acceptance of information technology: system 
characteristics, 
user 
perceptions 
and 
behavioral 
impacts," 
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, vol. 38, pp. 475-487, 
1993.  
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

