User-Centered and Persuasive Design of a Web-Based Registration and Monitoring 
System for Healthcare-Associated Infections in Nursing Homes 
Nienke de Jong1, Andrea Eikelenboom-Boskamp2,3, Andreas Voss2,3, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen1 
1Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
n.dejong@utwente.nl, j.vangemert-pijnen@utwente.nl 
 
2Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases 
Canisius Wilhelmina Hospital 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands 
eikelenboomandrea@gmail.com, vossandreas@gmail.com  
 
3Medical Microbiology 
Radboud University Medical Centre 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands 
Abstract— Patient safety is increasingly threatened by 
healthcare-associated infections. To cope with this threat, 
insight into the occurrence of such infections is paramount. We 
used a holistic approach for the user-centered and persuasive 
development of a system for the registration of healthcare-
associated infections in nursing homes. To do so, we combined 
multiple methods (literature search, expert discussion, 
questionnaire, interviews and scenario-based user-tests), 
closely cooperating with end-users. This study shows why 
involving end-users in all stages of development is of 
paramount importance for the creation of successful eHealth 
technologies. 
Keywords-User-centered design; Persuasive design; Web-
based; eHealth technology 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Healthcare is increasingly confronted with threats caused 
by Healthcare-Associated Infections (HAIs)  [1]. To be able 
to adequately protect patients from this threat, one of the first 
steps is to gather knowledge on its occurrence [1]. For 
hospitals, already a vast amount of surveillance data is 
available [1-7]. For other healthcare institutions (such as 
nursing homes), prevalence studies have more recently 
begun to take place. The results of the first prevalence study 
of HAIs in Dutch nursing homes were published in 2011 [8].  
To enable prevalence research in nursing homes, data 
must be collected on all clients that are present in the nursing 
homes at one point in time. The success of such data 
collection is entirely dependent on the willingness and 
capability of the elderly care physicians to register their 
clients in a correct and timely manner. Preferably, the 
registered data should be collected in a standardized way to 
fit other (e.g., nation-wide) surveillance programs [1]. One 
way to achieve this is via the use of a standardized 
registration system, that allows users to collect, process, and 
analyze surveillance data.  
We developed a registration system to optimally support 
elderly care physicians in the correct and timely registration 
of their clients, taking into account the national prevalence 
studies [2] with which collected data should be compatible. 
We aimed to do so, by applying user-centered and persuasive 
design to the development process.  
The research question is: How can user-centered and 
persuasive design improve the registration of HAIs in 
nursing homes by elderly care physicians? Aim is to make 
the new registration system reliable, fitting within work 
processes, and faster, easier and clearer than the current 
registration method. 
First, the methods that are applied in this study are 
described: the analysis of the current situation via expert 
discussion (section II.A.); the analysis of the users’ needs 
via a questionnaire study (section II.B); and the analysis of 
the user-friendliness and persuasiveness via in-depth 
interviews and scenario-based tests with end-users (section 
II.C.). Then, the results of the different study methods are 
given: a description of the current situation (section III.A.); 
the users’ needs and values (section III.B.); the use of 
persuasive systems design in the prototype (section III.C.); 
and the user-friendliness of the prototype (section III.D.). 
Finally, the performed study is discussed (section IV) and 
conclusions are drawn (section V). 
II. 
METHODS 
The Center for eHealth Research and Disease 
Management (CeHRes) has developed a roadmap (see Fig. 
1) that is used as a framework for the holistic development 
of eHealth technologies [9]. It incorporates principles from 
business modelling, human-centred design and persuasive 
design 
within 
five 
development 
cycles 
[10, 
11].
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1.   CeHRes Roadmap [9]. 
 
A. Analysis of Current Situation via Expert Discussion 
This project started with a request from iPrevent [12] to 
aid in the development of a new ‘mobile’ registration 
system. iPrevent is a regional infection control network 
within which healthcare institutions, elderly care physicians, 
medical microbiologists and Infection Control Professionals 
(ICPs) work together to structurally offer high quality care 
in the field of infection prevention [12].  
To gain insight into what iPrevent specifically wants or 
needs from this project, and into the prerequisites for the 
registration system, an expert discussion was held, with two 
project leaders (one of whom is also the data analyst) and 
two behavioral researchers. The outcomes of the discussion 
were complemented with literature on the registered HAIs 
and national surveillance.  
B. Analysis of Users’ Needs via Questionnaire 
Based on the expert discussion a questionnaire was 
developed, to gain insight in what values end-users had 
(concerning a registration system) and whether the project 
aims match these values. 
A total of 24 physicians who worked at different nursing 
homes within the iPrevent network participated in the study. 
Their age ranged from 30 to 61 (mean age 47 years). Most 
participants were female (19 female vs. 5 male).  
Questionnaire results are analyzed to obtain descriptive 
statistics. Statistical analyses were deemed redundant, given 
the developmental purpose of the study. Answers that are 
given to open-ended questions, were summarized if they 
overlapped and then their frequencies were analyzed. 
C. Analysis of User-Friendliness and Persuasiveness via 
In-Depth Interviews and Scenario-Based Tests with End-
Users 
To validate the questionnaire data and to optimize the 
user-friendliness and persuasiveness of the prototype, 
scenario-based user-tests and in-depth interviews with end-
users are performed.  
Four female elderly care physicians who worked in 
different nursing homes within the iPrevent network 
participated. Their ages varied from 33 to 59 (mean age 45 
years). One of the nursing homes they worked at, already 
used Electronic Client Files, the others will start to do so in 
the near future.  
Based on the analysis of the context and of the users’ 
needs, and in close cooperation with an ICP, a prototype of 
the registration system was developed using Balsamiq 
software. The prototype incorporated elements of Persuasive 
Systems Design (PSD) [13]. Not all elements of PSD were 
deemed relevant for this system, but as much elements as 
possible have been applied.  
Two scenarios were developed for the user tests. They 
were developed by an ICP and made use of literature on the 
HAI definitions. The scenarios addressed critical issues for 
registration.  
The physician was instructed to talk out loud during the 
entire user-test, not only mentioning what she thought, but 
also what she saw or sought, did or wanted to do. 
The entire conversations (including both interview and 
user tests) took about 45-60 minutes each. Audio recordings 
of the conversations were transcribed verbatim and analyzed 
using a code book. Some examples of the codes are given in 
Table 1. All codes were combined and the frequencies with 
which they were mentioned were analyzed.  
TABLE 1. EXAMPLES OF CODES USED FOR ANALYSIS OF USER-TESTS 
Examples of codes used for data-analysis 
Category 
Code 
Description 
Contextual 
Inquiry 
C1 
Subject describes a problem that is 
experienced in the current work process 
Value 
Specification 
V1 
Subject thinks working with the new 
system might be faster 
Design 
D1 
Subject thinks the order of the items in 
the mock up is wrong 
Operationalization 
O1 
Subjects talks about a possible barrier 
for using the new system 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
RESULTS 
A. Current Situation 
iPrevent has over the last years worked together with the 
approximately 30 nursing homes within their network, to 
perform annual prevalence measurements for nursing home 
infections. This means that elderly care physicians are 
required to once a year register all relevant data about the 
residents that live in their nursing homes. Inherent to the 
fact that it is a prevalence measurement, all clients must be 
registered within a short timeframe around a reference date.  
The content of the registered data is largely determined 
by the definitions of HAIs. These definitions were 
developed by the regional network in cooperation with the 
national surveillance system (PREZIES) [14]. In the 
hospital setting, surveillance is performed by trained 
infection control nurses. The use of the definitions in the 
nursing home setting, where registration is performed by 
physicians with little or no experience with surveillance, 
registration is far more complicated. The currently used 
registration system translated definitions into questions, but 
did not offer the physicians any additional support. The 
prior 
registration 
system 
used 
a 
SurveyMonkey 
questionnaire for registration. The questionnaire consisted 
of a long list of complicated questions. Many of them are 
irrelevant for most residents. For example, if a client does 
not use an antibiotic, the question about what an antibiotic is 
used for, is rather redundant. Also, all questions are 
presented on a single page. Physicians thus have to scroll 
down seemingly endlessly, past irrelevant questions, while 
scanning to find questions that are relevant, all the way 
down to the bottom of the page, before they can start with 
the registration of the next resident.  
Furthermore, an increasing amount (>30) of nursing 
homes participate in the prevalence measurements that 
iPrevent performs. Thus, increasingly large datasets are 
collected. Data processing, data analysis and presentation of 
feedback of the results to the nursing homes are all 
performed by a single data-analyst. This will soon no longer 
be feasible. Project leaders (and the data-analyst) therefore 
would like the system to perform these tasks automatically.  
Finally, project leaders requested that the new system 
would be ‘mobile’ (to be used on a smartphone) to enable 
bedside registration of clients by elderly care physicians. 
B. Users’ Needs and Values 
The questionnaire resulted in insight in the context of the 
problem and in the users’ values. When asked what kind of 
device they would like to use for the registration, most 
subjects indicated they preferred a PC (50,0%) or laptop 
(20,8%). The other subjects preferred to use a smartphone 
(12,5%), tablet (8,3%), or paper (8,3%).   
Most important reasons for users to be willing to use the 
new registration system were: (1) if they can interrupt 
registration without losing data; (2) if the new system is 
more user friendly; (3) if it can be opened simultaneously 
with Electronic Client Files (‘Elektronisch Cliënten Dossier’ 
in Dutch); (4) if clear insight is given in the results; and (5) 
if registration can be performed faster.  
One of the prerequisites that were found during the 
expert discussion said that it would be desirable if 
registration could be performed at the residents’ bedside. 
This would enable the physicians to directly see how the 
resident is doing. However, the questionnaire showed that 
none of the physicians considered this to be desirable. Most 
of them (54,2%) did indicate that it would be of added value 
for them to be more flexible in the location in which they 
register their clients, but didn’t want to do so bedside. Also, 
41,7% said that it would not be of added value at all since 
they just liked to register their residents in their offices. One 
physician (4,2%) wanted to register her clients in the 
department’s office, with the client files at hand.  
Yet, the in-depth interviews gave even more insight into 
the situation. Physicians explained that their nursing homes 
were (going to be) using Electronic Client Files (ECF). This 
is software that contains highly personal and private 
information about the residents. Therefore, many safety 
measures have been taken to protect this information. 
Because of one of these safety measures it is impossible to 
simultaneously open the ECF and the World Wide Web. In 
practice, this meant that elderly care physicians had to open 
the ECF, and write down all the information about all of 
their clients that they needed to register in the prevalence 
measurements. Then they had to close the ECF and open the 
SurveyMonkey questionnaire and enter the information they 
had written down. Not to mention that if they had forgotten 
any information, the entire procedure had to be repeated. 
The subjects therefore did want registration to be possible 
on a mobile device, but for reasons that differed from what 
was expected, i.e.: so they could simultaneously open the 
ECF on their pc and the registration system on the other 
device.   
C. Use of Persuasive Systems Design in the Prototype 
1) Primary Task Support 
One of the main concerns with working with the prior 
registration 
system 
was 
that 
working 
with 
the 
SurveyMonkey questionnaire required the physician to read 
through many irrelevant questions for every client. One of 
the most important elements of PSD that were to be used in 
the new system was therefore tunneling [13]. The prototype 
system was designed to guide the user through the system, 
questions to be answered are dependent on the answers 
given to prior questions. Thus, the entire system is a big 
decision tree, to make sure every client is registered via the 
shortest (fastest) possible route. 
Another concern with the prior registration system was 
the complexity of the used questions (which were based on 
definitions of HAI). To reduce the complexity, and thus the 
risk of interpretation errors, reduction was used. The aim of 
reduction is to reduce complex behavior into simple tasks, 
to help users perform the target behavior [13]. This was 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

done by translating complex and long questions into a 
flowchart consisting of multiple questions. For example, the 
originally used question for Gastro-Enteritis, was rather 
lengthy and complicated (see Quote 1).  
 
 
Quote 1.   Question about Gastro-Enteritis in the prior registration system 
(Originally in Dutch) 
 
This question was translated into shorter and simpler 
questions divided into several screens. Some of these 
screens are shown in Fig. 2.  
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.   Part of the screens of the prototype used for Gastro-Enteritis; 
Example of Reduction: (1) Answer options: Yes / No; (2) Button to return 
to previous screen; (3) Help-button for additional information; (4) Button 
to continue to next screen. 
 
 As mentioned before, it was of great importance that 
registration would be faster and could be paused without 
losing data. To enable this, elements of tailoring are applied 
to the prototype, which allows the system to be tailored to 
(in this case) the usage context factors [13]. Every nursing 
home was given a unique log-in code and password. A 
physician had to log-in once, and was then able to continue 
registering their clients one after another. Moreover, when 
starting the system, physicians are given two options: to 
register a new client or to edit data of an existing client (see 
Fig. 3). For the latter, an overview was generated of all 
clients that had previously been registered by that specific 
nursing home. Clients of other nursing homes are not 
shown. 
 
             
 
Figure 3.  Example of a screen that leads to Tailored information 
 
2) Dialogue Support 
The prototype registration system requires physicians to 
indicate which pathogens caused an infection. However, 
during the user tests it became clear that within nursing 
homes, little funding is available to perform the laboratory 
tests to acquire this knowledge. Furthermore, if a laboratory 
test was performed at the moment of registration, its results 
were not always known yet. Therefore, in the final 
registration system, questions are added to ask whether a 
laboratory test was performed and whether its results were 
already known. If the latter question was answered with ‘no’ 
a pop-up screen appeared. This screen reminded [13] the 
physician that lab results should be added later. 
Also, suggestion [13] is added to the final registration 
system. One example of the application of suggestion was 
used since physicians have to register all antibiotics that are 
used by their clients. However, the variety of antibiotics that 
exist is enormous and their names are complex. Initially, the 
intention was to let physicians scroll through an alphabetical 
list of all antibiotics (see Fig. 4).  
 
          
 
Figure 4.   Example of the screen that subscribes the need for Suggestion 
 
However, this was still too time consuming. Therefore, in 
the final registration system, a search system in which the 
physician enters the first three letters of the antibiotic is 
added. The system then automatically generates only 
antibiotics that start with these letters. 
3) System Credibility Support 
Finally, in healthcare in general and for the registration of 
healthcare-associated 
infections 
in 
nursing 
homes 
specifically, it is of great importance that the system is 
credible according to its users. Therefore, a website  was 
created about the services provided by the registration 
system [15]. The Infection Manager website was developed 
Does the resident have Gastro-Enteritis? The diagnosis 
Gastro-Enteritis is given if one of the following symptoms 
occurs in the client:  
 Three times or more diarrhea (different from normal for this 
client, frequency is not applicable when using incontinence 
materials)  
 Diarrhea and two of the following symptoms: fever, 
vomiting, nausea, stomach ache, stomach cramps, blood or 
mucus in feces.  
 Vomiting three times within 24 hours, without any 
additional symptoms (if vomiting is not associated with 
medicine use)  
 Vomiting and two of the following symptoms: fever, nausea, 
stomach ache, stomach cramps, blood or mucus in feces.  
 
 
 
Does the client 
have diarrhea? 
If yes, more 
than three 
times a day? 
If no, does 
client vomit? 
3 
1 
2 
4 
1 
1 
Edit a client’s data; only 
clients of the own nursing 
home are shown 
Register a new client 
Too long list to scroll 
through, due to 
availability of many 
different antibiotics 
Which antibiotics does 
the client use? 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

for the EurSafety Health-net project [16]. This is a large and 
successful European project involving many hospitals, 
microbiology laboratories and other healthcare institutions. 
The part of the website about the registration system 
consists of e.g. background information about the project 
and the parties that were involved in the development 
process. This was intended to give more clarity about the 
trustworthiness  and expertise of the project and its project 
members [13]. 
Finally, in the final registration system, it was decided to 
add the EurSafety logo, to give the system more surface 
credibility [13].  
D. Analysis of the User-Friendliness of the Prototype 
Based on the scenario-tests, many major and minor 
adjustments had to be made in the mock ups. These 
concerned the clarity of wording, sequence of questions, 
completeness, user-friendliness, design and location of the 
buttons. For example, initially, there were two screens in 
our prototype  for ‘Aids’, which asks whether the client uses 
any aids such as a catheter or tracheotomy; and 
‘Incontinence’, which asks whether the client is incontinent. 
During the user-tests, the subjects had several comments 
about these screens. First of all, whereas we interpreted the 
term ‘aid’ as being a catheter of some kind, the subjects 
indicated that the term ‘aid’ to them meant ‘walker’ (see 
Quote 2). So, they suggested using a different term.  
 
 
 
Furthermore, they found the screen about incontinence 
strange. In one of the scenarios, a client was described who 
had a catheter. The participants indicated that although 
incontinence is a possible reason for clients to get a catheter, 
they did not consider this client as being incontinent 
anymore (see Quote 3). They, therefore, said the option of 
having a catheter or stoma should be added to this screen. 
 
 
 
As a result, the two screens where replaced by a new 
screen. This screen asks whether a client is incontinent. 
However, an additional answer option has been added, to 
indicate that a client has a catheter or stoma.  
After the fourth user-test, no major issues where found 
anymore. Therefore, meetings with Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) developers were held to 
further discuss the requirements for the registration system 
and to finally develop it. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
This study was aimed at determining whether user-
centered and persuasive design could support a faster, 
easier, more fitting, more reliable and clearer registration of 
healthcare-associated infections by elderly care physicians. 
Regarding the design process, it can be said that the holistic 
approach using the CeHRes roadmap has provided the 
opportunity to not only develop an eHealth technology that 
fits the needs of its users and is successful in what it is 
intended to do, but to also make sure that it fits its context. 
The constant and structural cooperation with end-users 
during the development process, gave us the opportunity to 
make it an iterative process. This means that it was possible 
to evaluate the eHealth technology in every stage of its 
development, and to (at any time) adjust the direction that it 
was going in. This aids in the development of an eHealth 
technology that fits its users’ needs and context, and could 
potentially prevent high costs of re-design if major 
necessary adjustments are only found after final release of 
the technology. 
Certainly, we still want to evaluate the speed, user-
friendliness, fit with work processes, ease of use, clarity and 
persuasiveness of the final registration system. Thus, a 
summative evaluation is currently being planned. This 
evaluation will combine both qualitative and quantitative 
methods and will e.g. focus on user friendliness, speed of 
registration (both were found important by the end-users) 
and amount of errors that are made (important for the 
quality of the data). But for now, it can be said that the new 
system has already been used in two rounds of prevalence 
measurements, successfully registering over 3000 nursing 
home residents. It is web-based, and can therefore be used 
on any device capable of connecting to the world wide web. 
An example of a screen of the eventual registration system 
is given in Fig. 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example of the look and feel of the eventual registration system 
(Originally in Dutch) 
(Quote 2 – Originally in Dutch) “Yes, we use the word ‘Aid’ 
for something completely different. We use this word for 
walkers. So I would try to come up with a different word 
here.”  
(Quote 3 – Originally in Dutch) “You see, this client is not 
incontinent, but has a urethra catheter… So this is strange. You 
should add catheter here I guess. Because with a catheter you 
are not really incontinent anymore.”   
 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Limitations 
A limitation of this study is that it suffered from very 
strict and ambitious deadlines. This limited us in the amount 
of effort that we could put into the implementation stage of 
the development. Although this is thought to be a very 
relevant stage according to the CeHRes Roadmap, in this 
project its influence might be limited. The elderly care 
physicians who are the end-users of the registration system 
in this study, are obligated to use it if their nursing home 
participates in the prevalence measurements. 
Another possible limitation might be that our study had a 
relatively low number of participants. However, aim of this 
study was solely the development of an eHealth technology, 
not to perform an evaluation of its effects. 
Also, this project concerned an already existing 
intervention. Question was, whether technology can aid in 
its optimization. The context was, however, explored: 
regulations and conditions for use of the technology and the 
fit with existing systems for processing the data have been 
studied in this project. 
Finally, the given setting for this project (nursing homes) 
presented us with its very own challenges. The opportunities 
for using technology were limited, because of the 
technological infrastructure of Dutch nursing homes 
(wherein often outdated PCs are used), and the degree to 
which people are used to working with technology (e.g. only 
47,1% of the physicians used a smartphone). However, this 
gave us an interesting opportunity to  put ourselves and the 
possibilities of the CeHRes Roadmap to the test, to see how 
it and how we would cope with such limitations. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This article goes beyond the mere development of eHealth 
technologies. It has subscribed our strong believe that 
involving end-users in all stages of development is of 
paramount importance for the creation of successful eHealth 
technologies, because (1) it gives insight in the needs and 
wishes of the end-users, that have to be met by the eHealth 
technology; (2) end-users are able to give feedback on both 
details (the location of a button) and on the bigger picture 
(the clinical practice that the technology has to be used in); 
(3) it allows for the development to be an iterative process, 
which may prevent costly redesign to be necessary; and (4) 
although they might have used their own words to express 
themselves, end-users appeared to have very clear ideas 
about the their needs regarding Persuasive Systems Design.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project was funded by the Interreg IV “EurSafety 
Health-net” project. We also thank the elderly care 
physicians who participated in this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
ECDC, Point prevalence survey of healthcare-associated 
infections and antimicrobial use in European acute care 
hospitals., 2013, European Centers for Disease Prevention 
and Control: Stockholm. 
[2] 
PREZIES. Referentiecijfers maart 2007 t/m maart 2012: 
Prevalentieonderzoek. 2012  [cited 2013 9-3]; Available 
from: 
http://www.prezies.nl/zkh/prev/ref_cijfers/Referentiecijfers%
20Prevalentie%20tm%20maart%202012.pdf. 
[3] 
Mayon-White, R.T., Ducel, G., Kereselidze, T., and 
Tikomirov, E., An international survey of the prevalence of 
hospital-acquired infection. J Hosp Infect, 1988. 11 Suppl A: 
pp. 43-48. 
[4] 
Klevens, R.M., et al., Estimating health care-associated 
infections and deaths in US hospitals, 2002. Public health 
reports, 2007. 122(2): pp. 160. 
[5] 
Smyth, E.T.M., et al., Four Country Healthcare Associated 
Infection Prevalence Survey 2006: overview of the results. 
Journal of Hospital Infection, 2008. 69(3): pp. 230-248. 
[6] 
Gravel, D., et al., Point prevalence survey for healthcare-
associated infections within Canadian adult acute-care 
hospitals. Journal of Hospital Infection, 2007. 66(3): pp. 
243-248. 
[7] 
Lyytikäinen, O., Kanerva, M., Agthe, N., Möttönen, T., and 
Ruutu, P., Healthcare-associated infections in Finnish acute 
care hospitals: a national prevalence survey, 2005. Journal 
of Hospital Infection, 2008. 69(3): pp. 288-294. 
[8] 
Eikelenboom-Boskamp, A., et al., Three-year prevalence of 
healthcare-associated infections in Dutch nursing homes. 
BMC Proceedings, 2011. 5(Suppl 6): pp. 158. 
[9] 
Nijland, N., Grounding eHealth; Towards a holistic 
framework for sustainable eHealth technologies., in 
Psychology, Health & Technology, 2011, University of 
Twente: Enschede. 
[10] van Limburg, M., et al., Why business modeling is crucial in 
the development of eHealth technologies. Journal of medical 
Internet research, 2011. 13(4). 
[11] van Gemert-Pijnen, L., Karreman, J., Vonderhorst, S., 
Verhoeven, F., and Wentzel, J., Participatory Development 
via User-Involvement-A Case Study about the development of 
a 
Web-based 
Patient-communication 
system 
about 
Methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus 
aureus. 
electronic 
Journal of Health Informatics, 2011. 6(4):e28: pp: 1-15. 
[12] iPrevent. www.i-prevent.net.  [cited 2013 11-14]. 
[13] Oinas-Kukkonen, H. and M. Harjumaa, Persuasive Systems 
Design: Key Issues, Process Model, and System Features. 
Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, 2009. 24(28). 
[14] iPrevent. Definities van verpleeghuisinfecties. 2013 09-2012 
[cited 
2013 
14-11]; 
Available 
from: 
www.infectionmanager.com/definities. 
[15] Infection Manager.  [cited 2013 11-14]; Available from: 
www.infectionmanager.com/prevalentie. 
[16] Wentzel, M.J., J. Karreman, and J.E.W.C.v. Gemert-Pijnen. 
Towards an internet-based infectious disease management 
platform to increase patient safety. in eTelemed. 2011. 
Gosier, Guadeloupe, France: IARIA. 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

