Legal Preparedness for Incorporating Telemedicine into the Post Pandemic Health 
Care Ecosystem: Taiwan Experience 
 
Meng-Chen Tsou 
Ph.D. Candidate, Institute of Public Health 
National Yang-Ming Chiao-Tung University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
nina.mc.tsou@gmail.com 
Hsiu-Yi Yang 
Professor of Law, Institution of Public Health 
National Yang-Ming Chiao-Tung University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
hsiuiyang@nycu.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract—While the COVID pandemic is coming to an end, 
will the telemedicine surged during the pandemic fade away or 
become a “new normal”? This paper reviews the application of 
Taiwan’s digital technology in the pandemic, discusses the 
suitable scenarios for telemedicine, and introduces the 
responding legal/regulatory amendments. The authors argue 
that telemedicine has a potential to solve the care scarcity 
problem in an aging society, and the law should be more 
proactive in regulating telemedicine from a wider perspective 
aiming to better facilitating decentralization, resource-
integration, and precision care. 
Keywords-legal 
preparedness; 
Taiwan; 
Telemedicine; 
Telehealth; COVID; pandemic. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Taiwan's National Health Insurance (NHI) system is 
known for its high quality and low cost. In 2019, NHI 
provided 23 million residents with comprehensive medical 
services at a rate of 6.54% of GDP. A significant portion of 
this success can be attributed to the effective use of 
information technology. Since 2004, the NHI IC card has 
been in use, which integrates the cardholder's basic 
information, insurance information, medical information, 
and health administrative information. During the COVID 
pandemic, a simple card swipe can determine a cardholder's 
travel history and implement necessary quarantine measures. 
In 2014, NHI further introduced the "NHI MediCloud" 
system, which integrates patients' medical records from 
different hospitals on a single platform, allowing medical 
professionals to better understand the patient's medical 
history. When a COVID-positive patient needs to use 
Paxlovid, 
an 
oral 
medication, 
also 
known 
as 
nirmatrelvir/ritonavir, used to treat COVID-19, Taiwan's 
doctors can use this system to check for potential drug 
interactions. In addition, through digital contact tracing, 
electronic fencing, and digital monitoring of individual or 
population mobility flows, Taiwan was able to keep its 
number of confirmed COVID cases to only 800 by the end 
of 2020, when the global total exceeded 83 million. 
While the COVID pandemic is coming to an end, will the 
telemedicine surged during the pandemic fade away or 
become a “new normal”? In Section II of this paper, we will 
discuss the legal restrictions in Taiwan regarding 
telemedicine, as well as how the COVID-19 pandemic has 
led to greater openness towards it. Section III will outline 
the various legal adjustments made in Taiwan as a result, 
including the Telemedicine Rule, Regulations of Making 
and Management on Electronic Medical Records in Medical 
Care Institution, Medical Device Act, and Pharmacists Act. 
Finally, in Section IV, we will provide a summary of the 
impact of telemedicine on healthcare in times of care 
scarcity. 
II. 
OMICRON AND TELEMEDICINE 
Article 11 of Taiwan's Physicians’ Act stipulates that 
doctors must treat patients “in person”, with a limited 
exception of remote and isolated areas or some special 
situation. That is, telemedicine is not allowed. However, in 
April 2022, the Omicron outbreak occurred in Taiwan, and 
given that vaccination in Taiwan has become quite 
widespread, the government adjusted the definition of 
COVID cases: anyone having a positive rapid screening 
result confirmed by medical staff would be immediately 
considered a confirmed case. This made it necessary for the 
medical system to respond to the outbreak through 
telemedicine, and during the period from May 15 to June 22, 
2022, alone, the number of patients using telemedicine 
reached 1.85 million [1]. 
 
III. 
LEGAL/REGULATION AMENDMENTS IN TAIWAN 
Telemedicine is a form of healthcare that involves real-
time audio-video communication, as well as real-time audio 
and telephone communications. While the process may 
seem simple, it requires significant coordination, such as 
allowing for the reading and writing of medical records and 
the use of medical devices or equipment. Additionally, it is 
important to ensure information security and privacy 
throughout the process. After the telemedicine consultation, 
measures such as drug delivery and health insurance 
coverage must also be taken into consideration. To facilitate 
telemedicine during the pandemic, the Taiwanese authority 
issued necessary regulation amendments. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Rule of Medical Diagnosis and Treatment by 
Telecommunications (the Telemedicine Rule) 
The Telemedicine Rule defines in detail the scope and 
situations of “remote areas” and “special circumstances and 
urgent situations”. When the criteria above are met, doctors 
may use telecommunications methods to inquire about 
illness, set diagnosis and issue prescriptions, and treatment 
may be dispensed by nursing or obstetrics personnel 
belonging to health organizations. The term "special 
circumstances" refers to (1) patients who require close 
monitoring within three months of acute hospitalization, (2) 
residents of long-term care facilities, (3) integrated care 
recipients of family doctors, (4) recipients of home health 
care integrated plans, and (5) international patients. As for 
"urgent situations," it refers to situations where immediate 
medical treatment is required to save a life or to address an 
emergency [2]. 
In February 2020, Taiwan's health authorities 
clarified through an explanatory letter that patients who 
require immediate medical treatment or who need to see a 
doctor during home isolation or quarantine are considered to 
be in urgent situations. Chronic disease patients who are 
stable are considered to be in special circumstances [3][4]. 
Then in May 2021, the door to telemedicine was further 
opened, as long as the medical institution has been 
designated by the local health authorities, it can treat 
outpatients via telemedicine [5][6]. 
Currently, 
Taiwan 
is 
preparing 
to 
revise 
the 
Telemedicine Rule. In the draft, in addition to maintaining 
the existing framework, it is also planned to add the 
following five situations as special circumstances in which 
telemedicine can be used: long-term medication care for 
chronic diseases, end-of-life care, care for mobility-
impaired patients, care for disasters, infectious diseases or 
other major changes, and other situations designated by the 
competent authorities [7]. From this, we can see that 
although telemedicine may be considered an exception to 
face-to-face medical treatment, these special types are all 
intended to increase the accessibility of medical care for 
those who have difficulty using general medical care. 
 
B. Regulations of Making and Management on Electronic 
Medical Records in Medical Care Institutions 
A key element of telemedicine is communication 
networks and other information and communication 
technologies or equipment. Studies have shown that the 
highest proportion of video software used for telemedicine 
consultations during the epidemic in Taiwan is Line (54%), 
followed by Zoom (39%) [8], and whether these software 
have sufficient protection for security and privacy is in 
question. 
In July 2022, Taiwan announced a new version of the 
Regulations of Making and Management on Electronic 
Medical Records in Medical Care Institutions. In response 
to information and communication security, it added the use 
of encryption mechanisms that comply with international 
standards and also made relevant regulations for the 
electronic medical record exchange format to increase 
interoperability. These all help to improve the protection of 
information and communication security [9]. In addition, 
Article 18, Paragraph 2 of the draft of Telemedicine Rule 
also added a provision regarding "the information system 
used for telemedicine, involving the transmission, exchange, 
storage or issuance of prescription, examination, or test 
results, shall have personal identity verification and comply 
with the international standard organization's common data 
transmission encryption mechanism, and shall comply with 
the relevant regulations of the electronic medical record 
production and management regulations for medical 
institutions" [7]. Although there are no clear regulations for 
the equipment or software used in telemedicine, there is 
further protection for the storage and upload of medical 
record-related information. 
 
C. Medical Devices Act 
In the process of telemedicine, in addition to the software 
used for video, many medical equipment and even AI can 
assist patients in obtaining physiological data or tracking 
and monitoring diseases. For medical device hardware, there 
are already laws and regulations for medical devices to 
ensure safety and quality, however, for software, due to the 
characteristics is different from hardware [10], and for AI-
based deep/machine learning products, the same regulatory 
approach may not be appropriate [11]. How to regulate 
software 
is 
challenging 
many 
countries. 
Taiwan 
implemented the Medical Devices Act on May 1, 2021, in 
which the design of medical device software is included as 
part of the manufacturers' responsibilities to be managed 
[12]. Additionally, guidelines for medical device software 
and AI products have been released to provide a basis for 
compliance within the existing legal framework. 
 
D. Pharmacists Act 
Many telemedicine services require a prescription from a 
doctor. In the past, telemedicine in Taiwan also followed 
this principle. However, although Taiwan has implemented 
a separation of prescribing and dispensing of drugs, in 
practice, most medical institutions have attached pharmacies 
and drug revenue is also a source of hospital income[13][14], 
so the proportion of prescriptions issued is not high. In the 
past, patients usually had to go to the hospital to pick up 
their medication after telemedicine consultation, but this 
became inconvenient during the pandemic. Therefore, the 
Ministry of Health and Welfare, citing a meeting record 
from November 30, 2017, stated that pharmacists can 
personally deliver medication to homes, but only within the 
county or city where they are registered to practice, which is 
compliance with the Pharmacists Act [15]. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The Taiwan Association of Young Pharmacists also 
advocated for the use of electronic prescriptions as a support 
for telemedicine during the pandemic to reduce the risk of 
infection. In response to this call, the draft Telemedicine 
Rule have also included provisions for electronic 
prescriptions [16]. 
As for the types of medications that can be prescribed, 
there were no restrictions in the past, but the new draft 
regulations have added a provision that generally prohibits 
the prescription of controlled drugs, similar to many states 
in the US. 
 
IV. 
TELEMEDICINE AND CARE SCARCITY: CLOSING 
REMARKS 
The problem of aging and low birth rate in Taiwan is 
quite serious. In 2021, the population over 65 years old 
accounted for 14%, while the number of newborns was only 
around 150,000, setting the world record of low birth rate. 
The problem of care scarcity is imminent, and many elderly 
people living alone in cities can benefit from telemedicine. 
Taiwan's laws are clearly aware of this problem, so they are 
deliberately turning telemedicine from an exception to a 
new normal. Although there are still many challenges to 
overcome, increasing the scope of telemedicine and 
enhancing 
the 
requirements 
for 
information 
and 
communication security, as well as setting up new electronic 
prescriptions, can make telemedicine both convenient and 
safe. Additionally, through regulations on AI, medical 
software, etc., manufacturers have the opportunity to better 
understand the regulatory framework, so that future 
telemedicine can provide more comprehensive care. And 
with the coverage of the National Health Insurance, 
telemedicine can not only ensure the medical accessibility 
of the people, but also make it affordable. 
Even as the pandemic comes to an end, the widespread 
use of telemedicine is expected to change the medical 
system. Currently, telemedicine in Taiwan is still mainly 
based on synchronous telemedicine as defined by the AMA. 
However, in the era of digital health, our research team has 
also proposed the concept of the digital health era: the DIP 
model, which shifts healthcare services from large hospitals 
to home care (“Decentralization”); by “Integrating” health 
information collected by different sources, we hope to 
provide more “Precision” care for the public. This approach 
may also require the use of asynchronous telemedicine to 
achieve. Currently, the NHI Administration in Taiwan is 
also actively using existing databases to assist the 
development of AI and precision medicine in the 
biomedicine industry, while ensuring individual privacy, 
with the goal of improving the quality of healthcare services 
in the future [17].  
The development of telemedicine has brought numerous 
benefits to healthcare, but it also requires infrastructure 
development and policy considerations to ensure that 
resources are allocated to the most in-need populations and 
that information security and privacy are safeguarded. 
Additionally, the development of medical device software 
and AI cannot be overlooked, and product safety, efficacy, 
and reliability must rely on proper regulatory design. In 
particular, as AI is advancing rapidly, ethical issues must 
also be further addressed. Therefore, as technology develops, 
policies and laws should also continue to be updated and 
discussed in order to respond to changing needs. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude 
to the National Science and Technology Council of Taiwan 
for providing the funding for this research (MOST 110-
2420-H-037-003: 
THE 
IMPLEMENTATION 
OF 
NEW 
HEALTHCARE MODELS IN THE POST-PANDEMIC ERA IN 
TAIWAN: OPPORTUNITY AND CHALLENGES). Their support 
has been instrumental in allowing us to conduct this study 
and achieve the results that we present in this paper. 
We would also like to extend our sincerest thanks to 
Professor Tsuen-Chiuan Tsai for her exceptional leadership 
and guidance throughout this project. Her unwavering 
commitment and dedication to this research have been a 
constant source of inspiration, and her contributions to this 
study have been invaluable. 
Finally, we would like to acknowledge the hard work 
and efforts of all team members involved in this project. 
Their support and collaboration have been essential to the 
success of this research, and we are grateful to have had the 
opportunity to work with such talented individuals. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] N. Y. Shu, “Video Medical Consultation and Clinical 
Processes No Longer Disconnected: Taiwan's Telemedicine 
Care Chain Completely Linked” DIGITIMES, Jan. 7th, 2022. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.digitimes.com.tw/iot/article.asp?cat=&id=00006
40375_UBZ4S1RY68YID463YOGFX (last visit: Apr. 10th, 
2023). 
[2] Rules 
of 
Medical 
Diagnosis 
and 
Treatment 
by 
Telecommunications of Taiwan, 2018 
[3] Ministry of Health and Welfare, Wei-Bu-Yi No. 1091660661, 
Feb. 10th, 2020. 
[4] Ministry of Health and Welfare, Wei-Bu-Yi No. 1091661115, 
Feb. 19th, 2020. 
[5] Ministry of Health and Welfare, Wei-Bu-Yi No. 1101663341, 
May 15th, 2021. 
[6] Ministry of Health and Welfare, Wei-Bu-Yi No. 1101663760, 
May 17th, 2021. 
[7] Draft of Rules of Medical Diagnosis and Treatment by 
Telecommunications of Taiwan, Nov. 24th, 2022. 
[8] M. K. Huang, H. C. Fang, H. Y. Hsu, M. C. Yeh, and C. H. 
Lee, “Discussion on the application of telemedicine in Taiwan 
in response to COVID-19” vol 54:1, pp. 15–23, March, 2021. 
[9] Regulations of Making and Management on Electronic 
Medical Records in Medical Care Institutions of Taiwan, 
2022. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[10] K. Kadakia, B. Patel and A. Shah, “Advancing digital health: 
FDA innovation during COVID-19”, npj Digital Medicine, 
vol.3, pp. 1-3, Dec., 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41746-020-00371-7. 
[11] “Fostering Medical Innovation: A Plan for Digital Health 
Devices; Software Precertification Pilot Program”. Food and 
Drug Administration, pp. 35216–35218, July 28th, 2017, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2017/07/28/2017-
15891/fostering-medical-innovation-a-plan-for-digital-health-
devices-software-precertification-pilot. (last visit: Apr. 10th, 
2023.) 
[12] Medical Devices Act of Taiwan, 2021. 
[13] H.H. Fan and L. K. Lin, “Single Track System of Separation 
of Prescribing and Dispensing: South Korea’s Experiences”, 
The Journal of Taiwan Pharmacy, vol. 32, pp 22-28, 2016.  
[14] Y. C. Huang, “How Hospitals Make Profits through Non-
Core Revenues? Revealing the Secrets Hidden in Hospital 
Financial Reports.” In-news, Taiwan Public Television 
Services, 
2023, 
available 
from: 
https://innews.pts.org.tw/column/MTU0 (last visited Apr. 10th, 
2023) 
[15] Ministry of Health and Welfare, Wei-Bu-Yi No.1061669199, 
Dec. 14th, 2017. 
[16] Young Pharmacists’ Group, e-prescription should be the 
supporting measure for telemedicine to reduce people’s risk 
from infection. Taiwan Young Pharmacists’ Group| Facebook, 
May 
24th, 
2021. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.facebook.com/TaiwanYPG/posts/389594533050
4822/ (last visit: Apr. 10th, 2023). 
[17] P.-C. Lee, J. T.-H. Wang, T.-Y. Chen and C. Peng, Digital 
Health Care in Taiwan: Innovations of National Health 
Insurance. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022. 
 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

