The Role of Care Pathways in Personal Health Records 
Juha Puustjärvi 
University of Helsinki 
Helsinki, Finland 
juha.puustjarvi@cs.helsinki.fi 
Leena Puustjärvi 
The Pharmacy of Kaivopuisto 
Helsinki, Finland  
leena.puustjarvi@kolumbus.fi
 
 
 
Abstract— Care pathways, also known as clinical pathways, 
are one of the main tools used to manage the quality in 
healthcare concerning the standardization of care processes. 
They promote organized and efficient patient care based on 
evidence based medicine. It has been shown that their use 
reduces the variability in clinical practice and improves 
outcomes. However, so far the use of care pathways is 
restricted on healthcare personnel. We have analyzed the gains 
of care pathways in the context of new emerging healthcare 
models such as patient-centered healthcare. Especially we have 
extended Personal Health Records by the functionalities 
related to care pathways. We have used Business Process 
Diagrams for graphical representation of care pathways. 
Further, these diagrams can be easily translated into 
executable WS-BPEL code.  Their executions coordinate care 
pathways and automate many of their functionalities, such as 
the reservation of clinical resources and information therapy.  
Keywords - Care Pathways; Clinical Guidelines; Evidence-
Based Medicine; Personal Health Records; Patient-Centered 
Healthcare; Healthcare Processes  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A Personal Health Record (PHR) is a confidential and 
easy-to-use tool for managing information about patient’s 
health [1]. It can include a variety of information depending 
on where that information comes from, e.g., from patient 
himself, health care providers, pharmacies, insures, and the 
consumer [2]. It includes information about medications, 
prescriptions, allergies, vaccinations, illnesses, laboratory 
and other test reports [3]. It is accessible to the patient and to 
those authorized by the patient.  
Care pathways, (also known as clinical pathways, 
integrated care pathways, or care maps) are one of the main 
tools used to manage the quality in healthcare concerning the 
standardization of care processes [4]. They promote 
organized and efficient patient care based on evidence based 
medicine, and they aim to facilitate the communication, 
coordination roles and sequencing the activities of the 
multidisciplinary care team, patients and their relatives and 
by providing the necessary resources [5]. It has also been 
shown that their implementation reduces the variability in 
clinical practice and improves outcomes. 
Generally care pathways refer to clinical guidelines [6]. 
However, a single care pathway may refer to guidelines on 
several topics in a well specified context [7]. A clinical 
guideline is a document with the aim of guiding decisions 
and criteria regarding diagnosis, management, and treatment 
in specific areas of healthcare [8]. Such documents have 
been in use for thousands of years during the entire history of 
medicine [9]. 
In contrast to historical approaches in clinical guidelines, 
which were often based on tradition or authority, modern 
clinical guidelines are based on an examination of current 
evidence within the paradigm of evidence-based medicine, 
i.e., the use of current best evidence in making decisions 
about the care of individual patients. Hence, these modern 
guidelines usually include summarized consensus statements 
on best practice in healthcare. Further, a healthcare provider 
is obliged to know the medical guidelines of his or her 
profession, and has to decide whether or not to follow the 
recommendations of a guideline for an individual treatment. 
It has been shown that the use of clinical guidelines and 
care pathways reduces the variability in clinical practice and 
improves outcomes [4]. However, so far the use of care 
pathways is restricted on healthcare personnel and their used 
Electronic Health Records (EHRs) [10]11].   
In this paper, we describe our work on extending 
traditional PHRs by care pathways. So the use of care 
pathways is not only restricted on healthcare personnel but 
rather on patient’s healthcare team, which may include 
patient’s family members as well.  In our solution care 
pathways are presented by Business Process Diagram (BPD), 
which are increasingly being used to support healthcare 
processes. BPD [12] is based on a flowcharting technique 
tailored for creating graphical models of business process 
operations [13]. These elements enable easy development of 
simple diagrams that are easy to understand. Further, BPD 
processes can be automatically translated into executable 
WS-BPEL (Web Service Business Process Execution 
Language) processes [14][15], which activation can be based 
on the data stored in patient’s PHR.  
We use WS-BPEL as a computer interpretable clinical 
guideline language. Such languages explicitly model a care 
process by specifying the steps and the order in which these 
steps are to be executed [6]. However, our way of exploiting 
such a language deviates from its traditional use in that it 
does not retrieve patient’s medical data from EHRs but 
rather from PHRs. Further, we have restricted on automating 
the reservations on clinical resources as well as automating 
information therapy.   
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, in 
Section II, we give a short introduction to new emerging 
healthcare models. Then, in Section III, we shortly consider 
clinical guideline languages. In Section IV, we present our 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

way of using BPDs in presenting care pathways.  In Section 
V, we first present our developed cloud-based PHR-
architecture and then we present how we exploit SQL-
triggers in automating the activation of WS-BPEL-processes. 
Section VI concludes the paper by considering our future 
research.  
II. 
EMERGING HEALTHCARE MODELS   
Evidence-based medicine, or evidence-based health care, 
addresses the challenge of finding a way to ensure that 
clinicians base their day-to-day decision-making on current 
best evidence [16].  It is explicit and judicious use of current 
best evidence in making decisions about the care of 
individual patients. Practicing evidence-based medicine 
requires the integration of individual clinical expertise with 
the best available external clinical evidence from systematic 
research and our patient’s unique values and circumstances 
[10].  
Patient-centered care [17] emphasizes the coordination 
and integration of care, and the use of appropriate 
information, communication, and education technologies in 
connecting patients, caregivers, physicians, nurses, and 
others into a healthcare team where health system supports 
and encourages cooperation among team members. It is 
based on the assumption that physicians, patients and their 
families have the ability to obtain and understand health 
information and services, and make appropriate health 
decisions [18]. This in turn requires that health information 
should be presented according to individuals understanding 
and abilities [19]. 
Care pathways model an extended process of patient-
centered care by specifying key events, clinical exams and 
assessment that have been shown to produce the best 
outcomes for an appropriate episode of care [4]. They are 
increasingly seen as a means to put clinical guidelines in 
practice by interdisciplinary teams, as they help reduce 
patient uncertainty, improve resource utilization and 
encourage family-centered care. In particular, care pathways 
can be effective in supporting proactive care management 
and ensuring that patients receive relevant clinical 
interventions and assessments in a timely manner.  
Information 
therapy 
promotes 
patient-centered 
healthcare. It is a type of healthcare information service that 
has emerged in the past decade. The goal behind information 
therapy is to prescribe the right information to right people at 
right time [20]. Information therapy is also described as “the 
prescription of specific evidence based medical information 
to specific patients at just the right time to help them make 
specific health decisions or behavior changes” [21]. 
Information therapy applies to a wide range of situations 
and context. For example, information therapy may be a 
physician-written prescription telling a patient what to read, 
or it may use to help a patient to make treatment decision 
such as whether to continue medication.  
Information therapy can be compared to similar concepts 
in medicine, such as drug therapy, physiotherapy or 
bibliotherapy. However, information therapy differs from 
these in the sense that by exploiting information technology 
information therapy aims at providing personalization, 
targeting and documentation.   
Many studies have demonstrated that the provision of 
information therapy can increase compliance with treatment 
regimens, satisfaction with the health care provider and 
medical facility, and improve the ultimate health outcome for 
the individual [21]. It is also turned out that patients who do 
not 
understand 
their 
treatment 
instructions, 
disease 
management, or prescription requirements are more likely to 
mishandle their health, be hospitalized more frequently, and 
have much higher medical costs than their more involved 
counterparts.  
III. 
COMPUTER 
INTERPRETABLE 
CLINICAL 
GUIDELINE LANGUAGES     
The computer-interpretable clinical guideline languages 
explicitly model a care process by specifying the steps and 
the order in which these steps are to be executed [22]. 
Examples of these languages include Ashru, EON, GLIF, 
GUIDE, PRODIGY, and PROforma. A prerequisite for 
developing 
these 
languages 
is 
creating 
computer 
interpretable representations of the clinical knowledge that is 
contained in clinical guidelines.  
The computer-interpretable clinical guideline languages 
can be classified into process languages and declarative 
languages [23]. In the former approach a sequence of tasks is 
defined for the computer to perform while in the latter 
approach the logic of computation is defined without 
describing its control flow, and so leaving a lot of freedom to 
the user in selecting tasks and defining the order in which 
they can be executed. 
Although process languages allow flexibility by means of 
modeling alternative paths, they are incapable of handling 
exceptional or unpredicted situations. Exceptional situations 
have to be modeled explicitly. However, modeling all 
possible scenarios results in complex models and is not 
feasible since exceptional situations and emergencies may 
arise at any point in time [24]. This makes it difficult or even 
impossible to oversee what activity should be performed 
next.  
A gain of declarative languages is that they enable late 
binding, i.e., it is possible to choose an appropriate task at 
the point of care [25]. On the other hand, late binding 
resource allocation’s point of view means late “reservation”, 
which in the context of scarce resources often means long 
delays in obtaining the resources.  
For example, consider late binding with respect to blood 
test task and radiographer’s consultation. Often the delay for 
the former task is only a few days while for the latter task it 
is often some weeks or even months. Hence, late binding 
may significantly delay the whole healthcare process. This 
case becomes still more complex, if the tasks have mutual 
temporal dependencies, e.g., blood test must be taken at least 
one week before radiographer’s consultation. 
Due to the problems related late binding we argue that 
process model are more appropriate for our case, i.e., for 
modeling clinical pathways and their computer interpretable 
transformations. 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV. 
REPRESENTING CLINICAL PROCESSES BY 
BPMN AND WS-BPEL 
There are three important requirements for health care 
process modeling notations. First, the notation should be 
readily understandable by the analyst that create initial drafts 
of the clinical processes, and by the health care employees 
who manage and monitor those processes. Second, the 
notation should have enough expression power to model the 
temporal constraints of the executions. Third, the used 
notation should be easily transformed into an executable 
process modeling language.  
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) is a 
standard for business process modeling [12]. It provides a 
graphical notation called Business Process Diagram (BPD). 
It is suitable to presenting business as well as healthcare 
processes. 
 In BPD, there are three Flow Objects: Event, Activity 
and Gateway: 
 
An Event is represented by a circle and it represents 
something that happens during the business process, 
and usually has a cause or impact.  
 
An Activity is represented by a rounded corner 
rectangle and it is a generic term for a work that is 
performed in companies. The types of tasks are 
Task and Sub-Process. So, activities can be 
presented as hierarchical structures.  
 
A Gateway is represented by a diamond shape, and 
it is used for controlling the divergence and 
convergence of sequence flow.  
In Figure 1 we present how a resource allocation process 
for a diabetes patient can be represented by a BPD. 
 
Retrievepatient’s blood pressure values
Retrievepatient specific limits
Acceptable
values
Yes
No
Reserve blood test
Reserveurine test
OK
Reservetime for diabetes nurse
Reservetime for diabetes physician
 
 
Figure 1.  Resource allocation diagram in BPD. 
BPD enables the generation of executable WS-BPEL 
[14]. Thus it creates a standardized bridge for the gap 
between 
the 
business 
process 
design 
and 
process 
implementation. In particular, the BPMN specification 
includes an informal and partial mapping from BPMN to 
WS-BPEL 1.1 [15]. A mapping of BPMN to WS-BPEL has 
been implemented in a number of tools, including an open-
source tool known as BPMN2BPEL. In such mappings, each 
activity of the diagram corresponds to an execution of a web 
service, and the whole process (e.g., Resource allocation 
process) comprises a Web service. Further, these web 
services interact with a database management system, and 
thereby their functionalities can be exploited, e.g. the 
triggering mechanism as described in the next section.  
 
V. 
CLOUD-BASED PHR-SYSTEM 
A. Using the SaaS model 
Cloud computing [26] represents new way of delivering 
organization information technology: anyone with a suitable 
Internet connection and a standard browser can access an 
application in a cloud. In addition, cloud computing allows 
organizations to use applications without installation. It also 
allows for more efficient computing by centralizing storage, 
memory, processing and bandwidth [27].   
In designing the architecture of the cloud-based PHR- 
system we have followed the Software as a Service (SaaS) 
model. In this model, applications are hosted by service 
provider and made available to customers over the Internet. 
It provides access to software and its functions remotely as a 
Web-based service.  
Our SaaS-based architecture is presented in Figure 2. In 
this architecture a user (a member of patient’s healthcare 
team) can invoke the execution of the web services by 
patient specific parameters.  The execution of each service 
corresponds to an execution of a care pathway or some other 
functionality that promotes patient-centered healthcare. 
 
Browser
Browser
PHR Portal
PHRs 
Web 
Service 1
Web 
Service 2
Web
Service N 
. . .
Browser
…
Browser
Cloud applications
Patient and patient’s healthcare team 
Database Management System 
…
PHR Cloud  
 
 
Figure 2.  Cloud-based PHR-system. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

We have also design a mechanism for automatic 
activation of executable care pathways based on the values 
stored on PHRs. In the following subsections, we consider 
this mechanism. 
B. Representing the PHR Ontology in OWL 
 
At the conceptual level the PHRs are based on our 
developed PHR-ontology, which is graphically presented in 
Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 3.  PHR-ontology. 
In this graphical representation, ellipses represent classes 
and subclasses while rectangles represent data type and 
object properties. Classes, subclasses, data properties and 
object properties are modeling primitives in OWL (Web 
Ontology Language) [28]. Object properties (e.g., Uses) 
relate objects to other objects while data type properties (e.g., 
MedicationId) relate objects to datatype values. In the 
graphical ontology in Figure 3 we have presented only a few 
of objects’ datatype properties. 
We have used the following rules in transforming the 
PHR-ontology into relational schema: 
 
 
The name of the OWL class is the name of the 
relation. 
 
Each property of the OWL class is an attribute 
of the relation.  
 
The key of the relation is comprised of the 
identification of the OWL class and of the 
identification of those OWL classes that are in a 
multivalued relationship to the OWL class. 
 
In a relational database, all data is stored and accessed 
via relations [29]. A relation is defined as a set of tuples that 
have the same attributes. A tuple usually represents an object 
and information about that object. For example in Figure 4, 
the first tuple in the first relation indicates that the SSN of 
Elisa Gray is 1112444-A2, her SystolicLimit is 157 and 
DiastolicLimit is 71. 
The second relation indicates three test values of Elisa 
Gray’s blood pressure tests. 
 
BloodPressureLimits (     SSN                 Name
SystolicLimit
DiastolicLimit ) 
111244‐A2     Elisa Gray        157                   71
120351‐A2     Jack  Cruz        144                    61
121248‐B9     John Kent        171                    77
BloodPressureTestValue (     SSN                 Date
SystolicValue
DiastolicValue ) 
111244‐A2     06042011        142                   75
111244‐A2     09042011        160                   64
111244‐A2     07042011        155                   79
120941‐C5     Bob Jones        164                   68
 
Figure 4.  Relations BloodPressureLimits and BloodPressureTestValues. 
 
C. Specifying Views and Triggers on Relations 
 
As PHRs are only accessible by the patient and those that 
are authorized by the patient, we have to control the access 
of PHRs. In relational database systems such control can be 
easily carried out by views.  
To illustrate this, consider the first tuple of the relation 
BloodPressureLimits in Figure 4. It should be only 
accessible for Elisa Gray and her healthcare team. To enforce 
this we can specify a view ‘GrayBloodPressureLimits’ in 
SQL as follows: 
 
Create View GrayBloodPressureLimits AS 
 
SELECT * 
 
FROM BloodPressureLimits 
 
WHERE Name = ‘Elisa Gray’; 
 
Now, 
the 
virtual 
relation 
behind 
the 
view 
‘GrayBloodPressureLimits’ corresponds to the relation 
presented in Figure 5.  
 
GrayBloodPressureLimits (     SSN                 Name
SystolicLimit
DiastolicLimit ) 
111244‐A2     Lisa Smith        157                   71
 
Figure 5.  The virtual relation of the view GrayBloodPressureLimits. 
After the view is specified, we can easily set restrictions 
on its use, e.g., Elisa Gray has rights to read and update it 
while her physician Ian Taylor has only rights to read it.  
Database triggers play a central role in our designed 
PHR-system. We can easily specify triggers, which activate 
executable clinical pathways or the functionalities of 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

information therapy. Technically s database trigger [30] is 
procedural code that is automatically executed in response to 
certain events on a particular relation or view in a database.  
The SQL trigger statement gives the user a number of 
different options in the event, condition and action parts. For 
example, the following SQL trigger activates the execution 
of the care pathway named ResourceAllocation by a 
parameter ”Elisa Gray”, if Elisa’s systolic value exceeds her 
systolic value limit (157mmHg).  
 
CREATE TRIGGER GraySystolicAlert 
AFTER INSERTION of SystolicValue  
ON BloodPressureTestValue 
WHEN SystolicValue > SystolicLimit 
EXEC “ResourceAllocation(Elisa Gray)”  
 
By replacing the action part, i.e., the last line of the above 
trigger, by the action part 
 
“EXEC sendmail´elisa.gray@health-house.com,  
 
“Please 
familiarize 
with 
the 
advices 
at 
http://www.healthinfo.com/high_blood_pressure/”  
 
we can automate information therapy, i.e., advise Elisa to 
read  the guideline stored at the given URL.  
In general, providing guidelines does not require the 
creation of new content as relevant information entities 
already exist in a digital form [31]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The sophistication of information technology and 
communications is changing our society. In the ongoing 
healthcare reform, there is an increasing need to control the 
cost of medical care. In this context the significance of 
patient-centered healthcare is extensively recognized as it 
can help by providing information to the patients, their 
families and physicians, not only for illnesses, but also for 
prevention and wellness. This, however, requires that 
patient’s health information as well as other relevant medical 
information is presented in appropriate format according to 
individuals understanding and abilities. 
Advanced PHR systems  have the potential to 
dramatically contribute to patient centered healthcare as they 
enable patient to become more involved and engaged in their 
care, and allow other authorized stakeholders to access 
information about patient that has not been previously been 
available or difficult to access electronically.  The change 
that can be caused by the deployment of new PHR systems 
could also have a significant impact on the efficiency of 
administrative and clinical process in healthcare sector, and 
thus they will give rise for considerable cost savings. 
There are still many obstacles to the widespread use of 
patient centered healthcare. For example, many patients are 
not satisfied with the information concerning their future or 
ongoing care. Our way to alleviate this problem is the 
automation of information therapy and the deployment of 
executable care pathways. This is a promising approach as it 
has been shown that the use of clinical care pathways 
reduces the variability in clinical practice and improves 
outcomes.   
Still an arising question is how we can promote the 
production of care pathways suitable for PHRs. Hence, in 
our future research we will focus on developing graphical 
tools that assist physicians in constructing care pathways that 
can be easily stored and executed in PHR-systems. In 
particular, we will be focused on designing cloud-based 
solutions, i.e., we will extend the cloud-based PHR-system 
by new components. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Angst, R. Agarwal, and J. Downing, “An empirical 
examination of the importance of defining the PHR for 
research and for practice,” Proceedings of the 41st Annual 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 2008. 
[2] J. Puustjärvi and L. Puustjärvi, ”Capturing Semantics for 
Personal Health Records” In Poc. Of the 6th International 
Conference on Information Technology and Applications 
(ICITA 2009), pp. 26-31. 2009. 
[3] J. Puustjärvi and L. Puustjärvi, ”Designing and Implementing 
Personal Health Records” In  Proc. of the IADIS International 
Conference WWW/INTERNET 2009, pp. 205-212. 2009  
[4] T. Crocker, O. Johnson. and S. King, “Towards a 
Formalization of Care Pathways to Embody Good Practice in 
Healthcare”, In Proc. of eGOV 2007.  
[5] A. Gonz’alez-Ferrer, A. Teije, J. Fdez-Olivaras, and K. 
Milian, “ Automated Geration of Patient Tailored Electronic 
Care 
Pathways 
by 
Translating 
Computer-Interpretable 
guidelines into hierarchical task networks,” Artificial 
Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 57 pp. 91-100, 2013. 
[6] L. Castillo, J. Fdez-Olivares, O. Carcia-Perez, and F. Palao, 
“Efficiently handling temporal knowledge in an HTN 
planner”. In Proceeding of ICAPS06, Lake District, Cumbria, 
UK, 2006,  pp. 63–72. 
[7] T. Leaon, K. Kaiser, and S. Miksch, “Free and open source 
enabling technologies for patient-centric,guideline-based 
clinical decision support,” A survey. Methods of Information 
in Medicine, 2007 46, pp.74–86. 
[8] N. Mulyar, M.  van der Aalst, and M. Peleg, “A pattern-based 
analysis of clinical computer interpretable guideline modeling 
languages,” Journal of American Medical Information 
Association, 2007, 14(6),  pp.781–787. 
[9] M. Peleg, S. Tu , P. Ciccarese, and J. Fox, “Comparing 
computer-interpretable guideline models,” A case-study 
approach. 
Journal 
of 
American 
Medical 
Information 
Association , 2003,  No 10, pp.10–58. 
[10] K. Boone, “ The CDA Book”. Springer. 2001. 
[11] C. Hartley, and , E.  Jones,  “EHR Implementation” AMA 
Press. 2005. 
[12] A. White. “Introduction to BPMN,” IBM Corporation  
http://www.bpmn.org/Documents/Introduction%20to%20BP
MN.pdf. Last accessed 2014-9-30. 
[13] “Business 
Process 
Modeling 
Notation 
(BPMN), 
“http://www.bpmn.org/. Last accessed 2014-9-30. 
[14]  “Web Services Business Process Execution Language 
Version 
2.0. 
“Available 
at: 
http://www.oasis-
open.org/committees/download.php/14616/wsbpelspecificatio
n-draft.htm.  
[15] “BPEL4WS – Business Process Language for Web Sevices,” 
http://www.w.ibm.com/developersworks/webservices/library/
ws-bpel/. Last accessed 2014-9-30. 
[16] T.  Benson, “Principles of Health Interoperability HL7 and 
SNOMED,” Springer. 2010. 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[17] A. Bauman, H. Fardy, and H. Harris, “Getting it right; why 
bother with patient centred care?,” Medical Journal of 
Australia, 179(5), pp. 253-256, 2003. 
[18] R. Gillespie, D. Florin, and S. Gillam, “How is patient-
centred care understood by the clinical, managerial and lay 
stakeholders responsible for promoting this agenda?,”Health 
Expectations, vol 7 No 2, pp. 142-148, 2004. 
[19] J. Puustjärvi and L. Puustjärvi, “Moving from Remote Patient 
Monitors to Cloud-Based Personal Health Information 
Systems: a Way to Practicing Patient-Centered Chronic Care 
Model,”  In the proc. of the International Conference on 
Health Informatics (HEALTHINF 2012), pp. 37-45. 2012. 
[20] M. Mettle and D. Kemper, “Information Therapy: Health 
Education One Person at a Time,” Health Promotion Practice 
2004 4(3), pp. 214-217, 2004. 
[21] L. Trevena, H. Davey, A. Barratt, P. Butow, and P. Caldwell, 
“A systematic review on communicating with patients about 
evidence,” Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 12,(1),  
pp. 13-23, 2006. 
[22] L. Castillo, J. Fdez-Olivares, O. Carcia-Perez, and F. Palao, 
“Efficiently handling temporal knowledge in an HTN 
planner,” In Proceeding of ICAPS06, Lake District, Cumbria, 
UK, 2006,  pp. 63–72. 
[23] N. Mulyar, M. Pesic, W. van der Aalst, and M. Peleg, 
“Declarative and procedural approaches for modelling clinical 
guidelines: addressing exibility issues,” In Proceedings of the 
2007 
international 
conference 
on 
Business 
process 
management, BPM'07, pp. 335-346, Berlin,Heidelberg, 2008. 
Springer-Verlag. 
[24] R. Hull, “Formal study of business entities with lifecycles: 
Use cases, abstract models, and results,”  In Proceedings of 
7th International Workshopon Web Services and Formal 
Methods, volume 6551 ofLecture Notes in Computer Science, 
2010. 
[25] W. van der Aalst, N. Lohmann, P. Massuthe, C. Stahl, and K. 
Wolf., “Multiparty Contracts: Agreeing and Implementing 
Interorganizational Processes. The Computer Journal”, 53(1), 
pp.90-106, January 2010. 
[26] G.Boss, P. Malladi, D. Quan, L. Legregni, and H. Hall. 
“Cloud 
Computing,” 
Available 
at: 
http://download.boulder.ibm.com/ibmdl/pub/software/dw/wes
/hipods/Cloud_computing_wp_final_8Oct.pdf. Last accessed 
2014-9-10. 
[27] D. Chappel, “A Short Introduction to Cloud Computing: An 
Enterprise-OrientedView,” 
Available 
at: 
http://digitalebookden.com/a-short-introduction-to-cloud-
platforms.html. Last accessed 2014-9-30. 
[28] “OWL,WEB 
OntologyLanguage,” 
Available 
at: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/. Last accessed 2014-9-
30. 
[29] “Introduction to Relational Databases,” Available at: 
http://www.databasejournal.com/sqletc/article.php/1469521/I
ntroduction-to-Relational-Databases.htm. Last accessed 2014-
9-30. 
[30] “Database Triggers,” Available at:  
http://download.oracle.com/docs/cd/A57673_01/DOC/server/
doc/SCN73/ch15.htm. Last accessed 2014-9-30. 
[31] J. Puustjärvi and L. Puustjärvi, ”Personal Health Book: A 
Novel Tool for Patient Centered Healthcare,” In the Proc of 
the 
International 
Conference 
on 
Health 
Informatics 
(HEALTHINF 2011). pp. 386-393. 2011. 
 
 
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

