PROPHECY: Patient Reported Outcomes in Prostate Cancer, a Mobile-Health
Experience in Radiotherapy
Bruno Fionda, Anna Rita Alitto, Vincenzo Frascino,
Francesco Catucci, Giuditta Chiloiro, Loredana
Dinapoli, Ciro Mazzarella, Vito Lanzotti
Radioterapia Oncologica, Dipartimento di Diagnostica per
immagini, Radioterapia Oncologica ed Ematologia
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario "A. Gemelli" IRCCS
Rome, Italy
Email: bruno.fionda@policlinicogemelli.it
Antonio Piras, Andrea D’Aviero, Giovanni Palazzoni,
Francesco Preziosi, Vincenzo Valentini, Giovanna
Mantini
Istituto di Radiologia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore;
Radioterapia Oncologica, Dipartimento di Diagnostica per
immagini, Radioterapia Oncologica ed Ematologia
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario “A. Gemelli” IRCCS
Rome, Italy
Abstract—The
growing
relevance
of
Patient
Reported
Outcomes (PROs), the increasing importance of mHeatlh and
the
objective
discrepancy
documented
between
Patient
Reported Outcomes and Observer Reported Outcomes are
important aspects that need to be addressed when dealing with
prostate cancer patients. The aim of this work was to develop
an electronic Patient Reported Outcomes tool to systematically
assess the impact of radiation therapy on prostate cancer
patients’ quality of life. We elaborated a four-step process. In
the first step, a general literature search was made. The next
step was to generate a set of adequate questions and answers.
The subsequent step was to identify a reliable scale to report
adverse events, namely, the Common Terminology Criteria for
Adverse Events version 4.03 scale of toxicity. The last phase
was to implement a user-friendly interface. We developed a
new and innovative comprehensive list of items for prostate
cancer
patients
receiving
radiotherapy
whose
main
characteristic is to link the Patient Reported Outcomes
obtained from patients to a well-established scale of toxicity.
The conclusive validation of this conceptually innovative tool
should allow to provide both patients and physicians with a
useful tool to reduce, and possibly prevent, adverse events
during
and
after
radiotherapy,
with
a
consequence
of
improvement in terms of Quality of Life.
Keywords—Mobile-health; Quality of life; Patient reported
outcomes; Prostate cancer.
I. INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men and
the recent developments in therapeutic approaches have
allowed to obtain very long overall survival rates [1]. A key
aspect that needs to be addressed when dealing with such
patients is the Quality of Life (QoL) [2]. There are several
reasons which, in our view, should be taken into account
when considering to develop a QoL questionnaire for
prostate cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy to be used
specifically through mobile devices:
1)
The growing awareness in the scientific community
about the relevance of Patient Reported Outcomes (PROs)
[3][4].
2)
The increasing importance mHeatlh is rapidly
gaining [5][6].
3)
The objective discrepancy documented in scientific
literature between PROs and Observer Reported Outcomes
(OROs) [7][8].
On these premises, we decided to develop a specific
Health Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) prostate cancer
questionnaire which might be included in a much wider
electronic application developed in-house called VALEO+
(VAluation Endorsed by Oncology Patient) with the intent to
help all cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy treatment by
providing useful tools such as scheduling of appointments,
suggestions to improve lifestyle and a specific questionnaire
developed to assess toxicity.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we present the materials and methods used. Section III
presents the state of the art. In Section IV, we present the
results and we discuss them in Section V. We conclude the
work in Section VI.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
First of all, we identified two main sources from
literature. The first is the guidelines issued by the EORTC
for
developing
Questionnaire
Modules.
The
approach
proposed is, in this case, a “modular” one [9]: in particular,
the development of modules is specific to tumor site,
treatment modality, or a QoL dimension. The second major
reference for the questionnaire development was the Food
and Drug Administration [10]; for the FDA a PRO
instrument needs to capture PRO data used to measure
treatment benefit or risk in medical product clinical trials.
The
conceptual
framework
is
a
straightforward
expression of the extracted concepts by the questionnaire and
can be represented like a diagram with clear relationships
between items, the domain, and concepts (the specific
measurement
goal)
measured.
Keeping
in
mind
the
framework presented in these guidelines, we proceeded with
a four-step process to generate the questionnaire.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In the first phase, in which the relevant QoL issues
should be generated, an in-depth literature search was
performed [11]-[13]. Since prostate cancer has been widely
studied over the years and there is a great amount of
literature that extensively covers the issues related to quality
of
life,
we
decided
to
identify
the
most
relevant
questionnaires reported in the published reviews. After
identifying the most widely reported questionnaires, we
started a series of dedicated debates, performed within the
urological group of our department, to choose the most
relevant items to include in our questionnaire.
In the second phase the list of QoL items was converted
into questions in Italian language, keeping in mind the great
importance of the major methodological considerations
according the guidelines mentioned above in terms of item
construction: questions in fact need to be clear, brief and
unambiguous.
The third step implied identifying a reliable scale to
report adverse events and an accurate literature research was
performed to choose a simple and validated system to
correlate with the set of items and relative questions
generated.
In the last step, a user-friendly interface for patients was
realized with the help of graphic experts; this phase was also
crucial since this represents a key aspect which differentiates
a paper-based from an electronic approach and is a major
challenge when dealing with mobile-health PRO [14].
III. STATE OF THE ART
Table I summarizes the results of the relative items from
the seven questionnaires included in the analysis [15]-[21].
As shown in Table II, the number of possible choices for
patients
significantly
changes
across
the
different
questionnaires already existing and, in some cases, even
within the same questionnaire.
IV. RESULTS
After
choosing
the
questionnaires
included
in
the
reviews, we created a collection of all the questions
presented in the different questionnaires, grouping them
according to the relative item of interest.
After identifying the list of the items and of the domains,
the list was discussed by prostate experts at our institution
and the result was the identification of 3 main domains
including urinary symptoms, bowel symptoms and sexual
function/hormonal therapy related problems for a total of 14
items, as shown in Figure 1, The first domain (urinary)
includes hematuria, urinary incontinence, urinary tract pain
and
urinary
frequency.
The
second
domain
(bowel
symptoms)
includes
abdominal
pain,
diarrhea,
rectal
hemorrhage and proctitis. The last domain (sexual function
and hormonal therapy) includes sexual desire reduction, hot
flashes, breast pain, memory or concentration problems,
erection problems and ejaculatory problems.
Questions and answers have been formulated while
trying to keep the number of words as low as possible,
considering the means of delivery that is a smartphone or a
tablet.
All questions were subsequently revised by psycho-
oncologists
with
great
expertise
in
cancer
patients
questionnaires; in this phase, several changes were made in
order to make the question not only clear for patients, but
also to reduce any possible problem related to the question
itself.
TABLE I. NUMBER OF ITEMS IDENTIFIED IN
DIFFERENT QUESTIONNAIRES IN LITERATURE.
U.F.=Urinary frequency; U.D.=Urinary tract pain; U.I.=
Urinary Incontinence; U.B.= Hematuria; I.F.= Diarrhea;
I.D.=
Proctitis,
A.P.=
Abdominal
pain;
I.B.=
Rectal
Hemorrhage;
H.F.=Hot
flashes;
B.P.=Breast
pain;
Er.P.=Erection problems; Ej.P.=Ejaculatory problems
These differences might generate at least two kinds of
problems in our view.
The first problem is in patients' perspective because,
when they answer questions, patients face diversity, in the
range of possible choices, which could, in theory, be a
confounding factor in attributing the choice of symptom
severity.
The second problem is the physicians’ perspective
because it is difficult to compare the results from the
different questionnaires.
A possible solution to both problems could be found in
the third phase of our process since we chose to use the
U.F.
U.D.
U.I.
U.B.
I.F.
I.D.
EORTC QLQ - PR25
5
1
2
0
0
0
UCLA - PCI
1
0
3
0
0
1
EPIC
2
2
4
2
3
2
FACT-P
1
1
0
0
0
0
PORPUS
1
0
1
0
1
1
PC-QoL
0
0
5
0
1
1
PCSI - SDS
4
4
4
0
2
2
A.P.
I.B.
H.F.
B.P.
Er.P.
Ej.P.
EORTC QLQ - PR25
1
1
1
1
1
1
UCLA - PCI
2
0
0
0
3
0
EPIC
4
2
2
2
5
0
FACT-P
1
0
0
0
1
0
PORPUS
0
0
0
0
1
0
PC-QoL
3
1
0
0
2
0
PCSI - SDS
5
1
0
0
4
1
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

severity scale found in the CTCAE V 4.03, which is a scale
going from 1 to 5 from the less severe to the more severe
symptoms due to either frequency or entity increase
according to the different definitions [22].
TABLE II. DIFFERENT NUMBER OF RESPONSES
IDENTIFIED IN QUESTIONNAIRES IN LITERATURE.
Knowing the severity of the symptoms also includes
potentially life-threatening conditions (grade 4) and death
(grade 5); the absence of the symptom is not included in the
scale, so there is no zero.
We decided to exclude the two higher grades that is to
say grade 4 and 5, since they are not compatible with a
patient reported symptom and, therefore, we chose a 4 way
possible answers with one answer including the absence of
the symptom and a growing severity (in frequency or entity,
according to the CTCAE definition) for the remaining three
answers.
The fact that symptoms were initially derived from the
CTCAE, which is not a PRO tool, poses a problem for grade
1 asymptomatic situation such as, for example, for hematuria
or rectal bleeding. In these two cases, in order to confirm the
real absence of the symptom, we propose to add a urine and
stool test.
After choosing the questions and the relative answers, we
went on with the fourth phase to generate the graphical
interface.
We
relied
on
the
support
from
personnel
experienced in graphical design and tool creation for cancer
patients. The entire graphical interface has been completed
and is already fully available, as it can be seen in Figure 2.
Figure 1. Symptoms domains [27].
Figure 2. VALEO+ graphical interface.
V. DISCUSSION
Assessing PROs has turned out to be a central part of
healthcare by measuring the impact of both disease and
medical intervention on patients. The first attempts to
develop
wireless
mobile
health-related
quality
of
life
assessment started more than a decade ago [23]. Few authors
have reported about the evaluation of the reliability,
usability, and acceptability of point- of-care electronic PRO
EORTC - PR25
14
1=no symptom4=worst
UCLA - PCI
06
with a range of 3 to 6 answers and no fixed
correlation between severity and number
EPIC
05
with a range of 3 to 5 answers and correlation
between severity and increasing number
FACT-P
04
with correlation between severity and
increasing number
PORPUS
No definite number of answers
PC-QoL
17
with a range of 3 to 7 answers and correlation
between severity and increasing number
PCSI - SDS
15
1=no symptom→5=worst
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

assessments implemented in prostate cancer clinics [24]-[27]
and the available result is that mean scores and standard
deviations
are
similar
between
the
paper-pencil
and
electronic
forms
across
instrument
domains
with
no
assessment bias [28]-[31].
In our work, we followed an item pooling procedure,
which
was
mainly
based
on
previous
questionnaires;
searching in literature, we found that an item pooling
procedure for extracting items based mainly from pre-
existing questionnaires is an option that has already been
described [32][33]. The advantages of this choice are
important because it is possible to obtain a correspondence
between the patient reported symptoms and the chance to
implement a toxicity record.
The choice of the CTCAE has been used by other groups
actively involved in the development of quality of life tools
for cancer patients [34]; such choice is a key factor which
distinguishes our proposed questionnaire from the existing
ones in literature because the CTCAE links the indication of
a medical intervention to the severity of the symptom. In this
way, it is also possible to generate electronic alerts for the
patients who report experiencing certain grades of severity.
The chance to generate such alerts has at least two other
advantages. The first one is that the alert suggesting to
contact a doctor allows the doctor himself to confirm (or not)
the severity of the symptom reported (thus implicitly
validating the correspondence between the patient reported
outcome and the CTCAE). The other important aspect is
relative to prevention of severe symptoms: in fact, in case of
repeatedly reported low severity symptoms, which by
definition require no medical intervention, the system may
generate an alert signal to contact the doctor as well so that
an in depth analysis can be made of the result to prevent
further deterioration of the symptom.
Moreover, CTCAE does not distinguish acute from late
side effects, but it is focused on the symptoms themselves so
that the same question can actually be used both in the
treatment setting and, subsequently, in the follow-up of the
patients.
The importance of our choice of integrating a modified
version of the CTCAE scoring system in a mobile-health
system is, in our view, further strengthened by the very
recent release of a PRO- CTCAE item library [35][36].
VI. CONCLUSION
A specific questionnaire for prostate cancer patients
undergoing
radiotherapy
was
developed
to
realize
an
electronic PRO. A combined approach was used, both
traditional and innovative, in order to obtain a HRQOL tool
that may help patients, caregivers and physicians to improve
the quality of the treatment by focusing on the patient's
active role. The subsequent phase will require the testing of
the developed questionnaire by patients, in order to fully
validate it.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The abstract of this paper was presented at the 29th
Annual Meeting of the Italian Society of Uro- Oncology
(SIUrO) as a poster with interim findings. The poster’s
abstract was published in “Poster Abstracts” in Anticancer
Research 39: 1507-1629 (2019).
REFERENCES
[1]
R. L Siegel, K. D. Miller, and A. Jemal, Cancer statistics, 2019. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2019 Jan; 69(1), pp.7-34.
[2]
C. Acquadro et al., Incorporating the Patient's Perspective into Drug
Development and Communication: An Ad Hoc Task Force Report of
the Patient-Reported Outcomes (PRO) Harmonization Group Meeting
at the Food and Drug Administration, February 16, 2001. Value
Health. 2003;6, pp.522–31.
[3]
P. R. Deshpande, S. Rajan, B. L. Sudeepthi, and C. P. Abdul Nazir,
Patient-reported outcomes: A new era in clinical research. Perspect
Clin Res. 2011 Oct, 2(4), pp. 137-44.
[4]
L. C. Doward, and S. P. McKenna, Defining patient-reported
outcomes. Value Health. 2004 Sep-Oct;7 Suppl 1:S4-8.
[5]
R. Miniati, F. Frosini, G. Cecconi, F. Dori, and G. B. Gentili.
Development of sustainable models for technology evaluation in
hospital. Technol Health Care. 2014, 22(5), pp. 729-39.
[6]
G. Nasi, M. Cucciniello, and C. Guerrazzi, The role of mobile
technologies in health care processes: the case of cancer supportive
care. J Med Internet Res. 2015 Feb 12;17(2):e26.
[7]
C. F. Snyder, M. E. Watson, J. D. Jackson, D. Cella, and M.Y.
Halyard, Mayo/FDA Patient-Reported Outcomes Consensus Meeting
Group. Patient-reported outcome instrument selection: designing a
measurement strategy. Value Health. 2007 Nov-Dec;10 Suppl 2:S76-
85.
[8]
G. A. Sonn, N. Sadetsky, J. C. Presti, and M. S. Litwin, Differing
Perceptions of Quality of Life in Patients With Prostate Cancer and
Their Doctors. J Urol. 2013 Jan;189(1 Suppl):S59-65.
[9]
EORTC QUALITY OF LIFE GROUP – Guidelines for developing
Questionnaire Modules, 2011.
[10] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug
Administration Guidance for Industry: Patient- Reported Outcome
Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to Support Labeling
Claims. U.S. FDA, Clinical/Medical, 2009.
[11] J. Bergman and A. Laviana, Quality-of-life assessment tools for men
with prostate cancer. Nat Rev Urol. 2014 Jun;11(6):352-9.
[12] E. H. Hamoen, M. De Rooij, J. A. Witjes, J.O. Barentsz, and M. M.
Rovers, Measuring health-related quality of life in men with prostate
cancer: A systematic review of the most used questionnaires and their
validity. Urol Oncol. 2015 Feb;33(2):69.e19-28.
[13] S. Schmidt, O. Garin, Y. Pardo, J. M. Valderas, J. Alonso, and P.
Rebollo, Assessing quality of life in patients with prostate cancer: a
systematic and standardized comparison of available instruments.
Qual Life Res. 2014 Oct;23(8), pp. 2169-81.
[14] E. K. H. Chan, T. C. Edwards, K. Haywood, S. P. Mikles, and L.
Newton, Implementing patient-reported outcome measures in clinical
practice: a companion guide to the ISOQOL user's guide. Qual Life
Res. 2018 Nov 17.
[15] G. van Andel, A. Bottomley, S.D. Fosså, F. Efficace, C. Coens, and
S. Guerif, An international field study of the EORTC QLQ-PR25: A
questionnaire for assessing the healthrelated quality of life of patients
with prostate cancer. European Journal of Cancer. 2008 44, pp. 2418–
2424.
[16] P. Esper, F. Mo, G. Chodak, M. Sinner, D. Cella, and K. J. Pienta,
Measuring quality of life in men with prostate cancer using the
functional assessment of cancer therapy-prostate instrument. Urology.
1997 50, pp. 920–928.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[17] M. Krahn., P. Ritvo, and J. Irvine, Construction of the Patient-
Oriented Prostate Utility Scale (PORPUS): A multiattribute health
state classification system for prostate cancer. Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology. 2000 53, pp. 920–930.
[18] J. T. Wei, R. L. Dunn, M. S. Litwin, H. M. Sandler, and M.G. Sanda,
Development and validation of the expanded prostate cancer index
composite (EPIC) for comprehensive assessment of health-related
quality of life in men with prostate cancer. Urology. 2000 56, pp.
899–905.
[19] R. B. Giesler, B. J. Miles, M. E. Cowen, and M. W. Kattan, Assessing
quality of life in men with clinically localized prostate cancer:
Development of a new instrument for use in multiple settings. Quality
of Life Research. 2000 9, pp. 645–665.
[20] J. A. Clark and J. A. Talcott, Symptom indexes to assess outcomes of
treatment for early prostate cancer. Medical Care. 2001, 39, pp.
1118–1130.
[21] M. S. Litwin, R. D. Hays, A. Fink, P.A. Ganz, B. Leake, and R. H.
Brook, The UCLA Prostate Cancer Index: Development, reliability,
and validity of a health-related quality of life measure. Medical Care.
1998 36, pp. 1002–1012.
[22] T. M. Atkinson, L. J. Rogak, N. Heon, S.J. Ryan, M. Shaw, and L.P.
Stark, Exploring differences in adverse symptom event grading
thresholds between clinicians and patients in the clinical trial setting.
J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2017 Apr;143(4) pp. 735-743.
[23] C. Wu, R. J. Volk, J. R. Steinbauer, G. M. Kuo, and J. S. Smith, A
wireless mobile health-related quality of life assessment. AMIA Annu
Symp Proc. 2003, p. 1054.
[24] P. Sharma, R. L. Dunn, J. T. Wei, J. E. Montie, and S. M. Gilbert,
Evaluation of point-of-care PRO assessment in clinic settings:
integration, parallel-forms reliability, and patient acceptability of
electronic QOL measures during clinic visits.Qual Life Res. 2016
Mar;25(3), pp. 575-83.
[25] M. Spillane, P. Pollock, L. Hedden, E. Wu, L. Goldenberg, and J. M.
Jones, Implementation of an electronic patient reported outcome
system in a prostate cancer urology clinic. Journal of Clinical
Oncology 2018 36:7_suppl, p. 143.
[26] L. Warrington, K. Absolom, P. Holch, A. Gibson, B. Clayton, and G.
Velikova, Online tool for monitoring adverse events in patients with
cancer during treatment (eRAPID): field testing in a clinical setting.
BMJ Open. 2019 Feb 1;9(1):e025185.
[27] B. Fionda, A. D’Aviero, A. R. Alitto, V. Frascino, A. Piras, and F.
Catucci, Patient Reported Outcomes in Prostate Cancer, a mobile-
health Essay (PROPHECY). Anticancer research. 2019. 39(3) pp.
1507-1629.
[28] J. S. Marcano Belisario, J. Jamsek, K. Huckvale, J. O'Donoghue, C.P.
Morrison, and J. Car, Comparison of self-administered survey
questionnaire responses collected using mobile apps versus other
methods. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Jul 27.
[29] A. Rogausch, J. Sigle, A. Seibert, S. Thüring, M. M. Kochen, and W.
Himmel, Feasibility and acceptance of electronic quality of life
assessment in general practice: an implementation study. Health Qual
Life Outcomes. 2009 Jun 3;7:51.
[30] E. Rincon, F. Monteiro-Guerra, O. Rivera-Romero, E. Dorronzoro-
Zubiete, C. L. Sanchez-Bocanegra, and E. Gabarron, Mobile Phone
Apps for Quality of Life and Well-Being Assessment in Breast and
Prostate Cancer Patients: Systematic Review 2017 JMIR vol 5, no 12.
[31] J. Pereira, E. Green, S. Molloy, D. Dudgeon, D. Howell, and M.K.
Krzyzanowska, Population-based standardized symptom screening:
Cancer Care Ontario's Edmonton Symptom Assessment System and
performance status initiatives. J Oncol Pract. 2014 May;10(3), pp.
212-4.
[32] E. Vidhubala, R. R. Kannan, S.C. Mani, K. Karthikesh, R. Muthuvel,
and V. Surendran, Validation of quality of life questionnaire for
patients with cancer--Indian scenario. Indian J Cancer. 2005 Jul-
Sep;42(3):138-44.
[33] M. L. Rothman, P. Beltran, J. C. Cappelleri, J. Lipscomb, and B.
Teschendorf, Mayo/FDA Patient-Reported
Outcomes Consensus
Meeting Group. Patient-reported outcomes: conceptual issues. Value
Health. 2007 Nov-Dec;10 Suppl 2:S66-75.
[34] E. Galligioni, E. M. Piras, M. Galvagni, C. Eccher, S. Caramatti, and
D. Zanolli, Integrating mHealth in Oncology: Experience in the
Province of Trento. J Med Internet Res. 2015 May 13;17(5):e114.
[35] E. Basch, B. B. Reeve, S. A. Mitchell, S. B. Clauser, L. M. Minasian,
and A.C. Dueck, Development of the National Cancer Institute's
patient-reported outcomes version of the common terminology
criteria for adverse events (PRO-CTCAE). J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014
Sep 29;106(9).
[36] J. L. Hay, T. M. Atkinson, B. B. Reeve, S. A. Mitchell, T. R.
Mendoza, and G. Willis, Cognitive interviewing of the US National
Cancer Institute's Patient-Reported Outcomes version of the Common
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO-CTCAE). Qual Life
Res. 2014 Feb;23(1):257-69.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

