How to Communicate STI and HIV Test Results Online to MSM? 
The Barriers and Motives MSM Perceive in the Online Communication of STI and HIV Test Results 
Esther Moekotte, Joyce Karreman,  
Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen 
Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
e.moekotte@student.utwente.nl; 
j.karreman@utwente.nl; j.vangemertpijnen@utwente.nl 
Udi Davidovich 
Department of Research, Cluster Infectious Diseases  
Public Health Services Amsterdam 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands 
udavidovich@ggd.amsterdam.nl
 
 
Abstract— Testlab is an online service for Men who have Sex 
with Men (MSM) to get tested on STIs and HIV. Testlab is 
part of the MANtotMAN project. This project aims to improve 
testing behaviour and increase awareness on STIs and HIV 
among MSM. Currently, the users of Testlab do not receive 
specific test result online, because it does not seem appropriate 
to communicate potentially upsetting news online, without the 
presence of a health care professional. However, little is known 
about the barriers and motives MSM perceive in receiving 
online test results. Forty-four interviews were held with MSM 
to investigate barriers, motives and the importance of the tone 
of online communication regarding test results. The main 
conclusion of this study is that the vast majority of participants 
would like to have the option to choose whether or not to 
receive their specific test results online. They perceive little 
barriers in receiving low impact STIs (Chlamydia, gonorrhoea, 
syphilis and) test results. More barriers are perceived for HIV 
online test results. 
 
Keywords - eHealth; STI, HIV; professional communication; 
empathic communication 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Men who have sex with men (MSM) have an increased 
risk for STIs (Sexually Transmitted Infections) and HIV 
(Human Immunodeficiency Virus). In the Netherlands, they 
are therefore advised to be tested on STIs twice a year and 
to be tested on HIV once a year. There are several options to 
get tested on STIs and HIV in the Netherlands. One can get 
tested at the general practitioner, at a STI-clinic of the GGD 
(Public Health Services), or a STI-clinic at a specialised 
hospital. Another option to get tested is via Testlab, an 
online service for MSM to get tested on STIs and HIV. 
Testlab is a part of the MANtotMAN website, which is part 
of the MANtotMAN project. This project aims to improve 
the prevention and treatment of STIs and HIV for MSM.  
 
The MANtotMAN website was developed by the Dutch 
Aids Fund, Schorer (Dutch institute for homosexuality, 
health and well-being), the GGD Amsterdam and the GGD 
Rotterdam (Public Health Services of the municipalities 
Amsterdam and Rotterdam). The website was launched in 
the summer of 2008 and has since conducted several theme 
campaigns aimed to improve test behaviour and to create 
awareness on STIs and HIV. The website attempts to 
increase testing and decrease risk behaviour among MSM. 
The website offers information on safe sex, what to do after 
having unprotected sex, living with HIV, dating and 
partners, etc.  
 
The reason Testlab was developed is that a low threshold 
service to get tested on STIs (Chlamydia, gonorrhoea and 
syphilis) and HIV was not yet present for MSM. Testlab 
provides MSM with a new and innovative eHealth 
application. The difference in the Testlab procedure 
compared to the other testing alternatives is that the men can 
fill in the necessary paperwork online; they can choose their 
date and time to go to a nearest laboratory. Once there, all it 
takes is a couple of minutes for all the cultures and blood 
samples are taken. Whereas going to the general 
practitioner, a hospital or a STI-clinic is far more time 
consuming and the procedure allows less anonymity than 
the Testlab procedure. Another major difference of the 
Testlab procedure is that MSM receive their a-specific test 
results online. This means that MSM receive an online 
message either telling them that all tests were negative or 
that one or more tests were positive. If one or more tests are 
positive, they are asked to come to the STI-clinic. At the 
clinic, they receive their specific test results, counselling if 
needed, treatment and, if necessary, follow-up and 
confirmation tests.  
 
The 2010 HIV monitor shows that the MANtotMAN 
project is successful in reaching their target population and 
that MSM familiar with the website have a higher intention 
to get tested on STIs and HIV [1]. Not only is their intention 
to get tested higher, evaluations of the project have 
indicated that there is a rise in the testing rate among MSM 
that are familiar with MANtotMAN and Testlab. This 
shows that there is a need for online interventions on STIs 
and HIV testing.  
When Testlab users were asked about their experiences, 
some of them indicated that they would have liked to 
receive specific test results online [2]. However, one can 
think of several advantages and disadvantages of allowing 
people to receive online specific test results that can have a 
large impact. A qualitative study was conducted to answer 
the following questions: 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

- 
What motives and barriers do MSM perceive for 
receiving specific test results online? 
- 
How important is the tone of voice in the online 
communication of results? 
 
The theoretical background, the method and results of 
this study are described in the remainder of this paper. The 
paper ends with the conclusion of the study. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE OVERVIEW  
 
The first step in answering the research questions was a 
literature 
review 
about 
self 
tests 
and 
empathic 
communication. 
A. Advantaged and disadvantages of self tests 
Self-tests are becoming increasingly popular and more 
available to the general public in the Netherlands [3]. Four 
different types of self-test are indicated: 1) a self-test where 
the samples are taken at home and results can be viewed 
immediately; 2) a self-test where the samples are taken at 
home and then sent to a laboratory, with results received 
through post or internet; 3) a self-test where people are 
required to go to a laboratory for collecting of samples and 
then receive their test results through post or internet; 4) a 
street-corner test, these are tests offered by organizations in 
public places such as grocery shops, libraries, etc. Testlab is 
a type 3 self-test, this type of self-test has the least amount 
of disadvantages compared to the other types of self-tests. 
Critics of self-testing state that self-tests involve high 
costs and will only increase test results among people at 
low-risk for disease, and that the high-risk population will 
not use self-tests. These critics also indicate that testing 
without supervision of a qualified health professional could 
lead to adverse medical and psychological outcomes [3-6]. 
This is one argument for not providing the Testlab users 
with online test results. A health care professional who tells 
them personally about the test results, explains these results 
and who can immediately answer any questions might be 
better, especially because STIs and HIV are serious diseases 
that can have a large impact on patients. 
On the other hand, self-testing appears to be applicable 
in the present-day views on consumer autonomy and self-
management, and it could also empower consumers to gain 
control over their personal health [3, 7, 8], which is an 
argument for providing Testlab users with online results. 
Protagonists of self-tests believe that the availability of self-
tests will lead to increasing test rates as well as earlier 
diagnosis and treatment. They also indicate that self-tests 
are more convenient and provide more anonymity than 
current testing methods, and that it promotes patient 
empowerment. 
B. Empathic Communication in eHealth 
 
Receiving positive test results for an STI or for HIV can 
have a traumatic impact on a person. More STIs are curable 
nowadays, but HIV, even though it is a controlled disease, is 
still incurable. So, it is important to deliver this news 
tactfully. Bad news in health care can be defined as “any 
news that drastically and negatively alters the patient‟s view 
of her or his future” [9, p.15]. It can be delivered in different 
ways; there is no standard on how it should be delivered. 
The literature implies that the communication style is 
important; the use of an empathic style is best when the 
diagnosis is of a more serious nature, where a less empathic 
but objective, professional style is more accepted when the 
diagnosis is not life altering or life threatening [10, 11]. An 
empathic style is defined as responding to the receiver‟s 
emotions. In this study, we use the term „informative‟ for a 
less 
empathic, 
but 
professional 
and 
objective 
communication style. 
A study on how different communication styles can 
affect risk perception by De Wit, Das and Vet [12] indicates 
that the use of narratives is more effective in communicating 
health 
risk 
than 
using 
objective 
and 
statistical 
communication. 
Although a lot of research is done on the use of different 
communication styles in health communication, little is 
known about the use of text styles in the communication of 
online test results [12-16]. Kreps and Neuhauser [17] 
conclude that if e-health information meets conditions such 
as tailored messages, interactive, engaging, and can be 
delivered to mass audiences; it can make a difference in 
improving the quality of both health care and disease 
prevention.  
This study focuses on informative and empathic text 
styles for the communication of online test results. Testlab 
has already shown that is successful in the prevention and 
early detection of STIs and HIV among MSM. The goal of 
this study is to find out how this positive trend can be 
continued in the communication of the test results.  
 
III. 
METHOD 
 
The method of the qualitative study is described below. 
A. Participants 
A total number of 44 MSM participated in this study (14 
were HIV+, 30 were HIV-). Guest et al. indicate that that 12 
in depth interviews is sufficient for a fairly homogeneous 
group [18]. Saunders, Lewis and Thornhill suggest a sample 
size of 25 to 30 people [19]. Since our target group is 
heterogeneous, we decided to interview more people than 
suggested in the literature, to be sure that the results would 
be relevant.  
The participants were between 18 and 64 years of age 
(mean: 43). The education level varied from vocational 
education to university education. Some of the men had 
used Testlab before (N=25) others had no experience with 
Testlab (N=19). Participants were recruited through the 
Public Health Services of Amsterdam, Rotterdam-Rijnmond 
and of the region Twente (municipality: Enschede), and the 
hospital in Enschede (Medisch Spectrum Twente). STI 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

nurses and HIV consultants assisted the researchers with 
recruiting participants.   
B. Sample Selection 
The inclusion criteria of this study: participants had to be 
18 years or older, they had to be men, they head to be 
homosexual or bisexual, they had to speak Dutch, and they 
had to be tested at least once on a STI and/or HIV. These 
inclusion criteria were communicated to the nurses who 
recruited the participants and were checked by the 
researchers when the appointment for the interview with a 
possible participant was scheduled.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Empathic test result for HIV 
Translation: 
1. The HIV test result. “Maybe this news upsets you; do realize this is a 
preliminary test result. You need to come to the STI-clinic for the final test 
result; there a confirmation test is done” 
2. “What to do next?” Also an outline with the next steps, but with 
empathic additions. “Maybe you are reluctant to go to the STI-clinic, but 
remember: the sooner you come to the STI-clinic, the sooner you‟ll have 
your final results. If you would like you can bring someone to the STI-
clinic with you.” 
3. Advise to come to the STI-clinic as soon as possible, either today or the 
next working day. 
4. The referral letter (download, print, or email) 
5. Link with information about HIV and treatment options, empathic 
addition: “We understand that you might wish more information on HIV, if 
you do, please click the link below.” 
 
C. Materials 
Prototypes of web pages with the online test results were 
constructed. Four screen shots were shown to the 
participants: positive test results for gonorrhoea presented in 
an informative style, positive test results for HIV presented 
in an informative style, positive test results for gonorrhoea 
presented in an empathic style and positive test results for 
HIV in an empathic style (see Figure 1). The contents of the 
test results written in an empathic style were the same as the 
contents of the test results written in an informative style. 
However, we added some empathic elements to the text. In 
the informative text, the men are told “Go to the STI clinic 
as soon as possible …” while in the empathic version, the 
men are told “Maybe, you are reluctant to go to the STI 
clinic …” The informative text states: Below, you can find 
more information on…” while the empathic versions state 
“We understand that you might wish more information on 
…” 
The initial interview questions were constructed on the 
bases of the literature study on informative and empathic 
texts. These interview questions were formed into a topic 
list and supported by a PowerPoint presentation that was 
used during the interviews. This topic list was used to keep 
a semi-structured nature in the questions and contained 
questions on motives and barriers the interviewee perceived 
when receiving online test results. We specifically asked the 
preferences, motives, and barriers concerning online 
communication of test results.  
D. Procedure 
We used semi-structured interviews to gain insight in the 
motives and barriers that MSM perceive in receiving online 
STI/HIV specific test results, their needs for specific 
information when receiving these test results and in which 
way these results can be best communicated. In Amsterdam 
the interviews were held at the research department of the 
GGD Amsterdam, in Rotterdam at the STI clinic of the 
GGD Rotterdam-Rijnmond and in Enschede at the STI-
clinic of the GGD region Twente. The average time for an 
interview was 45 minutes.  
At the beginning of every interview a short introduction 
about the research was given. Participants who were not 
familiar with Testlab received an additional explanation 
about the website MANtotMAN and Testlab (the 
application, procedures and current communication of test 
results) to make sure they understood how Testlab works. 
After the introduction, permission was asked to record the 
interview and to convert it into text afterwards. Assurance 
about anonymous collection of the data was given. A 
PowerPoint presentation was used to show prototypes of 
web pages with online test results. The participants saw 
positive test results for gonorrhoea presented in an 
informative style, positive test results for HIV presented in 
an informative style, positive test results for gonorrhoea 
presented in an empathic style and positive test results for 
HIV presented in an empathic style successively 
E. Data Analysis 
In this research categorisation of meanings was used to 
put the data in relevant categories so it could provide insight 
into the relationships in the collected interview data. 
Through open coding the general issues with online 
communication of test results were found and categorized. 
In all the issues derived from the transcribed interviews we 
searched for overlapping themes through axial coding. This 
resulted in the identification of several themes such as the 
relation between the severity of the test result (e.g. 
gonorrhoea vs. HIV) and the preference for the type of text 
(informative or empathic) used in the communication of the 
test result. All transcripts were imported and analysed with 
MAXQDA 2010, a software program for the analysis of 
qualitative data.  
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The research team consisted of 3 researchers, all with 
different backgrounds (psychology, communication sciences 
and biomedical sciences). The researchers 
with a 
background in communication sciences and biomedical 
sciences performed the interviews. The first 6 interviews 
were coded by both the researchers and discussed with the 
supervising researcher to reach consensus about the coding 
system. This was done to ensure equal coding of the two 
researchers. After these 6 interviews each researcher coded 
their own interviews, but discussion took place each time a 
new code was used. These discussions could lead to an 
adjustment or addition the initial topic list, or to the 
rephrasing, combining, or splitting of earlier formulated 
codes. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results of this study indicate that more motives than 
barriers were perceived to receive STI specific test results 
online. This applies for all participants, although men who 
had already used Testlab in the past perceived more motives 
than the men who had never used Testlab. This is why men 
in Amsterdam and Rotterdam perceived more motives than 
men in Enschede; Testlab is currently only available in these 
two cities.  
The results showed a difference in the participants‟ 
opinions about the STIs (Chlamydia, gonorrhoea and 
syphilis) on the one hand and HIV on the other. As 
expected, more barriers were perceived for receiving online 
test results indicating a positive test result for HIV than 
receiving results indicating a positive test result for 
gonorrhoea. Furthermore, the participants had a preference 
for an empathic style when the results indicated that one 
was positively tested for HIV and a preference for an 
informative text style when the results were about 
gonorrhoea. 
A. Motives for online test results 
The most important motive mentioned for receiving 
positive STI and HIV test results online was that one did 
not have to wait for appointment at the STI clinic to get 
the results. The advantage of not having to wait for an 
appointment implied that one could immediately start 
taking measures to protect themself and his partner(s) 
and, more important, it reduced the anxiety. When test 
results are communicated a-specific, the participants 
indicated they feel a lot of anxiety when they already know 
that they are tested positively, but have to wait until their 
appointment at the STI-clinic before they know what they 
tested positive for. 
 
“A bad feeling, especially since they only say, “you’ve 
tested positive on something, but what is it?”. This caused 
stress for a whole week.” (Rotterdam; no. 9; Testlab user, 
HIV-negative) 
 
Another motive for receiving test results online is patient 
autonomy. Some participants mentioned that they found it 
important to be able to decide for themselves when and 
where they would get their results and what they would do 
after getting the results. 
 
“Yes, I would prefer it [online HIV test result], because then 
I can decide when to see the result, when to process it and 
what to do next. Whether you want to go to your general 
practitioner or the STI-clinic […]. Then you have had time 
to think whether you want to see your general practitioner 
for additional support or knowledge. And whether you want 
to talk to someone. But at least you have had time to process 
it yourself and to come to terms with it.” (Amsterdam; no. 
4; Testlab user, HIV-negative) 
 
Related to the previous motive, participants also mentioned 
that they preferred getting bad news at home. 
 
“You know what’s it about [your online test result], and I 
was talking about preparation […], and yes I would 
probably wait until my husband is home. That is much 
better, in my opinion, than going to the STI-clinic by 
yourself and to hear it from someone else.” (Amsterdam, no. 
14; Testlab user, HIV-negative) 
 
Another motive that was mentioned is that the possibility to 
get online test results simply fits in the current digital 
world. 
 
“Yes, just look at it as demand [online HIV test results], a 
market condition. If there is demand from the market to give 
results in this manner, then yes, this might be a good tool to 
persuade MSM to get tested, as an additional means.” 
(Amsterdam; no. 20; Testlab user, HIV-negative) 
 
B. Barriers for online test results 
The barrier that was mentioned most often for both STI 
test results as HIV test results was the need for contact 
with a health professional. Although most of these men 
did believe that the option to choose specific online test 
results should be available.  
 
“Yes, often when you receive something online and you 
have questions, you don’t receive an answer immediately 
[…] I’d rather go to someone who can tell me exactly what I 
have and what I have to do. I find that much easier.” 
(Enschede; no. 3; non-user Testlab , HIV-negative) 
 
The barriers most mentioned for receiving HIV test results 
online were that the impact is too large and that it can be 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

unexpected. Therefore, participants considered it better to 
receive the test results from a health care professional. 
 
“But I can imagine that you’ll freak out [after an online 
positive HIV test result]. And maybe make some decisions 
that you wouldn’t make when a professional guided you. I 
think that is a disadvantage of an online test result […] 
because then you can do it all by yourself, processing it and 
then thinking “I’ll drink that bottle of gin and take those 
pills.” So, no I wouldn’t do it [give online test results for 
HIV].” (Amsterdam; no. 18; Testlab user, HIV-negative) 
 
“Especially for people […] who […] test for prevention 
[…] and I believe that is a large group, who get tested and 
think, “It’ll all be all right”. This group, in my opinion, will 
be even more confronted when you read online “oh, and 
you have HIV”[…] I believe there is a large group that just 
[thinks] “I’ll get tested every 6 months or each year and I’ll 
test negative for everything” and then you suddenly receive 
a positive test result for HIV.” (Enschede, no. 7; non-user 
Testlab, HIV-positive). 
 
Another barrier for offering online HIV test results 
mentioned was “ostrich policy”. Some participants feared 
that men who receive a positive HIV test result online 
would not take the appropriate actions.  
 
“Yes, the biggest problem [with online HIV test results] is 
that people won’t take immediate action, that you won’t go 
to the STI-clinic immediately and that people won’t get 
treatment. And the biggest problem is ostrich policy. That 
you’re going to pretend it didn’t happen. That is not only a 
problem for the person that tested positive, but also for 
future sex partners.” (Amsterdam; no. 16; non-user 
TestLab, HIV-negative) 
 
C. Empathic versus informative style 
Most participants agreed that the informative style was 
more appropriate for test results for low impact STIs. 
 
“Yes, the shorter and the more factual, the better, I 
think.”(Amsterdam; no. 9; Testlab user; HIV-negative) 
 
Barriers perceived for the empathic test result for low 
impact STIs included aspects such as patronizing tone, 
overbearing and too dramatic.  
 
“Well, it already starts with, “maybe this news will upset 
you” that’s already a patronizing tone. And then “You must 
realise” [that it is a preliminary diagnosis]. Then I think to 
myself, of course you should realise this, but this […] is 
patronizing, not factual.” (Amsterdam; no. 9; Testlab user; 
HIV-negative).  
 
With regard to online test results for HIV, the participants‟ 
opinions differed from each other. There seems to be a 
slight preference for an empathic style. Some participants 
perceived the empathic test result to be more reassuring 
and personal than the informative test result. 
 
“This is friendlier. Because it says, “don’t be too upset” it 
gives some empathy that is nice to read, I think. Because 
that is what happens, it upsets you a bit reading that you’ve 
tested positive. And then you explain that it’s a preliminary 
diagnosis. Which comes across better than in the other 
[informative test result], I believe.” (Enschede, no. 9; non-
user Testlab, HIV-positive) 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Considering all motives and barriers mentioned by the 
participants, the first conclusion of this study is that the vast 
majority of the participants believe that Testlab should offer 
the possibility to receive specific test results online. 
Especially Testlab users and participants from Amsterdam 
and Rotterdam would like this option. A little more 
resistance was found among MSM from Enschede. The 
reason for this could lie in the fact that Testlab is not offered 
in Enschede. It is possible that, even though a general 
impression of the Testlab website was given, the MSM from 
Enschede found it difficult to imagine what it would be like 
to receive test results online.  
The answer to our first research question is twofold; the 
results showed a clear difference between the participants‟ 
perceptions of getting online results for gonorrhoea and for 
HIV. Even though barriers for putting specific test results 
online have been mentioned for all STIs, all Testlab users in 
this research thought it would be best if positive test results 
for gonorrhoea (and other STIs as syphilis and Chlamydia) 
are given online. For HIV test results both Testlab users and 
non-Testlab users mentioned more barriers. On the one 
hand, a large portion of participants believed that people 
should be given the choice to receive all test results specific, 
while on the other hand some participants believed people 
should be protected and therefore positive HIV test results 
should only be given face-to-face by a health professional. 
The answer to our first research question  
The results also show a difference in preference for a 
communication style between a diagnosis for gonorrhoea 
and an HIV diagnosis. The answer to the second research 
question is that the communication style is important for 
both diagnoses, but that an empathic style is preferred for an 
HIV-diagnosis and an informative style for a low impact 
STI. This is in line with the results from the literature study 
[10, 11]. Participants felt that a positive HIV test result 
should be more extensive than the result of a low impact 
STI. The main motive participants had for preferring 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

empathic communication is that they found it more personal 
and reassuring than the informative communication.  
Most motives for choosing informative communication 
of test results involved low impact STI test results. The 
empathic version was sometimes found overbearing in the 
case of a low impact STI diagnosis. The main motive for 
preferring the informative style was that the communication 
was short and factual. This was highly appreciated for low 
impact STI test results. The barriers were that the 
informative 
communication 
was 
less 
personal 
and 
reassuring than the empathic communication. 
Based on this study, it seems to be advisable to include 
the possibility to receive online test results for low impact 
STIs in self-tests as Testlab. However, providing online 
specific HIV test results raises several concerns. Since the 
men that we interviewed mentioned a number of barriers, 
but also some motives, we recommend doing more research 
before offering this possibility.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the Public Health Services of the 
municipalities Amsterdam, Rotterdam and Enschede and the 
outpatient HIV clinic Medisch Spectrum Twente for their 
help of recruiting seropositive MSM. A special thanks to 
Livia Kalma for interviewing half of the respondents and 
analyzing part of the data.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Stichting 
HIV 
Monitoring, 
“Monitoring 
of 
Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Infection in the Netherlands,” 
Academic Medical Centre of the University of Amsterdam, 
2010. 
[2] R. Koekebier “Internal evaluation report Testlab - De online 
soa en hiv test applicatie van MAN tot MAN. Een studie naar 
gebruik, effectiviteit en usability/acceptability, ” Amsterdam: 
GGD Amsterdam, 2009. 
[3] J. Grispen, M. Ickenroth, N. de Vries, G. Dinant, G. Ronda, 
and T. van der Weijden, “Improving behaviour in self-testing 
(IBIS): Study on frequency of use,consequences, information 
needs and use, and quality of currently available consumer 
information (protocol),” BMC Public Health,10, 2010, pp. 
453. 
[4] G. N. Colfax, J. S. Lehman, A. B. Bindman, E. Vittinghoff, 
K. Vrazniza, P. L. Fleming, et al., “What happened to home 
HIV test collection kits? Intent to use kits, actual use, and 
barriers to use among persons at riskfor HIV infection,” Aids 
Care, 14, 2002, pp. 675-682. 
[5] L. Frith, “HIV self-testing: a time to revise current policy,” 
The Lancet, 369, 2007, pp. 243-245. 
[6] A. Ryan, S. Greenfield, R. McManus, and S. Wilson, “Self-
care-has DIY gone too far?” British Journal of General 
Practice, 56, 2006, pp. 907-908. 
[7] G. Ronda, P. Portegijs, G. Dinant, F. Buntinx, R. Norg, and T. 
van der Weijden, “Use of diagnostic self-tests on body 
materials among Internet users in the Netherlands: prevalence 
and correlates of use,” BMC Public Health, 9 , 2009, pp. 100. 
[8] J. Grispen, G. D. Ronda, N. de Vries, and T. van der Weijden, 
“To test or not to test: A cross-sectional survey of the 
psychosocial determinants of self-testing forcholesterol, 
glucose, and HIV,” BMC Public Health, 11, 2011, pp. 112. 
[9] R. Buckman, “How to break bad news: A guide for health 
professionals,” Baltimore: John Hopkins Press, 1992. 
[10] T. Minichiello, D. Ling, and D. Ucci, “Breaking Bad News: A 
Practical Approach for the Hospitalist,” Journal of Hospital 
Medicine, 2(6), 2007, pp.  415-421. 
[11] W. Baile, R. Buckman, R. Lenzi, G. Glober, E. Beale, and A. 
Kudelka, “SPIKES -A Six-Step Protocol for Delivering Bad 
News: Application to the Patient with Cancer,” The 
Oncologist, 5, 2000, pp. 302-311. 
[12] J. de Wit, E. Das, and R. Vet, “What Works Best: Objective 
Statistics or a Personal Testimonial? An Assesment of the 
Persuasive Effects of Different Types of Message Evidence 
on Risk Perception,” Health Psychology, 27(1), 2008, pp. 
110-115. 
[13] L. 
Hinyard 
and 
 
M. 
Kreuter, 
“Using 
Narrative 
Communication as a Tool for Health Behavior Change: A 
Conceptual, Theoretical, and Empirical Overview. Health 
Education & Behavior, 34 (5), 2006, pp. 777-792. 
[14] E. Peters, I. Lipkus, and M. Diefenbach, “The Functions of 
Affect in Health Communications and in the Construction of 
Health Preferences,” Journal of Communication, 56, 2006, pp. 
140-162. 
[15] M. Green, “Narratives and Cancer Communication,” Journal 
of Communication, 56, 2006, pp. 163-183. 
[16] L. Block and P. Williams, “Undoing the Effects of Seizing 
and Freezing: Decreasing Defensive Processing of Personally 
Relevant Messages,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 
32 (4), 2002, pp. 803-833. 
[17] G. Kreps and L. Neuhauser, “New directions in eHealth 
communication: Opportunities and challenges,” Patient 
Education and Counseling , 78, 2010,  pp. 329-336. 
[18] G. Guest and A. J. Bunce, “How many interviews are 
enough? An experiment with data saturation and validity,” 
Field methods, 18(1), 2006, pp. 59-82. 
[19] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, “Research methods 
for business students (5 ed.),” Harlow: Pearson education. 
 
 
 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

