Online Information about Cancer Patient Pathways (CPP) in Norway
Heidi Gilstad
Health Informatics Research Group
Department of Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine
The Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU)
Trondheim, Norway
e-mai: heidi.gilstad@ntnu.no
Abstract—A Cancer Patient Pathways (CPP)- program was
implemented in Norway in January 2015. An important
emphasis of CPP is that the patient should be ensured
adequate information and involvement in relation to her/his
cancer diagnosis and treatment. Updated information about
CPPs in Norway is mainly available through two Web portals:
helsedirektoratet.no and helsenorge.no. With reference to
Critical
Discourse
Analysis
and
Fairclough’s
notions
knowledge
exchange
and
activity
exchange,
the
online
information about CPP is examined and discussed with an
emphasis on what characterizes the communication exchange.
The results show that the CPP online information has an
unclear addressee, and that there is more activity exchange
with directives to health personnel than knowledge exchange
with health facts to patients on both health portals. The
conclusion is that in order to develop targeted and adequate
online information, health authorities need to be aware of
citizens’ eHealth literacy.
Keywords- cancer patient pathways; CPP, critical discourse
analysis; CDA; communication exchange; knowledge exchange;
activity exchange; the ADIUVAT-model.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The research-based knowledge about of how eHealth will
influence healthcare delivery is limited. The potential of
using eHealth services for health information exchange
seems promising, since a large group of people can be
reached efficiently. However, there are important issues to
take
into
consideration
when
eHealth
is
adopted
in
healthcare, one of them being the digital divide [1].
Although eHealth has become widely available, accessible
and affordable, there is a cultural and social gap between
those who use the eHealth services and those who do not.
This divide, caused, for example, by a lack of infrastructure,
computer equipment, motivations or skills, affects the
society on an overall level. Even more importantly, the
eHealth literacy level of the citizens varies [2] [3] [4] [5]
[6]. While some are perfectly able to understand and apply
the information given, others are to be considered illiterate.
We should acknowledge that these mechanisms also might
have
unintentional
consequences
within
health.
The
problems related to the eHealth divide should therefore be
taken into account in the communication and information
distributed to patients of all diagnostic categories.
Healthcare authorities and healthcare institutions are
responsible for providing health information relevant to the
healthcare services they offer to the population and the
patients. But what characterizes health information? How
can we distinguish good quality health information from bad
quality health information? The objective of this paper is to
examine certain aspects of health information provided from
health authorities and health institutions concerning cancer
patient pathways (CPP). It is especially interesting to
analyze how existing information is presented and to whom.
The following research question guides the paper: What
characterizes the online information from the authorities
concerning the cancer patient pathways in Norway?
The expected outcome of this paper is threefold: 1)
knowledge about the discursive characteristics of the online
information about CPP from the Norwegian authorities
available for health personnel and for patients and their
caregivers,
2)
a
discussion
of
notions
from
Critical
Discourse Analysis as tools for analysing online health
information in general, 3) a model of the patients health
information pathway. The subsequent part of Section I
offers an introduction to the CPP program in Norway.
Section II presents the theoretical and analytical framework
of the paper, while Section III is the methodology section.
Section IV offers the analysis and results, and these are
discussed in Section V, where the ADIUVAT-model is also
suggested. Section VI contains concluding remarks.
A.The introduction of Cancer Patient Pathways in Norway.
Inspired
by Denmark, the
Norwegian Government
introduced Cancer Patient Pathways (CPP) (Norwegian:
“pakkeforløp for kreft”) in January 2015. The politically
decided introduction of 28 CPPs is expected to have an
impact on logistics and on information flow in patient care.
The purpose of the CPPs is that “cancer patients will
experience a
well-organized, coherent and
predictable
pathway
without
unnecessary,
non-medically
justified
delays
in
assessment,
diagnosis,
treatment
and
rehabilitation. An important aspect is that patients must be
ensured adequate information and involvement.” [7] [8] The
Directorate for Health emphasizes that it is a logistics
reform, and not new guidelines for diagnosis [9].
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

After 12 months of iterative implementation of 28 CPP
and 31 diagnostic guidelines in primary and specialist
healthcare, the overall experience is positive; the pathway is
more predicable for the patients and their next- of kins [9].
However, some issues are raised that indicate that there is
still room for improvement. One issue is that patients are
more focused on time, and tend to have time as a driving
force in their communication with healthcare. However, the
CPP does not reduce medically justified delays. Moreover,
experiences show that the bottlenecks in the CPP are
imaging, endoscopy, and pathology. This is in coherence
with the findings in Denmark [10]. This challenge calls for a
structural change in the respective departments as well as a
focus on communication across departments and towards
patients. Moreover, the transition between primary and
specialist healthcare is challenging, for example with regard
to the quality of referrals from the general practitioners.
Previously the GPs wrote a thorough description, whereas
now many write only “pakke” (package). Also, the lack of
coordinated data systems poses challenges. The use of
contract specialists and private actors makes routines and
information flow challenging due to different systems. The
procedures of coding are challenging for both doctors and
health secretaries due to different patient administration
systems. Moreover, the preparation of reports to aid in
improvement work is not yet initiated. Yet another issue is
the coordination of the pathway for the patient. The role of
the
pathway
coordinators
is
regarded
as
important.
However, experiences show that the teaching and training of
pathway coordinators and the definitions of their tasks are
not adequately established. Finally, there is a challenge with
regard to management, economy and redisposition of
resources since the government has not allocated more
financial support for the implementation of the reform.
The
glue
in
the
logistical
chain
of
the
CPP
is
communication and information flow. The Directorate of
Health [7] emphasizes the importance of involving the
patient and next-of-kin in decision-making throughout the
pathway. The patient is given the promise, and the right, to
be involved actively in the decision-making about own
health. Moreover, ethics in the communication i.e. “respect
and
empathy,
shall
be
maintained“.
In
addition,
the
Directorate of Health emphasizes that social aspects,
expectations and the “individual abilities” of the patient
shall be taken into consideration, and the pathway shall be
predictable at all stages. The promise, and right, to be
involved in decision-making, to be treated ethically, to be
addressed according to the individual health- and eHealth
literacy level and to experience a predictable pathway
demonstrates a good intention from the authorities about
patient-centeredness
in
healthcare.
But
what
are
the
implications of including patients in decision-making about
their own health? Decision- making is the situation where a
choice is made among many possible choice alternatives.
The task of making decisions about his/her own health
based on assessments of different alternatives requires an
understanding of what we can expect from the healthcare
system, and what kind of information is available at what
time during the patient pathway.
Inclusion of patients can be done through mainly two
ways of communication and information exchange. Firstly,
through face-to-face communication where the specific
condition of the patient is discussed and followed in
iterative
consultations,
and
secondly,
through
making
information available in a written form for patients to
consult to obtain knowledge about the condition in general
as well as with regard to the condition of the specific
patient. Subsequently, the online information available
about CPP in Norway is discussed in relation to analytic
notions from Critical Discourse Analysis.
II.
THE THEORETICAL AND ANALYTIC FRAMEWORK
A. Discourse Analysis
The theoretical and analytic framework for this project is
Discourse analysis. Discourse analysis is a perspective on
social life that contains both methodological and conceptual
elements [11]. There are various approaches to discourse
analysis depending on the object of study. This paper draws
on notions from Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) [12].
According to Fairclough [12], discourse analysis is based
on the assumption that language is an irreducible part of
social life, dialectically interconnected with other elements
of social life, so that social analysis and research always has
to take account of language. Social life can, and should, be
studied through a focus on language. CDA is concerned
with continuity and change at a structural level in society as
well as at a more narrow textual level. In this paper the
focus is on a textual level, with the point of departure that
texts are produced to bring changes in society, for example
in healthcare, education, politics and trade.
In the analysis of the online information about CPP we
make a distinction between two types of exchange in
communication: Knowledge exchange, that has a focus on
exchange of information, making claims, stating facts, and
activity exchange, that has a focus on activity, on people
doing things or getting people to do things (12). Based on
this distinction, we analyse online information about CPP
with the help of speech functions (for example instructions,
solicitations, statements, questions, demands and offers),
and look at what kind on sentence types are appearing (for
example interrogative, and
imperative sentences). The
generalized speech functions can again be distinguished into
speech acts. The speech function “Offer” could for example
include the speech acts promising, threatening and thanking,
while the speech function “Demand” would include for
example the speech acts ordering and requesting.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

III.
METHODOLOGY
A keyword search on “pakkeforløp” and “pakkeforløp for
kreft” was conducted. A list of hospitals, regional health
authorities, interest organisations and “other” linked to the
keyword appeared. The links were systematically examined,
and the content described. Also external links were mapped.
The majority of the institutions mentioned had brief
information about CPP, but linked to the Webpages
provided by the Directorate of Health for more information.
Some hospitals had developed their own information on
CPP, with overviews of CPP coordinators, leaders and
timeframes for each cancer type. Since the Web portals
from the Directorate of Health were linked to from most
institutions, there are expectations at hospitals all over the
country that the Directorate of Health should provide
adequate information about CPP. This is the reason why we
decided
to
study
the
content
on
CPP
available
at
helsedirektoratet.no and helsenorge.no more closely. In this
paper, the following data is studied: CPP online information
provided
by the
Directorate
of Health
including:
1)
Information at the health portal helsedirektoratet.no [13] and
2) Information at the health portal helsenorge.no [7].
Selected sections are studied in depth, and analyzed in a
CDA perspective.
IV.
ANALYSIS
A. Information about CPP in Norway available online
The online information is examined theoretically and
analytically through drawing on the following notions from
CDA; 1) addresser and addressee, and 2) knowledge
exchange versus activity exchange.
B.Addresser and addressee
The primary addresser of both helsedirektoratet.no and
helsenorge.no is the Directorate of Health.
Helsedirektoratet.no information concerning CPP has a
double addressee: first, GPs, healthcare professionals in
primary- and specialist healthcare, and secondly, patients.
The information for healthcare professionals as primary
addressee
is
for
example
the
contact
information
emphasizing that the GP and other healthcare professionals
can contact the Directorate via email address if they have
questions. In addition, topics of the Website are diagnostic
guidelines and the role of the CCP coordinator. On the same
page, there is a link called “CPP and patient information”.
The primary addressee is the healthcare professional who
can
subsequently
advice
the
patient
to
access
it
herself/himself.
The primary addressee at helsenorge.no is the patient.
Helsenorge.no is a health portal, and the idea is to gather
information relevant for the patients (for example general
health information, booking appointments, electronic health
record at hospitals (pilot in two regions), ePrescriptions,
referrals, deductibles, summary care record/ kjernejournal).
The information about CPP is found under the categories
diagnosis/cancer/CPP (updated 30.08.2015).
In the subsequent section we analyze the online health
information on CPP in two cases, respectively: Case 1:
assessment
of
selected
CPP
information
at
helsedirektoratet.no and Case 2 assessment of selected CPP
information at helsenorge.no.
C. Case 1: helsedirektoratet.no
The information on the Web portal helsedirektoratet.no
concerning
CPP
is
organized
in
the
following
main
categories: 1) Aim of CPP, 2) CPP and patient information,
3) Diagnostic guidelines- the role of the general practitioner
(GP), 4) Implementation of CPP, 5) Experiences from
Denmark and 6) Code Guidelines.
Category 2), “CPP and patient information”, links to
“general information for all CPPs”, which is the same
information as presented in the Action Plan and “general
patient
information
about
examination
for
suspected
cancer”. In addition, “CPP and patient information”, links to
information about all 28 types of cancer included in the CPP
program. The information on each cancer type is organized
with a) an introduction to the specific type of cancer, b) the
entrance to the CPP (risk groups, symptoms, referral to
CPP, decision about CPP, information and dialogue with the
patient, responsibility for the referral, registrations, pathway
times, c) examination about the cancer type, d) initial
treatment, e) follow-up and control, pathway times, e)
registrations of codes in the CPP (codes to be used at
examination, at biopsy, at transferal to another hospital, at
decision about initial treatment, at treatment, at the end of
the CPP). With reference to the analytic categories of
Fairclough [12], in the subsequent section we do an analysis
of the communication exchange in category 2) “CPP and
patient information”.
a) Lung cancer as an illustratve example
All information about the 28 cancer types is structured
similarly, so the information about lung cancer is used as an
illustrative example [14]. The link: “The introduction to
CPP for lung cancer” leads to the section on “General
information about lung cancer” which contains a brief
knowledge exchange, as manifest in for example the
following two sentences with statement of facts: ”Annually
around 2,900 are diagnosed with lung cancer. In 2012
respectively 1,600 men and 1,300 women were diagnosed.”
The factual statements are followed by an evaluation “The
prognosis is not good”, with a support of a new factual
statement: “Five years of relative survival is 19 % for
women and 13 % for men”. This worrying reading is
tentatively modified by a new statement of fact: “Modern
treatment resulted in somewhat better prognosis than
previously”. The next section “National action program” is
brief, and links to an action plan (broken link).
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

The subsequent section, “Pathway coordination” refers to
the coordination of the pathway. The main kind of
communication exchange here is activity exchange, as
exemplified in: “Coordination of the patient pathway shall
ensure effective pathways from the time the referral is
received by specialist health service until treatment is
started or CPP is concluded, without undue delay and with
close cooperation between all involved departments and
specialists.” This instruction, from the Directorate of Health
to all departments and specialists, gives directions about
how to proceed with CPP effectively and within an expected
timeframe. Subsequently, a new instruction is given, this
time specifically about how hospitals are expected to
coordinate the pathway: “All hospitals that investigate and
treat cancer should have course coordinators who have close
contact with the patient and involved agencies.” This is
followed by an instruction on who shall be in charge of the
particular CPP: “Pulmonary Physician will be the one that
formally starts CPP for lung cancer, and has a central role in
coordination
with
other
specialists.”
The
two
latter
instructions
concern
roles
and
responsibilities
professionally, and within and across institutions.
Also in the section “Multidisciplinary teams”, the activity
exchange is the primary communication exchange mode,
“All hospitals that treat lung cancer shall have regular
multidisciplinary decision-making meetings. At meetings
where lung surgery is considered, the lung specialist, the
thorax
surgeon,
the
oncologist,
the
radiologist,
the
pathologist, the nuclear medicine specialist and the pathway
coordinator
should
participate”.
This
demonstrates
an
expectation from the Directorate of Health about how the
respective hospitals should organize decision-making and
who are expected to participate. This requires thorough
coordination of clinical personnel, and puts demands on
their priorities. Interestingly, the patient is not mentioned.
This is followed by a knowledge exchange formulated as an
evaluation: “These meetings ensure quality control of
diagnosis and surgical treatment as well as planning of
further treatment.”
The section “Information and dialogue with the patient” is
also characterized by activity exchange, but is to a lesser
extent dominated by instructions and more characterized by
underlying values from the addresser as to how information
should be conveyed. Fairclough [12] claims that there is a
value-content in factual statements that links knowledge
exchange
to
activity
exchange.
When
promoting
information and dialogue with the patient as an important
tool in the CPP, the Directorate of Health expresses the
objective that patients and next-of kins should experience
good information, involvement, influence and dialogue
throughout the pathway. In an activity exchange, the
inclusion of the patient is not formulated as an instruction,
but a solicitation, expressed in present tense: “The patient
and the responsible doctor jointly decide the further
pathway”.
However, the expectation about the patients
being treated with respect and empathy is an instruction:
“The communication with the patients and their families
shall in all circumstances be based on respect and empathy.
Information and dialogue should take place in a considerate
way and be adapted to the recipient’s individual abilities
such as age, social situation, language, expressed wishes and
needs.” This instruction contains value-content about how
patient communication is best conducted, but does not really
specify what respect and empathy actually means in the
context. However, subsequently we read a value-content
solicitation about an aspect that the healthcare professional
should
emphasize
in
the
communication,
namely the
patients expectations throughout the pathway: “Further, the
communication
with
the
patient
should
include
a
clarification concerning expectations about the pathway,
including inclusion of patient and next-of kin”. Note that the
difference between the tense of the use of the verb shall and
should also indicates the difference between instruction and
solicitation here.
Finally, there are instructions about how communication
and
information
should
be:
«Communication
and
information shall be consistent and coordinated. As part of
the
communication,
the
patient
and
next-of-kin
shall
iteratively be involved and informed about examination
results and next step in the CPP.” The addressee of this
instruction is seemingly the coordinator since she is the one
that is appointed to have all coordination and overall contact
with the patient. The subsequent instruction is giving
directions to the hospital managements about how they
should organize for good communication: “The hospitals
shall, in cooperation with relevant patient organizations,
prepare for talks with authorized peers if the cancer patients
and/or the next-of-kins wish this.” The Directorate has
expectations
about
information
and
dialogue
that
accompanies
the
implementation
of
CPP,
but
with
unspecified criteria.
D. Case 2: helsenorge.no
The information online about CPP offered on the patient
health portal helsenorge.no is introduced with a section
concerning the goals of the CPP, i.e. that patients should
experience a complete and predictable pathway without
unnecessary delays caused by non-medical factors, and that
patients shall receive information and be involved.
The pathway coordinator is mentioned briefly as contact
point for the patients. The patients will be informed about a
telephone number to call for information. In addition, on the
right side of the Website, there is a telephone number, with
opening hours during daytime. The information emphasizes
that the results are being good so far, for example in keeping
the predefined time schedules.
Helsenorge.no information concerning CPP links to
information booklets for the 28 distinct types of cancer
included in the CPP-program. The booklets introduce the
respective CPP for the specific type of cancer with two
pages concerning the examination about cancer and the
phases for examination and treatment. Exanimation and
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

treatment is illustrated in a table as illustrated in Table 1,
where the expected time is particularly emphasized.
TABLE 1: ESTIMATED TIME IN EACH PHASE OF THE CPP
All information about the CPP diagnostic categories is
organized in the same way. Table 1 is an illustrative
example borrowed from the booklet on myelomatosis. The
table
emphasizes
knowledge
exchange
in
progress
description of the 3 different phases in the examination and
the estimated time frame (in days) for each phase. The
middle column contains comments. The first comment,
“The pathway coordinator makes sure that you will undergo
examinations in order to clarify if you have cancer or not”,
is an example activity exchange with a third party actor, the
coordinator. The primary addressee is the patient. However,
the indirect addressee here is the coordinator and the
healthcare institution that has the responsibility to provide
for this service.
The comments concerning phase 2, can be interpreted as
a mix between knowledge exchange and activity exchange:
depending on who the addressee is: “During this time frame
examinations will be done to decide whether you have
cancer or not. On suspicion of cancer you are examined by a
doctor. Blood tests, bone marrow tests, and different x-rays
are conducted. When the results are ready, usually it is
possible to decide whether you have cancer or not. If you
haven‘t got cancer, the CPP is terminated”. Here we can
identify a primary addressee; the patient, and an indirect
addressee; the institutions in charge of providing care. The
progress of the process is described. This is an example that
shows that the information can be regarded as knowledge
exchange to the primary addressee, the patient, as it explains
the rationale behind what is going to happen throughout the
pathway.
However,
to
the
indirect
addressee,
the
information
is
rather
activity
exchange,
and
gives
instructions
to
the
healthcare
professional
about
the
procedures throughout the CPP.
V.
DISCUSSION
We
have
seen
that
the
information
at
both
helsedirektoratet.no and helsenorge.no concerning CPP has
multiple addressees; the healthcare institutions concerned
with CPP, the healthcare professionals, including the
management and the CPP coordinators, and the patients. At
helsedirektoratet.no, the communication exchange about
coordination, roles and responsibilities is characterized by
activity exchange formulated as instructions concerning
roles and responsibilities professionally and within and
across institutions and expectations about multidisciplinary
competencies required for professional decision-making.
The communication exchange about the information with
the patients is characterized by values. There are examples
of instructions and solicitations containing value-content.
Moreover, there are instructions and expectations about
communicative
responsibilities,
but
with
unspecified
criteria. At helsenorge.no, the knowledge exchange is
characterized by the progress description and the estimation
of time as factual information about the procedures in
relation to the CPP. Whether the communication can be
interpreted as knowledge exchange or activity exchange
depends on the addressee: what can be interpreted as factual
knowledge
about
procedures
for
the
patient,
can
be
interpreted
as
activity
exchange
for
the
healthcare
professionals.
The theoretical terms from Critical Discourse Analysis
knowledge exchange and activity exchange are valuable for
analytically
identifying
what
characterizes
the
communication exchange of online health information. The
knowledge exchange is mainly relevant for expressing facts
concerning cancer and CPP to the patients. However, from
an analytic point of view, the term knowledge exchange is
context-dependent, since the content interpretation may
depend on who the main addressee is.
The activity
exchange is commonly used in the CPP information online,
both as instructions and solicitations to the healthcare
professionals and the institutions.
Online health information for the patients should be
presented according to the needs of the patients at the
different points in the pathway. Online information that pays
attention to the heterogeneity of the patient group may be
one of several measures to diminish the digital divide.
Factual and targeted health information at each step of the
pathway enables the patient to take part in decision-making,
and make informed choices.
Health authorities that are responsible for ensuring
adequate
health
information
and
communication,
and
consequently patients, would gain by taking the patient’s
eHealth literacies, i.e. prerequisites for and capabilities to
access,
understand
and
apply
online
information
[2][3][4][5][6], into consideration when developing health
information. Especially important is the consciousness
about what information and communication exchange is
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

relevant at what point during the pathway. Based on insights
from the analysis of the CPP communication exchange, and
informed by discussions on eHealth literacy (ibid), below is
suggestion of a model of the patients’ health information
pathway. The model is called ADIUVAT (lat: helps), an
acronym
based
on
the
patient’s
steps
to
finding,
understanding
and
taking
action
upon
the
health
information.
Figure 1: The ADIUVAT model
First, the citizen needs to know how to Access the
information. After having overcome that first obstacle, the
second step is to Decide whether the information is relevant
for solving the health question or not. This requires some
basic
knowledge
about
disease
and
medical
notions.
Thirdly, the citizen must Identify whether the content level
is right, if she/he is in the target group for the information
and if the terminology is known. The fourth, and maybe the
mort important step, is to actually Understand the content.
Although the citizen can understand the information on a
general level, she/he will probably not fully understand the
implications for her/his personal condition. Thus, as the fifth
step, she may need to Verify and qualitycheck the content
through communication with health personnel. Having
understood the content in relation to diagnostic results of the
personal condition, the sixth step would be to Accept the
diagnosis and the treatment, and finally to Take action
based on the information, for example by taking the
prescribed medication. Although being under development,
the ADIUVAT model may be used as a starting point for
discussions about what kind of information the patients need
at what point in the pathway.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The implementation of cancer patient pathways in the
hospitals in Norway was a politically decided top-down
process
from
the
Norwegian
authorities.
The
online
information, which mainly consists of instructions, is
perhaps a natural consequence of the top-down strategy, as
it mirrors the instructions from the political leadership.
Although the intentions of the Norwegian health authorities
are changes in the patient-provider relationship, moving
from a paternalistic towards a more participant model, this
brief analysis demonstrates that the linguistic style of the
online information is rather authoritarian.
The online
information about CPP would benefit by having more
clearly defined addressees, more knowledge exchange of
facts and more clearly defined visions and criteria for what
constitutes
high
quality
health
communication
and
information exchange. Patients, healthcare professionals and
healthcare institutions would profit of an overall and explicit
elaboration about the defined criteria of high quality health
communication
and
information
exchange
concerning
cancer patient pathways, not only with regard to online
information but also in verbal communication between
patients and professionals in face-to face consultations.
Knowledge-based and targeted information is an important
measure to reduce the digital divide.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
My gratitude goes to the Department of Neuroscience at NTNU
and to the Operation Room of the Future at St.Olavs Hospital for
providing resources to the postdoc project, and to Mikael Lyngstad
and David Bowie for their inspiration.
REFERENCES
[1]
Wangberg, Andreassen, Kummervold, Wynn, & Sørensen (2009).
Use of the internet for health purposes: trends in Norway 2000–2010.
Scandinavian journal of caring sciences.
[2]
Andreassen, Bujnowska-Fedak, Chronaki, Dumitru, Pudule, Santana,
Wynn. (2007). European citizens' use of E-health services: A study of
seven countries. BioMed Central Public health.
[3]
Gilstad. (2014) Toward a comprehensive model of eHealth literacy.
Toward
a
comprehensive
model
of
eHealth
literacy.
CEUR
Workshop Proceedings.
[4]
Monkman and Kushniruk (ACMI Fellow; CAHS Fellow) eHealth
literacy
issues,
constructs,
models,
and
methods
for
health
information technology design and evaluation, http://www.kmel-
journal.org/ojs/index.php/online-publication/article/view/514/281
[5]
Bautista(2015).From Solving a Health Problem to Achieving Qua
lity
of
Life:
Redefining
eHealth
Journal
of
Literacy
and
Technology, Volume 16, Number 2.
[6]
Norgaard, Furstrand, Klokker, Karnoe, Batterham, Kayser, Osborne
(2015): The e-health literacy framework: A conceptual framework
for characterizing e-health users and their interaction with e-health.
[7]
Helsenorge.no/sykdom/kreft/pakkeforlop-for-kreft. (2015)
[8]
Cancer Package Pathway (CPP). A general introduction for all CPPs,
Hdir 11/2014, https://helsedirektoratet.no/retningslinjer/pakkeforlop
[9]
Tveit, Hdir, Experience Conference CPP, 2015, Stjørdal.
[10] Dyrop, Safwat, Vedsted, Maretty-Nielsen, Hansen, Jørgensen, et al.
Cancer Patient Pathways shortens waiting times and accelerates the
diagnostic process of suspected sarcoma patients in Denmark. Health
Policy. 2013;113(1):110-7.
[11] Wood,
Kroger.(2000):
Doing
discourse
analysis:
Methods
for
studying action in talk and text. Thousand Oaks, CA, US: Sage
Publications, Inc
[12] Fairclough (2003): Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social
Research
[13] Directorate of Health (2015): CPP
https://helsedirektoratet.no/kreft/pakkeforlop-for-kreft and
[14]
Directorate of Health (2015): CPP Lung cancer,
https://helsedirektoratet.no/retningslinjer/pakkeforlop-for-lungekreft.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

