Assembling Goal Attainment and Collaboration  
Videoconference in Clinical Practice 
 
Anne Granstrøm Ekeland 
Norwegian Centre of Integrated Care and Telemedicine  
9038 University Hospital of Tromsø, Norway, and  
University of Tromsø, Department of Clinical Medicine 
Telemedicine and e-Health Research Group 
Email: Anne.granstrom.ekeland@telemed.no  
 
 
Abstract - Videoconferencing (VC) for clinical work at 
scale is underway at the University Hospital of North 
Norway (UNN) as a strategy to support the goals of 
integrated and coordinated care pathways and reduce 
secondary health care costs. A research project: 
“Modelling 
Videoconference 
Collaboration” 
was 
designed to investigate financial and social aspects 
following this development. The project primarily looks 
at collaboration between clinicians. This paper reports 
on the sociological aspects of the project where the 
overall objective is to explore emerging new models for 
clinical 
VC 
collaboration 
and 
analyze 
specified 
mechanisms involved in optimizing the potential of the 
service. In the paper I report results on the question: 
what theoretical resources are useful for addressing 
processes towards goal attainment and VC practices of 
collaboration? Based upon a review of scientific 
publications, policy documents and theoretical work, a 
summary of experiences with VC use in Norway is 
presented to identify results on goal attainment and 
collaboration practices. International findings are also 
briefly considered. Complexities concerning influences 
and goals were identified. This result is used to introduce 
and discuss theoretical approaches, arriving at the 
concept of assemblage for addressing complexity.  
Arguing for the use of this concept, the paper concludes 
with operational questions for further empirical 
exploration and analyses. 
 
Keywords-video-conference; 
goal 
attainment; 
clinical 
practice; collaboration and integration of care; theoretical 
resources 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Videoconferencing (VC) for clinical work as part of 
telemedicine services has been used at the University 
Hospital of North Norway (UNN) for approximately 25 
years [1]. During the last 5 years, measures to develop VC 
use at scale have been taken on  as a strategy both to support 
the goals of more integrated and coordinated care pathways 
and reduce secondary health care costs [2].   
The research project: “Modelling Videoconference 
Collaboration”, ongoing 2013 and 2014, is designed to 
investigate 
processes 
and 
outcomes 
through 
multi-
methodological approaches, including quantitative and 
qualitative methods. The overall objectives are to explore 
emerging new models for clinical VC collaboration and to 
analyze active mechanisms involved in optimizing the 
potential of the service, that is: the process of goal 
attainment. One half of the project addresses economic 
models and the other, which this paper derives from, 
examines socio-material models.  
In sociology, determining theoretical positions and 
resources normally form large portions of projects. Basic 
assumptions, research questions, analytical approaches and 
concepts are considered to be intertwined and parts of the 
production of results. Therefore, the first aim was to 
determine theoretical resources and specify analytical 
concepts. In the paper I present and discuss responses to the 
question: What theoretical resources are useful for 
addressing processes towards goal attainment and VC 
practices of collaboration?  
The resources are to be used for investigations and 
analyses of active mechanisms involved in goal attainment 
and collaborative processes, and to conceptualize socio-
material models of optimization of potential. This aim will 
involve empirical studies of ways collaboration and 
integration of care are co-produced, and made viable and 
sustainable in specific practices where videoconference is 
used.  
The paper is organized as follows: First, a section on 
methods and data for the theoretical considerations in this 
paper is presented. The following results section includes a 
presentation of published material on videoconferences, use, 
plans and anticipations in Norway, focusing on goal 
attainment and collaboration. Considering the results, 
theoretical approaches are then presented. I propose a 
concept of assemblages as a response to the findings of 
complexity of influences and goals in the research literature 
and documents. The discussion section addresses two 
questions: 1) how can goal attainment using information and 
communication technologies (ICTs) in health care be 
addressed? And 2) how can collaboration and integration of 
302
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

care be addressed? The paper concludes with questions and 
hypotheses for future work as well as data sources for the 
analyses of mechanisms and models for goal attainment, 
including collaboration.  
II. 
METHODS AND DATA 
The methods and data sources used for the sociological 
project reported here are as follows.  
 
Addressing Norwegian experiences, documents 
from the Regional Authorities of Helse Nord on 
videoconference use and priorities from 2005 were 
studied.  
 
A literature search was performed through Google 
Scholar using the terms “videoconference in 
clinical practice in Norway” and “videoconference 
use at UNN”. Selection criteria were peer reviewed 
international publications reporting experiences 
from utilization of telemedicine including VC, 
dating from 2005 onwards. Papers with a focus on 
priorities, goal attainment and collaboration were 
included. Full text papers were retrieved and 
studied.  
 
Recent Norwegian government documents on 
health care reforms were studied, focusing on 
integration, collaboration and use of ICT’s in 
health care.  
 
Peer reviewed scientific papers commenting on 
recent Norwegian reforms were studied.  
 
A literature search using PubMed was performed 
with the search term: “systematic review of use of 
videoconference in clinical practice”. Reviews 
addressing videoconference, collaboration and goal 
attainment were selected, retrieved and studied. 
 
The main focus in this paper is on developing 
theoretical resources and concepts. A selection of 
work on processes of utilization, collaboration and 
governing of ICT’s in innovation within the body 
of complexity studies was considered. This 
selection was substantiated through relevance for 
the subject area under study as argued in the paper.  
 
III. 
RESULTS 
In the results section, I present videoconference, its use in 
Norway, plans and assumptions as well as published results 
on goal attainment and collaboration.  
A. Video conference definition and use 
Although, in simple terms telemedicine refers to the 
delivery of medical and health services at a distance, there is 
no single or uniform telemedicine application. Telemedicine 
pertains to a dimension of distance that is bridged with the 
help of communications technologies, from Plain Old 
Telephone System (POTS) to satellite communications,  
ICT and networking technologies, such as the Internet,  and 
the Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) [3].  
   Video conference includes different technologies [4-6] 
making it a tool for collaboration between colleagues, 
education and remote patient consultation. Videoconference 
for clinical use is a synchronous service, indicating 
discussion of clinical questions with real time use of text, 
images, and video of the patient or wherever the patient may 
be present. The project I report on has its main focus on 
collegial 
collaboration. 
VC 
has 
undergone 
vast 
development, and today mobile units may be utilized by 
doctors for collegial discussion along with traditional VC 
studios or lecture halls equipped with large screens. The 
videoconference concept itself might be under pressure as 
technologies and use situations evolve [4].  
    In late 2005, the Northern Norway Regional Health 
Authority requested an evaluation of all tested telemedicine 
services in northern Norway to clarify which were suitable 
for large scale implementation. They developed a priority 
list of medical specialties and topics.  
    The first tier priorities were teleradiology, digital 
communication and integration of patient records, and 
education. The second priorities were teledialysis, pre-
hospital thrombolysis, telepsychiatry and teledermatology. 
The third priorities were pediatrics, district medical centers, 
tele-ophthalmology and tele-otorhinolaryngology. VC was 
one type of service discussed.  
      In 2011, a report on the use and potential for 
videoconferencing in Helse Nord was commissioned as an 
internal report. The report concluded that there is great 
potential for the scale and nature of videoconferencing to 
increase. The recommendations were on pragmatic and 
operational levels and included the establishment of a new 
in-house organization to lead future videoconferencing, 
probably requiring specific expertise and resources to be 
bought in from outside companies. Rejuvenating the 
infrastructure, providing a well-resourced Service and 
Support Centre and increasing future involvement of clinical 
staff at UNN was also proposed. Strategic support at senior 
level in the University Hospital was also considered 
essential if the vision of future widespread use of 
videoconferencing for health care was to be realized.  
    Two different kinds of clinical videoconference were 
described as possible concerning inpatients and outpatients. 
Examples of the former include staff consultations about 
patients who have been discharged from the main hospitals 
to the regional and local levels. Following discharge, 
hospital staff could carry out regular case conferences with 
local staff to ensure proper follow-up. This does not take 
place on any scale at present; however, some outpatient 
video consultation already does take place including activity 
in dermatology, orthopedics and surgery, especially with 
stoma. 
    The report described considerable potential in outpatient 
follow-up by videoconference. For example, there were 
approximately 115,000 outpatient visits to the UNN per 
year. By supposing that one-quarter were from remote areas 
where videoconferencing would be preferable to travel, and 
303
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

that one-quarter of these appointments were suitable for 
videoconferencing (e.g. follow-up or "outpatient control"), 
this would represent an additional 7000 conferences per 
year, i.e. this would double the present number of 
videoconferences, and would increase the number of patient 
consultations by about ten times. Considering the latter as a 
hypothetical statement, I will address experiences from 
Norway when it comes to optimizing potentials next. Are 
operational and pragmatic strategies considered successful? 
 
B. Goal attainment:  experiences 
    Three papers have commented directly on different 
conditions for goal attainment understood as increased use 
of ICT’s in health care for Norwegian services.  
    In psychiatry for instance, videoconferencing was mostly 
used for meetings, supervision and lectures, and to a lesser 
degree clinically with the patient present. Lack of 
videoconferencing equipment in collaborating institutions 
was identified as an inhibiting factor in use. A gap between 
the potential of videoconferencing and its actual utilization 
in Norway's mental health sector was described [7]. 
    One paper accentuated user support, training, research 
potential, financial incentives and interactions between 
clinicians and ICT personnel as important factors in 
motivating health-care personnel to use telemedicine [8]. 
In another paper, factors for successful implementation    
were: usability, user participation, adequacy of training, 
potential for research, stated requirements for Mean Time 
Between Failures (MTBF) and communication between ICT 
personnel and clinicians [1]. 
 
C. Collaboration 
Motivation 
and 
good 
communicative 
interaction 
between ICT personnel and clinicians were among the 
identified heterogeneous conditions for use. The Norwegian 
health care system is considered well-organized within its 
two main sectors; primary health and long-term care on one 
hand, and hospitals and specialist services on the other. 
However, the relationship between them lacks mediating 
structures. In 2003, the work of a governmental committee 
on collaboration was commented upon by Romøren et al 
[9]. The committee was described as having a sharp eye for 
the power game between primary and secondary health care, 
with the latter as the stronger. Their report argued for 
equalization as an important prerequisite for developing 
sound collaboration and coordination, and against primary 
economic or organizational reforms as effective means to 
optimize potentials in co-ordination and collaboration.  
The new health care reform, the Coordination Reform, is 
one initiative to ensure high quality services across sectors 
and between health care levels [2]. The Coordination 
Reform represents a shift in perspective away from the 
operational to the administrative level and appeals to the 
need for economic or organizational reforms in order to 
foster collaboration and quality. The reform also represents 
a shift towards a focus on collective goal attainment, for 
instance via care pathways, as opposed to internal goal 
attainment for specific sections or institutions of health care.   
In sum, goals of collaboration between the different 
sectors of health care, including strategies ranging from 
technological, operational, administrative, economic and 
organizational reforms were described, as well as challenges 
thereof. Active mechanisms for collaboration between 
different professionals and institutions will be further 
explored and conceptualized in the remaining phases of the 
project. 
Collaboration between colleagues within the same 
profession and institution could prove to be parts of another 
conceptual model. Since the 1960s, substantial development 
in the uses of video-conferencing (VC) among medical 
personnel has been reported, including surgeons who have 
adopted the technology [10]. VC is widely used for 
telementoring surgical procedures and in trauma and 
emergency medicine. VC is also used by multidisciplinary 
teams and for the follow-up of patients after surgery. VC is 
considered a common clinical tool for surgeons, providing a 
great opportunity to alter surgical practice and to offer 
patients the best expertise despite especially great distances 
in rural areas. 
A systematic review of inter professional collaboration 
(IPC) in health care reported that videoconferencing 
compared to audio conferencing in multidisciplinary case 
conferences showed mixed results. More rigorous, cluster 
randomized studies with an explicit focus on IPC and its 
measurement, were suggested to provide better evidence of 
the impact of practice-based IPC interventions on 
professional practice and healthcare outcomes. Studies 
should include qualitative methods to provide insight into 
how the interventions affect collaboration and how 
improved collaboration contributes to changes in outcomes 
[11]. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
1) How can goal attainment, using ICTs in health care be 
addressed? 2) How can collaboration and integration of care 
be addressed? As evident, the three papers discussing goal 
attainment consider use of telemedicine as a success in 
itself, and the authors discuss conditions for obtaining more 
use. Use is a necessary condition for goal attainment. Taken 
together, coordination, collaboration, ICTs, economic 
incentives, power relations, organizational reforms and 
motivation were suggested as influencing use and goal 
attainment. These are highly heterogeneous influences. 
In addition, collaboration and coordination seem to be 
considered both conditions for use and as parts of the goal. 
The impression from publications is that goal attainment 
and collaboration is intertwined, dependent parts of a 
complex array of factors, actors and relations, ranging from 
micro processes to overall political and economic decisions. 
In the next section theoretical resources are proposed and 
304
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

discussed for approaching and making sense of such 
complex arrays of factors influencing use of VC in health 
care and better collaboration for goal attainment. For this 
purpose, the concept of assemblage is explored after a short 
introduction to basic assumptions about ICTs and goal 
attainment within different theoretical perspectives.  
 
A. Basic assumptions in the studied literature: ICTs and 
goal attainment  
 “Integrated care” and “improved patient pathways” are 
two main goals set by political priority through the 
Coordination Reform. These goals include operational, 
technological, organizational and economic regulations to 
foster collaboration and integration. Videoconference in 
different technological versions is one of the tools 
considered.  
How clinical VC can contribute or be a means to achieve 
the goals involves complex processes. Processes of use, 
innovation and improvement have been considered with 
different basic assumptions of the roles and power of ICTs, 
their protocols and software standards:  
 
Information and communication technologies have 
become considered an institution into themselves 
by producing cognitive, normative and regulative 
effects in specific domains [12]. This view is 
stemming from Roger’s ideas about diffusion of 
innovations first published in the 1960’s [13]. This 
is a determinist view of technologies.  
 
Information and communication technologies have 
conversely been considered as both used and 
produced through and by the meaning that actors 
attribute to them in daily practices [14]. These are 
the social constructivist views, also pointing to 
individual actors or groups of actors and their 
motivations for use.  
 
Information and communication technologies  have 
also been considered tools used by authorities or 
industry for governing behavior and institutions 
[15]. These are the instrumentalist views of ICTs. 
 
B. Assemblages 
In the papers reporting experiences and the policy 
documents referred to above, ICTs are considered with partly 
contradictory assumptions according to the perspectives 
outlined above. According to the policy documents, they are 
described as one of many factors instrumentally influencing 
goals, as having inherent regulatory effects and as strategic 
instruments. A body of research different from the 
determinist, social constructivist and instrumentalist views, 
has developed a terminology to address such complexity.  
Some main characteristics from this body of research are 
described below, and their relevance for the empirical study 
to follow will then be discussed.  
In this body of research, ICTs are described as one 
influence in heterogeneous and dynamic assemblages 
stretching from micro to macro, gaining power to influence 
goal attainment in ever changing constellations. Power is 
considered to be an empirical question in such assemblages, 
resulting from ongoing transparent negotiations, subtle 
power games and/or material, mental or scientific resource 
allocation [16-19]. 
Assemblages comprise in various mixes and connections 
a plethora of actors such as professionals, political 
authorities, technical agencies, bureaucratic organizations, 
ICT providers, service firms, regulatory bodies, software 
engineering companies, and research centers, together with 
the technical, functional and normative components with 
which they run their transactions. In different and 
unpredictable manners, these influence the faith of goals. 
All these actors are subject to being strengthened, 
disappearing or changing due to the processes.  
An assemblage constitutes a loosely structured, ever 
evolving ecology of heterogeneous elements where 
boundaries and linkages among administrative bodies 
cannot be unequivocally fixed, tending to shift and drift in 
time. Assemblages are always ad hoc, thereby needing 
constant re-conceptualization. What seems to emerge as a 
distinctive feature of this institutional ecology is that 
coordination and execution of tasks are equally dependent 
on formal, normatively-based authority structures and on 
functional linkages and communication standards and 
protocols. The overall functioning of assemblages and the 
viability of the ecology itself are based as much on 
communications and functional relations as authority and 
norms [16].  
The regulatory and enforcement capabilities are thus 
considered to be equally embodied in formal laws and 
regulations, and into technical standards and devices 
brought about by the technology, while the share of the 
latter pair is constantly growing. The combination of 
technical standards and software codes with bureaucratic 
procedures and legal codes give rise to novel institutional 
arrangements and practices, where ICTs increasingly 
provide the implicit context for the performance of practices 
and the overall operation of the administrative agencies. 
One of the visible consequences is that normativity gets dis-
aggregated into specialized sub-assemblages [17]. Control 
over goal attainment is therefore an ongoing achievement 
and not predictable. 
These assumptions and concepts are underlying an 
approach to scientific inquiry submerged under the broad 
category of complexity studies in which  the ways 
individual roles, groups and organizations emerge, evolve 
and adapt to their environment are studied [20]. 
 
C. Assemblages for studying goal attainment and 
collaboration for integration of care 
Formative 
and 
naturalistic 
methodologies 
that 
acknowledge telemedicine as an ongoing collaborative 
achievement have been recommended for assessments [21].  
305
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Such approaches engage with stakeholders, including 
patients to produce and conceptualize new and effective 
telemedicine innovations. How may collaborating clinicians 
and patients be attended to in assemblages? Motivation was 
considered an important condition for use and this subject 
area will be addressed in the continued project. In recent 
social science work, the force and power of individual 
actors’ evaluative relations to their daily activities has been 
highlighted [22]. Efforts to define and make professional 
excellence viable are considered to provide the emotional 
energy necessary to support and domesticate positive 
innovations. Involvement by clinical staff, motivation and 
communication were considered as important conditions for 
use, and are also inherent to the goal.  
From the discussion above, the research questions for 
the second part of the sociological project can be more 
precisely defined: How are operational, technological, 
organizational and economic regulations, standards and 
reforms 
accommodated 
and 
reconfigured 
in 
daily 
collaboration using VC in clinical practices to obtain goals? 
How are improvements understood?  
In order to analyze mechanisms, the project will more 
specifically consider: 
 
Which actors and factors make up the 
practices? 
 
What are their motives? 
 
What and who are enrolled? 
 
What and who are excluded and why? 
 
Which support is gained from what/who? 
 
What 
opposition 
is 
encountered 
from 
whom/what? 
 
What is changed and how are new models of 
VC collaboration enacted? 
 
How are goals of collaboration and integration 
of care understood and conceptualized? 
By including accommodation in the question, the roles 
of individual actors, their knowledge and philosophies are 
acknowledged. These may vary between different actors and 
institutions. The research project therefore also addresses 
challenges and solutions of a philosophical character. Goals 
might be differently understood and the project will take 
into consideration different opinions and constructs.  
A few challenges concerning collaboration and quality 
goals are briefly considered here. By looking at the 
combination of operational, strategic, motivational and 
material influences, the questions asked point to a deeper 
challenge for health care, for instance as described by 
Timmermans & Berg [23, 24]. They consider the dualism 
between what has been conceptualized as humanist care and 
technological standards as crucial to balance for health 
services to be sustainable 
Such contradictions have been described between 
primary care and specialized services as units, and represent 
an underlying gap when it comes to collaboration. How may 
reconfiguration of standards in domestication processes 
reconcile the dualism between standardized care and 
humanized care? Contradictions in goals of humanizing care 
with the use of technologies, standards and structures in 
health care will be addressed in the project. 
A second challenge that will be addressed within this 
perspective is discussed by Sayer [22]. Reconciling the 
dualism between normativity and values on one hand, and 
reason may prove to be an active mechanism for obtaining a 
viable practice of integration and collaboration.The project 
will address such underlying philosophical issues in case 
they are made relevant for understanding active mechanisms 
involved in goal attainment of collaboration and integration. 
The agency in everyday evaluative actions relevant to 
motivation for collaboration will be discussed additionally. 
The question is to consider how collaboration and 
improved care pathways are performed and done beneficial 
to patients, nurses and doctors, taking all aspects, 
regulations, standards and reforms into consideration or not. 
The point is to explore how VC collaboration is performed 
in practices in ways that professionals and patients 
experience as good.  
In addition this continued project will take into 
consideration deeper philosophical contradictions described 
by Timmermans and Berg, and Sayer, as they affect or are 
affected in efforts to obtain goals.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
I conclude with questions, assumptions, hypotheses and 
data sources for future work. The questions that the 
discussion point to are: How are units and dualisms 
affected? What are the vital components of viable practices? 
My assumption is that units and dualisms will be reconciled 
in situations where collaboration is performed via VC in 
ways that professionals and patients experience as good. 
The hypothesis is that the approach of heterogeneous 
assemblages will sensitize such discussions. 
For the empirical study to come, a wide range of data will 
be collected from observations, interviews, local data bases 
and existing literature. The project will provide models of 
conditions under which VC works and where goals are 
considered as obtained. The collaboration models will 
include knowledge about what clinical areas, under which 
circumstances, and for which patients VC works according 
to goals. In addition, it will include knowledge about how 
goals are obtained, that is: what are the active mechanisms 
involved? It is underscored that use in itself is not   
necessarily 
considered 
a 
success 
and 
the 
users’ 
understanding of goal attainment will be described and 
discussed. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The project was funded by the North Norwegian Health 
Authorities 2013 and 2014. 
 
 
306
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

REFERENCES 
[1] Hartvigsen, G., et al. Challenges in telemedicine and eHealth: 
lessons learned from 20 years with telemedicine in Tromso. In 
MEDINFO 2007: Proceedings of the 12th World Congress on 
Health (Medical) Informatics: Building Sustainable Health 
Systems. 2007. IOS Press. 
[2] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, Report no. 
47 to the Storting. The Coordination Reform, Proper 
treatment - at the right place at the right time 2009, Ministry 
of Health and Care Services: Oslo, Norway. 
[3] Sood, S., et al., What is telemedicine? A collection of 104 
peer-reviewed perspectives and theoretical underpinnings. 
Telemed J E Health, 2007. 13(5): p. 573-90. 
[4] Al-Hadithy, N. and Ghosh, S., Smartphones and the plastic 
surgeon. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg, 2013. 66(6): p. 155-
61. 
[5] Edirippulige, S., et al., A systematic review of telemedicine 
services for residents in long term care facilities. J Telemed 
Telecare, 2013. 
[6] Paul, L.A., Hassija, C.M., and Clapp, J.D., Technological 
advances in the treatment of trauma: a review of promising 
practices. Behav Modif, 2012. 36(6): p. 897-923. 
[7] Hanssen, B., Wangberg, S.C., and Gammon, D., Use of 
videoconferencing in Norwegian psychiatry. Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare, 2007. 13(3): p. 130-135. 
[8] Norum, J., et al., Prioritisation of telemedicine services for 
large 
scale 
implementation 
in 
Norway. 
Journal 
of 
Telemedicine and Telecare, 2007. 13(4): p. 185-192. 
[9] Romøren, T.I., Torjesen, D.O., and Landmark, B., Promoting 
coordination in Norwegian health care. International Journal 
of Integrated Care, 2011. 11(Special 10th Anniversary 
Edition). 
[10] Augestad, K.M. and Lindsetmo, R.O., Overcoming distance: 
video-conferencing as a clinical and educational tool among 
surgeons. World Journal of Surgery, 2009. 33(7): p. 1356-
1365. 
[11] Zwarenstein, 
M., 
Goldman, 
J., 
and 
Reeves, 
S., 
Interprofessional collaboration: effects of practice-based 
interventions on professional practice and healthcare 
outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2009. 3. 
[12] Kallinikos, J., The consequences of information: Institutional 
implications of technological change. 2007: Edward Elgar 
Publishing. 
[13] Rogers, E.M., Diffusion of innovations. 2010: Simon and 
Schuster. 
[14] Bijker, W., Hughes, T.P., and Pinch, T., The Social 
Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions in the 
Sociology and History of Technology. 1987, Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
[15] Bertot, J.C., Jaeger, P.T., and Grimes, J.M., Using ICTs to 
create a culture of transparency: E-government and social 
media as openness and anti-corruption tools for societies. 
Government Information Quarterly, 2010. 27(3): p. 264-271. 
[16] Contini, F. and Lanzara, G.F., ICT and innovation in the 
public sector [Electronic book]: European studies in the 
making of e-government. 2009: Palgrave Macmillan. 
[17] Sassen, S., Territory, authority, rights: From medieval to 
global assemblages. Vol.7. 2006: Cambridge Univ Press. 
[18] Latour, B., Reassembling the social-an introduction to actor-
network-theory. Oxford University Press, Sep 2005. pp. 316.  
[19] Law, J., Notes on the theory of the actor-network: ordering, 
strategy, and heterogeneity. Systems Practice, 1992. 5(4): p. 
379-393. 
[20] Greenhalgh, T., et al., Diffusion of innovations in service 
organizations: systematic review and recommendations. 
Milbank Quarterly, 2004. 82(4): p. 581-629. 
[21] Ekeland, A.G., Bowes, A., and Flottorp, S., Methodologies for 
assessing telemedicine: A systematic review of reviews. 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 2011. 
[22] Sayer, A., Why things matter to people: Social science, values 
and ethical life. 2011: Cambridge University Press. 
[23] Timmermans, S. and Berg, M., The gold standard: The 
challenge of evidence-based medicine and standardization in 
health care. 2003: Temple University Press Philadelphia. 
[24] Timmermans, S., Berg, M., The practice of medical 
technology. Sociology of health & illness, 2003. 25(3): p. 97-
114. 
 
 
 
307
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

