Reference Design Model for a Smart e-Coach Recommendation System for Lifestyle
Support Based on ICT Technologies
1Ayan Chatterjee, 1Martin W. Gerdes, 1Andreas Prinz, 2Santiago G. Martinez, 2Anine Christine Medin
1Faculty of Engineering and Science
2Faculty of Health and Sports Sciences
University of Agder
Grimstad, Norway
e-mails: {ayan.chatterjee, martin.gerdes, andreas.prinz, santiago.martinez, anine.medin}@uia.no
Abstract—As acknowledged by the World Health Organization
(WHO), the demographic development shows that by 2030,
eight out of ten foremost causes of death will be connected to
risk conditions of lifestyle diseases, regardless of gender.
Chronic illness associated with modifiable lifestyle factors will
be accountable for the highest death worldwide. Health
behavior change should be given priority to avoid serious
damages. An Electronic Coach (e-Coach) system can empower
people to achieve a healthy lifestyle with early risk predictions
and appropriate tailored lifestyle recommendations. Research
in e-Health has the potential to provide methods to improve
personal healthcare with Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT). An Electronic Health (e-Health) virtual
coaching recommendation system can monitor people and
convey the appropriate recommendations to improve their
lifestyle and prevent against non-communicable or lifestyle
diseases.
This paper addresses the
potential
of
selected
emerging information and communication technologies to
make e-Health systems smarter, more collaborative, and more
efficient. As a result of the analysis, a reference design is
discussed here to develop and validate the performance of a
smart e-Coach system utilizing ICT, Internet of Things (IoT),
and Artificial Intelligence (AI) to provide individual lifestyle
recommendations aiming at a healthier lifestyle to prevent
obesity and overweight. The healthcare sector is still looking
for
collaborative,
user-friendly,
optimized,
cost-effective,
reliable
systems
for
health
e-Coaching
with
automatic,
meaningful,
empirical
evidence-based,
and
personalized
lifestyle recommendations. The focus is on this system’s
implementation
and
validation,
considering
obesity
and
overweight as a case study.
Keywords- e-Coach; e-Health; AI; IoT; Human-centered
design; ICT; Lifestyle diseases; Recommendation; Decision
support; Data security and privacy; Ethics; Ontology.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Globalization, rapid urbanization, poor dietary habits,
and a sedentary lifestyle negatively impact people’s health
across
the
globe,
affecting
people
from
different
socioeconomic groups. Key risk factors are excessive use of
alcohol, inappropriate nutrition, physical inactivity, surplus
consumption of salt, intake of saturated fat, smoking,
drinking of excess sugar-containing foods, and beverages.
All these factors can contribute extra weight gain, elevated
blood glucose level, high blood pressure, higher total
cholesterol in the blood, followed by different physiological
impacts
such
as
obesity,
cardiovascular
disease,
hypertension, and diabetes type II, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Non-communicable
or
lifestyle
diseases
are
the
most
common cause of death worldwide. It is the leading
unconditional probability of dying between ages 30 and 70
years [12]. ‘Obesity and overweight’ is one of the major
lifestyle diseases thsat lead to other health conditions, such
as Cardiovascular Diseases (CVDs), Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Diseases (COPDs), cancer, diabetes type II,
hypertension, and depression. It is a nutritional disorder and
represents an excess amount of energy storage as mass in the
body.
e-Health monitoring has become increasingly popular
providing ICT-based remote and timely care support to its
patients and healthcare providers. A health e-Coach system
is an interactive, secure, monitoring, and caregiving system
to produce automatic, meaningful, empirical evidence-based
and
personalized
lifestyle
recommendations
to
attain
personal
wellness
goals.
The
goals
are
achieved
by
maintaining a balance in social life, physical activities (such
as sleeping, exercising), eating, and daily stress level. The
conferred reference e-Coach model will capture personal,
physiological, activity (sleep pattern, exercise), nutrition
(fruits, vegetables, salads, energy drinks, and alcohol) and
contextual data (spatial, temporal and weather) from secure
wearable bluetooth enabled devices, manual interactions,
feedback, and customized questionnaires over time. The
collected time-series data will train machine learning models
for behavior analysis, early prediction of wellness trends and
risks.
Once the health risk is predicted, the e-Coach system will
produce lifestyle recommendations to target individuals to
improve their well-being, health, and physical performance
by determining
and
recommending
individual lifestyle
changes.
Emerging
e-Coach
systems
reveal
certain
limitations
in
terms
of
technologies,
quality,
and
performance. To overcome those limitations, an integrated
and collaborative e-Coach service is described, addressing
the cooperation of secure cloud-based fitness and well-being
services with the public health and the care infrastructure.
e-Health research helps us to solve e-Coach associated
challenges,
such
as
activity
and
wellness
status
determination, an ontology for e-Health information, the
selection
of
an
e-Coach
strategy,
the
generation
of
automated,
meaningful,
empirical,
evidence-based
and
personalized lifestyle recommendations and their automatic
assessment compared to a set goal. This study is deeply
focusing on what to coach and how to coach, including the
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

design, development, testing, and evaluation of observational
evidence-based, context-specific, and individual lifestyle
recommendations. Here, we have highlighted a reference
design model for e-Coach and recommendation generation
for obesity and overweight, and we are currently working on
its implementation and the validation phase.
A high-level reference design is presented in this paper
with special consideration of upcoming technologies, such as
data ontologies from Semantic Sensor Networks (SSN), IoT,
AI, Decision Support Systems (DSS), big data, data mining,
and Human-Computer Interaction (HCI). The objective of
the considered health e-Coach system, as illustrated in
Figure 5, can be summarized as follows: a) improve personal
healthcare with the help of ICT; b) deliver high quality,
evidence-based, secure, cost-effective, timely care to support
people for sustaining a healthy lifestyle; c) predict the health
risks and generation of risk alerts; d) ensure a rule for
personal data security, portability, and remote access; e)
normalize the heterogeneous format of personalized data
with appropriate e-Health ontology model; f) analyze human
psychology, human behavior and; g) follow defined medical
guidelines for the generation of lifestyle recommendations.
Figure 1.
Development of non-communicable or lifestyle diseases.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) The reference design model of an e-Coach system for
guiding obese and overweight people is described. It
provides smart and efficient supervision of participants
aiming at a healthier lifestyle within a highly secured
environment following the medical, security, and human-
centric design guidelines.
2)
Collection
of
necessary
personal,
physiological,
activity, nutrition, and context related data following data
governance.
3) Derivation of knowledge from raw data and e-Health
knowledge representation with ontology and reasoning.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In
Section II, we summarize the related work and highlight the
differences between our current and existing work. Section
III presents health e-Coach design factors. In Section IV, we
describe an e-Coach reference model for obesity and
overweight. The paper is concluded in Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK
Different projects have been conducted by different study
groups on health e-Coach to generate a personalized
recommendation plan for a healthy lifestyle. The idea is to
give remote care to participants with a suggestion for a
healthy diet and fitness plan to prevent obesity and obesity-
associated non-communicable diseases. Behavior and health
are strongly linked. Healthy eating and regular physical
activity can lead to a healthy lifestyle [1]. Having proper e-
Coaching
recommendation
plan
may
help
people
to
accomplish health goals to maintain healthy behavior.
Research projects have addressed the following two types of
recommendations approaching obesity:
(a.) food-based recommendations where a Machine
Learning (ML) algorithm with the experience sampling
method has been used to develop an interactive support
system for dietary recommendations. Sensors are used to
collect data related to state (emotion, social activity), context
(e.g., location, time, and weather), and collected data are sent
to a secured storage over the IoT infrastructure. After that, a
decision support system is developed to predict human
behavior and generate timely feedback for activity. It uses a
classification algorithm (decision tree approach) to warn
people against unhealthy food, and
a clustering algorithm
(Hierarchical Agglomerative) for profiling. It generates
feedback (passive feedback or cognitive behavioral therapy
or adaptive or active) with adaptive messages (intervention)
[4], including proper food suggestions, alerts for allergic or
harmful substances, recommendations for relaxation and
yoga [3]. The solution for feedback is either Short Message
Service (SMS) based, web-based, mobile application based,
or combined [4].
(b.) physical activity-based recommendations, where a
tracker has been maintained for daily step count, metabolic
equivalent of tasks, kilocalories, and distance to reduce
sedentary behavior. A healthy diet, enough physical activity
to ensure energy balance, not smoking, and limited alcohol
are four key factors to prevent obesity significantly. Data has
been captured over time and studied (data processing and
transformation, such as cleaning, formatting, pre-processing)
with ML algorithms to give feedback wheather the target is
achieved or not. Based on the result, the personalized and
predictive model recommends changing personal behavior,
daily routine, or diet plan [5].
Obesity may lead to social isolation or loneliness, or
depression [6], that may intensify the chance of premature
death. Demisris et al. [7] proposed a theoretical framework
for assessment and visualization of older adults’ wellness. It
is an enhanced screening platform for wellness and a
telehealth component captures vital signs and a customized
questionnaire. The system also incorporates a gait analysis
component. Based on the analysis of multiple health and
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

wellness parameters, the system aims to identify early trends
or patterns to help in health risk prediction for overweight
people,
and
recommends
a
wellness
solution
with
technological tools and techniques. The wellness parameters
of the system are physical well-being, social well-being, and
spiritual well-being. Gerdes et al. [2] proposed a holistic
concept of a coaching system for the Conceptualization of a
Personalized e-Coach for Wellness Promotion. The paper
describes a Continuous Process of Wellness Management
with a gap to complete the cycle for continuous process. The
gap is closed with a case study of obesity and overweight,
and the reference design model discussed here.
The identified gaps in current health e-Coach studies are
summarized as a lack of a.) context-specific empirical,
tailored recommendation; b.) medical guidelines to follow to
generate lifestyle recommendations; c.) personal, health, and
wellness data protection plan (security and accessibility); d.)
consent to recruit participants in the study as a part of fair
data economy; e.) human-centric designing (co-design, user
experience,
safety,
cost);
f.)
credibility
analysis;
g.)
complexity analysis; h.) methodology, guidelines, protocols,
i.) analysis of efficacy, sustainability, maturity, j.) proper
research (legal mobile apps and their data protection policy,
ligal
body
sensors,
or
actuators
to
collect
important
physiological data and storing them at unsafe storage); k.)
post-research participant’s data security plan.
Our study is focused on mitigating the gaps, as described
above, and transform distributed, heterogenous health and
wellness sensor data into meaningful information to build a
machine learning model for health risk prediction and to
generate an effective individualised recommendation in case
of obesity, as well as to turn it into a behavioural motivation
for an effective human-eCoach-interaction. The concept of
the Reference System for Telehealth and Telecare services
and System Architecture for Future Telehealth and Telecare
Services [8] has been extended here to design the health e-
Coach system to guide obese and overweight people.
III.
HEALTH E-COACH DESIGN FACTORS
In this section, we first describe the essential factors to be
considered
while
designing,
developing,
testing
and
validating the performance of a health e-Coach system to
achieve the research goal.
A.
Perspective
The reference digital health e-Coach system will capture
personal, physiological (blood pressure, heart rate, blood
cholesterol level, blood glucose, height, weight), contextual
(time, location, environment, ocial), and behavioral (physical
activity, nutrition, sleep) data over time from medically
approved
secure
wearable
sensors,
customized
questionnaires, manual interaction (interviewing), mobile
apps, and feedback forms. Data will be stored in a secure
storage and will be utilized to train a machine learning model
for behavior analysis and the early prediction of wellness
trends and risks, as illustrated in Figure 2. Once wellness
trends and health risks are predicted, the e-Coach system will
deliver
corresponding
alerts,
suggestions,
and
lifestyle
recommendations to its target individuals to improve their
well-being, health, and physical performance by determining
and
recommending
optimal
individual
lifestyle
factors
(example - healthy diet, regular exercise). The perspectives
of the discussed “health e-Coach” system here are to deliver
lifestyle
recommendations
to
prevent
obesity
and
overweight, and, thereby, help participants to lead a healthier
lifestyle to reduce the risk of chronic illness.
B.
Approach
We are going to follow the well-established design-
science-research
methodology
[9]
to
system
design,
development, and evaluation of the e-Coach system. The
overall tasks can be summarized as follows: (1.) systematic
literature review; (2.) design and development (feasibility
study, data collection, development of a recommendation
engine, e-Coaching through interaction); (3.) trial run; and
(4.) model evaluation with performance parameters (goal
achievement). The feasibility study includes (a.) what to
measure? [independent variables (e.g., demographics) and
dependent variables (e.g., BMI)]; (b.) how to measure?
[spending time to explore and find the right instruments and
methods]; (c.) type of data to be collected [personal,
physiological, contextual and behavioral] and determination
of data collection process; (d.) policy for the recruitment of
the participants; (e.) preparation of consent form; (f.) data
security and privacy - General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR); (g.) usage of a standard framework for e-Health
lifestyle recommendation and determination of health e-
Coach efficacy.
C.
Data Collection
Personal, physiological, contextual, nutrition, and activity
related data are most important in this study to determine the
wellness status and we are going to capture a selected set of
data in Table I from participants with minimal effort. The
frequency
of
data
collection
(personal,
physiological,
contextual, activity, nutrition), the specific target group to be
monitored, modelling of an SSN ontology, the appropriate
list of sensors and assessment tools, the development of a
gateway for data collection, storing of clean, normalized data
in the storage (as data volume will be high), and ensuring its
security are important. Management of data from continuous
observations, management of incomplete data is in focus, as
illustrated in Figure 3.
After the collection of necessary data, training, and cross-
validation of the machine learning model with appropriate
features for health risk prediction are important. The
selection of proper machine learning and deep learning
algorithms for time-series analysis of collected health and
wellnesss data and their comparative study concerning
accuracy score, classification report, the confusion matrix are
all important and need research focus for generating an
effective recommendation plan. Once risk prediction is
made, it is necessary to deliver alerts, recommendations, and
suggestions to the participants so that they can follow them.
This
requires
interactive
human-computer
interaction,
building trust about the system, integrating offline (human)
coaching psychology to the e-Coach, selection of an
effective recommendation plan, and improving it further.
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF TYPE OF DATA TO BE COLLECTED
Personal Data
Age,
gender,
mobile,
email,
postcode,
income,
education, social participation, medical history, food
preferences, habit, waist to hip ratio, smartphone app.
usage for behavioral tracking, internet connectivity
Physiological
Data
Blood pressure, heart rate, blood glucose, total blood
cholesterol, weight, height
Contextual
Data
Temporal and spatial data, weather data
Activity Data
Raw acceleration, energy expenditure, metabolic rate,
physical activity intensity, total steps, activity bouts,
sedentary bouts, sleep latency, total sleep time, sleep
efficiency
Duration of activity and non-activity
Nutrition Data
Intake of energy drinks, alcoholic beverages
Intake of core foods such as vegetables or fruits
Intake of discretionary foods such as unhealthy “junk
foods.”
eCoach platform
Case study: obesity and
overweight
e-Health
Experts
Suggestion, Preferences,
Feedback
EHR Data Collection
Decision
Support System
Wearable
Sensors
Questionnaire, Self-
Reported Data,
Preference Data
Physiological
Activity
Contextual
Personal
Nutrition
Define Data Collection
Frequency
Figure 2.
e-Coach overview of obesity and overweight.
D.
Secure Wearable Sensors and Data Security
Physiological and activity data are generally collected via
secure wearable devices. The wearable activity monitors are
connected with a smartphone or tab or computer via
bluetooth nearfield communication technology. Participants
will install a developed mobile application that will transfer
the collected activity and physiological data to a private
secured storage, in compliance with GDPR or similar.
Though
different
wearable
health
sensor
devices
are
available on the market, we need to choose only legal
devices. Wearable sensor devices should have regulated
access control policy, approval by the authorized medical
board (example, Food & Drug Administration (FDA), US) to
collect, process, and store health related personal data.
In our study, collected personal, physiological, activity,
nutrition, and contextual data, as described in Table I, will be
processed securely during transmission using encryption, and
there will be no possibility of information leakage. Transport
Layer Security (TLS), a Virtual Private Network (VPN),
authentication (form based, active directory, API key), and
authorization (access control) will be used in our model to
secure data during transmission and during storage. Data will
be
stored
at
a
secure
storage
with
Fast
Healthcare
Interoperability Resources (FHIR) standard and data will be
accessed with HTTP based REST API following an API key
authentication.
Figure 3.
Data collection from obese and overweight participants.
A dedicated platform will be used for collecting, storing,
analyzing, and sharing sensitive data in compliance with
privacy regulations (GDPR). The API key, access-control
list, two-layer authentication with form based authentication
(Unique User-id (UUID) or username and password), and
active directory security or RSA key are appreciated to
protect the system from illegitimate users.
Linking between unique user-id and personal identifiers
(such as name/email/phone/postcode) should be stored in a
secure environment, and there will be no clue to perform any
cross-identification or backtrack legal formulation of any
participant. In line with the participant’s consent or request,
information about the participants must be anonymized by
removing personal identifiers or deleted after the successful
deployment of the project.
E.
Knowledge Presentation
Integrating raw, unstructured, high volume data from
heterogeneous sources like wearable sensors, questionnaires,
mobile applications, interviewing, and creating a compact,
machine-understandable, structured, meaningful information
from it, is challenging. But, it is important to extract
knowledge from data in order to convey tailored lifestyle
recommendations.
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Semantic web is a concept and a group of technologies
that support the development of machine-interpretable data
and allows machines to process, explore, and analyze web
documents effectively. It has offered an universal framework
for describing data with common data formats, specifying
data about data with semantic web languages URI, XML/
XML schema, RDF, RDFS, OWL, RIF/ SWRL rules,
SPARQL, and assisting better knowledge representation,
advanced access, formal analysis of resources, uphold
standardization,
increase
interoperability
among
heterogeneous sources and networks, data integration, data
discovery, and situation awareness. The semantic sensor
network incubator group (SSN-XG) has developed an SSN
ontology to model sensor devices, systems, and processes
observations and to allow its network, sensors, and data to be
organized, installed, managed, queried, controlled through
high-level specification. It is a domain-independent ontology
[10].
OWL (defines what to write) processes web information
when RDF (defines how to write with triple-store-resource,
property and value) is used for describing. RDFS, which is
an extension to RDF, provides data-modeling and structured
vocabularies for RDF data. OWL (turtle syntax) with
SPARQL API (a query engine for querying and updating
RDF models using the SPARQL standards [13]. SPARQL is
a query language and a protocol for accessing RDF designed
by the W3C RDF data access working group. SPARQL
queries RDF graphs.), Protégé (an open-source ontology
development tool with OWL support), Apache Jena (a free
and open source Java framework for building semantic web,
linked
data
applications
and
extract
knowledge
from
ontology), SSN Ontology, which gives sensor descriptions
and
observations,
and
SNOMED-CT
(a
systemized
nomenclature of medicine since 1965 and designed as an
ontology and it is an organized list of a wide variety of
clinical terminology defined with unique codes namely ICD)
have all been used in our research to model the health e-
Coach ontology for the case study: obesity and overweight
and the same ontology modelling is beyond the scope of this
paper.
F.
Human-Centric Design
In our research, we will use human-centric approaches to
design and develop the desired health e-Coach system and
make it more usable, utilizing human factors or ergonomics
and
usability
learning
and
skills
[ISO
9241-210
-
Ergonomics of Human-Centered System Interaction]. A solid
user-centered design that will be used has been discussed
here. It follows a cyclic process of
1. plan 2. analyze 3.
design and 4. test and evaluate.
Accomplishing user-centered design is very challenging,
and it needs a comprehensive process, beginning with
planning, analyzing and closing with testing and improving it
further. Such a system can only be accomplished by putting
the user experience at the heart of the development process.
It is a process that places human needs and limitations at a
higher priority compared with other targets during design
thinking and implementation. To achieve a successful
human-centric
design,
designers
should
focus
on
the
following [10]:
a.) co-design; b.) define the problem that
needs to be solved well; c.) understand user characteristics
and needs; d.) perform research on user experience and
understand user behavior and impressions; e.) the developed
prototypes must be tested and validated by real users to
ensure
smooth
user
experience,
design
consistency,
reduction of learning effort, and building trust; f.) a
continuous
communication
between
user
and
the
designer/design to gain feedback to ensure further design
improvements; g.) the design should be shaped in the user’s
cognitive knowledge; h.) empathic system experience and
according to system development that users love to use daily.
We envision to integrate elements of the human process
of coaching in our research, such as feedback/ rating,
preference
sharing,
user-friendly
human-computer
interaction, intelligent interactive session, problem solving,
timely alert (SMS/e-Mail), wellness vision, motivational
suggestions, encouragement, assessing human psychology
and sentiment based on physiological and contextual data,
educating people to make the human-eCoach-interaction
effective for obesity recommendations. In human centered
design, all the human factors, social factors, and technology
factors intermingle together under the human activity
umbrella. The human centered design process will flow in
between
three
main
phases:
research,
prototype,
and
implement keeping human at the heart of the design.
G.
Requirement Framework
The subsequent technical requirement domains have to
be considered in the design, development, and evaluation of
the discussed health e-Coach system and its supporting
infrastructure components are as follows (Table II):
TABLE II. REQUIREMENT FRAMEWORK FOR E-COACH SYSTEM
Feasibility
Technical and financial feasibility study to ensure
what
to
measure,
how
to
measure,
resource
management, deadline, and risk management.
Scalability
The developed solution must support the expected
growth in participant numbers, services, and devices.
Data
Governance
The developed solution must ensure a fair data
economy; it must be trustworthy and allow the
implementation
of complex, distributed,
security
policies, and rules following GDPR.
Interoperability
The developed solution must be hosted in a secure
domain, but it will enable interactions with other
national,
international,
and
third-party
domains
securely.
Usability
The solution must include a co-design initiative to
increase its acceptability and error-free handling.
Reliability,
Robustness,
Availability
Collection and storing of the needed amount of health
and wellness data-keeping participant’s burden as low
as
possible,
data
security,
accurate
health
risk
prediction and real-time, meaningful, evidence-based,
context-specific,
personalized,
risk-free
lifestyle
recommendations will make the solution reliable.
Training
Proper training (digital literacy) should be provided to
increase error-free handling of the system and system
acceptability.
H.
Goal
The goals and focus of the discussed health e-Coach
system can be summarized as follows – a.) encourage co-
design; b.) creation of a compact, intelligible abstraction
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

from massive, raw, unstructured observations for health and
wellness data using e-Health ontology; c.) protection against
illegitimate access to the system and personal health records;
d.) collection of personal, physiological, activity, and
nutrition data to build a machine learning model for health
risk prediction and to understand if there is any negative
change in behavior pattern; e.) model automatic, meaningful,
and empirical evidence-based and personalized lifestyle
recommendations
to
achieve
health
wellness
goals.
Continuous monitoring of the willing participants and
evaluation of time-series monitoring data will produce detail
knowledge about the individual relation between nutrition,
activity, and Basal Metabolic Rate (BMI). Based on the
obtained knowledge, the lifestyle recommendations, as
depicted in Figure 4, with regards to nutrition and activity,
will be given to the participants to avoid obesity and
overweight.
Figure 4.
Recommendation plan for obesity and overweight.
IV.
PROPOSED MODEL DESCRIPTION AND RESULT
The holistic obesity and overweight e-Coach model is
based on the co-design initiative, and the participant is
located at its core. As illustrated in Figure 5, the complete
model is divided into seven components – 1.) formulation –
This includes: systematic literature review to gain complete
knowledge about obesity and overweight, its causing factors
and associated results, feasibility study (technical and
financial), defining what to coach and how to coach,
identification of needed data to be collected, defining
frequency of collection, and e-Health ontology design; 2.)
selection of participants – This includes: advertisement with
defined inclusion and exclusion criteria, consent preparation,
consent signing, training, participant’s account creation,
handover of wearable sensor devices; 3.) infrastructure –
This includes: the needed cloud infrastructure for data
collection (network elements, firewall, protocol, active
directory authentication, VPN) and secure database storage;
4.) data collection – This includes the collection of
physiological data, environmental contextual data, personal
data, activity data, and nutrition data from participants via
secure wearable sensors, manual interaction, interviews,
smartphone apps, feedback, and customized questionnaires
overtime at defined frequencies; 5.) decision support system
– This is needed to train a machine learning model for
behavior analysis, early prediction of wellness trends and
risks; 6.) e-Coach and recommendation plan – The e-Coach
system will help to model lifestyle recommendations to
achieve health wellness goals and will advise about physical
activity, nutrition, and other relevant factors for healthier
lifestyle coaching. The e-Coach system integrates a proper
recommendation plan that follows clinical guidelines; 7.)
human e-Coach interaction – This menas incorporating
elements of the human process of coaching,
such as
feedback/ rating, preference sharing, user-friendly human-
computer
interaction,
intelligent
chat
service,
problem
solving, timely alert (SMS/ e-Mail/ Voice), wellness vision
(physical/
social/
emotional/
spiritual),
motivational
suggestions, encouragement, assessing human psychology
and sentiment based on physiological and contextual data,
educating people to make the human-e-Coach-interaction
effective for lifestyle recommendations.
Health e-Coaching is a continuous process that collects
health and wellness data from participants continuously via
wearable clinically approved sensors, smartphone apps,
questionnaire over time and process them with AI algorithms
to predict health risk, behavioral pattern, change in habits,
random variation in lifestyle over a week/ month/ day-by-
day, and assessment of behavioral data to generate evidence-
based, real-time, context-based lifestyle recommendations,
suggestions, alerts and followed by, the evaluation of
individual goal. The role of ICT experts (researchers/
developers/ technology experts) is to design, develop, test,
and evaluate the performance of an e-Coach system in active
collaboration with health experts (nutritionists/ nurses/
physicians/ psychologists). The health experts help to design
and validate the rules for needed data collection, lifestyle
recommendations, health risk prediction, and determination
of vital physiological signs.
V.
CONCLUSION
We are working on the assumed hypothesis that ‘an
effective e-Coaching mechanism can prevent obesity and
overweight
with
automatic
generation
of
personalized
lifestyle recommendation.’ The data collection and lifestyle
recommendation process should neither create any side
effects nor any major discomfort to the participants. Hence,
researchers need to collect the maximum amount of personal,
physiological, activity, nutrition data with a minimum
amount of collection, and measurement overhead. The entire
measurement process should not be burdensome and, hence,
we are going to collect a listed set of data in Table I with the
participant’s consent. Integrating offline human coaching
psychology to an e-Coach, selection of an effective lifestyle
recommendation plan, and improving it further to reach the
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

convergence criteria of overweight to normal weight, is a
computationally hard problem. This reference design model
can be extended to e-Coach people against other lifestyle
diseases.
REFERENCES
[1]
H.
Rutjes,
M.
C.
Willemsen,
and
W.
A.
Ijsselsteijn,
“Understanding effective coaching on healthy lifestyle by
combining theory-and
data-driven
approaches”,
InPPT@
PERSUASIVE, pp. 116, 2016.
[2]
M.
Gerdes,
S.
Martinez,
and
D.
Tjondronegoro,
"Conceptualization of a personalized ecoach for wellness
promotion", In Proceedings of the 11th EAI International
Conference
on
Pervasive
Computing
Technologies
for
Healthcare, ACM, pp. 365-374, 2017.
[3]
A. Fadhil, “Towards Automatic and Personalised Mobile
Health
Interventions:
An
Interactive
Machine
Learning
Perspective”, arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01842, 2018.
[4]
S. Gerasimos, G. Weiss, B. Boh, L. Lemmens, and A. Roefs,
"Machine learning techniques in eating behavior e-coaching",
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 4, 645-659, 2017.
[5]
T. Bdijkhuis et. al, "Personalized physical activity coaching: a
machine learning approach", Sensors, vol. 2, 623, 2018.
[6]
L. Ellwardt, M. Aartsen, D. Deeg, and N. Steverink, "Does
loneliness mediate the relation between social support and
cognitive
functioning
in
later
life?", Social
science
&
medicine, pp. 116-124, 2013.
[7]
D. George, H. J. Thompson, B. Reeder, K. Wilamowska, and
O. Zaslavsky, "Using informatics to capture older adults’
wellness", International journal of medical informatics, vol.
11, pp. 232-241, 2013.
[8]
M. Gerdes, F. Reichert, J. P. Nytun, and R. Fensli, "Reference
design for smart collaborative telehealth and telecare services
based on iot technologies", International Conference on
Computational
Science
and
Computational
Intelligence
(CSCI), IEEE, pp. 817-820, 2015.
[9]
K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, M. A. Rothenberger, and S.
Chatterjee. "A design science research methodology for
information
systems
research", Journal
of
management
information systems, vol. 3, pp. 45-77, 2007.
[10] J. Giacomin, “What Is Human Centred Design?”, The Design
Journal, pp 606-623, 2014.
[11] N. Lasierra, A. Alesanco, D. O'Sullivan, and J. García. "An
autonomic ontology-based approach to manage information in
home-based scenarios: From theory to practice", Data &
Knowledge Engineering, pp.185-205, 2013.
[12] https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-
and-overweight, accessed March, 2020.
[13] https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/, accessed March, 2020.
[14] M. M Rodgers, V. M. Pai, and R. S. Conroy. "Recent
advances in wearable sensors for health monitoring", IEEE
Sensors Journal, no. 6, pp. 3119-3126, 2014.
[15] D. Siewiorek, A. Smailagic and A. Dey, “Architecture and
applications of virtual coaches”, Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 8, pp. 2472-2488, 2012.
[16] M. Wiesner and D. Pfeifer, “Health recommender systems:
concepts, requirements, technical basics and challenges”,
International journal of environmental research and public
health, vol. 3s, pp. 2580-2607, 2014.
[17] A.
Chatterjee,
M.
Gerdes,
and
S.
Martinez,
"eHealth
Initiatives for The Promotion of Healthy Lifestyle and Allied
Implementation Difficulties", IEEE International Conference
on
Wireless
and
Mobile
Computing,
Networking
and
Communications (WiMob), pp. 1-8, 2019.
Systematic literature review
and evidence synthesis
Case study: obesity and
overweight
Health professionals
Treatment rules
Identify target group
Seeks care against
Healthy
Overweight
Electronic Coaching
Paltform
Decision support
system (AI)
Human coaching
psychology
ICT- researcher,
developer
Creates
Integrates
Intervention
rules/plans
Develops
What to coach?
- Parameters
- Quality of life
Data collection
How to coach?
- Human computer
interaction
- eCoach strategy
Goal setting
(personalized)
Creates relevant goals
Uses
Technology
- Machine learning
- Deep learning
- Reinforcement learning
- Semantic ontology
Evaluation
Uses
Uses
Performs
Recommendation/
Feedback
Personalized, evidence Based
Figure 5.
Holistic obesity and overweight e-Coach model.
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

