Apnea Event Estimation During Sleep Using Polyvinylidene Fluoride Film 
 
Su Hwan Hwang, Hee Nam Yoon, Da Wun Jung and 
Kwang Suk Park 
Interdisciplinary Program of Bioengineering 
Seoul National University 
Seoul, Korea 
lostzoo@bmsil.snu.ac.kr 
Yu-Jin Lee and Do-Un Jeong 
Department of Neuropsychiatry and Center for Sleep and 
Chronobiology 
Seoul National University Hospital 
Seoul, Korea 
eugenie8199@hotmail.com
 
Abstract—This paper suggests an unconstrained method for 
sleep apnea event detection during sleep based on physiological 
signal from polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) sensor. Sleep 
apnea syndrome (SAS) is a common sleep-related breathing 
disorder and it is closely related with cardiovascular diseases. 
Polysomnography (PSG) is the gold standard for SAS 
diagnosis but it has many drawbacks. Six SAS patients 
participated in our study and patient’s respiratory signals 
during sleep were collected by a PVDF sensor which was 
installed on a bed. Sleep apnea events were detected using 
amplitude of measured respiration signals and the Apnea 
Hypopnea Index (AHI) results were compared with those from 
PSG. The Pearson correlation coefficient between paired 
results was 0.982 (p<0.001) and apnea severity of each patient 
was accurately assessed.  
Keywords-Sleep Apnea; PVDF film; Polysomonography 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Sleep apnea is a kind of sleep-related breathing disorders 
(SRBDs) which is characterized by repetitive abnormal 
interruption of breathing during sleep. About 4 % of adult 
men and 2% of adult women suffer from sleep apnea 
syndrome (SAS) [1]. Since SAS disrupts the sleep 
architecture of patients, it can lead to systemic hypertension 
[2], fatigue [3] and heart failure [4]. In addition, previous 
studies reported that sustained sleep apnea syndrome is 
associated with cardiovascular diseases [4], such as 
arrhythmia, ischaemic heart diseases. Continuous monitoring 
of apnea events during sleep can be a useful tool for the early 
detection and prevention of sleep apnea-related disorders. It 
is accompanied by improvement the quality of daily and the 
reduction of healthcare costs.  
In a traditional sleep and sleep-related disorder diagnostic 
system, polysomnography (PSG) is a representative method.  
Even though PSG has been regarded as the gold standard to 
diagnose and monitor SAS, there are some drawbacks. PSG 
recording during sleep provides a discomforting experience 
to patient because many electrodes are attached to the 
patient’s face and body. Moreover, it demanded specially 
trained sleep experts, relatively long set-up time, high costs 
and a controlled hospital environment.  
To overcome these disadvantages, there have been many 
alternative ways to detect SAS without PSG recoding. In 
previous studies, the electrocardiogram (ECG)-based method 
revealed that RR-interval- [5] or R-peak amplitude-based 
classification method [6] is feasible for apneic epoch 
determination. Also, respiratory-based or pulse oximetry-
based studies reported high correlation coefficient (r > 0.9) 
between AHI from PSG and suggested ones. Despite these 
attempts, dominant system for the unconstrained monitoring 
of sleep apnea still does not exist. 
Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) film is a piezoelectric 
polymer which is good for application where mechanical 
stress is being applied. This thin and flexible film is widely 
used for film transducer or speaker elements and specially 
applied where signal to noise requirements influence very 
low mass loading by the sensors. In previous studies, PVDF 
film was used as a sensor for recoding of respiration and 
heart rate [7] [8]. Although these studies have been made to 
non-intrusively measure subject’s physiological signals, the 
algorithm for apnea event detection from signals measured 
by PVDF sensor has rarely been studied.  
In this study, we established the unconstrained sleep 
apnea monitoring system using PVDF sensor and assessed 
the accuracy of our system compared to PSG. 
II. 
METHOD 
A. Subjects and PSG data 
Six SAS patients participated in our study. According to 
apnea and hypopnea index (AHI, events per hour), four 
patients showed severe severity and others were moderate 
severity. Sleep-related parameters of the patients were 
summarized in Table 1. Nocturnal PSG was conducted at 
Center for Sleep and Chronobiology, Seoul National 
University Hospital (SNUH). Patient’s PSG data were scored 
according to the guideline of R&K by registered 
polysomnograpghic physicians [9]. This procedure was 
approved by the institutional review board of SNUH, Seoul, 
Korea. 
TABLE I.  
SLEEP-RELATED PARAMETERS OF PATIENTS 
Parameter 
Value (mean ± S.D.) 
Gender (Male/Female) 
6/0 
Age (years) 
49.7±26.8 
BMI (kg/m2) 
26.8±3.2 
Total sleep time (minute) 
436.1±59.6 
Sleep Efficiency (%) 
88.1±6.2 
280
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Estimated AHI    
(events per hour)
Reference AHI     
 (events per hour)
 
 
Estimated vs. PSG
Y=X
n=6
R=0.982
p < 0.01
 
 
B. Respiration signal acqusition system 
Respiratory related signals of patients during sleep were 
measured using PVDF sensor. The PVDF film thickness was 
about 100 micrometer (part no.: 3-1004347-0, Measurement 
Specialties, Inc.) and it was installed between a bed mattress 
and the bed cover. To prevent damage to the sensor, thin 
silicon pad was placed on the PVDF sensor and its thickness 
was 1 millimeter. Consequently, total thickness of combined 
system was 1.1mm and it could keep the subject’s conscious 
awareness from sensor installation. The PVDF sensors were 
positioned under the patient’s back and they were composed 
4x1 arrays. Fig. 1 shows the actual sensor installation on the 
bed and the size of the combined system. During inspiration 
and expiration cycle, expanded or diminished volume of the 
body applies different levels of pressure to the PVDF sensor 
and output signals of the sensor are changed. Four channel 
signals from the sensors were collected simultaneously with 
PSG data using NI-DAQ 6221 (National Instruments, Austin, 
Texas). The sampling rate was 250Hz. 
 
C. Apnea event decision algorithm 
Apnea or hypopnea events during sleep were estimated 
from nocturnal data from the PVDF sensors. First, 
respiratory-related signals were derived from PVDF data by 
low-pass filtering (lower than 1 Hz). After filtering, to 
remove baseline wondering, detrended moving average 
technique was adopted. Each processed signal does or does 
not show the respiratory state because best contact channel 
changes depending on sleep posture or sleep period. So, 
principal component analysis (PCA) method was applied to 
each channel signal for best channel selection. Before PCA 
was applied, each channel of data was normalized to have 
zero mean and unit variance. The correlation coefficients 
between PC 1 and each channel signal were calculated and 
the data of channel that showed the highest correlation with 
PC 1 was selected. Amplitude of peaks of selected 
respiration signal was calculated using the self-developed 
peak detection algorithm. Apnea or hypopnea events were 
estimated when following criteria are met: 
 
Figure 1.  Sensor installation and size of combined system. 
 
TABLE II.  
RESTULS OF SAS SEVERITY AND AHI ESTIMATION 
Subject # 
Severity 
(PSG / Our Method) 
AHI 
(PSG / Our Method) 
1 
Severe / Severe 
46.0/48.9 
2 
Severe / Severe 
34.8/36.1 
3 
Moderate / Moderate 
21.5/21.0 
4 
Severe / Severe 
42.2/46.9 
5 
Severe / Severe 
33.5/38.9 
6 
Moderate / Moderate 
29.2/28.3 
Mean ± S.D. 
 
34.5±8.8 / 
36.7±10.7 
AHI (events per hour) severity;  
5-15: mild, 15-30: moderate, >30: Severe 
S.D. standard deviation 
 
1) Amplitude of respiration peak drops by >30% of 
average value of previous 7 peaks  
2) The duration of this drop occurs for a period lasting 
at least 10 seconds. 
 
These rules were determined according to the published 
manual for the scoring of sleep and associated events [9]. 
Finally, the apnea event estimation results were compared 
with the ones from PSG. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
As shown in Table 2, in all patient cases, apnea severity 
concordance was revealed by 6 of 6 subjects (100%). Mean 
AHIs from our methods and PSG were 36.7±10.7 (range: 
21.0-48.9) and 34.5±8.8 (range: 21.5-46.0) events per hour, 
respectively. The root mean square error (RMSE) between 
paired results was 3.2. In Fig. 2, AHI validation process 
between PSG and ours was evaluated by using the Pearson 
correlation coefficient and it was 0.982 (p < 0.001, paired 
sample t-test).  
In Fig. 3, agreement between AHI from PSG and ours was 
evaluated by using Bland-Altman method. In this figure, 
each black-dot was expressed in terms of the mean 
difference ± standard deviation between coupled results and 
all cases existed within 95% limits of agreement as dashed 
lines (2 x standard deviation). 
 
Figure 2.  Correlation coefficient between PSG-AHI and estimated AHI 
 
281
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

20
25
30
35
40
45
50
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Mean + 2*S.D.
Mean - 2*S.D.
(AHIPSG+AHIPVDF)/2
AHIPSG 
ㅡ
 AHI
PVDF
Mean
 
Figure 3.  A Blean-Alzman plot for AHI from PSG and proposed method.   
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this study, we assessed the unconstrained apnea event 
estimation method during sleep using the respiration signal 
measurement sensor. Apneic event estimation process was 
accomplished the following steps;  
 
1) respiratory signal extraction from PVDF data  
2) best contact channel selection  
3) apnea or hypopnea event decision algorithm. 
 
This sequential technique was applied to the patient’s PVDF 
data during sleep while they can even be unaware of the 
recording process. AHIs from the proposed method were 
compared with the ones from PSG and we demonstrated a 
strong 
correlation 
between 
paired 
results 
(r>0.98). 
Furthermore, apnea severity of all participations showed 
perfect concordance and root mean square error between 
PSG and ours was only 3.2%. Consequently, our apnea event 
estimation method for patients with sleep apnea syndrome 
was proved to be comparable to PSG. Because the suggested 
method is simple and do not disturb subject’s sleep, it can be 
used for long-term or ambulatory sleep apnea monitoring 
purpose.   
AHI estimation results from the suggested study were 
compared with commercial systems used in ambulatory 
purpose. For instance, a wrist-worn device that contains an 
optico-pneumatic sensor, arterial oxygen saturation sensor 
and actigraph was used to estimate the AHI during sleep [10]. 
Even though the wrist-worn device includes SaO2 signal that 
fully reflects the stop breathing, correlation coefficient 
between PSG and the suggested method was 0.87. Another 
example is NightWatch (NW) system that records eye 
movement, leg movement, SaO2, nasal-oral airflow, chest 
and abdominal wall motion, etc [11]. The correlation for 
AHI was 0.94 between NW and PSG and it is lower than 
those from our methods. However, to establish that the 
PVDF sensor and our method can be employed to estimate 
subject’s apneic events successfully during sleep, more data 
of sleep apnea patients or normal subjects will be verified.  
In our system, the PVDF sensors were composed of 4 
channels under the patient’s back position. During recordings, 
perpendicular vibration to the body which was induced 
respiration transfers to the sensor in horizontal direction 
through the bed mattress. Since the PVDF sensor has high 
sensitivity in a particular direction, sensor array was aligned 
horizontally long and narrow. By contrast, the sensitivity of 
PVDF sensor is poor in thickness direction. So, when 
patients slept with right or left lateral posture, apnea event 
estimation error was relatively high compared with that from 
other posture (supine and prone). In PVDF channel selection 
procedure, channel #1 and 2 were hardly selected as best 
contact channel. During the PSG, most of the time, patients 
slept with the pillows and there is a gap between the bed 
mattress and upper part of the body. Because upper body of 
patients was not fully contacted with the PVDF sensor, 
channel 1 and 2 were accompanied by a relative low signal 
to noise ratio and this is why these channels were not 
selected as best contact channel. 
In our study, as shown in the Fig. 3, the presented PVDF 
sensor-based apnea event detection method tended to 
overestimate the AHI for severe severity. For patients with 
moderate severity, RMSE between PSG-AHI and ours was 
only 0.7 and it was acceptable result. However, for severe 
severity, corresponding error was 3.9. The relatively high 
error from patients with severe severity occurred partly since 
our system estimated the respiratory signal drop as apnea 
events that not satisfy standard event scoring criteria. For 
patients with severe sleep apnea, other sleep-related 
breathing disorders (SRBD), such as snoring, upper airway 
obstruction and congestive heart failure, could occur during 
sleep and these SRBD can also affect the amplitude of 
respiratory signals [12]. Respiratory event related arousals 
(RERAs) during sleep may also influence respiration signal 
drop.  
In this paper, a reliable and unconstrained method to 
estimate the sleep apnea events was suggested. Using the 
PVDF sensor, apnea event estimation performance was 
obtained and its result was comparable to that of PSG. We 
speculate that the proposed method can be used for the 
continuous sleep apnea ambulatory monitoring system.  
   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Public Welfare & Safety 
Research 
Program 
through 
the 
National 
Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of 
Education, Science and Technology (No. 2012-0006551) 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Young, M. Palta, J. Dempsey, J. Skatrud, S. Weber, and S. 
Badr, "The Occurrence of Sleep-Disordered Breathing among 
Middle-Aged Adults," New. Engl. J. MED, vol. 328, Apr. 
1993, pp. 1230-1235. 
[2] P. Lavie, D. Silverberg, A. Oksenberg, and V. Hoffstein, 
"Obstructive sleep apnea and hypertension: from correlative 
to causative relationship," J. Clin. Hypertens (Greenwich), vol. 
3, Sep. 2001, pp. 296-301. 
[3] L. J. Epstein and J. W. Weiss, "Clinical consequences of 
obstructive sleep apnea," Seminars in Respiratory and Critical 
Care Medicine, vol. 19, 1998, pp. 123-132. 
[4] E. Shahar, C. W. Whitney, S.Redline, E. T. Lee, A. B. 
Newman, F. Javier Nieto, G. T. O’Connor, L. L. Boland, J. E. 
282
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Schwartz, and J. M. Samet,“Sleep-disordered breathing and 
cardiovascular disease: Cross-sectional results of the sleep 
heart health study,” Amer. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., vol. 163, 
Jan. 200, pp. 19–25. 
[5] B. Yilmaz, M. H. Asyali, E. Arikan, S. Yetkin, and F. Ozgen, 
"Sleep stage and obstructive apneaic epoch classification 
using single-lead ECG," Biomed Eng Online, vol. 9, 2010, pp. 
39. 
[6] J. Boyle, N. Bidargaddi, A. Sarela, and M. Karunanithi, 
"Automatic detection of respiration rate from ambulatory 
single-lead ECG," IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed, vol. 13,  
Nov. 2009, pp. 890-896. 
[7] J. Siivola, "New noninvasive piezoelectric transducer for 
recording of respiration, heart rate and body movements," 
Med Biol Eng Comput, vol. 27, Jul. 1989, pp. 423-5. 
[8] F. Wang, M. Tanaka, and S. Chonan, "Development of a 
PVDF piezopolymer sensor for unconstrained in-sleep 
cardiorespiratory monitoring," Journal of Intelligent Material 
Systems and Structures, vol. 14, Mar. 2003, pp. 185-190. 
[9] E. A. Wolpert, "A manual of standardized terminology, 
techniques and scoring system for sleep stages of human 
subjects," Archives of General Psychiatry, vol. 20, 1969, p. 
246. 
[10] N. T. Ayas, S. Pittman, M. MacDonald, and D. P. White, 
"Assessment of a wrist-worn device in the detection of 
obstructive sleep apnea," Sleep Med, vol. 4, Sep. 2003, pp. 
435-42. 
[11] D. P. White, T. J. Gibb, J. M. Wall, and P. R. Westbrook, 
"Assessment of Accuracy and Analysis Time of a Novel 
Device to Monitor Sleep and Breathing in the Home," Sleep, 
vol. 18, Feb. 1995, pp. 115-126. 
[12] M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, and W. C. Dement, Principles and 
practice of sleep medicine, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 
2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
283
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

