Patient Empowerment and New Citizen Roles through Telehealth Technologies 
The Early Stage 
Jane Clemensen,  
Aske Denning, Mette Atipei Craggs 
MedCom 
Odense, Denmark 
jcl@medcom.dk, ade@medcom.dk, mac@medcom.dk 
Janne Rasmussen 
Centre for Clinical Innovation 
Odense University Hospital 
Odense, Denmark 
janne.rasmussen2@ouh.regionsyddanmark.dk
 
 
Abstract - The aim of the present article is to explore the 
potential for citizens to gain new empowered roles 
through the use of health technology. The authors 
propose the distinction between citizen roles on two 
levels: the role of the citizen as patient actively involved 
in his own treatment and then an ‘extended citizen role’. 
Findings are based on a literature review combined with 
lessons learned from two telehealth projects currently 
running in Denmark. The authors find that the 
empowerment happens through information-sharing; 
offering the patients a visual overview of their course of 
treatment, 
letting 
the 
patients 
take 
their 
own 
measurements, and letting them provide verbal and 
written inputs. Finally, perspectives on communities of 
shared care and ‘ambient assisted living’ are discussed.  
  
Keywords - telehealth; patient involvement; telemedicine; home 
monitoring; citizen roles  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
When studying recent literature on the delivery of health 
services it becomes clear that health sectors all around the 
world are overburdened and under severe pressure. The 
demographic challenges faced by the aging nations of the 
developed world as well as the developing nations with a 
new, growing middle class, combined with the increasing 
need for treating chronic illnesses, imply that the relationship 
between citizens and their health sector is bound to change. 
The use of information and communications technology 
(ICT) in telehealth programs is a part of future health care, 
but in order to significantly reduce the burden of health 
sectors, citizens must know how to help themselves – and 
each other.  
The present article reflects upon experiences and 
potentials in terms of patient involvement from two 
telehealth projects carried out in Denmark, both of which 
rely partially on self-management, and discusses these 
experiences in relation to findings from the literature. The 
focus of the present article is telehealth technologies that are 
related to the ideal of ‘ambient assisted living’ as described 
later. The projects included are Tele Ulcer Care and 
DREAMING 
(elDeRly-friEndly 
Alarm 
handling 
and 
MonitorING). 
 Tele Ulcer Care demonstrates the use of ICT in the 
treatment of patients with diabetic foot ulcers. The project 
started as a research project in which video conferencing was 
used, i.e., synchronous treatment [1,2]. After the research 
phase, the project entered a development phase in which 
transferring images and notes via mobile phones and a web-
based ulcer record was introduced, i.e., asynchronous 
treatment involving the patient, the visiting nurse, and the 
ulcer specialist. During the development phase, a mini-
Health Technology Assessment (HTA) was produced [3] in 
which the benefits for the patient were established; reduced 
time spent on waiting and commuting, faster diagnosis and 
treatment, and fewer hospitalizations and visits to the 
outpatient clinic. The mini-HTA also states that the web-
based ulcer record allows for patient involvement in own 
treatment, which is discussed later. Currently, the project is 
demonstrating the asynchronous system at various sites in 
Denmark and is aiming for national implementation. 
DREAMING is a research project under the auspices of 
the European Union, which tests a range of welfare 
technology services in real life pilots in cooperation with 
public authorities under a randomized control trial. The 
project 
tests 
elderly-friendly 
alarm 
and 
monitoring 
technology in the citizens’ home. The technology consists of 
medical measuring equipment, environmental monitors, and 
video conferencing. The citizens included must be at least 65 
years old and suffer from diabetes, heart failure, or COPD 
(Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease).  The citizens take 
their own measurements, which are transmitted wirelessly to 
a portal accessible for the visiting nurses. The project is 
currently trialed at pilot sites in six European countries: 
Denmark, Sweden, Germany, Estonia, Italy, and Spain.  
The two projects are at different stages in their life 
cycles: Tele Ulcer Care has been through its research and 
development phases and is currently demonstrating the 
technology as the final step before national implementation, 
while the DREAMING project is currently collecting its 
initial research results. Note also that the projects are 
primarily relying on tele-monitoring and are not examples of 
self-management in its full form. Despite these factors both 
projects present relevant experiences and elements of patient 
empowerment and self-care, and the authors believe that the 
projects teach us some important lessons in terms of 
technology and patient roles, that are relevant for future self-
management projects. Finally, the projects differ in the 
degree to which they are currently relying on patient 
empowerment. This will be discussed later.  
In terms of citizen roles, this article suggests 
distinguishing between two levels: the first level is the 
114
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

citizen as a patient actively involved in his own treatment, 
the second level is the citizen as actively involved in the 
general delivery of health care services to the social 
environment, e.g., a senior community or a virtual network, 
in which the citizen lives. This level is what we call ‘the 
extended citizen role’. The first level is very present and 
widely discussed in published literature, while the second 
level is a somewhat novel, undocumented idea, but 
nonetheless an important perspective that can help us 
imagine how the future of health care might look like. 
The aim of this article is to explore the potential for 
citizens to gain new empowered roles through the use of 
telehealth technology. The following section is based on a 
literature review in which these questions are attempted 
answered: How does telehealth technology influence the way 
health care services are delivered in terms of the patient’s 
role? What barriers and issues are important to keep in mind 
when attempting to empower the patient? 
Section II outlines research on telehealth and patient 
involvement. Section III describes the methods used in the 
research of the present article. Section IV presents results 
from the two projects Tele Ulcer Care and DREAMING and 
Section V discusses these results in relation with the findings 
of Section II. Section VI draws conclusions from this 
discussion, and finally, in Section VII, perspectives beyond 
the scope of the present article are presented. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Telehealth, including telemedicine, programs are feasible 
for the education and involvement of patients in their own 
illness and for motivating them to engage in self-monitoring 
[4-7]. ICT in general allows for a more interactive patient-
provider relationship based on information-sharing [8]. For 
instance in ulcer care, appropriate information about options, 
benefits, and risks, helps the patient make better decisions in 
daily, or even acute, self-treatment [9,10]. Note however, 
that others have documented that telemedicine does not 
necessarily facilitate self-care [11].  
Studies have shown that patient education has the 
potential to improve the quality of care, including improving 
patient satisfaction with the treatment [9,12,13] and 
enhancing the patient’s access to information [13,14], sense 
of control [5,14] and quality of life [15]. Other studies have 
documented improved patient-provider relationship (despite 
a decrease in the amount of personal contact) [5,6] and 
reductions in the number of readmissions [15] as well as in 
the duration of face-to-face consultations [9] due to patients’ 
better understanding of their illness.  
Particularly synchronous telehealth, i.e., tele-consultation 
using video-communication, allows for a dialogue between 
e.g., patient, visiting nurse, and expert, through which the 
patient becomes empowered and more actively involved in 
the planning of his or her care [10,16]. Asynchronous 
telehealth (e.g., utilizing and transferring digital images in 
ulcer care), on the other hand, results in easily accessible 
visual data that allow patients to follow the progress of their 
treatment, which gives a significant psychological boost 
[17]. Involving the patient is beneficial for the providing 
organization as well; including the patient’s perspectives in 
the telehealth program improves the implementation of such 
programs, since it allows for continuous adjustments [14]. 
Certain barriers to patient involvement have been 
identified: the need for training and getting used to 
communicating via e.g., video, which lacks the natural flow 
of face-to-face communication [16], hesitation towards self-
care due to unfamiliarity with the technology [18], 
inadequate video quality and internet connections [7], and 
finally, impairments of vision, hearing, psychomotor skills, 
and cognitive skills, esp. with elderly patients [15].  
Although some studies document patients’ enthusiasm 
about the new technology [4,14], patient involvement is 
crucial in overcoming potential opposition towards the 
technology, and studies show that the longer patients have 
been involved in a telehealth project, the more likely they are 
to accept the technology [10,12]. Note that it is crucial to 
identify the personal characteristics of the target patient, e.g., 
urban/rural, young/old, since these will give an indication of 
potential patient-barriers to unfamiliar technology [19]. 
Since the target group of many telehealth programs is the 
elderly population who often have special needs when it 
comes to home care, it is especially important that these 
citizens and their daily lives are involved in the planning of 
care. Generally, it should be recognized that when care takes 
place in the patient’s home, it must be carried out on the 
patient’s terms [20]. In one study, it is stated that patients are 
of the opinion that home hospitalization results in an easier 
and quicker return to everyday life both physically and 
mentally [21]. 
There are a number of ethical issues to consider in 
telehealth programs, some of which are related to the 
empowerment of the patient: privacy of information, 
informed consent, the accessibility and usability of the 
technology, and the danger of making patients too dependent 
on technological support instead of making them more 
autonomous [22]. 
The project MethoTelemed has published the manual 
Model for ASsessment of Telemedicine (MAST) [23] in 
which issues and perspectives relevant for the evaluation of 
telemedicine programs are outlined. The MAST manual 
considers patient empowerment a sub-topic to ‘patient 
perspectives’, which mainly focuses on patient satisfaction 
and perception. In general, the manual only briefly discusses 
the concept of patient empowerment and focuses mainly on 
the delivery of health care services, instead of the patient’s 
active involvement in these services. Further, a gap in the 
literature on this topic is also revealed. The MAST manual 
does however include aspects that are central to the present 
article: The patient’s relatives’ perceptions of telemedicine, 
changes in the patient’s role in social life, and changes in the 
way responsibility is allocated. 
The present article focuses on the potential of patient 
empowerment in order to contribute to the debate on the 
future of health care and the role of the individual citizen. 
III. 
METHODS 
The present article applies findings from the literature to 
the experience and lessons learned from two telehealth 
projects, Tele Ulcer Care and DREAMING. The emerging 
115
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

perspectives are then analyzed in relation to the theme of the 
‘two levels of citizen involvement’. 
The literature used was found in the databases ACM 
Digital Library, Cochrane Library, CSA Illumina, Ovid 
Medline, and PubMed. We used the following search 
strategy: (telemedic* OR telehealth OR telecare) AND (“self 
care” OR “self treatment” OR “patient involvement” OR 
“patient empowerment”), and ended up with approx. 30 
articles of significant relevance. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Tele Ulcer Care is founded on the research of [1,2,24] 
who used participatory design methods, field observations, 
semi structured interviews, focus groups, and qualitative 
analysis of transcriptions of telemedical consultations to 
investigate experiences with telemedical treatment. The 
authors propose a joint treatment between the expert, the 
visiting nurse, and the patient, and they find that 
telemedicine improves the specialist’s basis for decision, and 
enhances the confidence and the satisfaction for both the 
patients and the visiting nurses. 
 
As mentioned above, we distinguish between two levels 
of patient involvement: 1) involvement in own treatment and 
2) the extended citizen role. In terms of patient involvement 
on the first level, Tele Ulcer Care has experience which 
sheds light on this aspect: Firstly, the joint care between 
patient, visiting nurse, and expert, whether it is through video 
conference, transfer of digital images, or communication via 
an electronic record, allows for the patient to learn more 
about his own illness and which precautions to take without 
physically having to seek expert advice. Secondly, the 
patients perceive, to a great extent, the applied technology (a 
web browser and a mobile phone or video conference 
equipment) to be simple and familiar, which is essential in 
patient involvement. Finally, since foot ulcers can cause 
social stigma, the patient is likely to be interested in being in 
charge of his own life as much as possible and to reduce the 
extent to which he is perceived as being ‘ill’. In terms of the 
extended citizen role, Tele Ulcer Care has no experience yet, 
but there is a potential as discussed in the next section. 
In the DREAMING project, the citizens are involved at 
both of the two before mentioned levels. At the first level, 
involvement in the citizen’s own treatment takes place from 
the moment he enters the project. In terms of the second 
level, the technology included in the project opens up for the 
possibility of creating an ‘ambient assisted living’ (AAL) 
society like the one described in the next section. 
Lessons learned in the project so far have shown that 
when introducing the technology to elderly citizens, 
appropriate training and involvement in the process promotes 
a positive attitude towards the technology. This experience 
has also been described in [25] along with challenges and 
lessons learned in other areas within the project. Thus, the 
DREAMING project has acquired important knowledge 
about how to successfully bring together the elderly and the 
technology. After having become involved in the project, the 
citizens see how the project will benefit them and want to be 
empowered through the technology. Furthermore, they do 
not find the technology intrusive, but clearly feel safer with 
the technology in their home than without.  
At an early stage of the project, the first Danish citizen 
included in DREAMING had the technology installed in her 
home on a small, isolated island. Despite her previous 
occupation as the head of the island’s post and ferry office, 
this particular citizen had never used a computer in her life 
and always wrote down everything using pen and paper. 
However, after instructions from the project team, she had no 
difficulty using the equipment and was happy to avoid some 
of the time consuming trips to her doctor on the mainland 
[26]. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
One way to realize the concept of patient empowerment, 
i.e., allowing the citizen to undertake some of the visiting 
nurse’s former tasks, is to create ambient assisted living-
spaces where self-care technologies are integrated in the 
citizen’s daily life in a non-intrusive way. Self-care is made 
easier if the technology utilized is already familiar to the 
citizen and even easier still if the technology is integrated 
into other familiar, non-technological objects. An AAL-
space could be the citizen’s home, or it could be a senior 
community, or even village, where the inhabitants all have 
social roles to fulfill and are empowered in such a way that 
they are capable of helping each other in their respective 
management of care. In an AAL-environment, the citizen is 
autonomous, but never isolated. 
In Tele Ulcer Care, the visiting nurse is currently 
responsible for treating the patients’ ulcers, taking pictures of 
the ulcers with her mobile phone, and uploading the pictures 
along with any additional notes to a web-based ulcer record 
accessible to the ulcer specialists at the hospital and to the 
general practitioners (GP). The ulcer record works as a 
platform of communication between the patients and the 
health professionals, and the patient himself and his relatives 
can also gain access to the patient’s personal data in the ulcer 
record and this is where the project includes elements of 
patient empowerment: The patient can keep track of his 
treatment and the healing (or deterioration) of the ulcers. It is 
then interesting to note that although findings from the 
literature supports the idea that telehealth motivates the 
patients to be actively involved, Tele Ulcer Care’s mini-HTA 
states that the patients’ request for gaining access to their 
personal data in the ulcer record was not as present as 
expected. A possible explanation might be that we as patients 
have yet to get used to the idea that we have the authority to 
be more than just passive receivers of health care services. 
Another explanation for the degree of patient motivation 
might be whether the telehealth technologies are perceived 
by the patient as being user friendly. Note however that since 
2009, as can be seen in Fig. 1, the number of notes uploaded 
to the electronic ulcer record by the patients has increased 
gradually. This might indicate that appropriate training and 
enough time to get familiarized with the technology can 
facilitate patient involvement. 
The research on which Tele Ulcer Care is based found 
that telemedicine has the potential to bridge the gap between 
the medical experts (i.e., doctors and/or nurses at the  
116
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Patient 
Visiting 
nurse 
 
Medical 
expert 
Patient 
Visiting 
nurse 
Medical 
expert 
Traditional treatment 
Telemedicine/-health 
Figure 1. Development in the number of patient notes uploaded. 
Source: Dansk Telemedicin. 
 
hospitals) and the visiting nurses treating the patients in the 
sense that the triangle of patient, visiting nurse, and medical 
expert is completed (Fig. 2). This might be perceived as 
leaving the patient out of discussions on his treatment but it 
has quite the opposite effect: Instead of having to act as the 
intermediary between expert and visiting nurse, i.e., having 
to answer questions about the treatment, which the patient 
might feel insecure about, the completed triangle ensures that 
he no longer has to worry about the communication between 
expert and visiting nurse. Instead, he can assume the role of 
the patient that is actively involved in a three-way dialogue, 
knowing that his inputs are valuable in the course of 
treatment and that they are received by both the expert and 
the visiting nurse. The asynchronous telemedicine system of 
transferring images and notes, currently demonstrated in the 
project, has the potential of further enhancing the level of 
patient empowerment: instead of having to be present at the 
same time as the visiting nurse and medical expert as with 
video conferencing in synchronous treatment, the patient can 
access his data in the ulcer record whenever he has the time, 
and he can even write notes in his own record for the health 
care professionals.       
Note that although the work of [24] takes a patient-
involvement approach, it still focuses mainly on the patient 
as a receiver rather than an active user. However, an 
important perspective can be drawn from the research: the 
patients’ feelings of satisfaction, security, and confidence 
with this new kind of treatment might be an indication of the 
patients being ready for health care services in which they 
are more actively involved. 
The technology of telemedical ulcer treatment is very 
simple; the phone is an off-the-shelf mobile phone with 
camera and the electronic ulcer record is a user friendly 
browser, hence patients are likely to easily familiarize 
themselves with the technology and not to have significant 
resistance towards using it. 
The simplicity of the technology and its non-intrusive, 
mobile nature combined with the potential for this kind of  
 
 
 
 
treatment to reduce some of the social stigma related to foot 
ulcers shows that telemedical ulcer treatment can live up to 
the ideal of ambient assisted living. Future perspectives on 
citizen involvement in ulcer treatment are presented in 
section VII. 
In DREAMING, the citizens assume a new role as 
patients from the very beginning in that they manage a 
number of tasks previously handled by the visiting nurses. 
By taking their own measurements and communicating with 
the nurses via video conference, the citizens become 
involved in their own course of treatment in a way that is 
radically different from traditional patient roles. In fact, they 
take over some of the central nursing tasks and are thereby 
largely in charge of their own treatment. Thus, the treatment 
of chronically ill elderly citizens takes on a new aspect of 
self-management and moves away from the traditional 
treatment methods concerning this demographic group living 
in their own homes. By having the necessary measuring 
equipment at home, the citizens are not only more 
independent, but also safer as they can take measurements if 
they feel unwell and because they know that their daily 
measurements are evaluated continuously by the nurses who 
used to actually take the measurements. This assertion is 
supported by statements from one citizen who says: “I like 
the fact that we are closely monitored” and continues by 
agreeing with a statement made by the project nurse: “It 
gives a sense of freedom to be able to handle your own 
treatment, while knowing that you are still being looked 
after. That’s really an advantage.” Another citizen states: “It 
is so simple” and continues “Technology really is genius” 
[27].   
Video conference technology opens up for a more active 
dialogue between the citizens and the visiting nurses, and for 
citizens to take their measurements on their own and thereby 
to gain a better understanding of their particular condition. 
Earlier studies of a similar nature have reported positive 
effects on patients’ health and quality of life as well as cost-
effectiveness and structural aspects [28-37], and it is 
anticipated that the solutions applied in DREAMING can 
improve health care services dramatically. 
The technology applied in DREAMING also allows for 
the citizens to take on an extended role in the larger 
perspective of society. AAL technologies offer a new 
freedom for chronically ill elderly citizens and allow for 
them to be actively involved in society for longer. In 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Oct 2009
Dec 2009
Feb 2010
Apr 2010
Jun 2010
Aug 2010
Figure 2. The new joint triangle of care 
117
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

DREAMING, this is particularly pertinent to the video 
conference component. This system is connected to and runs 
via the citizen’s own TV and therefore constitutes a familiar 
interface for the citizen. The system brings society into the 
citizen’s own living room, so to speak, by offering the 
possibility of face-to-face contact with nurses, GPs, family, 
and friends, including other elderly citizens experiencing 
similar health problems. 
In the abovementioned MAST manual, potentials of 
patient empowerment is not listed as one of the preceding 
considerations 
deemed 
necessary 
when 
evaluating 
telemedicine programs. It might be beneficial to include this 
aspect in the preceding considerations since the opportunities 
that patient empowerment allows for, are likely to 
significantly influence the assessment of telemedicine. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The present article has shown how, in research projects, 
citizens’ role as patients in health care has already been 
influenced by telehealth technology. Examples have been 
presented that show telehealth technologies can empower 
patients in such a way that they are actively involved in a 
new triangle of care. The empowerment happens through 
information-sharing; offering the patients a visual overview 
of their course of treatment, letting the patients take their 
own measurements, and letting them provide verbal and 
written inputs. Further, the idea has been presented that the 
technology can pave the way for citizens to take care of 
each other. Also, both projects show that old age is not 
necessarily a barrier in the use of ICT.  
Of the two projects presented, DREAMING relies on 
patient empowerment the most due to these factors: The 
patients 
themselves 
are 
already 
taking 
their 
own 
measurements and the flexible video conferencing system 
makes it easy to establish contact with health professionals.  
In order to fully realize the second level of citizen 
involvement, the extended citizen role, in telehealth 
projects, it is crucial that it is made clear to the patients, 
relatives, etc. that their inputs are valuable and that the 
health professionals have an interest in empowering the 
patients since this improves the basis for decision and 
ultimately the quality of the treatment. 
The success of telehealth programs rely heavily on 
patient inclusion in the planning and development processes 
as well as the technology being non-intrusive and user-
friendly, even elderly-friendly; potential factors such as co-
morbidities and reduced cognitive and psycho-motor skills 
have to be taken into consideration. Both projects have 
experienced how appropriate training and patient inclusion 
have lowered potential resistance to the technologies. 
VII. PERSPECTIVES 
In its fullest form, patient empowerment through 
telehealth technology allows for direct communication 
between the patient and the medical expert. Note however, 
that this does not mean that visiting nurses become 
redundant, but it does imply that as patients will become 
more competent in their own care, the visiting nurse’s 
professional role is likely to change. Training the patients in 
self-management does not, of course, entirely substitute the 
competences of the visiting nurses but it does have the 
potential of reducing their burden of tasks. More research on 
how telehealth technology will affect the roles of health 
professionals would be valuable.   
The next step in terms of citizen involvement in ulcer 
treatment would be letting the patients take the pictures 
themselves and to upload both the pictures and comments on 
the state of their ulcers to the electronic record. In 
DREAMING, this is already taking place as the citizens are 
taking their own measurements instead of leaving the task 
for the visiting nurses. The second level of citizen 
involvement, the extended citizen role, in telemedical ulcer 
treatment as well as treatment for diabetes, heart failure, and 
COPD would be letting citizens perform this kind of 
treatment on each other and/or educating the relatives in 
performing it. In other words, to extend the above-mentioned 
triangle of care to include patients’ relatives, neighbors, or 
other persons from the patients’ social network as well. In 
this connection, the video conference component opens up 
for the possibility of a new network comprising not only 
medical specialists and relatives, but also new acquaintances 
in terms of other citizens in a similar situation. This would 
allow for the citizens to exchange experience and help each 
other. This is a valuable feature as other patients are often a 
better source of advice for how to live with a chronic illness 
than medical specialists who are primarily concerned with 
treatment of the illness. 
An important lesson from the DREAMING project is that 
the more encompassing telehealth technologies are the better. 
For instance, since a diabetes patient is likely to suffer from 
several co-morbidities it would make good sense to provide 
this patient with a technology that is able to measure and/or 
monitor e.g., both his glucose levels and his foot ulcers.   
To help relieve the strained health care sectors it might be 
necessary to let health professionals focus more on the actual 
treatment and then empower patients and their relatives to 
deal with the more care-related tasks. This might be realized 
through the use of AAL-communities in which non-intrusive 
technology, telehealth technology being only one kind, 
empowers citizens to be involved in their own care and the 
care of their fellow citizens. Ideally, the design of such AAL-
spaces will be based on continuous user feedback. Self-care 
programs require patient involvement at every stage, as well 
as user-driven innovation, sharing of knowledge between 
providers and patients, and education about preventive care 
and treatment that the patient himself can be in charge of. 
VIII. REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Clemensen, “Pervasive healthcare – home treatment of diabetic 
foot ulcers,” PhD dissertation, The Centre of Pervasive Healthcare, 
ISIS Katrinebjerg, University of Aarhus, 2006. 
[2] 
S. B. Larsen, “Pervasive home care – technological support for 
treatment of diabetic foot ulcers at home,” PhD dissertation, 
Department of Computer Science, University of Aarhus, 2006. 
[3] 
Afdelingen for Kommunesamarbejde, Region Syddanmark and Sår i 
Syd, “Mini-MTV: Telemedicin i sårbehandlingen,” April 2008. 
118
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

[4] 
L. Lamothe, J.-P. Fortin, F. Labbé, M.-P. Gagnon, and D. Messikh, 
“Impacts of telehomecare on patients, providers, and organizations,” 
Telemedicine and e-Health, 12(3), pp. 363-369, 2006. 
[5] 
F. Tudiver et al., “Primary care providers’ perceptions of home 
diabetes telemedicine care in the IDEATel project,” The Journal of 
Rural Health, 23(1), pp. 55-61, winter 2007. 
[6] 
B. Waldo, “Telehealth and the electronic medical record,” NURSING 
ECONOMIC$, 21(5), pp. 210+245-246, Sep.-Oct. 2003. 
[7] 
A. Balamurugan et al., “A pilot study of diabetes education via 
telemedicine in a rural underserved community,” The Diabetes 
EDUCATOR, 35(1), pp. 147-154, Jan.-Feb. 2009. 
[8] 
D. M. D’Alessandro and N. P. Dosa, “Empowering children and 
families with information technology,” Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med, 
155, pp. 1131-1136, Oct. 2001. 
[9] 
M. K. Dobke, D. Bhavsar, A. Gosman, J. De Neve and B. De Neve, 
“Pilot trial of telemedicine as a decision aid for patients with chronic 
wounds,” Telemedicine and e-Health, 14(3), pp. 245-249, April 2008. 
[10] G. Litzinger, T. Rossman, B. Demuth, and J. Roberts, “In-home 
wound care management utilizing information technology,” Home 
Healthcare Nurse, 25(2), pp. 119-130, Feb. 2007. 
[11] B. Johnston, L. Wheeler, J. Deuser, K. H. Sousa, “Outcomes of the 
Kaiser Permanente tele-home health research project,” Arch Fam 
Med, 9, pp. 40-45, Jan. 2000. 
[12] S. M. Finkelstein et al., “Telehomecare: quality, perception, 
satisfaction,” Telemedicine Journal and e-Health, 10(2), pp. 122-128, 
2004. 
[13] P. A. Mayes, A. Silvers, and J. J. Prendergast, “New direction for 
enhancing quality in diabetes care: utilizing telecommunications and 
paraprofessional outreach workers backed by an expert medical 
team,” Telemedicine and e-Health, 16(3), pp. 358-363, April 2010. 
[14] M.-P. Gagnon, L. Lamothe, M. Hebert, J. Chanliau, and J.-P. Fortin, 
“Telehomecare for vulnerable populations: the evaluation of new 
models of care,” Telemedicine and e-Health, 12(3), pp. 324-331, 
2006. 
[15] L. Cardozo and J. Steinberg, “Telemedicine for recently discharged 
older patients,” Telemedicine and e-Health, 16(1), pp. 49-55, Jan.-
Feb. 2010. 
[16] C. Ratliff and W. Forch, “Telehealth for Wound Management in 
Long-term Care,” Ostomy Wound Management, 51(9), 2005. 
[17] S. Hayes and S. Dodds, “Telemedicine: a new model of care,” 
NursingTimes.net, 
http://www.nursingtimes.net/nursing-practice-
clinical-research/telemedicine-a-new-model-of-care/205747.article, 
2003. (Dec. 6, 2010). 
[18] C. Ebner et al., “Mobile teledermatology: a feasibility study of 58 
subjects using mobile phones,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 
14(1), pp. 2-7, 2008. 
[19] W. Palmas et al., “Recruitment and enrollment of rural and urban 
medically underserved elderly into a randomized trial of telemedicine 
case management for diabetes care,” Telemedicine and e-Health, 
12(5), pp. 601-607, 2006. 
[20] J. McGarry, “Exploring relationships between older people and 
nurses at home,” NursingTimes.net,  
http://www.nursingtimes.net/nursing-practice-clinical-
research/exploring-relationships-between-older-people-and-nurses-at-
home/1732199.article, 2008. (Dec. 6, 2010) 
[21] B. Dinesen, “Implementation of telehomecare technology – impact on 
chronically ill patients, healthcare professionals and the healthcare 
system,” PhD thesis, Center for Sensory-Motor Interaction, 
Department of Health Science and Technology, and Department of 
Development and Planning, Aalborg University, Denmark, 2007. 
[22] G. Demiris, D. P. Oliver, and K. L. Courtney, “Ethical considerations 
for the utilization of telehealth technologies in home and hospice care 
by the nursing profession,” Nurs Admin Q, 30(1), pp. 55-66, Jan. 
2006. 
[23] K. Kidholm et al., “The MAST Manual,” part of the MethoTelemed 
project, Norwegian Centre for Telemedicine and MedCom, February 
2010. 
[24] J. Clemensen, S. B. Larsen, M. Kirkevold, and N. Ejskjaer, 
“Treatment of diabetic foot ulcers in the home: video consultations as 
an alternative to outpatient hospital care,” International Journal of 
Telemedicine and Applications, pp. 1-6, 2008. 
[25] J. Clemensen, C. Marcussen, and M. A. Craggs, “The DREAMING 
Project,” unpublished.  
[26] D. Stenbæk, ”Nu får Marie besøg af tv-doktoren,” Fyens 
Stiftstidende, p. 34, 18 Sep. 2009. 
[27] DREAMING – Region of Southern Denmark – HD Quality video, 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XYb_TzIJwTA. (Dec. 6, 2010) 
[28] K. D. Blanchet, “Telehealth and diabetes monitoring,” Telemedicine 
and e-Health, 14(8), pp. 744-746, 2008. 
[29] D. J. Cook., J. C. Augusto, and V. R. Jakkula, “Ambient intelligence: 
technologies, applications, and opportunities,” Pervasive and Mobile 
Computing, 5(4), pp. 277-298, 2009. 
[30] C. Duke, “The frail elderly community – based case management 
project,” Geriatric Nursing, 26(2), pp. 122-127, 2005. 
[31] S. M. Finkelstein, S. M. Speedie, and S. Potthoff, “Home telehealth 
improves clinical outcomes at lower cost for home healthcare,” 
Telemedicine and e-Health, 12(2), pp. 128-136, 2006. 
[32] S. Koch, “Home telehealth – current state and future trends,” 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 75, pp. 565-576, 2006. 
[33] L. Magnusson, E. Hanson, and M. Borg, “A literature review study of 
information and communication technology as a support for frail 
older people living at home and their family carers,” Technology and 
Disability, 16, pp. 223-235, 2004. 
[34] S. Meystre, “The current state of telemonitoring: a comment on the 
literature,” Telemedicine and e-Health, 11(1), pp. 63-69, 2005. 
[35] M. J. O’Grady, C. Muldoon, M. Dragone, R. Tynan, and G. M. P. 
O’Hare, “Towards evolutionary ambient assisted living systems,” 
Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 1(1), pp. 
15-29, 2010. 
[36] G. Paré, M. Jaana, and C. Sicotte, “Systematic review of home 
telemonitoring for chronic diseases: the evidence base,” JAMIA, 14, 
pp. 269–277, 2007. 
[37] E. Seto, “Cost comparison between telemonitoring and usual care of 
heart failure: a systematic review,” Telemedicine and e-Health, 14(7), 
pp. 679-686, 2008. 
119
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

