Leveraging Machine Learning and Natural Language Processing for Monitoring   
E-health Publications 
Andrius Budrionis, Rune Pedersen, Torbjørn Torsvik, Karianne Lind, Omid Saadatfard 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
e-mail: Andrius.Budrionis@ehealthresearch.no, Rune.Pedersen@ehealthresearch.no, Torbjorn.Torsvik@ehealthresearch.no, 
Karianne.Lind@ehealthresearch.no, Omid.Saadatfard@ehealthresearch.no 
 
 
Abstract—E-health is a rapidly developing field governed by 
national and international guidelines. These guidelines are often 
generic, making it problematic to monitor the development of 
the field with regards to the expected directions. To address this 
shortcoming, we present a data analytics pipeline for continuous 
monitoring of e-health publications in Norway with regards to 
the national e-health strategy. The pipeline contains PubMed 
data import module, machine learning, natural language 
processing modules and a visualization component. The 
potential of the proposed approach is illustrated by identifying 
publication trends in Norway for the last ten years. These trends 
show how well focus areas of the Norwegian e-health strategy 
are represented in scientific publications. The pipeline is 
customizable and can be extended to support other countries, e-
health strategies and publication channels. 
Keywords-e-health strategy; publications; machine learning; 
natural languge processing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, e-health has become an important topic in 
political agendas of both developing and developed countries. 
According to the World Health Organization, 58% of member 
states have developed national e-health strategies and 87% 
reported one or more national mobile health (m-health) 
initiatives in 2016 [1]. These initiatives are often connected to 
ongoing research activities disseminating achievements and 
lessons learned through scientific publication channels. 
In Norway, e-health has undergone a strong national 
foundation process, especially from 2016 up till now. Through 
the establishment of a Directorate for E-health (E-Dir) and the 
Norwegian Center for E-health Research (NSE), as well as 
national initiatives and strategies, such as One Citizen – One 
Journal [2], the National E-health Strategy [3], and the 
National Action Plan for E-health 2020-22 [4], the national 
development and focus on e-health has escalated. In light of 
these initiatives, monitoring how well national development 
of e-health corresponds to the goals defined in the 
aforementioned documents is an important feedback to the 
decisionmakers. 
Considering the multifaceted nature of e-health [5], it is 
difficult to draw a boundary between e-health, telemedicine, 
health technology, medicine and other closely related fields. 
This uncertainty makes it difficult to isolate and measure 
achievements within e-health and, thus, monitor compliance 
of national e-health development against strategic documents, 
such as National E-health Strategy [3] and the National Action 
Plan for E-health 2020-22 [4].  
Publication of scientific papers could be considered as a 
proxy for research and development in the field [6]. Building 
on our previous publication [7] where we manually searched 
for e-health papers and classified them into several groups, we 
present improvements allowing continuous monitoring of 
scientific publications in Norway with regards to the National 
E-health Strategy [3].  
Our previous work showed that it is problematic to classify 
publications into the focus areas of the National E-health 
Strategy [3] with high accuracy, however, achieved 
performance was considered sufficient for revealing 
publication trends. These trends showed value without being 
completely accurate at a single publication level [7]. This 
paper presents continuation of our work on e-health 
publication monitoring in Norway and classification of the 
identified manuscripts into the six underlying focus areas: 1) 
digitization of work processes, 2) seamless/coherent patient 
pathways, 3) improved use of health data, 4) new ways to 
provide healthcare, 5) common foundation for digital services 
and 6) national e-health management and increased 
implementation [3].  
The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 
II provides a summary of methods used to produce results, 
which are presented in Section III. Section IV discusses the 
key findings and limitations of this work, while Section V 
concludes the paper.  
II. 
METHOD 
To 
provide 
continuous 
monitoring 
of 
e-health 
publications, a data analytics pipeline, covering data 
collection analysis and visualization was developed. 
Considering the multifaceted definition of e-health, a neural 
network-based 
approach, 
encompassing 
language 
representation was selected for differentiating e-health 
publications from other irrelevant content. To be specific, a 
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers 
(BERT-base) model pretrained on large Wikipedia corpus [8] 
was adapted to differentiate between e-health and not e-health 
publications. 
BERT 
is 
a 
general-purpose 
language 
representation model trained in an unsupervised manner. 
Unlike simpler Natural Language Processing (NLP) models 
based on word counts, BERT takes context of tokens into 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

consideration. This way, the model captures language 
semantics and is able to differentiate between tokens that 
would be considered the same by word-count models. 
To learn contextual relationships between words (or text 
tokens), BERT utilizes a Transformer neural network 
architecture and an attention mechanism. BERT is trained 
using two strategies: masked word prediction in a sequence of 
tokens and next sentence prediction. Both strategies are 
trained together minimizing combines loss function. BERT 
model, trained on a big language corpus, learns language 
representation and relationships between text tokens. Such 
general-purpose model can be later finetuned for specific NLP 
tasks without the need to retrain entire model [8]. In 
comparison to model pretraining, finetuning is considerably 
less demanding computationally and can be performed on 
much smaller datasets. 
To adapt the general purpose BERT-based model to a 
specific task, it was finetuned on a manually labelled 
publication corpus presented earlier (e-health publication 
dataset) [7]. This corpus contains 1891 publications (816 e-
health, 1075 not e-health) papers. Text from title, keywords 
and abstract fields was used for model finetuning. Finetuning 
was performed in Google Colab environment.  The e-health 
publication dataset was split into training (60%), validation 
(20%) and testing (20%). The model was evaluated using a 
random test set (20% of the e-health publication dataset) after 
model finetuning.  
Due to manual data collection, the e-health publication 
dataset was skewed and contained a much larger proportion of 
e-health publications than data available in PubMed [7]. To 
ensure that the model generalizes for data available in 
PubMed, an additional evaluation step was included. A 
PubMed dataset, containing 924 publications (25 e-health and 
899 not-e-health) was manually labelled and used for 
validating the model’s performance. The PubMed dataset 
represents e-health and not e-health class distribution in data 
extracted from PubMed. 
To map e-health publications to the focus area of the 
National E-health Strategy, a machine learning model 
developed previously was employed [7]. This model is based 
on token count values (Term Frequency – Inverse Document 
Frequency, TF-IDF) and was trained on the e-health 
publication dataset to differentiate between the following 
publication classes: 
1) 
Digitization of work processes. 
2) 
Seamless/coherent patient pathways. 
3) 
Improved use of health data. 
4) 
New ways to deliver healthcare. 
5) 
Common foundation for digital services. 
6) 
National 
e-health 
management 
and 
increased 
implementation. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The architecture and validation of the developed models 
are summarized in this section.  
A. System design 
To support up-to-date monitoring of e-health publications, 
a data analytics pipeline was set up. The pipeline contains 
three major components (Figure 1): 
1. Data import. This component handles queries to the data 
providers (PubMed in the current setup) and returns 
metadata for every publication meeting inclusion 
criteria. When monitoring publications from Norway, 
inclusion criteria was limited to at least one coauthor 
affiliated with Norway and publication dates (01-01-
2010 – 01-04-2020). These data are stored in a relational 
database for further analysis. 
2. The data analytics component hosts pretrained machine 
learning models for classifying publications into specific 
groups. The two-class classifier performs dataset 
denoising, 
discarding 
irrelevant 
(not 
e-health) 
publications. Since our focus is monitoring production 
e-health related papers, only these manuscripts are 
considered in further analysis. The six-class classifier 
classifies e-health publications into 6 focus areas of the 
Norwegian E-health Strategy [3].  
3. The visualization module performs data aggregations 
and presents the results of the data analytics step in a 
visual way.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Data analytics pipeline 
B. Performance of the classification models 
The performance of the 2-class model was tested on two 
datasets containing different ratios of positive class (e-health) 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

publications. The e-health publication dataset contains the 
same ratio of positive and negative class examples as the 
dataset used for model finetuning. The PubMed dataset 
represents a realistic ratio of positive and negative class 
examples observed in PubMed (Table I). 
TABLE I. PERFORMANCE OF THE 2-CLASS MODEL 
Dataset 
Class 
Precision 
Recall 
f-1 
score 
AUC 
E-health 
publication 
dataset 
Not 
e-
health 
0.92 
0.88 
0.9 
0.888 
E-health 
0.85 
0.90 
0.87 
PubMed 
dataset 
Not 
e-
health 
0.99 
0.99 
0.99 
0.858 
E-health 
0.82 
0.72 
0.77 
 
A trained 6-class classifier, reported in an earlier 
publication, was used for classifying e-health publications 
into the focus areas of the Norwegian E-health Strategy [7]. 
The performance of this model is available in Table II. 
TABLE II. PERFORMANCE OF THE 6-CLASS CLASSIFIER [7] 
Class 
Precision 
Recall 
f1-score 
1. Digitization of work 
processes 
0.70 
0.58 
0.63 
 2. Better continuity of 
care    
0.61 
0.62 
0.62 
 3. Improved use of 
health data 
0.62 
0.71 
0.67 
 4. New methods to 
provide healthcare 
0.74 
0.77 
0.75 
 5. 
Common 
foundation for digital 
services 
0.53 
0.62 
0.57 
 6. National e-health 
management 
and 
increased 
implementation 
0.66 
0.64 
0.65 
 
C. Visualizations 
To illustrate how the trained model could be used for 
monitoring scientific publications in e-health, all publications 
containing “Norway” in author affiliation and published 
during the last 10 years (01-01-2010 – 01-04-2020) were 
extracted using PubMed API. More than 70 000 publications 
were published in PubMed by authors affiliated to Norway. 
The aforementioned 2-class model was used to filter out 
irrelevant papers based on their title, keywords, and abstract. 
The number of e-health publications stratified yearly are 
visualized in Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 2.  E-health publications authored by researchers affiliated to 
Norway. Publication period 01-01-2010 – 01-04-2020 
To map the identified e-health publications to the focus 
areas of the National E-health Strategy, they were classified 
using a 6-class classifier (Figure 3, Figure 4) [3]. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Classification of e-health publications into focus areas of a 
National E-health Strategy 
To show how number of publications in each class 
developed in time, they were stratified on yearly basis and 
visualized in Figure 4.  
 
 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 4.  Classification of e-health publications into focus areas of a National E-health Strategy stratified yearly
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this paper, we demonstrated how to leverage a data 
analytics pipeline for monitoring the production of scientific 
publications. This pipeline is flexible and easily extendable to 
other fields, data sources and visualizations. 
A. Key findings 
Monitoring of e-health publications shows an increasing 
pace of publishing scientific contributions in the field of e-
health in Norway (Figure 2). It may not be surprising, 
considering similar trends are observable in other fields of 
research. However, it is an important result, demonstrating the 
feasibility of the presented monitoring approach. We 
previously performed a similar experiment manually querying 
selected research databases with a set of keywords specifically 
combined to capture e-health publications [7]. Considering 
that manual search included more data sources, it is natural 
that some differences in yearly publication counts were 
observed when comparing these methods. Regardless of these 
deviations, both methods captured the same publication trend.  
B. Model performance 
Classification of e-health and not e-health publications has 
been attempted previously using more traditional approaches 
[7]. These data processing pipelines consist of two major 
steps: transformation of free text into numeric representations 
(for instance, TF-IDF) that are later used for training machine 
learning 
models. 
This 
approach 
is 
rather 
simple 
computationally, however, does not take language semantics 
into account. Advanced NLP models, such as BERT can 
address language specifics much better, however, are 
computationally intensive and require more data to deliver 
satisfactory performance. Even though pretrained BERT 
models are less dependent on the amount of data (they have 
learned 
language 
representation 
during 
pretraining), 
generating sufficient amount of data for model finetuning 
could be problematic in some fields. In our case, finetuning 
BERT for 2-class classification showed performance increase 
with regards to the baseline model based on TF-IDF [7]. 
However, finetuning BERT for the 6-class classification 
resulted in poor performance, indicating data insufficiency. 
The traditional NLP model based on TF-IDF features and 
Naive Bayes classifier performed better for this task.    
C. Limitations 
Accuracy of the machine learning model has to be taken 
into consideration when looking at the absolute numbers of e-
health publications. Even though the model generalizes 
reasonably well, some performance decline is observable in 
the PubMed dataset (Table 1). It is caused by the different 
class label distribution in the e-health publication dataset used 
for model finetuning and PubMed dataset used for validation. 
While the absolute numbers presented in Figure 1 should be 
interpreted with caution, the identified publishing trend is not 
affected by these discrepancies.  
Due to the difficulties of accessing other research 
publication databases, only papers indexed in PubMed were 
included in this study. Unfortunately, PubMed lacks 
publications indexed elsewhere or only published in non-
indexed conference proceedings. However, it is fair to assume 
that the major part of e-health related publications is available 
in PubMed. E-health is often considered as an intersection of 
health, technology and social sciences. Focus on health topics 
makes PubMed the preferred database for e-health 
publications. 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

D. Future work 
In this proof-of-concept phase, automatic data collection 
was implemented using PubMed API for querying relevant 
publication metadata. Even though the number of publications 
in PubMed shows general trends in scientific paper 
production, this number could be considered misleading in 
terms of absolute publication count. Previous research shows 
that some e-health publications are published in channels that 
are not indexed by PubMed [7]. Other major research 
databases were not included in data collection due their 
limitations and costs associated with consumption of metadata 
APIs. Inclusion of publication data from Scopus and Web of 
Science databases is planned for the future. 
Publications from other countries could contribute to the 
insights delivered by this system by contrasting global e-
health research and development trends. Even though the 6-
class model is optimized for the Norwegian context, it could 
be useful for other countries. Replacing the 6-class model with 
another one, addressing specific use case requirements better 
(for instance, focus areas of e-health implementation strategy 
in other countries) is straightforward. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
National strategies are complex and often generic 
documents that are difficult to map to the scientific 
development in a field. Academic publishing could be used as 
a proxy hinting to the maturity of a specific field and a 
direction it may take in the future. In this paper, we presented 
how novel data science methods could be leveraged to map 
production of research papers into focus areas of the 
Norwegian E-health Strategy. This mapping shows the 
coverage of various focus areas in the e-health strategy by 
scientific publications and provides insights to the decision 
makers about underresearched topics.   
REFERENCES 
[1] WHO Global Observatory for eHealth and World Health 
Organization, Global diffusion of eHealth: making universal 
health coverage achievable : report of the third global survey 
on eHealth. 2016. 
[2] Direktoratet for E-helse, “Utredning av «Én innbygger – én 
journal»,” [Report "One Citizen - One Health Record"] Dec. 
2015. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.webcitation.org/73nstSwCb. [Accessed: 09-Nov- 
2018]. 
[3] Direktoratet for E-helse, “Nasjonal e-helsestrategi 2017-
2022,” [National e-health strategy 2017-2022] [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.webcitation.org/73ntEa1LR. 
[Accessed: 09-Nov- 2018] 
[4] Direktoratet for E-helse, “Nasjonal handlingsplan for e-helse 
2017-2022,” [National action plan for e-health 2017- 2022] 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.webcitation.org/73ntLCceo. [Accessed: 09-Nov- 
2018]. 
[5] G. Eysenbach, “What is e-health?,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 
3, no. 2, p. e20, 2001, doi: 10.2196/jmir.3.2.e20. 
[6] C. W. Belter, “Bibliometric indicators: opportunities and 
limits,” J. Med. Libr. Assoc. JMLA, vol. 103, no. 4, pp. 219–
221, Oct. 2015, doi: 10.3163/1536-5050.103.4.014. 
[7] A. Budrionis, K. Lind, I. M. Holm, O. Saadatfard, and R. 
Pedersen, “Establishing Baseline in the Status of E-health 
Research in Norway,” presented at the eTELEMED 2019, The 
Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, 
and Social Medicine, Feb. 2019, pp. 85–89, Accessed: Mar. 
01, 
2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid
=etelemed_2019_5_40_40070. 
[8] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: 
Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language 
Understanding,” ArXiv181004805 Cs, May 2019, Accessed: 
Apr. 
28, 
2020. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805. 
 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

