The Use of Dialectical Dialogues in a Personalized Virtual Coach for Obese 
Emotional Eaters 
A Research Protocol for a field study among target group  
Aranka Dol1, Olga Kulyk2, Hugo Velthuijsen1, Lisette van Gemert-Pijnen2, Tatjana van Strien3 
1Institute for Communication, Media & IT, Hanzehogeschool UAS, Groningen 
2Department of Psychology, Health and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede 
3Behavioural Science Institute and Institute for Gender Studies, Radboud University, Nijmegen 
3Department of Health Sciences and the EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University, Amsterdam 
e-mail: 1{a.dol, h.velthuijsen}@pl.hanze.nl, 2{o.a.kulyk, j.vangemert-pijnen}@utwente.nl, 3t.vanstrien@psych.ru.nl 
 
 
Abstract—There is a growing number of eHealth interventions 
aiming at enhancing lifestyle to address obesity. However, the 
existing interventions do not take the emotional aspects of 
obesity into account. Forty percent of the overweight 
population is an emotional eater. Emotional eaters gain weight 
because of poor emotion regulation, not just due to bad eating 
habits. We aim at developing a personalized virtual coach 
‘Denk je zèlf!’ providing support for self-regulation of 
emotions for young obese emotional eaters. This paper 
presents an eCoaching model and a research study protocol 
aiming at the validation of persuasive coaching strategies based 
on behavior change techniques. Ultimately, we aim at 
designing a personalized eCoaching framework, allowing us to 
optimally translate successful behavior change mechanisms 
and techniques, such as dialectical strategies, into personalized 
persuasive coaching strategies. 
Keywords-personalized virtual coach; obesity; emotional 
eaters; persuasive technology; eHealth; mHealth; tailoring 
messages; coaching strategies. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Obesity has become a major societal problem worldwide 
[1]. The main reason for severe overweight is excessive 
intake of energy, in relation to the individual needs of a 
human body. Obesity is associated with poor eating habits 
and/or a sedentary lifestyle. A significant part of the obese 
population (40%) overeat due to negative emotions [2]. 
There is little attention to the personal needs of emotional 
eaters when it comes to existing health interventions [3]-[5]. 
Current face-to-face treatments are focused on restructuring 
cognitions and behavior. There is a need for self-
management support and personalized coaching to enhance 
emotional eaters in recognising and self-regulating their 
emotions [6][7]. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Virtual coaching systems form a broad and vivid research 
area [8]-[11]. Since chatbot Eliza was invented by Joseph 
Weizenbaum [12], many new studies have emerged. Over 
the last years, virtual coaches have been developed for 
behavior change support, healthy lifestyle, and physical 
activity support [13]-[17]. Existing virtual coach applications 
lack systematic evaluation of coaching strategies and usually 
function as (tele-)monitoring systems, limited to giving 
general feedback to the user on achieved goals and/or 
accomplished (online) assignments [18].  
This paper presents an eCoaching model and the research 
protocol and design rationale for evaluation of persuasive 
coaching strategies for emotional eaters based on the 
Dialectical Behavior Therapy and Persuasive System Design 
model [19].  
This research study is a continuation of the previous 
study on the design and evaluation of a personalized virtual 
coach for emotional eaters [7]. The long-term goal of the 
virtual coach is to raise awareness of emotional eaters on 
their own emotions, and to enhance a positive change of 
attitude towards accepting the negative emotions they 
experience. 
In the next paragraphs in Section II, we first discuss the 
theoretical underpinnings of dialectical behavior therapy, 
persuasive coaching strategies and Ecological Momentary 
Assessments. Next, we elaborate on the design rationale of a 
personalized virtual coach. We then present the design of the 
research protocol in Section III. We finish this paper in 
Section IV with a discussion on the expected contributions of 
this research study, conclusion, and future work. 
A. Dialectical Strategies 
Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) focuses on getting 
more control over one’s own emotions by reinforcing skills 
in mindfulness, emotion regulation, and stress tolerance [37]. 
Emotion regulation is about recognizing and acknowledging 
emotions and accepting the fact that they come and go. The 
behavior change strategies within DBT are based on 
validation and dialectics [20]. Dialectics changes the users’ 
attitude and behavior by creating incongruence between an 
attitude and behavior since stimuli or the given information 
contradict with each other. We believe that the integration of 
the dialectical behavior change strategies and persuasive 
features (PSD model) will enhance the personalization of the 
virtual coach for emotional eaters.  
Emotional eaters deal with an invalidating daily life 
environment. DBT offers powerful “mechanisms of change” 
with a well-balanced mix of being validated in their 
perception of negative emotions and a confrontation 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

(dialectical) with a practical focus on changing problem 
behavior. Our eCoaching model translates these mechanisms 
into persuasive dialogues and persuasive features. 
Validation strategies suggest responding in an empathic 
way, by hearing another person’s point of view and 
accepting them (and their emotions) without judging. 
Dialectical strategies focus on confronting the user with a 
practical focus on changing problem behavior; the key is in 
finding a balance between acceptance of strong feelings and 
emotions and change by adapting feelings and emotions 
using emotion regulation and interpersonal effectiveness.  
B. Persuasive Technology  
Persuasive Technology (PT) is a significant predictor for 
adherence and offers strategies to reinforce the validation – 
and dialectical strategies’ influence on attitudes and 
behaviors. We believe that PT can assist emotional eaters in 
attitude change and acceptance of their own emotions. It is 
essential to identify the intended outcome or change of the 
intervention, prior to determining the design principles and 
coaching strategies that would positively contribute to the 
persuasiveness in any way. We chose Persuasive Systems 
Design (PSD) model [19] for translating behavior change 
techniques from DBT into persuasive coaching strategies, 
since PSD focuses on persuasion context and easily 
implementable persuasive design features.  
C. Ecological Momentary Assessments 
Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) is applied to 
systematically collect data about daily experience and 
feelings of the users, as well as the context of use, for 
instance, through a user-friendly smartphone application. 
Experience sampling is widely used in daily psychiatry 
practice [21]-[22], nowadays allowing to real-time measure 
and record encountered feelings and emotions through 
mHealth applications. 
D. Design rationale for the personalized virtual coach 
‘Denk je zèlf!’ 
The virtual coach ‘Denk je zèlf!’ (Dutch for ‘Develop a 
wise mind and counsel yourself’) is an interactive and self-
learning persuasive system that coaches in attitude and/or 
long-term 
behavior 
change 
by 
providing 
real-time 
personalized support [7]. Based on the context (e.g., 
location), emotional state of the user, and natural language 
processing, the virtual coach application enables tailoring of 
the real-time feedback to the individual user. The coach 
application communicates with the user over a chat timeline 
and provides personal feedback based on persuasive 
coaching 
strategies, 
originated 
from 
validation 
and 
dialectical strategies of DBT and persuasive features of the 
Persuasive System Design model [19]. 
The open-source natural language parser, Alpino [23] is 
self-learning, able to recognize and understand sentences that 
contain emotional words or phrases. The emotion-labeled 
words will be divided over the basic 6 emotions [24]. 
The virtual coach system consists of four educational 
modules on intake and commitment, mindfulness, emotion 
regulation and stress tolerance. The user is guided to set a 
personal profile, and set preferred moments for daily 
reminders via a text message. Users are encouraged to keep 
track of the moments they are experiencing cravings or 
giving in to a binge, and what emotions they are 
experiencing at those moments. The coaching system will be 
designed for an Android smartphone platform.  
III. 
APPROACH AND METHODS 
A. Research protocol 
For the purpose of this two week field research study, we 
design a mockup version of the virtual coach in order to 
evaluate validating and dialectical strategies with the target 
users. 
This research study aims at answering the following 
research questions: “Which coaching strategies do users with 
a specific type of emotional eating behavior benefit most 
from while consulting their personalized virtual coach?; 
“Which coaching strategies are optimal for which 
emotions?” and “Which coaching approach do users prefer 
in which context, e.g., time of the day, before/after a 
craving?” 
B. Target group and participants 
We focus on emotional eaters (N=30), age 18-45 years, 
both women and men. Participants will be recruited via a 
Dutch franchise organization of dietitian nutritionists, who 
are specialized in treating emotional eating behaviors.  
C. Procedures 
First, a pilot study will be conducted with 2-3 
participants to validate the study protocol and to test the 
virtual coach prototype application. Participants are ensured 
in the anonymity of their participation. Data collected during 
this research study will be analyzed for research purposes 
only. The data will be stored anonymously and safely on a 
local server, using the encrypted secure network connection 
(https) only the main researchers have access to.    
D. Questionnaires and measures 
Participants will be asked to fill out the demographics 
data ((nick) name, age, gender, weight, length, place of 
residence) and three questionnaires on eating behaviour, 
personality and quality of life:  
 
the Dutch Eating Behavior Questionnaire 
(DEBQ) [25] 
 
Five Factor Personality Inventory (FFPI) [26] 
 
Positive and Negative Affect Scales (PANAS) 
[27]. 
E. Ecological Momentary Assessments 
During the whole time span of the research study, namely 
14 days, participants will be reminded by a text message 
(SMS) on a daily basis to visit the mobile application and 
answer two questions: “Did you have cravings / have a binge 
today?’ and “How do you feel at the moment?” The answers 
to these questions will allow us to find out what the optimal 
coaching moments might be.  
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

F. Behavioral Chain Analysis 
In the behavioral chain analysis (diary), participants will 
be asked to fill in what happened before they gave in to a 
binge, and which emotions/feelings they were experiencing. 
G. Dialectical Dialogues 
Participants will be presented with short dialogues 
(validating or dialectical) and they will be asked to select the 
ones they prefer, according to their (current) emotions. To 
trigger a certain emotion (e.g., the affect that fits best with 
the chosen coaching strategy), a set of pictures will be shown 
to the user that evoke respectively sadness, anger, fear, and 
disgust [28]. Then, a user will be asked to select one or more 
emotions they are experiencing at the moment they saw the 
picture(s). After that, dialogues that fit with the dominating 
emotion, will be presented to the user. The questions in the 
dialogues are labeled with one of the 4 basic negative 
emotions (anger, sadness, fear, disgust) and the answers are 
presented in accordance with one of the validating and/or 
dialectical (dissonant) strategies. 
H. Post-interviews 
Participants will be invited to participate in a semi-
structured post-interview to discuss their experiences with 
the presented dialogues and their motivation for picking 
specific answers. Post-interviews will be audio recorded with 
permission of participants. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION, CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
This article presents the research study design to evaluate 
and validate the coaching strategies that emotional eaters 
prefer in a personalized virtual coach, based on their 
emotional state and context. The potential contribution of 
this research is divided into two fields.  
First, a multidisciplinary holistic user centered design 
approach provides valuable insights into preferred persuasive 
coaching strategies of the target users for developing a 
meaningful and persuasive virtual coaching system for self-
managing emotions. One of the main goals of the 
personalized virtual coach for emotional eaters is to raise 
awareness of their own emotions and to enhance a positive 
change of attitude towards accepting the negative emotions 
they experience daily. Ultimately, enhancing emotion 
regulation is expected to lead to a better weight management 
of emotional eaters.  
Second, it will gain more insights into applying the 
behavior change techniques from health psychology and 
persuasive technology for virtual coaching application. Next 
step is to focus on developing virtual coaching systems that 
actually coach the user by analyzing real-time behavior and 
providing real-time personalized timely feedback based on 
user profile, events and context. Coaching based applications 
can provide self-management support for patients at times 
when a therapist is not available, or in the case that the user 
needs personalized anonymous support that is always within 
reach, which is the case for emotional eaters who often 
experience feelings of shame. 
To conclude, this study makes two main contributions: 
(1) gaining more insights into: a) what coaching strategies 
emotional eaters prefer; b) what triggers emotional eaters to 
(over)eat and at what times of the day the craving usually 
occur; c) emotional states at the moments of experiencing 
food cravings and giving into binges, and (2) we aim at 
developing a general personalized eCoaching framework, 
enabling the optimal translation of successful behavior 
change techniques, such as dialectical strategies, into 
persuasive coaching strategies implementable for broader 
target groups. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
World Health Organisation WHO | Obesity and Overweight. January 
(2015) 
Available 
at: 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/ 
[retrieved: 
January 31, 2017] 
[2] T. Van Strien, C.P. Herman, and M.W. Verheijden, “Eating style, 
overeating and weight gain. A prospective 2-year follow-up study in a 
representative Dutch sample,” Appetite, 12;59(3), pp. 782-789, 2012. 
[3] 
J. Harvey-Berino et al. “Internet delivered behavioral obesity 
treatment,” Prev Med, 08;51(2), pp. 123-128, 2010. 
[4] 
M.J. Hutchesson et al. “eHealth interventions for the prevention and 
treatment of overweight and obesity in adults: a systematic review 
with meta-analysis,” Obesity Reviews, 16, 5, pp. 376-392, 2015. 
[5] 
G.M. Manzoni, F. Pagnini, S. Corti, E. Molinari, and G. Castelnuovo, 
“Internet-based behavioral interventions for obesity: An updated 
systematic review,” Clinical Practice and Epidemiology in Mental 
Health, 7, pp. 19-28, 2011.  
[6] 
M.M. Linehan, “Skills training manual for treating borderline 
personality disorder,” New York, NY US: Guilford Press, 1993. 
[7] 
A. Dol, O.A. Kulyk, H. Velthuijsen, J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, 
and T. van Strien, “Developing a Personalised Virtual Coach ‘Denk je 
zèlf!’ for Emotional Eaters through the Design of Emotion-enriched 
Personas,” International Journal On Advances in Life Sciences, vol 8, 
3&4, 2016. accepted for publication 
[8] 
H. Geissler, M. Hasenbein, S. Kanatouri, and R. Wegener, “E-
Coaching: Conceptual and Empirical Findings of a Virtual Coaching 
Programme International,” Journal of Evidence Based Coaching and 
Mentoring. Vol 12 (2), pp. 165 – 187, 2014. 
[9] 
S. Kelders, O.A. Kulyk, L. van Gemert-Pijnen, and H. Oinas-
Kukkonen, “Selecting effective persuasive strategies in behavior 
change support systems,” In: Third International Workshop on 
Behavior Change Support Systems (BCSS 2015), In conjunction with 
PERSUASIVE 2015, June 3-5, Chicago, USA, 1 – 6, 2015. 
[10] N. Beerlage-de Jong, A. Eikelenboom-Boskamp, A. Voss, R. 
Sanderman, and J. van Gemert-Pijnen, “Combining User-Centered 
Design with the Persuasive Systems Design Model; The Development 
Process of a Web-Based Registration and Monitoring System for 
Healthcare-Associated Infections in Nursing Homes,” Int. Journal on 
Advances in Life Sciences, 6, pp. 262-271, 2014. 
[11] O.A. Kulyk, C. den Daas, S. David, and L. van Gemert-Pijnen, “How 
Persuasive are Serious Games, Social Media and mHealth 
Technologies for Vulnerable Young Adults? Design Factors for 
Health Behavior and Lifestyle Change Support: Sexual Health Case,” 
In: Proc. of the 3d Int. Workshop on Behavior Change Support 
Systems (BCSS 2015). In conjunction with PERSUASIVE 2015, 
June 3-5, Chicago, USA, 2015. 
[12] J. Weizenbaum, “ELIZA--A Computer Program For the Study of 
Natural Language Communication Between Man and Machine,” 
Communications of the ACM. Volume 9, Number 1, pp. 36-35, 1966. 
[13] T.W. Bickmore, D. Schulman, and C. Sidner, “Automated 
interventions for multiple health behaviors using conversational 
agents,” Patient education and counseling 92(2), pp. 142-148, 2013. 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[14] O.A. Kulyk, H.J.A. op den Akker, R. Klaassen, and J.E.W.C. van 
Gemert-Pijnen, “Personalized Virtual Coaching for Lifestyle Support: 
Principles for Design and Evaluation,” International Journal on 
Advances in Life Sciences, 6;3&4, pp. 300-309, 2014. 
[15] A. Van Wissen, C. Vinkers, and A. van Halteren, “Developing a 
Virtual Coach for Chronic Patients: A User Study on the Impact of 
Similarity, Familiarity and Realism,” Proceedings 11th International 
Conference, PERSUASIVE 2016 Salzburg, Austria, April 5–7, 2016. 
[16] E. Hudlicka, “Virtual training and coaching of health behavior: 
Example from mindfulness meditation training,” Patient Education 
and Counseling. 92, pp. 160–166, 2013.  
[17] R.J. Beun, et al., “Improving Adherence in Automated e-Coaching. A 
case from Insomnia Therapy,” Proceedings 11th International 
Conference, PERSUASIVE 2016 Salzburg, Austria, April 5–7, 2016. 
[18] A. Lentferink et al., “Self-tracking and Persuasive eCoaching in 
Healthy Lifestyle Interventions: Work-in-progress Scoping Review of 
Key Components,” Proceedings of the Fourth Int. Workshop on 
Behavior Change Support Systems (BCSS16), co-located with the 
11th Int. Conference PERSUASIVE 2016, Salzburg, Austria, April 5, 
pp. 15-35, 2016.  
[19] H. Oinas-Kukkonen, and M. Harjumaa, “Persuasive Systems Design: 
Key Issues, Process Model, and System Features. Communications of 
the Association for Information Systems,” 24(1), 28, pp. 485-500, 
2009. 
[20] T.R. Lynch, A.L. Chapman, M.Z. Rosenthal, J.R. Kuo, and M.M. 
Linehan, “Mechanisms of change in dialectical behavior therapy: 
Theoretical and empirical observations,” J Clin Psychol. 04;62(4), pp. 
459-480, 2006. 
[21] S. Shiffman, A.A., Stone, and M.R. Hufford, “Ecological momentary 
assessment,” Annu Rev Clin Psychol, 4:1–3.6, 2008. 
[22] I. Myin-Germeys et al., ”Experience sampling research in 
psychopathology: opening the black box of daily life,” Psychological 
Medicine, 39, pp. 1533-1547, 2009. 
[23] “PIONIER Project,” University of Groningen, The Netherlands. 
Available at: http://www.let.rug.nl/vannoord/alp/Alpino/ [retrieved: 
January 31, 2017].  
[24] P. Ekman, “An argument for basic emotions,” Cognition and 
Emotion, 6(3-4), pp. 169-200, 1992.  
[25] T. Van Strien, J.E.R. Frijters, G.P.A. Bergers, and P.B. Defares, ”The 
Dutch Eating Behavior Questionnaire (DEBQ) for Assessment of 
Restrained, Emotional, and External Eating Behavior,” International 
Journal of Eating Disorders, 5(2), pp. 295-315, 1986. 
[26] A.A. Hendriks, K.B. Hofstee, and B. de Raad, “The Five-Factor 
Personality 
Inventory 
(FFPI),” 
Personality 
and 
Individual 
Differences, 27 (2): pp. 307-325, 1999. 
[27] D. Watson, L.A. Clark, and A. Tellegen, “Development and 
validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The 
PANAS scales,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol 
54(6), pp. 1063-1070, 1988. 
[28] K.S. Quigley, K.A. Lindquist, and L.F. Barrett, “Inducing and 
measuring emotion: Tips, tricks, and secrets,” Chapter in H. T. Reis 
and C. M. Judd (Eds.) Handbook of Research Methods in Social and 
Personality Psychology, New York, Cambridge University Press, pp.  
220-250, 
2013.
 
 
 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

