Assistance Effect of an Evolved Heel-Raising Unit for Walking Disabilities 
 
 
 
Haruki Baba, Akimasa Suzuki  
Graduate School of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
E-mail: g231s027@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp,  
suzuki_a@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
  
Yoshitoshi Murata 
Research and Regional Cooperation Office 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
E-mail: y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Elderly people and people with diseases such as 
hemiplegia often have a walking disability, which increases 
their risk of falling and suffering injuries. In walking, the 
angular velocities when raising the heel and swinging the toe 
forward are lower for elderly people than for healthy 
individuals, because of their lower muscle power. We 
previously developed a heel-raising unit based on a spring, but 
that unit lacked a mechanism to release the spring at the 
optimal timing, as reported in the International Journal on 
Advances in Life Sciences in 2020. We have since developed an 
evolved heel-raising unit that works when the heel starts to rise 
after the whole shoe has contacted the floor. Experimental 
results demonstrate that the evolved unit's assistance effect is 
better than that of the previous simple unit. We also report a 
correlation between body weight and the optimal spring 
stiffness, and we show that the evolved unit does not affect the 
individual’s walking posture as much as the previous one did. 
Keywords: walking disability; walking-assist unit; heel 
raising; walking posture; muscle power. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As the percentage of elderly people in the world’s 
population is increasing [1], the number of functionally 
impaired people, such as those with hemiplegia, will also 
increase. People with such diseases and very elderly people 
often have walking disabilities, which increase their risk of 
falling and injuring themselves [2].  
Our previous study comparing the walking gaits of 
hemiplegia patients and healthy students showed that the 
angular velocities while raising the heel and swinging the toe 
forward were lower for people with walking disabilities than 
for healthy people. The reason was the lower muscle power 
of the hemiplegia patients in our study [3]. This suggests that 
assistance in raising the heel and swinging the toe forward 
could help people with walking disabilities to have a gait 
closer to normal. 
Two kinds of foot prostheses, the Solid-Ankle Cushion-
Heel (SACH) foot (e.g., 1D10, Ottobock, Germany [4]) and 
the energy storage and return (ESAR) foot (e.g., Vari-Flex, 
Össur, Iceland [5]), have enabled foot amputees to improve 
their gait to be close to normal. In the case of the SACH 
foot, a properly shaped wedge of cushioning material is 
built into the heel part of the foot prosthesis to absorb shock 
when the heel of the shoe contacts the floor and thus assist 
in raising the heel. The ESAR foot has a kind of leaf spring 
to absorb the contact shock and assist in raising the heel 
more effectively than the SACH foot does. 
Inspired by the ESAR foot, we previously developed a 
heel-raising unit that used a spring [6]. The unit was very 
simple, as it comprised only a conical coil spring and a V-
shaped attachment cover made of thin stainless steel, but it 
did not have a mechanism to release the spring at the optimal 
timing. As a result, it started to raise the heel as soon as the 
shoe's heel contacted the floor. Instead, the spring should 
ideally be released when the heel starts to rise in the gait 
cycle.  
Hence, we have developed an evolved heel-raising unit in 
which the spring is released when the heel begins rising after 
the whole shoe has contacted the floor. Experimental results 
with the evolved unit demonstrated that its assistance effect 
was notably better than that of the previous unit, and that it 
did not affect the walking posture as much as the previous 
one did.  
In Section II, we describe the differences in gait between 
a hemiplegia patient and a healthy person to clarify the 
required characteristics of an evolved heel-raising unit. Then, 
in Section III, we explain how the SACH foot and ESAR 
foot compensate for a lack of kicking power when raising the 
heel. Section IV describes the structure of the evolved heel-
raising unit and the experimental results, before Section V 
concludes with a summary of the key points.  
II. GAIT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN HEMIPLEGIA PATIENTS 
AND HEALTHY PEOPLE 
We analyzed the walking gait cycles of both unimpaired 
people and people with walking disabilities by using a 
wearable device (WD) and a Kinect to detect warning signs 
of falls [3]. Every patient with a walking disability in this 
experiment had hemiplegia and trained periodically at a 
rehabilitation facility. To estimate the kicking power and the 
change in angle between the foot and the floor, we 
experimentally measured the output data from an 
acceleration sensor and a gyroscope sensor in a WD 
mounted on the front of a shoe. A Sony SmartWatch 3 was 
used as the WD. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Following Tao et al. [7], we divided the normal 
walking gait cycle into eight phases as shown in Figure 1: 
(1) initial contact (heel-strike timing), (2) loading 
response, (3) mid-stance, (4) terminal stance (toe-off 
timing), (5) pre-swing, (6) initial swing, (7) mid-swing, 
and (8) terminal swing. 
 
Figure 1. Normal walking gait cycle (right foot). 
 
Figures 2 and 3 show examples of changes in the 
angular velocity, angle, and acceleration for a healthy 
participant and one with a walking disability, respectively, 
over the course of two steps. Each flat region (roughly in 
the center of each graph) represents the period when the 
shoe's entire sole touched the floor. The acceleration in this 
period is roughly 9.8 m/s2 because the acceleration sensor 
still measures gravity. The maximum angular velocity at 
point A indicates the kicking power when raising the heel. 
This action occurs between the mid-stance and terminal 
stance, as shown in Figure 1. The minimum angle at point B 
indicates the toe angle to the floor at the terminal swing.  
As seen in Figure 2, the lowest angular velocity at point 
A for the unimpaired participant was approximately 420°/s. 
In contrast, as seen in Figure 3, the highest angular velocity 
at A for the participant with a walking disability was only 
250°/s. Thus, the latter participant clearly had a weaker 
kicking power than the healthy individual when raising the 
heel, which indicates a clear difference in gait. 
Similarly, the highest angle at point B in Figure 2 for the 
unimpaired person was approximately −18°, whereas the 
lowest angle at B in Figure 3 for the participant with a 
walking disability was approximately −8°.  
Tables I and II list the averages and standard deviations 
(SDs) of the measured angular velocity at point A and angle 
at point B. The angular velocity at A was clearly different 
between the unimpaired participants and those with walking 
disabilities. There was also a measurable difference between 
them in the angle at point B, although the ranges of those 
values sometimes overlapped. 
Thus, the individuals with a walking disability had a 
weaker kicking power when raising the heel than that of the 
healthy participants. They also had difficulty raising their 
toes during the terminal swing phase. Accordingly, if 
additional power could compensate for the difference in 
kicking power when raising the heel, an individual with a 
walking disability could walk with a gait closer to that of a 
healthy person. 
TABLE I. ANGLE VELOCITY AT TERMINAL STANCE 
Participants 
Average (deg/s) 
SD (deg/s) 
Unimpaired 
participants 
509.36 
18.91 
Participants with 
disability 
342.06 
86.52 
 
TABLE II. ANGLE AT TERMINAL SWING 
Participants 
Average (deg) 
SD (deg) 
Unimpaired 
participants 
-17.76 
8.02 
Participants with 
disability 
-7.45 
8.02 
 
A 
Raisin
g  
toe 
Raising 
heel 
B 
Swing  
leg 
forwar
d 
Acceleration (m/s2)
Angular velocity (deg/s)
Angle (deg)
Angle
Angular velocity
Time (ms)
 
Figure 2. Examples of the angular velocity, angle, and acceleration 
for an unimpaired participant. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
III. 
WALKING ASSISTANCE MECHANISMS IN PASSIVE FOOT 
PROSTHESES 
There are two types of walking assistance mechanisms 
in passive foot prostheses. First, the SACH foot [8], shown 
in Figure 4 [4], was designed to provide shock absorption 
and ankle action characteristics close to those of a normal 
ankle without the use of an articulated ankle joint. The 
SACH foot's action is achieved by the use of two functional 
elements: a properly shaped wedge of cushioning material 
built into the heel, and an internal structural core or keel 
shaped at the ball of the foot to provide a rocker action. A 
primitive version was first developed toward the end of the 
1800s. 
Second, the ESAR foot [5], shown in Figure 5, has a 
kind of leaf spring at its heel and an adequate roll-over 
shape like that of the foot, which generates the kicking 
power when raising the heel and increases the dissipated 
energy during the step-to-step transition in a walking gait. 
Wezenberg et al. reported that the ESAR foot was more 
effective than the SACH foot in reducing metabolic energy 
while walking [9], and Houdijk reported that it evolved the 
step length symmetry [10]. 
The cushioning material of the SACH foot or the leaf 
spring of the ESAR foot compensates for a lack of foot 
muscle to kick off the floor when raising the heel. This 
suggests that a shoe with a mechanism to raise the heel 
would enable elderly people with low muscle power to walk 
more easily. 
 
 
Figure 4. Examples of the SACH Foot (1D10, Ottobock, Germany). 
 
Figure 5. Examples of the ESAR Foot (Vari-Flex, Össur, Iceland). 
 
IV. 
SPRING-ASSIST UNIT FOR WALKING DISABILITIES 
A. Structure of heel-raising unit 
With the goal of developing a heel-raising unit, we first 
developed a shoe, shown in Figure 6, to assist individuals 
with walking disabilities. This shoe had a coil spring and a 
leaf spring that enabled the wearer to raise the heel more 
easily. The coil spring force was 15 kg, and the shoe had a 
roller to prevent the toe from accidentally tripping.  
In experiments with this shoe, we noticed a correlation 
between body weight and the most effective spring power, 
which would affect the walking posture. Moreover, every 
participant felt that the timing of generating the spring 
reaction force was too early for smooth walking.  
 
Figure 6. Heel-assist shoe prototype. 
Acceleration (m/s2)
Angular velocity (deg/s)
Angle (deg)
Angle
Angular velocity
Time (ms)
 
Figure 3. Examples of the angular velocity, angle, and acceleration 
for a participant with a walking disability. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

We thus focused on clarifying the correlation between 
body weight and the optimal spring stiffness to understand 
its effect on walking posture. Specifically, we developed the 
heel-raising unit shown in Figure 7. Its mechanism was very 
simple, as it comprised only a conical coil spring and a V-
shaped attachment cover. We adopted the conical spring so 
that it could be thinner. When stepped on, it provided a 
spring power of 3, 5, 9, or 11 kg. The attachment cover was 
made of thin stainless steel.  
We measured electromyography (EMG) and posture 
data from healthy students and elderly participants by using 
an iEMG [11] and a Kinect [12]. The results demonstrated a 
linear correlation between body weight and the optimal 
spring stiffness, and the spring-assist unit did not affect the 
walking posture.  
These studies were reported in the International Journal 
on Advances in Life Sciences in 2020 [6]. However, the 
device shown in Figure 7 did not have a mechanism to 
release the inner spring when the heel started to rise just 
after touching the floor in the initial contact phase.  
 
 
Figure 7. Two views of the simple heel-raising unit. 
 
We think that the inner spring should optimally release 
as soon as the heel rises, and this paper focuses on clarifying 
the effect of optimizing the spring-release timing. We thus 
developed the evolved heel-raising unit shown in Figure 8. 
This model was fabricated with a metal 3D printer. Even 
though it was made of titanium to be light, its weight was 
210 g. The evolved unit comprises a top part A, bottom part 
B, inner spring, and release timing control part. The top part 
is placed in the heel part of a shoe. The release timing 
control part comprises a slider (C) U shaped rod (D), and L 
shaped rod (E) as shown in Figure 9. 
Figure 10 illustrates the configurations for locking and 
releasing the inner spring. Before touching the floor, the 
inner spring is in the released state, as shown in Figure 10(a). 
When the wearer touches the heel to the floor, the top part A 
goes down, part C slides up, part D rotates counterclockwise, 
and part E rotates clockwise. Finally, as shown in Figure 
10(b), the corner of part E latches with a notch in the top 
part A. 
Next, when the wearer raises the heel from the floor, part 
C slides down, part E rotates clockwise, and part E rotates 
counterclockwise. Finally, the corner of part E releases from 
the notch, as shown in Figure 10(a), and the top part A 
raises the heel.  
B. Experimental setting 
Next, we built the evolved heel-raising unit into the heel 
parts of both left and right shoes, as shown in Figure 11.  
To compare the difference in the assistance effect 
between the simple heel-raising unit and the evolved unit, 
we measured iEMG and motion data from healthy 
participants using both of them. Each participant walked 
with and without springs having power of 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 
kg, in the space shown in Figure 12. Wireless EMG sensors 
were attached to the gastrocnemius of the right leg to gather 
the iEMG data. The motion data was measured at the head 
and mid-hip to analyze the effect on the walking posture, 
which was measured with a Kinect. 
 
 
               (a) Bird’s-eye view                            (b) Top and side views 
Figure 8. Various views of the evolved heel-raising unit. 
 
 
Figure 9. Structure of the release timing control part 
 
 
(a) Released state                          (b) Latched state 
Figure 10. Configurations for locking and releasing the inner spring. 
 
(a) Spring released state 
 
(b) Spring compressed state 
Figure 11. Pair of shoes incorporating the evolved heel-raising unit. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 11. Measurement space. 
C. Evaluation of assistance effect 
Figure 13 shows the iEMG values for each participant 
with each spring stiffness, and Figure 14 shows the 
improvement rates (IRs) due to the heel-raising unit. Here, 
the IR was calculated as follows: 
; 
A: iEMG at most effective spring stiffness; 
B: iEMG without heel-raising unit. 
 
The IRs were different for each participant, but those 
with the evolved unit were clearly larger than those with the 
simple unit. Note that the measured iEMG values for 
participant C were much larger than those of the other 
participants; however, the reason for this remains unclear. 
Figure 15 shows the spring stiffness at the lowest iEMG 
value with respect to the participant's body weight. In 
contrast to the case of the simple unit, the results for the 
evolved unit did not show a linear correlation between body 
weight and the optimal spring stiffness. However, because 
the number of participants was not enough for appropriate 
evaluation, we will need to measure such data for more 
participants. 
Finally, Figure 16 shows the average peak-to-peak 
ranges (A-P2P) for the participants' top/bottom (T/B) and 
left/right (L/R) motions at the head and mid-hip. Although 
there were differences among the participants and 
differences between not using the heel-raising unit, using 
the simple unit and the evolved unit regarding the order of 
A-P2P, the differences appeared random and showed no 
obvious trends. 
 
Figure 13. Measured iEMG vs. spring stiffness for each participant. 
 
Figure 14. Improvement rate due to heel-raising unit. 
 
Figure 15. Spring power at lowest iEMG vs. participant body weight. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Average peak-to-peak range for T/B and L/R motion over two 
steps [mm]. 
 
The results also demonstrate that the evolved unit had 
little effect on the walking posture as much as the simple 
unit did 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
It is difficult for elderly people to raise their heels 
because of their low muscle power. As a result, most shuffle 
their feet when walking and sometimes stumble or trip over 
something and fall down. We have thus spent nearly 10 
years studying how to prevent such falls and developing a 
heel-raising unit to compensate for low muscle power. In 
this work, we developed an evolved heel-raising unit, in 
which a spring in the unit is released when the foot shifts 
from the whole shoe contacting the floor to the heel rising. 
Experimental results with the evolved unit demonstrated 
that its assistance effect was notably better than that of our 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

previous unit, whose structure did not control the spring-
release timing. Moreover, the evolved unit had little effect 
on the walking posture as much as the previous one had. 
This experiment included a low number of participants who 
were all healthy students. We will thus need to measure data 
from many elderly people to correctly evaluate the evolved 
unit's assistance effect. Another problem is that the 
prototype model in these experiments was heavy and 
sometimes broke or did not work well, since the model was 
fabricated with a metal 3D printer. A consumer model will 
need to be lighter and more reliable, and to have a lower 
cost. After developing lighter and more reliable model, we 
would like to measure data from many elderly people to 
reconfirm assistance effects of the evolved heel-raising unit. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank the students in the Suzuki Lab for their help in 
conducting this research. We also thank Mr. Shizuo Yazawa 
for designing the evolved heel-raising unit. This work was 
supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 19K11326. 
REFERENCES 
[1] World Population Ageing 2020, United Nations, [Online] 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/pd/sites/www.un.org.developm
ent.desa.pd/files/undesa_pd-
2020_world_population_ageing_highlights.pdf  
[retrieved: May, 2022]. 
[2] W. P. Berg, H. M. Alessio, E. M. Mills, and C. Tong, "Circumstances 
and consequences of falls in independent community-dwelling older 
adults", Age Ageing, Vol. 26, pp. 261-268, 1997. 
[3] Y. Murata, S. Yoshida, T. Niinuma, and K. Yoshida, "Comparative 
Analysis of Walking Gait Cycle between Healthy People and 
Walking Disabilities to Prevent Tripping Using Wearable Device and 
KINECT," IARIA, International Journal on Advances in Life 
Sciences, vol 9 no 3 & 4, pp. 186-197, 2017. 
[4] Ottobock, 1D10 Dynamic foot, [Online] 
https://professionals.ottobock.com.au/Products/Prosthetics/Prosthetics
-Lower-Limb/Feet/1D10-Dynamic-foot/p/1D10,  
[retrieved: May, 2022]. 
[5] Össur, Vari-Flex® , [Online] 
https://www.ossur.ca/prosthetic-solutions/products/dynamic-
solutions/vari-flex 
 [retrieved: May, 2022]. 
[6] H. Baba, A. Suzuki, and Y. Murata, “Spring Assist Unit for 
Individuals with Walking Disabilities,” IARIA, International Journal 
on Advances in Life Sciences, vol 12 no 3 & 4, pp. 102-113, 2020. 
[7] W. Tao, T. Liu, R. Zheng, and H. Feng, "Gait Analysis Using 
Wearable Sensors," Sensors, 12(2), pp. 2255-2283, 2012. 
[8] A. Staros, “The SACH (Solid-Ankle Cushion-Heel),” Orthopedic & 
Prosthetic Appliance Journal, pp. 23-31, 1957. 
[9] D. Wezenberg, A. G. Cutti, and H. Houdijk, "Differentiation between 
solid-ankle cushioned heel and energy storage and return prosthetic 
foot based on step-to-step transition cost," The Journal of 
Rehabilitation Research and Development, Volume 51, Number 10, 
pp. 1579-1590, 2014. 
[10] H. Houdijk, D. Wezenberg, L. Hak, and A. G. Cutti,  "Energy storing 
and return prosthetic feet improve step length symmetry while 
preserving margins of stability in persons with transtibial 
amputation," Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2018, 
15(Suppl 1):76, pp. 41-48, 2018. 
[11] Wireless EMG logger, Logical Product Corporation, [Online] 
 http://www.lp-d.co.jp/EMGSensor.html,  
[in Japanese, retrieved: May, 2022]. 
[12] Meet Kinect for Windows, [Online] 
https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/kinect,  
[retrieved: May, 2022]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

