Designing User Interfaces for Personal Health Assessment Questionaires
A Report From a Pilot Study
Conceição Granja, Kari Dyb, Stein Roald Bolle
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research
University Hospital of North Norway
Tromsø, Norway
{conceicao.granja, kari.dyb, stein.roald.bolle}@telemed.no
Gunnar Hartvigsen
Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research
University Hospital of North Norway
Tromsø, Norway
Department of Computer Science
UiT – The Arctic University of Norway
Tromsø, Norway
gunnar.hartvigsen@telemed.no
Abstract—The cancellation of elective surgeries wastes valuable
hospital
resources.
Our
site
of
research
has
identified
inadequate planning due to lack of information as a main
cause for cancellations. It is anticipated that the pre-operative
planning
process
may
be improved
if
adequate
patient
information is gathered at an earlier stage, before the patient is
admitted at the hospital. The aim of our research is to
determine how
an electronic personal health assessment
questionnaire interface to the patient should be designed.
Participants were asked to complete the electronic personal
health assessment questionnaire in the two versions of the
interface. The results indicate that, contrarily to literature, in a
pre-operative setting, patients prefer to be presented various
questions
at
a
time
when
completing
personal
health
assessment questionnaires.
Keywords-cancellations;
surgery
department;
electronic
communication; electronic health record; patient interfaces.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The cancellation of elective surgeries wastes valuable
hospital resources [1][2][3][4]. It is also reported that
cancellations
negatively
affect
the
patient
[5][6][7].
Accordingly, cancellations are stressful and costly, with a
high level of emotional involvement before surgery [2].
However, it is reported that between 10 and 40 % of elective
surgeries are cancelled [8][9][10]. Furthermore, it has been
reported that 50 % of these cancellations might be avoided
[2][7][11].
The eTeam-Surgery project is studying the cancelation of
elective surgeries problem at the University Hospital of
North Norway (UNN). At UNN, inadequate planning due to
lack of information was identified as the main cause for
cancellations [12]. It is anticipated that the pre-operative
planning process may be improved if adequate patient
information is gathered at an earlier stage, before the patient
is admitted at the hospital. It has been reported previously
that such patient information may be included in a personal
health assessment questionnaire, and requested from the
patient at an earlier stage and while the patient is still at
home [12]. Such document refers to the patient medical
history and includes questions on previous diseases (e.g.,
heart disease, high blood pressure, and diabetes), previous
surgeries, general information (e.g., allergies, and smoking
habits), woman specific (e.g., maternity), and use of
medication, as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Sample of the paper version of the personal health
assessment questionnaire, which provided the basis to the eTeam-
Surgery electronic questionnaire.
The eTeam-Surgery project gathered the information
required from the patient in a structured document, and
developed a web-based tool to make it available to the
patient. When designing the interface of the web-based tool
the doubt arises: “How a Personal Health Assessment
questionnaire should be graphically presented to the user to
promote his/her participation?”
Adamson and Bachman [13] , at the Mayo Clinic,
reported on a pilot study of using structured histories for
patient. The authors suggested that questionnaires should be
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

presented to the patient one question at a time [13].
Considering that both studies refer to patient reported
history, it was decided to try the configuration suggested by
the Adamson and Bachman study [13], despite it had been
carried out in a primary care setting.
The aim of our research is to determine how an electronic
personal health assessment questionnaire interface to the
patient should be designed. We will explore if, in a pre-
operative setting, patients prefer to be presented with one
question at the time, or various questions simultaneously,
when completing an electronic personal health assessment
questionnaire.
This paper is divided in four sections. In the first section,
the problem with surgical cancellations is introduced, and the
aim of the study is described. In the second section, the data
collection methodology is presented and explained. The
results are disclosed and interpreted in section three. In the
last section, the authors discuss the study configuration, and
suggest improvements to it based on the feedback of
participants.
II.
METHOD
Two
prototypes
of
the
electronic
personal
health
assessment questionnaire were built, each one featuring a
different version of presenting the questionnaire. In Version
1, various questions were presented to the participant,
grouped by subject. In Version 2, participants were presented
one question at a time, following the suggestion in Adamson
and Bachman’s study.
Participants were asked to complete the electronic
personal health assessment questionnaire in the two versions
of the interface. A cross over methodology was used to
ensure that the participants’ choice was not influenced by the
version completed first. Thus, for each participant the
starting version was randomly selected.
III.
RESULTS
The fieldwork was carried out through a period of two
days,
in
February
2014.
Participants
were
randomly
approached on the street, and a total of 11 persons agreed to
participate. The sample consisted of six women and five
man. Participants were given documentation where it was
provided information related to the eTeam-Surgery project,
and the context of their participation, and their consent to
participate in the study was requested. Subsequently, the
participants were given a tablet and asked to complete both
versions
of
the
electronic
personal
health
assessment
questionnaire. Upon completion the participants were asked
to choose their preferred version. The results are presented in
Figure 2.
Figure 2. Frequency of the participants’ preferred interface version.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
The work presented herein was collected through the
period of two days. After this period the authors’ decided to
terminate the study due to the low adherence, and evaluate
possible measurements to improve the participation in the
study.
The size of the sample achieved in this study did not
meet the required statistical significance and, therefore, no
conclusions may be drawn based on the results. However,
the results indicate a probability that, in a pre-operative
setting, patients prefer to be presented various questions at a
time, that the authors which to further explore in a future
study. Following, the authors explore on the reasons
provided to refuse the participation in the study, as a basis to
improve the configuration of future studies.
The study presents herein was terminated after two days
of fieldwork by authors’ decision, since the participation fell
short on the expectations. The two main reasons provided by
the possible participants to not take part in the study were:
A. Being uncomfortable in providing their information
It was explicit in the consent form that it was not required
from the participants to provide their true medical history.
This
was
further
emphasized
when
approaching
the
participants. Nevertheless, it was still used as a reason to not
take part in the study.
B. Did not want to complain on the hospital.
The authors’ affiliation with the hospital lead possible
participants to believe that opinions on the hospital’s services
quality was being collected. This could not be clarified since,
once this was presented as a reason to not take part in the
study participants did not want to engage in a conversation.
These behaviors lead the authors’ to consider that future
studies require a less constraining context. This implies that
the participants should participate, e.g., from home, without
the presence of the researchers, mimicking the real context of
the web-based tool application. Furthermore, it is required to
emphasize the main interest (i.e. the choice on the interface
version), and anonymous nature of the study. This may be
achieved by making it explicit in the consent form that the
data on the answers was not stored, and providing non-
participant related login data to the tool.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Version 1
Version 2
Frequency
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the regional health
authority Helse-Nord for funding the research project HST
1119-13 and HST 1125-13.
REFERENCES
[1]
A.
Foster,
"Operating
Theatres:
Review
of
National
Findings," Audit Commission for Local Authorities and the
National Health Service, London 2003.
[2]
W. N. Schofield, G. L. Rubin, lM. Piza, Y. Y. Lai, D.
Sindhusake,
M.
R.
Fearnside,
and
P.
L.
Klineberg,
"Cancellation of Operations on the Day of Intended Surgery
at a Major Australian Referral Hospital," Medical Journal of
Australia, vol. 182, pp. 612-615, 2005.
[3]
M. J. Lacqua and J. T. Evans, "Canceled Elective Surgery: An
Evaluation," American Surgeon, vol. 60, pp. 809-811, Nov
1994.
[4]
B. Ivarsson, P. O. Kimblad, T. Sjoberg, and S. Larsson,
"Patient
Reactions
to
Cancelled
or
Postponed
Heart
Operations," J Nurs Manag, vol. 10, pp. 75-81, 2002.
[5]
M. G. Perroca, M. d. C. Jericó, and S. D. Facundin, "Surgery
Cancelling at a Teaching Hospital: Implications for Cost
Management," Revista latino-americana de enfermagem, vol.
15, pp. 1018-1024, 2007.
[6]
A. R. Tait, T. Voepel-Lewis, H. M. Munro, H. B. Gutstein,
and P. I. Reynolds, "Cancellation of Pediatric Outpatient
Surgery: Economic and Emotional Implications for Patients
and Their Families," Journal of clinical anesthesia, vol. 9, pp.
213-219, 1997.
[7]
T. L. Trentman, J. T. Mueller, S. L. Fassett, C. L. Dormer,
and K. P. Weinmeister, "Day of Surgery Cancellations in a
Tertiary Care Hospital: A One Year Review," Journal of
Anesthesia & Clinical Research, vol. 1, 2010.
[8]
M. Aaserud, MariTrommald, and J. Boynton, "Elektiv Kirurgi
- Strykninger, Skjerming Og Effektivitet," Tidsskr Nor
Lægeforen vol. 21, pp. 2516-2519, 2001.
[9]
A. González-Arévalo, J. I. Gómez-Arnau, F. J. DelaCruz, J.
M. Marzal, S. Ramírez, E. M. Corral, and S. García-del-Valle,
"Causes for Cancellation of Elective Surgical Procedures in a
Spanish General Hospital," Anaesthesia, vol. 64, pp. 487-493,
2009.
[10] S. Z. Yoon, S. I. Lees, H. W. Lee, H. J. Lim, S. M. Yoon, and
S. H. Chang, The Effect of Increasing Operating Room
Capacity on Day-of-Surgery Cancellation vol. 37. Edgecliff,
AUSTRALIE: Anaesthesia Society of Anaesthetists, 2009.
[11] P. Sanjay, A. Dodds, E. Miller, P. J. Arumugam, and A.
Woodward,
"Cancelled
Elective
Operations:
An
Observational Study from a District General Hospital," J
Health Organ Manag, vol. 21, pp. 54-58, 2007.
[12] C. Granja, K. Dyb, S. R. Bolle, and G. Hartvingsen, "Reduced
Elective Surgery Cancellations through Patient Involvement
in Pre-Operative Planning in Norway," eTELEMED 2014,
The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine,
and Social Medicine, 2014, pp. 164-69.
[13] S. C. Adamson and J. W. Bachman, "Pilot Study of Providing
Online Care in a Primary Care Setting," Mayo Clinic
Proceedings, Elsevier, 2010, pp. 704-710.
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

