Figure 1.  Example of the user interface of “Telerehabilitation for 
Elderly People”. 
Play for Health: Videogame Platform for Motor and Cognitive Telerehabilitation of 
Patients 
 
Francisco Tous, Alicia Domingo, Alberto de 
Rodrigo, Miguel Ángel Alcalde, Miguel Ángel 
Rújula, Pedro Ferriol, and Olga Romero  
Health Department 
iBit Foundation 
Palma de Mallorca, Spain 
xtous@ibit.org, adomingo@ibit.org, arodrigo@ibit.org, 
malcalde@ibit.org, mrujula@ibit.org, pferriol@ibit.org, 
oromero@ibit.org 
María Ángeles Farreny, María del Carmen Buen, 
Begoña Llano, Elena Ponce, and Petra Vidal 
Department of Rehabilitation 
Son Llàtzer Hospital 
Palma de Mallorca, Spain 
mfarreny@hsll.es, mcbuen@hsll.es, bllano@hsll.es, 
eponce@hsll.es, pvidal@hsll.es
 
 
Abstract - This paper presents Play for Health platform for the 
rehabilitation of patients suffering from various diseases 
developed by iBit Foundation and Son Llàtzer Hospital. The 
platform is basically formed by a management module 
intended for clinical therapies of telerehabilitation and an 
unlimited number of games that can be combined with 
different methods of interaction. Users interact with the 
computer in different ways according to their needs. These 
games provide an incentive for patients and promote the 
realization of the exercises planned by the medical staff in a 
fun, easy and intuitive way. Furthermore, this system is 
applicable to other fields such as education and social care. 
Keywords - Telerehabilitation; videogame; user interaction 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Play for Health strategy in iBit Foundation intends to 
apply ICT (Information and Communication Technologies) 
to the processes of rehabilitation care through an open and 
scalable technology platform. 
The first phase of this initiative has been funded by the 
Spanish Government and is called "Telerehabilitation for 
Elderly People (TeleRHB)", which has implemented a tool 
to perform remote monitoring of processes and physical 
therapy to patients with total knee replacement (Fig. 1). 
Currently it is ongoing the second stage of the strategy, 
which consolidates the platform, developed by the project 
"General Mobilization System for People with Disabilities 
(Rehab8)" funded as well by the Spanish Government and it  
is being prepared for exploitation. 
Play for Health Platform is developed by iBit Foundation 
with the functional collaboration of Son Llàtzer Hospital in 
Palma de Mallorca. This platform allows patients to follow a 
rehabilitation program tailored to their needs from their 
homes or care facilities.  
This paper explains the technological platform starting 
from the related work and following the description and a 
real case game. Finally it presents the conclusion and the 
future work in this line.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In recent decades there has been significant progress in 
using information and telecommunication technologies in the 
field of health and more specifically in the case of 
telerehabilitation, both physical and cognitive. Many national 
and international pilot projects have been developed but few 
of them get to the production phase and become a real 
medical service. 
Most projects in this sense refer to telemonitoring of 
chronic patients. It’s briefly described some projects directly 
related to the remote rehabilitation: 
• 
“Cognitive 
telerehabilitation 
platform 
(PREVIRNEC)”. It is a system for conducting 
cognitive rehabilitation exercises in a virtual space 
that represents a daily routine for the patients, such 
as a kitchen. The concept is different from the one 
posed by iBit Foundation because PREVIRNEC 
interacts with the computer via a mouse and 
keyboard and the system can only train cognitive 
abilities (not both physical and / or cognitive as in 
the case of Play for Health). 
• 
“Clinical Leading Environment for the Assessment 
of Rehabilitation protocols in home care (CLEAR)” 
[1] is implementing a telerehabilitation service at 
European level to contribute to the harmonization of 
59
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

e-Health services in the European Union. This 
project focuses on the treatment of chronic diseases 
that are prevalent among the elderly. CLEAR is 
pursuing the design and implementation, validated 
by different testbeds, and a European standard for 
the development of telerehabilitation services.  
Furthermore, there are many initiatives that use with 
good results the capabilities of current video game consoles 
like 
Nintendo 
Wii 
for 
the 
implementation 
of 
telerehabilitation projects. In comparison to the use of such 
technologies that are commercial and closed, Play for Health 
allows the development of personalized rehabilitation plans, 
adjustable to patient outcomes, the parameterization of the 
results to monitor and store and an Application Program 
Interface (API) for developing new content. Also, while the 
games used in these consoles are generally oriented to the 
leisure and wellness, the contents of Play for Health are 
specifically designed for specific diseases, in close 
collaboration with clinical teams to treat these diseases. 
III. 
FUNCTIONAL OBJECTIVES 
Currently the high rate of aging population in developed 
countries is an important social concern. In the medium to 
long term, the number of elderly dependents could become 
unsustainable for the socio-public health system unless we 
take appropriate action. 
In this scenario, ICT for health and, in this case, 
telemedicine and more specifically telerehabilitation, can be 
a powerful tool to address this situation. On one hand, ICT 
offer great flexibility to adapt to the needs for treatment and 
allow better use of health resources and improve the quality 
of life of patients. 
Therefore, telemedicine is seen as a tool to keep in line 
expenses without lowering service quality and effectiveness 
of treatments. 
The principal objective is to enhance patient autonomy. 
The first step is identifying the patient's functional 
limitations by the rehabilitation team (rehabilitation 
physician, physiotherapist and occupational therapist), taking 
into account its primary disease and the implications or 
consequences of it. After identifying these functional 
limitations, the degree of collaboration of patients and their 
caregivers, mood and motivation, the rehabilitation team 
may 
decide 
therapeutic 
interventions 
through 
telerehabilitation [2]. 
The platform addresses the design and implementation of 
a therapeutic program of physical and psychomotor 
rehabilitation aimed at people with some kind of functional 
disability, regardless of the disease they have. It provides 
patients with various exercises to improve remotely the 
following aspects: functionality for activities of daily living, 
physical mobility, some cognitive functions and sensory 
perception (such as attention, memory [3] or visual 
perception), coordination [4] skills, psychological aspects 
such as motivation, handling some technical support and 
posture. In this way, and taking into account the patient's 
general condition, the functional team indicates games or 
exercises to be performed, frequency, repetition and rest 
periods. 
IV. 
TECHNOLOGICAL DESCRIPTION 
Play for Health platform provides resources and services 
needed for game development of the specific pathology. It is 
easily extensible in terms of functionality, either by adding 
new games or by the incorporation of new interaction 
methods.  
Play for Health is based on the development of:  
• 
The contents or games, each of them designed to 
improve skills within the rehabilitation process. 
• 
The methods of interaction or interfaces. They are 
the tools with which the patient can interact. They 
may vary depending on the functional goal 
established by the medical team. 
• 
The module for clinical staff interaction with the 
platform for the management of rehabilitation plans 
for each patient. Both the number of games and 
methods for interaction that can manage the platform 
are unlimited. 
A. Contents 
The contents are the games aimed at the rehabilitation of 
motor and cognitive functions. They are jointly designed by 
the technicians and clinical personnel. 
Each game is developed independently, using the 
existing platform and methods of interaction available. 
Sometimes it is necessary to develop a new module for 
specific interaction for a game but once developed it can be 
reused in other games. 
An example of the first games developed is a puzzle of 
pieces that aims to stimulate cognitive and motor functions. 
The patient may choose the right piece to put in the puzzle to 
develop the cognitive function. To improve the motor 
function the patient may move the piece of the puzzle to the 
right place using the hand. 
During play sessions, the system is able to record 
interesting values such as response time, time to perform the 
movement, the precision of movement, the number of errors 
made and the number of steps needed to complete the puzzle. 
These data will be transmitted to the server system so that 
medical personnel can analyze and compare the evolution of 
these variables during therapy. Subsequently, the system 
may be changing the difficulty of the games automatically or 
manually by medical personnel, so that the patient continues 
to be challenged, to maintain its motivation and allowing a 
steady and gradual improvement of its capacities. 
As for the customization of the games, the system adjusts 
its level of difficulty depending on both the results achieved 
by the patient and the clinical staff. In the first case, the 
games are designed to fit the clinical profile of patients. 
Different profiles of patients according to medical conditions 
(e. g., elderly profile, multiple sclerosis patient profile, etc.) 
adjust the scores to the results of the game. In the second 
case, clinicians analyze the results of the game and may 
change data and parameters of the game for that patient. 
In terms of content, it has been created the games: 
“Puzzle Training” (see this game as a real case example on 
the next section), Rhythm (the game is to remember a 
60
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Figure 2.  “Puzzle Training” screenshot. 
sequence of sounds) and Molobolos (it is to direct a ball 
through a maze).  
B.  Clinical management system 
Play for Health Platform has a clinical module for: 
• 
Setting up rehabilitation plans tailored to each 
patient by selecting the difficulty level, type of 
exercise, the location of the stimuli, providing 
reinforcement to the patient by positive or negative 
feedback, the type of activity and the execution time 
of that activity. 
• 
Recording the activity of the patients. 
• 
Viewing the progress: increase improvement of 
accuracy, decrease errors, increase responsiveness, 
speed of execution of the exercise, increase 
resistance to work. 
• 
The use not only in private homes but also in public 
hospitals, health centers, nursing homes, etc. 
C. Interaction methods 
A method of interaction is composed of devices (mouse, 
camera, keyboard, tablet, dance mat, etc.) that record values 
such as motion, pressure, speed, etc. through different types 
of sensors that can capture functional changes of the patient, 
and the software needed to interpret and translate the data 
into commands that allow the execution of the game. 
These interaction devices (interaction event producers) 
integrate with the video games (consumers of events) 
through a plug-in dynamic interaction system. 
Currently it is implemented the following methods of 
interaction on the platform: detection of movement in one 
part of the body through webcam (recognition of the palm), 
dance mat, Wii Remote (Wiimote), keyboard and mouse. 
To date it is combined with Puzzle Training the motion 
detection technology in an area with webcam, mouse and 
keyboard; with Rhythm: motion detection in an area with 
webcam, mouse and keyboard; and it is intended to integrate 
Molobolos with the Wii Remote and Wii Balance Board. 
V. 
A REAL CASE: "PUZZLE TRAINING" 
This section describes the experience of one of the 
games, Puzzle Training, and its applications in the field of 
rehabilitation in order to analyze the results of the project. 
Moreover, we present the clinical results as the analysis of 
indications and contraindications of the relevant parameters 
in the hospital. 
A.  Description 
 Puzzle Training is a puzzle game developed by iBit 
Foundation to run on the platform Play for Health, under the 
functional supervision of a clinical team of Son Llàtzer 
Hospital Rehabilitation services. 
The game builds a puzzle by selecting different pieces, 
against a variable background. It consists of 9 pieces that 
must fit together (see Fig. 2). At the start, the game requests 
the piece to be fit. There are three possibilities, one correct 
and two incorrect. 
The execution of the game is based on different systems: 
recognition of a sequence number, color recognition and 
image recognition. The program treatment clinical team 
defines the level of difficulty determining the pace, speed, 
number of games and the duration in the patient's session. 
B.  Interaction methods 
To date it is combined with Puzzle Training the motion 
detection technology in an area with webcam, mouse and 
keyboard. The methods of interaction intended to be used 
with Puzzle Training are: 
• 
Detection of the palm of the hand through a 
webcam. It allows the detection of movement by 
using 
computer 
vision techniques. 
You 
can 
determine the position, velocity and relative size. Its 
handling does not require precise movement; it is 
possible to capture a global and gross upper limb 
movement when the user selects the correct puzzle 
piece that appears in different places on the screen 
(top, left or right) and also it allows use of the 
superior bilateral limb. 
• 
Detection of a colored glove. It provides greater 
precision in the selection of the piece, upper limb 
coordination of shoulder elevation and elbow flexion 
and extension. 
• 
Dance mat. It allows: improving standing balance 
(static or dynamic) and/or standing resistance 
(tolerance to the maintenance of that position); 
unipodal balance; the possibility of regulating the 
speed of stimulus presentation and response time; 
increasing the coordination of movement. 
• 
Mouse. It allows focusing the patient's goals at the 
cognitive level. If the patient's requirements are 
physical, the use of this type of interaction permits to 
work the coordination shoulder - elbow - hand more 
accurately. 
• 
Keyboard. It develops cognitive and mobility aspects 
of fine hand as is the identification of the fingers. 
• 
Touch screen. It works the muscles of the hand: 
bidigital or three-digit clip, and the intrinsic muscles 
61
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

of the hand. It can be combined with lifting exercises 
and elbow flexion and extension. 
C. Getting results 
When the patient completes the scheduled session, it 
automatically generates a document showing the minimum 
and maximum reaction time, the environment characteristics, 
the medals collected by the patient, the number of hits and 
misses, medals for speed and skill, etc. 
It has been established the measurement of the sessions 
of patients from November 5, 2010 until December 12, 2010. 
The patient age ranges from 31 to 83 years and the types 
of diseases treated are: 
• 
Multiple Sclerosis (4) 
• 
Brown Sequard Disease (1) 
• 
Cerebrovascular 
accident 
(CVA) 
effects 
(4): 
hemiplegia / hemiparesis. 
• 
Supraspinatus rupture (1) 
• 
Parkinson (1). 
The objectives for the patients using Play for Health are:  
• 
Increase / maintain balance unipodal / bipodal. 
• 
Increase / maintain laterality. 
• 
Increase / maintain joint range of shoulder. 
• 
Increase / maintain joint range of elbow. 
• 
Increase / maintain joint range of wrist. 
• 
Improvement of flexor and extensor muscles. 
• 
Increase of resistance. 
• 
Improvement / maintenance of grip. 
• 
Improvement / maintenance of heavy manipulation 
with finger exercises. 
• 
Improvement of body image. 
• 
Improvement of coordination and trembling. 
• 
Improvement of hand-eye coordination. 
D. Analysis of indications and contraindications 
The indications for this game provided by the clinicians 
are:  
• 
Improvement of the limitations caused by diseases of 
diverse 
etiology: 
traumatic, 
neurological, 
neuromuscular and cognitive, always requiring 
mobility training, cognition, speed, coordination and 
balance. 
• 
Completion of a treatment to be taken place in a 
rehabilitation center. 
• 
Keeping the patient's functional status in chronic 
stages of the diseases mentioned above. 
• 
Occasionally as a substitute for inside hospital 
treatments. 
The contraindications for this game provided by the 
clinicians are:  
• 
Lack of patient acceptance. 
• 
Severe cognitive or sensory deficits that prevent 
learning. 
• 
Severe physical deficits that impede the management 
of interaction interfaces 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The results of the use and management of the platform by 
both patients and therapists are: 
• 
Good acceptance by the patient. 
• 
Relative ease of programming from the therapists. 
• 
Dynamic and stimulating treatment thanks to the 
existence of multiple programs. 
• 
It permits the individualization of programs 
(response time, difficulty level, location of stimuli, 
the possibility to repeat many times) and a record of 
evolution (response capacity, working time, trial and 
error). 
• 
Robust so far except for the hand movement that is 
vague. 
The difficulties to face are due to ignorance of the elderly 
population, mainly the use of new technologies and the 
difficulty of learning, which is probably higher for patients 
with acquired brain injury (large group of current users). 
So far the tests are being made only in the occupational 
therapy department and have not begun at home. This will 
need monitoring the patient by the healthcare professionals. 
In cases where the work is only at home, it will be 
important to keep contact with the therapist to avoid 
frustration and ensure collaboration and stimulation of the 
patient. 
In terms of objectives achieved it has been perceived:  
• 
Better use of health resources. 
• 
Treatment tailored to the characteristics and outcome 
of patients. 
• 
Improved adherence and acceptance of the treatment 
by patients. 
• 
Increasing role of patients in their own rehabilitation 
process. 
• 
Facilitation of the progression of the daily work of 
health personnel. 
• 
Creation of a basic structure, on which to develop a 
treatment for various diseases. 
• 
Use of low-cost but high implementation system. 
It’s planned the growth of the system on several fronts: 
first the use of new interaction technologies to recognize the 
movements with greater precision and reliability and second 
the repository of video games will be increased, thus 
multiplying the number of potential patients who may 
benefit from using the system. 
This platform is not only intended for telerehabilitation. 
It can also be used in other medical areas such as chronic 
patients, social health and education. 
Video games, in addition to be an entertainment, have 
many applications. Some analyzed and studied areas are: 
• 
Education. 
• 
Continuing education related to work through the 
training of certain skills to become professionals and 
experts. 
• 
Social care, through training programs for the 
elderly, people with mobility deficits, etc. 
The intention of the iBit Foundation for the coming years 
is to continue working on the technology developed within 
62
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

the Play for Health strategy, to extend to other areas and 
improve its functionality in general. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Habilis Europe, CLEAR project, www.habiliseurope.eu (December 
2010). 
[2] P. G. Forducey, W. D. Ruwe, S. J. Dawson, C. Scheideman-Miller, 
N. B. McDonald, and M. R. Hantla. Using telerehabilitation to 
promote 
TBI 
recovery 
and 
transfer 
of 
knowledge. 
NeuroRehabilitation, vol 18, 103-111 (2003). 
[3] B. M. Brooks and F. D. Rose. The use of virtual reality in memory 
rehabilitation: 
current 
findings 
and 
future 
directions. 
NeuroRehabilitation, vol 18, 147-157 (2003). 
[4] D. J. Reinkensmeyer, C. T. Pang, J. A. Nessler, and C. C. Painter. 
Web-based telerehabilitation for the upper extremity after stroke. 
IEEE Transactions on neural systems and rehabilitation engineering, 
vol 10, NO. 2, 102-108 (2002). 
 
 
63
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

