Knowledge Management Framework for E-Healthcare in Saudi Arabia  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Abstract--In the last decade, the government of Saudi 
Arabia has given high priority to developing and 
implementing 
e-healthcare 
services 
and 
technologies. 
However, it has met a number of barriers in implementing 
its healthcare initiatives. This paper describes these barriers 
and 
proposes 
an 
e-health 
knowledge 
management 
framework to overcome these barriers by integrating 
developments from knowledge management with knowledge 
discovery techniques. This framework should assist in the 
delivery of competitive e-healthcare services and improve 
intellectual capital to provide smart health services in the 
country. The proposed framework will be applied to the 
domain of diabetes. 
Keywords-knowledge management; knowledge discovery; 
Saudi Arabia, diabetes mellitus. 
I.BACKGROUND 
Eysenbach defines e-health as ‘an emerging field in the 
intersection of medical informatics, public health and 
business, referring to health services and information 
delivered or enhanced through the internet and related 
technologies’ [1]. According to the World Health 
Organization (WHO) e-health refers to‘...the use, in the 
health sector, of digital data - transmitted, stored and 
retrieved electronically- in support of health care, both at 
the local site and at a distance’.  
In the last few decades, the Saudi Arabian government 
has given a high priority to improve its e-health services. 
A number of new initiatives have emerged focusing on 
many aspects of healthcare, ranging from creating 
electronic files for patients, statistical monitoring of 
infectious diseases, connecting all hospital systems using 
technologies of cloud computing and monitoring the 
arrival of pilgrims and vaccines given to each pilgrim in 
their home country [2].  However, the implementation of 
these initiatives has been impaired by many problems 
outlined as follows (as illustrated in Figure 1): 
 
Non-connectivity 
of 
information 
systems.  
Though some regional directorates and central 
hospitals are using information systems [3], there 
is no effort to connect these information systems 
in order to build up a national healthcare system 
[4]. 
 
Lack of technical expertise and computer skills. 
Computer 
skills 
of 
healthcare 
staff 
and 
professionals are deficient due to their lack of 
experience in using computer applications [5]. No 
guidelines are provided to handle electronic 
medical records (EMRs), and many complain 
about poor maintenance of computers and 
networks and slow computers and terminals.  
 
Failure of adoption Health Information Services 
(HIS). There are critical issues associated with 
planning 
and 
adopting 
HIS, 
and 
its 
implementation in Saudi Arabia; some of these are 
caused by the poor technical support and over 
running of time and budget [5][6].  
 
Human 
barriers. 
This 
problem 
has 
been 
considered as the major reason for failing to adopt 
health information systems in Saudi hospitals [7]. 
Human barriers include negative beliefs of 
healthcare professionals towards technologies and 
lack of trust by medical staff towards computer 
based medical solutions. Therefore, many medical 
staff resists the change from traditional to 
computer based healthcare services. 
 
Cultural barriers. Cultural factors contribute to 
the failure in adopting e-health because of limited 
human interaction [6]. Aldraehim and Edwards [8] 
explain that Saudi Arabian people are extremely 
influenced by their culture and therefore prefer 
physical interaction to virtual contact. 
 
Medication safety. According to Aljadhey et al. 
[9], medication safety raises two major e-health 
issues. The first issue refers to communication 
gaps 
among 
healthcare 
institutions, 
which 
contribute to medical mishaps and patients’ 
medical historical issues. The second issue is 
limited use of technology whose consequences 
occur in illegible handwriting. Computerised 
Provider Order Entry (CPOE) can solve this 
problem; however, this is being adopted slowly.  
 
Financial barriers. Transmitting traditional paper 
medical records to electronic system can be very 
costly [10]. Such high expenditure, which needs to 
be spent on the adoption of IT in health, may lead 
to the slow uptake of e-health applications. 
 
Security and Privacy. This focuses on the easiness 
in accessing EMRs of patients due to the fact that 
some medical records of patients can be 
disseminated to others without permission of the 
patient or the doctor [5]. 
 
 
Saleh Almuayqil1, 2 
1College of Computer Science and Information 
Aljouf University 
Skaka, Saudi Arabia 
e-mail: saleh.naif@ju.edu.sa 
 
Anthony S. Atkins2, Bernadette Sharp2 
2School of Computing 
Staffordshire University 
Stafford, UK 
e-mail: {a.s.atkins, b.sharp}@staffs.ac.uk 
 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. SECI Model [22] 
 
     This paper is structured as follows. Section 1 
presents the background regarding e-health barriers in 
Saudi Arabia. Section 2 explains the role of knowledge 
management and knowledge discovery in healthcare. 
Section 3 introduces the proposed framework to overcome 
e-health barriers in Saudi Arabia. Section 4 presents brief 
information about diabetes mellitus, which is set to be the 
domain of our study. Section 5 summaries the directions 
adopted by this project. 
II. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT AND 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY 
Nowadays, patients and health practitioners are 
connected to hospitals, clinics and pharmacies; they share 
knowledge in order to reduce administrative costs and 
improve the quality of care. Although the focus tends to be 
on managing health records and interoperability of IT 
healthcare systems, knowledge management plays an 
important role in providing high quality and effective 
healthcare 
system. 
It 
also 
allows 
the 
capture, 
representation and dissemination of knowledge of 
healthcare professionals such as their strategies, practices 
and insights. This knowledge is the power that enables 
organisations and individuals to select the best actions and 
strategies [11]. Utilisation of best practices provides 
significant advantage for organisations in term of 
competition and efficiency. Individuals keep their 
knowledge in their brain and those individuals have the 
brainpower or intellectual capital that every organisation 
desires [12]. Furthermore, their knowledge helps identify 
current problems as well as achieve desired results [13]. 
Consequently, many top managers are recognising the 
importance of capturing and managing knowledge of its 
healthcare professionals and developing systems to 
improve their services.  
Knowledge Management is a useful mechanism to 
capture the intellectual capital of organisations, and 
healthcare establishments, in particular, so that they can 
deliver the best quality of care. It can help healthcare 
professionals cope with the fragmented and distributed 
nature of medical knowledge, the challenges caused by 
information overload and the importance to access local 
knowledge in making clinical decisions [14]. Additionally, 
it can provide healthcare practitioners with educational and 
training initiatives in terms of professional development 
and changing environment preparation [20][21][22]. 
Finally, dissemination of medical knowledge and best 
practices enable social learning initiatives where evidences 
can be disseminated to clinicians, nurses, and other 
healthcare 
workers 
[23][24][25] 
at 
national 
and 
international levels as well as to rural areas.  
Knowledge management can provide a dynamic 
process of capturing, storing, sharing and creating both 
types of knowledge, explicit and tacit [21]. Explicit 
knowledge is communicable in systematic language 
whereas tacit knowledge is obtained through experience 
and cannot be articulated [22]. Nonaka and Takeuchi [22] 
suggest that knowledge changes from explicit to tacit and 
vice versa in two dimensional learning environments 
through four processes, known as SECI, in the form of a 
spiral. SECI includes four modes conversion procedures: 
Socialisation, 
Internalisation, 
Externalisation, 
and 
Combination (as illustrated in Figure 2). Socialisation 
enables the conversion of tacit knowledge via interaction 
among individuals and can be achieved through shared 
experience. Internalisation enables converting explicit 
knowledge to tacit knowledge, while externalisation 
enables tacit knowledge to be converted to explicit 
knowledge. It makes tacit knowledge understandable and 
can be recorded or saved by visualising it in an explicit 
form. Combination is the process of ‘systematizing 
concepts into a knowledge system’ [22]; for example, 
people synthesise different sources of explicit knowledge 
through  meetings, conversations and exchange of 
documents [16][27]. Nonaka concludes that knowledge is 
created continuously by restructuring the existing 
knowledge through the synergy of these four processes. 
However, a number of issues have been raised regarding 
Nonaka’s premises; consequently, other models have been 
developed and/or extended Nonaka‘s basic ideas. For 
example, Nissen [23] developed the knowledge flows 
model to capture the organisational knowledge dynamics 
and added two further dimensions to Nonaka: life cycle 
and flow time. Harsh [24] proposed a third dimension 
which accounts for knowledge reusability and where 
technology and human interaction can play a significant 
role in management of data, information and knowledge.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. E-health Barriers in Saudi Arabia 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 3. Components of e-Health Knowledge Management 
System 
 Yao et al. [25] argue that SECI assumes that the only 
source of corporate knowledge originates from the staff 
within the organisation. In the healthcare sector, patients as 
well as healthcare workers contribute significantly to 
knowledge creation and knowledge sharing. Furthermore, 
tacit and explicit knowledge are not only embedded in 
people as new knowledge can also be extracted from 
external sources such as data, databases, and documents. 
These can be analysed in order to discover new 
knowledge. Knowledge discovery is another emerging 
discipline aimed at identifying valid, novel, understandable 
and useful patterns in data, texts, images, and other media 
[26]. It uses statistical and artificial intelligence techniques 
to analyse and process large amount of data [27]; it should 
be without or at least less human intervention [28]. Data 
mining is a subfield of knowledge discovery which 
discover novel and valid trends/associations using machine 
learning techniques [29]. Typical applications of data 
mining in healthcare include monitoring high risk of 
diabetic individuals so that appropriate messages can be 
communicated to them [30],  predicting length of stay of 
patients with spinal cord injuries [31], and predicting 
hypertension from patient medical records with eight other 
diseases [32]. According to Berger and Berger [33] data 
mining is a useful approach for dealing with the rapid 
expansion of medical knowledge and healthcare data. 
Whilst knowledge discovery can support the discovery 
of new knowledge from patients’ healthcare data, 
knowledge management provides a forum to share and 
disseminate this new acquired knowledge and to combine 
it with the explicit and tacit knowledge acquired from 
healthcare practitioners. Such integration can address some 
of the problems discussed above and improve the quality 
and performance of healthcare services. Furthermore, it 
can assist healthcare organisations in making strategic 
effective decisions [34]. Hwang et al. [35] demonstrate 
how association rules can be applied to extract knowledge 
from patients’ medical records along with medical rules of 
tumor associated diseases to develop guidelines for 
clinicians. These guidelines could be then shared among 
healthcare practitioners through a knowledge management 
system and deliver a better quality care to patients. 
III. E-HEALTH KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
FRAMEWORK 
It is important here to recognise that despite significant 
advantages in applying knowledge management in the 
healthcare sector, there are a number of barriers primarily 
caused by the absence of clear knowledge management 
strategy related to deficiency of effective team working, 
cultural barriers, poor IT infrastructure, degree of sectorial 
professionalisation, and political conflicts [41][42][43]. 
Finn and Waring [39] illustrated the importance of 
effective team working and stated that ‘architectural 
knowledge’ is fundamental for efficient team practice to 
ensure the delivery of safe and effective care to patients. 
As mentioned earlier, cultural barriers play also a negative 
role as some cultures do not encourage knowledge sharing; 
this constitutes an obstacle to knowledge management 
processes [40]. The healthcare sector tends to be mono-
disciplinary and relationships of professionals within this 
sector are highly standardised, hence there is a resistance 
among doctors to share their findings and initiatives [37]. 
Strong governmental regulations and political and 
management conflicts can also hinder knowledge sharing 
among healthcare practitioners [41]. Guven-Uslu [38] 
described the clinician-managerial conflict as one of the 
important obstacles; the priority of managers is to 
minimise cost whereas the first priority of clinicians is to 
provide best care for patients.  
To address the above issues, we propose a holistic 
framework approach to the healthcare knowledge 
management; this approach is still inspired by the SECI 
model of Nonaka, we are aware of the critical issues 
associated with the two dimensional approach to 
knowledge management. One of those issues is that the 
SECI model is embedded within the Japanese context. 
Saudi Arabian cultural is strongly influenced by the Arabic 
culture which should be taken into consideration when 
applying the SECI model of Nonaka and Takeuchi 
[23][42]. This framework is primarily designed to address 
some of the barriers highlighted above from four 
perspectives: Business, Human, Financial and Technology. 
By integrating knowledge discovery into knowledge 
management we aim at identifying, extracting and 
organising tacit and explicit knowledge related to 
problems and solutions from multiple sources and at 
providing a forum for generating and sharing consistently 
new knowledge by linking tacit and explicit knowledge to 
a specific medical domain and its literature. The proposed 
framework, referred herewith as e-health knowledge 
management system, is tailored initially to address the 
healthcare issues in Saudi Arabia and is focused on a 
specific medical domain (e.g. diabetes mellitus) to 
evaluate its viability and performance. 
This section describes the four components of our 
framework (as illustrated in Figure 3). The Business 
component focuses on organisational issues and aims at 
extracting and managing the barriers associated with the 
failure of adopting health information services and medical 
safety such as poor technical support and unrestricted 
access to medications.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 4. E-health Knowledge Management System 
The Human component deals with the human barriers 
in relation to the use of technology from the healthcare 
workers and the cultural barriers from the patient 
perspectives; this will address the negative beliefs of 
healthcare professionals and patients towards the use of 
virtual contact and interaction with technological devices. 
The role of patients in the process of knowledge 
production and the computing skills of both, the healthcare 
professionals and patients, are critical to the success of our 
framework. To this end, the Technology component 
manages the non-connectivity issues and focuses on the 
technical expertise and computer skills, security and 
privacy issues. This component includes training aspects to 
address the limited/lack of computer skills among 
healthcare staff and professionals and their patients. 
Finally, the Financial component attempts to elicit the 
constraints 
and 
policies 
associated 
with 
the 
implementation, maintenance and monitoring of healthcare 
information services, namely the high cost of transmitting 
from traditional patients’ paper records to electronic 
records. The proposed framework will elicit some of these 
problems and propose solutions (as illustrated in Figure 4).  
Elicitation of problems and solutions will be 
accomplished through interviews and protocol analysis, 
and others via simulation and personal construct theory. 
Also card sorting will be employed to elicit the problems 
and potential solutions in order to promote best practices. 
The Saudi e-health data elicited from the four components 
will be then further analysed using machine learning 
techniques to elicit best practices and strategies.  
Similarly, patients’ data will be mined to extract useful 
trends and associations to improve the healthcare services. 
The acquired knowledge from these four components will 
be then represented into a knowledge management system, 
which will provide relevant knowledge to healthcare 
professionals who may be seeking or sharing best 
practices, strategies, guidelines and policies, and to 
patients who need to contact specific healthcare services or 
professionals for advice or help.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The proposed system will also provide access to 
academic papers related to specific problems to support 
healthcare professionals.  
IV. DOMAIN OF APPLICATION 
Diabetes mellitus, which is one of the highest chronic 
diseases in Saudi Arabia that affect patients from different 
genders, ages and weights, is to be used to validate our 
proposed framework. It can have severe complications 
such as stroke [47][48], heart attack [44], heart failure 
[45], kidney failures [44], Alzheimer disease [46] and 
mortality [47]. 
It is estimated that 382 million people have diabetes in 
the world, and by 2035 this will rise to 671 million. There 
were 3.6 million cases of diabetes in Saudi Arabia in 2013 
[48].  According to Shaw, Sicree, and Zimmet [49], the 
prevalence percentage for diabetes mellitus in Saudi 
Arabia was 16.8% among adults in the ages of 20-79 years 
old, and it is expected to reach 18.9% in 2030. Over 96% 
of all Saudi medical healthcare budgets are attributed to 
diabetes by Saudi citizens and 4% incurred by non-Saudi 
nationals. The national healthcare financial burden has 
reached $0.87 billion, excluding (i) indirect costs such as 
absenteeism, lost productivity, unemployment from 
disease-related disability, lost productivity due to early 
mortality by disease, and (ii) healthcare system 
administrative costs, cost of medications, clinician training 
programs, and research and infrastructure development 
[50]. The proposed framework will include the financial 
costs and its impact on human and barriers components 
into the framework. It will also attempt to overcome the 
barriers by utilising technology components.  
A number of data mining applications have focused on 
diabetes. For example Meng et al.[51] produced a model to 
detect diabetes using 12 risk factors and Chang, Wang, and 
Jiang [52] uses risk factors to identify hypertension and 
hyperlipidemia. Suh et al. [53] developed the WANDA 
system to remotely help monitor blood glucose, weight, 
and blood pressure. HealthOrg is an application to monitor 
high risk diabetic individuals so that appropriate message 
can be communicated to patients [30]. Roch et al. [54] 
recognise the need and the challenges that healthcare 
professionals and researchers face in developing a much 
needed comprehensive knowledge management support 
system for diabetes care. To the best of our knowledge, no 
integration of data mining and knowledge management for 
diabetes has been attempted.  
V. CONCLUSION 
Knowledge management and knowledge discovery are 
well developed research areas. However, the review of the 
literature has shown that there has been no systematic 
attempt at integrating them to address critical healthcare 
issues. The aim of our research project is to bridge this gap 
in order to improve the healthcare services and provide a 
forum for healthcare professionals to deliver the best 
healthcare to their patients. The first stage of this research 
will focus on the barriers associated with the healthcare of 
diabetes mellitus in Saudi Arabia. To this end, a survey is 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

being undertaken to identify the current barriers and 
problems regarding e-healthcare faced by diabetic patients, 
healthcare professionals and IT specialists. This specific 
domain will be used to validate the proposed e-health 
knowledge management framework, which is ambitious in 
its approach. The proposed system is designed to support 
the recent government initiatives of the Saudi Ministry of 
Health in improving the national healthcare of its citizens. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by Aljouf University, Saudi 
Arabia and the Knowledge Management Research team at 
the School of Computing at Staffordshire University, UK. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Eysenbach, “What is e-health?,” Journal of medical 
Internet research, vol. 3, no. 2, 2001, p. E20. 
[2] 
P. Ram, “New Strategic Initiatives–A Case Study of the 
Saudi Health Ministry,” hrmars.com, vol. 3, no. 1, 
2014, pp. 236–246. 
[3] 
M. Almalki, G. Fitzgerald, and M. Clark, “Health care 
system in Saudi Arabia: an overview,” … 
Mediterranean health …, vol. 17, no. 10, 2011, pp. 
784–93. 
[4] 
M. Altuwaijri, “Electronic-health in Saudi Arabia. Just 
around the corner?,” Saudi medical journal, 2008, pp. 
171–178. 
[5] 
M. Khalifa, “Barriers to Health Information Systems 
and Electronic Medical Records Implementation. A 
Field Study of Saudi Arabian Hospitals,” Procedia 
Computer Science, vol. 21, Jan. 2013, pp. 335–342. 
[6] 
M. Aldraehim, S. L. Edwards, J. Watson, and T. Chan, 
“Cultural impact on e-service use in Saudi Arabia : 
Results from Questionnaire,” 2012, pp. 230–236. 
[7] 
M. Altuwaijri, “Implementation of computerized 
physician order entry in National Guard Hospitals: 
assessment of critical success factors,” Journal of 
Family and Community Medicine, vol. 18, no. 3, Sep. 
2011, pp. 143–51. 
[8] 
M. Aldraehim and S. Edwards, “Cultural impact on e-
service use in Saudi Arabia: the need for interaction 
with other humans,” International Journal of …, vol. 3, 
2013. 
[9] 
H. Aljadhey, M. A. Mahmoud, M. A. Hassali, A. 
Alrasheedy, A. Alahmad, F. Saleem, A. Sheikh, M. 
Murray, and D. W. Bates, “Challenges to and the future 
of medication safety in Saudi Arabia: A qualitative 
study,” Saudi Pharmaceutical Journal, Sep. 2013. 
[10] 
M. Amatayakul, “Keys to successful EHR 
implementation.,” Healthcare financial management: 
journal of the …, no. January, 2010. 
[11] 
I. Nonaka, “A Dynamic Teory of Organizational 
Knowledge Creation.pdf.” 1994. 
[12] 
J. Liebowitz, “Knowledge management and its link to 
artificial intelligence,” Expert systems with 
applications, vol. 20, 2001, pp. 1–6. 
[13] 
Shu-hsien Liao, “Problem solving and knowledge 
inertia,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 22, no. 
1, Jan. 2002, pp. 21–31. 
[14] 
D. Nicolini, J. Powell, P. Conville, and L. Martinez-
Solano, “Managing knowledge in the healthcare sector. 
A review,” International Journal of Management 
Reviews, vol. 10, no. 3, Sep. 2008, pp. 245–263. 
[15] 
S. Antrobus, “Developing the nurse as a knowledge 
worker in health--learning the artistry of practice.,” 
Journal of advanced nursing, vol. 25, no. 4, Apr. 1997, 
pp. 829–35. 
[16] 
C. Kenner and J. H. Fernandes, “Knowledge 
management and advanced nursing education,” 
Newborn and Infant Nursing Reviews, vol. 1, no. 3, 
Sep. 2001, pp. 192–198. 
[17] 
H. M. G. Martins, D. E. Detmer, and E. Rubery, 
“Perspectives on management education: an 
exploratory study of UK and Portuguese medical 
students,” Medical Teacher, vol. 27, no. 6, Jan. 2005, 
pp. 493–498. 
[18] 
J. Lathlean and A. le May, “Communities of practice: 
an opportunity for interagency working.,” Journal of 
clinical nursing, vol. 11, no. 3, May 2002, pp. 394–8. 
[19] 
J. Gabbay and A. le May, “Evidence based guidelines 
or collectively constructed ‘mindlines?’ Ethnographic 
study of knowledge management in primary care.,” 
BMJ (Clinical research ed.), vol. 329, no. 7473, Oct. 
2004, p. 1013. 
[20] 
M. R. Tagliaventi, “The role of networks of practice, 
value sharing, and operational proximity in knowledge 
flows between professional groups,” Human Relations, 
vol. 59, no. 3, Mar. 2006, pp. 291–319. 
[21] 
G. Ni, W. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Zong, and M. Xie, 
“Research on the Knowledge Management System of 
the Vicarious Management Corporation,” 2010 
International Conference of Information Science and 
Management Engineering, Aug. 2010, pp. 62–67. 
[22] 
I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, The Knowledge-Creating 
Company. 1995, p. 62. 
[23] 
C. Bratianu, “A critical analysis of the Nonaka’s model 
of knowledge dynamics,” Proceedings of the 2nd 
European Conference on …, vol. 8, no. 2, 2010, pp. 
193–200. 
[24] 
O. K. Harsh, “Three dimensional knowledge 
management and explicit knowledge reuse,” Journal of 
Knowledge Management Practice, 2009. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.tlainc.com/articl187.htm. 
[Accessed: 22-Jun-2014]. 
[25] 
W. Yao, J. Chen, J. Hu, and Y. Wu, “Diagnosis for 
Nonaka: The critique of SECI theory,” Management of 
Technology (ISMOT), 2012 International Symposium 
on, Nov. 2012, pp. 417–420. 
[26] 
Y. Feng, “Towards knowledge discovery in Semantic 
era,” 2010 Seventh International Conference on Fuzzy 
Systems and Knowledge Discovery, no. Fskd, Aug. 
2010, pp. 2071–2075. 
[27] 
D. Delen, G. Walker, and A. Kadam, “Predicting breast 
cancer survivability: a comparison of three data mining 
methods.,” Artificial intelligence in medicine, vol. 34, 
no. 2, Jun. 2005, pp. 113–27. 
[28] 
M. Grobelnik and D. Mladenic, “Automated knowledge 
discovery in advanced knowledge management,” 
Journal of Knowledge Management, vol. 9, no. 5, 2005,  
pp. 132–149. 
[29] 
U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth, “From 
data mining to knowledge discovery in databases,” AI 
magazine, 1996, pp. 37–54. 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[30] 
H. Koh and G. Tan, “Data mining applications in 
healthcare,” Journal of Healthcare Information 
Management—Vol, vol. 19, no. 2, Jan. 2011, pp. 64–
72. 
[31] 
M. R. Kraft, K. C. Desouza, and I. Androwich, “Data 
mining in healthcare information systems: case study of 
a veterans’ administration spinal cord injury 
population,” in 36th Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2003. Proceedings of 
the, 2003, p. 9 pp. 
[32] 
F. Huang, S. Wang, and C.-C. Chan, “Predicting 
disease by using data mining based on healthcare 
information system,” in 2012 IEEE International 
Conference on Granular Computing, 2012, pp. 191–
194. 
[33] 
A. M. Berger and C. R. Berger, “Data mining as a tool 
for research and knowledge development in nursing.,” 
Computers, informatics, nursing : CIN, vol. 22, no. 3, 
pp. 123–31. 
[34] 
X. Li, Z. Zhu, and X. Pan, “Knowledge cultivating for 
intelligent decision making in small & middle 
businesses,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 1, no. 1, 
May 2010, pp. 2479–2488. 
[35] 
H. Hwang, I.-C. Chang, F. Chen, and S. Wu, 
“Investigation of the application of KMS for diseases 
classifications: A study in a Taiwanese hospital,” 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 34, no. 1, Jan. 
2008, pp. 725–733. 
[36] 
T. Sensky, “Knowledge management,” Advances in 
Psychiatric Treatment, vol. 8, no. 5, Sep. 2002, pp. 
387–395. 
[37] 
E. Ferlie and L. Fitzgerald, “The nonspread of 
innovations: the mediating role of professionals,” 
Academy of management …, vol. 48, no. 1, 2005, pp. 
117–134. 
[38] 
P. Guven-Uslu, “Uses of Performance Metrics in 
Clinical and Managerial Networks,” Public Money and 
Management, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 95–100, Apr. 2006. 
[39] 
R. Finn and J. Waring, “Organizational Barriers to 
Architectural Knowledge and Teamwork in Operating 
Theatres,” Public Money and Management, vol. 26, no. 
2, Apr. 2006, pp. 117–124. 
[40] 
D. P. Lorence and R. Churchill, “Incremental adoption 
of information security in health-care organizations: 
implications for document management.,” IEEE 
transactions on information technology in biomedicine : 
a publication of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society, vol. 9, no. 2, Jun. 2005, pp. 169–73. 
[41] 
G. Currie and O. Suhomlinova, “The Impact of 
Institutional Forces Upon Knowledge Sharing in the 
UK NHS: The Triumph of Professional Power and the 
Inconsistency of Policy,” Public Administration, vol. 
84, no. 1, Mar. 2006, pp. 1–30. 
[42] 
D. Weir and K. Hutchings, “Cultural embeddedness 
and contextual constraints: knowledge sharing in 
Chinese and Arab cultures,” Knowledge and Process 
Management, vol. 12, no. 2, Apr. 2005, pp. 89–98. 
[43] 
H. S. Jørgensen, H. Nakayama, H. O. Raaschou, and T. 
S. Olsen, “Effect of blood pressure and diabetes on 
stroke in progression.,” Lancet, vol. 344, no. 8916, Jul. 
1994, pp. 156–9. 
[44] 
J. a D. R. N. Appuhamy, E. Kebreab, and J. France, “A 
mathematical model for determining age-specific 
diabetes incidence and prevalence using body mass 
index.,” Annals of epidemiology, vol. 23, no. 5, May 
2013, pp. 248–54. 
[45] 
S. A. Hunt, W. T. Abraham, M. H. Chin, A. M. 
Feldman, G. S. Francis, T. G. Ganiats, M. Jessup, M. A. 
Konstam, D. M. Mancini, K. Michl, J. A. Oates, P. S. 
Rahko, M. A. Silver, L. W. Stevenson, and C. W. 
Yancy, “2009 focused update incorporated into the 
ACC/AHA 2005 Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Heart Failure in Adults: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines: 
develope,” Circulation, vol. 119, no. 14, Apr. 2009, pp. 
e391–479. 
[46] 
Penn Medicine, “Brain Insulin Resistance Contributes 
to Cognitive Decline in Alzheimer’s Disease,” 2012. 
[Online]. Available: 
http://www.uphs.upenn.edu/news/News_Releases/2012
/03/insulin/. [Accessed: 13-Mar-2014]. 
[47] 
S. L. Murphy, J. Xu, K. D. Kochanek, and V. Statistics, 
“National Vital Statistics Reports Deaths : Final Data 
for 2010,” vol. 61, no. 4, 2013. 
[48] 
International Diabetes Federation, “Saudi Arabia | 
International Diabetes Federation,” 2014. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.idf.org/membership/mena/saudi-
arabia. [Accessed: 19-Sep-2014]. 
[49] 
J. E. Shaw, R. a Sicree, and P. Z. Zimmet, “Global 
estimates of the prevalence of diabetes for 2010 and 
2030.,” Diabetes research and clinical practice, vol. 87, 
no. 1, Jan. 2010, pp. 4–14. 
[50] 
A. K. Alhowaish, “Economic costs of diabetes in Saudi 
Arabia.,” Journal of family & community medicine, 
vol. 20, no. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 1–7. 
[51] 
X.-H. Meng, Y.-X. Huang, D.-P. Rao, Q. Zhang, and Q. 
Liu, “Comparison of three data mining models for 
predicting diabetes or prediabetes by risk factors.,” The 
Kaohsiung journal of medical sciences, vol. 29, no. 2, 
Feb. 2013, pp. 93–9. 
[52] 
C.-D. Chang, C.-C. Wang, and B. C. Jiang, “Using data 
mining techniques for multi-diseases prediction 
modeling of hypertension and hyperlipidemia by 
common risk factors,” Expert Systems with 
Applications, vol. 38, no. 5, May. 2011, pp. 5507–5513. 
[53] 
M. Suh, J. Woodbridge, T. Moin, M. Lan, N. Alshurafa, 
L. Samy, B. Mortazavi, H. Ghasemzadeh, A. Bui, S. 
Ahmadi, and M. Sarrafzadeh, “Dynamic Task 
Optimization in Remote Diabetes Monitoring 
Systems,” 2012 IEEE Second International Conference 
on Healthcare Informatics, Imaging and Systems 
Biology, Sep. 2012, pp. 3–11. 
[54] 
A. Rocha, A. Martins, J. C. Freire Junior, M. N. Kamel 
Boulos, M. E. Vicente, R. Feld, P. van de Ven, J. 
Nelson, A. Bourke, G. ÓLaighin, C. Sdogati, A. Jobes, 
L. Narvaiza, and A. Rodríguez-Molinero, “Innovations 
in health care services: the CAALYX system.,” 
International journal of medical informatics, vol. 82, 
no. 11, Nov. 2013, pp. e307–20.  
 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

