Analysis on the Impact of GDPR in Healthcare-related Blockchain Solutions and
Guidelines for Achieving Compliance
Christos Kontzinos
Decision Support Systems Lab
National Technical University of Athens
Athens, Greece
e-mail: ckon@epu.ntua.gr
Panagiotis Kapsalis
Decision Support Systems Lab
National Technical University of Athens
Athens, Greece
e-mail: pkapsalis@epu.ntua.gr
Spiros Mouzakitis
Decision Support Systems Lab
National Technical University of Athens
Athens, Greece
e-mail: smouzakitis@epu.ntua.gr
Michael Kontoulis
Decision Support Systems Lab
National Technical University of Athens
Athens, Greece
e-mail: mkontoulis@epu.ntua.gr
Ourania Markaki
Decision Support Systems Lab
National Technical University of Athens
Athens, Greece
e-mail: omarkaki@epu.ntua.gr
Dimitris Askounis
Decision Support Systems Lab
National Technical University of Athens
Athens, Greece
e-mail: askous@epu.ntua.gr
Haralampos Karanikas
Datamed S.A.
Athens, Greece
e-mail: h.karanikas@gmail.com
Alexandros Christodoulakis
Datamed S.A.
Athens, Greece
e-mail: alexandroschristodoulakis8@gmail.com
Panagiotis Dimitrakopoulos
Datamed S.A.
Athens, Greece
e-mail: pdimitrakopoulos@datamed.gr
Abstract—Blockchain is an emerging technology that offers
decentralised data management capabilities in a distributed
ledger. While the initial and main domain of application has
been and continues to be that of cryptocurrencies and their use
in secure, digital economic transactions, blockchain’s inherent
properties for security, immutability and transparency make it
an excellent solution for various domains that deal with
personal or even sensitive data such as the domain of
healthcare.
At
the
same
time,
the
radical
increase
of
digitisation in healthcare, as well as automation of processes,
robotics, and the rise of medical sensors and devices also led to
an unprecedented rise in medical data availability. This fact
has brought forth citizen and societal concerns regarding the
safety of their medical data and the transparency of data
transactions that they engage in, especially given that medical
data are sensitive. To address these and other concerns, in the
European Union, the European Commission established in
2016 that General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) to
establish user rights concerning their data as well as set out the
obligations of an organisation that is responsible for storing,
managing and processing said data. Some of the articles of the
GDPR, while integral to safeguard a user’s rights, are opposite
to
the
technical
capabilities
of
innovative
technologies,
blockchain being one of them. The scope of this publication is
to present blockchain, describe its potential in the healthcare
domain, list limitations between blockchain and the GDPR,
and finally provide guidelines to reconcile the two, acting as a
roadmap for researchers and organisations who are developing
blockchain applications in healthcare and other domains.
Keywords-blockchain; healthcare; GDPR; sensitive data;
patient rights.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Blockchain is a technology that enables decentralised
data management in a distributed ledger [1, 2]. It consists of
a number of blocks, which are interconnected and represent a
set of transactions [3]. The structure of blockchain involves
the distribution of a ledger’s blocks in a number of peer-to-
peer nodes of a given data infrastructure instead of being
stored centrally [4]. Each block, in addition to the data stored
in it, contains a cryptographic hash, the hash of the previous
block, and the timestamp of its creation. A hash is generated
with the help of cryptographic hash functions and is the
representation of the block data as it is directly dependant on
them. For this reason, it can be used to verify the integrity of
data transactions contained in each block. In addition, the
hash of each block depends on the hash of the previous block
in the chain, which essentially makes the entire blockchain
ledger immutable, given that any change to a block will
change the hash, not only of that block but of all following
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

blocks as well. In addition, blockchain is not managed by a
central
authority,
and
maintains
the
integrity
of
the
transaction history in the system through consent algorithms
that require some form of network majority to validate and
accept a system change. Consequently, blockchain solutions
empower the users by providing them not only with the
capability to manage and share their data as they see fit but
also with voting rights that are important to achieve network
consensus.
Blockchain first appeared in 2008 and has become
widely
known
for
its
use
as
a
public
account
for
cryptocurrencies
such
as
bitcoin
and
Ethereum.
Nevertheless, it can also be used in other domains to create
permanent, public, and transparent data management systems
[5]. In fact, in recent years, the added value of blockchain
has been realised by the research community and various
organisations that propose and develop innovative solutions
in
areas
other
than
cryptocurrencies
such
as
health,
education, public administration, and supply chains among
others. Regardless of the scope of the application, the general
operation of a blockchain can be seen in Figure 1.
Figure 1. High level operation of a blockchain.
It is widely accepted that blockchain can be an effective
and most importantly secure solution in any field involving
data transactions. Smart contracts (contracts that can be
executed/implemented
partially
or
completely
without
human interaction) also play a big role not only in providing
data protection but also by adding a degree of automation in
the management and validation of transactions in the system
[6]. Given that in the general case of an open, public
blockchain, users have ownership of their data, smart
contracts are used to help them define the rights (access,
sharing, processing rights etc.) that third party users have on
specific pieces of data. Overall, blockchain networks ensure
continuous availability, reliability, security, durability, and
integrity in a given network or system [4]. The main reason
that allows blockchain to have such a wide scope is that at
any time, network users can know the system status. To
increase security and trust in the network, blockchain
includes various mechanisms through which a transaction is
secured [4], the main ones being the proof of existence and
non-existence (it can be easily verified with certainty if an
item exists in the system), the proof of time (when
information is stored in the blockchain, the time at which it
was added is also stored as part of the transaction’s
metadata), the proof of order (in case of network congestion,
the order in which some requests/transactions were made is
stored as well), the proof of authorship (data entries in the
blockchain include details of the user who added them) and
the proof of ownership (the owner of a specific item is
always known).
The main scope of this publication is to present the
potential
of
blockchain
for
developing
secure
data
management systems in the domain of healthcare, address
legal, ethical and societal challenges and obligations and
provide guidelines for the development of not only secure
but legally compliant blockchain solutions when it comes to
managing sensitive medical data.
Section I provides the introduction to the document,
explains in short, the operation of a generic blockchain
system and describes the scope of the publication. Section II
includes a bibliographic research on the potential of
blockchain systems in healthcare and describes the current
European
and
national
legislations
that
impact
the
development of blockchain solutions. Section III lists
successful
practices
and
provides
guidelines
for
the
development of ethical blockchain systems. Finally, Section
IV concludes the document and provides ideas for future
work.
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II.
BLOCKCHAIN IN HEALTH AND GDPR COMPLIANCE
A.
Blockchain in Healthcare
Blockchain is an emerging technology that can be
applied in various domains. In healthcare, blockchain’s
inherent
properties
for
security,
immutability,
decentralisation, and transparency can help reengineer many
everyday
processes
for
both
patients
and
healthcare
practitioners, as well as develop and implement more
innovative and effective ICT healthcare systems. Blockchain
can initially be used as a database, given that in traditional
medical/hospital
systems,
efficient
and
secure
data
management comes with high installation and maintenance
costs to ensure data safety when it comes to sensitive
medical data. This fact can also result in ineffective
communication and coordination among systems of different
healthcare providers (lack of trust when it comes to data
sharing), leading to patients having their medical data split
among
various
ICT
platforms
in
fragmented
form.
Blockchain significantly reduces these problems by ensuring
data integrity and maintainability across all devices and
systems
connected
to
the
network,
since
every
data
transaction leaves a digital trail, thus ensuring visibility of
actions, while also reducing the possibility of system
malfunction, due to the fact that there is no central point of
failure. In other words, in a blockchain network, the creation
of a new block of data (which represents a specific number
of data transactions) must follow specific rules, usually
hardcoded in the system and governed by smart contracts
and must also achieve system consensus to be included in the
ledger. Blockchain makes users responsible for their data, by
also allowing them to define the access rights of third parties
to it. Giving control of the data back to the patients and the
users of the network and not only to healthcare organisations,
ensures their correct use (existence of greater transparency
and increased security). As such, blockchain systems are
more secure against attacks and eavesdropping, so cases of
malicious
use
are
virtually
impossible
[7].
Figure 2. Blockchain Projects and Initiatives in Healthcare [11].
In modern healthcare, the prevailing standard for health
data management is the Electronic Health Record or EHR,
which represents the amalgamation of health and medical
data concerning a patient in digital form. Nevertheless, the
low degree of digitisation in the sector, in combination with
the increased costs for the adoption of EHR systems hinders
their widespread use and implementation in more medical
processes. It is considered that the introduction of EHRs in
blockchain-based medical platforms could increase overall
data
interoperability
in
the
domain,
and
improve
communication
and
coordination
among
heterogeneous
healthcare providers, in addition to reducing costs for
managing
security
and
data
governance
issues
[8].
Blockchain offers a robust infrastructure and an additional
level of security that can be implemented with no extra cost,
compared
to
traditional
systems.
This
allows
the
development of value-adding applications and services on
top of the blockchain ledger that can in turn facilitate mass
analyses of medical data, freeform queries on a patient’s
data, personalisation of a patient’s profile, notifications etc.
In traditional systems, such applications usually operate in
the isolated ICT environment of each respective healthcare
provider to minimise security risks, while analysis of
patients’ data requires their informed consent. Such issues
are minimised when patients have control over their data and
decide who can have access to them and for what purpose.
Moreover, every action that requires blockchain data leaves a
digital trail, thus increasing overall transparency and trust in
the system and its stakeholders. Another innovative concept
when it comes to blockchain in healthcare, includes the use
of cryptocurrencies (peer-to-peer decentralised electronic
form of money, which is based on cryptographic principles
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to ensure network security and authenticate transactions) [9]
to
facilitate
economic
transactions
in
the
network.
Companies, such as Bowhead Health, have developed such
platforms, where users can make their data available to
researchers and receive cryptocurrencies as compensation
[10]. Finally, blockchain can be used to combat counterfeit
drugs and prescriptions. Applying blockchain principles to
the pharmaceutical supply chains (usually in conjunction
with Internet of Things devices, such as sensors and
surveillance systems) increases visibility and reliability
throughout the life cycle of a drug. The increased interest in
the healthcare domain for blockchain solutions is evident by
the sheer number of initiatives and applications, as shown in
Figure 2.
B.
GDPR and National Legislations
The
General
Data
Protection
Regulation
(GDPR)
2016/679 [12] is a piece of legislation that was developed to
safeguard data protection and privacy for all individuals
within
the
European
Union
(EU)
and
the
European
Economic Area (EEA). It also governs the export of personal
data outside of the EU and EEA regions. The GDPR is
primarily intended to give individuals control over their
personal data and to simplify the rules of compliance for
international companies by consolidating regulations within
the EU [13]. It was issued on 14 April 2016 and entered into
force on 25 May 2018 [14].
According to the GDPR, personal data is defined as
information
that
describes
an
individual,
such
as
identification,
physical
characteristics,
education,
employment, financial status, interests, activities, and habits
among others. In addition, the personal data of a person
referring to his/her racial or ethnic origin, political views,
religious or philosophical beliefs, medical records or health
status,
social
welfare,
love
life,
criminal
prosecution,
convictions
as
well
as
participation
in
associations/
organisations related to the above are characterised as
sensitive. Sensitive data is protected by law with stricter
regulations compared to personal data [15] and cannot be
used to identify or profile an individual. According to the
GDPR, citizens have a number of rights [16] with regard to
their personal data, the most important of which are the
rights to information, access, correction, deletion, objection,
notification, automatic decision making and data portability.
To ensure compliance with the above, according to the
GDPR, the management of personal data by companies and
other
organisations
should
be
explicitly
defined
and
governed by specific principles [17].
To begin with, organisations must ensure beyond any
reasonable doubt that there are legitimate reasons for
collecting and using personal data by obtaining the informed
consent of their clients for such purposes. In addition, and
regarding data processing, companies must ensure that they
accurately store only the data that is necessary for the
purpose of the processing for which consent has been
obtained (data minimisation principle). The explicit consent
of individuals is also required for the transfer and processing
of their data by third parties. For this reason, consent forms
are used, which state in detail the purposes of data collection,
as well as the processing they will undergo. To comply with
the above, the GDPR recommends that organisations appoint
a data protection officer (DPO), who acts as a single point of
contact between customers, the organisation and supervising
authorities and provides advice on security measures. and
data protection policies. Finally, the GDPR recommends
conducting a data protection impact assessment (DPIA) to
identify and manage potential threats to personal data,
especially in systems that implement innovative/emerging
technologies in traditional systems.
As already mentioned, according to the GDPR, medical
information about a person is considered as sensitive
personal data. As such, it is a given that organisations active
in the health sector are responsible for storing and processing
medical data by following the basic provisions of the GDPR.
However, in most countries of the EU there are some
additional fundamental rights regarding patient data, which
are defined by national legislations and must be respected by
organisations that operate in said countries. For example, in
the Greek legislation, according to article 12 of Law 2472/
97 [18], patients have the right to access their data and
receive their official medical files, certified from the
healthcare facility where they have been treated. In addition,
law 3418/2005 [19] regulates the conditions for granting
access rights to a patient's medical record to a relative. This
right of access is allowed only in exceptional cases, in which
the third party acts as a legal representative, has an official
written authorisation, or to protect the vital interests of
patients in cases that they are unable to provide their consent
(e.g., a patient has lost consciousness). On the other hand,
medical professionals, especially when they also act as data
controllers, have the obligation to report accidental or illegal
damage, loss, alteration, and disclosure (unauthorised) of
data to the respective supervisory authorities. To comply
with
the
aforementioned
rights
and
obligations,
data
controllers
must
provide
patients
with
the
relevant
documents that describe the respective regulations and
ensure they have their explicit and informed consent
(temporary or permanent) for processing their data.
III.
ACHIEVING GDPR COMPLIANCE IN BLOCKCHAIN
PROJECTS AND INITIATIVES
GDPR
compliance
when
it
comes
to
blockchain,
concerns the way that this technology is used in various
cases and applications and is considered to be a critical issue
for the European Commission. Therefore, there are some
important issues that need to be addressed, under the GDPR,
regarding the protection of personal data in a blockchain. In
particular, the structure and storage of data in a blockchain
network is done in such a way that it does not allow the
deletion or correction of data once it is registered in the
chain, according to the immutability property. Therefore,
even if the controller of a network can be identified, it
becomes impossible for that controller to delete or update the
file of a transaction without irreversibly damaging the
blockchain ledger, since the hash of each block (which is
representative of the data in the block) is also dependent on
the hash of the previous block. In other words, blockchain is
built entirely on the assurance that transactions will never be
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

forgotten or deleted, aiming to build decentralised trust as
well as develop and expand the network of participants.
Nevertheless, the correction and deletion of personal data
are two basic rights provided to data owners by the GDPR.
To comply with GDPR provisions, organisations developing
blockchain
applications
employ
various
encryption
techniques, in combination with the destruction of the key
that provides access to the blockchain data. Another
technique that is widely used is the storage of data in central
databases and the use of blockchain to store and verify
transactions between users of the system, thus minimising
the security and privacy risks arising from the need to respect
GDPR regulations. Especially regarding the right to be
forgotten, non-blockchain storage allows deletion of user
data. The fact that the data cannot be deleted from the
blockchain does not affect the system in this case, since after
data deletion from the centralised storage the only data
remaining
in
the
blockchain
are
the
hashes
of
the
transactions, which cannot lead to the identification of the
user (especially since the data to which the hashes point have
been deleted). The same is true in networks where data
storage is done in a decentralised manner, such as in a
private cloud or the mobile device of each user.
The aforementioned GDPR obligations do not mean that
blockchain is an ineffective solution that is hard
to
implement and maintain in healthcare ICT systems. In
Section II, it was explained that blockchain can actually
solve most current challenges and shortcomings. In fact, in a
way, blockchain and the GDPR are similar as they both
focus on empowering the user and increasing visibility, data
privacy and security. The only issue when it comes to
developing GDPR-compliant blockchain systems is that of
data deletion/correction and that can be bypassed as already
explained. However, the fact of the matter remains that
blockchain
is
an
emerging
technology
and
its
implementation in domains other than cryptocurrencies is
relatively new. One the one hand, this means that users and
stakeholders of blockchain systems are largely unfamiliar
with the technology and oftentimes suspicious of its
attributes, which makes sense as the actual algorithmic part
that ensures security in a blockchain is not easy to
comprehend.
On the other hand, and given that non-
cryptocurrency blockchains are just now emerging, the
technical specifications of implementing such systems have
not yet been specified for each distinct domain in a way that
ensures legal and ethical compliance and at the same time
maximises the effectiveness of the technology. This should
be viewed as an opportunity to set out the legal and ethical
requirements that must be met in such cases and create
roadmaps that will guide blockchain development efforts in
the future. While, different areas of implementation have
their own requirements and require different roadmaps, the
consolidation of legal and ethical obligations by the GDPR
means that knowledge generated for a given domain may be
transferred and applied in other domains as well.
As such, in healthcare-related blockchain projects the
following actions are deemed as necessary to guide the
efforts for achieving GDPR compliance.
1.
Informed consent: Blockchain initiatives must draft
informed consent forms that set out the rights of patients
and the legal obligations of the data controller and
participating organisations. If user data populate the
system, the consent form must explicitly explain the
reasons for data gathering and ensure that those reasons
are grounded on a legal basis. The same is true for the
analysis of user data and their use by third parties.
2.
Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA): While there
are a number of prerequisites that define whether a
DPIA must be performed, in healthcare blockchains that
deal with sensitive data, a DPIA is considered necessary
in
almost
all
cases.
The
DPIA
is
an
excellent
opportunity
for
blockchain
initiatives
to
pinpoint
potential risks and explain how such risks will be
resolved. It is imperative to note that a DPIA must be
exhaustive when it comes to data privacy risks. For
example, even if malicious attacks in a blockchain
system are almost impossible, this risk should still be
mentioned in a DPIA along with the explanation of how
blockchain maintains system security. This should also
be seen as an opportunity to educate non-technical
stakeholders
and
legal
entities
on
blockchain’s
properties and steadily increase trust in the technology.
3.
Appointment of a DPO: Every blockchain development
effort should have a DPO appointed. It is important that
DPOs have legal backgrounds and are knowledgeable
on the GDPR, since they validate the measures taken at
each step and can also act as a point of contact with
national and EU GDPR offices for clarifications and
other matters.
4.
Privacy-by-design: It is important that the privacy by
design principle is followed when developing a medical
blockchain, meaning that all security measures must be
set out from the start, before the system is implemented.
In a medical blockchain, the privacy-by-design principle
sets out the following conditions/measures:
a.
Non-blockchain storage: To comply with the
users’ right of data deletion, all personal and
sensitive data must be stored in non-blockchain
repositories. In that case, the blockchain adds
an additional level of security in the system as
it validates all data transactions. In that case,
the non-blockchain solutions that may be used
by patients for data storage (e.g., cloud, IPFS,
mobile devices) must also be set out from the
beginning.
b.
Anonymisation/pseudonymisation: Despite the
security offered by blockchain, it is considered
a good practice to anonymise/pseudonymise
personal and sensitive data that can lead to a
user’s identification.
c.
Patients’ rights: It is important that all legal
requirements that concern patient rights on
their data (access, sharing, deletion etc.) are set
out before development starts. This usually
entails
researching
the
legal
and
ethical
landscape, stakeholder interviews etc. When
such legal requirements are set out, they can be
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

programmed in smart contracts, which are used
to verify whether a data transaction can be
performed.
It
can
be
surmised
from
the
above
that
GDPR
compliance requires informed consent, risk assessment, and
the design of all security measures before development
starts. In addition, blockchain initiatives and consortia should
periodically assess the legal and ethical landscape to uncover
changes or updates in the respective legislation or even
innovative approaches that facilitate compliance.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND NEXT STEPS
The
scope
of
this
publication
was
to
showcase
blockchain as an emerging technology that can facilitate the
reengineering of data governance practices in healthcare, as
well as assess the respective legal and ethical landscape so
that guidelines for compliance can be generated. All in all, it
can be surmised that the GDPR is not a piece of legislation
aiming to create limitations for innovative technologies, but
rather to set out the requirements that must be met by
technical solutions to ensure privacy and security. In fact,
when the GDPR came into practice, many researchers
thought that the right to data deletion will mean the end for
EU blockchain initiatives. However, that is not the case as it
led to blockchain’s role as a security infrastructure to come
into the forefront of technical solutions instead of its role as
a database. At the moment, the end goals of blockchain and
the GDPR seem quite similar, both aiming to empower the
data owner and bring forth a new age in data management.
The guidelines that have been generated to achieve GDPR
compliance are not hard to implement and keep track of,
while the technical requirements that must be met follow the
lines
of
effective
programming
practices
instead
of
imposing hard constraints that will affect the end-result. It is
imperative that in this period, researchers, legal experts and
developers
work
together
to
set
out
roadmaps
for
compliance in various areas and domains. Such roadmaps
will facilitate more ethical technical solutions in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper was written under the context of the IMPILO
project, which is funded by the Greek operational program
"Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship, Innovation" - EPANEK
(2014–2020),
in
the
national
action:
"RESEARCH
-
CREATE - INNOVATE", with project code T1EDK-01382.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Esposito, A. Santis, G. Tortora, H. Chang, and K.K.R.
Choo, “Blockchain: A panacea for healthcare cloud-based
data security and privacy?” IEEE Cloud Computing 5, pp.
31–37, 2018.
[2]
S
Nakamoto,
“Bitcoin:
A
peer-to-peer
electronic
cash
system”, 2008. Available at: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.
[3]
K. Peterson, R. Deeduvanu, P. Kanjamala, and K. Boles, “A
blockchain based approach to health information exchange
networks.” Proceedings of NIST Workshop
Blockchain
Healthcare, Gaithersburg, pp. 1–10, 2016.
[4]
D.
Drescher,
“Blockchain
basics:
A
non-technical
introduction in 25 steps.” 1st ed. Apress, Frankfurt, 2017.
[5]
K. Kotobi and S.G. Bilen, “Secure blockchains for dynamic
spectrum
access:
A
decentralized
database
in
moving
cognitive radio networks enhances security and user access.”,
ieee vehicular technology magazine 13.1, pp. 32-39, 2018.
[6]
P.
Franco,
“Understanding
bitcoin:
Cryptography,
engineering, and economics.” 1st ed. Wiley Finance Series,
New York, NY, 2014.
[7]
C.C. Agbo, Q.H. Mahmoud, and J.M. Eklund, “Blockchain
technology in healthcare: A systematic review.” Healthcare.
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute, pp. 56, 2019.
[8]
A. Petre and N. Hai, “Opportunities and challenges of
blockchain technology in the healthcare industry.” Medecine
sciences 34(10), pp. 852-856, 2018.
[9]
T. Polansek, "CME, ICE prepare pricing data that could boost
bitcoin".
Available
at:
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-
cme-group-bitcoin-idUSKCN0XT1G1,
2016.
Accessed
in
August 2020.
[10] Bowhead
Health,
Bowhead.
Available
at:
https://bowheadhealth.com/. Accessed in August 2020.
[11] A.
Coravos,
“Where
are
the
healthcare
blockchains?”,
Available at: https://blog.andreacoravos.com/where-are-the-
healthcare-blockchains-8fcf6a3e28f8.
Accessed
in
August
2020.
[12] European Commission, “Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the
European parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016.”
European Commission, Brussels. Available at: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj. Accessed in August 2020.
[13] Council of the European Union, “Presidency of the Council:
Compromise text. Several partial general approaches have
been instrumental in converging views in Council on the
proposal for a General Data Protection Regulation in its
entirety. The text on the Regulation which the Presidency
submits for approval as a General Approach appears in
annex.”
Brussels,
2015.
Available
at:
https://www.swlaw.com/publications/legal-alerts/2544.
Accessed in August 2020.
[14] European Parliament, “Implementation of GDPR since 25
May 2018. Available at: https://eugdpr.org/. Accessed in
August 2020.
[15] Administration of Personal Data Protection, “General Data
Protection Regulation.” Available at: https://www.dpa.gr/
portal/page?_pageid=33,213319&_
dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL. Accessed in August 2020.
[16] European Commission, “General Data Protection Regulation
– chapter 3.” GDPR, 2016. Available at: https://gdpr-info.eu/
art-3-gdpr/. Accessed in August 2020.
[17] European Commission, “General Data Protection Regulation
– chapter 5.” GDPR, 2016. Available at: https://gdpr-info.eu/
art-5-gdpr/. Accessed in August 2020.
[18] Greek Government Gazette, “Law 2472/1997, Protection of
citizens from personal data processing– Right of access
(article
12).
“SGG
50/A/10.4.1997.
Available
at:
https://www.dpa.gr/portal/
page?_pageid
=33,19052&_dad=portal &_schema=PORTAL#12. Accessed
in August 2020.
[19] Greek Government Gazette, “Law 3418/2005, Code of
medical ethics.” SGG 287/Α/28.11.2005. Available at: 
http://www.dpa.gr/APDPXPortlets/htdocs/documentDisplay.
jsp?docid=162,112,178,83,91,84,31,147. Accessed in August
2020.
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

