Supporting eHealth Innovations: an Insurer’s Perspective 
Ruud Janssen, Sikke Visser, Elles Gyaltsen-Lohuis, Marike Hettinga 
Research group IT-innovation in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
Email: {TJWM.Janssen}{S.Visser}{EGE.Lohuis}{M.Hettinga}@windesheim.nl 
 
Abstract—Health care insurers play a vital role in the 
implementation of eHealth and other care innovations within 
the health care sector. Yet, very little is said in the literature 
about how innovations are being evaluated by insurers, and 
what criteria are being used to do so. This paper describes the 
results of a case study into the evaluation process and criteria of 
a large health care insurer in The Netherlands. The results show 
that experts from several departments within the insurer are 
involved, that these experts each bring their own set of criteria 
to the table, and that the decision to provide support for an 
innovation (e.g., by funding its wider implementation or by 
reimbursing its use) is based on consensus between these 
experts. Based on these results, an interactive website was 
developed to better inform entrepreneurs, project managers, 
researchers and other people active in the field of eHealth 
innovation about the insurer’s role and criteria for supporting 
eHealth innovations. 
Keywords-eHealth; innovation; health care; insurer; support; 
evaluation; criteria. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper describes a follow-up study of the research 
project Successful Entrepreneurship in eHealth [1]. During 
this project an eHealth innovation map for the Dutch health 
care system was developed: a diagram showing entrepreneurs 
in eHealth (a) which health care parties to involve during the 
implementation process, (b) their roles and their mutual 
relations, (c) their interests in eHealth innovation, and (d) the 
kinds of evidence that can be used to convince these parties of 
the added value of an eHealth innovation [2]. Furthermore, a 
set of corresponding fact sheets and an interactive website 
were developed to provide eHealth entrepreneurs with concise 
information for choosing an appropriate innovation route 
within the health care system [3]. 
At the outset of the project, but also afterwards while 
disseminating the results to the wider audience of eHealth 
entrepreneurs, it was found that the role and interests of the 
health care insurer within the Dutch system were largely 
unclear to the entrepreneur. Based on this finding and 
facilitated by an additional research grant, the decision was 
made to conduct a follow-up study with the aim to shed more 
light on the insurer’s process and criteria for evaluating 
eHealth innovations. Such evaluation takes place, for 
instance, when an entrepreneur requests the support of an 
insurer by funding the implementation of an eHealth 
innovation by health care providers, or by reimbursing its use 
by health care providers or patients. It was expected that the 
current confusion among entrepreneurs about the insurer’s 
role (and the resulting mismatch of expectations when 
requesting support from an insurer) could thus be reduced. 
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first study 
into the process and criteria used by a health care insurer to 
evaluate health care innovations such as eHealth. For instance, 
the authors have searched extensively in the MEDLINE 
database [4] and found no results mentioning specific 
processes or criteria. The study was carried out in close 
cooperation with two innovation experts from a large Dutch 
health care insurer, who in this way were hoping to make the 
insurer’s role and interests more transparent to entrepreneurs. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section II describes the methods used for data collection and 
analysis, Section III reports on the main findings with respect 
to the insurer’s evaluation process and evaluation criteria, and 
Section IV summarizes the conclusions and next steps. 
II. 
METHOD 
A. Data collection 
During the study, data were collected in six ways: 
1) Interviews with two innovation experts 
A semi structured interview was held with two innovation 
experts from a large Dutch health insurer. The interview 
focused on the evaluation process and the evaluation criteria 
of this insurer. 
2) Screening of the insurer’s innovation portal 
The insurer’s innovation portal (a website and 
accompanying web form where health care innovations can be 
submitted by entrepreneurs and care providers to request the 
support from the insurer) was screened for any information 
pertaining to the process and criteria. 
3) Documentation of submissions and assessments 
The research team was provided with detailed 
documentation of all submitted innovations over the last 
quarter (17 in total), including written evaluations by all 
experts involved in the evaluation process. 
4) Observation of one expert meeting 
One researcher was present during the meeting where 
these submissions and their evaluations were discussed among 
all involved experts, and where decisions were made whether 
or not to provide support. Due to the confidential nature of the 
discussions only field notes were taken; no audio recordings 
were made and no pictures were taken. 
5) Documentation of decisions and considerations 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Two days after the meeting, the research team was 
provided with the written decisions and accompanying 
considerations that had been sent to the applicants. 
6) Consultation of two other experts 
Two other experts were frequently consulted during the 
study to check that the results were sufficiently representative 
of the processes and criteria of other insurers in The 
Netherlands: the first an innovation expert working at another 
insurer, and the second an eHealth program officer at a large 
national research funding agency.  
B. Data analysis 
Analysis of the collected data was performed in five 
stages: 
1) Extracting and assigning remarks, questions etc. 
All remarks, questions, suggestions etc. that were made as 
part of the evaluation of the 17 submitted innovations were 
extracted from the field notes, written assessments and 
decisions, and then assigned to the individual expert who 
made them. 
2) Grouping experts into expert roles 
Based on their job title and the department they worked 
for within the insurer, the individual experts were grouped into 
expert roles. 
3) Identifying the criteria per expert role 
All remarks and questions assigned to the experts within a 
single expert role were clustered (using the affinity 
diagramming technique [5]) to identify the criteria per role. 
4) Prioritization of the criteria 
The resulting criteria were then prioritized per role by all 
involved experts to arrive at a set of three main criteria per 
role. 
5) Fine-tuning the roles and criteria 
Throughout steps 2-4 the intermediate results were 
discussed with the two innovation experts that had been 
interviewed as part of the data collection process. Together 
with the research team they fine-tuned the roles and criteria 
based on feedback they obtained from their colleagues. 
C. Website development 
Based on the resulting expert roles and corresponding sets 
of main criteria, an interactive website was developed. The 
website had to document the insurer’s role in the health care 
system and its interests in eHealth innovation, the insurer’s 
evaluation process for eHealth innovations, and the criteria 
used within this process. As part of the development process, 
an evaluation of the website’s content and usability was 
carried out with three entrepreneurs. This was done by means 
of a structured user interface walkthrough [5]. 
III. 
FINDINGS AND RESULTS 
A. Evaluation process 
The insurer participating in this research has developed an 
innovation portal which is part of its website and where, year 
round, entrepreneurs and other health care innovators are 
invited to submit their ideas by means of a form. Among the 
questions asked in this form are: What patient needs are 
addressed by your idea? How does your idea improve the 
quality of care? How does your idea lower the cost of care? 
and What kind of support do you request from the insurer? 
All ideas submitted in this way are first assessed in 
writing, typically by three to five experts working within the 
insurer. Once every three to four months, the submitted ideas 
and the written assessments are discussed in a meeting 
between all involved experts. During the meeting that was 
observed, 17 ideas were discussed. Once consensus about an 
idea has been reached between the experts, the decision 
whether or not to support the idea is made and the applicant is 
notified. Applicants whose ideas have been accepted are 
invited for a follow-up meeting at the insurer. It may also 
happen that an applicant is requested to come up with 
additional information. 
B. Experts and expert roles 
Overall, 28 experts were involved in the evaluation of the 
17 submitted innovations. Among them were care and cure 
purchasers (8), innovation consultants (5), policy coordinators 
(5), pharmaceutical and medical advisors (4), commercial 
consultants (4), IT experts (1), and department managers (1). 
The experts worked for the departments purchasing (10), 
innovation (7), policy (4), commerce (4), and medical advice 
(3). Of these experts, 21 were involved in the written 
evaluation of the submitted innovations whereas 11 experts 
were present during the meeting where the submitted 
innovations were discussed. 
Based on job title and department and on feedback 
provided by the experts themselves, the experts were grouped 
into seven expert roles: the medical advisor, the innovation 
consultant, the policy coordinator, the proposition manager, 
the purchaser, the market consultant, and the technology 
consultant. The first and second columns of Table I list the 
expert roles and the respective scopes when evaluating 
innovations. For instance, the medical advisor role focuses on 
the medical quality of an innovation: does it conform to the 
state-of-the art in medical evidence and professional 
standards? 
C. Evaluation criteria 
Using the affinity diagramming technique [5] all questions 
corresponding to a single expert role were clustered to identify 
criteria. For instance, all questions and remarks made by the 
four medical and pharmaceutical experts in the written 
assessments and/or during the expert meeting, were all 
assigned to the medical expert role and then clustered. Affinity 
diagramming is particularly suited for this task since it allows 
topics to emerge from the data rather than from predefined 
categories. The topics that emerged in this way were 
financing, target group, patient problem, uniqueness, added 
value, and implementation, with each role contributing 
questions and remarks to one or more topics. 
Next, criteria were identified per topic. This was done in 
several iterations and in close co-operation with the experts 
themselves. As a final step, the generated criteria were 
prioritized to arrive at a set of three main criteria per role. See 
the third column of Table I. For instance, the medical advisor 
role uses cost effectiveness, medical evidence and substitution 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

of existing care as the three main criteria when evaluating an 
innovation. 
D. Interactive website 
Based on the results of the study, an interactive website [6] 
was developed for entrepreneurs, project managers, 
researchers and other people active in the field of eHealth 
innovation. The website consists of five pages: (1) a general 
introduction about the aim of the website, (2) a brief 
description of how to submit an innovation for evaluation by 
the insurer, (3) the main page where entrepreneurs can read 
about the insurer’s criteria and complete an assessment to 
learn how their own innovation might score when evaluated 
by the insurer, (4) background information about the insurer 
and its role within the health care system, and (5) links to 
relevant websites and organizations. 
The result of the assessment (see Figures 1 and 2) is 
explicitly not shown in terms of a ‘fail’ or ‘pass’ as this would 
be an unrealistic simplification. Rather, the result is indicated 
by seven color-coded avatars that each stand for one of the 
expert roles. An avatar’s color represents whether the 
respective expert role is likely to be convinced (green), 
undecided (orange) or unconvinced (red), and is determined 
by the answers given to three questions (either ‘yes’, ‘no’ or 
‘unsure’). For instance, for a green avatar the answers should 
include at least 2 yes’s and 0 no’s. Overall, this reflects the 
actual evaluation process, where the individual experts might 
be convinced, undecided or unconvinced and where the final 
decision is made based on a discussion where consensus 
between the experts is reached. 
IV. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
Health care insurers play a crucial role in the 
implementation of innovations within the health care sector. 
Yet, very little (if anything) is said in the literature about how 
innovations are being evaluated by insurers, and what criteria 
are being used to do so. Although the results presented here 
are based on the process and criteria of a single insurer, the 
study has delivered useful results and clearly deserves a 
follow-up. 
Such a follow-up study should, preferably, also be done in 
other countries with different health care systems. The process 
and criteria we found, must be determined by the 
characteristics of the health care system and the role of 
insurers within the system. For instance, the Dutch system can 
be characterized as a universal health care system with 
compulsory insurance carried out by competing private 
insurers [7]. This may explain why some criteria address the 
insurer’s image or customer retention. We expect that the 
criteria of insurers acting within other types of systems will to 
some extent be different. 
Besides contributing to the transparency about the 
insurer’s evaluation process and criteria, the study has also 
proven beneficial for the insurer itself. The co-operating 
experts were surprised to learn, after the first stages of the 
analysis, how much overlap existed between the remarks 
made and questions asked by every one of them. The ensuing 
iterations to fine-tune the expert roles and evaluation criteria 
has led to a greater awareness and a more streamlined 
evaluation process within the insurer. It also led to a strong 
involvement among the experts, who clearly saw the benefits 
of a greater transparency about the insurer’s evaluation 
process, 
such 
as 
fewer 
misunderstandings 
among 
entrepreneurs and a higher quality of future submissions. 
 During the last stages of the study, three representatives 
of the target group (all eHealth entrepreneurs) were invited to 
evaluate the website by means of a structured user interface 
walkthrough [5]. This has led to several improvements of the 
website. More importantly, it showed that the information 
presented on the website and the assessment are indeed useful. 
Figure 1. Part of the main page of the developed website. The avatars of four 
out of seven expert roles are visible.  
Figure 2. Part of the assessment. The three questions for the expert role 
medical advisor are visible. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

The participating entrepreneurs stressed the value of adding 
descriptions to the website of successful cases where insurer 
and entrepreneur have indeed co-operated in the wider 
implementation of an innovation. 
Overall, the study and website have received a warm 
welcome among entrepreneurs, insurers and government 
officials. Removing obstacles for health innovation is an 
important issue on the agenda of the Ministry of Public 
Health. Nevertheless, the actual added value of the website 
remains to be seen (for instance by studying the question: is 
there any difference in success rates among entrepreneurs who 
did and who didn’t consult the website before submitting their 
ideas to the insurer?). The Ministry of Public Health has, in 
the meantime, provided an additional grant to extend the study 
to more insurers, and to incorporate the description of several 
successful cases as requested by the entrepreneurs. The results 
will be reported at this conference in due time. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank the experts who contributed to 
this study: Matthijs van der Bijl and Tanya Levi (innovation 
consultants at health care insurer VGZ), Mirande Groener 
(eHealth program manager at health care insurer Achmea) and 
Dr. Inge Valstar (program officer at research funding agency 
ZonMw). The research described in this paper was made 
possible by a research grant of Stichting Innovatie Alliantie 
(NVG-3-2011-19-14M). 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Janssen et al., “Developing evidence guidelines for eHealth 
small and medium-sized enterprises,” Proc. eTELEMED 2013, 
Feb. 2013, pp. 92-95. 
[2] R. Janssen et al., “Innovation routes and evidence guidelines 
for eHealth Small and Medium-sized Enterprises,” Int. J. Adv. 
Life Sc., 2013, 5(3&4), pp. 188-203. 
[3] R. Janssen et al., “An eHealth innovation map for small and 
medium-sized enterprises,” Proc. eTELEMED 2014, Mar. 
2014, pp. 292-301. 
[4] See http://www.pubmed.gov. [Retrieved March, 2016] 
[5] J. Hackos and J. Redish, “User and task analysis for interface 
design,” New York: Wiley, 1998. 
[6] See 
http://www.watwildezorgverzekeraar.nl 
(in 
Dutch). 
[Retrieved March, 2016] 
[7] See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_health_coverage_ 
by_country#Netherlands. [Retrieved March, 2016] 
TABLE I. EXPERT ROLES, EVALUATION SCOPES AND MAIN EVALUATION CRITERIA 
Expert role 
Evaluates whether the innovation… 
Main evaluation criteria 
Medical advisor 
satisfies the state-of-the art in medical 
evidence and professional standards 
1. cost effectiveness (does it contribute to better health at equal or lower cost) 
2. medical evidence (is there any proof that it is safe and effective) 
3. substitution (can it replace a current treatment) 
Innovation consultant 
contributes to cost reduction while 
maintaining or improving quality of care 
1. business case (are costs balanced by benefits) 
2. stakeholder support (has it been developed in co-creation with stakeholders) 
3. pilot readiness (is it ready for a trial to evaluate its added value) 
Policy coordinator 
fits the insurer’s responsibilities and 
strategy 
1. patient problem (does it address an existing patient problem) 
2. insurer role (does it fit with the insurer’s role within the health care system) 
3. insurer strategy (does it fit with the insurer’s policy and strategy) 
Proposition manager 
has added value for the insurer and its 
subscribers 
1. insurer image (will it aid the insurer to distinguish itself from its competitors) 
2. customer retention (will it help to retain or attract customers) 
3. customer value (will it improve the insurer’s customer offerings) 
Purchaser 
can be reimbursed within the public 
health insurance regulations 
1. substitution (will it replace, not supplement, existing care) 
2. care regulations (can it be made to fit within current regulations) 
3. reimbursement regulations (is it reimbursable under current regulations) 
Market consultant 
addresses an existing patient need 
1. patient problem (does it address an existing patient problem) 
2. patient involvement (have patients been involved during its development) 
3. patient need (does it fit with patient needs and desires) 
Technology consultant 
is truly new 
1. scalability (can it be scaled to more care providers) 
2. uniqueness (is it unique compared to its alternatives) 
3. privacy & compliancy (is information handled according to relevant standards) 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

