A Concept of a Patient-centered Healthcare System  
Based on the Virtualized Networking and Information Infrastructure 
Artur Binczewski, Krzysztof Kurowski, Cezary Mazurek, Maciej Stroinski 
Poznan Supercomputing and Networking Center 
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences 
Poznan, Poland 
e-mail: {artur|kikas|mazurek|stroins}@man.poznan.pl 
 
 
Abstract—In the paper we introduce and discuss the concept of 
an architecture of a patient-centered eHealth ecosystem. It is 
composed of three layers which were developed around three 
autonomic types of platforms of services in eHealth. The first 
platform is a corporate eHealth network which is based on the 
concept of the LivingLab system introduced earlier. This level 
is concerned with specialized reference centers and is a natural 
place for a broad range of advanced tools and eHealth 
infrastructures. The next level is developed basing on the 
concept of regional healthcare networks. Some examples of 
such networks or projects in Poland are mentioned. Regional 
Healthcare Networks are the most natural environments which 
bring together all the actors involved in patients’ healthcare. 
The third level in the proposed architecture is related to the 
family (or individual) eHealth platforms. The environment of 
this kind is natural for storing, management of and access to 
personal health records. The concept of a proposed 
architecture was used to discuss its three main paradigms and 
their importance for the future global eHealth ecosystem. The 
presented approach assumes the evolutionary model which 
enables the virtualization on every level, new generation 
communication protocols between corresponding networks, 
and finally a smart electronic health record. 
Keywords-Regional Healthcare Networks; Virtualization; 
Electronic Patient Records; eHealth; Resource Management 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
These days, in the first two decades of the new century, 
we are becoming aware of rapid ICT development and 
widespread 
deployment 
of 
emergent 
services 
and 
applications across the world. Many barriers in further 
development of modern societies can be overcome since new 
services are enabled by ICT in sectors such as e-government, 
e-education and e-health. On the other hand, we are facing a 
new problem. The sustainable, dynamic growth of different 
local markets of new services creates new barriers 
aggravating the interoperability of systems like healthcare 
networks, which is crucial to enable users to access their data 
and services anytime and from any place. 
The improvement of the quality in healthcare systems 
depends on the relation between medical processes and ICT. 
Such a trend is visible all over the world; it is also 
particularly noticeable that many initiatives are undertaken in 
the European Union. A substantial effort has been made in 
order to define a strategy for founding and development of 
Regional Healthcare Networks (RHCNs) – eHealth systems 
on a macro regional scale. The example is the Baltic Sea 
macro region [1].  
This scope of integration between medical systems and 
ICT is the one of the most popular trends in recent years 
[2][3]. Due to this fact, Section II shortly presents the 
European strategy regarding RHCNs, and next we give some 
examples of those systems which are currently under 
development in Poland. One of them, the Wielkopolska 
Center of Telemedicine, is managed by the authors. 
However, the analysis of barriers and challenges in 
eHealth performed in the context of emergent new 
technologies, such as: Future Internet, grids, cloud 
computing, and ubiquitous computing [13] provides a basis 
for thoughts of fundamental manner. The principal sphere of 
healthcare is related to regional systems, but a very important 
place in the entire health ecosystem is assigned to other two 
areas: the domain of highly specialized medical aid as well 
as the field of at-home-care. The first one concerns 
specialized reference centers with adequate, knowledgeable 
human assets and equipped with unique diagnostic devices 
(which are very often associated with advanced ICT 
applications supporting medical processes). The second area 
is related to a patient home monitoring, assistance in chronic 
illness as well as prophylaxis. Though, these areas of 
medical treatment together with RHCNs, form a common, 
global system which the authors have compared to a tree 
structure in Section III (the Healthcare Tree). Next, through 
mapping this tree onto processes of integration with ICT we 
obtain the three-ply structure of networks: Family eHealth 
Net, Regional eHealth Net, and Corporate eHealth Net. We 
characterized them briefly in Section III. 
When we take a global sight over such a structure of 
eHealth networks and we consider it as an integrated system, 
we will notice a problem of an interoperability assurance 
within the structure. In Section IV and V, the authors 
concentrate on two areas of interoperability: communication 
and data layer. In the first case, broader use of network 
virtualization techniques as well as intelligent management 
of network resources and connected devices is propounded, , 
then the concept of Smart Electronic Health Record is 
introduced in the second case. 
II. 
REGIONAL HEALTHCARE NETWORKS  
For more than 10 years it has been regional e-Health 
systems which have been in close proximity to day-to-day 
health care, and in many cases have grown from the concept 
51
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

of Regional HealthCare Networks [4][5][6]. These types of 
systems became broadly deployed in Europe as well as many 
other countries, and allowed to boost the quality of 
healthcare through integration with ICT, which was noticed 
by  patients. 
A. European Strategy 
Improvement in healthcare in Europe is induced through 
setting appropriate priorities on the deployment of ICT 
means 
for 
health 
market 
(referenced 
as 
eHealth 
technologies). One of the fundamentals of the global strategy 
in this area was to build Regional Health Care Networks 
which aimed at combining three existing techniques into one 
regional health system: 
• 
Internet and web techniques, making access to 
advanced communication functionality easy 
• 
Security techniques, making the Internet usable for 
patient-related information.  
• 
Standardisation 
techniques, 
making 
integration 
possible with existing IT systems already in use by 
the professionals in the region [2]. 
Rapid development of RHCNs was in line with European 
view 
on 
healthcare, 
which 
perceives 
macroregional 
connections as a way for providing patient-centric services. 
Such seamless integration can be achieved only when new 
technical means are deployed in order to ensure the 
interoperability of existing eHealth systems. An appropriate 
action has been taken to build a technical platform to 
implement this policy [1][7].  
The strategic direction of the European Commission was 
also to enable the deployment of Europe-wide computer-
supported networks based on broadband infrastructures and 
Grid technologies. In parallel, a substantial effort has been 
made in developments of these technologies which are 
crucial for eHealth as well as for other application areas.  
B. Interoperability within common data space - examples 
Common diagnosis and information space for patient-
centered health services are related to all diagnosis devices 
which produce digital images that are gathered in electronic 
health records. These records collect all information about a 
patient 
(including 
the 
history 
of 
his/her 
medical 
examinations). It is obvious that all data must be organized 
in a completely secure environment and should be available 
for any kind of process related to patient treatment. 
Moreover, at the same time, all these data should serve as a 
basis for research related to early detection of diseases as 
well as prophylaxis. In particular, a patient who is treated 
outside the hospital or needs continuous medical surveillance 
should be remotely connected to his/her information space 
and parameters within this space should be monitored by 
his/her medical support.  
1) Wielkopolska Center of Telemedicine 
The Wielkopolska Center of Telemedicine project 
(WCT) aiming at establishing a telemedical infrastructure in 
the area of trauma in Wielkopolska started in May 2009 [8]. 
The objective of the project is to build a regional platform 
for remote medical teleconsultations allowing to introduce 
standardized communication in trauma. This platform will 
connect 26 hospitals from Wielkopolska with 7 clinical 
departments. In addition to the deployment of the platform 
for medical teleconsultations, the project also constructs the 
Medical Digital Library which collects anonymous medical 
data and provides this information through accompanying 
telemedical services of educational nature [9][10]. Both 
subsystems are closely coupled with each other to enable the 
sharing of data between them and allow users to seamlessly 
utilize services provided by both of these subsystems. WCT 
is also the field for prototype implementation of the concepts 
discussed thereinafter. 
2) Pomerania 
A telemedical network connecting 32 hospitals is under 
development in the Euroregion ‘Pomerania’. The network is 
to link 11 hospitals in the Zachodniopomorskie region 
(Poland) and 21 hospitals in Meklemburg-Vorpommern and 
Brandeburg (Germany). It is aimed at increasing the quality 
of medical services and increasing the diagnosis success rate 
in the region facing the decline in the number of available 
medical specialists. The project develops a system which 
will allow to order medical expertise through submitting a 
request containing a full set of medical information related to 
a given patient. The information will be centered around 
radiological images and additional documents containing 
useful information concerning the requested expert opinion. 
The project tackles challenges in such medical domains as 
teleradiology, telepathology, telestroke, teleophthalmology, 
telecardiology and teleurology. 
3) Regional System of Medical Information in Łódź 
The Regional System of Medical Information in Łódź 
aims at supporting management of the regional healthcare 
system. Its main goal is to improve the efficiency and quality 
of medical services. The system will bring real benefits for 
patients, namely better management and planning of medical 
services, which should facilitate easier access to specialists 
and shorter waiting time for visits.  
The new solution which involves 18 healthcare centers 
will have an influence on efficient administration of supplies. 
Additionally, through data aggregation, the system will 
facilitate the evaluation of regional public health.  
4) Medical Information System in Podkarpackie 
The Medical Information System in the Podkarpackie 
region will help in data exchange in the scope of: 
• 
electronic transfer of medical documentation, routine 
access to electronic documents which are relevant to 
continued treatment and finally an admission of 
service provider with regard to information about 
medical history of the patient; 
• 
access to electronic medical records enabled for 
patients and providing an information regarding 
planned and delivered healthcare services.  
The main priorities of the System are related to 
interoperability of IT systems in the scope of access to 
electronic 
medical 
records, organization 
of 
medical 
processes, healthcare management as well as standardization.  
C. Further development of RHCNs 
Over the last ten years we could observe a process of 
intensive development of ICT as well as substantial 
52
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

advancement in medical research. It also influenced the 
development of RHCNs. We are currently facing a new 
digital revolution. Its boundaries are set by way of expected 
fast networks/Internet, in which the user access interface is 
expected to be delivered at the level of 1 Gb/s (including 
mobile users) and backbone networks are headed towards 
terabit bandwidth. The most powerful computers will get to 
petaflops performance, and will be using advanced 
techniques of distributed processing in grids [11] and clouds 
[12] broadly. Technologies of Future Internet such as human 
(i.e. patient) digital surrounding, context- and semantics-
based services, knowledge sharing and, last but not least, 
user-friendly, human-to-machine natural interfaces. 
We have already set the concept of the integrated Health 
LivingLab platform against the above-mentioned trends in 
[13]. In this context a broader question about the significance 
of this development for eHealth global attitude and the role 
of future regional systems has to be raised. 
III. 
EHEALTH ECOSYSTEM 
A. The concept of eHealth ecosystem 
To some extent the healthcare system should be a 
reflection of some reality. Patients live in smaller or larger 
families within a particular area (i.e. regions). Consequently, 
it is natural that they look for help and care in their 
proximate surroundings. However, in difficult cases both 
patients and regional healthcare ‘actors’ look for any kind of 
support in collective competences and experience. More 
often than not and at the same shared level, the scientific 
research is carried out, and the unique diagnostic laboratories 
can be accessed together with other resources which might 
be helpful and promising in solving complex problems. Such 
healthcare ecosystem can be visualized as ‘the healthcare 
tree’ (Fig.1). 
After its integration with broadly understood advanced 
ICT tools, the healthcare tree makes up a three-layered 
architecture of the patient-centered e-Health ecosystem 
containing corporate eHealth platforms, regional eHealth 
platforms and family (or individual) eHealth platforms 
(Fig.2).  
B. Corporate Networks 
The first level of connectivity within the eHealth 
ecosystem is provided through the dedicated network. Parties 
which are usually connected to the Internet via different ISPs 
can join this backbone network through Virtual Private 
Network (VPN) connections provided for them by particular 
telecom operators or ISPs.  
This level can be associated with the range of university 
hospitals and main (national) specialistic medical centers. 
They are usually equipped with rare, complex diagnostic 
instruments, specialized ICT applications, which support 
medical processes. They are very often related with research 
on understanding and eradicating diseases or drug discovery. 
Therefore, we define this level as a corporate networks level. 
The authors declare in [13] that this type of a network can be 
effectively developed and deployed using scientific IT 
infrastructure 
(e.g. 
eInfrastructure 
in 
Europe, 
Cyberinfrastructure in USA). Such a trend has become a 
leading force for new strategies, e.g. ICT Infrastructures for 
e-Science in Europe [14] and US UCAN project with 
Internet2 in USA [15]. 
 The corporate network level can connect and provide 
other components which are essential for applications 
delivery. They may include applications for disease research 
and treatment organization, teleconsultations, medical 
teleeducation, virtual laboratory for medical imaging studies 
and diagnosis, as well as diagnosis support.  
C. Regional Networks 
Regional Healthcare Networks have been established in 
Europe in many different regions. They are generally one of 
the most important outcomes of EC strategies in the 
development of infrastructure for healthcare. The region is 
the most natural environment which brings together all the 
actors involved in patients’ healthcare. Some projects 
introduce collaboration as the most important feature of these 
networks at this moment [4].  
D. Private Family Networks 
The patient groups in private family networks will be, 
 
 
Figure 2.  Patient centered eHealth ecosystem 
 
 
Figure 1.  The Healthcare Tree 
53
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

first of all, families: it seems that due to the inheritance of 
certain diseases, or inheritance of susceptibility to diseases, 
enabling an integrated analysis of medical data concerning 
ancestors will potentially allow to diagnose diseases quicker 
or implement better prevention. As a new concept it requires 
more attention.  
The patient environment includes various biosensory 
equipment allowing to measure vital health signals or 
otherwise 
(semi-)automatically 
control 
diagnostic 
or 
therapeutic processes. Some examples of such equipment 
are: pulse oximeters, blood pressure monitors, glucose 
meters, ECG meters, weight scales or insulin pumps. These 
devices are usually connected to mobile phones, PDAs or PC 
computers to allow receiving of data from the sensors and 
transmitting the data for further processing. Due to their 
personal character such devices are a permanent part of the 
Private Family eHealth Network of the given patient. On the 
other hand, the patient may also be temporarily exposed to 
the activity of other equipment, or find him/herself in an 
environment where a specific condition is also monitored in 
addition to the patient’s vital signals. Such equipment 
includes various imaging modalities (e.g. USG or Computer 
Tomography) and public space environment sensors (e.g. 
measuring air temperature or pollution). Such devices will 
get connected to the Private Family eHealth Network for the 
time required to acquire the patient’s data and transfer them 
to his/her PDL. Finally, the backbone eHealth network will 
include, in addition to all networking devices allowing to 
maintain an active link between all systems in question, 
systems that either contain some vital information 
concerning the patient or should receive the data stored in 
PDL. These systems are, among others, hospital information 
systems (and information systems installed at other 
healthcare institutions) that store parts of patient’s Electronic 
Health Record (EHR) and serve as an entry point for the 
medical personnel supporting the patient. The concept of 
such network and application scenarios was introduced in 
[16]. 
E. The new concept for eHealth infrastructure  
In corporate networks interesting medical data which are 
broadly used in research are gathered. However, when 
looking from the research perspective, those medical data 
which are gathered in network from other layers, i.e. RHCNs 
and Family Networks, are of great importance. Thus, the 
problem of using these data is the main reason for building 
global or federated repositories of medical data. Such a 
scenario can be realized through mechanisms of the Medical 
Digital Library [9][10]. However, modern medicine is 
currently facing the problem of searching and processing 
within mass data space. To reduce this problem we propose 
to apply in the medical data layer a solution of Smart EHR, 
which was originally designed in [40]. 
To illustrate the potency of integration with ICT and to 
show how fragmented and interregional communication 
between platforms could be changed, gaining from 
technological achievements we concentrate on two areas of 
the interoperability: communication and data layer.  
IV. 
MECHANISMS FOR GLOBAL INTEROPERABILITY IN THE 
EHEALTH ECOSYSTEM 
A. Communication interoperability conditionning in the 
global eHealth system  
The internetworking communication is the first paradigm 
which is critical to guarantee the interoperability in the 
global eHealth system. This paradigm concerns both the 
communication between systems in the scope of the same 
architecture layer (i.e. within the corporate platforms or 
regional 
platforms 
or 
family 
platforms) 
and 
the 
communication between systems from separate layers.  
Private, family healthcare networks form an environment 
for communication of digital medical devices, which can be 
located in the patient surroundings: in their house or in their 
private space. Moreover, an environment of this kind is 
natural for storing, management of and access to Personal 
Health Records (PHRs). According to concepts introduced 
and realized by our team within two projects [17] and [18], 
these records are to be stored in the so-called Patient Digital 
Library [19]. We will continue the discussion further on, but 
evade issues which are related to standards for data 
acquisition from medical devices, standards for storage and 
representation of medical data as well as standards for 
communication in telemedicine.  
We will face the problem of communication between 
family eHealth networks with their neighborhood, mainly 
regional eHealth networks. This connection hereupon has to 
guarantee appropriate parameters in terms of bandwidth, 
robustness and security. Many authors (e.g.[20][21]) point 
out problems with sustenance and attainment of these 
parameters at the level required by eHealth applications. One 
should also remember that the communication with RHCN 
has the dynamic characteristics of the Internet (excluding 
specialized constant monitoring) in the extranet alike 
structures as well as that the patient exploits the Internet also 
(or even mainly) for the purpose of other services. 
The crucial role in a substantial revolution in 
communication means will be played by widespread new 
networking technologies such as: fiber to the home (FTTH) 
in the structure of wired NGN [22] and LTE in wireless 
networks [23]. 
Target bandwidth, which is for instance expected to be 
offered within European home networks, is at a minimum 
level starting from 30 Mb/s, through 100 Mb/s and up to 
1 Gb/s [24], and a wireless networks from 150 Mb/s to 1 
Gb/s. Making such a breakthrough is expected to come not 
only in the stationary communication but also in the mobile 
one, which will influence patient availability anytime and 
anywhere. 
 This advancement will also enforce a comparative change in 
eHealth networks at the higher layers, i.e. regional and 
corporate ones, in which the necessity will occur to handle 
the aggregated traffic as well as the accessibility of 
networking and information resources with respect to 
economic factors, i.e. costs of network connections and other 
essential resources. This change has, among others, an effect 
on the necessity of building dynamic links but with 
predictable parameters.  
54
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

In the authors’ opinion, this problem can be solved by 
applying technologies and mechanisms of the Future 
Internet: virtualization of networks and protocols for 
integrated information and network resources management. 
Virtualization can be applied to any resource which has a 
feature (possibility) of managing a part of a given hardware, 
software or information resource which can then make up a 
logical functional entirety. As an example we can quote 
wired and wireless networks appliances (e.g. switches, 
routers, 
access 
devices, 
base 
stations, 
controllers), 
computers, external storage, archive systems, operating 
systems, applications as well as content. Then, it is possible 
to create (also dynamically) virtual slices of physical 
resources which are dedicated for particular tasks, services, 
user groups in an economic manner (sharing of costs related 
to the usage of resource), with regard to security (dedicated 
resources) 
and 
reliable 
(easy 
options 
for 
resource 
multiplication and replacement of broken parts). The concept 
of virtualization is not new (compare [25]); however, 
nowadays it becomes a ruling paradigm for building 
emergent systems. 
From 
the 
perspective 
of 
the 
main 
(common) 
communication medium the above mentioned concept 
enables the opportunity for building parallel (e.g domain or 
service specific) Internets (e.g. MANA project [26]), parallel 
interfaces between user and internet and, moreover, 
information driven networks (e.g. 4WARD project [27]). As 
an example of such parallel internets an eHealth Internet can 
be considered.  
Through virtualization the process of eHealth networks 
assembling will become easier. In networks of local 
operators and ISPs, users (Family Healthcare Networks - 
FHCNs) will obtain access to the eHealth Internet (see 
below), and thus to services provided by family doctors or 
specialists as well as to other healthcare services, realized in 
typical RHCNs. The system (cloud) of networks connected 
this way simplifies the development and deployment of new 
eHealth services, and facilitates the transfer of services 
available up to now in former systems of RHCNs towards a 
new, more efficient and secure platform (Fig.3). 
The RHCNs cloud, understood as an eHealth Internet, 
allows any user of this system (i.e. patient) to choose best 
possible medical services, advice, consultancies, etc. with 
regard to individual requirements and priorities. This way, 
the competitiveness and quality of available services will 
grow. Particular RHCNs can also create eHealth federations 
which handle more complex services taking into account 
narrow specializations, consultations, respite care, etc. It is 
also natural that an opportunity for creating and management 
of virtual professional communities in RHCNs (e.g. 
oncologists, urologists, surgeons) is their important feature. 
At the top level of knowledge and competence, very 
advanced eHealth services are generated, and research often 
related to grand challenges in medicine is carried out. 
Among such advanced services we can name processing and 
simulations of models of diseases, parameterized with 
individual patient data, searching for similar cases, clinical 
decision support, an access to medical archives, usage of 
virtual laboratories, immersive work, teleconsultations, 
remote 
surgery 
transmission, 
teleeducation 
and 
telementoring. For this reason, in the last 10 years some 
successful approaches have been applied in the area of grid 
processing structures to build these types of systems 
[28][29][30]. Recently, this approach is referenced as cloud 
processing.  
One of the main problems to be handled is the 
configuration of such resource virtual infrastructures to 
realize particular, dynamic tasks offered by RHCNs. It is a 
complicated and difficult process. Whenever any part of the 
requested infrastructure, at any level of the assumed 
architecture (e.g. eHealth corporate platform) is not available 
in the traditional system, then after allocated resources in 
lower layers (e.g. network) become available, the process has 
to be reiterated. The number of such iterations can be large 
and also economic calculation is not meaningless here.  
In order to avoid aforementioned situations and make the 
process of building virtual infrastructures which are 
temporarily dedicated to handling of eHealth services faster, 
we propose to apply the specialized protocol for integrated 
control of networks and resource, namely G2MPLS. In 
particular, 
this 
protocol 
can 
be 
broadly 
used 
in 
communication between the eHealth corporate platforms 
cloud and RHCNs. 
The protocol G2MPLS is an extension of ASON/GMPLS 
standard architecture. It facilitates one step allocation and 
provisioning of network and grid/cloud processing resources. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Family, regional and national levels of eHealth virtualized 
infrastructure 
 
55
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

The protocol has been developed by the international team 
involved in the Phosphorus project, which was coordinated 
by our team [31]. 
G2MPLS Control Plane, its architecture, services and 
interfaces are precisely explained in [32][33][34]. The 
outlook for the model architecture is presented in Fig. 4.  
The left part presented in Fig. 4 comes from [33] and 
illustrates the place in which the G2MPLS protocol is placed 
in the architecture of advanced systems of distributed 
processing (grid/cloud). Then, on the right side the 
corresponding layers of the corporate eHealth platform 
introduced in [13] are presented. It is important to remember 
that advanced applications which make use of grid/cloud 
processing in this platform own the resources that for 
efficient cooperation require very fast connections which can 
be obtained in optical networks. 
In order to present the usage of this protocol for the 
purpose of eHealth tasks control, we can imagine several 
scenarios of communication between corporate networks and 
RHCNs which require allocation and provision of particular 
resources able to provide the requested functionality (Fig. 5).  
B. Smart EHR 
The EHR allows to provide health professionals with a 
better knowledge of the patient’s history and of previous 
interventions by other colleagues. For many years different 
concepts of integrating patient medical records have been 
introduced, starting from [35]. Various concepts can be seen 
for example in [36][37][38]. 
The communication model defined for a Smart EHR is to 
be supported by particular services enabled in all layers of an 
eHealth ecosystem. The key difference between this concept 
and traditional PHR is that in our opinion most interactions 
between a patient and a doctor will happen at the regional 
level close to the patient’s permanent location, whereas 
patient appointments with other doctors may happen 
spontaneously due to increased patient mobility. In this case, 
the patient will contact a doctor assigned to another hospital 
often located in a different region or country. However, 
patient’s virtual health records should always be accessible 
on-line via the established Network of Trust connecting legal 
Trusted Third parties which protect and maintain patient 
records. The patient has full control over his or her data and 
can provide limited access to any doctor during a certain 
diagnosis or accident. However, even then the data transfer 
and all updates should be monitored and audited by a Center 
for Data Protection responsible for on-line transactions on 
health records. Thanks to innovative and powerful data 
integration and exploitation tools as well as multi-scale 
modeling and large-scale simulations that have been 
demonstrated in the ACGT project [39][40], we may also 
envision innovative healthcare services considering and 
integrating data from the molecular and basic organs to the 
living organism level that will also be part of the virtual 
health records. Thus, not only basic historical data will be 
collected in the trusted networks, but also more sophisticated 
data structures integrated with personalized computing 
models for better prediction and treatment of diseases will be 
available. Depending on regional health problems, local 
epidemic warnings or key medical challenges (e.g. malaria 
and cancer treatment) patients will still be encouraged to 
grant access to their virtual health records to external 
researchers and medicine experts in a way they fully control 
and agree upon (e.g. only anonimized data access).  
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION CONDITIONS 
A. G2MPLS 
For the aforementioned scenarios we can provide a 
simplified communication schema which is based on the 
G2MPLS Integrated Model (Fig.5). 
In this model, G2MPLS is responsible for scheduling and 
configuring all the job parts, those related to the Grid sites 
and those related to the network. It seems that at the network 
level the knowledge has to be available, regarding grid/cloud 
resources. Regardless of this, to coordinate workflow 
services, the separate grid/cloud scheduler is required.  
The major part of research and development work has to 
be done in the range of discussed technologies and 
mechanisms, however one can undoubtedly declare, that 
problems seem to be solvable within next 5 years and it is 
possible to provide the basis for the building of a New 
Generation eHealth System. 
It is also worth mentioning that both the resource 
virtualization functionality and the new protocol for control 
of resource availability assume that previous communication 
standards in telemedicine (e.g. HL7RIM, HL7CCOW, 
HL7v2.x 3.0, DICOM) are applied in this architecture, the 
above described functionality of the Future Internet. 
B. Smart EHR 
The most important role in data integration is played by a 
Master Ontology developed for ACGT. It is used for 
 
 
Figure 4.  An outlook for G2MPLS architecture 
 
 
Figure 5.  G2MPLS based simplified communication 
 
56
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

describing (annotating) the information in the heterogeneous 
data sources integrated within ACGT environment (Fig.6). 
The model chosen for data integration is Query 
Translation, therefore data stays in their physical location 
and a virtual view represents the integration. It is realized by 
introducing a Semantic Mediator. It requires the creation of a 
view for every single data source using terms and 
relationships from the Master Ontology. These views are 
created through a Mapping process. During the Mapping 
process, correspondences between elements in the data 
sources and terms and relations in the Master Ontology are 
created. These correspondences are used to carry out the 
query translation. Once a query is performed, the mediator 
splits it into the necessary queries dedicated to the 
underlying data sources. Each of these queries passes 
through the mapping filter which converts the terms and 
relationships from the Master Ontology to the original 
database vocabulary, generating the final queries in 
SPARQL to be sent to the database wrappers. 
The results are obtained in the database wrappers result 
set format. The mediator annotates them using the Master 
Ontology and finally retrieves an integrated set of results in 
OWL. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Recently, people have become more mobile and therefore 
more often than earlier require help, advice or even medical 
treatment 
provided 
outside 
their 
natural 
regional 
surroundings. Medical tourism becomes more and more 
popular, especially in Europe. Patients who need help, either 
occasionally or intentionally, may decide to be provided with 
medical services in any place and any time. To receive 
valuable service they will require access to their complete 
medical data records. Such patient-centered approach 
requires new apporaches in the organization of the global 
eHealth system.  
The proposed concept of communication between 
corporate eHealth platforms, regional healthcare networks 
and private family networks introduced in this paper builds 
upon the concept of an integrated eHealth LivingLab 
platform. The global eHealth ecosystem defined in the 
proposed architecture is related to three very important 
paradigms: virtualization on every level, new generation 
communication protocols between these systems and finally 
smart electronic health records.  
Previous achievements and the level of solutions 
available up to now set particular conditions for evolution in 
the process of migration from the existing architecture 
towards a global new generation eHealth system.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Baltic Health Network, website: http://www.baltic-ehealth.org/ 
accessed on 2010.10.11. 
[2] 
Building Regional Health Care Networks in Europe, A European 
Strategy for Regional Health Care Networks, EUROPEAN 
COMMISSION - DG XIII, website: www.medcom.dk/dwn448, 
accessed on 2010.10.11. 
[3] 
V.Koufi, 
F.Malamateniou, 
and 
G.Vassilacopoulos, 
“Building 
interoperable health information systems using agent and workflow 
technologies”, Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 2009, 
Vol.150, pp. 180-184. 
[4] 
M. Bruun-Rasmussen, K.Bernstein, and C.Chronaki, “Collaboration – 
a new IT–service in the next generation of Regional Health Care 
Networks”, International Journal of Medical Informatics, 2003, Vol. 
70, pp. 205-214. 
[5] 
D.C. Kaelber, E. Pan, “The value of Personal Health Record (PHR) 
systems”, 
AMIA 
Annual 
Symposium 
proceedings, 
AMIA 
Symposium, AMIA Symposium, 2008, pp. 343-347. 
[6] 
Western North Carolina Health Network website: www.wnchn.org, 
accessed on 2010.10.11. 
[7] 
Smart Open Services for European Patients – epSOS website: 
http://www.epsos.eu, access on 2010.10.11. 
[8] 
M. Kosiedowski, C. Mazurek, K. Slowinski, M. Stroinski, 
K.Szymanski, and J. Weglarz, “Telemedical systems for the support 
of regional healthcare in the area of trauma”, Med-e-Tel 2010, pp.84-
88. 
[9] 
M. Kosiedowski, C. Mazurek, M. Stroinski, and J. Weglarz, “Grid-
supported Medical Digital Library”, Studies in Health Technology 
and Informatics, 2007, vol. 126, pp. 127-136. 
[10] M. Kosiedowski, C. Mazurek, M. Stroinski, and J. Weglarz, “Medical 
Digital Library services as an improvement of the teleconsultation 
system in the Regional Health Network”, in Proc. of the International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine 
“eTELEMED2009”, pp. 154-159 
[11] I Foster, C Kesselman, J M Nick, and S Tuecke: “Grid Services for 
Distributed Systems Integration”, IEEE Computer, June 2002. 
[12] R. Buyya, S.Y. Chee, and V. Srikumar: “Market-oriented cloud 
computing: vision, hype, and reality for delivering IT services as 
computing utilities”, Proceedings of the 2008 10th IEEE International 
Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications , 
pp. 5-13.  
[13] C.Mazurek and M. Stroinski, “Innovative ICT platform for emerging 
eHealth services: Towards overcoming technical and social barriers 
and solving grand challenges in medicine”, eTELEMED 2010, pp. 
33-38. 
[14] United States Unified Community Anchor Network (U.S. UCAN), in 
Broadband 
USA 
Application 
Database, 
http://www.internet2.edu/government//docs/execsummary.BTOP.fina
l.pdf 
[15] ICT Infrastructures for e-Science. Communication from the 
Commision to the European Parliament, the Council, the European 
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. 
Brussels, 5.3.2009, COM(2009) 108 final, pp.5-6. 
[16] J.Swiatek et al., “State of the art analysis of eHealth networks, , 
Project report, Future Internet Engineering – Z3.2 eHealth Networks, 
06.2010 
 
Figure 6.  The example of logical data integration in Smart 
Electronic Health Record 
57
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

[17] Wielkopolska 
Center 
for 
Telemedicine 
website, 
https://www.telemedycyna.wlkp.pl/web/guest/home, 
Accessed 
on 
2010.10.11 
[18] Future Internet Engineering website: https://iip.net.pl/en, Accessed on 
2010.10.11 
[19] W. Burakowski et al., “State of the art analysis of eHealth networks: 
Medical Digital Library” eds J.Swiatek et al., “State of the art 
analysis of eHealth networks”, Project report, Future Internet 
Engineering – Z3.2 eHealth Networks, 06.2010 
[20] L. Skorin-Kapov and M. Matijasevic, “Analysis of QoS requirements 
for e-Health services and mapping to evolved packet system QoS 
classes”, International Journal of Telemedicine and Applications, 
Volume 2010 (2010), Article ID 628086, 18 pages 
[21] T. Grechenig, B. Tappeiner, and A. Wujciow, “Challenging 
interoperability and bandwidth issues in national e-Health strategies 
by a bottom-up approach: Establishing a performant IT infrastructure 
network in a Middle East State”, 10th International Conference on e-
health Networking, Applications and Services, 2008. HealthCom 
2008, pp. 148-155. 
[22] J. Kani et al., “Next-generation PON: part i: technology roadmap and 
general requirements”. Communications Magazine Vol. 47, 11 (Nov. 
2009), pp. 43-49. 
[23] LTE: The Future of Mobile Broadband Technology. White Paper, 
Verizon wireless, https://www.lte.vzw.com/Portals/95/docs/LTE The 
Future of Mobile Broadband Technology.pdf, Accessed on 
2010.12.09. 
[24] Digital 
Agenda 
for 
Europe 
Communication, 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/digital-agenda/index_en.htm 
Accessed on 2010.10.11. 
[25] M. Xu, Z. Hu, W. Long, and W. Liu, “Service virtualization: 
Infrastructure and applications”, in “The Grid 2, Second Edition: 
Blueprint for a New Computing Infrastructure”, I. Foster, K. 
Kesselman, Eds, 2004, The Elsevier Series in Grid Computing, pp. 
179-189. 
[26] Position Paper. Management and Service-aware Networking 
Architectures (MANA) for Future Internet System Functions, 
Capabilities 
and 
Requirements 
2009 
http://www.future-
internet.eu/fileadmin/documents/prague_documents/MANA_Position
Paper-Final.pdf, Accessed on 2010.10.11. 
[27] M. Völker et al., “An Architecture for concurrent future networks” in 
2nd GI/ITG KuVS Workshop on The Future Internet. Karlsruhe, 
Deutschland: GI/ITG Kommunikation und Verteilte Systeme, 2008, 
http://doc.tm.uka.de/2008-VoelkerEtAl-
An_Architecture_For_Concurrent_Future_Networks.pdf 
[28] M. Ellisman. and S. Peltier, “Medical data federation: The biomedical 
informatics research network”, in “The Grid 2, Second Edition: 
Blueprint for a New Computing Infrastructure”, I. Foster, K. 
Kesselman Eds. pp. 109-120. 
[29] F.Berman, G.Fox, T.Hey: Grid Computing: Making the Global 
Infrastructure a Reality eds. K.Baldridge, P.E. Bourne: The New 
Biology and the Grid, 2003, pp.907-922. 
[30] M.Brady et al., “eDiamond: “A Grid-Enabled federated database of 
annotated mammograms”, in “Grid Computing: Making the Global 
Infrastructure a Reality”, F. Berman, G. Fox, and T. Hey, Eds., 2003, 
pp. 923-943. 
[31] Phosphorus project, www.ist-phosphorus.eu, Accessed on 2010.10.11 
[32] S. Figuerola et al., “PHOSPHORUS: Single-step on-demand services 
across multi-domain networks for e-science”, . Proc. SPIE, Vol. 6784, 
Paper 67842X. 
[33] E. Escalona et al., “Deployment and interoperability of the 
Phosphorus grid enabled GMPLS (G2MPLS) control plane”, 2008 
Eighth IEEE International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the 
Grid (CCGRID), 2008, pp. 716-721. 
[34] G. Zervas et al., “Phosphorus grid-enabled GMPLS controla plane 
(G2MPLS): architectures, services, and interfaces” Communications 
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 46, pp. 128–137.  
[35] D.W. Forslund, R.L. Phillips, D.G. Kilman, and J.L. Cook, 
“TeleMed: A working distributed virtual patient record system”. Proc 
AMIA Annual Fall Symposium, 1996, pp. 990. 
[36] J.D. Halamka et al., “Early experiences with Personal Health 
Records”, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 
2008 Jan–Feb; Vol.15(1), pp. 1–7. 
[37] F Malamateniou and G. Vassilacopoulos, “Developing a Virtual 
Patient Record using XML and web-based workflow technologies. 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, Vol.70(2-3), pp. 131-
139. 
[38] S. Koch et al., “Towards a virtual health record for mobile home care 
of elderly citizens”, Department of Medical Sciences, Medical 
Informatics and Engineering, Uppsala University, University 
Hospital, Sweden, Studies in Health, Technology and Informatics, 
Vol.107, pp. 960-963. 
[39] ACGT project website http://eu-acgt.org/, Accessed on 2010.10.11 
[40] Tsiknakis, M. et al, “A Semantic grid infrastructure enabling 
integrated access and analysis of multilevel biomedical data in 
support of postgenomic clinical trials on cancer”, IEEE Transactions 
on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 2008, pp. 205-221. 
 
 
 
58
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

