Core Archetypes  
The Means to Build Confidence Around the Power of Structured EPR Systems? 
 
Gro-Hilde Ulriksen 
Norwegian Center for E-health Research – University 
hospital North Norway 
Telemedicine and eHealth Research Group, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø 
e-mail: Gro-Hilde.Ulriksen@telemed.no 
Rune Pedersen 
University Hospital of North Norway, Section for E-health 
administration 
Norwegian Center for E-health Research – University 
hospital North Norway 
Telemedicine and eHealth Research Group, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø 
e-mail: Rune.Pedersen@unn.no
 
 
Abstract—This paper reports from three different levels of 
working with archetypes in Norwegian healthcare.  The paper 
contributes to a qualitative longitudinal interpretive study, 
connected to the development of a large-scale electronic patient 
record (EPR) system in the North Norwegian Health Authority. 
The focus of the paper is on how the notion of core archetypes 
could contribute to speeding up the process of developing 
national archetypes in Norway. Also, how core archetypes may 
increase clinicians understanding of structured EPR systems, 
based on different user experiences. We discuss when to start 
using archetypes in clinical practice. Also, whether constructing 
a prototype of a basis EPR system based on core archetypes, can 
contribute to a faster development of the new EPR system, and 
national archetypes in Norway.  
Keywords-archetypes; electronic patient records; semantic 
interoperability; core archetypes.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
An increased emphasis on cost savings, patient safety, 
and efficiency in healthcare, has raised the focus on seamless 
integration, 
and 
standardization 
across 
professional, 
departmental, and institutional boundaries [1]-[3]. Important 
efforts to achieve such goals, are improving the role of the 
electronic patient records (EPR), to make it a structured work 
tool, supporting patient pathways and decision support [4]. 
Semantic interoperability is a key requirement for improving 
EPR communication [8], to ensure that senders and recipients 
have the same understanding of information and standards 
[9]. 
An 
important 
element 
for 
reaching 
semantic 
interoperability is standardizing the clinical EPR content. 
However, standardizing clinical workpractice and routines 
have been difficult to accomplish [5]-[7].  
In Norwegian healthcare, improving the role of the EPR 
has been part of national strategies and visions since the 
1990’s [1]-[2], to enable sharing and integrating healthcare, 
as well as organizing information in a more structured 
manner [10].  Hence, in 2012 the North Norwegian Health 
Authority established a large ICT (information and 
communication 
technology) 
project 
named 
FIKS 
(standardization of the regional ICT portfolio), to standardize 
the regional ICT portfolio. One of FIKS’s most important 
roles was to collaborate closely with the largest EPR vendor 
in Norway, on developing a new openEHR based EPR 
system, using archetypes as core elements for standardizing 
the clinical content. The openEHR framework built on a two-
level modelling. The intention of the first level, the technical 
reference model, was to increase semantic interoperability, 
and reuse of data [11]-[13]. The second level, contained 
archetypes and templates, as standards for the clinical 
content. The two-level model made it possible to make 
changes only to the clinical content of the archetypes, without 
having to alter the underlying open EHR information model.  
The openEHR framework allowed for archetype design at 
different levels of healthcare organizations. In Norway 
however, the primarily work with archetypes was conducted 
at a national level, with NRUA (National Editorial group for 
Archetype development in Norway) as the coordinator of the 
work. To design optimal archetypes for the clinical content 
of EPR systems, it was necessary for clinicians to have a key 
role in both developing and approving the national 
archetypes. The clinical content of an archetype based EPR 
system had to contain numerous archetypes, to cover the 
clinical practice. There were 39 approved archetypes in 
March 2016, and even if 100, more were in the process, an 
estimated number of 1000-2000 was necessary, to encompass 
the clinical content of an EPR system. The absence of 
completed archetypes complicated and delayed the 
development of the new archetype-based EPR system. 
Hence, this raised a question whether to start using 
unapproved archetypes or not, and the consequences of using 
them before a national consensus was reached. In addition, it 
was challenging for the users included in developing the new 
EPR, to grasp the potential of this system based on a 
completely new technology. These factors might in part 
explain why the development process lasted much longer 
than expected.  
We introduce the concept of core archetypes, as a 
contribution to solving this dilemma. NRUA has claimed it 
possible to use 30 core archetypes, as a foundation for about 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

90% of a basic EPR system [14]. The remaining 10 % 
represent specific archetypes related to clinical specialties, 
important to include for completing the EPR system. Our 
questions are therefore: Can a set of core archetypes provide 
the necessary foundation for understanding the potential of a 
new open-EHR based EPR system, and can focusing on  these 
core archetypes speed up the archetype design process? Our 
goal was to evaluate the establishment of this core set of 
archetypes, through interaction with projects essential to the 
ongoing process. The rest of the paper is structured as 
follows; in section two, the method is presented, in section 
three, the three levels of archetype work in Norway are 
described. The concluding discussion in the fourth section, 
focuses on when to start using archetypes, and the use of core 
archetypes for a prototype of a basic EPR system.  
II. 
METHOD 
This paper contributes to a longitudinal interpretive study, 
connected to the development of a large-scale EPR system by 
the 
North 
Norwegian 
Health 
Authority. 
The 
methodologically positioning of the study is within a 
qualitative interpretive paradigm. The focus is on evolving 
and improving the understanding of a studied phenomenon, 
by looking at it from different viewpoints, within a context 
[15]-[16]. An advantage of using a qualitative interpretive 
approach is enabling complex textual descriptions of how 
people experience a particular matter, by providing 
information about the human side of a given process [16]. 
The fieldwork draws on the first author’s role working in 
FIKS for two years and afterwards continuing to follow 
activities in the project, by participating in workshops and 
meetings connected to the development of the new EPR 
systems. The second author has contributed in the regional 
and national work with the new EPR and archetypes for the 
last seven years, participating in meetings, discussions and 
observations. 
The 
personal 
information 
protection 
commissionaire for research in the health region, and the 
Norwegian social science data service (NSD), approved the 
data collection for this study. All informants provided written 
consents for the interviews by e-mail. Both authors have 
conducted several open-ended interviews, both related to the 
development of the new EPR, and the national work with 
archetypes. The purpose of using open-ended interviews is 
enabling informants to tell their story, without the author’s 
pre-perceptions getting in the way. The interviewers had 
prepared some questions, to make sure the interviews covered 
the topics they wanted to focus on. In addition, new 
interesting issues to include emerged in several interviews. 
The interviews were transcribed and analyzed separately, and 
as a part of a whole [Ibid].  Interesting quotes were translated 
into English (almost all Interviews were in Norwegian). In 
addition 
to 
transcribed 
and 
interpreted 
interviews, 
observations from several workshops and meetings as well as 
project documents from FIKS and NRUA were included in 
the data collection. In table I, an overview of the data 
collection is presented. 
TABLE I.  
AN OVERVIEW OF THE DATA COLLECTION 
Data source  
 
Interviews with contributors to the work with 
archetypes, and the development of new EPR. 
30  open ended 
interviews  
Participatory observation 
250 hours 
Participation in meetings, workshops, and informal 
discussions. 
300 hours 
Document studies: Documents from the CKM, 
concerning 
archetypes 
in 
general, 
and 
the 
problem/diagnosis archetype in particular. 
 
 
 A document analysis on the consensus process of one 
particular archetype namely Problem/diagnosis, provided 
important insights for understanding the national work with 
archetypes. 
III. 
WORKING WITH ARCHETYPES IN NORWAY 
We have focused on three parallel processes important for 
the Norwegian archetype development between 2012-2016. 
First, the development of a new openEHR based EPR system, 
using archetypes as standards for the clinical content, with 
focus on development of the surgical pre-planning module. 
Second, the internal process of establishing a well-
functioning NRUA organization, including a network of 
competent healthcare personnel to participate in the 
consensus process. Third, the development of local 
archetypes at a specialized hospital clinic, including the first 
attempts of using archetypes for clinical practice.  
A. Development of the new EPR system 
In 2012, the North Norwegian Health Authority 
completed an extensive tender, and decided to regionalize 
their new ICT portfolio. To carry out these changes, they 
established a regional project FIKS, to run from 2012-2016. 
FIKS was considered one of the largest ICT investments in 
Norwegian healthcare, with a total cost expected to exceed 
€100 million [17]. The main goals of the project were to 
establish a regional ICT portfolio, as a foundation for 
regionally standardized patient pathways, decision support, 
and integrations between clinical ICT systems. 
A regionalization, including standardizing EPR work 
practice, was a necessary requirement to reach such goals, 
enabling the Health Authorities to better administrate and 
compare information from the hospitals in the region. The 
FIKS project run in close collaboration with system users 
from the hospitals and the vendors.  
The new EPR was designed to improve the user’s 
workdays, providing structured data including predefined 
content elements, and schemes for documentation, enabling 
an increased overview and reuse of patient data.  In addition, 
the possibility of including patient pathways was important 
for improving the EPR. This was enabled by using the 
international 
openEHR 
architecture, 
standardized 
by 
CEN/ISO [18]. The openEHR architecture built on 
standardized information models, open source components, 
and highly structured clinical content, with archetypes as core 
building blocks. Archetypes were structured data elements of 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

clinical 
concepts, 
where 
observations, 
evaluations, 
instructions, and actions, formed the ongoing process of 
treatment and care [19]. Archetypes were used to define how 
clinical data was structured, seamlessly stored, and 
transferred between EPR systems [20]. The intention was for 
archetypes to contain a maximum dataset, including evidence 
about knowledge objects, and relevant attributes [21]-[22]. It 
was possible to design both widely reusable generic 
archetypes, as well as specialized ones, designed for a distinct 
local setting [8], [14], [22-24]. The new EPR system required 
archetypes, as standards for the clinical content. The problem 
was that there were no archetypes available in Norway, when 
they started designing this new EPR system in 2012. The idea 
was for the vendor to design some generic archetypes 
necessary for the overall structure of the EPR. Further, the 
system users themselves would continue developing 
archetypes necessary for clinical practice, for example 
clinical observations such as blood pressure, body weight, 
clinical scorings, and schemes for procedures. One member 
of FIKS stated: “At first it seemed possible for clinicians to 
design archetype based schemes on the fly, I don’t however 
think this will be the case.”  
The vendor started in 2012 the work with designing 
generic archetypes for the new EPR system. Since there were 
several archetypes available in the international CKM, 
constructed by the openEHR organization, it seemed rather 
straightforward to import these archetypes, and adjust them 
to Norwegian conditions. However, after working with 
archetype design for a year without achieving the desired 
results, it became obvious that this work was more complex 
than anticipated. The vendor recommended to establish a 
Norwegian CKM, and standardized methods for developing 
and maintaining Norwegian archetypes. Technology for 
storing and reusing archetypes, as well as defining how 
archetypes would relate to terminologies, were also important 
requirements identified. 
In addition to the archetype development, a parallel 
process of designing functionality for the new EPR system 
took place. More than 100 system users, from all the hospitals 
in the North Norwegian Health Authority, participated in an 
attempt of user centered system design, where an agile 
method - scrum was practiced. The idea was to develop the 
new EPR module by module, based on user stories from the 
system users as a foundation for the functionality. It became 
difficult for the system users to grasp the potential of the 
forthcoming EPR system, as neither archetypes nor the EPR 
system functionality was finished. The needs for the new 
EPR, identified by end-users, mainly built on challenges 
connected to the existing EPR system. One clinician stated: 
“When you ask clinicians today, they will outline needs 
related to their current work. Their starting point is the EPR 
they use today, that may be 20 years old. They are more likely 
to think small steps ahead, rather than focusing on large 
revolutionary changes, necessary for exploiting the potential 
of archetypes and openEHR.” Consequently, developing the 
EPR based on this approach, was time consuming, and 
inefficient. Since they did not have any prototype or model 
of the new system, it was demanding for clinicians to see the 
potential of it.   
As an example, they have worked with the pre-surgical 
planning module for the new EPR from FIKS started in 2012, 
still close to the end of 2015, six of the 18 nationally approved 
archetypes necessary for this module, have reached national 
consensus. They were prioritized, as a collaboration between 
NRUA and FIKS. Without the necessary archetypes in place, 
it was challenging to develop and test functionality for this 
module, as well as knowing what to prioritize working on. To 
increase the pace of finishing this module, NRUA has lately 
been involved closer in working with the necessary archetype 
requirements for this module.   
B. Constructing a national organization for handling 
archetypes 
The EPR vendor, developing the new EPR system, had 
gained more than 70% of the Norwegian marked, over the 
last years [25]. Hence, National ICT, the organization 
responsible for coordinating ICT-related initiatives in the 
Norwegian specialized health care services, decided to work 
with Norwegian archetypes at a national level. NRUA was 
established in 2013, to form a national archetype repository –
clinical knowledge manager (CKM). The overall goal of 
NRUA, was to coordinate the development, and use of 
archetypes on a national level, both handling the national 
consensus process of agreeing on archetypes, as well as 
supporting local initiatives for archetype design and usage. 
The NRUA organization consisted of five persons 
responsible for clinical modeling of archetypes, in addition to 
representatives from all the four Regional Health Authorities 
in Norway. NRUA established an editorial group to initiate 
archetype reviews, and form collaboration with clinicians. 
They also managed the recruitment for the national consensus 
process. In the consensus process clinicians used the web 
based CKM to review and approve archetypes, enabling 
asyncronically communication between participants in the 
process. The first years NRUA focused primarily on 
establishing a well-functioning organization, with a network 
of clinicians and other system users to work with archetypes. 
They provided training and support for new CKM users, 
established connections to the international CKM, and 
translated existing archetypes into Norwegian, for the 
clinicians to review. One of the archetype reviewers stated: 
“NRUA has members with a genuine interest in archetypes 
and they have worked very hard to get this organization up 
and running.” Because of establishing the organization, the 
actual consensus work moved slowly the first years. The first 
archetype was nationally approved in 2014, five months after 
NRUA started their work. However, investing this much time 
on the organization early on, enabled NRUA to increase the 
pace of archetype development last year. There were 
39archetypes approved in Norway in March 2016 and a 100 
more was in the process. A goal is to have 200 archetypes 
approved by the end of 2016. In addition, NRUA had gained 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

valuable knowledge along the way, both on how to structure 
archetypes, and on how to run the organization.  
The extensive process of reaching archetype consensus 
was time-consuming for the contributors to participate in. 
When they first started as reviewers, it took time to get to 
know the CKM tool, and understand the complex clinical and 
technical relations of the archetypes. Each archetype had 
several review iterations. One clinician stated: “A review 
iteration takes everything between 15min and 1,5 hour, 
depending on the complexity of the archetype. In addition, all 
archetypes go through more than one review iteration.” 
Recruiting participants to work with national archetypes was 
challenging, and the time-consuming review process led to 
several dropouts from the work, especially from clinicians. 
Since archetypes were used as standards for the clinical 
content of the EPR, it was important for clinicians to have an 
essential role in defining and designing them. One clinician 
said: “It is crucial to include clinicians in this work; they have 
the clinical knowledge and know what is important to focus 
on, for the archetypes to be useful standards for clinical 
work.” He also commented, “If others than clinicians design 
the archetypes, it will be troublesome to get clinicians to 
accept and use them.”  It was however difficult for NRUA 
and the clinicians to know what archetypes to prioritize 
working with and how long the consensus process of each 
archetypes would take, to be able to plan the work with 
archetypes ahead. It was also problematic to ensure that the 
archetypes fit the clinical practice of Norwegian healthcare, 
since they had no way of testing them out in clinical practice.  
C. Developing and trying out archetypes in clinical 
practice 
Based on the notion of archetypes being the new standard 
for communication in Norwegian healthcare, several projects 
have been eager to start using them. Since the national design 
of archetypes took years to gain foothold, some local 
initiatives began to use archetypes for clinical practice, before 
they had been through the national consensus process, some 
even started developing local archetypes themselves. One 
member of NRUA stated: “Systems that use archetypes today 
are not designed on nationally approved archetypes, or even 
international ones. They are mainly constructed by system 
users themselves.”  
One example was a hospital clinic in the Southern and 
Eastern Norway Regional Health Authority that developed 
highly specialized archetypes for their clinical practice. This 
was a clinic working within a very narrow clinical field. 
Thus, they had a clearly defined focus area, and mainly 
needed specialized archetypes designed particularly for this 
field of expertise. When they started working with archetypes 
in 2014, NRUA was still in the process of establishing 
national consensus on their first archetype, (even if they had 
started the consensus process of several other archetypes as 
well). The clinic used approximately eight archetypes that 
had started the consensus process in Norway, the rest they 
assembled from the international CKM, and other existing 
repositories or clinical standards worldwide. The ones they 
did not find in any existing CKM, they developed themselves, 
in close collaboration with the EPR vendor. When the clinic 
started using archetypes for clinical practice, this was one of 
the first attempts to try out archetypes in a Norwegian clinical 
setting.  This provided the clinic, NRUA, and the vendor, 
retrospective with important insight on the usability of 
archetypes at different levels, especially compositions, 
evaluations, and cluster archetypes. Testing archetypes in an 
actual clinical setting enabled identifying necessary 
requirements for improving, not only the local, but also the 
national archetypes, to make them suitable for both small and 
large-scale clinical usage. The clinic identified some 
challenges related to conforming these local archetypes to the 
national standards.  First, the versioning of the local and the 
national archetypes clashed. Second, extensive structural 
differences between the local and the national archetypes, led 
to interoperability issues for different versions of the same 
archetype, with the risk of losing data when switching the 
local archetypes into national ones. In addition, the users 
experienced that creating local archetypes based on schemes 
from the old EPR were unpractical to use. NRUA is assisting 
the clinic in their further work, to enable the local archetypes 
to conform to the national ones.   
IV. 
CONCLUDING DISCUSSION 
The three examples described; A) the development of the 
new EPR, B) the process of establishing a national 
organization for developing and approving archetypes, and 
C) the process of starting a local initiative with hands on 
archetypes and solutions, indicates a need for improving and 
speeding up the archetype development process. In this 
context, there are two important issues to address. First, the 
question of consensus and/or the clinical value of archetypes; 
There is a broad agreement to only use consensus made 
archetypes in a production environment (use in the EPR), 
despite this it has been necessary to use “unapproved” 
archetypes in production, to speed up the processes. 
Secondly, and based on this, is the use of core archetypes to 
provide a prototype of a basic EPR system, to enable 
accelerating the process of archetype consensus, and the 
development of the new EPR system. 
 Based on these examples, the work with archetypes in 
different settings of Norwegian healthcare has raised a 
number of important issues. In the North Norwegian Health 
Authority, the strategy was not to start using archetypes 
before they had reached national consensus. The overall goals 
were to secure structured   high quality archetypes, in line 
with the national standard, confirming that the archetypes 
they include in the new EPR system were compatible with 
other archetypes in Norway. However, since the vendor 
started developing archetypes for the new EPR themselves, 
the national consensus work related to these archetypes 
started too late to support the development process. This 
strategy contributed to delays in the development strategy. In 
addition, it was not possible to test the developed 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

functionality for the modules of the new EPR, like the 
surgical pre-planning, without any available archetypes to 
structure the clinical content. They adopted this strategy, due 
to the unknown consequences of using archetypes that had 
not reached national consensus. A project leader in FIKS 
stated: “Some of the consequences we dread from using 
unapproved archetypes are the lack of interoperability, the 
need for converting data, loss of historical data, all leading 
to increasing cost.” However, they did not want to stop 
developing the new EPR system completely, due to the lack 
of archetypes. “There is a risk that if we are too cautious with 
starting to use archetypes  it will make our development set 
to provide excessive profit related to reuse of data and 
clinical parameters fall way behind (project leader FIKS).” 
In the Southern and Eastern Norway Regional Health 
Authority, the strategy was nearly the opposite. They started 
to use archetypes that had been included in the consensus 
process. Thus, some places, as in the small clinic described, 
they also used archetypes not yet included in the consensus 
process, and even developed some new ones themselves. 
Starting to use unapproved archetypes in a clinical production 
environment, provided important insights for the vendor, the 
clinicians, and NRUA, on the actual usability of the 
archetypes that were under development nationally. NRUA 
has gradually undergone the hospitals very specialized 
structured schemes and variables. The development that this 
local 
initiative 
started 
was 
important 
for 
the 
maturity of NRUA as an organization, the archetype 
development, as well as for the EPR vendors. If they had 
waited for the regional EPR project to have all their 
archetypes approved, for example for the surgical pre- 
planning module, before testing out archetypes in clinical  
practice, they would still be missing the knowledge on how 
the archetypes actually work in a clinical setting. The 
understandings gained from this project, made it conceivable 
to improve the structure and content of the national 
archetypes. It also contributed to NRUA increasing their 
knowledge on archetypes, and capacity of assisting similar 
future projects. Clinical involvement, a suitable graphical 
interface, and integrations, are all interconnected with the 
development of archetypes and templates. 
On the other hand, a clinical environment using 
archetypes that had not reached national consensus led to 
several interoperability challenges. The local archetypes 
were versioned following the same standard used by NRUA. 
This would consequentially lead to both a local and a national 
archetype with the same version number. Firstly, if the 
possibility to create a new version disappears there will be a 
loss of clinical data when converting to a consensus made 
archetype. Secondly, mixing up the local and the national 
archetypes might be a secondary problem, since the two 
definitely are comparable. Further, since the national 
archetypes were developed after the local ones were taken 
into use, there is a risk of a dissimilar structure of the local 
and national archetypes. If the deviations are too extensive, 
the local and the national archetypes might not be able to 
communicate. One of the archetype reviewers with a 
technological background described this potential problem: 
“The local system will continue to work on its own, but if the 
structure of the archetypes is changed extensively to enable 
national consensus, they will no longer be able to 
communicate with the old version of the archetypes. 
Consequentially a system based on the local archetypes, 
cannot 
communicate 
with 
systems 
using 
national 
archetypes.”  Accordingly, this might lead to losing historical 
data, or having to spend an extensive amount of time and 
money on converting all existing data to the new national 
archetype format.  
To solve these complex issues, instead of trying out the 
archetypes in local projects with potentially complicated and 
expensive consequences, another approach would be to 
prioritize finishing the national consensus on the 30 core 
archetypes, and then use them to create a prototype of a basic 
EPR system. NRUA has defined the core archetypes as a 
sufficient basis for an EPR system[14], and they have 
composed a synthesis stating that: “90% of the journal 
functions in the electronic patient record including non-
specialized examinations and procedures can be represented 
by using 30 core archetypes” [14]. Having a prototype based 
on the core archetypes for the clinicians to test, would most 
likely help them better grasp the potential of the new EPR, 
and how to continue the development process. One clinician 
stated: “It is difficult for clinicians to imagine the possibilities 
of new EPR and not base their requirements on today’s 
needs. Having a prototype would ensure that the archetypes 
cover then necessary clinical content for the modules of new 
EPR.” Such prototype might also provide useful information 
for the vendor on how to include the archetypes technically 
in their new system, and gain knowledge that is missing today 
on how to create and import templates into the EPR system 
based on archetypes. In addition, NRUA could profit on such 
a prototype, to identify which archetypes to prioritize for the 
national consensus process for each clinical specialty. This 
also includes further experience with fitting the archetypes 
for clinical practice. As time has gone by and NRUA’s 
knowledge on archetype development has increased, they 
have already started to revise the synthesis. One member of 
NRUA stated: “The synthesis was created by NRUA based 
on a fundamental understanding of essential elements to 
include in an EPR, and archetypes necessary to cover the 
fundamentals areas. It will probably be necessary to extend 
the number of core archetypes to 30-50.”  
18 of the core archetypes are nationally approved and five 
more are in the process. Creating a basis model of an EPR 
system, based on core archetypes for testing the clinical 
usability of archetypes, could increase the pace of the national 
consensus work. The question is however, why these were not 
prioritized for the consensus processes. One of the members 
of NRUA said: “We started out prioritizing the defined core 
archetypes. However, the work with core archetypes takes 
time since these are very generic and extensive concepts 
archetypes.” Establishing generic archetypes within an 
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

immature organization was time consuming, since there were 
no experienced archetype designers, neither clinicians nor 
technical personnel in Norway. Hence, trying and failing was 
part of the process. How many clinicians to include, how to 
structure the archetypes, whether to translate international 
archetypes, or establish new ones from scratch, were some of 
the questions to consider. As a result, the last two years of 
working with archetypes in Norway on different levels of 
healthcare, NRUA has gained the necessary level of 
competence to fulfill their role as an organization that 
coordinate the national work with archetypes, as well as 
supporting local initiatives. Consequentially, future local 
initiatives should include NRUA at an early stage, to avoid the 
type of challenges that the clinic in the Southeast health region 
experienced from using local archetypes.   Based on this, an 
important conclusive remark is; yes, the core archetype is a 
promising tool for future accomplishments of archetypes, and 
speeding up the development of the new EPR. Still the process 
described, and the following maturation of the national 
environment has been a necessary process. Now, NRUA and 
the national consensus work have reached the required 
maturity level, to exploit the possibilities that constructing a 
prototype/model by using core archetypes can provide for the 
future work with archetypes, and the new EPR system in 
Norwegian healthcare.  
REFERENCES  
[1] Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services, White Paper, 
Report 9, “One citizent one journal,” national goverment 2012. 
[2] National ICT’s action 41, Use of archetype methodology for 
the definition, availabiliy and use of clinical information 
models in health-based Information Systems, Norway, 2012. 
[3] National ICT’s action 48, Clinical documentation for overview 
and learning, Norway, 2012. 
[4] The office of the Auditor General, The office of the Auditor 
General’s investigation of the ICT in hospitals and electronic 
interaction in health services, 2008. 
[5] S. Timmermans and M. Berg, “Standardization in Action: 
Achieving Local Universality through Medical Protocols,” 
Social Studies of Science, vol. 27, issue 2, pp.  273-305, 1997.  
[6] R. Pedersen and G. Ellingsen, “Standardizing nursing work: 
works in practice but not in theory?” Studies in health 
technology and informatics, vol. 157, pp. 91-96, 2010. 
[7]  G. 
Ellingsen, 
E. 
Monteiro, 
and 
 
G. 
Munkvold, 
“Standardization of work: Co-constructive practice,” The 
Information Society, vol 23, issue 5, pp. 309–26, 2007. 
[8] C. Rinner, et al., “Creating ISO/EN 13606 archetypes based on 
clinical information needs.” Proceedings of EFMI Special 
Topic Conference" e-Health Across Borders Without 
Boundaries; pp. 14-15, 2011. 
[9] P. Gibbons, et al., “Coming to terms: Scoping interoperability 
for health care” Health level seven, 2007. 
[10] T. Meum, G. Ellingsen, E. Monteiro, G. Wangensteen, and H. 
Igesund, “The interplay between global standards and local 
practice in nursing,” International journal of medical 
informatics, volum 82, issue 12, pp. 364-74, 2013. 
[11] R. Chen, et al., “An archetype-based testing framework,” 
Studies in health technology and informatics, vol.136, pp. 401-
406, 2008. 
[12] S. Garde, P. Knaup, E. Hovenga, and S. Heard, “Towards 
semantic interoperability for electronic health records,” 
Methods Inf Med, vol. 46, issue 3, pp. 332-343, 2007. 
[13] T. Beale and S. Heard, “Open EHR Release 1.0.2,” 
Architecture Overview.  London, 2008. 
[14] National 
editorial 
board 
for 
archetypes. 
NRUA: 
Corearchetypes.[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://wiki.arketyper.no/wiki/Kjernearketyper, 
2015 
2015.12.09.  
[15] HK. Klein and MD. Myers, “A set of principles for conducting 
and evaluating interpretive field studies in information 
systems,” MIS Quarterly, vol.23, issue 1, pp. 67-94, 1999. 
[16] G. Walsham, “Interpretiv case studies in IS research: nature 
and methode,” European Journal of information systems, vol. 
4, pp. 74-81, 1995. 
[17] B. Christensen  and G. Ellingsen, editors, “Standardizing 
Clinical Pathways for Surgery Patients through ICT,” 
European Workshop on Practical Aspects of Health 
Informatics (PAHI), Edinburgh, Scotland. http://ceur-ws.org 
http://ceur-ws.org. 2013. 
[18] ISO: Health informatics - Electronic health record 
communication, Part 1 Reference model CEN. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=4078
4.European comitte for  standardization, 2007, 2015.12.07.  
[19] R. Chen, P. Georgii-Hemming and H. Åhlfeldt, “Representing 
a Chemotherapy Guideline Using openEHR and Rules,” 
Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, vol. 150, pp. 
653–657, 2009. 
[20] A. Moreno-Conde et al., “Clinical information modeling 
processes for semantic interoperability of electronic health 
records: systematic review and inductive analysis,” Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, pp. 925-934, 
2015. 
[21] MR. Santos, MP. Bax and D. Kalra, “Dealing with the 
archetypes development process for a regional EHR system,” 
Appl Clin Inform, vol. 3, issue 3, pp. 258-275, 2012. 
[22] M. Marcos, JA. Maldonado, B. Martínez-Salvador, D. Boscá 
and M. Robles, “Interoperability of clinical decision-support 
systems and electronic health records using archetypes: a case 
study in clinical trial eligibility,” Journal of biomedical 
informatics, vol. 46, issue 4, pp. 676-689, 2013. 
[23] E. Hovenga, S. Garde, T. Carr and C. Hullin, “Innovative 
approaches and processes for capturing expert aged care 
knowledge for multiple purposes,” Electronic Journal of Health 
Informatics, vol. 2, issue 1, 2007. 
[24] H. Leslie and S. Heard, Archetypes 101, Ocean Informatics 
2006. 
[25] DIPS-ASA, 
About 
us, 
Available 
from: 
http://dips.com/eng/about-us.2015, 2015.10.16.  
 
 
 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

