Linked Care - Information Transfer in Mobile Care and Support
Kathrin Mühlhauser, Franz Werner 
Department Health Sciences, FH Campus Wien 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: kathrin.muehlhauser@fh-campuswien.ac.at, franz.werner@fh-campuswien.ac.at 
Elisabeth Haslinger-Baumann, Theresa Galanos, Doris Zeidler  
Comepetence Center for Applied Nursing Research, FH Campus Wien 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: elisabeth.haslinger-baumann@fh-campuswien.ac.at, theresa.galanos@fh-campuswien.ac.at, 
doris.zeidler@fh-campuswien.ac.at   
ABSTRACT—Mobile care professionals are facing immense 
workload, less time, and little recognition. They often have to 
finish their documentation work in leisure time and do not get 
enough information from the other health professionals. 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) support 
can bring significant improvements for home care and the 
involved care giving parties. To increase its potential and 
operating range, the project, named Linked Care (LICA, 
consisting of the first to letters of both words), develops IT 
systems that address and support practice-oriented challenges, 
increase digital data availability and reduce the work-related 
burdens of health care professionals as well as clients/patients 
and their involved support system. Experiences with existing 
IT systems plus the current existing Austrian Electronic Health 
Record System (ELGA, an acronym of Elektronische 
Gesundheitsakte) serve as a starting point to enable a 
continuous information supply in mobile care and support 
within the project. The solution will provide interdisciplinary 
support and the connection of relevant participants in the care 
process, offering a new type of responsive user interface. The 
LICA-project investigates the end-users’ needs and specifies 
the processes in workshops with local representatives and 
regional political and administrative stakeholders. In this way, 
the LICA-solution allows for the exchange and evaluation of 
care data via standardized interfaces throughout Austria, in 
consideration of the socio-economic regional and national 
environments. The project will create an ELGA-compatible 
software portal that can be linked to existing systems. Large-
scale tests will be carried out in different federal states with at 
least 60 clients/patients (persons who are in the need of 
homecare) while implementing/using different survey methods 
to collect data. The consortium parties will ensure the 
development of the solution as a business model. Requested 
findings include feedback on software usability, application 
and affordability for the care giving and care receiving target 
group. The generated Care Summary creates new possibilities 
for data exchange within the health care sector.  
Keywords-IT documentation systems; communication systems; 
health care and nursing; interdisciplinary research  
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nurses experience many burdens and challenges in their 
daily work. Documentation is often described as particularly 
stressful [3]. According to estimates, about 30% of working 
hours are used for documentation. This time cannot be spent 
with clients/patients, which in turn can lead to nurses 
finishing documentation work in their free time to have more 
available hours for direct client-based care [5]. The 
increasing number of people in need of care leads to an 
increase not only in the objectively measurable but also in 
the subjectively experienced care effort. As the complexity 
within the formal and informal care support network is 
increasing, the need for adequate client-related coordination 
between the involved parties is also growing. A continuous 
and detailed client documentation is the starting point of 
client related coordination and communication. However, the 
organization of client documentation in the care system is 
not only challenging in terms of effort, it also shows 
deficiencies and complications regarding the information 
flow and exchange between the different formal and 
informal 
care 
giving/providing 
parties. 
Adequate 
documentation is indispensable for high-quality nursing and 
medical care, as well as interdisciplinary cooperation. Due to 
the dual financing system of medical care, nursing care and 
homecare, the resulting responsibilities may be different in 
nature and “not necessarily conducive to the efficiency of the 
systems" [2]. Furthermore, the lack of interdisciplinary 
exchange is closely related to financial and time constraints: 
only 60% of all mobile care service providers cooperate with 
professional groups outside their own services [2]. On the 
one hand, the heterogeneity of the documentation and 
communication systems offered by different providers 
complicates the communication connection/link within the 
different mobile services/software solutions. On the other 
hand, the non-existence of an obligatory uniform solution 
forms a massive barrier to continuous information transfer. 
Sophisticated services, which are needed to support recent 
technological innovations, have not been provided while 
creating data gaps in all areas of social welfare and health 
care. This causes discontinuance and translation problems 
within software solutions.   
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

So far, the record validity was and still is questionable 
due to existing language barriers between the carer’s first 
language 
and 
the 
available 
application 
languages. 
Comprehensive documentation is particularly important. As 
an example, specific groups were identified, that are not 
familiar with professional care within their households (e.g., 
people with migration background, people with mental 
illnesses, etc.). The lack of affordability in the presence of 
social disadvantage or the lack of information of particularly 
vulnerable groups, for whom care is mainly provided 
informally or within the family. The situation described 
above points out the need for comprehensive documentation 
and communication that combines several information 
clusters. Therefore, it contributes to a subjectively facilitated 
situation and to an objectively increased efficiency [2]. It 
also advocates the improvement of communication and 
interface management based on detailed surveys.  
The aim of this project is to enable a technology-based 
cooperation between clients/patients as well as their support 
system and professional caregivers, nursing professionals, 
doctors, therapists, and pharmacies while using an efficient, 
secure and low-threshold digital tool, offering optimal IT 
support. 
This paper will give an insight into the LICA-project; 
starting with the ‘State of the Art’ in Section 2, followed by 
Section 3, ‘Method’, and finally describing the ‘Results’ as 
well as the ‘Conclusion and Further Works’ in Section 4 and 
5. 
II.
STATE OF THE ART 
Care network services exist all over the world. However, 
they neither include all necessary participants (medical care 
providers, pharmacies, care organizations, etc.) nor do they 
function on a digital level. Once integrated into one 
organization other services needed such as visiting services, 
home services and nursing care have to be organized by the 
employees [7]. 
In the EU and the USA there have been some digital 
developments in this field. Siemens eHealth Solutions [10] 
has created an electronic health network that brings together 
clients/patients, care teams and medical doctors to exchange 
relevant data. This system was designed for the clinical 
setting and not for the homecare sector. Furthermore, it does 
not include clients involved relatives or therapists. In the 
USA, the My HealtheVet portal [9] is available for Veterans 
by Veterans Health Administration (VHA) to renew 
prescriptions, organize doctor's appointments, contact health 
care teams, and retrieve information.  
Online Care is an US-platform for clients/patients and 
healthcare providers that is oriented towards GPS (or 
postcode) entries and enables corresponding connections. In 
Europe, cross-border healthcare data flow is already 
established, especially in the "eHealth Digital Service 
Infrastructure" [8]. Patient Summaries, ePrescriptions and 
eDispensation, are currently being rolled out. In Austria, the 
electronic health record system ELGA uses the same IT and 
technology standards, to create a feasible connection. In 
addition to numerous other initiatives, the EU is also striving 
for an "EU Health Data Space" to make available data more 
accessible for practical use within the healthcare system.  
III.
METHOD
The research project started in April 2021 und will last 
until 2025. Five end-user partners, five technology partners 
and three scientific/research partners are included, whereby 
one partner is accountable for the information privacy 
protection mechanisms.  
All required technical functionalities of the product will 
be identified and described by the team of developers and the 
potential end-user, while implementing the user-centered 
design approach [4], which is already currently running. 
Moreover, a mixed method approach, supported by a 
profound literature research, is used to identify, and approach 
the target groups in question as well as implement the 
appropriate methods for the various target groups and 
settings. By now, methods like focus group interviews, one-
on-one interviews as well as research diaries are applied. The 
use of a participatory approach [6] enables the involvement 
of people and groups that are difficult to reach (e.g., 24-hour 
care but also very vulnerable people). All research methods 
are applied low threshold and in a culturally sensitive 
manner.  
Additional stakeholders from the regional and national 
environment are involved to find solutions for specific 
issues. Over the duration of the project, goal-oriented, cross-
disciplinary, and cross-role networks of individuals and 
organizations will be created. Sustaining and continuing 
these networks after the end of the project, represents one of 
the long-term goals. Acceptance factors are defined by the 
experts for all development steps, validated several times 
during the project in an iterative manner and therefore, 
influence the development process directly. 
IV.
RESULTS
The results of the project LICA contribute to the 
expansion and further development of innovative methods in 
data collection and participatory product development. New 
knowledge tools are going to be developed, which will be 
available for further research issues in the field of care and 
support after the end of the project. Now, during the project, 
data gaps and new (data) information regarding the various 
stakeholders in the care sector are identified and collected. 
On the one hand, this data refers to the situation and needs of 
people in care as well as professional caregivers in the 
informal or formal sector. On the other hand, this data refers 
to the communicative interaction between the care and the 
medical sector. Thus, it provides a valuable basis for the 
development of new projects in both, the nursing, and the 
care sector. Furthermore, the newly developed data sets 
(indicators) will enable previously unused possibilities for 
data exchange in the care sector and for the first time allow 
for a standardized data exchange between general medicine 
practices and pharmacies as well as therapists and other 
stakeholders 
without digital data discontinuity. The 
comprehensive involvement of different service providers in 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the development of the product offers a solid foundation for 
the adoption of the product and ensures a high-quality 
exchange of relevant information. The job satisfaction of 
those working in the health sector may increases due to 
reduced documentation effort, duplications, and losses of 
information – leaving more time for the care of the 
clients/patients themselves. 
The inclusion of affected clients/patients and their 
relatives in the (ongoing) product development process, 
ensures the consideration of their needs and requirements. 
This increases the quality of care considerably in two 
regards: Firstly, the improvement of care and nursing on a 
somatic level is addressed and secondly the consistent 
participation of clients/patients and their social environment 
also increases the quality of care according to the WHO 
comprehensive concept of health:  
Since physical as well as mental and social factors are 
equally included in the documentation process and 
clients/patients themselves can play a decisive role during 
the process, they experience themselves as individuals with 
the power to act, who can influence their environment and 
living conditions. Having the power to act represents a 
central resource for subjective well-being according to the 
salutogenic approach [1]. 
The interoperability between the project solution and 
other software systems, such as ELGA, general practitioners’ 
software, pharmacies, mobile services, etc. is a novelty. The 
elaboration and application of indicators in the form of a care 
summary is an essential part of the content-related work and 
is only possible in a meaningful way by bringing different 
areas closer together. The increase in knowledge is possible 
due to the cooperation of mobile services, economy, 
scientific partners, and those affected.  
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
 The LICA-project is innovative – for the first time the 
broad use of ICT and the strong networking of different 
organizations and people involved, will make it possible to 
assess, which practical benefits each of the intended 
functionalities will create for the mobile care services, caring 
relatives and how the user interfaces need to be designed to 
fit their needs. The user-centered design approach, which is 
applied in the whole research process enables this plan.  
The profound literature research as well as the currently 
conducted focus group interviews show first significant 
results. These results provide a solid basis for the imminent 
research methods, which will take place in the upcoming 
four years. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is sponsored by the Austrian research 
promotion agency (FFG) under grant number 884194. 
Project partners are: Akademie für Altersforschung am Haus 
der Barmherzigkeit, Johanniter Österreich Ausbildung und 
Forschung gem. GmbH, Wiener Rotes Kreuz- Rettungs-, 
Krankentransport-, 
Pflege- 
und 
Betreuungsgesellschaft 
m.b.H., Volkshilfe Gesundheits- und Soziale Dienste GmbH 
(GSD GmbH), Volkshilfe Wien gemeinnützige Betriebs-
GmbH, CareCenter Software GmbH, Loidl-Consulting & IT 
Services 
GmbH, 
Compugroup 
Medical 
CGM, 
Österreichische 
Apotheker-Verlagsgesellschaft 
m.b.H, 
Steszgal Informationstechnologie GmbH, Fachhochschule 
Technikum Wien, Universität Wien. 
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Antonovsky: “Unraveling the mystery of health: how people 
manage stress and stay well”. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1987.
[2]
M. Firgo and U. Famira-Mühlberger: “Expansion of inpatient care in 
the federal states. Quantitative and qualitative effects of the use of 
public 
funds 
compared 
to 
mobile 
care”. 
WIFO. 
Vienna. 
http://www.wifo.ac.at/wwa/pubid/47447, 2014. 
[3]
E. Haslinger-Baumann, A. Lilgenau, C. Binder, and K. Gugenberger: 
“Quality characteristics in 24-hour care from the perspective of those 
affected. Results of a pilot survey study in Austria“. In Pflege Die 
wissenschaftliche Pflegezeitschrift für Pflegeberufe, 2019. 
[4]
L. Jung-Joo: “Against Method: The Portability of Method in Human-
Centered Design”, Doctoral Dissertation, Aalto University, School of 
Arts, Design and Architecture, Department of Design, Helsinki, 2012. 
[5]
B. Mittermann: “Long-term care: Where new challenges meet an old 
system“. 
 
Arbeit&Wirtschaft. 
https://www.arbeit-
wirtschaft.at/langzeitpflege-herausforderungen/, 2019. 
[6]
M. Wright, M. Block, and H. V. Unger: “Levels of Participation in 
Health Promotion: A Model for Assessing Participation“. In: 
Gesundheit Berlin (Hrsg.): Dokumentation 13. bundesweiter 
Kongress Armut und Gesundheit, Berlin, 2007. 
[7]
Care Network. https://www.carenetwork.org.uk/. 
[8]
CEF Digital Connectong Europe. https://ec.europa.eu/cefdigital/. 
[9]
My HealtheVet. https://www.myhealth.va.gov/mhv-portal-web/home. 
[10] Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics GmbH. https://www.siemens-
healthineers.com/at/digital-health-solutions/digital-solutions-
overview/patient-engagement-solutions/e-health-solutions.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-872-3
eTELEMED 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

