Impact of Knowledge Transfer Through the Implementation of an Emergency 
Telemedicine Program in a Brazilian Community Hospital 
Milton Steinman1, Carlos Alberto C. Abreu Filho1, Ana Helena Vicente Andrade2, Ruy G. Cal1, Nelson Akamine1, Alberto 
Kanamura 1, Miguel Cenderoglo1, Claudio Lottenberg1, Eliezer Silva1 
1. Critical Care Medicine Department and Institute of Social Responsibility of the Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein 
2. Hospital Municipal Moyses Deutsch 
São Paulo, Brazil 
miltons@einstein.br; carlos.afilho@einstein.br; Ana.vicente@hmbm.org.br; ruy.cal@einstein.br; 
nelson.akamine@einstein.br; kanamura@einstein.br; cenderoglo@einstein.br; claudio@einstein.br; silva.eliezer@einstein.br 
 
 
 
 
Abstract — Variation of quality care has been associated with 
heterogeneous survival rates among emergency and critical 
care patients. A body of evidence has shown that emergency 
and ICU physician-led team could deliver a more adequate 
care and decrease mortality rates and costs. In developing 
countries there is a shortage of specialists even in metropolitan 
areas. The main objective of this study is to describe the first 
Brazilian experience of a real time audio-visual telemedicine 
program (TM) providing 24/7 emergency and Intensive Care 
physicians’ coverage. Methods: The concept of telemedicine 
was implemented at two different hospitals in São Paulo; a 
secondary and public hospital, Hospital Municipal Moyses 
Deutsch (HMMD), and a tertiary and private hospital, 
Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein (HIAE). Results: Data were 
obtained from 100 teleconsultations (85 patients) records over 
a 4 months period. The majority of the requests originated 
from ICU (74.1%). Sepsis was the most common reason to 
access TM (29.4%), followed by stroke (24.7%). TM improved 
diagnosis in 16.5% and influenced clinical management in 
83.5% of the patients. Life-saving TM interventions were 
stroke thrombolysis in 4 patients and a limb amputation in 1 
patient. The majority of patients was discharged with no 
necessity of referring to another hospital. Conclusion: We 
conclude that the main contribution of telemedicine-based 
intervention is to avoid unnecessary transfers and to improve 
medical decision-making in a real time fashion. 
Keywords-Telemedicine; Emergency care; TeleICU. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Brazil is a federative republic that covers 8·5 million km2 
or 47% of the South America continent. With an estimated 
population of 190,732,694 in 2010, Brazil is the world's fifth 
most populous country around the world [1]. The Brazilian 
health system is made up of a complex network of 
complementary and competitive service providers and 
purchasers, building a public—private mix that is funded 
mainly by private institutions. The health system has three 
subsectors: the public subsector, in which services are 
funded and provided by the state at the federal, state, and 
municipal levels, including military health services; the 
private (for-profit and non-profit) subsector, in which 
services are funded by public and/or private institutions; and 
the private health insurance subsector, with different forms 
of health plans, varying insurance premiums, and tax 
subsidies. The public and private components of the system 
are distinct but interconnected [2, 3]. 
Brazilian “universal” healthcare system is called the 
Sistema Unico de Saude (Unified Health System, SUS). 
Most of the population (75%) utilizes almost exclusively 
this system, which sometimes is unable to offer a qualified 
health care to all of them. In fact, there is a shortage of 
doctors and nurses, especially in rural and even in distant 
metropolitan areas. Many hospitals are also poorly 
managed, lacking autonomy from state governing boards. 
And finally, there is a high level of inequality in medical 
technology and infrastructure, with larger, more affluent 
municipalities 
able 
to 
provide 
better 
technological 
equipment and medical care [3]. 
Survival rates for emergency care vary significantly 
between hospitals, reflecting variations in the quality of 
care. Many hospitals do not have the facilities and skills to 
provide effective specialist treatment, 24 hours a day, seven 
days a week. Evidence shows that emergency and ICU care 
should be led by experienced consultants with quicker and 
better decision-making processes, especially in the care of 
major trauma, sepsis, stroke and acute myocardial infarction 
[4,5]. 
Within this scenario comes up seeking to develop options 
for solving the health problems of critically ill patients, 
using effective remedies in the quality of care provided. In 
this context, appears telemedicine as a viable alternative to 
efficient resolution of such problems. The World Health 
Organization (WHO) [6] defines telemedicine as "the 
offering services related to health care, where the distance is 
a critical factor. Such services are provided by qualified 
health professionals, using information technology and 
communication to exchanging knowledge and information 
valid for diagnosis, prevention and treatment of diseases, 
and the continuing education of health care providers with 
health, as well as for scientific research purposes [6]. The 
Health Department, in order to improve the Public Health 
System, has decided to create the PROADI - Projeto de 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Apoio ao Desenvolvimento Institucional ao SUS, to 
improve health services around the country. The PROADI 
allows some hospitals, classified as “excellent” in terms of 
quality of care, fund projects, by using philanthropy. In this 
scenario, the HIAE developed a telemedicine program 
allowed emergency department and ICU staffs from public 
hospitals, including the Hospital Moyses Deutsch (HMMD), 
to receive real-time support from specialist staff in the 
emergency department and ICU at the Hospital Albert 
Einstein (HAE).  
The HMMD is a 240-beds, medium-complexity, public 
general hospital, including 60 emergency department beds. 
An estimated 500,000 people live near to the hospital. 
Emergency Department receives an annual volume around 
200,000 visits. Clinical, pediatrics, surgical, orthopedics, 
gynecology and obstetrics services are offered. HMMD is 
located at Jardim Angela district and cover an area with 
more than 23,125 square, at one of the most deprived areas 
in São Paulo city that has been considered by the United 
Nations as one of the most violent urban region in the 
world. 
The objective of this paper is to describe the impact of 
first Brazilian, real time telemedicine program (TM) 
providing 24/7 hours/days of an emergency department 
(ED) and Intensive Care Unit (ICU) coverage. This article is 
organized as follows: Section 2 presents the methodology 
and the parameters evaluated. Section 3 shows the most 
important results. Section 4 deals with discussions. Finally, 
Section 5 which presents the conclusions and future work. 
II. 
METHODS 
In 
January 
2012, 
the 
concept 
of 
telemedicine 
(synchronous connection) was implemented between HIAE 
and HMMD. We implemented a Telemedicine Central 
Command (TCC) located at HIAE with Endpoint 97 MXP 
Cisco ® Solution via a dedicated broadband connection of 2 
Mb. TCC offers 24/7 coverage provided of ED and ICU 
consultant and a full range of services and specialties in 
house, including neurologists, cardiologists and radiologists. 
We recruited 16 physicians dedicated to TM program with 
the following characteristics: owning motivation and pro-
activity to participate in the project; ICU or ED specialized; 
ability to transpose the difficulties and propose solutions 
and mastering all service protocols offering support to 
applicants. 
In the remote hospital (HMMD), a mobile Intern MXP 
ISDN/IP Cisco ® was introduced. The wireless network was 
sized to ensure quality signal transmission environment 
throughout the Emergency department and Intensive Care 
Unit (ICU). Radiologic and CT scans exams were evaluated 
using PACS technology.  
Inclusion criteria to access Telemedicine were based 
upon remote ICU or ED physician judgment. Every 
recruited patient, irrespective of whether transferred or not, 
was 
assessed 
by 
the 
Central 
Command 
through 
teleconference with an experienced consultant. Furthermore, 
we developed 36 clinical protocols that cover broader range 
of medical entities commonly encountered at the ICU and 
ED. 
Routine data extracted from electronic forms were patient 
demographics, source of referral, further details of 
presenting 
complaint 
and 
diagnosis, 
examinations 
performed, throughput times, treatment (s) given and 
discharge categories. Case specific data were collected 
during teleconsultation. including patient ID; names and 
grades of staff requesting and providing consultations; 
presenting complaint; date and time of consultation; type of 
consultation and images discussed; reason for consultation 
and query to be resolved; time taken and resources used; 
nature and impact of any technical problems; diagnosis; 
referral or treatment advice given.  
III. 
RESULTS 
From May to October 2012, a total of 100 patients 
records from 85 patients were analyzed. Mean age was 48.5 
yo, 51 (60%) were male, mean APACHE II SCORE was 
22.3; 63 (74.1%) patients were at ICU and 22 (25.9%) were 
at the ED. The main diagnoses are described in Table 1.  
 
TABLE 1.PATIENTS DIAGNOSES 
 
Diagnoses
n
%
Neurologic
Stroke. Trauma. Syncope.
Infection / Sepsis 
25
29.4%
Cardiac / Pulmonary
Abdominal
Trauma
Others
4
4.8%
Cardiac Arrest. Infarction. Heart 
Failure. Heart Block. Pericarditis. 
Tamponade. Pulmonary 
Embolism. Lung Cancer.
Mesenteric Ischemia. Pancreatitis. 
Hepatic Failure.
Abdominal. Thoracic. 
Hemorrhagic Shock.
4
4.8%
5
5.9%
Coagulopathy. Hyperosmolar 
Syndrome. Intoxication.
27
31.8%
20
23.7%
 
 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

For 14 patients (16.5%), TCC influenced diagnosis 
conclusion, and for 71 patients (83.5%), TCC contributed to 
clinical management. In 53 (62.4%) of the consultations, a 
specialist other than TCC staff were needed to attend 
specific requests. The external medical specialists consulted 
are summarized in Table 2.  
TABLE 2. SPECIALISTS DEMANDED 
 
Medical Specialist 
N 
% 
Neurology 
23 
43.4% 
Pneumology 
6 
11.3% 
Cardiology 
6 
11.3% 
Infectology 
4 
7.5% 
Gastroenterology 
3 
5.7% 
Cardiac Surgery 
2 
3.8% 
General Surgery 
2 
3.8% 
Hematology 
2 
3.8% 
Others 
5 
9,5% 
 
Most of the teleconferences occurred in the middle of the 
day, around 1:30 PM (Table 3). The mean hospital length of 
stay was 13.6 days, the hospital mortality was 37.6% (32 
patients). Regarding patients admitted at the ED (22), 15 
(68.2%) were transferred to the ICU, 10 (11.7%) were 
transferred to a tertiary hospital and 6 of these patients 
(7.1%) were submitted to major surgical procedures [heart 
surgery (2), neurosurgery (3) and liver transplantation (1)]. 
Among all the 85 patients, 36 (42.4%) had an invasive or 
surgical procedure indicated after TM session.  
 
 
 
 TABLE 3: TIME OF TM CONSULTATION 
 
Time 
Cases 
Morning 
24 
Afternoon 
70 
Night 
6 
 
Table 4 describes the main procedures performed after 
TM consultation. In 19 (22.4%) patients TM suggested 
antibacterial-changing scheme.  
 
Among the 4 patients submitted to stroke thrombolysis, 
the mean time from the onset of the symptoms to the initial 
of the procedure was 163.2 min, mean NIH Stroke Scale 
was 14.7 before the thrombolysis and 12.7 at the end of the 
procedure. There were no cases of bleeding complications 
after the procedure. 
TABLE 4. INVASIVE / SURGICAL PROCEDURES 
 
Diagnosis 
n 
% 
Hemodialysis 
17 
47,2% 
Coronary Angiography 
4 
11,1% 
Stroke Thrombolysis 
4 
11,1% 
Neurosurgery 
3 
8,3% 
Angiography 
2 
5,5% 
Chest Tube Placement 
2 
5,5% 
Cardiac Surgery 
2 
5,5% 
Limb Amputation 
1 
2,7% 
Liver transplantation 
1 
2,7% 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
 
Telehealth technologies, which embrace telemedicine, are 
being used in a wide array of applications and 
environments, and there is a substantial body of literature 
advocating their use and general utility [7,8]. 
Telemedicine has the potential to improve quality of care 
by allowing clinicians in one “control center” to monitor, 
consult and even care for and perform procedures on 
patients in multiple locations. 
TM experience in other medical specialties fully applies 
in the field of emergency medicine (EM) [9,10]. Emergency 
healthcare is complex but its most important requirement is 
rapid and correct decision-making on diagnosis and 
treatment. In addition, this occasionally must be performed 
in situations other than in a hospital emergency department 
(ED). Thus in the case of accidents, emergencies, and so on, 
healthcare is necessary in poor conditions and, most 
importantly, away from the reference health center, so that 
distance and time factors get great relevance for the 
successful diagnosis and treatment of affected patients. In 
this context, remote teleconsultation by specialists in an 
emergency situation may be important for rapid, correct and 
specialized decision making, whether clinical or surgical, on 
immediate questions such as whether and where to transfer 
the patient or what therapy should be administered. 
Telemedicine may provide medical decision support for 
remote practitioners with the effect of reducing inter-
hospital transfers and improving quality of care. By 
enabling the transmission of visual information such as X-
rays or pictures of injuries to specialists, telemedicine may 
enable remote practitioners to obtain expert guidance on 
how to manage a patient locally. 
Quality health care to critical patients is complex and 
requires extensive resource use; the shortage of qualified 
experienced multidisciplinary teams in some public 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Brazilian Hospitals can negatively affect the outcomes of 
critical patients. Otherwise, the primary and secondary 
hospitals need to transfer the critical patients to tertiary 
centers, which increase the costs of Health System.  
Tele-ICU programs can be a solution because they are 
capable of leveraging the skills of an experienced team of 
critical care doctors and nurses to ICUs where bedside 
services are not available and provide a vehicle for broadly 
applying evidence-based best practice protocols to improve 
patient safety and outcomes [9]. The experience led us to 
develop evidence-based protocols but tailored to local 
constraints such as use of thrombolytics in cases of acute 
myocardial infarction when angioplasty is not available. 
We´ve made up to 36 protocols regarding most common 
ICU and ED issues. These protocols were also used to 
initiate telemedicine sessions. 
Although some patients may still require transfer or 
referral, particularly in the absence of the necessary on-site 
facilities or expertise, telemedicine should ensure transfers 
are appropriate, and made to the right specialist at the right 
time. It may also ensure that both patients and the receiving 
unit are adequately prepared for the transfer. Even in cases 
where a transfer may not be indicated, telemedicine may be 
used as a medium for ‘second opinions’ on diagnosis and 
management, providing reassurance to both the clinician 
and the patient prior to discharge and potentially improving 
quality of care. In this case, patients may actually receive an 
enhanced service, in that they may receive a more senior 
opinion, other way this would not be feasible. 
Advantages related to the implementation of telemedicine 
in the ED and ICU other than the availability of an 
experienced team readily accessible, include: to obtaining 
conducting videoconferencing between stakeholders; quick 
access to updated sources of information for conducting 
research together, including development of scientific 
protocols. Allows patients have access to specialist services 
including for case discussion and opinion of experts, the 
viability of training and standardization of procedures and 
better quality of care, more efficient monitoring of critical 
patients, as well as monitoring and efficient management of 
quality indicators of ED and ICU departments. 
The benefits also include greater patient safety, reduction 
in the hospital costs; reduction in the number of hours / ICU 
nurse / patient-day, reduction in costs for pharmacy, 
laboratory supplies, therapies and other costs associated 
with the care of ICU patients. Beyond addition, by 
promoting the reduction of mean length of stay enables 
increase in the volume of admissions that result in an 
increase in revenue institutions. Some authors reported 
reductions in hospital and ICU length of stay and hospital 
mortality as well [11].  
In Brazil, as in other countries, there is a lack of 
specialized professionals (including for intensive care), few 
Brazilian ICUs have specialized physicians 24 hours 
available. The reasons for this shortage are the high cost of 
hiring skilled labor and lack of specialized intensive care 
physicians. Telemedicine programs can help meet this 
demand by professionals, since they allow access to centers 
reference in critical care medicine to several distant 
hospitals, providing this expertise remotely, enabling other 
professionals, contributing with the reduction of morbidity 
and mortality. The Hospital Municipal Dr. Moyses Deutsch 
is a secondary hospital located at a very poor and populated 
district of São Paulo – Brazil. There is a monthly average of 
16000 visits at the ED; many of these are admitted at the 
hospital with very bad social and health conditions, 
contributing unfavorably to the patient’s outcomes. The 
clinician’s hospital staff is compounded by young general 
doctors, 
without 
specialists 
like 
neurologists, 
neurosurgeons, cardiologists and many others. In this 
scenario it has been always necessary to transfer many 
patients to tertiary hospitals to be seen by specialists. Before 
the implementation of the Telemedicine Program as many 
as 60 outside evaluations were made each month, mainly for 
neurologic 
evaluation. 
The 
implementation 
of 
the 
Telemedicine Program reduced unnecessary transfers, 
during the 6 month period of initial experience; only 11.7% 
(10 patients) were transferred to other medical centers.  
As mentioned before, HIAE provide in house coverage of 
experienced 
neurologists 
available 
24/7 
hours/days. 
Through PACS system and radiologist support, TM offered 
decision making support for stroke thrombolysis. Before the 
implementation of the TM program, this therapy has never 
been applied. This is the first Brazilian experience with the 
implementation of a TM program and the first report of 
successful stroke thrombolysis guided by telemedicine.  
Financial cost also poses both a real and perceived barrier to 
the application and adoption of telemedicine in developing 
countries. Equipment, transport, maintenance, and training 
costs of local staff can be daunting for countries with little 
income or limited funding for the implementation and 
maintenance 
of 
telemedicine 
initiatives. 
Moreover, 
convincing 
evidence 
to 
support 
the 
overall 
cost-
effectiveness of particular telemedicine strategies may be 
weak, while the economic implications of such strategies in 
different settings may not yet be known [8,11]. 
If telehealth is going to move beyond being regarded by 
many as a tool or a substitute for traditional healthcare 
delivery, its ability to impact diagnosis, treatment options 
and patient outcomes must be demonstrated using 
experimentally 
rigorous 
techniques 
supported 
by 
appropriate statistics. 
This is a retrospective observational study that analyzed 
the initial Brazilian experience in the implementation of a 
Telemedicine Program connecting a secondary medium 
complex regional public hospital to a tertiary medical 
center.  
The study presented initial encouraging results, the 
program proved to be useful in helping diagnosis, 
conducting critical cases and transferring specialized 
medical knowledge to hospitals with shortage of human and 
technical resources.  
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We conclude that the main contribution of telemedicine-
based interventions from the tertiary to the secondary 
hospital is to avoid unnecessary transfers and to improve 
medical decision-making in real time by an effective 
expertise transfer. Besides, the implementation of this 
program allows patients with stroke timely receive 
thrombolysis guided by telemedicine. Finally, a prospective 
clinical trial will be running to analyze the impact of TM 
program on patient outcomes, including hospital length of 
stay, sequelae, and hospital mortality. From these data, we 
could spread this technology in different areas around the 
country.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Coordenação Geral de Atenção Hospitalar 
CGHOSP/DAE/SAS/MS- Brazilian Ministry of Health 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística. Séries 
estatísticas & séries históricas. Rio de Janeiro: O Instituto. 
Avaliable at http://www.ibge.gov.br/series_estatisticas/. (last 
accessed Jan 31, 2013). 
[2] Brasil- MInsitério da Saúde. Rede Interagencial de 
Informações para a Saúde—RIPSA. Indicadores e Dados 
Básicos 
-Brasil, 
2008. 
Avaliable 
at 
http://tabnet.datasus.gov.br/cgi/idb2008/matriz.htm#recur. 
(last accessed Feb 05, 2013) 
[3] Paim J., Travassos C., Almeida C., Bahia L., and Macinko J. 
The Brazilian health system: history, advances, and 
challenges. Lancet. 2011; 377(9779): pp. 1778-1797.  
[4] Aucar J., Granchi T., Liscum K., Wall M., and Mattox K. Is 
regionalization of trauma care using telemedicine feasible and 
desirable? Am J Surg. 2000 Dec;180(6): pp. 535-539. 
[5] Luyt C.E., Combes A., Aegerter P., Guidet B., Trouillet J.L., 
Gibert C., and Chastre J: Mortality among patients admitted 
to intensive care units during weekday day shifts compared 
with 'off' hours. Crit Care Med 2007; 35: pp. 3-11. 
[6] World Health Organization. Global Observatory for e-Health. 
2005. Available at www.who.int/kms/initiatives/e-Health/en/ 
(last accessed Jan 30, 2013).  
[7] Klein Y., Donchik V., Jaffe D., Simon D., Kessel B., Levy L., 
Kashtan H., and Peleg K. Management of patients with 
traumatic 
intracranial 
injury 
in 
hospitals 
without 
neurosurgical service. J. Trauma 2010; 69(3): pp. 544-548.  
[8]  Zawada E.T., Herr P., Larson D., Fromm R., Kapaska D., and 
Erickson D. Impact of an intensive care unit telemedicine 
program on a rural health care system. Postgrad Med 2009; 
121: pp. 160–170 
[9] Duchesne J.C., Kyle A., Simmons J., Islam S., Schmieg R.E 
Jr., Olivier J., and McSwain N.E Jr. Impact of telemedicine 
upon rural trauma care. J Trauma. 2008; 64(1): pp. 92-97; 
discussion pp. 97-98. 
[10] Keane M.G. A review of the role of telemedicine in the 
accident and emergency department. J Telemed Telecare 
2009;15: pp. 132–134. 
[11] Nguyen Y.L., Wunsch H., and Angus D.C. Critical care: the 
impact of organization and management on outcomes. Curr 
Opin Crit Care. 2010; 16(5): pp. 487-492. 
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

