Deployment of Electronic Prescriptions in Belgium
Marc Nyssen
BISI Medical Informatics Group, Public Health Department
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Brussels, Belgium
mnyssen@vub.ac.be
Marc Buckens
FLUX
APB
Brussels, Belgium
mbuckens@apb.be
Abstract—After  a  two-year  pilot,  including  the  ICT 
(Information and Communication Technology) developments 
and  small  scale  tests,  the  Recip-e  project  for  ambulatory 
electronic prescriptions is currently in national roll-out phase. 
Along  with  the  operational  secure  data-flow, an important 
number of parameters are captured and taken along; these 
parameters are processed and archived, enabling us to make a 
first evaluation regarding the approach taken in Belgium, both 
from a technical point of view and from a methodologic point 
of  view,  regarding  the  technical  developments  and  the 
involvement of all stakeholders.
Keywords: electronic prescription; e-health; deployment
I.
 INTRODUCTION
Prescriptions are a cornerstone in most health systems: in 
the  paper  world,  the  prescribing  health  worker  (general 
practitioner,  specialist,  dentist)  writes  down  a  medical 
prescription on a pre-formatted piece of paper, signs it and 
usually hands it over to the patient. The patient then collects 
the  medication,  written  on  the  paper  prescription,  in  a 
pharmacy. Here, health systems may differ greatly: in some 
countries  the  choice  of  the  pharmacy  is  not  free  (e.g., 
Denmark where this is determined at the time of prescribing, 
and often limited by physical  constraints: islands with a 
single pharmacy [4]). In other countries, the choice of the 
pharmacy  is  free:  the  patient  determines  where  he  will 
collect the prescribed medication. This last case corresponds 
to the Belgian situation [13].
In this paper, we will highlight the main design features 
of the ambulatory electronic prescription system “Recip-e” 
[14] in the sections II and III, then in section IV (Results) the 
roll-out  process  is  quantified  and  discussed  in  the  Vth 
section.
II.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The objective set forward for the Recip-e project phase 0 
was to realize an in depth study to identify the elements 
required to realize the theoretical model. This theoretical 
model resulted from a study performed in the context of the 
Belgian Ministry of Health and Social Affairs in 2002 [13].
The pilot study covered following topics:
 Evaluate the functional, technical and operational 
requirements for a realistic implementation
 Make a stakeholder analysis
 Benchmark equivalent projects abroad
 Study the financial implications
 Communication / Interaction with the stakeholders
 Propose a roll-out plan.
Figure  1  shows  the  current  flows  of  the  paper  and 
electronic  prescriptions in Belgium:  from  the prescribing 
physician via the patient to the pharmacy which he can 
choose freely.
Figure 1.  Recip-e dataflows
Benchmarking with Sweden and Denmark [1][7], teaches 
us that the introduction of EPP (Electronic Pharmaceutical 
Prescriptions)  can  take  several  years.  Innovations  in  the 
medical sector are confronted with the relatively high inertia 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 








A.
Data Format
The  building blocks required  to realize an  electronic 
prescription system are based on an existing technology :
1. Internet communication protocols/web-services
The KMEHR-bis message "pharmaceutical prescription"
comprises an administrative  header, followed by a folder 
(containing the data which are found on a paper prescription) 
such as the prescriber´s identity, the patient and as many 
items elements as there are medications on the prescriptions. 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

This number would be limited to 9, for practical reasons. The 
items comprise  the  market  name  of  the  medication,  the 
unique Belgian identifier code for a given drug (CNK), the 
packaging and quantity, posology, way of administration, 
and the frequency (daily, morning/afternoon, ...) and free text 
instructions for patients.
Close examination of this XML message by experts in 
the field rose a single comment: the pharmacists would like 
to see the addition of the indication by the prescriber (the 
reason why this particular drug was prescribed), so that they 
can  be  involved  in  taking  up  responsibility  for  more 
appropriate use of the drug. This remark will be taken into 
account for the next version of the KMEHR messages and 
the prescribing physicians will be informed.
Tarification  offices,  of  the  pharmacists´  professional 
associations,  health  insurance  and  the  social  security 
administration are not part of the  inner loop  of the EPP 
project. They obtain the administrative and financial data 
regarding the delivered medication via the pharmacists, as is 
the case now (see Figure 1). Moreover, it would be desirable 
to include information regarding the insurance status of the 
patient  and  the  permissions  required  for  expensive 
medication (Chapter IV of the Belgian Nomenclature) as 
early as possible, preferably at the moment the prescription is 
made. To realize this, a connection with the MyCarenet 
service of the mutual insurance instances will be required. 
The MyCarenet services provide safe access to the insurance 
status of all individuals, registered in Belgium.
C.
Data flows and interactions
Step 1: creation of a prescription by the prescriber. The 
prescriber creates an electronic prescription, normally via his 
medical package or via a web prescription program. The 
prescription is signed digitally (either each prescription is 
digitally signed or the prescriber´s session is authenticated 
via  the  e-ID  +  pin  code  of  the  prescriber,  if  a  similar 
procedure  can  be  accepted  as  in  the  intra-muros 
prescription).  Then  the  prescription  is  transmitted  in 
encrypted format to  the Recip-e server. See Figure 2.
Here, some formal verifications are performed: identity of 
prescriber and patient´s identity. If all tests passed, a RID 
(Recip-e  ID  ==  unique  identifier  for  each  accepted 
prescription within the system) is attributed. The RID is sent 
in response to the prescribing system within seconds (max. 
5s). The prescription is then printed, using the legal format, 
comprising the RID as a bar-code (Figure 3). Otherwise, a 
meaningful error message is generated and transmitted to the 
prescribing system.
    For security reasons, the prescription is divided into 
several data-blocks: 

administrative (patient, RID)

administrative prescriber (ID,..)

medical: ( medication, posology, ...)
blocks 2 and 3 are encrypted with a key, kept by the eHealth-
platforrm, while encrypted data are stored in the Recip-e 
database.
 
 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

D.
Technical implementation
During the pilot phase (2011-2013), three infrastructures 
were set-up:
1.
The  test-environment  at  the  software  developer 
Accenture (main software developer of the project)
2.
The  acceptance  environment,  integrated  into  the 
eHealth-platform's  acceptance  bus,  servers  and 
database hosted by Belgacom (the national telecom 
company and commercial datacenter provider)
3.
The  production  environment,  integrated  into  the 
eHealth-platform's  production  bus,  servers  and 
database hosted by Belgacom, managed by Recip-e.
These three were maintained throughout the pilot phase 
of the project and the current roll-out phase. Developments 
are first made and tested on the test server of the software 
developer, then transferred to acceptance and made available 
for  testing purposes  by software  vendors of  EMR's  and 
pharmaceutical  softwares  and  the  Recip-e  team.  After 
approval, updates are then transferred from the “acceptance” 
to the “production” servers, accessible to the end-users.
In the roll-out phase, a fourth environment was set-up on 
independent servers, on another location (Uniweb), for the 
logging and monitoring functions, exclusively accessible to 
the Recip-e technical team.
Authentication of end-users, both in acceptance and in 
production environments is performed by a combination of 
the following elements:

The national identity card and associated pin-
code to authenticate the individual

A certificate associated with the health worker 
and attributed via the eHealth-platform.
which result in “sessions”. During such session, the health 
worker  can  access  the  system  and  perform  the  actions, 
associated with his role in the health system: a GP can create 
prescriptions, a pharmacist can deliver and a patient can 
consult the pending prescriptions, for himself as shown in 
Table 1.
TABLE 1. RECIP-E FUNCTIONS AND PERMISSIONS
Function
GP
Pharmacy
Patient
Create prescription
*
Revoke (delete) prescription
*
*
*
List open prescriptions
*
*
Print prescription content
*
*
*
Mark as delivered
*
Mark as undelivered
*
Archive prescription
*
Announce prescription
*
Create feedback messages
*
List feedback messages
*
E.
Management by the patient
The  patient  can  manage  (list,  delete,  forward)  the 
prescriptions, related  to himself, residing on the Recip-e 
server   via a portal, that will be made available via the 
network of mutual insurance instances of the country and 
other health portals. He also can deny certain access rights 
for health care professionals to his pending prescriptions. 
Mandates should be managed outside Recip-e, but be part of 
a more general system, in which the e-Health platform plays 
a  central  role.  Recip-e  will  make  use  of  these  generic 
services that will implement the operational access matrix of 
the complete health system. As long as this service is not yet 
operational,  we  will  have  to  work  with  default  values, 
corresponding to the procedures that exist in the current 
(paper based) health system, in complete accordance with 
legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  and  in  agreement  with 
stipulations by the Privacy Commission [x] and the internal 
Recip-e ethical committee.
Step 2: The patient selects the care provider (pharmacist 
in case of pharmaceutical prescription) of his choice. He 
identifies himself by his electronic ID and (in the transition 
period, while paper prescriptions remain the only legally 
valid  ones,  he/she   will  then  recover  the   pending 
prescription(s) via his professional package and will deliver 
what  is  written  on  the  prescription).  The  electronic 
prescription is removed from the prescription server upon 
receipt by the care provider. The prescription system will not 
keep an archive of delivered prescriptions: this task remains 
with the care providers who have this responsibility right 
now  in  the  paper  world.  We  wanted  to  avoid  a  huge 
accumulation of sensitive medical data in a single place and 
by doing so, realize a link with another ongoing project by 
the  pharmacies:   establishing  the  medication  records  of 
individual patients, which already will include the original 
prescriptions (soon in electronic, time-stamped format).
IV.
RESULTS
A.
Deployment with the GP's
After the “pilot phase”, national roll-out was prepared 
and  effectively  started  in  May  2013  by  involving  all 
recognized vendors of electronic medical records for general 
practitioners (17) and software for pharmacies (9), active in 
the country. Via the “registration procedure” managed by the 
Federal state's institution “eHealth-platform”, vendors of GP 
software were required to implement access to the secure 
webservices  of  the  health  system  and  a  number  of 
applications,  amongst  which  the  electronic  ambulatory 
prescriptions via Recip-e. Several mini-lab sessions and from 
the very start of the pilot until testing sessions were held to 
assist the software vendors and to assess the operation (end-
to-end) via real-life scenarios. In September 2014, 14 of the 
17 software packages for GP's complied and by November, 
all passed the tests.
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

start moving in. Once prescribers have observed how little 
effort it takes, they continue to use the system.
For the benefits to become evident to the whole sector, 
we need to obtain a much higher deployment degree and 
familiarity  of  the  end-users  with  the  more  sophisticated 
functions  such  as  the  feed-back  messages  and  the 
verification of “list  open prescriptions” enabling GP's to 
verify weather the patient has at least collected previously 
prescribed medication.
Pharmacists have the possibility to link the electronic 
prescription to their “robots”, but the ergonomy of their 
softwares is a key factor.
Although in very few cases, inconsistencies between the 
paper-based and the electronic prescription were observed, 
due to software bugs and due to manipulation errors, in 
general, the roll-out strategy works.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The purpose of the Recip-e pilot study (phase 0) was to 
perform an in-depth analysis of all aspects of an electronic 
prescription  system  for  Belgium  corresponding  to  the 
theoretical model realized previously, fitting into the Belgian 
health system and aiming to obtain a consensus from all 
involved parties: physicians, pharmacists, authorities and the 
patients. The in-depth analysis resulted in pilot (phase 1) that 
enabled to implement and test on a small scale but with real 
data. This resulted in phase 2: the current national roll-out, 
which shows that in the transition, co-existence of paper-
based and electronic prescriptions works, but that strong 
incentives are required to move the whole sector to make use 
of the electronic functions. 
A  very  important  element  is  the  cooperation  of  all 
electronic service providers, to make the access by the end-
users  consistent,  so  that  in a  single  step,  they  obtain  a 
complete  set  of  complementary  services,  combining 
administrative  simplification,  support  to  their  medical 
information  and  communication  in  a  secure  way  with 
guarantees of privacy and professional quality.
After  completing  the  roll-out  of  the  pharmaceutical 
prescriptions (or in parallel with the final steps),  we will 
move to the remaining types of prescriptions and decide how 
and when full “de-materialisation” will take place, liberating 
us from the paper-based prescriptions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank RIZIV/INAMI and the 
eHealth-platform for their support.
REFERENCES
[1]
Stroetmann, K. A., Jones, T., Dobrev, A and Stroetmann, V. 
N,,  "eHealth  is  Worth  it",  The  economic  benefits  of 
implemented  eHealth  solutions  at  ten  European  sites, 
European Commission, 2006, Information Society and Media, 
available via www.ehealth-impct.org, ISBN 92-79-02762-X
[2]
Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport, Netherlands, "ICT in 
Dutch Healthcare: An International Perspective",  May 2006, 
available via  www.minvws.nl (last accessed on May 24th 
2013)
[3]
Data  Protection  Working  Party,  Article  29,  "Working 
Document  on  the  processing  of  personal  data  relating  to 
health  in  electronic  health  records  (EHR)",  February  15th 
2007,
 
available
 
via 
http://europa.eu.int/comm/justice_home/fsi/privacy/index_en.
htm (last accessed on December 8th 2014)
[4]
Theilgaard,  J,   "Message  Implementation  Guide  for 
Prescription", version 1.0, 21.03.97 for the CoCo project, on 
behalf of Medcom, Denmark. Zipped file (120 K) of a Word-
document of 117 pages
[5]
CEN-TC-251  Secretariat,  "European  Standardisation  of 
Health Informatics, Results of the mandated work by CEN-
TC-251", June 2001
[6]
Beun, J. G. , Jansen, P., Bakker, A. and  Branger, P., "Zorg 
Identificatie/Identification  Santé  (ZIS),  Vooronderzoek. 
Voorbereiding  implementatie  Zorg  Identificatie  nummer 
(ZIN)
Een analyse van Aspecten die spelen bij implementatie van 
het persoonsgebonden nummer in de zorg", Netherlands, 2002
[7]
Öhlund,  S-E.,  "ePrescribing  Implementation  in  Sweden", 
WM-data Kalmar, Sweden, available via www.wmdata.com, 
2006
[8]
Vandenberghe,  A.,  Kmehr-Bis  support  site  (KMEHR 
specifications)
 
available
 
via
 
website: 
https://www.ehealth.fgov.be/standards/kmehr/ (last  accessed 
December 11th 2014)
[9]
Stroetmann,  K.  A.,   Dobrev,  A.,  Lilischkis,  S.  and 
Stroetmann, V. "eHealth priorities and strategies in European 
countries",  eHealth  ERA  report,  March  2007, 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/health/docs/
policy/200703/ehealthera-countries.pdf (last accessed June 1st 
2014)
[10] RIZIV: (Dutch)  Geneesmiddelen en andere farmaceutische 
verstrekkingen  –  Reglementaire  documenten  –  Het 
geneesmiddelenvoorschrift
[11] http://www.riziv.fgov.be/drug/nl/pharmacists/papers/prescript
ions/index.htm (last accessed November 22nd 2014)
[12] Laws and decrees: K.B. 10 August 2005, B.S. 20 September 
2005, KB  21 December 2001
[13] English web report of the original theoretical EMP study 
http://minf.vub.ac.be/~marc/rapemvnewe/ 
(last  accessed 
December 8th 2014
[14] Recip-e  project  webpage  http://recip-e.be (last  accessed 
December 8th 2014)
[15] Belgian Privacy Commission: 
http://www.privacycommission.be/ ((last accessed December 
8th 2014)
[16] BCFI-CBIP:  Belgisch Centrum voor Farmacotherapeutische 
Informatie,  http://www.bcfi.be/ , (last accessed December 8th 
2014)
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

