Health Technology Trust: Undeserved or Justified?  
A review of technological risks in eHealth 
 
H.C. Ossebaard, R.E. Geertsma 
RIVM - National Institute for Public Health  
and the Environment 
Bilthoven, The Netherlands 
hans.ossebaard@rivm.nl , robert.geertsma@rivm.nl  
 
J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen 
University of Twente 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
j.vangemert-pijnen@utwente.nl  
 
 
Abstract - Challenges for global health care are considerable. 
Increasing healthcare expenditures, ageing, the rise of chronic 
diseases and the public health threat of infectious diseases give 
reason 
to 
worldwide 
concern. 
Many 
believe 
eHealth 
technologies to contribute to the solution of these issues and to 
the necessary innovation of healthcare systems. Is the 
widespread 
trust 
among 
public 
administrations, 
care 
professionals, researchers and the general public justified? The 
present paper aims to assess the risks of eHealth technologies 
for both patient safety and quality of care. A quick-scan of 
scientific literature was performed to collect publications on 
risks associated with the use of eHealth applications in cure 
and care. Only random clinical trials (RCTs) were included. 
Data-management issues were excluded. Of 340 identified 
publications, 
17 
met 
the 
inclusion 
criteria. 
Human, 
technological or organizational risks appear to be no subject of 
RCTs. But they come into view en marge implementations. As 
such, the selected studies suggest there is evidence for risks 
caused by the use of eHealth in healthcare which can 
negatively affect the quality of care and the safety of patients. 
A realistic reconsideration of the implementation of eHealth 
interventions is recommended. The ceHRes roadmap is an 
evidence-based guideline to systematically avoid or minimize 
these 
risks. 
 
Keywords - risks; eHealth technology; patient safety; 
quality of care; trust 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Challenges for global health care have been documented 
extensively. Most countries face a serious increase in 
healthcare expenditures that corresponds to ageing, a growth 
in multi-morbid chronic illnesses, the menace of infectious 
diseases, consumerism or other dynamics [1, 2]. eHealth 
technologies have frequently been hailed as a panacea for 
these challenges. These technologies have proven their 
potential to contribute to the increase of (cost-) effectiveness 
and efficiency of care, the improvement of the quality of 
care, the empowerment of consumers, system transparency, 
and eventually to the reduction of health care costs [3-7]. 
But expectations have recently been mitigated due to the 
publication of studies that emphasize the complex nature of 
innovation in healthcare and the lack of rigid evidence for 
impact of eHealth technologies on health care outcomes 
thus far [8, 9]. Moreover, the application of eHealth 
technologies in healthcare may introduce risks for patient 
safety and quality of care [10-12]. Nonetheless, trust in 
information and communication technologies (ICT) seems 
to remain unaffected by these moderating results. This is 
remarkable against a backdrop of widespread declining trust 
in the legal system, in politics, finance, science and other 
public domains [13, 14]. Public administrations, care 
professionals, researchers and the general public are 
generally trustful and overly optimistic about the „a-
political‟ power of digital technology in virtually all public 
and personal domains [15, 16]. Investments in ICT are 
rarely withdrawn because of identified or alleged risks for 
patient safety or for the quality of care. Where interpersonal 
trust is an attitude towards others whom we hope will be 
trustworthy, institutional trust refers to institutions or 
systems (i.e. the government or the administration of 
justice) and their trustworthiness [17]. The value of 
institutional trust lies in its opportunities for cooperation, 
knowledge, autonomy and other „social goods‟ that 
contribute to the foundations of society [18]. In the case of 
eHealth technology the question if trust is warranted is 
socially important as well. Is it plausible, justified and well-
grounded to trust technologies that are designed to advance 
health, safety and care? Are these systems trustworthy 
themselves? Is adherence related to trust? Trust in and 
trustworthiness of eHealth interventions are obviously 
affected by (perceived) risks and lack of knowledge in the 
long run. Over the last decades studies of risk (and 
technology) have grown into a major interdisciplinary field 
of research. Risk researcher Hansson states “When there is a 
risk, there must be something that is unknown or has an 
unknown outcome. Therefore, knowledge about risk is 
knowledge about lack of knowledge. This combination of 
knowledge and lack thereof contributes to making issues of 
risk complicated from an epistemological point of view” 
[19]. Since epistemology is not our focus here we will apply 
a an internationally accepted definition for risk i.e. “the 
combination of the probability of occurrence of harm and 
the severity of that harm” [20]. This definition is also used 
134
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Conceptual risk  
Description 
eHealth technology 
development as an 
expert-driven process  
If project management fails to arrange 
stakeholder participation in the full 
development process risks for rejection by 
(end-)users increase. 
eHealth technology 
development ignores 
evaluation 
If the development is viewed as a linear, 
fixed and static process instead of a 
iterative, longitudinal research activity 
risks of suboptimal outcomes increase.  
Implementation of 
eHealth technology as 
a post-design activity 
If conditions for implementation are not 
properly accounted for  right from the start in 
all subsequent stages stakeholders may drop 
out. 
eHt development does 
not affect organization 
of healthcare 
If it is ignored that eHealth technologies 
intervene with traditional care characteristics 
and infrastructure unexpected effects cause 
stakeholders to abandon.  
eH technologies as 
instrumental, 
determinist applications 
If eH interventions ignore users‟ needs for 
affective, persuasive communication and 
information technologies for motivation, self 
management and support, they drop-out.. 
eH research fails to 
integrate mixed-
methods and data 
triangulation 
If conventional research methods keep falling 
short of assessing the added value for 
healthcare in terms of process (usage, 
adherence) and outcome variables 
(behavioral, clinical outcomes; costs) societal 
and scientific refutation follows. 
* Van Gemert-Pijnen et al., 2011 [22] 
 
in the international standard for risk management of medical 
devices [21] which is the regulatory sector in which part of 
the eHealth technologies can be classified. 
 
In a recently published study we have reported on flaws 
and drawbacks of eHealth technologies [22]. This study was 
based on a comprehensive analysis of eventually sixteen 
frameworks regarding the development and implementation 
of eHealth interventions over the last decade (2000-2010). 
The reported drawbacks may legitimately be conceived as 
risks since they imply equivalent and immediate hazards for 
the patient‟s safety or the quality of care. Therefore we think 
it relevant for the present study to provide a short summary 
of these findings. Table I shows a summary of these risks 
phrased in conceptual terms. 
 TABLE I. RISKS DERIVED FROM PREVIOUS RESEARCH* 
 
 
Precisely the opposites of factors that improve the uptake 
and impact of eHealth technologies constitute risk for both 
patient safety and quality of care; they increase the 
probability of occurrence of harm and the severity of that 
harm. For further reading we refer to the abovementioned 
review.  
In the present study we seek to validate these outcomes 
by assessing the nature and prevalence of any risk to 
patients´ safety and quality of care that may be associated 
with eHealth applications, as established in randomized 
controlled trials. These interventions include web-based and 
mobile applications for caregivers, patients and their 
relatives within a treatment relationship as well as 
technology regarding quality in healthcare. This provides an 
inventory of documented risks that impact on quality of care 
and the patients‟ well-being. Increasing use of eHealth 
technology is one of the major developments in today‟s 
healthcare [23]. The opportunities of web-based and mobile 
eHealth technologies should therefore remain central to the 
global health discourse. At the same time it is required to 
explore the risks of these technological advancements. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE SCAN 
The present desk research involves a literature scan to 
exploratory assess only those risks that are reliably 
documented in the scientific literature. The scan is restricted 
to publications regarding risks that affect the quality of 
healthcare and the patients‟ safety. The public health domain 
is excluded. Issues concerning security of data-transmission, 
storage, encryption, standardization, data-management and 
privacy are not included to avoid overlap and redundancy 
[24]. The search is limited to randomized controlled trials 
(RCT) to allow for comparisons. No systematic review was 
performed. 
 
The bibliographic database SciVerse Scopus was searched 
because of its broad content coverage including 100% 
coverage of Medline titles and over 16.000 peer-reviewed 
academic journals. The used search query combined the 
topic „eHealth‟ with search terms regarding risk, healthcare-
setting and study design. The complete query can be found 
in Appendix I. One author reviewed the titles and abstracts 
of the identified publications to decide whether they should 
be examined in full detail. Inclusion criteria are: (1) the 
article deals with an eHealth application and/or (2) deals 
with risks for (3) quality of care in general and/or patients´ 
safety resulting from the use of the application. Articles 
describing such risks merely as unintended outcomes were 
included as long as these risks affect quality of care and/or 
patients´ safety. Articles whose titles contained outcome-
measures or evaluation criteria of an eHealth program were 
included as well. If risks or limitations where explicitly 
mentioned in the abstract, the article was included. 
Furthermore (4) articles had to be RCTs published (5) 
between 2000-2011. Finally (6) only articles written in the 
German and English language were scanned. An overview 
of the inclusion criteria is presented  in Table II. The study 
selection process is included in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
135
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE  II. INCLUSION CRITERIA FOR THE STUDY SELECTION PROCESS 
     Inclusion criteria  
1. eHealth application 
2a. in Title: outcome-measure and/or evaluation and/or risk  
2b.in Abstract: risk and/or limitation found  
3. Quality of care and/or patients´ safety/well being 
4. Design: Randomized controlled trial 
5. Publication year: between 2000 – 2011 
6. Language: German or English  
 
 
Identified risks were structured according to a multi-level 
approach covering risks dealing with either human factors 
(patient), technology factors or organizational factors, 
referring to the framework for health information systems 
evaluation as proposed by Yusof et al. [25].   
III. 
OUTCOMES 
A. Study characteristics 
The search was performed in SciVerse Scopus in July 
2011 
delivering 
initially 
340 
potentially 
relevant 
publications. Of these, 17 were eventually included after the 
selection procedure described sub II.    
B. Multi-level risks assessment 
Human, technological or organizational risks appear to 
be no primary subject of the RCTs identified in the search. 
However they emerge as secondary effects or unintended 
outcomes of eHealth technology implementations. Identified 
risks have been structured with regard to their primary 
occurrence at a human level, a technological level and 
organizational level.  
 
1) Risks concerning Human factors 
Masa et al. [26] compared conventional spirometry to online 
spirometry with regard to outcome measures like forced 
vital capacity, quality criteria (acceptability, repeatability) 
and the number of maneuvers and time spent on both of the 
two procedures. They found that the number of spirometric 
maneuvers needed to meet quality criteria was somewhat 
higher in the online mode as compared to conventional 
spirometry. Online spirometry also took more time for 
patients (mean differences of 0.5 additional maneuvers and 
0.7 minutes more). Higher time-consumption may also 
negatively affect the remote technician instructing the 
patient while the latter uses the spirometer. The spirometric 
values achieved online were very similar to the values 
achieved by conventional spirometry.  
 
Some eHealth applications appear to be more beneficial for 
specific patient groups. Bujnowska-Fedak et al. [27] tested a 
tele-homecare application for monitoring diabetes. Older 
and higher educated patients, spending a lot of the time at 
home and having acquired diabetes recently, benefited most 
from the application. A positive association was found 
between educational level and ability to use the tele-
monitoring system without assistance. Spijkerman et al. [28] 
evaluated a web-based alcohol-intervention without (group 
1) and with (group 2) feedback compared to a control group 
in order to reduce drinking behavior in 15-20yrs. old Dutch 
binge-drinkers. They found that the intervention may be 
effective in reducing weekly alcohol use and may also 
encourage moderate drinking behavior in male participants 
over a period of 1-3 months. The intervention seemed 
mainly effective in males while for females a small adverse 
effect was found. Women following intervention group 1 
were less likely to engage in moderate drinking and had 
increased weekly drinking a little, although significantly 
(p=.06; 1.6 more drinks/week), at one month follow-up. 
Zimmerman et al. [29] performed a secondary analysis on 
data from an RCT on a symptom-management intervention 
for elderly patients during recovery after coronary artery 
bypass surgery. They found that the intervention had more 
impact on women than on men for symptoms such as 
fatigue, depression, sleeping problems and pain. Regarding 
measures of physical functioning no gender differences 
were found. Cruz-Correira et al. [30] tested adherence to a 
web-based asthma self-management tool in comparison to a 
paper-based diary. The tool was designed to collect and 
store patient data and provide feedback to both patient and 
doctor about the former‟s condition in order to support 
medical decision making. Patients‟ adherence to the web-
based application was lower than in the control group. 
Willems et al. [31] tested a home monitor self-management 
program for patients with asthma where data such as 
spirometry results, medication use or symptoms were 
recorded. They found a low compliance of participants with 
the intervention protocol. Participants in the intervention 
group recorded in average less PEF tests (peak expiratory 
ﬂow; lung function data): 1.5 per day versus the required 
number in the protocol of 2 tests per day. Verheijden et al 
[32] tested a web-based tool for nutrition counseling and 
social support for patients with increased cardiovascular risk 
in comparison to a control group receiving conventional 
care. The authors found that the uptake of the application in 
the intervention group was low (33%) with most 
participants using the tool only once during the 8 months 
study period. Patients properly using the intervention were 
significantly younger than those who did not. Morland et al. 
[33] compared an anger management group therapy for 
veterans 
delivered 
face-to-face 
versus 
via 
videoconferencing. Group therapy via videoconferencing 
teleconferencing seemed effective to treat anger symptoms 
in veterans. While no differences could be found between 
the two groups regarding attendance or homework 
completion, the control group reported a significant higher 
overall group therapeutic alliance than the intervention 
group. Postel et al. [34] evaluated an eTherapy program for 
problem drinkers, where therapist and patient communicated 
online to reach a reduction of alcohol use, as compared to a 
control group receiving regular information by email. While 
effective for complying participants, they found high drop-
out rates in the eTherapy group though quitting the program 
136
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

did not automatically mean that the participant had also 
relapsed or increased alcohol consumption. Ruffin et al. [35] 
tested a web-based application where participants received 
tailored health messages after giving information about 
family history of six common diseases. In the intervention 
group the authors found modest improvements in self-
reported physical activity and fruit and vegetable intake. But 
participants also showed a decreased cholesterol-screening 
intention as compared to the control group who received 
standard health messaging.   
In summary, higher time consumption, unintended 
adverse effects, and selective benefits differing for sex, 
education, age and other variables are the risks observed on 
the side of the human (end-)user. Frequently adherence (or 
compliance, drop-out, alliance, up-take) is mentioned and 
associated with a negative impact on the intended effect of 
an intervention. 
 
2) Risks concerning Technology 
Evaluating a tele-homecare application for monitoring 
diabetes Bujnowska-Fedak et al. [27] observe usability 
problems among participants; 41% of them (patients with 
type 2 diabetes) were unable to use the system for glucose-
monitoring needing permanent assistance. Patients who 
could easily use the application derived a greater impact 
from its use. Nguyen et al. [36] evaluated an internet-based 
self-management 
program 
for 
COPD 
patients 
but 
discontinued before the sample target was reached due to 
technical and usability problems with the application. 
Participants stated at the exit interview that decreased 
accessibility, slow loading of the application, and security 
concerns prevented them from using the website more 
frequently. Participants reporting usability problems had to 
complete (too) many actions on a PDA-device before being 
able to submit an exercise or symptom entry. Other 
problems dealt with limited wireless coverage of the PDA. 
The technical problems decreased participants´ engagement 
with the tools. Decreased engagement was associated with 
the number of web log-ins and the exercise and symptom 
entered via the website and/or the PDA. While evaluating a 
web-based asthma self-management tool Cruz-Correira et 
al. [30] found nine patients reporting problems (19 in total) 
related to the use of a web-based self-management tool. 
Most problems concerned the internet connection and the 
graphical user interface. Two of the patients could not even 
use the application because of technical problems. 
Demaerschalk et al. [37] tested the efficacy of a 
telemedicine application (vs. telephone-only consultation) 
for the quality of decision making regarding acute stroke. 
They found technical issues in 74% of telemedicine 
consultations versus none in telephone consultations. The 
observed 
technical 
problems 
did 
not 
prevent 
the 
determination of treatment decision but some did influence 
the time necessary to treatment decision-making. Jansà et al. 
[38] used a telecare-application for type 1 diabetes patients 
having poor metabolic control to send glycaemia values to 
the diabetes team. They found that 30% of team-patient 
appointments were longer than expected (1h vs. 0.5h) due to 
technical problems with the application. Technical problems 
concerned the inability to send results of counseling caused 
by problems with the application itself, the server or 
internet-access.  Using a telemanagement application for 
diabetes patients Biermann et al. [39] found that 15% of the 
participants had difficulties in handling the application, the 
consequences of which were not elaborated. In a study of an 
asthma 
self-management 
telemonitoring 
program 
by 
Willems et al. [31] 1/3 of participants experienced technical 
problems, mostly with malfunctioning devices. Practitioners 
had to contact patients e.g., regarding a missed data transfer 
leading to logistical problems. 
 
In summary, a variety of issues have been reported at the 
technology level affecting patient safety or quality of care. 
They range from usability problems and security issues to 
problem with accessing the server or malfunctioning 
devices. 
 
3) Risks concerning Organization  
Copeland et al. [40] tested whether a telemedicine self-
management intervention for congestive heart failure (CHF) 
patients could be effective in terms of improving physical 
and mental health-related quality of life and cost-
effectiveness as compared to a control group receiving usual 
care. They could not find substantial differences between 
groups, but overall costs related to CHF were higher for the 
intervention group. The authors state that this might be 
related to the intervention encouraging medical service 
utilization by facilitating access to care. 
 
One tele-management application for diabetics allows 
patients to measure their blood-glucose values and send it to 
their care provider [39]. Though time-saving for patients, 
use of the application lead to 20% more time investment (50 
vs. 43 min. per month over a 4-month period, and 43 vs. 34 
min. per month over an 8-month period) on the side of the 
care provider compared to conventional care. The higher 
time expenditure did not reflect time necessary to manage 
the application itself: it was due to more access to the 
provider, so that patients tended to call more often. Montori 
et al. [41] also found a comparable risk concerning time-
consumption. They tested a telecare-application for data-
transmission for type 1 diabetes patients. The nurses needed 
more time reviewing glucometer data (76 min. vs. 12 min.) 
and giving the patient feedback (68 minutes vs. 18 minutes) 
in the telecare condition as compared to the control group. 
The authors found more nurse feedback time to be 
significantly associated with more changes in insulin doses; 
more changes of doses thus appeared in the telecare group.  
Strayer et al. [42] tested a personal digital assistant 
(PDA) as a tool for improving Smoking Cessation 
Counseling (SCC) against a paper-based reminder tool. In 
semi-structured interviews medical students providing SCC 
137
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

reported that they felt barriers for using the PDA in practice 
such as a lack of time or a lack of training. Also they felt 
uncomfortable to use the PDA in the presence of patients. 
The PDA tool did not increase key SCC behaviors of the 
participants of the intervention group as compared with the 
paper-based reminder. 
 
In summary, increased time consumption, barriers for 
proper use and financial issues are the risks observed at the 
organizational level. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
RCTs of the immediate risk of eHealth technology for 
patients‟ safety or quality of care have not been found. Risks 
emerge as unintended, secondary outcomes in the margin of 
studies aiming to evaluate the effectiveness of eHealth 
interventions. The selected studies suggest nonetheless 
evidence for risks at all three levels of the multi-level 
approach applied. Ten studies mention risks concerning the 
patient at the human level, especially where adherence issues 
lead to suboptimal use of an intervention and corresponding 
low effectiveness. But also adverse effects were reported, as 
well as the fact that not all patient groups can equally benefit 
from an eHealth intervention. Issues at a technological level 
were found in seven studies, revealing considerable rates of 
usability problems, limited access or other technical 
problems. Organizational issues were found with regard to 
higher use of resources (time, money, staff) affecting quality 
of care in two studies. Table III shows the level and nature of 
the risks observed in our study. 
TABLE III. OBSERVED RISKS  
Risk level 
Description  
Human level 
Adherence (or compliance, drop-out, 
alliance, up-take) 
 
Unintended adverse effects  
 
Selective patient benefits (sex, 
education, age and other variables)  
 
 
Technology level 
Usability problems 
 
Access 
 
Security issues 
 
Malfunctioning devices 
 
 
Organizational level 
Higher time consumption 
 
Barriers for proper use 
 
Higher costs 
 
 
 
In some cases the causes of the risks were qualified as 
study (design) artifacts. In many instances the consequences 
have not been elaborated.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Risk is a complicated epistemological issue that refers to 
a lack of knowledge along subjective and objective 
dimensions. Trust is an important social good. But trust is 
risky. The observed lack of academic interest for risk 
assessment in eHealth technology should be a matter of 
concern. Patient safety and quality of care deserve a high 
level of risk awareness when it comes to new technologies. 
At present risks emerge in the margin of RCTs in eHealth. 
They are conceived as problems, issues, disadvantages, costs 
or other designations that one way or another affect human, 
technological or organizational functioning in a detrimental 
manner.  
Though both quantity and quality of the reported issues 
do not seem disturbing at first glance, a wider search would 
almost certainly deliver a more disquieting range and 
diversity of risks. Given the outcome of our study that none 
of the RCTs were designed to study risks, we must conclude 
that they do in fact not represent the studies with the highest 
evidence level related to our research question. Therefore, a 
follow-up search, including review articles, controlled 
clinical trials, and perhaps also observational studies should 
be performed. Furthermore, in databases such as MAUDE 
(Manufacturer and User Facility Device) of the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration, in grey literature, articles in 
professional magazines and other (online) sources of 
different organizational, consumer and academic nature a 
variety of incidents involving risks have been recorded1. 
While often viewed as avoidable or improvable intervention 
flaws or explained as study (design) artifacts they should not 
be played down. Their presumed prevalence and incidence 
give rise to reconsideration when it comes to exploring the 
opportunities of web-based and mobile eHealth technologies 
for global healthcare innovation.  
This reconsideration implies the need for extensive 
research that explicitly focuses on establishing the volume 
and nature of such risks. It also implies an improved way of 
monitoring to advance transparency in the reporting of risk 
prevalence and safety incidents. Finally it implies a higher 
level of healthcare risk management, continuity of care and 
understanding of how risks affect patients through risk 
identification, operating ways to avoid or moderate risks and 
developing contingency plans when risks cannot be 
prevented or avoided.   
 
The results of the present scan are in accordance with 
outcomes from the ceHRes study that covers over a decade 
of 
eHealth 
technological 
development 
[22]. 
 
The 
„conceptual‟ risks (Table I) represent the same categories of 
risks that result from the literature study. For instance 
expert-driven eHealth interventions that neglect the essential 
role of patients lead to adherence issues mentioned sub B1). 
Or disregarding conditions for implementation imply 
underestimating issues such as time-consumption mentioned 
sub B3). To minimize and avoid such risks a „Roadmap‟ has 
been developed to design, develop, implement and evaluate 
eHealth interventions (see Appendix III). It uses concepts 
and techniques from business modeling and human centered 
design [43]. The roadmap serves as a guideline to 
                                                           
1 Risk analyses of these and other sources will be published in 2012.  
138
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

collaboratively improve the impact and uptake of eHealth 
technologies. For this purpose it is published as a wiki 
(ehealthresearchcenter.org/wiki/ ). 
 
For now the ubiquitous trust in technology seems 
unjustified and needs to be put in perspective to be deserved. 
We have the instruments and the knowledge to reconsider 
the implementation of eHealth to achieve this. Until then 
present stakeholders should be aware to minimize such risks 
ex ante. But at the end of the day it is the acceptability of a 
risk that determines the necessary course of action.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Under its 2011 Work plan (Domain Drugs and Medical 
technology; theme: information- and communication 
technology), 
the 
Dutch 
Health 
Care 
Inspectorate 
commissioned the National Institute for Public Health and 
the Environment (RIVM) to conduct this study of which we 
here present the first outcomes. It was carried out in 
collaboration between the Centre for Biological Medicines 
and Medical Technology and the Centre for Public Health 
Forecasting (RIVM), the Center for eHealth Research (IBR 
Institute for Social sciences and Technology, University of 
Twente). We thank ms. Fabiola Mueller for her work in data 
collection and mr. Adrie de Bruijn for his input in 
discussions about the subject of this study. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] WHO 2003. The world health report 2003 – Shaping the 
future. Geneva: World Health Organization. 
[2] WHO 2010. Global Status Report on Noncommunicable 
Diseases 2010. Geneva: World Health Organization. 
[3] Nijland N., van Gemert-Pijnen J.E.W.C., Kelders S.M., 
Brandenburg B.J., Seydel E.R. Factors Influencing the Use of 
a Web-Based Application for Supporting the Self-Care of 
Patients with Type 2 Diabetes: A Longitudinal Study J Med 
Internet Res 2011;13(3):e71. 
[4] Kelders S.M., Van Gemert-Pijnen J.E.W.C., Werkman A., 
Nijland N., Seydel E.R. Effectiveness of a Web-based 
intervention aimed at healthy dietary and physical activity 
behavior: a randomized controlled trial about users and usage. 
J Med Internet Res. 2011 Apr 14;13(2):e32. 
[5] Verhoeven F., Tanja-Dijkstra K., Nijland N., Eysenbach G., 
J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen, Asynchronous and Synchronous 
Teleconsultation for Diabetes Care: A Systematic Literature 
Review J Diabetes Sci Technol. 2010 May; 4(3): 666–684. 
[6] Resolution WHA58-28. eHealth. In: Fifty-eighth World 
Health Assembly, Geneva, 16-25 May 2005. Resolutions and 
decisions. 2005. Geneva: World Health Organization. 
http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/WHA58/WHA58_28-
en.pdf [accessed 9 May 2011]. 
[7] Glasgow, R.R., eHealth Evaluation and Dissemination (2007) 
Research American Journal of Preventive Medicine 32(5) , 
119-126. 
[8] Black A.D., Car J., Pagliari C., Anandan C., Cresswell K., 
Bokun T., et al., The impact of eHealth on the quality and 
safety of health care: a systematic overview. PLoS Med 2011; 
8: e1000387- doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000387   
[9] Atienza A.A., Hesse B.W., Baker T.B., et al. Critical issues in 
eHealth research. Am J Prev Med 2007;32(5):S71-S74.   
[10] Geertsma R.E., De Bruijn A.C.P., Hilbers, E.S.M., Hollestelle 
M.L., Bakker G., and B. Roszek. New and Emerging Medical 
Technologies - A horizon scan of opportunities and risks. 
RIVM report 360020002, 2007. Bilthoven: RIVM. 
[11] IGZ (Dutch Healthcare Inspectorate). State of Health Care. 
2008 Medical technological risks underestimated [Staat van 
de gezondheidszorg 2008. Risico‟s van medische technologie 
onderschat]. Den Haag: IGZ. 
[12] National Academy of Sciences (Nov. 2011) Health IT and 
Patient Safety: Building Safer Systems for Better Care. 
Washington: Institute of Medicine. 
[13] Barben D. Analyzing acceptance politics: Towards an 
epistemological shift in the public understanding of science 
and technology. Public Understanding of Science May 2010 
vol. 19 (3) 274-292. 
[14] Dierkes M. & Von Grote, C (Eds.) Between understanding 
and trust: the public, science and technology. Harwood 
Academic, 2000 
[15] WRR [Dutch Scientific Council for Government Policy] 
iOverheid [iGovernment]. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University 
Press. 
[16] Beeuwkes Buntin M., Burke MF, Hoaglin MC and D. 
Blumenthal (2011) The Benefits of Health Information 
Technology. Health Affairs (30)3,  464-471 
[17] Hardin, R. (2002). Trust and Trustworthiness, New York, 
NY: Russell Sage Foundation. 
[18] McLeod, C, Trust, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
(Spring 
2011 
Edition), 
Edward 
N. 
Zalta (ed.) 
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2011/entries/trust/ 
[accessed 9 Oct. 2011]. 
[19] Hansson, SO, Risk, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
(Fall 2011 Edition), E. N. Zalta (ed.) 
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2011/entries/risk/ 
[accessed 9 Oct. 2011]. 
[20] ISO/IEC Guide 51:1999. Safety aspects - Guidelines for the 
inclusion in standards. ISO, Geneva, Switzerland, 1999. 
[21] EN ISO 14971:2009. Medical devices - Application of risk 
management to medical devices (ISO 14971:2007, Corrected 
version 2007-10-01). CEN/CENELEC, Brussels, Belgium, 
2009. 
[22] Van Gemert-Pijnen J.E.W.C., Nijland N., Ossebaard H.C., 
Van Limburg A.H.M., Kelders S.M., Eysenbach G., Seydel 
E.R. (2011). A holistic framework to improve the uptake and 
impact of eHealth technologies. J Med Internet Research.. In 
press. doi:10.2196/jmir.1672 
[23] Duchatteau D.C. and M.D.H. Vink (2011). Medical-
technological 
developments 
care. 
Background 
study. 
[Medisch-technologische 
ontwikkelingen 
zorg 
20/20. 
Achtergrondstudie]. Den Haag: Council for Public Health and 
Health Care [Raad voor de Volksgezondheid en Zorg]. 
[24] IGZ (Dutch Healthcare Inspectorate). State of Health Care. 
2011. In health care, patient information exchange challenges 
not resolved with ICT without standardization of processes 
[Staat van de gezondheidszorg 2011. Informatie-uitwisseling 
in de zorg: ICT lost knelpunten zonder standaardisatie van de 
informatie-uitwisseling niet op]. Utrecht: IGZ 
[25] Yusof M.M., Kuljis J., Papazafeiropoulou, A. and L.K. 
Stergioulas (2008). An evaluation framework for health 
information systems: human, organization and technology-fit 
factors (HOT-fit). Int. J. Med. Inform. 77(6):386-398. 
PMID:17964851 
[26] Masa, J. F., González, M. T., Pereira, R., Mota, M., Riesco, J. 
A., Corral, J., Farré, R. (2011). Validity of spirometry 
performed online. European Respiratory Journal, 37(4), 911-
918. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00011510 
139
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[27] Bujnowska-Fedak, M. M., Puchała, E., & Steciwko, A. 
(2011). The impact of telehome care on health status and 
quality of life among patients with diabetes in a primary care 
setting in Poland. Telemedicine and e-Health, 17(3), 153-163. 
doi: 10.1089/tmj.2010.0113 
[28] Spijkerman, R., Roek, M. A. E., Vermulst, A., Lemmers, L., 
Huiberts, A., & Engels, R. C. M. E. (2010). Effectiveness of a 
Web-based brief alcohol intervention and added value of 
normative feedback in reducing underage drinking: A 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 12(5), e65p.61-e65p.14. doi: 10.2196/jmir.1465 
[29] Zimmerman, L., Barnason, S., Hertzog, M., Young, L., 
Nieveen, J., Schulz, P., & Tu, C. (2011). Gender differences 
in recovery outcomes after an early recovery symptom 
management intervention. Heart and Lung: Journal of Acute 
and Critical Care. doi: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2010.07.018 
[30] Cruz-Correia, R., Fonseca, J., Lima, L., Araújo, L., Delgado, 
L., Castel-Branco, M. G., & Costa-Pereira, A. (2007). Web-
based or paper-based self-management tools for asthma--
patients' opinions and quality of data in a randomized 
crossover study. Studies in health technology and informatics, 
127, 178-189.  
[31] Willems, D. C. M., Joore, M. A., Hendriks, J. J. E., van 
Duurling, R. A. H., Wouters, E. F. M., & Severens, J. L. 
(2007). Process evaluation of a nurse-led telemonitoring 
programme for patients with asthma. Journal of Telemedicine 
and 
Telecare, 
13(6), 
310-317. 
doi: 
10.1258/135763307781644898 
[32] Verheijden, M., Bakx, J. C., Akkermans, R., Van Den 
Hoogen, H., Godwin, N. M., Rosser, W., . . . Van Weel, C. 
(2004). Web-based targeted nutrition counselling and social 
support for patients at increased cardiovascular risk in general 
practice: Randomized controlled trial. Journal of Medical 
Internet Research, 6(4).  
[33] Morland, L. A., Greene, C. J., Rosen, C. S., Foy, D., Reilly, 
P., Shore, J., Frueh, B. C. (2010). Telemedicine for anger 
management therapy in a rural population of combat veterans 
with 
posttraumatic 
stress 
disorder: 
A 
randomized 
noninferiority trial. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71(7), 
855-863. doi: 10.4088/JCP.09m05604blu 
[34] Postel, M. G., De Haan, H. A., Ter Huurne, E. D., Becker, E. 
S., & De Jong, C. A. J. (2010). Effectiveness of a web-based 
intervention for problem drinkers and reasons for dropout: 
Randomized controlled trial. Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 12(4), e68p.61-e68p.12. doi: 10.2196/jmir.1642 
[35] Ruffin, M. T., Nease, D. E., Sen, A., Pace, W. D., Wang, C., 
Acheson, L. S., Gramling, R. (2011). Effect of preventive 
messages tailored to family history on health behaviors: The 
family healthware impact trial. Annals of Family Medicine, 
9(1), 3-11. doi: 10.1370/afm.1197. 
[36] Nguyen, H. Q., Donesky-Cuenco, D., Wolpin, S., Reinke, L. 
F., Benditt, J. O., Paul, S. M., & Carrieri-Kohlman, V. (2008). 
Randomized controlled trial of an internet-based versus face-
to-face dyspnea self-management program for patients with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Pilot study. Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, 10(2). doi: 10.2196/jmir.990 
[37] Demaerschalk, B. M., Bobrow, B. J., Raman, R., Kiernan, T. 
E. J., Aguilar, M. I., Ingall, T. J., .Meyer, B. C. (2010). Stroke 
team remote evaluation using a digital observation camera in 
arizona: The initial mayo clinic experience trial. Stroke, 41(6), 
1251-1258. doi: 10.1161/strokeaha.109.574509 
[38] Jansà, M., Vidal, M., Viaplana, J., Levy, I., Conget, I., Gomis, 
R., & Esmatjes, E. (2006). Telecare in a structured therapeutic 
education programme addressed to patients with type 1 
diabetes and poor metabolic control. Diabetes Research and 
Clinical 
Practice, 
74(1), 
26-32. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.diabres.2006.03.005 
[39] Biermann, E., Dietrich, W., Rihl, J., & Standl, E. (2002). Are 
there time and cost savings by using telemanagement for 
patients on intensified insulin therapy?: A randomised, 
controlled trial. Computer Methods and Programs in 
Biomedicine, 
69(2), 
137-146. 
doi: 
10.1016/s0169-
2607(02)00037-8 
[40] Copeland, L. A., Berg, G. D., Johnson, D. M., & Bauer, R. L. 
(2010). An intervention for VA patients with congestive heart 
failure. American Journal of Managed Care, 16(3), 158-165.  
[41] Montori, V. M., Helgemoe, P. K., Guyatt, G. H., Dean, D. S., 
Leung, T. W., Smith, S. A., & Kudva, Y. C. (2004). Telecare 
for Patients with Type 1 Diabetes and Inadequate Glycemic 
Control: A randomized controlled trial and meta-analysis. 
Diabetes 
Care, 
27(5), 
1088-1094. 
doi: 
10.2337/diacare.27.5.1088 
[42] Strayer, S. M., Pelletier, S. L., Martindale, J. R., Rais, S., 
Powell, J., & Schorling, J. B. (2010). A PDA-based 
counseling tool for improving medical student smoking 
cessation counseling. Family Medicine, 42(5), 350-357.  
[43] Van Limburg A.H.M., Hendrix R.M.G., Ossebaard H.C., 
Seydel E.R. and J.E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen. (2011). 
Business modelling to advance the development and 
implementation of eHealth technologies. J Med Internet Res., 
in press. 
 
 
 
  
 
Appendix I 
Search query used in SciVerse Scopus 
 
(TITLE-ABS-KEY(ehealth OR e-health OR "e health" 
OR etherapy OR e-therapy OR "e therapy" OR emental 
OR e-mental OR "e mental" OR telemedicine OR telecare 
OR teleconsult OR telemonitoring OR telehealth OR 
teleconference OR "health information technology" OR 
"web based") OR TITLE-ABS-KEY("internet based" OR 
"web application" OR domotica OR “personal digital 
assistant” OR “pda”) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY(risk OR 
risks OR danger* OR threat OR threats OR limitation* 
OR barrier* OR problem* OR concern* OR challenge 
OR challenges OR “adverse effect*” OR quality OR 
drawback OR drawbacks) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY(health 
OR care OR “healthcare” OR healthcare) AND TITLE-
ABS-KEY("randomized clinical trial*" OR "randomised 
clinical trial*" OR "randomized controlled trial*" OR 
"randomised controlled trial*" OR rct OR "RCTs" OR 
experimental)) AND PUBYEAR AFT 1999 AND 
PUBYEAR BEF 2012 AND (LIMIT-TO(LANGUAGE, 
"English") OR LIMIT-TO(LANGUAGE, "German")) 
140
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Appendix II 
Study selection process 
 
 
 
141
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

  
Appendix III 
ceHRes Roadmap to improve the impact of eHealth interventions 
 
 
 
 
 
142
Copyright (c) The Government of The Netherlands, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

