Can an Ad-hoc ontology Beat a Medical Search Engine? The Chronious Search
Engine case.
Piero Giacomelli
Tesan S.p.A., Italy
email:giacomelli@tesan.it
Giulia Munaro
Tesan S.p.A., Italy
email:munaro@tesan.it
Roberto Rosso
Tesan S.p.A., Italy
email:rosso@tesan.it
Abstract—Chronious is an Open, Ubiquitous and Adaptive
Chronic Disease Management Platform for Chronic Obstruc-
tive Pulmonary Disease(COPD) Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)
and Renal Insufﬁciency. It consists of several modules: an
ontology based literature search engine, a rule based decision
support system, remote sensors interacting with lifestyle in-
terfaces (PDA, monitor touch-screen) and a machine learning
module. All these modules interact each other to allow the
monitoring of two types of chronic diseases and to help clinician
in taking decision for care purpose. This paper illustrates how
the ontology search engine was created and fed and how some
comparative test indicated that the ontology based approach
give better results, on some estimation parameters, than the
main reference web search engine.
Keywords- Telemedicine; chronic disease management; onto-
logy search engine.
I. INTRODUCTION
Scientiﬁc advances over the past 150 years, particularly
in the medical ﬁeld, have allowed the extension of life
expectancy in western countries and this trend seems to
increase in future years. Conservative estimates suggest that
by 2030 in EU countries the proportion of people over 60
years regard the entire population will be around 50%; this
means that we will see a gradual increase in the number
of those subjects with chronic diseases (i.e., diseases not
involving healing), that will therefore increase the cost and
effort over health care facilities [1].
Chronic diseases are slowing but constantly replacing
malnutrition and infection as primary causes of mortality in
the population [2]. The World Health Organization (WHO)
has recently emphasized that chronic diseases are a global
priority [3].It was calculated that, if governments are able
to put in place public health policies that produce a 2%
yearly reduction in mortality rates for chronic diseases, 36
million deaths would be prevented worldwide between 2005
and 2015 [4].
Chronic diseases are difﬁcult to treat and, apart from
deaths, have collateral social impact that are becoming an
economic emergency both in western and developing coun-
tries. As the number of patient with chronic diseases is rising
there will be an increasing cost for hospitalization structure
both public and private. Considering some speciﬁc diseases
like Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD), sometimes there is,
during the medical treatment, a non-return point from where
the hospitalization is continuous as for dialysed people. The
traditional approach consisting in periodic check-ups and
periodic lab exams seems a model that won’t be sustainable
as the population gets older and the total number of patients
with chronic diseases rises. At present the physician deals
with an increasing number of chronic patients that are
lowering the periodic check-ups and so reducing the ability
to prevent, if not death, worsening in patient’s quality of
life.
In the latest years, we have seen a tremendous growth
in IT infrastructure, both from the hardware and commu-
nication capacity. Nowadays a common mobile phone is
much more powerful in terms of hardware and software
capacity than the ﬁrst calculating machine that allowed the
man to land on the moon forty years ago. The continu-
ous growth of the World Wide Web (WWW) and, linked
to this, the continuous growth in bandwidth capacity for
data transmission allows to have cheaper and more widely
available bandwidth, for larger portions of the population.
As consequence of the exponential growth of hardware
and software infrastructure it is possible to rethink the
whole approach to the treatment of complex chronic diseases
by limiting the hospitalization only to situations of severe
worsening of patient condition. This was the original idea
behind the EU funded Chronious project [5]: constructing a
generic platform to monitor, in an unobtrusive way, patient
with chronic disease in two goals [6]:
• Improve the patients quality of life, by reducing as
much as possible the hospitalizations.
• Allow the clinician a continuous monitoring of the
patients, both in standard and potential risk situations.
To gain this two goals, the Chronious platform has to
integrate different technologies such as hardware and soft-
ware modules that need to interact among themselves. This
paper is focused on the ontology search engine module:
we will illustrate what are the aims of this module and
what are the main components. The storage system for
the documents is an ontology, developed speciﬁcally for
the CODP and CKD diseases. We will illustrate how this
ontology was created and enriched, from medical literature
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

sources. Finally we will illustrate our tests conducted against
the principal medical search engine and how the preliminary
results seem to indicate that such approach can outperform
the results of a web search engine. The paper is organized in
the following sections. We will ﬁrst describe the Ontology
Chronious Search Module and what were the needs and
how we solved them. Chapter three fully illustrate the whole
process of document uploading and processing of the text to
gain the enrichment of the ontology. Finally we will illustrate
our tests results and suggest some future improvements.
II. CHRONIOUS SEARCH MODULE
Chronious is an hardware/software platform devoted to
monitor in a remote way COPD and CKD patients. In Figure
1, a schema of the whole system is presented:
Figure 1.
Chronious modules
The chronic patient is equipped at home with the follo-
wing devices:
• a Personal Digital Assistant (PDA) that contains ma-
chine learning algorithms, acting as a ﬁrst alerting
system and that is used to transmit data to a central
system through GPRS technology.
• A Home Patient Monitor (HPM) that is used to allow
patients to insert qualitative information on diet, activity
and drugs intake.
• Bluetooth medical devices: weight scale, blood pressure
intake device, glucometer, air quality monitoring tool.
Coupled with these devices a sensorized t-shirt for
vital parameters recording like cardiac and respiratory
signals.
For the two pathologies, different sets of equipments are
given to the patient according to the clinician. For example
the glucometer is usually assigned to CKD patient affected
by diabetes comorbidity .
The data collected are automatically transmitted via GPRS
to a Central System that, using a web interface, and a
rule-based Central Decision Support System (CDSS), allows
clinician to monitor patient and to receive suggestions on
how to act in case of a worsening trend or a potentially life
risk situation.
The CDSS uses JENA [7] framework and a set of rules
codiﬁed in OWL [8] format to display suggestions to the
clinician. An example of such a rule is displayed in table II.
Table I
EXAMPLE OF A SUGGESTION GIVEN BY THE CDSS
patientID
1
AlertType
White
Date
01/02/2011
Description
body temperature up to 38
Suggested action
hospitalization of the patient
Guideline Text
text from literature
For CKD we used the KDOQI Guidelines [9], for COPD
we create a set of rules based on clinician experience.
The suggestions are portion of text extracted from literature
reference or documents provided by the experts. Managing
documents and information , and organising concepts, such
as comorbidities, and relations between them is a central
task, for having a correct outcome to the CDSS calling.
Searching literature reference, we ﬁnd that latest infor-
mation retrieval/storage systems studies, seem to indicate
that ontology structure are a better way details concepts and
the relations between them [10]. Ontologies have been used
successfully on medical [11], genetic [12] and surgery [13]
ﬁelds. The document repository for storing informations on
the COPD and CKD diseases, was chooses as an ontology.
This lead us to other issues: how to build the ontology and
how to enrich it with new concepts and to validate it.
Agreeing with doctors , the main reference on the medical
ﬁeld is the PubMed[14] site. PubMed is a free database
accessing primarily the MEDLINE database of references
and abstracts on life sciences and biomedical topics. As of
1 July 2011, PubMed has over 21 million records going back
to 1966, selectively to the year 1865, and very selectively
to 1809. About 500,000 new records are added each year.
As of 1 July 2011, 11.9 million articles are listed with
their abstracts and 3.3 million articles are available full-text
for free.
The problem was how to integrate all this huge
among of information in the PubMed site with the Chronious
Ontology. Apart from the integration the main problem was
how to connect all sparse information about COPD and CKD
pathologies in a way to produce a real value information to
the clinician. Querying Pubmed for generic COPD (at 1th
September 2011), we have as outcome 33319 documents.
We coupled the Chronious Documents repository with a
Search Module for having an interface that clinician can
use to fast access literature speciﬁc information on the two
diseases treated by Chronious.
Using these intuitions, the whole Chronious Search Mod-
ule of the Chronious System is composed of four main parts:
• Upload tool: a web interface that is able to upload ﬁles
to the repository.
• The repository itself and the ontology used to underline
concepts and relation extracted from the raw text.
• Enrichment tool: a tool that after the text information
extraction is able to say which new concepts and
relations should be accepted.
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

• A search tool. This is the ﬁnal web interface for the
clinician that using the concepts and terms provided in
a free text search or more structured way is able to
query the repository and give documents as feedback.
Being that the Chronious Search Tool was the entry point
for the CDSS, the clinician feedbacks about the whole
architecture underlined potential issues. The main issue, was
that it is useless to use a personalized search engine while
going via web to PubMed was so fast and so accessible.
Another issue was that the clinician should upload manually
the document into the repository. We will describe the
processing of a single document to demonstrate how we
solve these issues.
III. THE CHRONIOUS UPLOAD/PROCESSING SYSTEM
The Chronious ontology have been developed using the
DOLCE ontology [15], however to enrich the relation be-
tween the nodes of the ontology graph, a functionality for
transforming text into concept were needed. The upload
functionality is based on a web interface that is able to
upload a pdf ﬁle and associating it with some general
information like author, journal, year, volume. Due to the
fact that the more documents are uploaded the better the
ontology can be enriched, we code a web spider that is
able to use Pubmed site structure to download automatically.
Even if the ﬁnal step of the process, the Enrichment
Tool validation, needs a human approval of the concept
chosen, this automated download tool helps the boring part
of downloading a document from PubMed and uploading to
the Chronious system.
The automated download tools is basically a web crawler
that periodically use a query string over the Pubmed search
functionality, do the HTTP request, parse the html pages
and ﬁnd html tag for having information about the pdf
ﬁle to download. The code was developed using .NET
framework 3.5 being that the CLR provide a library that is
able to interact directly with an html page using the DOM
(Document Object Model) system.
This allows easily to mimic nearly every interaction that
the human user can have with the page like: entering text in
the input ﬁelds and clicking on a link to simulate the ”save
as” functionality.
After the downloading ﬁnished successfully the informa-
tion are stored on a RDBMS database so that only new
papers are downloaded and parsed.
One of the problem faced with this approach is the copy-
right issues that affects the contents of the PubMed database.
The greatest part of the articles indexed by PUBMed are
protected by copyright, as they come from journals that have
copyright agreements, so in most of the case the content
of the document cannot be viewed for a user that have no
subscription. The problem is not present if we use the upload
tool is used inside an institution that have a subscription with
PubMed based on the ip address.
However if the Automated Upload Tool is installed on a
normal pc downloading document provide an infringement
of the PubMed copyright.
To avoid this we decide to use a lower set of documents
that are provided by Pubmed for free until the document is
published on the journal, for having a ﬁrst test on the system
and to see if the concepts extracted were in line with the
ontology we build. To prevent any possible copyright issue,
we decide to show to the ﬁnal user only the DOI of the
document so in case the user would like to see the whole
document he must open a browser window. This action
will shift the copyright from the Chronious system to the
ﬁnal user of the search tools. At the end of the enrichment
process the module removes the physical pdf.
Once the
document is uploaded into the repository a Natural Language
Processing (NLP) is used to for Information Extraction
(IE). For implementing the NLP algorithms the GATE [16]
framework will be used. GATE is a leading infrastructure for
developing and deploying software components, that process
human language. Among others it provides a framework,
based on JAVA, that implements the architecture and can be
used to embed language processing capabilities in different
applications.
GATE supports many document formats like: Plain Text,
HTML, SGML, XML, RTF, Email, PDF and Microsoft
Word.
Every text is splitted into sentences and words and and
every concept extracted is then indexed and associated
with a weight that evaluate the correspondence with the
other concepts already present into the Chronious ontology.
Once this evaluation is done the concept extracted are
presented to the human user using a web interface, where
the new concepts are shown with their evaluation indexes
see Figure 2.
Figure 2.
Enrichment Tool
After the whole process ﬁnished, a web interface that able
to query the ontology for terms evaluation in a structured or
free text search form (see Figure 3) is the last interface. So a
clinician is able to use it for fast ﬁnding literature reference.
In addition, the search functionality, uses also the concepts
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

in the ontology so it is possible to have fast reply to query
like ”abnormal coughing toxicity”.
Figure 3.
Search Tool
The goodness of the query results should ﬁnally be
evaluate. Next chapter will detail the criteria used.
IV. EVALUATION
As we said having another search functionality apart from
PubMed raised some murmurs from clinicians, so we need to
show that from the perspective of information retrieved, the
Chronious Search Tool has some advantages over PubMed.
For doing this, various classiﬁcations and criteria for
ontology evaluation have been considered in the literatures
[17]. However, no standard evaluation criteria have been
deﬁned so far. Reference literature proposed [18] a ”three
dimensions” classiﬁcation to evaluate ontology in three
categories: Structural Dimension, Functional Dimension and
Usability-Proﬁling Dimension.
Considering that Struc-
tural Dimension and Usability-Proﬁling Dimension where
validated by ontology experts we focused on Functional
Dimension with three different tests see Table II:
Table II
FEATURES TO BE TESTED IN CHRONIOUS ONTOLOGY TESTING
Test Identiﬁer
Description
TF-B-1
Agreement Among Experts
TF-B-2
User-Satisfaction
TF-B-3
User-Satisfaction and Completeness of Search Result
The questionnaire interview approach can be applied in
TF-B-1 to conclude the agreement among medical experts
to evaluate the correctness of the developed Chronious on-
tologies. Test participants for this test were medical experts,
especially in CKD and/or COPD area.
The black-box test TF-B-2 utilizes the same approach as
TF-B-1, the questionnaire interview approach, to measure
the overall satisfaction of the end-user. Because there are
three different search options in the Search Module (Search
by Metadata, Search by Concept, and Search by Free Text),
the questionnaire should take all these options into account
and compare their search result quality with each other.
The people involved for this interview were the end-user
of Chronious Healthcare Professional GUI, i.e., the medical
experts.
In black-box test TF-B-3, Precision P is deﬁned as the
number of relevant documents retrieved by a search g(r)
divided by the total number of documents retrieved by that
search N.
P = g(r)
N
while Recall R is deﬁned as the number of relevant docu-
ments retrieved by a search g(r) divided by the total number
of existing relevant documents G (which should have been
retrieved).
R = g(r)
G
Precision and Recall are two widely used statistical
classiﬁcations, especially in information retrieval domain.
Precision can be seen as a measure of exactness or ﬁdelity,
whereas Recall is a measure of completeness.
Usually, Precision and Recall scores are not discussed in
isolation. Instead, either value for one measure are compared
for a ﬁxed level at the other measure (e.g., Precision at a
Recall level of 0.75), or both are combined into a single
measure, such as the F-measure [19], which is the weighted
harmonic mean of Precision and Recall:
F = (β2 + 1) · P · R
(β2 · P) + R
Whereby β is a value between 0 and 1 reﬂecting the
weighting of Precision vs. Recall.
Before doing an evaluation we uploaded into the reposi-
tory 1000 free access documents grabbed by the Automatic
Upload Tool from Pubmed using two different query strings
• CKD treatment for CKD ontology part.
• COPD treatment limited to year 2008 for COPD onto-
logy part.
Because the document repository of Chronious Search
Module and of the PubMed Central system is artiﬁcially
identical (constrained with some speciﬁc limitations), for
same search query, the two systems should contain the same
number of relevant documents to this query, i.e., G for that
query in both systems should be equal. It follows that, no
matter which value the variable G has, the comparison of
F-measure between these two search systems will only be
inﬂuenced by g(r) and N of the search result. Hence, if
the value of g(r) and N are available for a search both
with Chronious Conceptual Search option and with PubMed
Central system, the F-measure of the search results with
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

both systems can be compared with each other with the
help of their function diagrams (the search query used in
both systems must be identical).
Some outputs of our tests can be seen in Table III
Table III
FEATURES TO BE TESTED IN CHRONIOUS ONTOLOGY TESTING
G
F-measure Chronious
F-measure Pubmed
500
0.724637681
0.595238095
1000
0.531914894
0.426136364
2000
0.347222222
0.27173913
The table shows that, the Chronious Conceptual Search
option performs better than the PubMed Central system with
the search query, no matter how many relevant documents
existed in the repository to this query. With this approach,
although the F-measure value of a search result cannot be
estimated for every type of query, the search performance
of the Chronious Search Module, however, can be compared
with the search performance of the PubMed Central system,
using the F-measure.
V. CONCLUSION AD FURTHER IMPROVEMENTS
Even if the test results seem promising, it is not possible
to say that in general the ontology search approach can
outperform a search functionality like PubMed one. However
the good news, is that such kind of approach on storing
information, is promising for developing future artiﬁcial
intelligence systems for application in telemedicine. Linking
concepts like symptoms to drug or caring procedures with
relations underline by literature studies can greatly help
clinician during their daily routines. It would be interesting
to evaluate the Conceptual Search on the whole corpus of
the Pubmed database even if this would be impossible due to
copyright restriction and infrastructure storage possibilities.
For sure PubMed will remain the main reference literature
search engine, however it is our opinion that having struc-
tures information like the one in Chronious ontology, will
for sure be an added value.
Another interesting task would be the evaluation of a com-
plex free text query search over the two systems. Free text
search remains the ﬁrst approach for searching information.
Reﬂection on how to beneﬁt from ontology structured data in
improving outcome for free text search seems is a research
problem that require a deeper evaluation.
Last we point out that Chronious Enrichment Tool still
need to have a human interaction. A still open research task,
is the one of having some kinds of automation in inserting
the new concepts and relations in the existing ontology, in
way to have a sort of unsupervised concepts enrichment that
mimics the rule extraction in transaction datasets. We leave
these suggestions hoping that the reader will be interested
to think about them.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Zoccali, A. Kramer, and K. Jager, “Chronic kidney disease
and end-stage renal disease a review produced to contribute to
the report the status of health in the european union: towards
a healthier europe,” NDT Plus, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 213–224,
2010.
[2] A. R. OMRAN, “The epidemiologic transition: A theory of
the epidemiology of population change,” Milbank Quarterly,
vol. 83, no. 4, pp. 731–757, 2005.
[3] W. H. Organization, “Preventing chronic diseases: a vital
investment,” 2005.
[4] K. Strong, C. Mathers, S. Leeder, and R. Beaglehole, “Pre-
venting chronic diseases: how many lives can we save?”
Lancet, vol. 366, no. 9496, pp. 1578–1582, 2005.
[5] TeSAN.
(2008,
Jun.)
Chronoius
ofﬁcial
site.
[Online].
Available: http://www.chronious.eu
[6] M. Vitacca, L. Bianchi, A. Guerra, C. Fracchia, A. Span-
evello, B. Balbi, and S. Scalvini, “Tele-assistance in chronic
respiratory failure patients: a randomised clinical trial,” Euro-
pean Respiratory Journal, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 411–418, 2009.
[7] Jena
ofﬁcial
web
site.
[Online].
Available:
http://jena.sourceforge.net
[8] W3C. (2009, Nov.) Owl speciﬁcations. [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/
[9] KDOQI, “KDOQI Clinical Practice Guidelines and Clinical
Practice Recommendations for Diabetes and Chronic Kidney
Disease.” American journal of kidney diseases : the ofﬁcial
journal of the National Kidney Foundation, vol. 49, no. 2
Suppl 2, Feb. 2007.
[10] K. M. S.C. Punitha and M. Punithavalli, “Article: Impact of
ontology based approach on document clustering,” Interna-
tional Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 22, no. 2, pp.
22–26, May 2011.
[11] J. M. Abasolo and M. Gomez, “Melisa. an ontology-based
agent for information retrieval in medicine.” in In: Proceed-
ings of the First International Workshop on the Semantic Web
(SemWeb2000, 2000, pp. 73–82.
[12] M. Ashburner, C. A. Ball, J. A. Blake, D. Botstein, H. Butler,
J. M. Cherry, A. P. Davis, K. Dolinski, S. S. Dwight, J. T.
Eppig, M. A. Harris, D. P. Hill, L. Issel-Tarver, A. Kasarskis,
S. Lewis, J. C. Matese, J. E. Richardson, M. Ringwald,
G. M. Rubin, and G. Sherlock, “Gene ontology: tool for
the uniﬁcation of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium.”
Nature genetics, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 25–29, May 2000.
[13] O. B. R. Mudunuri and T. Neumuth, in GI Jahrestagung,
S. Fischer, E. Maehle, and R. Reischuk, Eds., vol. 154.
GI,
2009, pp. 1044–1054.
[14] Pubmed
ofﬁcial
site.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.pubmed.org
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[15] M. B. L. Schneider and D. Koepsell, “Article: Impact of
ontology based approach on document clustering,” Frontiers
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications, vol. 229, no. 2, pp.
28–38, May 2011.
[16] GATE. (2008, Jun.) Gate ofﬁcial site. [Online]. Available:
http://www.chronious.eu
[17] M. G. J. Brank and D. Mladenic, “A survey of ontology
evaluation techniques,” in In In Proceedings of the Conference
on Data Mining and Data Warehouses (SiKDD 2005, 2005.
[18] M. C. A. Gangemi, C. Catenacci and J. Lehmann, “Modelling
ontology evaluation and validation,” in Proceedings of the 3rd
European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC2006), number
4011 in LNCS, Budva.
Springer, 2006.
[19] C. J. van Rijsbergen, Information retrieval.
Butterworths,
1979.
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

