Human Centered Development of a Web-based Intervention for the Prevention of 
Depression 
 
Saskia M. Kelders 
Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
National Institute for Public Health and the 
Environment 
Bilthoven, the Netherlands 
 s.m.kelders@utwente.nl 
 
Maarten Jan Oskam, Ernst T. Bohlmeijer, Julia 
E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen 
Center for eHealth Research & Disease Management 
University of Twente 
Enschede, the Netherlands 
mail@maartenjan.com;  
e.t.bohlmeijer@utwente.nl; 
j.vangemertpijnen@utwente.nl
 
Abstract—Web-based preventive interventions have shown to 
be effective for the prevention of depression, but high rates of 
non-use and drop-out, less than optimal implementation in the 
care organization and low acceptance rates cause interventions 
to be less effective in practice than in theory and research. The 
lack of a holistic overview where the human and technological 
context is given a prominent place, seems to be one of the main 
reasons for this less than optimal effectiveness. This study 
employs methods based on the holistic approach of the CeHRes 
roadmap to create a viable web-based intervention and to 
investigate the suitability of the chosen methods and the pitfalls 
that can be encountered. The study shows that it is possible to 
create a viable web-based intervention by including different 
stakeholders (users, designers, programmers, researchers) in 
different phases of the development process. The employed 
methods are suitable and yield complementary results, but 
made our approach more user and expert driven than fully 
stakeholder driven. Furthermore, our project team was 
organized with the researcher as the central hub. Although this 
worked well most of the time, we propose a more ideal 
organizational structure in which a formal project leader, who 
can be a researcher, has a mandate to make decisions and 
resources to be involved in all steps of the process.  
Keywords-Human 
Centered 
Development; 
Web-based 
Application; eHealth; Holistic; Design; Depression. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
To reduce the large public health burden of the high 
prevalence of depression, early interventions targeted at 
people at risk are essential and can be cost-effective [1, 2]. 
However, recruiting participants for interventions to prevent 
the onset of depressive disorders is quite a challenge [3]. 
Developing 
and 
implementing 
web-based 
preventive 
interventions might provide an opportunity to overcome this 
challenge [3, 4]. Advantages of web-based interventions can 
be seen not only in the broader reach, but also in increasing 
convenience for the users, the opportunity to provide 
information in an interactive and timely manner and cost-
effectiveness 
[5-7]. 
Meta-analyses 
show 
that 
these 
interventions, on average, do have a positive influence on the 
severity of the complaints [8, 9]. Nonetheless, there are 
drawbacks of online interventions. High rates of non-use and 
drop-out, less than optimal implementation in the care 
organization and low acceptance rates cause interventions to 
be less effective in practice than in theory and research [10-
13].  
Many studies are done to investigate the effect of a web-
based intervention solely on clinical outcomes, without 
attention for the organizational and technical context [13]. 
Especially the technology is seen as a given, only the effect 
can be subject to research. In development, this leads to a 
technology push: technology is developed because of the 
technological possibility, not because the target group needs 
the technology. The lack of a holistic overview where the 
human and technological context is given a prominent place, 
seems to be one of the main reasons that web-based 
interventions do not reach their full potential [13-15].  
Recently, other approaches that take into account the 
context of the developed technology are gaining ground in 
the development of web-based interventions. Human 
centered design,  which advocates the systematic, continuous 
consultation of potential users during the whole design 
process, is one of these approaches [16] and has been shown 
to have a positive effect especially on user satisfaction and 
fitting to user needs [17]. User satisfaction can be seen as an 
aspect of usability, which has been defined as: ‘The extent to 
which a product can be used by specified users to achieve 
specified 
goals 
with 
effectiveness, 
efficiency, 
and 
satisfaction in a specified context of use’ [18]. Fitting to 
needs of the users can be seen as an increased perceived 
usefulness of an application [19]. To ensure that these 
positive effects can be achieved, certain pitfalls should be 
avoided or dealt with in an appropriate manner. Common 
pitfalls that have been identified are: losing the focus on the 
user [20, 21]; a middle-of-the-road design [14, 22]; an 
uninvolved project leader [23].  
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Another approach that is gaining ground in eHealth 
development is business modeling, which focuses on 
creating an optimal fit between the technology that is being 
developed and the organizational resources and capabilities 
to create a sustainable technology [24]. A framework that 
combines both approaches is the CeHRes (center for eHealth 
research) roadmap [15]. The roadmap with five main phases 
in the development process is shown in figure 1. The 
combination of human centered design and business 
modeling in this framework might provide a means to help 
achieve the full potential of a web-based intervention for the 
prevention of depression. 
In this paper, we describe a study into the development of 
a web-based intervention for the prevention of depression, 
employing methods from the CeHRes roadmap. The goal of  
the study is twofold. The first goal is to create a viable web-
based intervention, that is attuned to the needs and wishes of 
the end-users and fits the organizational context for which it 
will be developed. The accompanying research question is: 
What usability and usefulness issues are detected by 
employing a human centered design process? The second 
goal is aimed at the process: We aim to investigate the 
suitability of the chosen methods, the pitfalls we encounter 
and ways to cope with these pitfalls. The accompanying 
research questions are: How suitable are the employed 
methods? What pitfalls are encountered en what lessons can 
be learned from this? 
The significance of the first aim of the study is obvious 
for the application being developed, but additionally, when 
developing similar web-based applications, the results can be 
used as a vantage point. The significance of the second aim 
is much broader. New web-based applications are developed 
at a startling rate, but there is no scientifically underpinned 
agreement on how to best develop these applications [14] 
(for example of an ad hoc development see [25]). The results 
of this study will provide a starting point for future 
development of web-based interventions.  
II. 
METHODS 
A. Content of the Intervention 
The web-based intervention for the prevention of 
depression developed during this study is called ‘Living to 
the full’. This intervention is based on acceptance and 
commitment 
therapy 
(ACT) 
and targets 
experiental 
avoidance that can be considered as a generic risk factor for 
mental illnesses [26]. The intervention as a group format and 
as a guided self-help format with email support by a 
counselor have both shown to be effective in reducing 
depressive symptoms [27-29]. The content of the web-based 
intervention has been adapted from the self-help book 
‘Living to the full’ [30]. 
B. Value Specification 
In this phase of the CeHRes roadmap it is determined 
which values the different stakeholders deem important. 
These values and prospective users’ needs and wishes need 
to be translated into functional and organizational 
requirements. For this study we have chosen to employ 
interviews, rapid prototyping and a feedback session (Table 
I) to assess the needs and values of the target group and to 
translate them into requirements for the application. 
Interviews and rapid prototyping were conducted with 
prospective end-users, i.e., people with mild depressive 
symptoms who are willing to participate in a preventive 
intervention. The feedback session to translate the needs and 
values of this target group into requirements was conducted 
with researchers, designers and programmers. 
1) Interviews and Rapid Prototyping 
Semi-structured interviews were performed to identify the 
needs and requirements of the target group and the  
usefulness of various possible functionalities of the system. 
The interviews were combined with rapid prototyping [31]. 
In total, 18 interviews were conducted. The interview 
participants were recruited from a previous study into the 
Figure 1.  CeHRes roadmap 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

effectiveness of ‘Living to the full’ as a guided self-help 
format with e-mail support [28]. Our participants were not 
able to participate in that study because of an overwhelming 
number of responses, but were willing to participate in our 
study. All participants received a gift voucher for their 
participation. Prior to the interview, the interviewer 
explained the goal and process of the interview, obtained 
permission to audio record the interview and each 
interviewee signed an informed consent. A typical interview 
lasted about 45 minutes. 
TABLE I.  OVERVIEW OF RESEARCH ACTIVITIES AND INSTRUMENTS  
Research phase 
Research activity 
Research method 
 Value 
specification 
Assessment of needs and 
values of target group. 
Interviews & Rapid 
prototyping 
Translation of needs and 
values in requirements.  
Feedback session 
(researchers, designers & 
programmers) 
Design 
 
Usability assessment by 
target group. 
Usability testing 
Usability assessment by 
experts. 
Cognitive Walkthrough 
Prioritizing points for 
improvement. 
Feedback session 
(researchers, designers & 
programmers) 
 
The interview scheme was based upon eHealth and 
Human Centered Design literature [15, 21, 31, 32] and 
consisted of three parts. Part 1 focused on previous 
experience with the content of the intervention (ACT) and 
with web-based interventions in general. Furthermore, the 
needs and requirements were discussed by asking three 
cruxes that the web-based intervention has to satisfy and one 
thing that would be a reason to quit (or not start) the 
intervention. Rapid prototyping was part 2 of the interview 
and focused on the usefulness of three parts that were 
available as a paper prototype, i.e., text message coaching, 
online diary and feedback. Part three assessed demographics, 
such as age, education and internet experience.  
The interviews were not transcribed, but were analyzed 
within 48 hours after the interview had taken place, 
according to the guideline of Holtzblatt [33]. We used a 
thematic analysis to identify patterns in the responses [34]. 
Part 1 was  analyzed by translating the cruxes and reasons to 
quit into needs and values. Part 2 was analyzed by counting 
the number of respondents who would and would not like to 
use the different features. Further information was coded 
using a thematic analysis. All analyses were done by two 
independent coders.   
2) Feedback session 
The results of the interviews and rapid prototyping were 
communicated to the designers and programmers by means 
of a report written by the researchers. This report was 
presented and discussed with the development team of the 
web-based application to translate the needs and values into 
requirements. The researchers specified the most important 
needs and values and the development team used their 
expertise to implement these requirements into the prototype 
of the application. 
C. Design 
In this phase of the roadmap, (a prototypical version of) 
the technology is developed, based on the requirements. The 
framework advocates the application of cooperative design 
in which the design team creates the technology with 
prospective users and stakeholders together. For this study 
we have chosen to employ think aloud usability testing with 
the target group and a cognitive walkthrough with experts 
(Table 1) to assess the usability and usefulness of the web-
based application. 
1) Usability testing 
Usability testing was used to assess the usability of the 
application by the target group. We employed a scenario-
based think aloud protocol [35], i.e., respondents were 
guided through the application by means of scenarios that 
pose a problem or task that might be solved or completed by 
using the program and respondents were instructed to 
verbalize their thoughts during the whole process of the test. 
We conducted 10 usability tests. Participants were recruited 
using online advertisements and were part of the target group 
of the web-based intervention. All participants received a gift 
voucher for their participation. All usability tests were 
recorded and coded retrospectively. The material (audio and 
video) was reviewed and issues were identified by the 
researcher. Verbal comments as well as actions taken by the 
respondents could be coded as issues. These issues  were 
analyzed using a coding scheme based upon the 
subconstructs of the ISO definition of usability [18] 
following the work of Hornbaek et al. [36].  
2) Cognitive Walkthrough 
The cognitive walkthrough method was used to assess 
the usability of the application by experts. This method was 
used in addition to usability testing by the target group to 
gain a broader overview of the usability of the application 
[35]. Eight experts of the University of Twente conducted 
the cognitive walkthrough. Issues were coded using the same 
coding scheme as used for the usability testing. 
3) Feedback session 
The results of the usability testing and cognitive 
walkthrough were communicated to the designers and 
programmers by means of a report written by the 
researchers. This report was presented and discussed with the 
development team of the web-based application to prioritize 
the points for improvement. 
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Value Specification 
The mean age of the 18 respondents was 45 years (sd = 
10),  78% (n = 14) was female and 78% (n = 14) has 
completed at least higher vocational education. The needs an 
values that arose from the interviews are presented in Table 
II. 
67% (n = 12) respondents indicated that they would use 
text message coaching. 11% (n = 2) would not use this 
feature and for the remaining 22% (n = 4) using this feature 
depends on the content of the text messages. Reminders (n = 
11) are seen as the most useful content for the text messages, 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

although assignments (n = 6) and motivation (n = 4) are also 
seen as useful content. 
The possibility of an online diary was received with 
mixed reactions. 44% (n = 8) would definitely use it and 
thought of it as a pleasant addition. However 56% (n = 10) 
would only use the diary when it is part of an assignment in 
the course. 
TABLE II.  NEEDS AND VALUES  
Needs and values 
n 
Functional design application 
12 
Feedback/contact with counselor 
8 
Added value of content 
8 
Flexible schedule of doing the course 
6 
Contact with others using the application 
6 
Attractive application 
5 
Fixed endpoint 
3 
Specific/clear instructions 
3 
Limited time investment (content and assignments to-the-point) 
3 
Personal attention 
3 
Encouragement to complete the course 
3 
Focus on ‘real-world’ of the users 
1 
 
All respondents indicated that feedback would be useful 
and even essential. Feedback is expected on assignments, but 
it can also be useful for gaining new insights, support and 
motivation. Several respondents (n = 5) stress the importance 
of the feedback being personal.  
Based on the results of the interviews and rapid 
prototyping, a report with recommendations was written by 
the researchers and communicated with the design team. The 
recommendations were prioritized and an action plan was 
agreed on. 
B. Design 
The mean age of the 10 participants of the usability test 
was 38 years (sd = 11), 90% (n = 9) was female and 70 % (n 
= 7) has completed at least higher vocational education. The 
8 participants of the cognitive walkthrough can be 
categorized as usability experts (n = 7) and target group 
experts (n = 1) [33]. In total, both methods yielded 476 
issues, virtually equally distributed between the usability 
testing and cognitive walkthrough (respectively 52% (n = 
242) and 48% (n = 225)). Table III shows the distribution of 
the issues over the subconstructs of usability and the amount 
of positive (+), neutral (+/-) and negative issues. 
TABLE III.  ISSUES DESIGN PHASE 
 
Usability testing 
Cognitive 
Walkthrough 
total 
 
+ 
+/- 
- 
total 
+ 
+/- 
- 
total 
 
Effectiveness 
12 
3 
76 
91 
0 
0 
85 
85 
176 
Efficientcy 
20 
3 
31 
54 
0 
0 
1 
1 
55 
Satisfaction 
45 
5 
47 
97 
29 
3 
107 
139 
236 
Total 
77 
11 
154 
242 
29 
3 
193 
225 
467 
 
Issues ranged from the functioning of features (e.g., 
respondent cannot adjust the volume of the player of the 
mindfulness exercise; usability test, respondent 6); to layout 
(I like the colours, usability test, respondent 11); and to the 
lack of options (The mindfulness exercise should have the 
option to download the exercise as mp3-file; cognitive 
walkthrough, respondent 6). As can be seen in Table III there 
were differences in the sort of issues both methods detected. 
Usability testing yielded more positive issues and the issues 
were more evenly divided over the subconstructs. The 
cognitive walkthrough yielded only 1 issue in efficiency and 
most issues were found in satisfaction. 
Based on these 467 issues, 109 unique points for 
improvement were formulated. Of these points, 38 came 
forward in both methods, 19 were uniquely based on the 
usability testing and 52 were uniquely based on the cognitive 
walkthrough. 
The 109 points for improvement were communicated to 
the design team, by means of a report in which the 
improvements were categorized by feature of the application 
(e.g., signing up; the first lesson). During the feedback 
session with the researchers, designers and programmers, a 
prioritization was made, based on the study results and the 
estimation of the estimated effort (time and money) to 
implement the points of improvement. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 
A. Application 
Our first research question was aimed at identifying 
usability and usefulness issues by employing a human 
centered design process. The study has shown that 
employing the chosen research methods yielded many issues 
related to the application. Regarding usefulness, our results 
show that the most important needs and values of the target 
group are a functional design of the application, feedback or 
contact with a counselor and the importance of added value 
of the content of the intervention. Furthermore, we have seen 
that text message coaching seems a viable feature of the 
web-based intervention, as long as the content of the text 
messages serves as a reminder, an assignment or is 
motivational. An online diary can be useful, under the 
condition that the diary is embedded in assignments. 
Moreover, feedback is essential for a web-based intervention 
for the prevention of depression. Regarding usability, the 
results yielded over 100 points of improvement on usability 
aspects of effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction. Studies 
have shown the significance of a well attuned intervention to 
reduce non-use and dropout of an intervention [10-12]. By 
employing a human centered design process, we feel that we 
have succeeded in our goal to lay the foundation of a viable 
web-based intervention, that is attuned to the needs and 
wishes of the end-users and have thereby increased the 
expected future adherence to this intervention. However, the 
second part of our goal was to create an intervention that fits 
the organizational context for which it will be developed. 
Due to the methods we have used, our approach was more 
user and expert driven than fully stakeholder driven. The 
care professionals and the organizational context, might not 
have been given the appropriate attention. Nevertheless, the 
developed intervention seems to be viable for the end-users 
in their context. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Process 
The research questions that accompany our second 
research aim were focused at the suitability of the employed 
methods, the pitfalls we encountered and the lessons we have 
learned. The methods used in the value specification phase 
seem to be suitable. They have yielded valuable information 
on the needs of the target group and the usefulness of 
different features. However, according to the CeHRes 
roadmap [15] and human centered design literature (e.g., 
[32]), participation of the target group should start before the 
value specification phase. In this study the researchers and 
the design team have decided in advance that the target 
group has a need for the intervention and the chosen mode 
(web-based). Therefore, other modes (e.g., mobile, devices) 
have not been considered and the actual need for a web-
based intervention has not been researched. We feel that, for 
this topic, there is enough evidence to support the 
significance for web-based interventions [1-9], but it is 
important to always assess ones assumptions before trusting 
them blindly.  
For the design phase we used a target group method 
(usability testing) and an expert method (cognitive 
walkthrough). Interestingly, the expert method yielded far 
more unique points of improvement than the target group 
method. This is in line with the overview of usability 
methods of Jaspers [35] that states that in a later stage of 
development expert methods might yield more usability 
results. An explanation might be that end-users find it harder 
to separate the content and context from functional 
characteristics of a system [14]. This might also explain the 
differences in the distribution of the issues over the 
subconstructs effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction. 
Nevertheless, in line with the CeHRes roadmap, we feel it is 
important to view the system not as a stand-alone 
application, but in its context. Therefore, although the target 
group method did not yield as many unique points for 
improvement, it is still an important part of the design phase, 
especially because the end-users do not see the application 
separate from its context.  
In this study, we have made a first step in developing a 
web-based intervention for the prevention of depression 
following the CeHRes roadmap. Although we have included 
different stakeholders (users, designers, programmers, 
researchers), care professionals and the organization in 
which the intervention will be implemented have not been 
involved. This makes it hard to investigate whether the 
developed intervention fits the organizational context for 
which it is developed. Including these two important 
stakeholders in future research might lead to a better 
organizational fit. In the value specification phase, this could 
be realized by employing focus group methods and in the 
design phase by usability testing combined with interviews 
[15]. 
In the development process, we have encountered all of 
the common pitfalls described in the introduction (losing the 
focus on the user; a middle-of-the-road design; an 
uninvolved project leader) to a certain degree. Losing the 
focus on the user was seen most prominently in discussing 
and prioritizing the points of improvement in the design 
phase. Time and costs can quickly become more important 
than the needs and wishes of the users. It would have been 
better to involve the users in prioritizing the points for 
improvement. The pitfall of a middle-of-the-road design was 
also encountered in the design phase when users reacted 
differently on design ideas. For example, a sentence that was 
intended to rouse curiosity was found to be provoking for 
some participants and therefore tuned down. We did not 
encounter the pitfall of an uninvolved project leader as such, 
but we did encounter difficulties in the project team and 
interdisciplinary issues. Our project team consisted of 
researchers, designers and programmers. There was no 
formal project leader, instead one of the researchers took this 
role. The project team was organized with the researcher as 
the central hub. Although this informal project management 
worked well most of the time, there were instances where the 
informal project leader did not have the authority to make 
certain decisions or the resources to be involved in all 
aspects of the development process. These issues have led to 
time delays and confusion. A more ideal organizational 
structure based on our experiences and literature can be 
found in figure 2 [14, 23, 32]. In this figure, the project 
leader might be one of the researchers, provided that 
adequate resources and has a mandate to make decisions in 
the development process. 
 
 
Figure 2. Ideal organizational structure 
REFERENCES 
[1] Andrews G., Issakidis C., Sanderson K., Corry J., and Lapsley H., 
"Utilising survey data to inform public policy: comparison of the 
cost-effectiveness of treatment of ten mental disorders," Br J 
Psychiatry 2004 Jun;184:526-533. 
[2] Cuijpers P., van Straten A., Smit F., Mihalopoulos C., and Beekman 
A., "Preventing the onset of depressive disorders: a meta-analytic 
review of psychological interventions," Am J Psychiatry 2008 
Oct;165(10):1272-1280. 
[3] Cuijpers P., van Straten A., Warmerdam L., and van Rooy M.J., 
"Recruiting participants for interventions to prevent the onset of 
depressive disorders: possible ways to increase participation rates," 
BMC Health Serv Res 2010;10:181. 
[4] Postel M.G., de Haan H.A., ter Huurne E.D., Becker E.S., and de 
Jong C.A., "Effectiveness of a web-based intervention for problem 
drinkers and reasons for dropout: randomized controlled trial," J Med 
Internet Res 2010;12(4):e68. 
[5] Eysenbach G., "What is e-health?," Journal of Medical Internet 
Research 2001 Apr-Jun;3(2):E20. 
[6] Griffiths F., Lindenmeyer A., Powell J., Lowe P., and Thorogood M., 
"Why are health care interventions delivered over the Internet? A 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

systematic review of the published literature," J Med Internet Res 
2006;8(2). 
[7] Tate D.F., Finkelstein E.A., Khavjou O., and Gustafson A., "Cost 
effectiveness of internet interventions: review and recommendations," 
Ann Behav Med 2009 Aug;38(1):40-45. 
[8] Andrews G., Cuijpers P., Craske M.G., McEvoy P., and Titov N., 
"Computer therapy for the anxiety and depressive disorders is 
effective, acceptable and practical health care: a meta-analysis," PLoS 
One 2010;5(10):e13196. 
[9] Barak A., Hen L., Boniel-Nissim M., and Shapira N.a., "A 
Comprehensive Review and a Meta-Analysis of the Effectiveness of 
Internet-Based 
Psychotherapeutic 
Interventions," 
Journal 
of 
Technology in Human Services 2008;26(2/4):109-160. 
[10] Christensen H., Griffiths K.M., and Farrer L., "Adherence in internet 
interventions for anxiety and depression," Journal of medical Internet 
research 2009;11(2):e13. 
[11] Eysenbach G., "The law of attrition," Journal of medical Internet 
research 2005;7(1):e11. 
[12] Kelders S.M., Van Gemert-Pijnen J.E., Werkman A., Nijland N., and 
Seydel E.R., "Effectiveness of a Web-based intervention aimed at 
healthy dietary and physical activity behavior: a randomized 
controlled trial about users and usage," Journal of medical Internet 
research 2011;13(2):e32. 
[13] Yusof M.M., Papazafeiropoulou A., Paul R.J., and Stergioulas L.K., 
"Investigating evaluation frameworks for health information 
systems," Int J Med Inform 2008 Jun;77(6):377-385. 
[14] Pagliari C., "Design and evaluation in eHealth: challenges and 
implications for an interdisciplinary field," Journal of medical 
Internet research 2007;9(2):e15. 
[15] Van Gemert-Pijnen J.E., Nijland N., Van Limburg M.A.H., et al., "A 
holistic framework to improve the uptake and impact of eHealth 
technologies," Journal of Medical Internet Research In press. 
[16] Gould J.D. and Lewis C., "Designing for Usability - Key Principles 
and What Designers Think," Commun Acm 1985;28(3):300-311. 
[17] Kujala S., "User involvement: a review of the benefits and 
challenges," Behaviour & Information Technology 2003;22(1):1. 
[18] ISO, "Ergonomic requirements for office work with visual display 
terminals (VDTs)-Part 11: guidance on usability (ISO 9241-
11:1998)," 1998. 
[19] Davis F.D., "Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and User 
Acceptance 
of 
Information 
Technology," 
Mis 
Quart 
1989 
Sep;13(3):319-340. 
[20] Carroll J.M. Making use : scenario-based design of human-computer 
interactions. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press; 2000. 
[21] Kukafka R., Johnson S.B., Linfante A., and Allegrante J.P., 
"Grounding 
a 
new 
information 
technology 
implementation 
framework in behavioral science: a systematic analysis of the 
literature on IT use," J Biomed Inform 2003 Jun;36(3):218-227. 
[22] Kreps G.L. and Neuhauser L., "New directions in eHealth 
communication: opportunities and challenges," Patient Educ Couns 
2010 Mar;78(3):329-336. 
[23] Göransson B. and Sandbäck T. Usability designers improve the user-
centred design process. Paper presented at: INTERACT'991999; 
Edinburgh. 
[24] Spil T. and Kijl B., "E-health Business Models: From pilot project to 
successful deployment," Innovation and Knowledge Management in 
Twin Track Economies: Challenges & Solutions, Vols 1-3 2009:437-
448. 
[25] Stevens V.J., Funk K.L., Brantley P.J., et al., "Design and 
implementation of an interactive website to support long-term 
maintenance of weight loss," Journal of medical Internet research 
2008;10(1):e1. 
[26] Biglan A., Hayes S.C., and Pistorello J., "Acceptance and 
commitment: Implications for prevention science," Prev Sci 2008 
Sep;9(3):139-152. 
[27] Bohlmeijer E.T., Fledderus M., Rokx T.A., and Pieterse M.E., 
"Efficacy of an early intervention based on acceptance and 
commitment therapy for adults with depressive symptomatology: 
Evaluation in a randomized controlled trial," Behav Res Ther 2011 
Jan;49(1):62-67. 
[28] Fledderus M., Bohlmeijer E.T., Pieterse M.E., and Schreurs K.M., 
"Acceptance and commitment therapy as guided self-help for 
psychological distress and positive mental health: a randomized 
controlled trial," Psychol Med 2011 Jul 11:1-11. 
[29] Fledderus M., Bohlmeijer E.T., Smit F., and Westerhof G.J., "Mental 
health promotion as a new goal in public mental health care: a 
randomized 
controlled 
trial 
of 
an 
intervention 
enhancing 
psychological 
flexibility," 
Am 
J 
Public 
Health 
2010 
Dec;100(12):2372. 
[30] Bohlmeijer E.T. and Hulsbergen M. Voluit Leven. Mindfulness of de 
kunst van het ervaren, nu als praktisch hulpboek [Living to the full. 
Mindfulness or the art of acceptance, now as a practical help book]: 
Boom: Amsterdam; 2008. 
[31] Kinzie M.B., Cohn W.F., Julian M.F., and Knaus W.A., "A user-
centered model for Web site design: Needs assessment, user interface 
design, and rapid prototyping," J Am Med Inform Assoc 
2002;9(4):320-330. 
[32] Gulliksen J., Goransson B., Boivie I., et al., "Key principles for user-
centred systems design," Behaviour & Information Technology 2003 
Nov-Dec;22(6):397-409. 
[33] Holtzblatt K., Wendell J.B., and Wood S. Rapid contextual design: a 
how-to guide to key techniques for user-centered design: Morgan 
Kaufmann; 2005. 
[34] Braun V. and Clarke V., "Using thematic analysis in psychology," 
Qualitative research in psychology 2006;3(2):77-101. 
[35] Jaspers M.W.M., "A comparison of usability methods for testing 
interactive health technologies: Methodological aspects and empirical 
evidence," Int J Med Inform 2009 May;78(5):340-353. 
[36] Hornbaek K., "Current practice in measuring usability: Challenges to 
usability studies and research," Int J Hum-Comput St 2006 
Feb;64(2):79-102.
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

