Quantitative Analysis of Facial-Expression Training Application  
for Medical Doctors 
 
Akemi Oe, Yoshitoshi Murata 
Graduate School of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Iwate, Japan 
e-mails: akemioe@gmail.com, y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Abstract— Establishing trust between a patient and a doctor 
depends as much on their relationship as on the doctor’s 
medical abilities. One of important factors in building and 
maintaining a relationship is whether the doctor produces 
facial expressions appropriate for the patient’s condition. We 
developed a facial-expression training application for medical 
students and tested its effectiveness as a training tool. In this 
application, Microsoft Cognitive Services Emotion API is used 
to analyze the facial expression. Prior to developing this 
application, we studied what kind of facial expressions were 
appropriate in a doctor-patient greeting situation. We focused 
on four conditions for practicing facial expressions. Three of 
them are greetings given by doctors at the beginning of medical 
interviews of adult patients in a general ward of a hospital. The 
fourth is a medical scenario in which a doctor puts a 
stethoscope to a patient's chest, i.e., auscultation. To verify the 
training application’s effectiveness, the facial expressions 
before and after learning with the application were evaluated 
by potential patients. The results confirmed the application’s 
utility. 
Keywords-doctor-patient 
interaction; 
facial 
expression; 
nonverbal communication; facial-expression training application. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Patient satisfaction is an important component of medical 
care [1]. Improving patient satisfaction enhances trust and 
the relationship between patient and doctor, which leads to 
stronger adherence to prescribed protocol, such as taking 
medicine, and to enhanced therapeutic effects [2][3]. Many 
studies and reviews have shown that the main determinant of 
patient satisfaction is the patient-doctor relationship [4]–[8] 
and that patient satisfaction is higher when the patient 
communicates with a doctor who has strong nonverbal-
communication 
skills 
[9][10]. 
However, 
young 
inexperienced doctors and medical students often have 
trouble producing appropriate facial expressions when 
greeting a patient. The first author of this paper, a lecturer on 
medical communication, often 
hears 
young 
doctors 
complaining that, though they intend to smile, patients say 
that they seem angry. 
In response to these troubles, we developed a facial-
expression training application that physicians can use for 
independent-study. In this application, Microsoft Cognitive 
Services Emotion API is used to analyze the facial 
expression. Prior to developing this application, we 
quantitatively clarified acceptable expressions required when 
doctors treat patients by comparing human evaluation results 
with those of a computer system [11]. The results were 
incorporated into the application as model expressions. 
These model expressions are standards to compare with 
those of learners using the application. Then, to verify the 
effectiveness of the application, learners’ facial expressions 
before and after learning with the application were evaluated 
by potential patients. The evaluation results confirmed the 
utility of the application. 
After introducing related work in Section II and previous 
work in Section III, we describe the system of the facial-
expression training application in Section IV. We discuss the 
results of our experiments in Section V. Section VI gives our 
conclusion, and Section VII considers future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. Nonverbal Communication 
Medical interviews have traditionally focused on 
gathering relevant information from patients [12]. In 
contemporary medicine, the focus has expanded to building a 
trusting relationship, sharing decision-making, responding to 
the patient’s emotional state, and supporting actions related 
to the patient’s condition and treatment; this requires the 
doctor to have a wide range of communication skills [13]. 
These skills include “looking at a patient not as a case but as 
a human being” [14] and “building and maintaining a good 
relationship between doctor and patient” [15]. It has been 
shown that such skills have a greater effect on patient 
satisfaction than the doctor’s medical skills, the medicine 
prescribed, the information provided, the questions asked, 
and the advice and instructions given. In particular, a 
patient's satisfaction is positively related to the doctor being 
warm [14]–[16], empathic [14][16]–[18], friendly [16], and 
giving the impression of being human [17]. 
Nonverbal communication is a means of communicating 
these emotional aspects of oneself. Patient satisfaction is 
higher when the doctor has a strong ability to express his or 
her emotions and to read the emotions of others through 
nonverbal cues such as facial expressions, gaze, posture, and 
tone of voice [9][19][20]. In short, a doctor's nonverbal 
communication is an important aspect of patient care. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Learning Facial Expressions 
Natural, unconscious facial expressions can be seen in 
humans from infancy [21], but eventually conscious 
expressions appear. Conscious expressions might also be 
thought of as “false” expressions. These expressions are 
skills that form the basis of more complicated expressive 
behaviors, such as emotional expressions performed in 
accordance with rules in communication situations [22]. 
Facial expressions as expressions of emotion are thought 
to be founded in an understanding of emotions, and there are 
many developmental studies about understanding emotions. 
However, studies about learning facial expressions are 
mostly focused on social-skills training for children with 
developmental disabilities, and there are not many studies for 
adults. 
In one study, participants were required to express other 
people’s facial expressions by recalling emotions and 
showing photos of faces with emotions, the showing photos 
effect was shown about “anger” [23]. 
In research to develop a smile-training system with the 
goal of training participants to produce celebrity-like smiles 
(a facial expression recognized as attractive) [24], 
researchers created a smile-fitted deformation considering 
the characteristics of a celebrity-like smile in participants’ 
expressionless faces. As a result of training, participants 
were able to express a smile highly likely to be recognized as 
attractive by others. 
 From the above, it is clear that presenting appropriate 
facial-expression images is effective for facial-expression 
training as both a method of expressing emotions and a 
learning method. 
III. 
PREVIOUS WORK 
A previous study [11] has revealed what are considered 
acceptable facial expressions for a doctor in accordance with 
the patient's condition. One way to analyze appropriate facial 
expressions for doctors is to define the facial expressions of 
experienced doctors. However, their facial expressions are 
not always deemed appropriate. Also, because many young 
physicians have trouble presenting appropriate facial 
expressions when greeting a patient, we chose to find facial 
expressions that would be acceptable for most patients, 
including potential patients, from facial expressions that 
medical students think are suitable.  We chose greeting 
patients in the general ward of a hospital as the target 
situation.  
The procedure was as follows. The participant 
roleplaying the patient portrayed three conditions: a patient 
who feels physically healthy (a “bright patient”), one whose 
physical condition is unknown (an “expressionless patient”), 
and one who feels badly and is suffering pain (a “patient in 
pain”). We photographed these roleplayed conditions. Then, 
a plurality of medical students greeted the three photographs 
with the facial expressions that each student deemed 
appropriate, and we recorded video of them doing so. 
Comparing an evaluation by adults and analytical results 
from a computer of the medical student's greeting movies 
revealed what were considered the acceptable facial 
expressions in accordance with the patient's condition. The 
acceptable facial expressions when a young doctor greets an 
adult patient who is hospitalized in a general ward are as 
follows. For patients who feel physically healthy, the most 
acceptable facial expression is Figure 1; “continuous 
happiness” (expressed more as a laugh rather than simply a 
smile). For patients without a facial expression, the most 
acceptable facial expression is Figure 2; initially “happiness” 
(expressed 
as 
a 
smile) 
and 
then 
“neutrality” 
(expressionlessness).  
 
Figure 1.  Acceptable facial expression for patients who feel physically 
healthy. 
 
Figure 2.  Acceptable facial expression for patients without a facial 
expression. 
 
Figure 3.  Acceptable facial expression for patients in bad physical 
condition suffering pain. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

For patients in bad physical condition suffering pain, the 
most acceptable facial expression is Figure 3; “neutrality” 
with a little “sadness” or “surprise”. The cells in the Figure1-
3 corresponding to 0 or more and less than 0.2 are shown in 
blue, 0.2 or more and less than 0.4 in green, 0.4 or more 
and less than 0.6 in yellow, 0.6 or more and less than 0.8 in 
orange, and 0.8 or more in red. The total for all emotions is 1, 
and the value for neutrality is obtained by subtracting the 
total value for the seven emotions from 1. 
IV. 
FACIAL-EXPRESSION TRAINING APPLICATION SYSTEM 
A. Requirements and Design Concept 
Learners study in the following order so that the 
appropriate facial expressions can be learned efficiently 
and repeatedly. When starting, to enable learners to notice 
what their facial expressions are before training, the 
system has them greet with expressions that they think are 
suitable without any specific instructions. 
 
Step 1:  A learner chooses one of the model patients. 
Step 2:  The learner greets the model patient with a facial 
expression that the learner thinks appropriate, 
 and this greeting is recorded. 
Step 3: A video of the model doctor greeting the patient 
with the appropriate facial expression and analysis 
data are displayed, and important points to notice 
about the appropriate facial expressions are 
introduced. 
Step 4: The video recorded in Step 2 and its analysis data 
are displayed. 
Step 5: The learner repeats from Steps 2 to 4 until satisfied. 
Step 6: If the learner is satisfied, the learner selects a 
patient with a different condition and returns to 
Step 1. 
 
In the developed system, in addition to being able to 
check the facial expressions the learner performed by 
recording them as a video, the learner can also check the 
quality of his or her expression on a frame-by-frame basis. 
Each learner can save images as learning data and facial-
expression analysis results by applying security processing 
because these data and analysis results are important as 
research data. 
B. System Configuration 
We developed and used a system that quantitatively 
analyzes changes in facial expression. It is based on the 
Cognitive Services Emotion API [25] provided by 
Microsoft's Azure cloud service, and a facial-expression-
emotion detection system for video images. Our facial-
expression-emotion analysis system calculates the ratio for 
seven emotions (happiness, anger, contempt, disgust, fear, 
sadness, and surprise) reflected in the input video image and 
for neutrality. The total for all emotions is 1, and the value 
for neutrality is obtained by subtracting the total value for the  
 
Figure 4.  Configuration of facial-expression training application. 
seven emotions from 1. The configuration of this application 
is as shown in Figure 4. A video camera is controlled by the 
Open CV [26]. Recoded video data are converted the 
Motion-JPEG, and send to the Cognitive Services Emotion 
API. 
 At first, the learner selects a patient to be a training 
partner in Figure 5. After clicking the recording button, the 
learner talks to the model patient. When the greeting and 
consultation is over, the learner clicks the stop button 
followed by the next button in Figure 6.  
The emotional values of the model doctor’s facial 
expression are displayed. By selecting a timeline, the 
corresponding facial expression is displayed in Figure 7. 
The emotional values of the learner’s facial expression 
are displayed. By selecting a timeline, the corresponding 
facial expression is displayed in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 5.  Step 1: Patient-selection screen. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 6.  Step 2: Learner greets and examines patient while screen is 
recorded. 
 
Figure 7.  Step 3: Model doctor's appropriate facial expression and 
analysis results. 
 
Figure 8.  Step 4: Analysis of image taken in Step 2. 
C. Model Doctors 
Videos of model doctors were prepared with the 
following procedure. In a previous study [11], the acceptable 
doctors’ expressions for the patients were measured and 
selected. The model doctors (one male and one female) 
reproduced the acceptable facial expressions, and their 
reproductions were recorded as videos. Seventy-nine people 
evaluated these videos of Figure 9–11 and confirmed that 
they were appropriate, so we adopted them as the model 
doctor videos. 
 
   
              (1) Woman  
  (2) Man 
Figure 9.  Model doctor's appropriate facial expression for bright patiets. 
 
   
   (1) Woman (start) 
 
 (2) Woman (half-way) 
 
            (3) Man (start)   
 
 (4) Man (half-way) 
Figure 10.  Model doctor's appropriate facial expression for expressionless 
patiets. 
 
              (1) Woman  
  (2) Man 
Figure 11.  Model doctor's appropriate facial expression for patiets in pain. 
V. 
EVALUATION 
A. Experiment 
Six participants including three medical students played 
doctors and greeted patients with facial expressions that 
they thought appropriate for each condition of Figure 5. The 
application recorded them (before training)., the participants 
repeated the facial-expressions training so that they could 
approximate the analysis results of the model doctors. After 
practice, we recorded their facial expressions again (after 
training). Although evaluation by actual patients is best, it 
would have been difficult to request actual patients’ 
participation. Hence, we asked 30 general healthy adults 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

who had been hospitalized in the past or would be in the 
future. We showed the video recordings (before and after 
training) to 10 men and 20 women (average age 41.0 years) 
without sound. We asked them to judge whether the 
doctor’s facial expression was appropriate for the condition 
on a 3-point scale (1: appropriate, 2: neutral, 3: not 
appropriate). We asked them to also comment on anything 
they felt or noticed. We showed the recordings without 
sound because we wanted them to focus on the appropriate 
facial expressions in medical communication conditions, 
and emotion is easier to read from speech than from facial 
expressions. 
B. Effects of Training 
The graph of Figure 12–15 showing the result of the 
rating before and after the training is as follows. 
In order to examine the effects of training with the 
application, we conducted 2 (using the application: before 
and after) × 6 (doctors) two-way analysis of variance with 
the evaluation results as the dependent under four conditions. 
The results showed a significant difference at the 1% level 
under all conditions (in order from condition 1, F (59, 295) 
= 3.19, P<.01; F (59, 295) = 4.51, P<.01; F (59, 295) = 4.52, 
P<.01; F (59, 177) = 5.26, P<.01). 
 
Figure 12.  Average and standard deviation of each doctor’s evaluation 
score for bright patients. 
 
Figure 13.  Average and standard deviation of each doctor’s evaluation 
score for expressionless patients. 
 
Figure 14.  Average and standard deviation of each doctor’s evaluation 
score for patients in pain. 
 
Figure 15.  Average and standard deviation of each doctor’s evaluation 
score for auscultation. 
We consider the effectiveness of this application to have 
been confirmed because the evaluation scores improved 
with use of the application under all conditions. We also 
noticed the following two points during the experiment. The 
first point is that the evaluation for “patients in pain” was 
different for each person. Most persons regarded the 
doctor's serious expression as empathy and evaluated that as 
adequate. However, a few persons felt that the doctor's 
expression caused unease and worry, and that person 
evaluated the expression as not adequate. Therefore, the 
model expressions for patients in pain may not be limited to 
one type. The second point is that the facial expressions 
practiced in the application are unnatural for a few persons. 
By training in the application, people playing the role of 
doctor created expressions close to those of the model 
doctor's videos, and accordingly the evaluation score rose. 
However, when a facial expression that the participants 
learned was far from facial expressions that they always do, 
a few evaluators felt that the expression looked like “a 
pretended expression” or “artificial expression.” 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We developed a facial-expression training application 
that physicians can use for independent-study. Six 
participants practiced using this application to express 
appropriate facial expressions. To verify the effectiveness of 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

this application, the facial expressions that participants made 
before and after training with it were evaluated by 30 people. 
On the basis of the results, we consider the usefulness of the 
facial-expression training application to be verified. We 
think most learners could express their facial expression 
naturally by practicing repeatedly. 
In the future, we will improve the application so that the 
on-screen instructions will guide the learner's expressions 
more properly. In addition, because requirements for a doctor 
who cares for children are very different from those of one 
who cares for adults, we plan to add learning content for 
pediatricians.  
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Donabedian, The Definition of Quality and Approaches to 
Its Assessment. Ann Arbor, MI: Health Administration Press, 
1980. 
[2] S. H. Kaplan, S. Greenfield, and W. E. Ware, Jr, “Assessing 
the effects of physician-patient interactions on the outcomes 
of chronic disease,” Med. Care, vol. 27, pp. S110–S127, 
March 1989. 
[3] L. M. Noble, A. Kubacki, J. Martin, and M. Lloyd, “The 
effect of professional skills training on patient-centredness 
and confidence in communicating with patients,” Med. Educ., 
vol. 41, pp. 432–440, May 2007. 
[4] J. A. Hall, D. L. Roter, and N. R. Katz, “Meta-analysis of 
correlates of provider behavior in medical encounters,” Med. 
Care, vol. 26, pp. 657–675, July 1988. 
[5] J. A. Hall, J. A. Harrigan, and R. Rosenthal, “Nonverbal 
behavior in clinician-patient interaction,” Appl. Prev. Psychol., 
vol. 4, pp. 21–37, Winter 1995. 
[6] L. M. Ong, J. C. de Haes, A. M. Hoos, and F. B. Lammes, 
“Doctor-patient communication: A review of the literature,” 
Soc. Sci. Med., vol. 40, pp. 903–918, April 1995. 
[7] T. L. Thompson, “Interpersonal communication and health 
care,” in Handbook of Interpersonal Communication, 2nd ed., 
M. L. Knapp and G. R. Miller, Eds. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage, pp. 696–725, 1994. 
[8] S. Williams, J., Weinman, J, and J. Dale, “Doctor-patient 
communication and patient satisfaction: A review,” Family 
Practice, vol. 15, pp. 480–492, October 1998. 
[9] M. R. DiMatteo, A. Taranta, H. S. Friedman, and L. M. 
Prince, “Predicting patient satisfaction from physicians’ 
nonverbal communication skills,” Med. Care, vol. 18, pp. 
376–387, April 1980. 
[10] M. R. DiMatteo, R. D. Hays, and L. M. Prince, “Relationship 
of physicians’ nonverbal communication skill to patient 
satisfaction, appointment noncompliance, and physician 
workload,” Health Psychol., vol. 5, pp. 581–594, 1986. 
[11] A. Oe and Y. Murata, “Quantitative Analysis of Facial 
Expression for Medical Doctors,” IARIA, proceeding of 
Global Health 2018, pp.8–13, 2018. 
[12] J. Bird, S. A. and Cohen-Cole, “The three-function model of 
the medical interview. An educational device,” Advances in 
Psychosomatic Medicine., vol. 20, pp. 65–88, 1990. 
[13] H. de Haes and J. Bensing, “Endpoints in medical 
communication research, proposing a framework of functions 
and outcomes,” Patient Educ. Couns., vol. 74, pp. 287–294, 
March 2009. 
[14] Z. Ben-Sira, “Affective and instrumental components in the 
physician-patient relationship: An additional dimension of 
interaction theory,” J. Health Soc. Behav., vol. 21, pp. 170–
180, June 1980. 
[15] M. K. Buller and D. B. Buller, “Physicians’ communication 
style and patient satisfaction,” J. Health Soc. Behav., vol. 28, 
pp. 375–388, December 1987. 
[16] B. M. Korsch and V. F. Negrete, “Doctor-patient 
communication,” 
In 
Physician-patient 
Communication: 
Readings 
and 
Recommendations, 
G. 
Henderson, Ed. 
Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, pp. 29–40, 1981. 
[17] S. J. Williams and M. Calnan, “Convergence and divergence: 
Assessing criteria of consumer satisfaction across general 
practice, dental and hospital care settings,” Soc. Sci. Med., 
vol. 33, pp. 707–716, 1991. 
[18] R. C. Wasserman, T. S. Inui, R. D. Barriatua, W. B. Carter, 
and P. Lippincott, “Pediatric clinicians’ support for parents 
makes a difference: An outcome-based analysis of clinician-
parent interaction,” Pediatrics, vol. 74, pp. 1047–1053, 
December 1984. 
[19] R. C. Wasserman, T. S. Inui, R. D. Barriatua, W. B. Carter, 
and P. Lippincott, “Pediatric clinicians’ support for parents 
makes a difference: An outcome-based analysis of clinician-
parent interaction,” Pediatrics, vol. 74, pp. 1047–1053, 
December 1984. 
 [20] H. S. Friedman, M. R. DiMatteo, and A. Taranta, “A study of 
the relationship between individual differences in nonverbal 
expressiveness and factors of personality and social 
interaction,” J. Res. Pers., vol. 14, pp. 351–364, September 
1980. 
[21] L. A. Camras, and M. M, Shuster, “Current emotion research 
in developmental psychology,” Emotion review, 5, pp. 321-
329, 2013. 
[22] M. Lewis, M. W. Sullivan, and A. Vasen, “Making faces: Age 
and emotion differences in the posing of emotional 
expression,” Developmental Psychology, 23, pp. 690-697, 
1987. 
[23] N. Takahashi and I. Daibo, “The facial expressions by 
emotion-instruction and photograph-instruction, and the effect 
of presence of another person in the facial expressions of 
anger and sadness,” Japanese Journal of Interpersonal and 
Social Psychology, 3, pp. 65-72, 2003. 
[24] F. Kameyama and Y. Muraoka, “An Interactive Design 
System of an attractive smile,” J IEICE technical report. 
Human information processing, 95(554), pp. 15-22, 1996. 
[25] Microsoft 
Emotion 
API, 
https://azure microsoft.com/en-
us/services/cognitive-services/emotion/, [retrieved: January 
2019]. 
[26] Open CV, https://opencv.org/, [retrieved: January 2019]. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

