Mobile Real-time Analysis of Patient Data for
Advanced Decision Support in Personalized Medicine
Matthieu-P. Schapranow, Hasso Plattner
Hasso Plattner Institute
Enterprise Platform and Integration Concepts
August–Bebel–Str. 88
14482 Potsdam, Germany
{schapranow|plattner}@hpi.uni-potsdam.de
Cafer Tosun
SAP AG
Innovation Center Potsdam
August–Bebel–Str. 88
14482 Potsdam, Germany
cafer.tosun@sap.com
Christian Regenbrecht
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin
Institute of Pathology
Charitéplatz 1
10117 Berlin, Germany
christian.regenbrecht@charite.de
Abstract—Personalized medicine aims to treat pa-
tients speciﬁcally with respect to their individual dis-
positions. For that, researchers and physicians require
a holistic view on all relevant patient speciﬁcs when
making treatment decisions. We present our ﬁndings
of applying in-memory database technology to enable
real-time analysis of individual patient and cohort
data. In this contribution, we describes the mobile ap-
plication "Oncolyzer" that provides a holistic view on
individual patient data and enables ﬂexible analysis of
cohort data on mobile devices. It opens ﬂexible access
to relevant patient data on the hospital campus when
time-critical treatment decisions need to be made.
Keywords-Clinical Decision Support; Personalized
Medicine;
In-Memory
Database
Technology;
Real-
Time Analysis; Business Processes
I. Introduction
The amount of data acquired during patient’s medical
treatments is immense. For example, data of tissue
analyses, medical imaging, and haemograms, etc. add up
to terabytes of medical data depending on the speciﬁc
diagnostic approach [1]. In future, we expect the level of
detail of therapy data to increase continuously.
Personalized medicine aims at treating patients specif-
ically based on their individual dispositions, e.g. genetic
or environmental factors [2]. Thus, we consider the
detailed acquisition of medical data as the foundation for
personalized therapy decisions. The more ﬁne-grained
data are available, the more speciﬁc are the gained
insights, but the complexity of data processing rises, too.
Modern Hospital Information Systems (HIS) consist of
various data sources. Combining data from distributed
sources is one of the challenges of Computerized Clinical
Decision Support (CCDS) systems. Business Warehouses
(BW) or Business Intelligence (BI) systems incorpo-
rate speciﬁcally prepared business reports in a central
system. However, these reports do not allow a free
combination of all available attributes.
In the given work, we present our ﬁndings of applying
in-memory database (IMDB) technology for analysis of
clinical data during treatment of patients suﬀering from
Device Management
iPad
iPad
R
HANA
Tumor Registers
HTTPS
User 
Identification
Oncolyzer
med
Oncolyzer
scientific
History-
based
Access 
Control 
(HBAC)
Data
Integration
Hospital-internal
Hospital-
external
Statistical
Analysis
w/ R
Medical
Actions
Patient
Cohorts
Analysis
Clinical Systems
with Patient Data
Figure 1. Oncolyzer system architecture: Data from
clinical systems is combined and analyzed by the IMDB.
The results are accessible by the iPad application.
cancer diseases. Based on the feedback of physicians and
researchers, we designed a software system and a speciﬁc
mobile application as depicted in Figure 1.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In
Section II our work is set in context of related work.
We deﬁne requirements for clinical IT systems used in
context of personalized therapy in Section III and outline
the applicability of IMDB technology in Section IV.
Our research prototype Oncolyzer, which is speciﬁcally
designed for individualized therapy of cancer patients, is
presented in Section V. In Section VI, we deﬁne innova-
tive business processes that become possible due to the
use of IMDB technology for real-time analysis of patient
data. We discuss our research results in Section VII and
conclude our work with an outlook in Section VIII.
II. Related Work
Requirements engineering for software systems is well
deﬁned, e.g. by the International Standards Organiza-
tion (ISO) [3]. However, requirements for clinical soft-
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

ware are only rarely diﬀerentiated by existing stan-
dards. Coble et al. [4] outline their experiences during
designing, prototyping, and testing of clinical software
for workstations in the 1990s. We followed the design
thinking approach for software engineering of Plattner et
al. [5], which builds on viability, feasibility, and desirabil-
ity of the desired software. In consensus with Coble et al.,
this approach requires the early and regular involvement
of future users of the developed software system, i.e.
physicians and medical researchers in our case.
Coble et al. focused on the development for ﬁxed
workstations. Our user interviews showed that physi-
cians and researchers do not work at dedicated oﬃces
only. In contrast, they have frequently changing working
locations, e.g. emergency room, surgery room, intensive
care station, etc. As a result, we emphasized the mobility
aspect during requirements engineering.
Wright et al. [6] propose the use of Web 2.0 techniques
for building CCDS systems, e.g. Wikis for knowledge
management or private online forums. They elaborate on
the value of online CCDS, but they also discuss various
concern for a clinical wide use of Web 2.0 CCDS, such as
costs for knowledge management and liability for correct
data. We agree that online CCDS can improve clinical
knowledge management. However, we also see a need for
having the accumulated knowledge at hand at any time.
Thus, we focus on converging clinical knowledge from
private online sources and the required mobility aspects
of physicians and researchers.
Based on our conducted feedback loops, we focused
on the selected application perspectives summarized in
Table I. A detailed description of design decisions and
these perspectives is elaborated in Section V.
III. Requirements
In the following, we deﬁne speciﬁc requirements for de-
signing clinical software systems. They reﬂect a selected
subset of requirements from the software engineering
catalog as deﬁned for product quality in ISO/IEC 9126-1
and speciﬁcally revised in context of our work [3].
‚ Ease of Use: Clinical software artifacts must be
usable by untrained users, i.e. its user interface (UI)
should combine ease of use and functionality.
‚ Response Time: The response time of clinical ap-
plications must not exceed an empirical threshold of
approx. two second [7]. Our user interviews showed
that otherwise the latency outperforms any beneﬁts
resulting in the application not being used.
‚ Reliability: Clinical software must be available
without unplanned interruptions or malfunctions
due to its life-critical purpose.
‚ Productivity: Users of a clinical software solution
should be more eﬃcient than performing manual
processing steps or using alternative tools.
Table I. Application perspectives and corresponding user
groups Physicians (P) and Researchers (R).
Perspective
Group
Sect.
Holistic Patient View
P, R
V-A
Search in Structured and Unstructured Data
P
V-B
Real-time Analysis of Patient Cohorts
R
V-C
‚ Scalability: The system behavior of the designed
software must not be aﬀected by the number of
concurrent users. Extending existing hardware re-
sources, e.g. number of database servers, should
result in a linearly increasing capacity.
‚ Data Security: Clinical data are sensitive and
must be accessible by authorized personnel only.
Intended or unintended exposure of these data must
be addressed during the design of clinical software.
IV. In-memory Technology Building Blocks
We refer to IMDB technology as a toolbox of artifacts
to enable processing of enterprise data in real-time in
the main memory of server systems. IMDB technology
enables CCDS in an interactive way without keeping
redundant or pre-aggregated data, which is commonly
used in BW or BI systems to improve response times
for certain long-running reports [8]. In the following, we
outline selected building blocks of the IMDB technology
enabling real-time analysis of clinical data.
A. Combined Column and Row Store
Historically, separate database systems for processing
of analytical and transactional data evolved. The former
store and process data in a row-oriented format, i.e.
attributes of one record are stored side by side, while an-
alytical database systems are optimized to scan selected
attributes of huge data sets rapidly, e.g. by maintaining
pre-aggregated totals. Combining column and row stores
improves data access for analytical queries while keeping
transactional response times fast.
B. Insert-only
Insert-only deﬁnes how newly inserted data are man-
aged. Traditional database systems support four oper-
ations for data manipulations, i.e. insert, select, delete,
and update of data. The latter two are considered as
destructive operations since original data are no longer
available after its execution [9, Section 7.1]. In other
words, it is neither possible to detect nor to reconstruct
the complete history of values for a certain attribute
after its execution since only the latest value is perma-
nently stored. This violates legal regulations to perma-
nently store clinical data. Insert-only tables store the
complete history of value changes and the latest value
for a certain attribute [8]. Insert-only enables tracing
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Table II. Comparison of patient database table (top) and
its compressed, horizontally three-partitioned pendant
with corresponding dictionary (bottom).
Rec.
PatID
Loc.
ICD
1
091487
Colon
C18.4
2
357982
Larynx
C32.0
3
123498
Lip
C00.9
4
998711
Colon
C18.7
5
215678
Rectum
C20.9
6
647912
Rectum
C20.9
7
167898
Mama
C50.9
“
Rec.
PatID
Loc.
ICD
I
3
123498
2
C00.9
1
091487
4
C18.4
4
998711
4
C18.7
II
5
215678
3
C20.9
6
647912
3
C20.9
2
357982
1
C32.0
III
7
167898
5
C50.9
`
Val.ID
Value
1
Larynx
2
Lip
3
Rectum
4
Colon
5
Mama
of decisions within the treatment process, e.g. to ret-
rospectively perform analysis when certain treatments
were initiated.
C. Lightweight Compression
Lightweight compression refers to a data storage rep-
resentation, which consumes less space than its original
pendant [8]. Due to the ﬁxed data type per attribute,
the data domain is within a given interval, e.g. integer
values. The given data type deﬁnes the max. required
data domain for a compressed format. A columnar stor-
age layout supports lightweight compression techniques,
such as run-length encoding, dictionary encoding, and
diﬀerencing [10]. Table II depicts an excerpt of the pa-
tient table that is compressed using dictionary encoding.
D. Partitioning
We distinguish vertical and horizontal partition-
ing [11]. The former refers to the arrangement of indi-
vidual database columns, which is achieved by splitting
columns of one database table in two or more sets of
columns. Each of the sets can be distributed on indi-
vidual database servers [12]. The latter addresses long
database tables and its division into smaller chunks of
data [8]. Splitting data into equivalently long horizontal
partitions supports parallel search operations and im-
proves scalability. For example, a Kaplan Meier analysis
requires a full scan of the patient table as depicted in
Table II to identify patient records having the identical
International Code of Disease (ICD). With a single
partition, a single thread needs to access all patient
records to check the ICD predicate. The example depicts
the major code of the ICD as partition criteria. Thus, the
three partitions can be processed in parallel.
E. Multi-core and Parallelization
Parallelization can be applied to various locations
within the application stack of software systems. Let
us consider the HIS as an enterprise system that needs
to serve requests of diﬀerent users from various depart-
ments at the same point in time. Processing multiple
queries can be handled by multi-threaded applications,
i.e. they do not stall when dealing with more than one
query at a time. Operating systems threads are a soft-
ware abstraction that need to be mapped to physically
available hardware resources [13, Chapter 2]. A Central
Processing Unit (CPU) core is comparable to a single
worker on a construction area. If each query can be
mapped to a single core, the system’s response time is
optimal. If the workload exceeds physical capacities of
a single system, the work load can be distributed to
multiple servers or blades to achieve optimal process-
ing behavior. From the database point of view, data
partitioning supports parallelization since multiple CPU
cores on multiple servers can process individual parti-
tions in parallel [14, Chapter 6].
F. Active and Passive Data Store
We distinguish active and passive data stores. The
former are accessed frequently and updated regularly,
e.g. patient records of patients in the emergency room
or on the intensive care unit. Passive data are neither up-
dated nor accessed regularly, i.e. they are mainly used for
analytical and statistical purposes or in exceptional cir-
cumstances, where speciﬁc investigations require them.
For example, data stored about patients that have left
the hospital and have been invoiced can be considered as
passive data. The separation of active and passive data
is a special implementation of data partitioning that
establishes a memory hierarchy, e.g. fast main memory,
solid state disks, hard disks, tapes, etc. [8].
V. Research Prototype
In the following, we share details about our research
prototype and its application perspectives as summa-
rized in Table I. The system architecture and its inte-
gration within the HIS is modeled in Figure 1. The key
component of the architecture is the IMDB HANA that
enables real-time statistical analysis of patient cohort
data, medical actions, and data from further clinical
systems. The mobile devices are connected via a device
management layer to the database management system,
which combines data from clinical data sources, such as
tumor registers or HIS.
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. The holistic patient view consists top-down of
name and gender details, interactive treatment history
combining all relevant treatment information on a single
screen as well as a tabular view. The latter contains
from left to right details for treatment events, analytical
results, and a graphical evaluation of patients with the
same primary diagnosis using the Kaplan Meier analysis.
A. Holistic Patient View
The holistic patient view as depicted in Figure 2
combines patient speciﬁc data from various clinical
databases. For example, the complete treatment his-
tory consisting of diagnoses, surgeries as well as radio
and system therapies are combined and visualized as
a graphical timeline. The IMDB technology performs
real-time analysis to identify similarities in the data of
the selected patient and data of hundreds or thousands
or even hundreds of thousands similar patients. For
example, results for patients with the same year of birth,
with the same primary diagnosis, or gender ratio are
transparently calculated for any selected patient. This
environmentally derived information can signiﬁcantly
help to identify sources of diseases, e.g. to identify the
connection between TP53 gene mutations and urinary
bladder cancer after the nuclear plant catastrophe in
Chernobyl in 1986 [15].
The incorporated IMDB is hosted by the central
IT department running on multiple high-end servers.
In contrast to data warehouse systems, which store
pre-aggregated totals to improve long-running queries,
IMDB technology performs all calculations on the ﬂy. In
other words, once a new patient record has been added
to the database, it can be accessed immediately via the
Oncolyzer. The new record directly inﬂuences calcula-
tions and analysis results, e.g. Kaplan Meier analysis.
Figure 3. Result set of the search query for "adeno
carzinom colon desc male". The search term "carzinoma"
is identiﬁed by the fuzzy search as equivalent for "carci-
noma" and is also substituted by its abbreviation "ca".
The result set is also ﬁltered using the value "male" ob-
tained from a search in the structured attribute "gender".
B. Search in Structured and Unstructured Data
We
are
convinced
that
diagnostic
reports
con-
tain valuable information, although they consist of
less standardized free-text documents. As a result,
it is hard to access relevant details, e.g. to deter-
mine subscribed drug = Vincristin. The Oncolyzer
is equipped with a combined search for structured and
unstructured data, which is supported by the underlying
IMDB technology. The application perspective consists
of a search box following the Google-like UI. Patient
documents from diﬀerent systems, e.g. diagnosis reports,
preliminary diseases, death causes, etc., are searched for
the terms entered as depicted in Figure 3.
In addition to an exact match search, fuzzy search also
detects similar search terms, e.g. in case of typos [16].
Our research showed that fuzzy search is valuable in
clinical contexts as medical terms can be documented in
either Latin, English or German or their abbreviations.
Fuzzy search accepts a speciﬁc degree of fuzziness in the
search term, i.e. the result set contains more relevant
search results than an exact search for terms.
We further integrated a synonym search, which re-
turns documents that contain synonyms instead of the
searched terms. For instance, the abbreviation "ca." is
synonymously used for "circa", but it refers to "carci-
noma" in clinical documents. A clinical classiﬁcations
was added to the synonym table, e.g. the ICD and the
corresponding tumor location [17]. Thus, a search for the
tumor location "rectum" also returns results containing
the ICD code "C20".
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 4. Real-time analysis of patient cohorts: Filters
for tumor region, survival state, and number of therapies
were applied and a patient in the age group "70 to 80"
with the alias "Malte Mustermann" was identiﬁed.
Furthermore, stop words for structured search are
derived from all values stored as structured attributes. A
subsequent search for each stop word is performed in the
database table containing the structured attribute. For
example, a search for "male adeno ca" is expanded to a
combined search for patients having the value "m(ale)" in
structured attribute "gender" and associated documents
with indications for an adeno-carcinoma.
The combination of search in structured and un-
structured data leads to more accurate result set than
traditional search tools, e.g. exact match search.
C. Real-time Analysis of Patient Cohorts
Researchers are able to perform individual real-time
analysis on patient data on their mobile devices. The
analytical view of our Oncolyzer provides the graphical
UI for visualization of results of complex analytical
queries that are executed by the IMDB system. Thus,
researchers are able to identify relevant correlations with
external factors, e.g. to prevent recurrences or to form
patient cohorts. The quantity of patients that fulﬁll spe-
ciﬁc preconditions can be determined by using individual
criteria for ﬁltering, such as the patient’s age, the gender,
kind of tumor, or its localization as depicted in Figure 4.
The results are interactively visualized using individual
chart types, such as bar, pie or line charts. Clicking on a
fragment of the chart shows the list of concrete patients.
All patients are linked to their holistic patient view,
which connects analysis of cohorts and speciﬁc patients.
VI. Innovative Business Processes
In the following, we outline business processes that
build on our research prototype. They describe a com-
Table III. Classiﬁcation of innovative business processes
and aﬀected user groups (P = Physicians, R = Re-
searchers, B = Business managers), category (N = New,
E = Extended), application perspective (S = Search
view, H = Holistic patient view, A = Analytical view),
and corresponding section within this document.
Business Process
Group
Cat.
App.
Section
Evidence-based Treatment
P, R
E
H
VI-A
Building Research Hypotheses
R
N
A, H
VI-B
Pharmaceutical Feedback Loop
R
N
A
VI-C
Federal Bureau of Statistics
P, R
N
A
VI-D
Health Insurance Companies
B
N
A
VI-E
Tumor Board
P, R
E
A, H
VI-F
pletely new way of exploring treatment-relevant informa-
tion. We focus on the involved business entities and their
actions. Table III classiﬁes processes, involved entities,
and required application perspectives.
A. Evidence-based Treatment
Evidence-based treatment decisions are either directly
taken by physicians or supported by researchers, such as
biologists. It requires the retrieval of all available patient
data and the summary of treatment relevant details in
the UI [2]. We designed the holistic patient view as
described in Section V-A to combine clinical data. In
addition to patient speciﬁc data, it also contains results
of speciﬁc analysis results of data of patients with similar
indications or primary diagnoses.
B. Building Research Hypotheses
Clinical researchers require ﬂexible ways to test hy-
potheses and correlations between certain aspects of
patient data. BW or BI systems enable the analysis
of patient cohorts in a fast way, but involve complex
administrative operations for data preparation before
accessing results. After patient data is Extracted, Trans-
formed, and Loaded (ETL) into the BI system [18],
they are optimized for predeﬁned queries, i.e. expected
correlations need to be included in the reports. We in-
troduce a completely new way of analyzing patient data
while bypassing ETL processes. We keep all relevant
patient data in the main memory in a columnar format
without the need to load and prepare data, e.g. from
disks, before starting their analysis. As a result, data is
accessed at main memory latency time, i.e. 10 ns, instead
of about 100 ms required for hard disk access [8]. The
analytical view as described in Section V-C is designed
for interactive exploration and analysis of patient data.
Analyses are processed by the IMDB while the mobile
application is connected as remote UI and input device.
Researchers can access the holistic patient view for each
patient of the result set to retrieve patient-speciﬁc details
depending on their granted access.
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. Pharmaceutical Feedback Loop
New pharmaceutical products require to pass clinical
trials before being approved for regular use [19]. Phar-
maceutical manufacturers require patients with very
speciﬁc indications to participate in clinical trials. Phar-
maceutical researchers can analyze patient cohorts in a
similar way like clinical researchers using the analytical
view. Their access is restricted to anonymized cohort
data only, i.e. they are prohibited to access personal de-
tails of the holistic view. If a certain number of patients
with similar indication is required, but not present, they
can use bookmarks to get notiﬁcations once relevant
patients are present. Instead of performing these anal-
yses multiple times, a push notiﬁcation automatically
indicates new relevant patients. If the patient should
be recruited, the pharmaceutical researcher contacts the
hospital and the patient is informed by her/his physi-
cian. Only if the patient agrees, the contact with the
pharmaceutical researcher can be established.
D. Federal Bureau of Statistics
Statistical analyses of cancer diseases are regularly
conducted to supervise inﬂuencing factors, such as com-
pliance of treatments with clinical guidelines, rate of new
or recurrent cases, and an analysis of regional accumu-
lations [20]. The primary step is to obtain relevant data
from nationwide hospitals. In Germany, there are clinical
tumor registers that contain well documented data about
all recent cancer cases. A widely used documentation
system is the Giessener Tumor Documentation System
(GTDS) that provides interactive tools for documenta-
tion, veriﬁcation, and export of analysis data [21]. In
future, we expect the following trends to come up:
‚ The level of detail and therefore the size of the
documented data will increase and
‚ Consolidated nationwide tumor registers will oﬀer
new sources of information, e.g. for research [22].
Combining data from nation-wide tumor registers im-
proves the quantity of available data for evidence-based
treatment decisions. We implemented a Kaplan Meier
analysis that visualizes fractions of patient cohorts and
their survival time after ﬁrst diagnosis [23, Chapter 9].
It is based on patient cohorts with the same ICD of a
single hospital. The outlined business process describes a
completely new way to combine data from decentralized
tumor registers. In future, the basis for these analyses
will include data from national and worldwide tumor
registers. Thus, the quality of data used for personal-
ized treatment is improved by combining national and
international data sources.
Our contributions prove that IMDB technology can
be used to bridge individual data formats without the
need of data transformation. Therefore, we make use of
database views, i.e. a deﬁned transformation rule that is
processed, when the underlying data item is accessed [8].
As a result, views are a transparent way to expose a
homogenous data format while original data remains
unchanged. On the one hand, views require a portion
of designated processing time of the CPU. On the other
hand, the use of views reduce the time for integration of
new data, i.e. required transformations are eliminated.
This is beneﬁcial, if you access only a small portion of
data and instant transformations are performed (e.g. 100
relevant patients) while traditional ETL processes need
to transform the full data (e.g. of 100k patients).
Exposing analytical access to patient data supports
employees of the Federal Bureau of Statistics to create
national cancer reports. IMDB technology can reduce
the integration eﬀort for combining patient data from
clinical tumor registers of diﬀerent vendors. Further-
more, it enables interactive data exploration to trace
any kind of statistical anomalies and to determine their
natures. Nowadays, tracing anomalies in the reported
data is a time-consuming task since experts of the
statistics bureau, of the clinic and the physician who
have treated a speciﬁc patient, need to be involved.
As a result, the release cycles of cancer reports can
be reduced, for comparison, the German cancer report
2007/2008 was released in 2012 [20].
E. Health Insurance Companies
Health insurance companies are interested in optimiz-
ing the overall time of hospital stays. However, the du-
ration of a speciﬁc stay depends on various factors, such
as age of the patient, stage of cancer, etc. Periodically,
health insurance companies negotiate ﬁxed rates for
treatments of speciﬁc disease types with hospitals [24].
The rates are aligned with the average national costs
for treatment of the speciﬁc disease. However, hospitals
specialized for the treatment of certain disease types
argue that they receive more complex cases compared
to small, regional hospitals. As a result, hospitals are
also interested in providing in-house analysis of certain
disease types to negotiate more adequate rates. Latest
analyses of treated patient cohorts suﬀering from a
speciﬁc disease type forms the basis for the negotiating
process. In addition, it enables a more transparent and
holistic view on the treatment process, e.g. to match
speciﬁc thresholds for the duration of a hospital stay.
F. Tumor Board
In the course of cancer treatments, each individual
case is discussed by dedicated experts. They develop a
speciﬁc treatment plan, discuss alternatives, and regu-
larly evaluate the performance of the chosen therapy,
which requires all relevant data of the discussed pa-
tient [25]. All decisions of the tumor board need to
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

be documented and communicated, e.g. new treatment
decisions to anybody involved in the treatment process.
The holistic patient view of our research prototype
provides the tumor board with all relevant patient data.
We also added notes for patients and analysis results.
Notes can be used to ensure that all treatment relevant
decisions of the board are immediately documented and
all involved personnel are automatically informed when
accessing the patient’s data.
VII. Discussion
In the following, we discuss how our work respects the
requirements for medical software deﬁned in Section III.
We found that tools for physicians need to match
strict response time requirements. Due to the possibility
of unexpected events, such as emergencies, long-running
surgeries, etc., they need to have access to patient data
at any time and location. Physicians frequently change
their working locations within the hospital instead of
waiting for patients in their oﬃce. Thus, there is a need
for mobile access to patient data compared in contrast
to desktop computers.
We address the response time requirements by ap-
plying IMDB technology for data analysis, speciﬁc UI
design for accessing relevant data, and an optimized data
exchange to minimize the amount of exchanged data
between servers and mobile device.
Our prototype is designed for use on mobile tablet
devices. The mobility requirement forced us to focus
on the ease of use, e.g. due to size restrictions of
mobile displays. Firstly, we restricted the number of
application perspectives to a login, text search, real-
time analysis, and the holistic patient screen. During
our design evaluation sessions, we constantly received
feedback from physician and researcher user groups. We
identiﬁed that each user group has speciﬁc requirements.
As a result, we designed the search screen for physicians
and the analytical screen for researchers speciﬁcally.
Both screens consist of a limited number of UI controls.
The search screen consists of a search ﬁeld and a selector
for data sources. The analytical screen starts with a
selector of primary ﬁlter criteria and stored bookmarks.
In comparison, the holistic patient screen is optimized
for all user groups. The speciﬁcally designed interactive
time slider combines patient data from all hospital stays
and supports access to huge sets of patient data on a
limited screen. The latter enables a detailed drill-down
once a certain data entry is selected.
We were able to build an interactive mobile applica-
tion by exchanging a minimum of patient data to initial-
ize screens. Once the user is drilling-down to a speciﬁc
data item, detailed data are asynchronously loaded to
update the displayed content using asynchronous Ajax
calls and JavaScript Object Notation as data exchange
format [26], [27]. Thus, the ease of use and the response
time behavior of the application are addressed without
aﬀecting the quality of available data.
The data quality aspects also depends on the reliabil-
ity of the application. For that, the Oncolyzer is designed
as remote UI only while business logic and complex
analysis are processed in the IMDB system. For example,
if the battery of the mobile device drains, physicians can
switch to any other device, log-on, and access their data.
The IMDB system is operated by skilled personnel in the
IT department of the hospital. For scaling, new servers
are added to the database landscape and data portions
are updated without interrupting database operations.
New releases of the Oncolyzer are automatically de-
ployed via device management tools, such as Afaria [28].
The Sybase Unwired Platform (SUP) is used to process
user authorizations, perform necessary data transforma-
tions, and manage incidents, e.g. when an iPad device
gets lost. To prevent unintended data exposure, patient
data are never stored on the mobile device. If the
application is suspended or closed displayed data are
cleared. Unintended access is prevented by built-in lock-
ing features of the incorporated devices, e.g. password
protection. Access to sensitive patient data is controlled
by transparent security extensions of the History-Based
Access Control (HBAC) [29]. HBAC logs all user queries,
analyzes them for taking access decisions, adapts access
rights, and ﬁlters the result set accordingly.
The Oncolyzer is designed for very speciﬁc use-cases in
which the productivity of physicians and researchers was
increased, i.e. they access patient data using our applica-
tion in a uniﬁed way. The selected software development
process Scrum supported us in releasing new working
prototypes at the end of each week, receiving feedback at
the beginning of the week, and integrating new features
during the remaining time [30]. The tight interaction
with future application users helped to validate the
results of our development sprints every week.
VIII. Conclusion and Outlook
Treatment of cancer disease is a complex process,
which involves diﬀerent actors contributing their indi-
vidual piece of information to a complete picture. In
context of personalized treatment, we expect the amount
of available data per patient to increase further, e.g. by
integration of data from worldwide research institutes.
We outlined IT challenges in context of personalized
treatment and deﬁned requirement for clinical software
applications, e.g. strict response time of less than two
seconds. To prove the feasibility of our vision, we applied
IMDB technology for addressing real-time analysis of
clinical data. With regular user feedback, we were able
to design a CCDS as mobile application for iPad and
Android devices: The Oncolyzer is speciﬁcally developed
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

for physicians and medical researchers. We discussed
innovative business processes that become possible by
integrating the Oncolyzer in the clinical context, e.g.
involved industry partners beneﬁt from anonymized
analysis results as well as experts in tumor boards.
The given work is an initial move towards taking indi-
vidualized treatment decisions in the course of systems
biology. Our research results depict how to bridge the
gap between clinical data in HIS and end users, who
require access anywhere at any time.
IX. Acknowledgements
The given work combines the results of the research
areas software engineering and translational research on
tumor diseases. It is built on the collocation between
the Hasso Plattner Institute in Potsdam and the Charité
– Universitätsmedizin Berlin. Our results were honored
with the 2012 Innovation Award of the German Cap-
ital Region. We thank all colleagues, researchers, and
partners that were involved in requirements engineering,
design, implementation, and evaluation to make this
vision come true.
References
[1] J. Manyika et al., “Big Data: The Next Frontier for Inno-
vation, Competition, and Productivity,” The McKinsey
Global Institute, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[2] K. Jain, Textbook of Pers. Medicine.
Springer, 2009.
[3] ISO, “9126-1: Software Eng.: Product Quality,” 2001.
[4] J. M. Coble, J. Karat, and M. G. Kahn, “Maintaining a
focus on user requirements throughout the development
of clinical workstation software,” in Proceedings of the
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1997, pp. 170–177.
[5] H. Plattner et al., Design Thinking Research, ser. Un-
derstanding Innovation.
Springer, 2012.
[6] A. Wright, D. W. Bates, B. Middleton, T. Hongsermeier,
V. Kashyap, S. M. Thomas, and D. F. Sittig, “Creating
and Sharing Clinical Decision Support Content with
Web 2.0: Issues and Examples,” Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 334–346, Apr. 2009.
[7] W. Galitz, The Essential Guide to User Interface Design:
An Introduction to GUI Design Principles and Tech-
niques. New York, NY, USA: John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
[8] H. Plattner and A. Zeier, In-Memory Data Manage-
ment: An Inﬂection Point for Enterprise Applications.
Springer, 2011.
[9] M.-P. Schapranow, “Transaction Processing 2.0,” Mas-
ter’s thesis, Hasso Plattner Institute, 2008.
[10] P. Svensson, “The Evolution of Vertical Database Ar-
chitectures – A Historical Review,” in Proceedings of the
20th Int’l Conf. on Scientiﬁc and Statistical Database
Management.
Springer-Verlag, 2008, pp. 3–5.
[11] S. Lightstone et al., Physical Database Design: The
Database Professional’s Guide to Exploiting Indexes,
Views, Storage, and more.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2007.
1All online references were checked on Dec. 13th, 2012.
[12] J. M. Hellerstein, M. Stonebraker, and J. Hamilton, Ar-
chitecture of a Database System, Foundation and Trends
in Databases.
now Publishers, 2007, vol. 1.
[13] A. S. Tanenbaum, Modern Operating Systems, 3rd ed.
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall Press, 2008.
[14] J. M. Hellerstein and M. Stonebraker, Readings in
Database Systems, 4th ed.
MIT Press, 2005.
[15] K. Morimura, A. Romanenko, W. Min, E. I. Salim,
A.
Kinoshita,
H.
Wanibuchi,
A.
Vozianov,
and
S. Fukushima, “Possible distinct molecular carcinogenic
pathways for bladder cancer in ukraine, before and
after the chernobyl disaster.” Oncology Reports, vol. 11,
no. 4, pp. 881–886, 2004.
[16] F. Färber, S. K. Cha, J. Primsch, C. Bornhövd, S. Sigg,
and W. Lehner, “Sap hana database: data manage-
ment for modern business applications,” SIGMOD Rec.,
vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 45–51, Jan. 2012.
[17] World Health Organization, “International Classiﬁca-
tion of Diseases,” http://www.who.int/classiﬁcations/
icd/en/1, May 2012.
[18] J. Singh, Understanding ETL and Data Warehousing:
Issues, Challenges and Importance.
Lambert Acad.
Publishing, 2011.
[19] G. M. Ibrahim, C. Chung, and M. Bernstein, “Compet-
ing for Patients: An Ethical Framework for Recruiting
Patients with Brain Tumors into Clinical Trials,” Jour-
nal of Neuro-Oncology, vol. 104, no. 3, pp. 623–627, 2011.
[20] P. Kaatsch, C. Spix, A. Katalinic, and S. Hentschel,
“Krebs
in
Deutschland
2007/2008,”
Robert
Koch-
Institut und die Gesellschaft der epidemiologischen
Krebsregister in Deutschland e.V., Tech. Rep., 2012.
[21] Das Gießener Tumordokumentationssystem, 2012.
[22] Bundesrat,
“Entwurf
eines
Gesetzes
zur
Weiterentwicklung
der
Krebsfrüherkennung
und
zur Qualitätssicherung durch klinische Krebsregister
(Krebsfrüherkennungs- und -registergesetz - KFRG),”
http://dipbt.bundestag.de/dip21/brd/2012/0511-12.
pdf1, Aug 2012.
[23] T. A. Lang and M. Secic, How to Report Statistics in
Medicine: Annotated Guidelines for Authors, Editors,
and Reviewers.
Med. Writing and Commun., 2006.
[24] A. Frakt, “The Future of Health Care Costs: Hospital-
Insurer Balance of Power,” Expert Voices, 2010.
[25] K. Lehmann et al., “Interdisciplinary Tumour Boards in
Switzerland: Quo Vadis?” Swiss Med Wkly, vol. 138, no.
9–10, pp. 123–7, 2008.
[26] A. T. Holdener, AJAX: The Deﬁnitive Guide, 1st ed.
O’Reilly, 2008.
[27] D. Crockford, “RFC4627: The application/json Media
Type for JavaScript Object Notation (JSON),” http://
www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4627.txt1, July 2006.
[28] Sybase, Inc., “Afaria: A Technical Overview,” http://m.
sybase.com/ﬁles/White_Papers/Afaria-Technical-WP.
pdf1, 2012.
[29] M.-P. Schapranow, “Real-time Security Extensions for
EPCglobal Networks,” Ph.D. dissertation, Hasso Plat-
tner Institute, 2012.
[30] R. Pichler, Agile Product Management With Scrum: Cre-
ating Products that Customers Love, ser. Agile Software
Development Series.
Addison-Wesley, 2010.
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

