The Core of Design Thinking and its Impact on Digital Transformation in 
Healthcare 
Niels F. Garmann-Johnsena,b, Migle Helmersena  
aNORCE Research, bUniversity of Agder  
Kristiansand, Norway 
e-mail: niels.f.garmann-johnsen@uia.no, 
mihe@norceresearch.no 
Tom R. Eikebrokkb 
bUniversity of Agder 
Kristiansand, Norway 
e-mail: tom.eikebrokk@uia.no
 
 
Abstract—This study contributes to creating awareness about 
the potential of Design Thinking in healthcare. The review of 
the literature showed that this innovation-philosophy and 
paradigm has had a high impact on several sectors, especially 
the Information Technology sector, something that in its turn, 
impacts healthcare. Further research is needed to find 
solutions to remaining issues, like how to orchestrate dialog 
and co-creation with system-users, patients, different kinds of 
healthcare employees, and, e.g., policymakers. Although 
popular in practice, there has been a gap in academic 
literature, especially in Information systems, regarding the 
impact of Design Thinking in this context. Doing a literature 
review based on a central source of Design Thinking paradigm, 
Kees Dorst, the authors explore examples of such impact and 
generalize a picture of the state of art in this field. The impact 
of further research is then briefly discussed. 
Keywords-healthcare; Design Thinking; Abduction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
All Recent design science research has advanced our 
understanding 
of 
the 
value 
of 
Design 
Thinking 
methodologies (Design Thinking) and of using the design 
process for public policy innovations [1]. 
Dorst's article «The core of ‘Design Thinking’ and its 
application» [2] lays out the theoretical foundation for 
Design Thinking. This fundament builds on Abduction as the 
third inference method of social science research (the first 
two being Induction and Deduction, respectively), and 
abductive reasoning is often described as “the core of Design 
Thinking” [2]. The term ‘Abduction’ stems from Charles 
Sanders Peirce (1839–1914), the founder of American 
Pragmatism philosophy [3], and describes an approach to 
science which commences with one or more observations 
and then seeks the simplest and most likely explanation. 
There are two forms of Abduction, relevant to Design 
Thinking, explanatory and innovative [4]. In explanatory 
Abduction, the environment is scanned for truly surprising 
facts. While the rule may be known in other contexts, it is 
generally not familiar to the current one. Innovative 
Abduction produces an explanation (the design concept) for 
the desired value, the function, and an explanation (the form) 
for the design concept. “That is, we infer a new rule to 
explain the observation" (Op.cit.). 
Design Thinking has several characteristics as a 
methodology and gives a new formula for creating value. 
Design Thinking can lead to radical innovation through 
‘reframing the challenge’ [5]. The 'Thing', what to invent or 
build, and 'Working principle', how to invent or do 
something, lead to the aspired values. By iteratively 
exploring the problem space and solution space, the best 
combinations of the best ‘what’ and ‘how’ to achieve the 
desired values are discovered. This design principle is 
comparable to the LEAN ontologies for avoiding wasting 
resources in innovation and production. For example, Ries in 
his book “LEAN start-up (…)” emphasizes “doing the right 
things” before and over “doing things right” [6]. 
Design Thinking can be traced back to 1950-60, but was 
defined as a term by Rowe in 1987 [7]. Design Thinking 
builds on the elicited practice of industry designers [1] and 
aims at finding surprises; unexpected user- or consumer 
needs and desires, as basis for product- and service 
innovations [8]. Organizations should focus not only on 
"high end" users (the most demanding customers, those who 
pays the highest premium today), but be concerned with the 
needs of ordinary users as overshot consumers are the 
segment were new competitive market entrants’ hits. This is 
an analogy to Christensen’s studies of disruptive innovation 
patterns, that also underpin this point [9] along with “Blue 
Ocean Strategies” [10]. Design Thinking can also be an 
analogy to Soft Systems Methodology [11], as Design 
Thinking is well suited for complex, ´wicked´ problems or 
problematic areas [12]. 
Design Thinking as a scientific approach to design 
research has also been subject of critique in academia. There 
is a lack of rigour to research in Design Thinking [13]. 
Arguably, more rigid standards and protocols are needed; 
indeed, a protocol may be needed for designing innovation in 
general [14].  
Research problems 
The whole of the healthcare sector needs rapid 
transformation to sustain a high, human-centred quality 
while increasing the production of services, due to an 
expected aging of the population in many industrialized 
countries. 
Digitalization 
of 
services 
and 
Digital 
Transformation of the whole sector are looked upon as both 
a goal and a tool to achieve this efficiency. ‘Digitalization’ is 
a term that means implementing new technologies together 
with changed business- and service models. ‘Digital 
Transformation’ encompasses the content of the term 
‘Digitalization’,, but in addition, it also means the parallel 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

comprehensive change to the organization, its clients, and the 
society. 
Design Thinking is emerging as a methodology suited for 
facilitating these innovation processes, for human-centred 
design in the highly complex sector of healthcare. In this 
article, we examine the following questions: 
RQ1. How is Design Thinking defined in healthcare, and 
what kind of Design Thinking methods are applied? 
RQ2. What are the Design Thinking designer practices 
for dealing with complexity in healthcare? 
RQ3. What are potential pitfalls in applying Design 
Thinking in healthcare, and what kinds of caution should be 
applied? 
RQ4. What are the potential positive outcomes of 
applying Design Thinking methods, for the care providing 
organizations and for care-receivers? 
The rest of this article is organized as follows: In Section 
2, the methods applied to answer these research questions, 
namely, a literature search and analysis, are explained. 
Following this, in Section 3, the results of the search, and 
subsequent answers to the research questions are shown. In 
Section 4, the state of art is briefly summed up followed by a 
discussion of what are the remaining or new questions 
regarding this area.
 
Finally, the article ends  with propositions 
on avenues for further research. 
 
II. 
METHOD 
A literature review was chosen as the method for eliciting 
answers to the research questions. Dorst’s often cited 2011-
article [2] was chosen as a starting point for a forward search 
conducted in January 2020 with the Google Scholar search 
engine. This resulted in 1089 books and articles. 
A secondary search within these identified 254 books and 
articles using the term ´healthcare´. Screening these, we 
found 44 articles and books of relevance to the research 
questions. The articles omitted, although containing the 
search word, were found not concerned with healthcare, 
Design Thinking, or the combination of these two subjects. 
The 44 remaining articles were analyzed using the Nvivo 
application (Nvivo 12) for text marking and coding. Text-
passages that could share light on the research-questions 
were coded under nodes created for each research question, 
with appropriate sub-nodes, marking the found answers and 
coded with keywords for node-names, related to the first set 
of nodes [the research questions). As a result, the nodes 
became placeholders for concepts or themes after the 
principles of Webster and Watson for literature reviews [15] 
and resulted in themes organized after concepts and insights. 
This procedure stimulated the validity of the coding process, 
since several cited articles, independently of one another, 
underpinned the same concept. Conflicting concepts could 
also be identified, contrasted and lifted for discussion and 
further research. The next section provides a summary of the 
results of this analysis. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
The results from reviewing the literature start with how 
Design Thinking is defined in healthcare, and with an 
overview of Design Thinking methods used. Then, Design 
Thinking designer practices for dealing with complexity in 
healthcare were identified along with potential pitfalls in 
applying Design Thinking in healthcare, and what literature 
says on how to avoid these. Finally, the results identify 
potential positive outcomes of applying Design Thinking 
methods, for the care-providing organizations as well as for 
care-receivers. 
A. Definitions of Design Thinking in healthcare, and 
Design Thinking methods applied 
Tim Brown, president and CEO of IDEO, a consultancy 
company pioneering ideation and process innovation in 
healthcare, defines Design Thinking as ´human-centred 
approach to innovation that draws from the designer's toolkit 
to integrate the needs of people, the possibilities of 
technology, and the requirements for business success´. As 
such it is useful for dealing with open complex problems as 
in Information Technology (IT) and business development 
[16].  
Guerra and Tripp [17] compare different design methods 
for large scale information infrastructures and find that the 
more 
traditional 
methods 
[Stakeholder 
management, 
Community participation, Charette design, Lean design and 
construction, and Value sensitive design) lack emphasis on 
especially the later stages in Hasso Platner’s roadmap of the 
Design Thinking process. Hasso Platner’s Design Thinking 
process is here defined as the steps: Empathize (with users), 
Define (the user-problem), Ideate (seek potential solutions), 
Prototype and Test [17]. The inclination of Design Thinking 
to put forward prototyped solutions for the users to test, 
before investing and implementing, seems unique for Design 
Thinking methodology. This way, Design Thinking assures 
that the design process is based on accurate assumptions and 
understandings of the problem at hand [18]. With such 
credentials, what can explain resistance to the application of 
Design Thinking? If a special outcome is desired, Design 
Thinking may pose a problem, ´because creative events or 
the emergence of creative ideas cannot be predicted and 
rating ideas according to creativity is not straight forward´ 
writes Dorst and Cross in 2001, according to Garde [19]. 
Design Thinking is an intuitive decision-making practice. In 
environments characterized by fast-paced technological 
change 
contradictory, 
interdependent 
or 
changing 
requirements and information that may be inadequate or 
incomplete, like is often the case in healthcare, intuitive 
decision-making practices dominate over those which are 
evidence-based [20]. 
Design Thinking can be used as a framework for co-
creation with both patients and employees in healthcare 
institutions. Design Thinking is a human- and needs-centric 
approach to innovation that is well aligned with the needs of 
the very labour-intensive healthcare sector [21]. Co-creation 
can be used by hospitals, e.g., to redesign whole departments 
[22]. Design Thinking has been implemented in many 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

different organizational settings. In general, if relatively 
rapid change is needed, as in healthcare, a change- or 
innovation culture is also needed. Creating an innovation 
culture is a dynamic process in which areas of tension and 
fundamental innovation dilemmas should meet, rather than 
follow a recipe to implement role models towards success 
criteria [23]. Prud’homme van Reine identifies nine 
innovation dilemmas that organizational cultures face: 
including holistic vs. segmented views of challenges, 
competition vs. partnership, Consistency versus Pragmatism, 
etc. Identifying and balancing these tensions may be 
necessary to maintain an innovative culture, but Design 
Thinking can promote such organizational development by 
emphasizing long term holistic values over short-term 
individual goals. 
From the perspective of social innovation, many authors 
have seen the potential of Design Thinking to improve the 
quality of healthcare and public transportation. At the same 
time, many have been advocating for Design Thinking to be 
taught in universities to help students to become innovative 
professionals. Moreover, it has also been applied to industrial 
contexts, such as Small and Medium-sized Enterprises 
(SMEs) and large organizations [24]. 
Until recently, Design Thinking was not well received by 
academia, as the term does not give a clear indication of 
what field of research it should belong to [25]. Design 
Thinking alongside ´Lean Startup´ [6] belongs to a brand of 
learning that can be perceived as experiential learning [26]. 
To accommodate such learning a multiple of Design 
Thinking models have emerged over the last two decades, 
like e.g., “The 5C model” with 62 method cards [27]. 
Another method ´Actor mapping flags´ is used in the project 
“InnArbeid”, a project for providing mentally challenged 
youth with vocational employment [28]. A four layer-model 
of insights into human needs has been devised [5]. Behind 
such methods lies a common epistemological origin in terms 
of innovative abductive reasoning [29]. 
An overview of different modes of Design Thinking is 
provided by Kleinsman et al. [30], called “Description of the 
four images of Design Thinking”. It shows the role of Design 
Thinking in Purpose-driven innovation, Vision-driven 
innovation, Experience-driven innovation and Value-driven 
innovation. Cards and other artefacts of visualization and 
gamification of the idea-development process are employed 
in workshops with user representatives. 
Some alternatives to Design Thinking as an approach to 
innovation, in healthcare and other sectors, are used in 
developing countries and emerging economies. For example, 
the TRIZ-model - teoriya resheniya izobretatelskikh zadatch, 
literally: ´theory of the resolution of invention-related tasks´ 
was created by the Soviet inventor and science-fiction author 
Genrich Altshuller (1926-1998) and colleagues, starting in 
1946. Conferences are regularly held on this theme [31]. 
Still, in these proceedings, there are also examples of the 
application of Design Thinking in a healthcare environment. 
Here, TRIZ is combined with Design Thinking, in the design 
of an exoskeleton specialized in the assistance of hemiplegic 
patients during their re-education (Op. cit.). 
B. How Design Thinking designer practices are dealing 
with complexity in healthcare 
Under headers such as ’Design Thinking’ and ’strategic 
design’ practitioners and researchers advocate design as a 
way for dealing with complex problems within diverse fields 
such as business, the environment, and health care [27]. For 
improvement work in healthcare, there is a growing interest 
in applying Design Thinking [32]. Experienced designers 
systematically change their understanding of the problem 
space through framing the design problem at hand [33]. The 
core of the free-flowing design-practice entails expanding on 
what problem needs to be solved, as well as expanding on 
what type of solution might address the evolved problem. 
These two processes co-evolve, meaning that they iteratively 
inform each other [34]. Free flowing means that ´expert 
design practice shows that even the desired outcome can 
mutate with the adoption of a new frame, enabling designers 
much more freedom to step away from the initial paradox´ 
(Dorst, according to Op.cit.). This is based on the logic of 
Abduction [35]. Using ethnographical methods like 
interviewing and shadowing sessions, where clinical 
practices are observed, designers highlight and prioritize the 
value they find in the ambiguity present in the organizational 
culture [36]. Designers then start from the aspired value. 
Based on this knowledge they infer a suitable working 
principle (the rule), and finally, they propose an object 
(precondition) which can produce this working principle, to 
deliver the aspired value [29]. Such reasoning thus 
demystifies the genius of entrepreneurship [37]. This also 
lowers the risk of new investments and inventions. Many 
technologies have failed when introduced to the market, as a 
result of lacking or not having the proper Abduction in their 
reasoning [38]. So, when using Design Thinking, before 
creating solutions, efforts are put into framing the problem to 
be solved [39]. Sometimes small changes are not enough, 
and radical changes are required to achieve the aspired 
values. New frames that support radical innovation might be 
introduced by gaining new perspectives from outsiders or 
developed by insiders through thematic exploration (Op. 
cit.). The activities of framing (to set up a first problem 
description) and reframing (to put the initial perspective 
under scrutiny and change it) describe what skilled 
innovation teams excel at [40]. 
Humans with long term conditions might feel that 
healthcare treats them as a condition rather than as a whole 
person. Taking a holistic view on such experiences, Design 
Thinking creates a new context, a better formulation of the 
problem in a different area and that helps to shift peoples' 
thinking into areas from where the problem was always 
unsolvable into where it is suddenly solvable [41]. Framing 
and reframing should be understood as a ´(novel) standpoint 
from which a problematic situation can be tackled´ [18]. 
One of the main principles that public innovation 
practices can borrow from design is the activity of (re-) 
framing problems [42]. The frame serves as a working 
hypothesis for how the solution should work in order to 
achieve an aspired value (‘why’). In this way, the designer 
creates both a new way of understanding the problem as well 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

as a new way of acting within this problem in order to 
construct a new meaning [43]. A poor definition of the 
problem and its causes may falsely direct resources towards 
trying to solve the wrong problem [44]. Design Thinking has 
thus emerged as an innovative context framework to obtain a 
holistic picture of the state-of-the-art and to determine 
advantages for change [45]. The advantage of taking a 
holistic perspective first is that it tends to broaden the 
perspective taken and thus avoids short-sighted design 
biases, e.g., redesigning a tool rather than the activity-flow 
itself [19]. Figure 1 below illustrates how abductive 
reasoning reduces complexity and risk through abductive 
reasoning, framing and reframing the problem. 
Thies [33] reports the case of the Primary Care Unit 
(PCU) in the County Council of Värmland, Sweden, where 
an appointment to see a doctor was hard to get. Normal 
waiting times for non-acute appointments were around 4-6 
weeks. Acute meetings were taken care of the same day. 
However, the number of timeslots per day for acute meetings 
was limited, which highly influenced the workflow at the 
PCU, as well as the patients seeking help. A better IT-system 
for booking could be part of the solution, but it would be 
deceptive to range this as the whole solution. The underlying 
problems were bigger, with causes coming from the different 
actors' different perspectives and conflicting patterns of 
action. The value of the service designer lies in creating a 
holistic understanding of the problem as a basis for designing 
appropriate measures [34]. Complexity is enhanced by legal 
requirements stating that all patients should undergo an 
assessment before booking or being sent home. 
Patient focus groups are often involved in governance of 
hospitals, e.g. planning new facilities., but decisions to be 
made by a clinic administration needs to consider clinical 
considerations as well as legal requirements that may be at 
odds with patient focus groups’ perceptions of desirability. 
Transparency around the decision-process, making it more 
public may help to legitimize decisions. Design Thinking 
may help in this process [22]. 
Design Thinking can help in co-designing a holistic 
approach to achieving wellbeing as a value, in facilities for 
living and dying (palliative care) with dementia [46]. Design 
Thinking and user-centred design-process programs have 
also helped in creating successful new eHealth applications, 
e.g., The Connected Care start-up. Running since 2009, the 
start-up has been offering a self-healthcare solution for 
managing sleep disorders. ´In 2017, the 25+ employee-sized 
company was operating in 10 countries before it was 
acquired by a global electronics company a year later´ [47]. 
Hardy et al [48] reports on how ´inclusive, user-centred 
design research´ can improve therapies for Psychosis, 
through the development of the application, ´SlowMo´. 
C. Some potential pitfalls in applying Design Thinking in 
healthcare, and what kinds of caution should be applied 
There are requirements for a successful implementation 
of a new technology in healthcare, even if the application 
seemingly is designed after Design Thinking principles. The 
Leavitt’s diamond theory for change management applies 
and states that implementation of new technologies must be 
accompanied by change in structure, tasks and people. 
Orlowski et al. [49] reports on a case study using Design 
Thinking in redesign of an initial Design Thinking service 
innovation—the Nurse Knowledge Exchange (NKE). This 
strategy aimed at improving nursing communication and 
handover (between shifts) in the organization’s hospitals. 
The process, as in most applications of DT, was rapid 
and expert-led (i.e. controlled from start to finish by the 
design team), and it called on end users, who included staff 
from all organizational levels, but no patients, for 
contributions 
at 
various 
stages—particularly 
during 
interviewing/observing and field testing. The end-result was 
NKEplus. The authors described heavy resistance to 
implementation of the NKEplus strategy outside of the pilot 
site. The organization was used to, that Design Thinking-
based innovations and change normally were coupled with 
training support and formal changes to work roles and 
position descriptions. The rest of the case study details re-
implementation of NKEplus, a process that resulted in higher 
uptake and buy-in for NKEplus organization-wide. 
 
Figure 1. Abductive reasoning in innovation processes as in healthcare 
Identifying the right venue and creating a friendly 
atmosphere may enhance the probability for a positive 
outcome. In the case of the ´Wellfayre´ (a program for 
creating welfare innovations) thoughts about branding and 
the name ´WellFayre´ (…) gave the idea of taking paper 
cups, cakes and juice, in keeping with a ‘country village 
fayre’ aesthetic. This was given a warm welcome (see figure 
20). Each participant was comfortable, and conversation 
flowed freely. When deciding on the venue, the participants' 
health conditions were taken into consideration, i.e. their 
need for lifts instead of stairs [41]. 
Research on the role of Design Thinking in healthcare 
needs to consider the role of the designers. By observing 
what designers do, Cross summarized design abilities as 
“resolving ill-defined problems, adopting solution-focused 
cognitive strategies, employing abductive or appositional 
thinking, and using nonverbal modelling media” [39]. 
Furthermore, studies about design knowledge and expertise 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

also defined them in terms of how designers think and work 
through their tools, approaches, and ´artefacts´ [39]. To be 
effective, a distance to the subject at hand may be needed. 
A designer relies on hers or his personal integrity. An 
example: In the context of management research, studies 
have explored the effects of empathy on individuals and its 
influence on a group or organization. Empathy may be 
followed by an emotional contagion that can influence group 
behavior. Customer service representative may feel a degree 
of stress given the constant low--grade effect of listening to 
customers’ problems or negative feedback [25]. This issue 
could arguably underpin the case for using external resources 
for design research, as they may both have a degree of 
legitimacy, and a distance to the problems, needed to do an 
objective assessment that does not over-influence the 
solution-space. 
D. The potential positive outcome of applying Design 
Thinking methods, for the care providing organizations 
and for care-receivers 
Design Thinking may be a forerunner for other, more 
rigorous ontologies including Business Process Management 
and Modelling, Enterprise Architecture development [50] or 
ITIL [51]. Design Thinking has the potential to take you far 
into construction, like in making Ambient Intelligent 
Systems; ´The design process included concept generation 
and evaluation. In both we followed techniques that 
supported the design practice. In the generation phase we 
followed the Design Thinking (…) framework´ [52]. 
Putting humans first may be the hallmark of Design 
Thinking. The advantage of design-led innovation is its 
creation of opportunities based on emotion-rich innovations 
in the product or services value, as perceived by the user. 
Empathy is ‘the ability to see and experience through another 
person's eyes, to recognize why people do what they do’ 
[53]. Lupton [54] gives us a narrative from a typical process; 
´In a different project, I worked with designers to generate 
design artefacts for using in a participatory design workshop 
on digital health. The participants were drawn from 
healthcare consumer and practitioner groups, industry, and 
government agencies. They first took part in a group activity 
involving mapping the landscape of digital health 
technologies to determine which technologies were being 
used and the social relationships involved. The groups 
presented the maps to the other groups, explaining their 
choices and highlighting the positive and negatives aspects 
of the current digital health technology landscape. The other 
two activities asked participants to imagine future 
opportunities for new digital health devices or software, 
including 
making 
storyboards 
that 
inserted 
these 
technologies into narratives´ [54]. 
Using the ability to focus on emotional and social 
rewards, Design Thinking methods may improve public 
health. ´In one particular project focused on diabetes 
management, an IDEO team discovered that traditional 
clinical goals of diabetes management (such as losing weight 
and controlling blood sugar levels) to prevent further 
progression of the disease were inadequate in motivating 
many patients to make healthy changes to their habits and 
routines. By contrast, setting social and emotional goals 
(such as being able to walk a 5-kilometre tour or to dance 
with one’s daughter at her wedding) were highly motivating. 
As a result of this insight, the team made setting personal life 
goals (social and emotional) a core service element of the 
product they designed, changing the patient’s mindset from 
prevention to promotion in the process´ [55]. This way, 
Design Thinking may create whole new experiences from 
the user’s journey. (Design Thinking) tries to reframe the 
relationship between the user and the context in which the 
product/service are experienced. Philips Electronics, for 
example, developed Ambient Experience for Healthcare, a 
breakthrough application for reducing the anxiety and stress 
for patients - and especially for kids - when they undergo 
medical scans with Computed Tomography (CT) or 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). By rearranging the lay-
out of medical devices, introducing cartoons, video and 
relaxing images into the room, and using sound and 
interactive walls, the company fostered a new vision of the 
user experience´ [56]. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
After In this section the authors sum up the answers to 
the research questions (RQs) as detailed in the previous 
section and discuss what other topics of interest remains 
unanswered. Regarding RQ1 (see Section 1), this study has 
answered the research questions as follows: Design Thinking 
is defined in healthcare as a human- and patient-centric 
approach to ideation and innovation, and several Design 
Thinking methods have been applied. This article has 
provided a few examples. The Design Thinking practices for 
dealing with complexity, “wicked problems”, like often 
found in healthcare innovation dilemmas, makes the 
methodology appropriate in this context. Design Thinking 
methods for dealing with complexity involves abductive 
reasoning, framing and reframing of the problem, as shown 
above as a response to RQ2, and illustrated in Figure 1. 
There are potential pitfalls in applying Design Thinking in 
healthcare, and such an approach does not annihilate the 
needs for normal change management procedures, like 
getting all employees on board as involved and engaged 
[57], and employing proper governance methods. This would 
be the short answer to RQ3., but literature reports many 
positive outcomes of applying Design Thinking methods, for 
the care-providing organizations as well as for patients. This 
article has touched on a few examples, as a response to RQ4. 
Unanswered questions remain around what degree of 
standardization of the methodology is warranted. On one 
hand, a strict protocol may ease adoption of Design Thinking 
methods. On the other hand, a too rigid protocol may make 
Design Thinking lose its flexibility and agility and make it 
less intuitive as an instrument for a dialog between experts 
and novices within a certain domain.  
But Design Thinking is no ‘silver bullet’ and ideas may 
have to come from a lot of sources. Let us use the Primary 
Care Unit [33] as a speculative, imagined example of the 
importance of iterating between problem and solution. Here 
you could also mention Kim and Mauborgne’s 4-action 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

framework [10] – where the designer should ask what (what 
steps in the process) should be strengthened, reduced and 
simplified, eliminated and innovated, respectively - here for 
example innovating a digital advance diagnosis? The 
statutory analogue preliminary assessment of patients creates 
queues and obviously has little perceived value to patients, 
but requires a lot of time and resources. It steals, among 
other things, resources from the treatment (let’s assume then 
that the caregivers who make the assessment are also the 
ones who will assist with surgical intervention, and which is 
then also a scarce resource). In addition, the physician 
performs his or her own assessment, so that the pre-
assessment is quickly duplicated. A team of process 
innovators and designers with access to digital expertise 
might suggest a step ahead of the service, an online self-
diagnostic tool, perhaps linked to artificial intelligence, that 
could collect data and speed up the admission session 
(serving as decision support for both) those who do the pre-
assessment and for the doctor. Of course, such an idea had to 
be tested and piloted, in a dialogue with all stakeholder 
groups, as the details are quality-critical,, but similar 
solutions do exist, e.g., the Norwegian IT-service company 
Diagraphit [58], offer pre-appointment diagnosis tools. 
Further research could consist of case studies within 
concrete problematic areas in healthcare and public health. 
Such studies could inform both researchers and practice and 
devise how Ideally, health-institutions could shape co-
creation arenas (real and virtual) where all stakeholders can 
meet, where ideas developed according to Design Thinking 
principles, which can then be pursued handing over plans 
and ideas to more rigid tools and methods. 
Limitations of this study 
A literature study like this is not an exhaustive overview 
over all relevant aspects and the authors may have 
overlooked sources that might provide new insight of 
relevance to the research subject. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  J. de Koning, E. Puerari, I. Mulder, and D. Loorbach, 
"Landscape of participatory city makers: A distinct 
understanding through different lenses," Formakademisk. 
2019;12(2). 
[2] K. Dorst, "The core of ‘Design Thinking’and its application," 
Design studies. 2011;32(6):521-32. 
[3] S. Psillos, "An explorer upon untrodden ground: Peirce on 
Abduction,"  Handbook of the History of Logic: Elsevier; 
2011. p. 117-51. 
[4] A. Dong, M. Garbuio, and D. Lovallo, "Generative sensing in 
design evaluation," Design Studies. 2016;45:68-91. 
[5] M. Van Der Bijl Brouwer and K. Dorst, editors, "How deep is 
deep? A four-layer model of insights into human needs for 
design innovation," 9th International Conference on Design 
and Emotion 2014: The Colors of Care; 2014. 
[6] E. Ries, "Lean Startup: Schnell, risikolos und erfolgreich 
Unternehmen gründen," Redline Wirtschaft; 2014. 
[7] I. Luka, "Design Thinking in pedagogy," The Journal of 
Education, Culture, and Society. 2014(2):63-74. 
[8] J. Vink, B. Edvardsson, K. Wetter-Edman, and B. Tronvoll, 
"Reshaping mental models–enabling innovation through 
service design," Journal of Service Management. 2019. 
[9] C. M. Christensen, M. E. Raynor and R. McDonald, "What is 
disruptive 
innovation," 
Harvard 
Business 
Review. 
2015;93(12):44-53. 
[10] W. C. Kim and R. A. Mauborgne, Blue ocean strategy, 
expanded edition: How to create uncontested market space 
and make the competition irrelevant, Harvard business review 
Press; 2014. 
[11] P. B. Checkland, "Soft systems methodology," Human 
systems management. 1989;8(4):273-89. 
[12] S. Weedon, "The Core of Kees Dorst’s Design Thinking: A 
Literature Review," Journal of Business and Technical 
Communication. 2019;33(4):425-30. 
[13] P. Micheli, S. J. Wilner, S. H. Bhatti, M. Mura, and M. B. 
Beverland, "Doing Design Thinking: Conceptual review, 
synthesis, and research agenda," Journal of Product 
Innovation Management. 2019;36(2):124-48. 
[14] R. Anwar, S. Z. Abidin, and O. H. Hassan, editors, "In-vitro 
design protocol: Artificial situation strategy uses to 
comprehend 
designers’ 
thought," 
MATEC 
Web 
of 
Conferences; 2016: EDP Sciences. 
[15] J. Webster and R. T. Watson, "Analyzing the past to prepare 
for the future: Writing a literature review," MIS quarterly. 
2002:xiii-xxiii. 
[16] A. Ganova, "A case study for the evolution 6² model," 2017. 
[17] M. A. Guerra and S. Tripp, editors, "Theoretically comparing 
Design Thinking to design methods for large-scale 
infrastructure systems," DS 89: Proceedings of The Fifth 
International Conference on Design Creativity (ICDC 2018), 
University of Bath, Bath, UK; 2018. 
[18] B. F. Nielsen, "Framing humanitarian action through Design 
Thinking," 2015. 
[19] J. A. Garde, "Everyone has a part to play: games and 
participatory design in healthcare," 2013. 
[20] R. McLaughlan, "Learning from evidence-based medicine: 
exclusions and opportunities within health care environments 
research," Design for Health. 2017;1(2):210-28. 
[21] N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, M. Helmersen, and T. R. Eikebrokk, 
"Digital Transformation in Healthcare: Enabling Employee 
Co-Creation through Web 2.0," 2018. 
[22] M. Kucmanic and A. R. Sheon, "What Critical Ethical Values 
Guide Strategic Planning Processes in Health Care 
Organizations?," AMA journal of ethics. 2017;19(11):1073-
80. 
[23] P. Prud'homme van Reine, "The culture of Design Thinking 
for 
innovation," 
Journal 
of 
Innovation 
Management. 
2017;5(2):56-80. 
[24] D. Paula and K. Cormican, editors, "Understanding Design 
Thinking in Design Studies (2006-2015): A Systematic 
Mapping Study," DS 84: Proceedings of the DESIGN 2016 
14th International Design Conference; 2016. 
[25] A. Llamas, "Human-centered innovation processes. The Case 
of Design Thinking in-," 2015. 
[26] M. B. Ramsgaard and M. E. Christensen, "Missing links 
between lean startup, Design Thinking, and experiential 
learning approaches in entrepreneurship education," 2016. 
[27] Y. Rahim, I. Refsdal, and R. S. Kenett, "The 5C model: A 
new approach to asset integrity management," International 
Journal of Pressure Vessels and Piping. 2010;87(2-3):88-93. 
[28] K. Rygh and S. Clatworthy, "The Use of Tangible Tools as a 
Means to Support Co-design During Service Design 
Innovation Projects in Healthcare.  Service Design and 
Service Thinking in Healthcare and Hospital Management," 
Springer; 2019. p. 93-115. 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[29] G. Lamé, B. Yannou, and F. Cluzel, editors, "Analyzing RID 
methodology through the lens of innovative Abduction," 
2018. 
[30] M. Kleinsmann, R. Valkenburg, and J. Sluijs, "Capturing the 
value of Design Thinking in different innovation practices," 
International Journal of Design. 2017;11(2):25-40. 
[31] R. Benmoussa, R. De Guio, S. Dubois, and S. Koziołek, 
"New Opportunities for Innovation Breakthroughs for 
Developing Countries and Emerging Economies: 19th 
International 
TRIZ 
Future 
Conference," 
TFC 
2019, 
Marrakesh, Morocco, October 9–11, 2019, Proceedings: 
Springer Nature; 2019. 
[32] M. Marshall, D. De Silva, L. Cruickshank, J. Shand, L. Wei, 
and J. Anderson, "What we know about designing an effective 
improvement intervention (but too often fail to put into 
practice)," BMJ Qual Saf. 2017;26(7):578-82. 
[33] A. Thies, "On the Value of Design Thinking for Innovation in 
Complex Contexts: A Case from Healthcare," IxD&A. 
2015;27:159-71. 
[34] A. Thies, "Understanding Complex Problems in Healthcare: 
By Applying a Free-Flowing Design Practice," Stockholm 
University, Department of Computer and Systems sciences; 
2016. 
[35] J. Vallverdú, A. Puyol, and A. Estany, "Philosophical and 
Methodological Debates in Public Health," Springer; 2019. 
[36] Dorland, A. R. E., editor, "Doing Design Thinking: An 
Ethnography of the Digital Graphic Design Studio," 2018: 
Arts. 
[37] M. Garbuio, A. Dong, N. Lin, T. Tschang, and D. Lovallo, 
"Demystifying the genius of entrepreneurship: How design 
cognition 
can 
help 
create 
the 
next 
generation 
of 
entrepreneurs," Academy of Management Learning & 
Education. 2018;17(1):41-61. 
[38] L. Møller and R. Bennyson, "Project title: Design Adapted 
Technology for Healthcare [Project sketch]," In press 2015. 
[39] M. A. Pfannstiel and C. Rasche, "Service Design and Service 
Thinking in Healthcare and Hospital Management," Springer; 
2019. 
[40] Å. Ericson, J. Wenngren, J. Lugnet, H. Kaartinen, S. Pieskä, 
J. Vähäsöyrinki, et al., "Innovationstrial Internet," Luleå 
tekniska universitet; 2018. 
[41] M. Gill, "Exploring wellness," 2014. 
[42] M. Van der Bijl-Brouwer and R. Watson, editors, "Designing 
for the deepest needs of both public service consumers and 
providers; Innovation in mental health crisis response. DS 80-
1, Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on 
Engineering Design (ICED 15), Vol. 1: Design for Life, 2015. 
[43] K. L. Knudsen and L. M. Haase, editors, "The construction of 
meaning in design-driven projects," DS 89: Proceedings of 
The Fifth International Conference on Design Creativity 
(ICDC 2018), University of Bath, Bath, UK; 2018. 
[44] J. E. Reed and A. J. Card, "The problem with plan-do-study-
act cycles," BMJ Qual Saf. 2016;25(3):147-52. 
[45] C. Battistoni, C. Giraldo Nohra, and S. Barbero, "A Systemic 
Design Method to Approach Future Complex Scenarios and 
Research Towards Sustainability: A Holistic Diagnosis Tool," 
Sustainability. 2019;11(16):4458. 
[46] K. Seemann and D. Barron, editors, "Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Design4Health," Design4Health 
2017; Melbourne, Australia. 
[47] N. Sturkenboom, E. Baha, R. Price, M. Kleinsmann, and D. 
Snelders, editors, "A CHAT approach to understand framing 
in digital service innovation," Proceedings of the Design 
Society: International Conference on Engineering Design; 
2019: Cambridge University Press. 
[48] A. Hardy, A. Wojdecka, J. West, E. Matthews, C. Golby, T. 
Ward, et al., "How inclusive, user-centered design research 
can 
improve 
psychological 
therapies 
for 
psychosis: 
development 
of 
SlowMo," 
JMIR 
mental 
health. 
2018;5(4):e11222. 
[49] S. Orlowski, B. Matthews, N. Bidargaddi, G. Jones, S. Lawn, 
A. Venning, et al., "Mental health technologies: designing 
with consumers," JMIR human factors. 2016;3(1):e4. 
[50] T. J. Blevins, J. Spencer, and F. Waskiewicz, "TOGAF ADM 
and MDA," The Open Group and OMG. 2004. 
[51] S. Sahibudin, M. Sharifi, and M. Ayat, editors, "Combining 
ITIL, COBIT and ISO/IEC 27002 in order to design a 
comprehensive IT framework in organizations," 2008 Second 
Asia International Conference on Modelling & Simulation 
(AMS); 2008: IEEE. 
[52] M. Pavlovic, S. Kotsopoulos, Y. Lim, S. Penman, S. 
Colombo, and F. Casalegno, editors, "Determining a 
Framework for the Generation and Evaluation of Ambient 
Intelligent Agent System Designs," Proceedings of the Future 
Technologies Conference; 2019: Springer. 
[53] J. Schweitzer, L. Groeger, and L. Sobel, "The Design 
Thinking mindset: An assessment of what we know and what 
we see in practice," Journal of design, business & society. 
2016;2(1):71-94. 
[54] D. Lupton, "Towards design sociology," Sociology Compass. 
2018;12(1):e12546. 
[55] L. Thompson and D. Schonthal, "The social psychology of 
Design 
Thinking," 
California 
Management 
Review. 
2019:0008125619897636. 
[56] C. Cautela and M. Simoni, "The Role of Design in Design 
Intensive Start-ups," International Journal of Design Sciences 
& Technology. 2019;23(2):145-58. 
[57] N. F. Garmann-Johnsen, M. Helmersen, and T. R. Eikebrokk, 
"Worklife Ergonomics in eHealth Co-Creation Governance - 
“You can’t manage what you don’t measure”," eTELEMED; 
2018; Rome; 2018. 
[58] DiaGraphIT, "GoTreatIT® - documentation of daily medical 
treatment, benchmarking and quality registers in one work 
operation," 
https://diagraphit.no/en/2020 
[cited 
2020 
February]; Homepage (Eng. version) for the GoTreatIT 
solution. Available from: https://diagraphit.no/en/. 
 
 
 
 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

