User Experience Design for Persons Living With Dementia-
Current Methods and Experimental Experience
Sabrina Knappe1, Bruce Wallace1,2,3, Laura Ault2,3, Raﬁk Goubran1,2,3, Neil Thomas2,3,4,5, and Frank Knoefel1,2,3,4,5
1Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
2Bruy`ere Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada
3SAM3 Innovation Hub, Ottawa, Canada
4Bruy`ere Continuing Care, Ottawa, Canada
5Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
Email: sabrinaknappe@cunet.carleton.ca
Email: {wally, goubran}@sce.carleton.ca
Email: {lault, nthomas, fknoefel}@bruyere.org
Abstract—Persons Living With Dementia (PLWD) present both a
challenge and opportunity for ambient monitoring within smart
homes. Persons Living With Dementia could beneﬁt greatly from
smart home technologies that monitor their well being and enable
them to live at home longer. This potential has not been fully
realized, partly because of the difﬁculty in creating interfaces that
individuals with dementia can interpret and use. User experience
design and user centred design aim to produce technology that
is intuitive and accessible to target users. While traditional
user experience design methods are difﬁcult to carry out with
Persons Living With Dementia, they can be adapted to better
suit this population. By involving the families of Persons Living
With Dementia in the design process, adapting the prototyping
process, and encouraging empathy on the part of designers,
smart home technology for ambient monitoring can be developed
for Persons Living With Dementia in an inclusive way. The
paper presents results from research projects where Persons
Living With Dementia and those with less severe mild cognitive
impairment have engaged with technology user interfaces. The
results show that users were much more successful with simpler
interfaces such as a touch screen over mouse and keyboard.
They were also more successful with concepts that drew on
early learnings. Our results also show that Persons Living With
Dementia that experience night time wandering, can be supported
with visual and audio cues from a supportive smart home system.
This is a new user interface model for interaction with smart
home systems that will require the involvement of PLWD in the
design process.
Keywords–Ambient monitoring; Dementia; User Experience
Design; Supportive Smart Home.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Dementia is a progressive disease of the brain causing
cognitive decline and resulting in an impaired performance
of activities of daily living. Some of the cognitive domains
affected by dementia include memory, language, and abstract
thinking. PLWD, especially moderate or severe dementia,
require constant supervision, placing a signiﬁcant burden on
caregivers who are often close relatives. PLWD may struggle
with independent living as a result of their cognitive difﬁculties
and many caregivers opt to place loved ones in care homes
when overwhelmed by the responsibilities associated with
caring for an individual with dementia. Remote assessment
and support using in-home technology are a potential avenue
to allow PLWD to live at home longer by alleviating a
caregiver’s responsibilities [1][2]. A variety of projects have
been undertaken in an effort to integrate home assessment into
the lives of PLWD [3][4].
Projects, such as the AGE-WELL SAM3 (Sensors and
Analytics to Monitor Mobility and Memory) collaboration
between Bruy`ere Research Institute and Hospital, Carleton
University and AGE-WELL NCE Inc., seek to facilitate life
at home for Persons Living With Dementia using technology
based solutions. The process of designing supportive ambient
assessment solutions for PLWD is challenging due to the
cognitive impairments of the target users [5]. The classic User
Experience Design (UXD) pipeline includes the end user in
most parts of the design process through interviews and testing
which are used to gather insights into how to improve a
product’s usability.
In this paper, we discuss the current best practices for
UXD for PLWD according to previous work in the ﬁeld. In
Section II, we discuss current best practices in designing for
PLWD. Section II, A covers working with the families of
PLWD to facilitate the UXD process. Section II B, covers
adaptations that have been made to prototyping methods for
use with PLWD. Section II C, covers the role of empathy in
designing for PLWD as well as methods that have been used to
leverage it. We also outline the challenges and insights we have
gathered from past development of user interfaces for PLWD
in Section III. In Section III A, we outline an experiment using
word search and sudoku games. In Section III B, we cover an
experiment where PLWD played whack-a-mole on a digital
tablet. In Section III C, we go over an experiment where we
had older adults, some with PLWD, use a balance tracker.
In Section III D, we discuss a project where we designed
and tested a system to reduce nighttime wandering in PLWD.
In Section IV we outline a framework for future UXD for
continuing work within the AGE-WELL SAM3 collaboration
in section IV. In Section IV A, we list some rules for designing
PLWD-friendly interfaces. In Section IV B, we summarize the
importance of prototyping and iterative design in designing
for PLWD. Finally, we present discuss possibilities for further
work in Section V.
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II.
CURRENT BEST PRACTICES
Don Norman, who coined the term User Experience, de-
scribed the process as “think(ing) through all of the stages
of a product or service, from initial intentions through ﬁnal
reﬂections, from ﬁrst usage to help, service, and maintenance.
Make them all work together seamlessly” [6]. Current best
practice methods in user experience include integrating the end
user in the design process early and often. Iterative prototyping
is one of the most common methods used to involve end
users. It consists of the production of multiple prototypes
with increasing ﬁdelity, each inﬂuenced by the testing of the
previous prototype with a sample of end users. For example,
an initial prototype of a phone application might consist of
a series of paper cutouts representing the various screens of
the application. The end user must be able to interpret the
paper cutouts for what they represent, which requires abstract
thinking.
When working with PLWD, traditional user experience
methods must be adapted to better suit the cognitive difﬁculties
this group of end users experiences. The impairment in abstract
thinking in PLWD makes traditional prototype testing difﬁcult
[7]. In prior work, groups of older adults with low digital
literacy and moderate to advanced cognitive impairment were
involved in the prototyping of a TV remote [8]. The group of
participants in the study represent one of the more impaired
subgroups of PLWD. They had “little to no experience with
digital technology” [8] and most had an educational level
equivalent to 4th grade.
When afﬂicted with dementia, an individual’s memory
deteriorates starting with short term memory and eventually
affecting more long term memory. Individuals with both
signiﬁcantly progressed dementia and very little education
represent a group with signiﬁcant cognitive impairments. There
is emerging evidence that education has some protective effects
against dementia, so this group with low education would be
doubly challenged, for instance in the development of mental
maps. The remote controls the participants designed during
the prototyping exercise researchers led “would not have been
fully functional, and the participants had difﬁculties or were
unable to describe or explain their designs” [8]. This type of
challenge is common when trying to include PLWD in the
design process and has led to the adaptation of traditional UXD
methods. Though there has been limited work in adapting
design methods for PLWD, a few strategies have emerged.
A. Working with families of PLWD to facilitate UXD
PLWD often live with their families who act as informal
caregivers. The bulk of the caregiving responsibility often falls
on the spouse or a child of the PLWD [1][2]. These caregivers
are familiar to the PLWD and are familiar with the challenges
the PLWD faces. Because of this insight, they have frequently
either assisted PLWD in communicating with researchers and
designers or acted as a stand-in for the interests of their loved
ones. Previous projects have had caregivers in the long term
care home where the study was held assist the PLWD with
prototyping activities when they were unable to grasp what
was required of them [8].
In other work, families were used as units for participation
in the design of a board game [9]. The families presented
their opinions together, allowing the families to assist the
PLWD in communicating their thoughts. Including caregivers
when designing for PLWD is useful because they communicate
more easily with researchers. However, it is important to
recognize the distinction in the experiences of the PLWD and
the experiences of the caregiver. While the caregiver may have
empathy for the individual with dementia they care for, they
cannot have the same perspective. Relying solely on caregivers
to inform development can lead to missing important insights
on the part of the end user.
B. Adapting Prototype Methods for PLWD
Through trial and error, researchers have found ways of
adapting traditional prototyping methods to make them ac-
cessible to Persons Living With Dementia. The prototypes
themselves can be made more accessible by being explicit
and higher ﬁdelity in order to reduce the amount of ab-
stract thinking PLWD must engage in. Persons Living With
Dementia also can ﬁnd themselves unable to describe their
thoughts and feelings about a prototype to researchers. One
study found that in spite of moderate to severe cognitive
impairment, PLWD are able to engage in discussion about
photographs [8]. In this study, participants were asked to
use various paper “components” to make paper prototypes of
remotes. The participants found this task difﬁcult and were
unable to explain what their prototypes represented. Despite
the difﬁculties PLWD found in creating traditional protoypes
in this study, they found discussing photographs natural. While
the prototypes in the study were abstracted (the researchers
used paper to represent different pieces of a television remote),
photographs require very little abstraction on the part of PLWD
to make them interpretable. A later study used photographs
as a discussion tool for individuals with dementia to express
their feelings about their circumstances [10]. PLWD often ﬁnd
it difﬁcult to recall speciﬁc words to describe their situation.
The photographs helped prompt them and communicate their
state of mind to the researchers.
Another method that has been used to aid in vocabulary
recall is a modiﬁed semantic differential, “a scaling tool
which has been used frequently for measuring social attitudes,
particularly in the ﬁelds of linguistics and social psychology”
[11]. Semantic differentials usually involve subjects choosing
a number to represent a level of intensity for a particular
characteristic. A modiﬁed version has been used with PLWD,
allowing the individual with dementia to select from a variety
of adjectives on cards and place them on scales of ’a little
bit’, ’rather’, or ’very’ [9]. This simpliﬁed version of the scale
was interpretable to the PLWD and every participant was able
to use it in spite of varying levels of cognitive impairment.
These two methods present themselves as ways to facilitate
discussion about prototypes when PLWD ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
produce criticism unprompted.
C. Empathy as a Design Strategy
Designers and researchers are often able bodied and neu-
rotypical, and have not had experiences similar to those of
PLWD. “Young and healthy design team members often ﬁnd
it difﬁcult to collaborate with users who have different abilities
from them and live in difﬁcult situations” [10]. Empathy has
been posited as a strategy to bridge this gap in experiences.
“In empathic design, designers attempt to get closer to the
users’ experiences and circumstances” [10]. In empathic co-
design, one researcher is able to impart insights from meetings
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

with PLWD to the rest of their team. This is done through a
variety of exercises that encourages team members to consider
the perspective and experiences of PLWD. One activity ex-
plored is a role-play exercise where the design team re-enacts
scenes with some team members acting as individuals with
dementia. After the exercise there was discussion to encourage
participants to relate the role-play to their own experiences,
particularly emotions associated with the frustrations of living
with dementia.
A project detailing the design of assistive technology for
PLWD highlighted the utility of empathy on the part of
designers [12]. A few designers had consistent contact with
PLWD and deliberated with them over design choices. This
relationship fostered empathy in the “point of contact” for
the individuals with dementia and a deeper understanding of
their life experiences. Empathy lends itself well to personally
tailored designs. While not always feasible, tailoring designs
speciﬁcally for individuals can be empowering for PLWD.
Researchers personally tailored two tracking devices to help
participants’ families locate them should they become lost.
One participant remarked “they did not want to have to
carry a device that made them ’feel disabled’” [12]. This
sentiment reﬂects the importance of empathy in preserving the
personhood and dignity of Persons Living With Dementia.
Another method to help researchers understand the lives
of PLWD is the “diary interview method,” where participants
keep a diary that outlines their daily activities for a period of
time. While this method would be impractical for individuals
with advanced dementia, it can be an effective way to bridge
the gap between the experiences of researchers, designers, and
PLWD. One project involved the collection of diary interviews
with PLWD involved in dementia activism [13]. In the diaries,
participants explained what was and wasn’t difﬁcult for them
and expressed feelings of frustration and helplessness. They
were able to do so at their own pace, encouraged to record their
thoughts daily but not required to. The easy-going nature of
this method lends itself well to PLWD who become frustrated
with their inability to express themselves in conversation. “The
diary interview method, when modiﬁed, can engage people
with dementia as equal partners in the data-gathering process”
[13], and gathering qualitative data on the lives of PLWD in
this manner could provide researchers with signiﬁcant insights.
III.
INSIGHTS FROM PREVIOUS WORK
Previous collaborations between Bruy`ere Research Institute
and Hospital and Carleton University have focused on the de-
velopment of technology to longitudinally assess the cognitive
decline of PLWD. While formal User Experience Methods
were not used, insights into how PLWD interact with interfaces
were gleaned.
A. Word Search and Sudoku Computer Games
We designed two simple computer games to measure the
cognitive impairment of PLWD. The ﬁrst game was a word
search game, shown in Figure 1. The second was a sudoku
game, shown in Figure 2 [14].
Eleven participants played the games over a six month
period and their results for speed, performance, errors, and
hints used were measured and tabulated. For the word search
game, the user interface was shown on a computer screen and
users interacted with the game using a mouse and clicking
to highlight letters. Some users understood the game easily,
likely because of the similarity to physical pen and paper
word search games they have experienced for many years.
Some participants had difﬁculty associating the movements
they made with their mouse to the movement of the cursor
on the screen. Clicking the mouse was not always cognitively
associated with the ability to select a letter on the screen. Some
additionally felt the need or desire to watch their hand, which
led them to ignore the screen.
Figure 1. The word search game interface [14].
Figure 2. The sudoku game interface [14].
Particpants’ prior experience with sudoku was more limited
than their experience with word search type games. The visual
interface in the game was also dissimilar to what you might
encounter in the physical world. As a result, they demonstrated
less interest and had less success playing it. In addition, the
interface was signiﬁcantly more complex. Participants not only
had to navigate to the cell they wanted to interact with and
click on it to engage with it, they also needed to use a
keyboard to enter the numerical value they wanted to use and
hit enter to conﬁrm the value they chose. In spite of these
challenges, some participants were able to successfully play
the game. Relabeling keys, such as the “enter” key, helped
some participants better understand how to use the keyboard
in relation to the game.
B. Wack-a-mole Tablet Game
In another study, we presented twelve PLWD with a
whack-a-mole game and their performance was measured “to
determine the potential for a game-based instrument to provide
an indication of cognitive change and to study the suitability
of game-based techniques with patients” [15]. Based on our
prior work, we chose wack-a-mole, a game that users would
be likely to have early life experiences with. We also chose a
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 3. The whack-a-mole game interface [15].
touch-screen interface, as users in our previous work had strug-
gled with the mouse and keyboard setup. Visually, the interface
was similar to what participants may have seen at fairgrounds
in their childhood, with near photographic renderings of the
elements, shown in Figure 3.
To add some additional challenge, we added “bunnies” to
the game, which participants were supposed to avoid hitting.
It has been conventionally accepted that PLWD do not learn
new information because of impairments to episodic memory,
however, the results of the study indicate that PLWD can
learn an interface and a game. Several participants’ results
improved not only within sessions but also between weekly
sessions. “Analysis of the results indicates that they improve
their play over the ﬁrst few weeks and then eventually are able
to achieve a steady level of play. This indicates that participants
are showing an ability to learn the game,“ and its interface [15].
The participants even understood that they should hit the moles
and avoid hitting the bunnies. The possibility that PLWD can
learn an interface over time is a hopeful one, suggesting that
even if an interface initially presents a struggle to users with
dementia it may eventually be learned.
C. Balance and Cognitive Decline
We have also done work using more traditional digital
interfaces not speciﬁcally designed for PLWD. In a study done
using the Biodex Balance SystemTMshown in Figure 4, we
tracked the balance of older adults [16]. The Biodex Balance
SystemTMwas designed with generally physically and mentally
well users in mind. For example, it is used to evaluate the
balance of high performance athletes after a concussion. The
system’s interface consists of a plate participants stand on and
a screen that presents the participant with information on their
body position and motion using a dot representing their centre
of pressure overlaid on a target.
Users were positioned so that the dot aligns with the center
of the target and then asked not to move and to keep the
dot at the center of the target. Because the participants had
dementia, “reminding them to keep their feet in exactly the
same position [was] not always effective” [16], and they would
often shift their position even between the initial positioning
and the actual test. This indicates that they may not have made
the connection between the movement of the dot on the screen
and their shifting of their centre of pressure, similar to how
some users playing the word search game did not understand
Figure 4. The Biodex Balance SystemTM[16]
the association between the movement of their mouse and the
movement of the cursor on the screen. A modiﬁed interface
for the balance system may have helped the participants stay
in place and resulted in more accurate readings. For instance,
outlines of feet on the board may have helped remind PLWD
that they were not to move their feet. More research in this area
is required to know how best this interface could be adapted.
D. Nighttime Wandering
Our most recent effort has been the design and testing of
a system to aid in the reduction of nighttime wandering and
its impacts. Nighttime wandering is a common expression of
dementia symptoms in those with advanced cognitive decline.
It consists of the PLWD awakening at night and ﬁnding them-
selves disoriented, sometimes leading them to leave the home
[17][18]. Our smart home solution consisted of a pressure mat
embedded in the bed of the participant which is linked to a
smart speaker and smart lights. This is a marked break from
previous interfaces used in studies by PLWD, which have been
much more conventional, using a screen that users interact
with. Our interface for this project has no explicit interface
for users to interact with, it instead reacts to activities that
users might not instinctively understand to be connected to an
interface.
When the participant got out of bed at night, the pressure
mat in their bed would trigger a series of lights leading to
the bathroom, “as bathroom need is typically the cause for
wakening during the night hours” [17][18]. If the participants
strayed away further into another room an audio message
was triggered telling the participant that it is nighttime and
they should return to their bed. The message was typically
in the voice of caregivers, a choice made after consulting
families about what would suit them best. Fifteen individuals
participated in the study, dyads consisting of a Person Living
With Dementia and a caretaker. Because of the advanced nature
of the cognitive decline of individuals who exhibit nighttime
wandering behavior, it is possible that they interpreted the
message as actually being their caregiver speaking. We found
this system effective both in convincing the PLWD to return
to bed and in alleviating the stress caregivers felt about the
nighttime wandering of their loved ones. Future work could
explore how variations in the design of the audio and light
interfaces change the efﬁcacity of the system.
IV.
FRAMEWORK FOR UXD FOR PLWD
A. “Rules of thumb” for PLWD-Friendly Interfaces
Heuristics for the design of PLWD-Friendly interfaces can
be drawn from expert knowledge on the condition, as well as
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

previous work on interfaces from PLWD. Outlines on how user
interfaces should be adapted based on expert knowledge of the
condition have been created. The initial impacts of dementia
are on the cognitive domains such as memory, orientation, and
abstract thinking, however more advanced forms of dementia
also affect visuo-spatial skills [19]. These outlines emphasize
the difﬁculty in designing “one size ﬁts all” interfaces, and
the importance of making solutions that can be scaled to ﬁt
the progressive nature of dementia [20]. As their dementia
progresses, the individual may need adjustments made to suit
their more limited abilities [21]. While any interface designed
for PLWD should be user tested, we have compiled a list of
“rules of thumb” to use in initial designs for PLWD:
•
Large font size
As a general rule, larger font sizes are easier to read,
although “care should be taken that the font is not
increased to the point where scrollable windows are
required” [19].
•
Clear Navigation
PLWD are easily disoriented and may be lost trying to
navigate scrollable windows and other interfaces. The
location of the user within the structure of a product
should be clear at all times.
•
Reduce hidden affordances
PLWD often have difﬁculty associating elements with
actions that can be taken. For instance, PLWD found
using the touch-screen we used for the wack-a-mole
game easier than the mouse and keyboard with the
word search game, in part because they had difﬁculty
associating the movements of their mouse with the
movement of the cursor on the screen. Interfaces
should be designed in a way that PLWD understand
how they can interact with what they see.
•
Accommodate limited motor skills
Complex motor movements can also be difﬁcult for
PLWD, so interfaces that do not require advanced
motor skill are preferable. In our work using the
Biodex Balance SystemTMwe asked participants not
to move, which is a motor skill they found difﬁcult.
While this may have been due in part to memory,
discomfort with maintaining their position may also
have played a role [22] [23].
•
Avoid the need for information recall
Problems with short term memory can make informa-
tion recall difﬁcult for PLWD. Reiterating information
across multiple parts of the interface or separating it
into smaller, easier to remember chunks, are possible
alternatives [20].
•
Provide Hints
In our prior work with PLWD, we found the inclusion
of a hint function to be useful to PLWD. Providing
them with information when confused is important.
PLWD should always have some form of support
system to help them orient themselves [20]. The
simple hints we provided in the word search game
were used, but those given in the sudoku game were
largely ignored. It is possible that the display method
used in the sudoku game was too complex and so users
did not understand that hints were available.
•
Avoid Iconography
PLWD struggle with abstract thinking. Using icons
to indicate important information can be problematic
because PLWD may not associate it with what it
indicates correctly, and may not learn the association
over time.
Overall, interfaces for PLWD should be characterizable as
“structured,” and “simple” [24].
B. Prototyping and Iterative Design
The rules above cannot replace testing and iterative design,
where designers and engineers engage with stakeholders dur-
ing the development of a product. The particulars of dementia
mean that the best designs for PLWD may be designs that
designers ﬁnd counter-intuitive. These may only be discovered
through the testing of a wide variety of possibilities [25]. This
necessitates the involvement of PLWD in the iterative design
process. The adapted prototyping methods discussed above
may be appropriate for some populations with dementia. In
the case of severe dementia, teams may need an alternative
way to connect with their end user. Teams could consult
with less impaired PLWD to gain an understanding of how
they view and interact with the world. Alternatively, family
caregivers can be consulted or aid PLWD in communicating
with researchers, as discussed in Best Practices. Whatever the
method, it is crucial that individuals with dementia are involved
in the design process when they are the ultimate end users of
any piece of technology.
V.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
While it can be difﬁcult, PLWD can be integrated into the
UXD process. By using adapted prototyping methods, design
heuristics, and involving caregivers in discussions, designers
and researchers can gain insights into the lives of PLWD and
how the products they are creating can best serve them. Our
past work with PLWD has highlighted the difﬁculties they
encounter when interacting with interfaces the cognitively able
would consider obvious. Limitations in memory, orientation,
and abstract thinking are all barriers for PLWD when trying
to use interfaces. The future of the AGE-WELL SAM3 col-
laboration will include further work on non-traditional visual
user interfaces, interfaces in non-visual modalities such as
audio interfaces, and multi-modal interfaces such as the one
implemented in our nighttime wandering project. The limited
work done in these areas will necessitate further research into
how non-traditional interfaces can be made less abstract and
more interpretable to PLWD to allow communication of richer
and perhaps more complex supportive cues and messages.
Testing interfaces in the prototype stage is crucial to
identifying problems PLWD encounter while using them. By
using the framework outlined in this paper, we will be able
to make more stringent efforts at accessible and adaptable
technological solutions for individuals living with dementia.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the AGE-WELL NCE
Inc and National Innovation hub programs (Platform Project
Program, AW-PP2019-PP5) and by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC) Discovery Grant.
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

REFERENCES
[1]
K. J. Gilhooly et al., “A meta-review of stress, coping and interventions
in dementia and dementia caregiving,” BMC Geriatrics, vol. 16, no. 1,
May 2016, p. 106.
[2]
N. Farina et al., “Factors associated with the quality of life of family
carers of people with dementia: A systematic review,” Alzheimer’s &
Dementia, vol. 13, no. 5, 2017, pp. 572 – 581.
[3]
M. Cash, “Assistive technology and people with dementia,” Reviews
in Clinical Gerontology; Cambridge, vol. 13, no. 4, Nov. 2003, pp.
313–319.
[4]
D. J. Cook, M. Schmitter-Edgecombe, L. Jonsson, and A. V. Morant,
“Technology-Enabled Assessment of Functional Health,” IEEE Reviews
in Biomedical Engineering, vol. 12, 2019, pp. 319–332.
[5]
C. Ancient and A. Good, “Considering People Living with Dementia
When Designing Interfaces,” in Design, User Experience, and Usability.
User Experience Design Practice, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, A. Marcus, Ed.
Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2014, pp. 113–123.
[6]
D. Norman, “The way i see it - systems thinking: a product is more
than the product.” Interactions, vol. 16, 09 2009, pp. 52–54.
[7]
E. Jokisuu, P. M. Langdon, and P. J. Clarkson, “A Framework for Study-
ing Cognitive Impairment to Inform Inclusive Design,” in Designing
Inclusive Systems, P. Langdon, J. Clarkson, P. Robinson, J. Lazar, and
A. Heylighen, Eds.
London: Springer, 2012, pp. 115–124.
[8]
L. M. Muriana and H. Hornung, “Towards Participatory Prototyping
with Older Adults with and Without Cognitive Impairment: Challenges
and Lessons Learned,” in Human-Computer Interaction - INTERACT
2017, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, R. Bernhaupt, G. Dalvi,
A. Joshi, D. K. Balkrishan, J. O’Neill, and M. Winckler, Eds.
Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 344–363.
[9]
R. M. Branco, J. Quental, and O. Ribeiro, “Personalised participation:
an approach to involve people with dementia and their families in a
participatory design project,” CoDesign, vol. 13, no. 2, Apr. 2017, pp.
127–143.
[10]
W. Smeenk, J. Sturm, and B. Eggen, “Empathic handover: how would
you feel? Handing over dementia experiences and feelings in empathic
co-design,” CoDesign, vol. 14, no. 4, Oct. 2018, pp. 259–274.
[11]
J. Al-Hindawe, “Considerations when constructing a semantic differen-
tial scale,” La Trobe papers in linguistics 9, no.7, 1996, pp. 1–9.
[12]
S. Lindsay et al., “Empathy, participatory design and people with
dementia,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’12. Austin, Texas, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, May 2012, pp. 521–530.
[13]
R. Bartlett, “Modifying the Diary Interview Method to Research the
Lives of People With Dementia,” Qualitative Health Research, vol. 22,
no. 12, Dec. 2012, pp. 1717–1726.
[14]
B. Wallace, R. Goubran, F. Knoefel, M. Petriu, and A. McAvoy, “Design
of games for measurement of cognitive impairment,” in IEEE-EMBS
International Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI).
Valencia, Spain: IEEE, Jun. 2014, pp. 117–120.
[15]
B. Wallace, F. Knoefel, R. Goubran, P. Masson, A. Baker, B. Allard,
V. Guana, and E. Stroulia, “Detecting cognitive ability changes in pa-
tients with moderate dementia using a modiﬁed “whack-a-mole” game,”
IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 67, no. 7,
Jul. 2018, pp. 1521–1534.
[16]
L. Ault et al., “Preliminary Results from Longitudinal Balance As-
sessment for Older Adults with Cognitive Decline,” in 2019 IEEE
International Symposium on Medical Measurements and Applications
(MeMeA), Jun. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[17]
L. Ault, R. Goubran, B. Wallace, H. Lowden, and F. Knoefel, “Smart
home technology solution for night-time wandering in persons with
dementia,” Journal of Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies Engi-
neering, vol. 7, 2020, pp. 1–8.
[18]
B. Wallace, T. N. E. Harake, R. Goubran, N. Valech, and F. Knoefel,
“Preliminary results for measurement and classiﬁcation of overnight
wandering by dementia patient using multi-sensors,” in 2018 IEEE
International Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference
(I2MTC), May 2018, pp. 1–6.
[19]
C. Ancient and A. Good, “Issues with Designing Dementia-Friendly
Interfaces,” in HCI International 2013 - Posters’ Extended Abstracts, ser.
Communications in Computer and Information Science, C. Stephanidis,
Ed.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2013, pp. 192–196.
[20]
P. Gregor, A. F. Newell, and M. Zajicek, “Designing for dynamic
diversity: Interfaces for older people,” in Proceedings of the Fifth
International ACM conference on Assistive Technologies, Jul. 2002,
pp. 151–156.
[21]
A. Astell, Using Technology in Dementia Care : a Guide to Technology
Solutions for Everyday Living.
London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers,
2019.
[22]
A. Kluger et al., “Patterns of motor impairment in normal aging,
mild cognitive decline, and early alzheimer’disease,” The Journals of
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences,
vol. 52, no. 1, 1997, pp. 28–39.
[23]
A. Seelye et al., “Computer mouse movement patterns: A potential
marker of mild cognitive impairment,” Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Di-
agnosis, Assessment & Disease Monitoring, vol. 1, no. 4, 2015, pp.
472–480.
[24]
C. Tamanini, M. Majewski, A. Wieland, C. Schlehuber, and F. Kamieth,
“Graphical User Interface for an Elderly Person with Dementia,” in Con-
structing Ambient Intelligence, ser. Communications in Computer and
Information Science, R. Wichert, K. Van Laerhoven, and J. Gelissen,
Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2012, pp. 157–161.
[25]
L.-H. Chen and Y.-C. Liu, “Affordance and Intuitive Interface Design
for Elder Users with Dementia,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 60, 2017, pp.
470–475.
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

