 
 
Assessing Electronic Health Records: Are Basic Assumptions in “Health  
Technology Assessment” Useful?   
 
Anne Granstrøm Ekeland 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Norwegian Centre for e-health research 
Tromsø, Norway 
E-mail: anne.granstrom.ekeland@telemed.no 
 
 
Abstract—The use of Health Technology Assessment (HTA) in 
the field of information and communication technologies (ICT) 
is limited. The Norwegian health authorities and international 
networks call for steps to strengthen its use to support the 
development of good e-health services. Randomized controlled 
trials (RCT) are the gold standard approach in case studies in 
HTA and scholars have raised questions concerning their 
relevance in e-health assessments. Failure of basic philosophical 
assumptions inherent in RCT to reflect empirical features of e-
health is one explanation. In a sociotechnical perspective, this 
paper explores empirical features of “Common Implementation 
of Clinical Systems” (FIKS), a large-scale electronic health 
record program in North Norway. Drawing on documents, 
information and presentations over a 4 year period, it discusses 
how empirical features correspond to assumptions of RCT. Also 
considering scientific literature from assessments of electronic 
records, complimentary assumptions are presented. The 
objective is to contribute to a knowledge base for improving 
HTA of ICT. Results show that RCT assumptions of a stable 
world, fixed interventions and controlled implementation 
processes differed from empirical processes. Hence, RCT 
approaches fail to address important features of the program 
and produce knowledge that fully demonstrate (causes of) 
empirical benefits or pitfalls. The paper briefly considers 
complementary 
assessment 
perspectives. 
Embedding 
assumptions of a world in flux where social, technical and 
clinical entities influence each other in dynamic processes 
should increase the relevance of HTA of ICT, and affect real 
time developments. Further exploration of assumptions that 
encourage participatory and process assessment approaches is 
timely.  
Keywords- 
Health 
Technology 
Assessment 
(HTA); 
challenging assumptions, approaches and methods; programs of 
electronic 
health 
records; 
assumptions 
in 
constructive 
assessments  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Background  
The paper is positioned within a sociotechnical perspective 
and seeks to produce insights into the coherence between 
assumptions in health technology assessment (HTA) and the 
practices that are assessed. The need for assessments of 
information and communication technology (ICT) programs 
have been strongly expressed for instance by The parliament 
in United Kingdom (UK) in a summary of the National 
Health Service (NHS) information technology (IT) program. 
“The original objective was to ensure every NHS patient had 
an individual electronic care record which could be rapidly 
transmitted between different parts of the NHS, in order to 
make accurate patient records available to NHS staff at all 
times. This intention has proved beyond the capacity of the 
department to deliver and the department is no longer 
delivering a universal system. Implementation of alternative 
up-to-date IT systems has fallen significantly behind 
schedule and costs have escalated” [1]. 
Health Technology Assessment is expected to produce 
knowledge to help decide on and procure technology and 
services that are accurate, cost effective and with expected 
value and quality [2]. For those purposes, the Norwegian 
health authorities and international scientific networks for the 
conduct of HTA call for steps to strengthen its use in the field 
of ICT. As part of this, the Northern Norwegian Health 
Authorities (NNHA) in 2016 funded a three-year project for 
developing and adapting HTA approaches and tools. The 
project builds upon the White paper to the Storting: one 
patient – one record [3]. This paper is part of the project.  
The need for adapting and developing assessments for the 
field of e-health is expressed in several scientific 
publications, some of them referred to in section C below. A 
common idea is that established assessments have 
weaknesses in that they produce less relevant and timely 
knowledge. In this paper, weaknesses connected to basic 
philosophical assumptions in HTA are addressed. More 
specifically, those expressed in the gold standard approach of 
Randomised Controlled Trials (RCT) and related to 
development of electronic health records (EHR) in North 
Norway.  
The research question is how assumptions of RCT are 
amenable to empirical features of “Common Implementation 
of Clinical Systems” (in Norwegian an acronym, FIKS), a 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

large-scale program for developing and implementing a new 
EHR [4, 5]. The paper also briefly comments on approaches 
and methods of RCT, relying on equal assumptions. FIKS 
started in 2012 and is scheduled to last through 2016. It lies 
within the jurisdiction of the NNHA in North Norway. One 
common electronic patient record for all hospitals in the 
northern region of Norway is a goal. No pre-implementation 
evaluation has been carried out. 
The objective of the paper is to contribute to a knowledge 
base for addressing weaknesses of HTA of ICT and to briefly 
point to alternative assumptions which might strengthen its 
use for the benefit of patients, health professionals, policy 
makers, leaders and industry.  
In sections B and C to follow, HTA, its assumptions and 
weaknesses are presented. In section II an account of FIKS is 
given, followed by methods and materials of the 
investigation. The results and discussion section is divided in 
three sections each addressing different assumptions in RCT: 
a singular reality (context), a clear definition of the 
intervention and a controlled implementation process. 
Section 
IV 
points 
to 
approaches 
and 
methods 
accommodating different assumptions: a reality in flux, and 
interventions 
and 
implementation 
as 
ongoing 
socio/technical/medical achievements. In conclusion, the 
paper argues that exploring such assumptions should 
strengthen the relevance of HTA methodology for e-health.  
B. Health Technology Assessment (HTA) and RCT 
HTA is a research field defined as “the systematic 
evaluation of the properties and effects of a health 
technology, addressing the direct and intended effects of this 
technology, as well as its indirect and unintended 
consequences, and aimed mainly at informing decision 
making regarding health technologies. HTA is conducted by 
interdisciplinary 
groups 
that 
use 
explicit 
analytical 
frameworks drawing on a variety of methods [6].”  
The purpose of HTA is to establish a decision basis for the 
procurement of the right health technologies [7]. The 
European network for HTA, EUnetHTA justifies the research 
field as follows: “Health care decision making requires the 
right evidence at the right time.  Every day there are new 
health technologies available that can improve patient 
outcomes and refine health system efficiency.  HTA is a tool 
to review technologies and provide evidence of the value 
these technologies can deliver to patients and their families, 
health system stakeholders, and to society more broadly [6].” 
Health technologies comprise “Diagnostic and treatment 
methods, medical equipment, pharmaceuticals, rehabilitation 
and prevention methods, but also organisational and support 
systems used to deliver healthcare” [8]. The electronic patient 
record is a type of system that not only comprises of 
technology, but also involves vulnerable information, social 
interactions, relationships, and competencies among users 
(e.g. doctors, nurses, patients) as well as organizational 
structures, routines and coordination components. 
In HTA, different products have been developed to support 
knowledge-based decisions in health care, such as systematic 
reviews, meta-analyses, modelling and assessments of new 
medical methods. All tools draw on basic philosophical 
assumptions and form a coherent approach. The gold 
standard tool in case assessments are Randomised Controlled 
Trials (RCT). RCT is a type of scientific (often medical) 
experiment, where the people being studied are randomly 
allocated to one or other of the different treatments or 
interventions under study. RCTs are often used to test the 
efficacy or effectiveness of various types of medical 
interventions. The interventions are assumed to be clearly 
defined and demarcated and may provide evidence for 
adverse effects, such as drug reactions.  
C. Assumptions and Weaknesses 
Accurate assumptions to guide approaches is imperative 
for the production of useful knowledge to the confidence of 
different stakeholder groups. 
A basic assumption underlying an RCT is that of a singular 
reality amenable to objective scientific measurement to 
provide universal evidence for outcome of specified 
interventions. A relatively stable situation and causal 
variables and linkages has to be identified in order to be able 
to generalize and repeat outcome. One challenge for applying 
RCT for ICT and e-health programs is that empirical 
situations in general are more messy and in flux [9].  
In their assessment of electronic health records in the 
National Health Services (NHS) IT program in United 
Kingdom, Greenhalgh and colleagues addressed this 
challenge. They asserted that e-health initiatives occur in 
complex and fast moving socio-political arenas. Evidence is 
produced by, and fed back into a political process of deciding 
priorities and allocate resources to pursue them [10]. 
Interpreting practice in context can therefore be an alternative 
to the production of evidence for universal truths in 
controlled experiments as recommended in RCT.  
A second assumption underlying RCT is that of a clear 
demarcation and definition of the intervention, including a 
fixed start and endpoint. In ICT programs, this can be 
difficult to achieve given the fast-paced technological 
development and the seemingly endless range of possibilities 
for novel service delivery platforms. It normally takes years 
to accomplish an RCT and this is described as the most 
formidable challenge threatening to upset the very promise of 
potential solutions: The rate of emerging technologies and 
services is far outpacing the field’s capacity to demonstrate 
the conceptual or empirical benefits [11].  
A third challenge described is pressure to roll out new ICT 
services before pilots are fully evaluated. Implementation is 
hence assumed to be a linear operation where readymade 
technological applications are “rolled out” to an organization 
and can be objectively assessed. Human interaction might be 
considered as an obstacle. The alternative is proposals to 
address person-to-person models to understand how 
collegiate and interpersonal elements of care delivery can be 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

better embodied in assessments and as such brought to 
consciousness for influencing development [12]. In design, 
the influential openEHR standard represents a model driven 
approach allowing clinical personnel to be involved in 
development processes [4]. OpenEHR is a virtual community 
working on interoperability and computability. Its main focus 
is electronic patient records (EHRs) and systems [13]. Other 
innovation and design philosophies/practices such as “Design 
thinking” involve future thinking and creativity as main 
assumptions behind innovation [14].  
The three challenges and assumptions behind them are 
interconnected. It seems that basic assumptions and 
subsequent approaches of RCTs could fail as guiding 
principles for addressing all important aspects that affect the 
relevance of ICT. Evidence for positive or negative effects 
based upon erroneous assumptions might support both over 
optimist and over pessimist expectations for future 
development.  
In the rest of the paper, steps to address these challenges 
connected to the FIKS program are discussed. The research 
question is specified and discussed in three parts: How are 
assumptions about the reality, the intervention, the process of 
implementation and subsequent approaches and methods of 
RCT, amenable to empirical features of FIKS? Based upon 
scientific literature, complementary assumptions capable of 
improving HTA for ICT are presented. 
II. 
THE FIKS PROGRAM, METHODS AND MATIERALS 
A. FIKS 
FIKS is a large-scale program for developing and 
implementing a new electronic health record system, running 
from 2012 through 2016. The costs are estimated to EUR 90 
million and the vendor (DIPS) is the largest EHR vendor in 
Norway [4]. The aim is to introduce a single electronic patient 
record at the eleven North Norwegian hospitals, including 
radiology, lab, pathology and electronic requisition of 
laboratory services for general practices in the region [15]. 
An official information sheet of FIKS is published in English 
[5]. 
Additional 
description 
of 
the 
program 
and 
implementation is provided in the results and discussion 
sections. 
B. Methods and Materials 
The paper is based upon a mixed data material consisting 
of documents, web sites, information from advisors and 
presentations of the FIKS program to different actors in the 
hospitals in North Norway over a period of 4 years, from 
2012 to February 2016. In addition, document studies of 
papers and reports from two large scale evaluation and 
assessment projects in UK connected to the National Health 
Services (NHS) ICT program were studied:  “The UK 
Summary Care Record Programme” [10] and “Healthcare 
Electronic Records in Organisations” [16]. A number of 
scientific papers were recommended in publications from the 
two programs with a focus on assessment traditions. These 
are reflected both in the background and discussion sections. 
Triangulation is a social science technique that facilitates 
validation of data through cross verification from two or more 
sources [17]. In particular, it refers to the application and 
combination of several research methods in the study of the 
same phenomenon. Such techniques were applied to combine 
information from the multiple sources refined into useable 
assemblages. These culminated to form recognizable 
examples for the discussion of assumptions and approaches. 
The discussion sections also draw on arguments developed 
with the support of the MethoTelemed team, whose 
contribution is acknowledged [18].   
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Assumption one: A Singular Reality Amenable to 
Scientific Measurement and Control  
This section will substantiate that the context of FIKS and 
the program itself can be understood in terms of complexity, 
multiplicity and dynamism. To single out a clear distinction 
between the context and the program is also not a 
straightforward task. Relatively stable variables depicting the 
reality, or context, will, however also be distinguished and 
commented. This is one premise in RCT for defining external 
and internal causal variables and linkages in order to be able 
to repeat outcome in controlled ways.  
The context of FIKS is a number of mutually dependent 
actors, representing a myriad of interests trying to accomplish 
a unified vision. This is documented in the web page 
informing that the FIKS project implements the new systems 
in close cooperation with health authorities, Health Nord ICT 
(An organization established by the Regional Health 
Authorities designated to implement ICT services) and the 
various system suppliers. 
In 
addition, 
the 
different 
hospitals 
where 
the 
implementation occurs, represent different socio-political 
and institutional contexts. The context is therefore complex, 
interconnected and politicized, as health political decisions 
affect resources necessary to add affordances of, and 
accommodation of the record. Concerning affordances, the 
web page of FIKS informs that the next generation patient 
record is under development and is tested in the region. Some 
upcoming milestones in 2016 on the path to one common 
medical record are listed:  
 
One common medical record at the hospitals in 
Hammerfest and Kirkenes cities 
 
University Hospital North Norway employs 
regional radiology solutions including one 
common radiology archive 
 
The hospitals in Helgeland, Mo I Rana, Mosjøen 
and Sandnessjøen employ one common medical 
record (DIPS) [5] 
    This information tells us that both the contexts and the 
intervention consist of multiple, developing and mutually 
dependent components.  
Also the historical process accounts for a dynamic and 
inter-woven character of the context and intervention. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Already in 2011, necessary contracts for the program were 
signed, showing the different industrial actors involved. 
These are some of the milestones presented on the web page: 
2011 
 
Helse Nord Regional Trust signed a contract with 
Sectra 
 
Helse Nord Regional Trust signed a contract with 
Tieto 
 
Helse Nord Regional Trust signed a contract with 
DIPS 
2013 
 
Helse Nord Trust signed a contract with 
CompuGroup Medical Norge (CGM) 
 
Helse Nord Trust signed a contract with Infodoc 
 
Merging of pathology systems in two major 
hospitals 
2015 
 
Helse Nord Trust signed a contract with Hove 
Medical Systems [5] 
The assumptions for the conduct of an RCT, a controlled, 
measurable and relatively stable reality, are not reflected in 
the empirical features of the context/intervention. Rather, the 
multiple and mutually dependent actors and interests, depict 
a reality and situation under development and flux, depending 
on negotiations, shifting political conditions and resources.  
B. Assumption Two: A Clear Demarcation and Definition 
of the Intervention 
On the web page as well as the Facebook page, the goal 
of FIKS is described as an ambition that the people of the 
north will have their clinical history assembled in one patient 
record and that the practice of sending records between 
hospitals will end. An ambition refers to a work process, and 
not to a defined and fixed intervention as assumed in RCT. 
The notion rather refers to assumptions of a creative process 
like in “Design Thinking”. One of the first features of the 
intervention was described in 2013: “Moving the databases 
of the hospitals in Helse Nord to one central common 
database, is an important condition for the implementation of 
common patient administration and treatment systems and 
one common electronic record for the individual hospitals in 
North Norway.”[5]  
New ingredients were added to the service. Events were 
planned as an ongoing deployment process and the program 
was described in terms of technical/operational events: 
 
Connection of Narvik medical center against 
Health Nords regional solution for electronic 
requisitioning of Laboratory Services 11/25/2015 
 
Connection of Leirfjord medical office against 
Health Nord regional solution for electronic 
requisitioning of Laboratory services 11/25/2015 
 
Connection of Nordreisa medical office against 
Health Nords regional solution for electronic 
requisitioning of Laboratory Services 11/24/2015 
 
Connection of Træna medical office against Health 
Nords regional solution for electronic 
requisitioning of Laboratory Services  11/24/2015 
 
Connection of Skjervøy medical office against 
Health Nords regional solution for electronic 
requisitioning of Laboratory services[19]  
     By distinguishing events this way, the grounds are laid out 
for RCT of each part of the process, but the resources needed 
for accomplishing such an endeavor would be vast. There are 
also interconnections between the parts and therefore 
difficult to single out as clearly demarcated interventions. 
C. Assumption Three: Implementation as a Linear and 
Controlled Operation  
   The described pressure to roll out new ICT services 
before pilots are fully evaluated involves an assumption that 
implementation is a linear, top down and controlled process 
that can be distinguished from context and socio-political or 
human processes. The description of the implementation of 
FIKS, however, clearly points to an ongoing and changing 
process where different components should be aligned. This 
is how it is expressed on Facebook: The FIKS program in 
Helse Nord consists of six projects intended to develop and 
implement joint electronic record systems at the hospitals in 
Northern Norway: 
 
- One joint electronic record (DIPS) 
- New features of the electronic record (DIPS Arena) 
- Laboratory Information System 
- Radiology Systems (“Sectra”, “RIS” and “PACS”) 
- Joint pathology system in Tromsø and Bodø 
- Electronic requisition of laboratory services[19] 
In 2011 DIPS decided to use the OpenEHR framework for 
developing its next generation EHR for the hospital market 
[4]. This involves negotiations on development directions. 
The role of interaction between different participants in the 
process is a collegial and interpersonal process, enacted as 
different meetings for dialogue and negotiations:  
 
11.26.2015: Workshop (EPR Development): Theater 
nurse meeting - Planning and booking DIPS Arena 
 
11.26.2015: Workshop (EPR Development): Theater 
nurse meeting - meeting with clinicians 
 
11/26/2015: Workshop (EPR Development): Decisions 
in psychiatry - new module in DIPS Arena 
 
11/12/2015: Operation Planning (EPR Development): 
Meeting with clinicians at University Hospital of North 
Norway [5] 
This process adds to the formerly documented process of 
negotiating contracts with producers and vendors. 
FIKS also designates and educates super users, and state 
that the competencies of employees are crucial for the 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

development of good record systems: “Close to 190 super 
users at Nordlandssykehuset are ready to be educated on use 
and routines of the new electronic record and become leading 
DIPS experts [5].   
The description of the process of implementation shows a 
multitude of inter-related operational, interactional and 
relational processes. A linear, pre-defined and controlled 
“roll-out” process is not present, as assumed for RCT.  
D. Summary and discussion 
Among challenges in applying a HTA assessment 
framework for the study of an electronic patient record, is that 
HTA tools form a coherent approach and draw on common 
basic assumptions, which differ from empirical features. The 
basic assumptions of a stable reality amenable to objective 
measurement, a defined intervention and an operational and 
linear implementation process fails to address the empirical 
features described. This issue has been discussed in HTA, 
related to innovation research. Two different models or 
approaches are described in the core model (reference 20, 
page 15). “The linear diffusion model perceives new 
technology as an external stable entity that is brought to a 
(health care) system and induces change. A competing 
paradigm, the translation model, presumes that technology 
undergoes change in the environment it is brought into. 
Hence the final impact will not depend on the original 
technology only” [20]. In the case of FIKS, both the 
technology, the health care setting and the implementation 
process seem to be in a state of mutual translation. The 
empirical features of the applications and services connected 
with the record are highly diverse and constantly in flux 
within shifting social and organisational contexts. 
Challenges were connected to discrepancies between 
assumptions and features of the context or “reality” within 
which the electronic record is embedded, the intervention 
itself and the implementation process. In the next section,   
approaches that build upon other assumptions are addressed. 
IV. 
COMPLIMENTARY ASSUMPTIONS - THE 
CONSTRUCTIVIST UMBRELLA 
Challenges concerning the validity of evidence in the face 
of involvement of different stakeholders have been 
articulated within the HTA tradition, which is looking to 
overcome such challenges. One of the tools of HTA in that 
respect is consensus conferences with different stakeholders 
[21]. Such conferences have been subject to investigations 
and the following assertion strengthen the argument of a 
shifting social reality and the need to consider social relations 
as drivers for both intended and unintended outcome:  
“Consensus development programs are not immune to the 
economic, political, and social forces that often serve as 
barriers 
or 
threats 
to 
evidence-based 
processes. 
Organizations 
that 
sponsor 
consensus 
development 
conferences may do so because they have certain 
expectations for the findings of these processes, and may find 
themselves at odds with evidence-based findings. Other 
stakeholders, including from industry, biomedical research 
institutions, 
health professions, patient groups, and 
politicians seeking to align themselves with certain groups, 
may seek to pressure consensus development panelists or 
even denounce a panel’s findings in order to render desired 
results, the evidence notwithstanding.” (Goodman 2004:49) 
[22]  
The citation points to the importance of addressing 
social/political interests and processes to understand the way 
evidence can be produced and affect results of ICT use in 
health services.   
In contrast to assumptions in RCT about a relatively stable 
and objective reality, a fixed intervention and a linear and 
controlled implementation process, constructivist traditions 
assume flux. This implies a reality or context under 
development, interventions which are also subject to change, 
and implementation as partly unpredictable and depending on 
for 
instance 
resource 
allocation. 
Implementation 
is 
considered an on-going process where support or lack of 
support strongly influence the outcome. Therefore, it is not 
considered possible to generalise evidence based outcome in 
order to repeat good results in new or future settings. 
Assessment results are aiming to be fed back into a pragmatic 
and political process of deciding priorities and allocate 
resources to pursue them.  
In this perspective, validation is considered to be obtained 
through negotiations between the context, the researchers, the 
intervention and other stakeholders. Context is considered by 
involving different stakeholders’ interests and validity is 
addressed by asking what the study is valid for (Aguinaldo 
2004:127) [23].  
Such assumptions and resulting approaches may have 
particular strengths where the goal is to develop good e-
health services, to the confidence of users, professionals, 
policy makers and payers, and as a lead market in Europe. 
Thus, obtaining balance between different validity claims is 
a vast challenge. 
This paper has focused on the fluctuating character of 
reality, interventions and implementation. Nevertheless, 
there are also stable features of the three elements. To bridge 
the gaps between assumptions of the two traditions, the 
positivist (as in HTA) and the constructivist should be 
important for assessments of e-health. This point is also noted 
by Ammenwerth [24]. One goal should be to open the borders 
between traditions and identify how evaluators may draw on 
the benefits the different ones have to offer. 
Answers to the question “Does it work?” to produce 
evidence for universal truths, need to be supplemented by a 
whole range of answers to questions that reflect the 
complexity of most e-health interventions. “How does it 
work?” “What components are vital to success, and which are 
redundant?” “Why does it work in this context (and equally 
important not work)?” “Is this an appropriate and acceptable 
way of tackling the problem?” “How is quality produced and 
defined within certain innovation processes? Moreover, 
“who owns the definition of success?” 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

In process approaches, investigations are directed 
towards the conditions that are included in development 
processes, with a purpose to feed results back into the process 
for dialogue and improvements. The “intervention” is shaped 
and adjusted in and through practices of professional-social 
interaction between participants (doctors, nurses, patients) 
and the organisational, economic, political and ideological 
settings these practices are embedded in. The intervention 
also contribute to shape these settings as the approach pre-
supposes that all entities are in mutual shaping. Controlling 
conditions will be the crucial task for future results of 
innovations. Process investigations may produce knowledge 
to this end.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
The paper has substantiated empirical features of a reality 
in 
flux, 
an 
intervention 
under 
development 
and 
implementation processes as ongoing negotiations for the 
FIKS program. HTA assumptions of a stable reality, a fixed 
intervention and a controlled implementation process were 
not present. Steps to strengthen HTA use for ICT are timely. 
Knowledge about conditions for large processes with 
escalating costs is important as conditions built into the 
programs vastly influence the effects that emerge and 
manifest. Embedding assumptions of a world in flux where 
social, technical and clinical entities influence each other in 
dynamic processes should increase the relevance of HTA of 
ICT, and affect real time developments. Further exploration 
of assumptions that encourage participatory and process 
assessment approaches is timely. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I am grateful to the North Norwegian Health Authorities 
who funded the project and to communication advisor Elin 
Vinje Jenssen, who rapidly translated the fact sheet of FIKS 
to English. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 1. 
The Parliament, U.K. The National Programme for IT in 
the NHS: an update on the delivery of detailed care records 
systems, HC (2010-12).  [cited 2016 14.03]; Available from: 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201012/cmselect
/cmpubacc/1070/107003.htm. 
[2] HTA Glossary.  [cited 2016 14.03.]; Available from: 
http://htaglossary.net/HomePage. 
[3] The Norwegian Government. One inhabitant - one record, 
Meld. St. 9 (2012–2013).  [cited 2016 14.03.]; Available from: 
https://www.regjeringen.no/no/dokumenter/meld-st-9-
20122013/id708609/?q=Meld 
[4] B.Christensen and G. Ellingsen. Evaluating Model-Driven 
Development for large-scale EHRs through the openEHR 
approach. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 2016. 
89: p. 43-54. 
[5] Helse Nord. Implementation of common clinical ICT systems 
(FIKS). 
 
[cited 
2016 
14.03.]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.helse-nord.no/about-fiks-in-
english/implementation-of-common-clinical-ict-systems-fiks-
article135571-42080.html. 
[6] Eunethta. Mission, Vision & Values.  [cited 2016 14.03]; 
Available from: http://www.eunethta.eu/about-us/mission-
vision-values. 
[7] B. Jennett. Health technology assessment. BMJ : British 
Medical Journal, 1992. 305(6845): p. 67-68. 
[8] eunethta. HTA Common Questions.  [cited 2016 14.03.]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.eunethta.eu/about-
us/faq#t287n73. 
[9] T. Scott. Implementing an Electronic Medical Record System: 
Successes, Failures, Lessons. 2007: Radcliffe. 
[10] T.Greenhalgh and J. Russell. Why Do Evaluations of eHealth 
Programs Fail? An Alternative Set of Guiding Principles. PLoS 
Med, 2010. 7(11): p. e1000360. 
[11] D.J.  Jones. Future Directions in the Design, Development, and 
Investigation of Technology as a Service Delivery Vehicle. J 
Clin Child Adolesc Psychol., 2014. 43((1)): p. 128–142. 
[12] D.Avison and T. Young. Time to rethink health care and ICT? 
Commun. ACM, 2007. 50(6): p. 69-74. 
[13] What is OpenEHR?  [cited 2016 14.03.]; Available from: 
http://www.openehr.org/what_is_openehr. 
[14] Cohen, R. Design Thinking: A Unified Framework For 
Innovation. 2014  [cited 2016 15.03]; Available from: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/reuvencohen/2014/03/31/design-
thinking-a-unified-framework-for-innovation/#76b8788256fc. 
[15] Kallbekken, S. Første steg på veien mot en pasientjournal i 
Helse Nord.  [cited 2016 15.03]; Available from: 
http://www.unn.no/aktuelt/forste-steg-pa-veien-mot-en-
pasientjournal-i-helse-nord-article108606-10106.html. 
[16] EPSRC. Healthcare Electronic Records in Organisations 
(HERO). 
Available 
from: 
http://www.researchperspectives.org/rcuk/DD37EA56-9633-
4962-831C-D59E401B2216_HERO--Healthcare-Electronic-
Records-In-Organisations-. 
[17] A.K. Bekhet and J.A. Zauszniewski. Methodological 
triangulation: an approach to understanding data. Nurse Res, 
2012. 20(2): p. 40-3. 
[18] A.G. Ekeland, A. Bowes and S. Flottorp. Methodologies for 
assessing telemedicine: a systematic review of reviews. Int J 
Med Inform, 2012. 81(1): p. 1-11. 
[19] FIKS. Helse Nord FIKS.  [cited 2016 15.03.]; Available from: 
https://www.facebook.com/HelseNordFIKS/info/?tab=page_i
nfo. 
[20] eunethta. HTA Core model for medical and surgical 
interventions.  [cited 2016 
15.03]; 
Available 
from: 
http://meka.thl.fi/htacore/model/HTA%20Core%20Model%2
0for%20Medical%20and%20Surgical%20Interventions%201.
0r.pdf. 
[21] NICHSR. Monitor impact of HTA.  [cited 2016 15.03.]; 
Available 
from: 
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/nichsr/hta101/ta101011.html. 
[22] C. Goodman. HTA 101: introduction to health technology 
assessment. 2004, National Information Center on Health 
Services Research and Health Care Technology (NICHSR): 
http://aaz.hr/resources/pages/57/2.%20HTA101-
%20Introduction%20to%20health%20technology%20assessm
ent.pdf. p. 137. 
[23] J. Aguinaldo. Rethinking Validity in Qualitative Research from 
a Social Constructionist Perspective: From “Is this valid 
research?” to “What is this research valid for?”. The 
Qualitative Report, 2004. 9(1): p. 127-136. 
[24] E. Ammenwerth, J.Brender, P. Nykanen, H. U. Prokosch, M. 
Rigby and J. Talmon. Visions and strategies to improve 
evaluation of health information systems. Reflections and 
lessons based on the HIS-EVAL workshop in Innsbruck. Int J 
Med Inform, 2004. 73(6): p. 479-91. 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

