Designing Nudges in eHealth 
Short paper/work in progress 
Niels Frederik Garmann-Johnsen 
Dept. of Information Systems 
University of Agder 
Kristiansand, Norway 
Email: niels.f.garmann-johnsen@uia.no 
Migle Helmersen 
Dept. of Nutrition and Public Health 
University of Agder 
Kristiansand, Norway 
Email: migle.helmersen@uia.no 
Santiago Gil Martinez 
Faculty of Health and Sport Sciences 
University of Agder 
Grimstad, Norway 
Email: santiago.martinez@uia.no 
Abstract—Digital nudging are much used in eHealth and 
public health promotion. Such nudges can be very useful for 
patients and citizens in general, as it may help them self-
manage their own health, and may in many cases even save 
lives. But the designing of digital nudges is critical, for the 
purpose of the nudge to be achieved, and negative 
consequences of the measure avoided. This study disseminates 
the state of art in the field and will then seek to elicit 
purposeful design principles by combining Design Thinking 
and participatory design with frameworks for compliance with 
general health policies. The results so far show that this avenue 
for research seems promising.
Keywords-digital nudges; Design Thinking; Jobs to be done; 
user journey funnels; health promotion. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Nudging is a “choice architecture”, which involves all the 
outside forces that may subtly guide one’s decisions in one 
direction or another and provide an effective and viable 
public health strategy [1]. Digital nudging is the use of user-
interface design elements for guiding people’s behavior in 
digital choice environments [2]. According to Schneider et al 
[3] the interactions of designing digital nudges consists of 
the four phases Define the goal, Understand the user, Design 
the nudge, and test the nudge (Figure 1). Depending on the 
outcome of the Test-phase, the three previous phases are 
iterated again. 
Nudging initiatives in a public health setting typically 
involve arranging environments in ways that make health-
promoting behaviors more likely. A classic, oft-cited 
example of nudging involves positioning healthy food types 
more prominently than unhealthy ones in cafeterias [1]. 
Nudging relies mainly on System 1 reasoning, which is 
quick, intuitive, and automatic, as opposed to System 2, 
which is slower and more deliberative [4]. Although many 
nudging techniques are shown to have the intended effects, it 
is unclear whether they would work outside the study setting 
[5]. 
Nudge Theory presents a new collection of methods, 
deemed “nudges”, which have the potential for low-cost and 
broad application to guide healthier lifestyle choices without 
the need for restrictive regulation [6]. Nevertheless, there has 
not yet been a large-scale examination of the effectiveness of 
nudges, despite several policy making bodies now 
considering their use.  
Figure 1. Digital nudge design iterations. 
Nudging has been imported into the public health context 
to address the intransigent problem, from a political-
administrative point of view, of individuals not doing what is 
most beneficial for themselves health-wise [7]. A few 
articles documented that nudging seems to offer public 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

health a number of advantages: 1) information based public 
health campaigns are ineffective in producing desired health 
changes; 2) nudging operates directly on behaviors rather 
than attitudes and knowledge (behaviors has been described 
as the main concern of health promotion); 3) unlike 
legislating for better public health, nudging interventions 
preserve individuals’ autonomy [5]. Scoping reviews by 
Ledderer et al shows that most lifestyle-related “nudging” 
interventions and mechanisms are related to dietary choices 
[5]. Limitations are big regarding study design, target 
groups, duration of the intervention, and measures of 
effectiveness. Critical discussions about nudging are 
required, and there needs to be ongoing exploration of 
whether nudging interventions are gaining foothold in 
various arenas. 
As a good example, it was found that nudges resulted in 
an average 15.3 % increase in healthier dietary or nutritional 
choices, as measured by a change in frequency of healthy 
choices or a change in overall caloric consumption (a good 
public health strategy to combat obesity) [6]. 
This short paper represents a work in progress. The goal 
is to elicit design principles for good, effective, and ethically 
sustainable digital nudges. The work so far, reported here, 
represents a preliminary literature review for mapping the 
state of art in this concern, and comparison with 
methodologies from innovation management. The problem 
statement here is whether Design Thinking related methods 
may inform Nudge Theory and health promotion. 
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
A preliminary literature review has been performed using 
the following method and criteria. The search was done in 
Scopus electronic database [8] that partially includes 
databases MEDLIE and EMBASE ++. The search criteria 
(search string) are shown in Figure 2.  
TITLE ((digital* OR online OR web*) AND nudg*) AND TITLE-
ABS-KEY (health* OR promot* OR wellbeing OR "well being" 
OR "physical activ*" OR sedentar* OR diet* OR nutrition* OR 
food OR lifestyle* OR "life style*") 
Figure 2. Search string 
Using this string, February 2023, we found 44 articles. 
The references of the found articles can be found on the web 
address, Learning Service-Organization [9]. Of 44 articles, 
13 are outside scope (dealing with eco friendliness only), or 
not concluded studies. Of the remaining 31 articles most are 
concerned with healthy eating. Some articles are concerned 
with increasing digital literacy among users, responsible use 
of internet and social media, for more cost-effective public 
health measures, or more effective healthcare through 
adoption of technology. A recurring theme is that nudges 
need to be simple to be effective and strike the right balance 
of measures. Too much pressure may be counter productive. 
A general impression of the found articles is that they as a 
rule seems to be sympathetic and un-critical to the use of 
digital nudging in general. 
      Here follows some examples of themes (in this article’s 
authors interpretation), found in the reviewed articles: 
a) Nudging indirectly, encouraging development of the 
factors leading to more responsible behaviour; (here:) 
involvement in children's nutrition 
b) Online grocery shopping: Two-step nudges may be 
needed, to advocate both eco-friendly and nutritional 
quality food. Default shopping carts increase nutritional 
quality. 
c) Covid-19 contagion awareness: Nudges can be 
tailored by designers to different users. 
d) Renewal 
of 
subscription 
(disability 
parking), 
nudging towards using digital channels. A simple letter 
appealing using the argument of cost saving, had effects. 
e) Nudging general compliance with rules for 
behaving well, using China's social credits system as a case, 
shows that freedom to opt in or out, reduce the feeling of 
intrusiveness. 
f) Does the goal justify the means? A survey tests 
attitudes towards nudges. Freedom for users, transparency 
and the urgency of goals are important factors found. 
g) Switching meat-eating to plant-based: health 
arguments are the most effective. 
h) Health app design may benefit from behavioural 
economics. 
i) Nudges may promote taking part in population-
based screening programmes, such as mammography. 
j) Study provides insights especially for digital 
physical activity breaks for students during home studying. 
k) Coping is better that threat in an appealing for 
secure online behaviour. 
l) Healthier lifestyle: Finding right amount of nudging 
measures is critical. Too much information may cancel out 
effects. 
m) Social media and privacy issues regarding minors. 
n) Digital healthcare: For a digital nudge to work, it 
needs to address a user's automatic thoughts; appear when 
a user is open to making a choice; provide discrete, easy 
steps toward a goal; and offer positive reinforcement. 
III.
LESSONS FROM DESIGN THINKING
As a designer of digital nudges, one must strike the right 
balance of measures. This issue is arguably like the ones 
facing developers of good designs in general. Design 
thinking-inspired service design has emerged, especially the 
last ten years, as a popular methodology. Especially, the 
data- and telecommunication industry has embraced the 
concept. 
Design Thinking iterations are depicted in many ways. 
Figure 3 shows one of the more common ways [13]: 
Empathize with users (a parallel to understanding the user, 
ref. Figure 1.), Define the problem space, Ideate solutions, 
Prototype solutions, and Test solutions. The similarities with 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the Digital nudge iterations as depicted in Figure 1 are 
striking, so arguably, the methods are interchangeable.  
Figure 3. Design Thinking, iterations. 
A method often associated with Design Thinking and the 
phases of Empathizing with users and defining their needs 
and goals is Jobs to be done – theory [10][11]. The theory in 
short states that the consumers (citizens, customers, users, or 
patients) “employ” concepts (solutions, products, or services 
from a variety of different categories) to cover their needs 
and long term-goals, see Figure 4. The consumer or citizens 
experience with the concepts they employ in the now 
situation (AS-IS), may vary. They may experience both 
benefits and hurdles in the present situations. In mapping 
these hurdles, a designer may find clues as to why a nudge 
does not perform well.  
Jobs can be direct (cover core needs), related, emotional, 
product life cycle based, economic decision based etc. 
Citizen needs are stable and consistent over time (changes 
slowly). They are even similar between citizens in the same 
situation and context, so that if one manages to map these 
needs, by empathizing with the target group, even with a 
small number of informants, one should be able to see 
patterns. Citizens choose concepts (products and services) 
from a variety of sources. So, digital nudging can be seen as 
an instrument to direct those choices, a choice architecture. 
The adoption of such Design Thinking techniques 
potentially opens for using other similar tools in nudge 
design, like creating personas (a narrative and visualization 
of a typical member of a target group), and story boarding, 
visualizing the user journey in a patient history [13]. 
Figure 4. Jobs to be done Theory, AS-IS situation. 
The user’s process of “employing” a solution is a 
complicated process with many steps. Digital nudge 
designers may perhaps benefit from acknowledging this and 
limit the scope of the nudge, to nudging one stee at the time. 
The user journey or conversion model is often drawn like a 
funnel, since not all citizens are converted from one step to 
the other. This version, Figure 5, is inspired by Rogers [12]. 
It consists of the steps Situation awareness, users being able 
to assess hers or his own condition, Attention (to potential 
solutions), Interest, Desire, and Action (“employing”, 
acquire the solution). The step Loyalty symbolizes the users 
staying with the solution, e g health promotion program, 
compliance. The two last steps “Advocate” and Peer 
mentors, symbolize the user take a passive or even active 
role in promoting the program towards other new users.  
Figure 5. User journey- or conversion funnel. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV.
PRELIMINARY RESULTS
We propose that designers of digital nudges in eHealth 
may benefit from the study of methods associated with 
Design Thinking, Jobs to be done theory and user journey 
design.  
The citizen must be perceived as an agent that combines 
information from several sources and is a part of a network 
of users that share their points of view [12]. An 
understanding the process of conversions and Jobs to be 
done, as seen from the users, together with the literature on 
public health nudges [5] and others, may inform better and 
more sustainable digital nudges in future. 
Jobs to be done theory in combination with mapping the 
user journey may provide data for constructing efficient 
tests, checking the conversions step for step, identifying 
where along the journey the users are lost, and pinpointing 
areas for improvement in a health promoting program, in a 
future TO-BE situation (Figure 6).  
This article is a work in progress and contains untested 
propositions. More work is needed to substantiate the claims 
that are put forward here. 
Figure 6. Jobs to be done TO-BE situation, combined with nudging. 
There are more themes of interest to the scope of our 
article, to be found. Since this is a work in progress, this 
article’s authors will extend the literature search using 
forwards searches and fewer search criteria in future. We 
will also scrutinize central finds closer in later articles in this 
area of concern. 
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This study has come some way in disseminating the state 
of art in the field of interest. We have shown similarities and 
analogies between digital nudges design and Design 
Thinking. These similarities lead us to the proposition that 
Design Thinking methods may inform the design of 
successful digital nudges in public safety, health, and 
healthcare. 
Future work may consist of an extended search in 
literature as well as work with a model for an architecture 
framework or -platform, and an architecture development 
process, perhaps leveraging the aid of artificial intelligence 
for analysis and design.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors want to thank Ellen Sejersted, Senior and 
Subject Librarian, Health, and sport sciences, at University 
of Agder, Norway, for help with the literature review process 
and research design. 
REFERENCES
[1]
R. H. Thaler, and C. R. Sunstein. Nudge: Improving 
Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness. New Haven: 
Yale University Press; 2008. 
[2]
M. Weinmann, C. Schneider, and J. Vom Brocke. Digital 
nudging. Business & Information Systems Engineering, 58, 
433-436, 2016. 
[3]
C. Schneider, M. Weinmann, and J. Vom Brocke. Digital 
nudging: guiding online user choices through interface 
design. Communications of the ACM, 61(7), 67-73, 2018. 
[4]
D. Kahneman. Thinking fast and slow. Allen Lane. 2011. 
[5]
L. Ledderer, M. Kjær, E. K. Madsen, J. Busch, and A. Fage-
Butler. Nudging in Public Health Lifestyle Interventions: A 
Systematic Literature Review and Metasynthesis. Health 
Educ 
Behav. 
2020 
Oct;47(5):749-764. 
doi: 
10.1177/1090198120931788. Epub 2020 Jun 9. PMID: 
32517522. 
[6]
A. Arno, and S. Thomas. The efficacy of nudge theory 
strategies in influencing adult dietary behaviour: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. BMC Public Health 16, 676, 2016. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-016-3272-x.  
[7]
S. Vallgårda. Nudge—A new and better way to improve 
health? 
Health 
Policy, 
104(2), 
200–203, 
2012. 
https://doi.org/10.10 16/j.healthpol.2011.10.013 
[8]
Scopus  (2023). https://libguides.uia.no/scopus  
[9]
N. F. Garmann-Johnsen. References used in the literature 
review. 
https://nielsfgarmannjohnsen.wordpress.com/designing-
nudges-in-ehealth-short-paper-work-in-progress/, 2023. 
[10] A. W. Ulwick. Outcome-Driven Innovation®(ODI): Jobs-to-
be-Done Theory in Practice. Strategyn, LLC Whitepaper. 
2017. 
[11] C. M. Christensen, T. Hall, K. Dillon, and D. S. Duncan. 
Know your customers’ jobs to be done. Harvard business 
review, 94(9), 54-62, 2016. 
[12] D. L. Rogers. The digital transformation playbook: Rethink 
your business for the digital age. Columbia University Press. 
2016. 
[13] R. F. Dam, and T. Y. Siang, T. Y. Design thinking: A quick 
overview. 2020. 
[14] D. Zhu, W. Liu, and Y. Ly. Reflection on museum service 
design based on a UX foundation course. In Design, User 
Experience, and Usability. Application Domains: 8th 
International Conference, DUXU 2019, Held as Part of the 
21st HCI International Conference, HCII 2019, Orlando, FL, 
USA, July 26–31, 2019, Proceedings, Part III 21 (pp. 264-
274). Springer International Publishing. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

