Stress Intervention Online 
- Designing for Self-help through Multiple Help
Åsa Smedberg 
The Department of Computer and Systems Sciences 
Stockholm University 
Kista, Sweden 
asasmed@dsv.su.se 
Hélène Sandmark 
School of Health, Care and Social Welfare 
Division of Public Health Sciences 
Mälardalen University 
Västerås, Sweden 
helene.sandmark@mdh.se 
 
 
Abstract— E-health has undergone many changes during the 
years. One is the development of web-based self-help services for 
patients and citizens with health concerns. This paper presents 
design ideas for a stress management web-based system that 
takes the development of self-help services further. The aim of 
the system is to help people with mild to intermediate levels of 
stress problems change patterns of behavior and take control of 
their stressful life situations. The system includes not only self-
help through individual work with stress-related issues, but it 
also complements the individual efforts with help from peers and 
medical professionals. The system then becomes a platform for 
combining multiple help online. The system design ideas have 
resulted from research studies and practical experiences of stress 
management and web-based self-help systems. The paper also 
presents a couple of scenarios to illustrate in what ways the 
system usage can be characterized by multiple help online and a 
holistic approach to stress intervention. 
Keywords-stress intervention; web-based; self-help; multiple 
help; communication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
E-health systems have evolved in many different health 
areas. Both patients with physical and mental conditions and 
citizens with health concerns, such as unhealthy lifestyles, use 
the Internet to search for information and seek help from 
medical professionals and peers. One area is self-help for 
people who experience unhealthy levels of stress and high 
stress responses.  
Studies have shown that many people in working life are 
on sick leaves due to high levels of stress [1]-[2]. In Sweden, 
stress related dysfunctions have become the second most 
common reason behind sickness absence [3]-[5]. By changing 
unhealthy lifestyles, people can reduce the risk of getting 
severe illnesses. Preventive healthcare and early interventions 
are therefore recognized as important in order to help groups 
of people from becoming patients of the healthcare system and 
from being forced to sick leaves and long-term sickness 
absence.   
Stress research has since a long time been oriented toward 
studies involving the physiological response (= the body's 
reaction) to stress and the cognitive processes that influence 
the perception of stress. However, the social perspective of the 
stress response has established that people with similar life 
conditions are not necessarily affected in the same way, which 
indicates that stress is caused, at least in part, by a person's 
mind or way of thinking. To change a certain way of thinking 
and to tackle an unhealthy behaviour includes promotive and 
preventive interventions and an ongoing support [6]-[7]. This 
is where the Internet and web-based systems can play an 
important role through available information of different kinds 
and continuous communication with others. Intervention 
systems need flexibility that allows people to find their own 
ways through the system.     
The use of self-management intervention systems on the 
Internet today is characterized by information management, 
interactivity and communication. However, the use of the 
different 
online 
health 
services 
for 
information 
and 
communication with experts and peers has not yet reached the 
level of integration and holistic thinking. The paper addresses 
this gap. The paper introduces the design of a new type of web-
based stress intervention system that considers integration, 
flexibility and individual differences. It includes different ways 
to approach stress, both from a stressor perspective (triggers) 
and a response perspective (stress reactions). However, the 
main focus is on the individual intervention. It also includes 
different sources of help, from research findings to real life 
stories, communication with peers and practical tools and 
counseling. 
The following sections are organized as follows. To start 
with, background knowledge and understanding of stress, stress 
interventions and internet self-help services will be presented. 
Thereafter, we will introduce our design for a new web-based 
stress intervention system based on a holistic approach using 
multiple help online. 
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH AND KNOWLEDGE 
A. Stress 
According to the bio-psychosocial model of stress, it is 
stated that biological, psychological and social factors are 
linked in the progress of promoting health or causing disease 
[8]. In this model the mind and the body are well connected 
and 
interdependent, 
which 
means 
that 
biological, 
psychological, and social issues operate together to affect the 
health status. The model is somewhat more comprehensive and 
120
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

could be considered a development of Selye’s original model 
[9]. The stress response is elicited by a many different 
psychosocial stimuli which can threat the homeostasis, which is 
the ability to maintain internal equilibrium by adjusting its 
physiological processes.  Stress is experienced negatively when 
this imbalance occurs between the individual’s perceived 
demands and the ability to respond to these demands. In 
today´s life the psychosocial stressors are the most common. 
To let a thought or an event be appraised as a stressor, there is a 
perceived mismatch between the demands and the individual’s 
resources to cope with it [10]. 
B. Stress Intervention 
In stress intervention empowerment is a central concept. 
The strategies can be concluded as the processes leading to 
increased stress management and better health in different 
populations and groups of people. Empowerment helps people 
to increase control and manage their lives according to their 
needs and preferences. The key question is how to build on and 
reinforce authentic participation ensuring autonomy, feelings of 
value and sense of mastery in decision-making. Learning and 
problem solving abilities are important assets for any 
organization or work site wishing to reach its full potential, and 
empowerment within the individual stimulates job satisfaction. 
The educational approach to stress management is concerned to 
enabling people to make informed choices, set limits, and 
increase coping ability. The preventive and promotive 
approach are aimed to achieve behavior changes: Internal locus 
of control is a key factor in efforts to create empowered 
environments and empowered individuals able to meet 
stressors at work and in private life [11]-[12].  
C. Self-help and Different Actors Online 
There are different types of self-help services on the 
Internet today for people with lifestyle issues such as stressful 
lives. One is the Ask-the-Expert that lets users post questions 
directly to the system to be answered by an expert, and the 
users can also choose to browse the system for stored 
questions and answers [13]. This function in the e-health area 
is believed to offer value to people who need to gain new 
health knowledge and guidance [14]. The users can get health 
recommendations and advice from a medical expert [15], and 
this health service is also recognized to offer a new type of 
continuous relationships with medical experts [16].  
Another self-help service on the Internet is the community 
forum systems for peers. These community forums on health 
issues have become popular lately and are used regularly by 
patients and citizens with different physical and mental 
conditions [17]. These systems let people share experiences 
and offer each other advice on how to cope with different 
health concerns [18]-[19]. Research gives that patients online 
tend to be well informed today, and that they act both as 
producers and consumers of health information [20]. This blur 
between being a producer and a consumer of health 
information and services is also named ‘prosumption’ and the 
user a ‘prosumer’ (e.g., [21]-[22]). 
When the web-based communities on lifestyle problems 
for peers have been compared to the Ask-the-Expert systems, 
the two types of systems were shown to offer the users 
complementary contents and knowledge [23]-[24]. Advice and 
information given in the two types of systems were seen to be 
of different characteristics, allowing people with lifestyle 
problems to get diverse and complementary views of their 
problems. 
While 
answers 
from 
health 
experts 
were 
characterized by detailed descriptions of health subjects, the 
peer conversations emphasized personal experiences and more 
practically oriented advice. By linking the different answers – 
the ones from health experts and the ones from peers in 
community conversations – the users are assumed to benefit 
more [23]. This leads us to believe that a combination of 
different types of health services and actors in the stress 
management area would help people with mild to intermediate 
levels of stress problems change patterns of behavior and take 
control of their stressful lives. To integrate knowledge and 
experiences of medical professionals and peers is believed to 
make an advantage. 
Many people who suffer from stress related disorders 
prefer to get interventions through the Internet, and studies 
have also shown positive effects on health outcomes. 
However, there are probably high rates of drop-outs [25]-[26]. 
There is also little known about the participants’ use of the 
web-based 
stress 
intervention 
programs, 
what 
the 
communication patterns are like, and what support the 
participants take advantage of. How to make use of 
technological possibilities and human resources in this field 
needs to be further explored. 
III. 
DESIGNING A STRESS INTERVENTION SYSTEM 
A. Multiple Help Online – Five Types of Help 
The system for stress intervention online that we propose is 
designed as to form a whole of different help services and 
actors who contribute together. The system consists of five 
types of help: Ask-the-Expert, Counseling room, Community 
forum, Exercise programs and Stories told & research results. 
Below, the basic characteristics of each of these five are 
described. 
1) 
Ask-the-Expert 
Ask-the-Expert is where the user can ask medical 
professionals for help and advice on different stress related 
concerns. This help can be used both for direct questions and 
also for browsing for previously popped questions and their 
answers. This part of the system is based on communication 
between one user and a medical expert as well as on storage of 
these interactions. 
2) 
Counseling Room 
The counseling room is a chat area in which users and 
medical professionals can meet in smaller group sessions. The 
counseling room is based on synchronous communication 
among the participants. Different predefined topics related to 
stress management can be addressed during these sessions. 
Cognitive behavioral therapy for stress management addresses 
121
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

topics such as excessive job involvement, low self-esteem, lack 
of recuperation, work-family imbalance, job mobility and 
competence matching. 
3) 
Community Forum 
Communication between peers is also important for 
keeping up with ongoing stress interventions. Community 
forum lets the users have conversations together on current 
topics in their daily lives, related to sleep, work situation or 
balance between work and family, for example. The forum is 
based on asynchronous communication, and communication 
can therefore take place whenever the users have the need for 
it. The web communication with peers can help people get new 
insights and encouragement to develop new habits. 
4) 
Exercise Programs 
The fourth function of the system is exercise programs. 
Depending on the stress issue, there are different available 
exercises that the users can do on their own. Reflection 
exercises on work or study situation, relaxation techniques and 
abdominal breathing exercises to ease physical tensions are 
examples. The exercises are presented in textual form, audio 
and video, depending on the purpose of the exercise.  
5) 
Stories Told & Research Results 
The last function of the system is about giving the users 
access to stress-related research results and stories told by 
others who are, or have been, in similar situations. This part of 
the system is mainly based on storage of textual information. 
By letting the users read about other people’s stories together 
with comments from medical professionals, the users can learn 
to see their own situations clearer. It also helps to reduce 
stigmatization. 
B. Stress Intervention Areas 
There are different areas that need to be addressed in order 
to ease the stress levels of the users. The system’s multiple 
help is therefore structured in accordance with four main stress 
intervention areas: sleep, work/studies, balance in life and 
physical wellbeing. Figure 1 shows a design of this structure. 
The stress intervention areas are introduced in the following 
sub sections. 
1) 
Sleep 
It has been concluded that stress is strongly linked to 
disturbed sleep, insomnia and impaired awakening. The 
inability to relax and to let work issues act as stressors is 
probably an important link in the relation between stress and 
sleep. The quality of sleep has thus shown to be of great 
importance for the onset of stress-related dysfunctions as well 
as the recovery. It is therefore an impending risk that a person 
with high levels of stress ends up in a negative loop of 
increased sleeping disturbances and high level of stress. 
Assessments of sleeping quality and insomnia and exposure to 
stress as well as the effects of interventions need to be further 
investigated.  
2) 
Work/Studies 
An overcommitment at work could entail increased risk to 
experience work issues as stressful [27]-[28]. Exposure to 
stressful job conditions such as heavy workload, infrequent rest 
breaks, long work hours, shift work, and interpersonal 
relationships, can certainly have a direct influence on workers’ 
health. 
Overcommitted 
co-workers 
often 
suffer 
from 
inappropriate perceptions of demands and fail in their coping 
ability. Also, perfectionists have been described as people who 
are highly responsive to stress, and they tend to generate 
extensive stress for themselves [29]. Concern over mistakes 
and automatic thoughts of perfectionism are examples of things 
that can increase the level of stress. 
Both work and studies nowadays include a great amount of 
flexibility and ability to stay connected independently of time 
and space. In general, this is a positive development since it 
allows for distance work and studies. But at the same time it 
increases the risk of having more people ending up in active 
work and study lives without boundaries. To be able to 
negotiate about expectations regarding availability, and to set 
limits, are important for a healthy work and study life [30]. 
3) 
Balance in Life 
Stressors related to occupational work such as a frustrating 
work situation or a work-family imbalance are often major 
causes of strain, and mental ill-health, as well as psychosomatic 
conditions [4], [31]. Especially job strain with exposure to  
122
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

 
 
Figure 1.  Mockup design of the stress intervention system showing the multiple help functions and stress intervention areas. 
stressful job conditions could certainly be a health hazard to 
those who have additional strain from family life.  Perceptual 
distortion can prevent people from accurately assess cost–gain 
relations and to set limits [27]. 
4) 
Physical Wellbeing 
Responses to stress are often manifested in body tension. 
Regarding individual interventions in the area of dysfunction 
due to negative stress exposure, progressive muscle relaxation 
was originally designed by Jacobson to guide people through 
successive tensing and relaxation of the body muscle groups 
from toe to head to achieve overall body relaxation [32]. This 
process is easy to learn and teach, safe, non-threatening and 
non-competitive. Since then it has been concluded that the 
effectiveness of the interventions varied according to the 
health-outcome measure used. Cognitive-behavioural skills 
were more effective for psychological outcomes, whereas 
muscle relaxation techniques were more effective for 
physiological outcomes. Using a combination of techniques; 
muscle relaxation and cognitive-behavioural skills seemed to 
be more effective across outcome measures than using a single 
technique. Deep, diaphragmatic breathing is known to 
counteract the fight or flight response symptoms that are often 
associated with anxiety and negative reactions on stress 
exposure. Also meditation can be used to counteract stressful 
situations, as it is a technique to develop concentration and 
awareness to produce a calming effect. Here diaphragmatic 
breathing is central to any meditation practice. It has been 
found that there could be a lowering of blood pressure during 
deep breathing, which is interesting to consider in stress 
management [32]-[35]. 
C. A Holistic Design with Multiple Help Integration 
The stress intervention system proposed in this paper 
applies the concept of multiple help online for different stress 
intervention area. From this follows that peer conversations, 
questions to as well as answers from medical experts, 
counseling sessions, research results, life stories and exercises 
are available in each of the stress intervention areas. 
The different stress intervention areas aim at letting the 
user choose his or her way into the system based on what is 
believed to be the most urgent stress-related concern. At the 
same time, it is important to offer easy ways to navigate 
between the different intervention areas. The technical system 
can assist in this through links and navigation menus, but also 
medical professionals, as well as the peers, can support this by 
referring to other intervention areas. In a conversation on 
sleep, for example, there could be references to related 
conversations on work issues within the work/studies 
intervention area. 
The same idea is applied on the five types of help in the 
multiple help concept. The different types of help are linked 
together so that the users can navigate easy between them, but 
also the medical experts can encourage the users to take 
advantage of other help types for complementary support and 
knowledge. In the Ask-the-Expert answers, there can be 
references to relevant peer conversations that the user could 
join, for example. This can be implemented manually to start 
with, by having the medical expert suggesting peer 
123
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

conversations in his or her answer. In a future setting, it is also 
possible to implement automatic matching techniques in order 
to generate links to similar stress-related topics in different 
parts of the system.  
IV. 
SCENARIOS 
Below, there are two short examples of scenarios aiming to 
illustrate in what ways the web-based stress intervention 
system can be used to let the different stress areas, information 
sources, tools and actors work together. 
A. Scenario 1: Chain of Complementary Support  
Eve, 52 years, is a middle manager in a company. She is 
ambitious and has always felt that people around her have high 
demands on her. Today, her employees and family take almost 
all her time, which has led to a stressful life situation with too 
little sleep and unhealthy food and exercise habits.  
Eve enters the stress intervention system by visiting the 
stress intervention area “balance in life” and its community 
forum for peers. She finds a conversation that is ongoing, on a 
theme close to her own situation. She reads the conversation 
for a while, and then adds a posting telling the others that she 
finds it difficult to make room for herself and her needs. The 
conversation continues with the problem of saying no and to 
delegate responsibilities. One peer recommends Eve and the 
others to sign up for an online counseling session on how to set 
limits. Eve signs up, and later she joins the counseling session 
together with a handful of peers, moderated by a medical 
professional. During the session, the medical professional 
refers to an exercise on how to practice limit settings present in 
the help function “exercise programs”.     
B. Scenario 2:  Complementary Stress Intervention Areas 
Johan is a 37-year old man who works with systems 
analysis at a big IT-company. He works very long hours in 
front of his computer. His back has started to hurt, and his body 
is stiff and his eyes dry. Recently, his sleep has been affected as 
well. He finds it difficult to fall asleep and he often wakes up at 
night. 
The first thing Johan does when entering the stress 
intervention system is to open the intervention area called 
“sleep”. He starts to search for similar stories from others, and 
he also posts a question to the Ask-the-Expert service to find 
out about what he can do to ease his sleeping problems. The 
medical expert who answers the question from Johan presents 
some practical advice on how to relax before going to bed. But, 
since Johan has several concerns, the expert also recommends 
exercises that Johan can do at work, both to increase the variety 
of physical work activities when using the computer and to 
reduce strain on the eyes. These exercises are found in the 
stress intervention area called “work/studies”. The medical 
expert also recommends Johan to visit the stress intervention 
area called “balance in life”, to read about research results and 
to join conversations with peers on how to make room for other 
activities besides work. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has outlined some basic foundation of a new 
and holistic web-based system for stress intervention. The 
novelty of the system lies in the holistic approach considering 
both different aspects of stress and stress intervention and also 
different supportive roles and functions. Not only have 
attention been drawn to self-help through information access 
and exercises, but also to the necessity of having support and 
guidance from peers and medical professionals to ease the 
individual struggle for sustainable new habits and improved 
health. To make the system holistic, web links between the 
different intervention areas and also between the different 
kinds of help are considered. Additionally, the medical 
professionals and other actors in the system can amplify the 
holistic view of the system by making references to different 
system parts. This will let the user navigate more easily 
between the different parts of the system and to use different 
kinds of help in combination.  
Next step is to have the system design implemented, and 
then evaluated by a pilot test group. Research studies will also 
be conducted on the system usage and online communication 
patterns.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Henderson, N. Glozier, and E. K. Holland, ”Long term sickness 
absence is caused by common conditions and needs managing”, BMJ. 
2005; 330:802–3.   
[2] 
P. M. Dekkers-Sánchez, J. L. Hoving, J. K. Sluiter, and M. H. Frings-
Dresen, “Factors associated with long-term sick leave in sick-listed 
employees: a systematic review”, Occup Environ Med. 2008, 65, pp. 
153–157. 
[3] 
K. Holmgren, S. Dahlin-Ivanoff, C. Björkelund, and G. Hensing. ”The 
prevalence of work-related stress, and its association with self-perceived 
health and sick-leave, in a population of employed Swedish women”, 
BMC Public Health. 2009; 2;9:73.  
[4] 
H. Sandmark, “Work and family: associations with long term sick-listing 
in Swedish women”, BMC Public Health 2007, 7:287. 
[5] 
Försäkringskassan 
[The 
Swedish 
Social 
Insurance 
Agency].            
Social insurance statistics. Available at (accessed 10 October 2010): 
http://statistik.forsakringskassan.se/portal/page?_pageid=93,1&_dad=po
rtal&_schema=PORTAL. 
[6] 
K. Baughman, E. Logue., K. Sutton, C. Capers, D. Jarjoura, and W. 
Smucker, “Biopsychosocial characteristics of overweight and obese 
primary care patients: do psychosocial and behavior factors mediate 
sociodemographic effects?”, Preventive Medicine, No. 37,  2003, pp. 
129-137, Academic Press. 
[7] 
G. J. Norman, ”A review of ehealth interventions for physical activity 
and dietary behavior change”, Am J  Prev Med., 33(4), 2007, pp. 336-
345. 
[8] 
G. Engel, “The need for a new medical model: a challenge for 
biomedicine”, Science 1977; 196, pp.129–136. 
[9] 
H. Selye, “History and present status of the stress concept”, In A. Monat 
and R.S. Lazarus, eds. Stress and Coping, 2nd ed. New York: Columbia 
University, 1985. 
[10] J. Siegrist, “Psychosocial factors and stress”, In Encyclopedia of stress, 
Edited by Fink G. London, Academic Press, 2000. 
[11] K. Tones and J. Green, Health promotion : planning and strategies, Sage 
Publications, 2003.  
[12] I. Rootman, M. Goodstadt, L. Potvin, and J. Springett, “A framework for 
health promotion evaluation”, In Rootman, I. (ed.), Evaluation in Health 
Promotion: Principles and Perspectives. WHO, Regional Office for 
Europe, Copenhagen, 2001(92):7-38. 
124
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

[13] J. Budzik and K. Hammond, “Q&A: A system for the capture, 
organization and reuse of expertise”, Proceedings of the sixty-second 
annual meeting of the American Society for Information Science, 
Information Today, Inc., Medford N, 1999. 
[14] S. Marine, P. J. Embi, M. McCuistion, D. Haag, and J. R. Guard, 
“NetWellness 1995-2005: ten years of experience and growth as a non-
profit consumer health information and Ask-an-Expert service”, AMIA 
2005 Symposium proceedings, 2005. 
[15] R. Bromme, R. Jucks,  and T. Wagner, “How to refer to ‘diabetes’? 
language in online health advice”, Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19(5), 
2005, pp. 569-586. 
[16] J. Marco, R. Barba, J. E. Losa, C.M. De la Serna, M. Sainz, I. F. 
Lantigua, and J. L. de la Serna, ”Advice from a medical expert through 
the Internet on queries about AIDS and hepatitis: analysis of a pilot 
experiment”, PLoS Medicine, Public Library of Science, 3 (7), 2006, pp. 
1041-1047. 
[17] S. Fox and D. Fallows, “Internet health resources”, Pew Internet & 
American Life Project, July 16, 2003. 
[18] D. Maloney-Krichmar and J. Preece, “A multilevel analysis of 
sociability, usability and community dynamics in an online health 
community”, ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 
12(2), 2005, pp. 201-232. 
[19] J. Preece, Online communities – designing usability, supporting 
sociability, Wiley & Sons, 2000. 
[20] U. Josefsson, “Coping online – patients’ use of the Internet”. Doctoral 
thesis, Report 37, Dep. of Applied Information Technology, IT-
University of Göteborg, Sweden, ISBN 978-91-628-7080-5, 2007. 
[21] E. Riessman, “Restructuring help: a human services paradigm for the 
1990's”, American Journal of Community Psychology, 18, 1990. pp. 
221-230. 
[22] M. S. Salzer, “Consumer empowerment in mental health organizations: 
Concept, benefits and impediments”, Administration and Policy in 
Mental Health, Vol. 24, No. 5, 1997. pp. 425-434. 
[23] Å. Smedberg, “To design holistic health service systems on the 
Internet”, Proceedings of World Academy of Science, Engineering and 
Technology, November 2007, pp. 311-317.  
[24] Å. Smedberg, "How to combine the online community with Ask the 
Expert system in a health care site", Proceedings of the first International 
Conference on the Digital Society, IEEE Computer Society Press, 2007. 
[25] K. Cavanagh and D. Shapiro, “Computer treatment for common mental 
health problems”, J Clin Psychol, 2004, 60, pp. 239–251. 
[26] T. L. Bessell, S. McDonald, C. A. Silagy, J. N. Anderson, J. E. Hiller, 
and L. N. Sansom, ”Do Internet interventions for consumers cause more 
harm than good? A systematic review”. Health Expect, 2002, 5, pp. 28–
37. 
[27] D. Preckel, R. von Känel, B. M. Kudielka, and J. E. Fischer, “Over 
commitment to work is associated with vital exhaustion”, Int Arch 
Occup Environ Health 2005, 78, pp.117–122. 
[28] J. Siegrist and M. Marmot, ”Health inequalities and the psychosocial 
environment—two scientific challenges”, Soc Sci Med, 58, 2004. pp. 
1463–1473.  
[29] A. A-C. Chantal, J. Irvine, P. Ritvo, R.  A. Cribbie, G. L. Flett,  and P. L. 
Hewitt, ”Perfectionism and psychological distress: a modeling approach 
to understanding their therapeutic relationship”, J Rat-Emo Cognitive-
Behav Ther, 2008, 26, pp. 151–167. 
[30] R. A. Karasek and T. Theorell, “Healthy work: stress, productivity, and 
the reconstruction of working life”, New York: Basic Books; 1990. 
[31] H. Sandmark, “Job mismatching, unequal opportunities and long-term 
sickness absence in female white collar workers in Sweden”, Scand J 
Public Health 2009, 37, pp. 43-49. 
[32] E. Jacobson, Progressive relaxation (2nd ed.), University of Chicago, 
Chicago, 1938. 
[33] L. R. Murphy, “Stress management in work settings: a critical review of 
the health effects”, American Journal of Health Promotion, 1996, 11, pp. 
112–135. 
[34] M. C Jones and  D. W. Johnston, “Reducing distress in first level and 
student nurses: a review of the applied stress management literature”, 
Journal of Adv Nursing, 2000, 32, pp. 66–74. 
[35] B. Seaward, Managing stress, Boston: Jones and Bartlett, 2002. 
 
 
125
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

