Technical Viewpoint of Challenges, Opportunities,
and Future Directions of Policy Change and
Information-Flow in Digital Healthcare Systems
Areeg Samir
Computer Science Department
UiT The Arctic University of Norway
Tromsø, Norway
email: areeg.s.elgazazz@uit.no
H˚avard D. Johansen
Computer Science Department
UiT The Arctic University of Norway
Tromsø, Norway
email: havard.johansen@uit.no
Abstract—Digital healthcare systems often run on heteroge-
neous devices in a distributed multi-cluster environment, and
maintain their healthcare policies for managing data, securing
information flow, and controlling interactions among systems
components. As healthcare systems become more digitally dis-
tributed, lack of integration and safe interpretation between
heterogeneous systems clusters become problematic and might
lead to healthcare policy violations. Communication overhead
and high computation consumption might impact the system
at different levels and affect the flow of information among
system clusters. This paper provides a technical viewpoint of the
challenges, opportunities, and future work in digital healthcare
systems, focusing on the mechanisms of monitoring, detecting,
and recovering healthcare policy change/update and its imprint
on information flow.
Keywords—Digital Health; Healthcare; Distributed Environ-
ment; Policy; Multi-Cluster; Monitor; Detection; Performance;
Workload; Recovery.
I. INTRODUCTION
Digital healthcare systems deliver services to consumers
and patients and help them manage their health by provid-
ing a real-time communication environment. Each system
is commonly organized into many clusters with different
capacities, configurations, resources, and policies. A cluster
has a set of components that include several services. For
instance, a healthcare component might include services, such
as primary and hospital care services. Each service consists of
workflows, information pathways, and processes. A service
could be integrated within the same organization to create
a single unit. Different systems are also used for various
purposes; for example, the municipality uses one electronic
medical record system for documentation, while the hospital
and primary healthcare services use another type. Moreover,
various resources are shared among multiple organizations and
healthcare individuals. Here, it is difficult to predetermine a
fixed set of system individuals in such a dynamic environment
as their roles and access control could be changed with system
policy change. The system is expected to scale to respond to
load variations, leading to unexpected overhead due to data
movement and high resource consumption impacting system
services, processes, and information flow.
Different distributed management information system poli-
cies of healthcare are applied to manage the system’s infor-
mation flow, such as data security, data management, health
information dissemination, healthcare system resources, and
data analysis. In such a system, communications, dependency,
precedence, information shared between the system’s clusters,
different data standards, and multiple processes might be
impacted by changing/updating policies associated with data
flow in the system.
The lack of integration between the system’s clusters and
services complicates sharing, accessing, and flowing of infor-
mation in the system. Coordination is more of a challenge due
to the increasing complexity of services and the increasing
complexity of their political environment.
The paper aims to explore challenges, opportunities, and
future research directions in the digital healthcare system
focusing on the impact of policy change/updates on the flow
of information and its propagation at different system levels.
We provide high-level information about the paper topic while
being low-level enough to represent several key research
areas that mainly focus on the challenges and opportunities
within digital healthcare systems. We mainly concentrated
our investigation on the perspectives of sharing, monitoring,
detecting, and recovering the policy change and information
flow within healthcare system processes.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II explains the
method of research. Section III explores the information flow
of the digital healthcare system. Section IV discusses the chal-
lenges of information flow within a digital healthcare system.
Section V introduces opportunities. Section VI provides a set
of future research directions followed by conclusions section.
II. RESEARCH METHOD
The paper’s objective is addressed by answering a research
question: what are the challenges and opportunities that the
digital healthcare system might face when healthcare policies
change in a distributed environment?
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Search and Review Strategy
We conducted a systematic review according to PRISMA
guidelines [1] to identify documents that reported on the policy
change and information flow in healthcare and digital health-
care systems. We reviewed the state-of-the-art focusing on
the policy’s change/update and its impact on the information
flow in the digital healthcare domain. We are interested in
investigating various mechanisms that monitor, detect, and
recover the change and its impact on the flow.
Moreover, the research paper focused on reports issued from
pioneer healthcare organizations World Health Organization
(WHO), Joint Commission International, and the Organization
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) for the
period from 1999 to 2022 for several reasons:
• Detailed quantitative data on the use of digital health
appeared during that period.
• WHO released its first Guidelines [2] on digital health.
• A significant development in digital health became active
during that time [3].
• Significant relevant research was conducted during that
period [4]–[10].
• Diversity of digital health strategies [11].
According to the previously mentioned organizations, we
selected reports and documents issued by the healthcare
associations focusing on healthcare in general and digital
healthcare in specific, and we classified them into regions
according to the published classification by WHO as shown
in Table I. After that, we selected around 19 countries from
all regions1, and we investigated the healthcare system use-
cases of these countries. The selection is made according to
the common features, the characteristics of their healthcare,
and digital healthcare systems within and across regions in
which we are interested, such as:
• Digital healthcare technology: the ways that health in-
dividuals communicate, access/store/process medical and
health records, research health information, and engage
in a person-to-person exchange of text, audio, video, and
other data.
• Digital healthcare processes: the workflows and informa-
tion pathways within and across the organization.
• Multiplicity of policies: methods followed in handling
various policies with their versions in the organization.
• Resources
variations:
various
resources
in
varying
amounts and configurations are dispatched towards the
system’s activities depending on the dynamic require-
ments. The scale of resources is the basis of the diversity
of the actions taken.
• Dynamic adaptation: adaptation to hazards and ade-
quately environment conditions and to the emerging
needs and requirements of the situation.
• Collaboration across and within an organization: the ac-
tivities are performed by organizations from different sec-
1Europe: Nordic countries, Netherlands, Czech Republic, Serbia. Asia:
Japan, China, Vietnam, Taiwan, Kurdistan. Africa: South Africa, Tunisia,
Egypt, Nigeria, Zambia, America: the USA
tors, including interactions, operations, and relationships
of system components within and across the organization.
• Consistency of information sharing across the whole
process of the system.
TABLE I
HEALTHCARE ASSOCIATIONS ACCORDING TO REGIONS
Region
Associations
Europe
Public Health Association - European commission
Council of Europe and Health
America
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)
American Public Health Association
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Asia
The Association of Asian Pacific Community Health Organizations (AAPCHO)
Africa
Africa Health Organisation (AHO)
West African Health Organisation (WAHO)
Amref Health Africa
African Union
B. Search Criteria
Moreover, papers are selected from major journals and con-
ferences2 in health, healthcare, digital healthcare, and medical
care. Based on that, we searched Web of Science, PubMed,
Scopus, Medline, Scielo, IEEE Xplore Library, ACM Digital,
Science Direct, Springer Link, and Google Scholar using
criteria: years = 1996 − 2022, and keywords = ”Healthcare
System Information Flow” OR ”Information Flow Control
Multi-Cluster System” OR ”Policy Change and Update Man-
agement” OR ”Monitor Policy Change” OR ”Detect Policy
Change” OR ”Recover Healthcare System” OR ”Health Care
Management” OR ”Healthcare Service Quality” OR ”Informa-
tion Share” OR ”Hierarchical Policy Management” OR ”IoT in
Healthcare” OR ”Cost Reduction” OR ”Healthcare Resource
Allocation” OR ”Hospital Workflow Processes” OR ”Uncer-
tainty in Healthcare Management” OR ”Digital Healthcare
Security Cloud”.
C. Search Outcome and Analysis
We ended up with more than 2000 papers distributed
unevenly among the journals and conferences.
We created a map analysis of the ”Digital Healthcare”
definition based on bibliographic analysis utilizing VOSviewer
version 1.6.18 to concentrate on the works in digital healthcare
during the period mentioned above. We determined whether
each paper: (1) had some form of qualitative/quantitative anal-
ysis, technical viewpoints, method development, or review of
methods in the keywords mentioned above, and (2) considered
a multi-cluster approach. We conducted a systematic literature
review of potential barriers to policy change and information
flow in digital healthcare systems. That left us with 241
papers for a full review. We evaluated the papers according
2healthcare, health policy management, health services research and policy,
transactions on software engineering, computing transactions, Internet of
Things, International Journal of Trend in Research and Development, Journal
of Business & Economic Policy, International Journal of Advanced Computer
Science and Applications, International Conference on Pervasive Computing
Technologies for Healthcare
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to different criteria: information flow control modeling, dy-
namic monitoring, continuous detection, data sharing, policy
consent, security concern, information flow recovery, and cost
reduction. Papers that did not focus on those criteria were
excluded. We ended up with 22 papers that are relevant for
our survey.
D. Search Boundaries
We analyzed the healthcare, digital health, and medical
systems in cloud computing, edge computing, statistical and
dynamic analyses, machine learning, telemedicine, e-Health,
security (blockchain platforms), and IoT. Due to the enormous
scope of digital health technologies and literature studies,
the paper could not discuss all aspects of these fields. The
paper aims to discuss the recent challenges and advances in
healthcare and digital healthcare.
III. INFORMATION FLOW IN HEALTHCARE SYSTEM
According to the research method conducted previously,
the infrastructure of a healthcare system consists of various
electronic medical/health records, databases, networking tech-
nologies, and other specific biomedical, administrative and
financial technologies that generate, transmit and store health-
care information [4][6][7][12]–[16]. The information flow
from healthcare providers (Health Individuals) is entered into
an Electronic Health Record (EHR) [17] and then networked
to regional and national databases through EHR [12][15][18],
as shown in Figure 1.
Based on that, a healthcare provider might generate various
complex processes that affect the flow of information within a
system [8][12][15][19][20]. The number of possible processes
increases with the number of interacted participants. Thus, the
complexity of processes varies among the interacted healthcare
participants. For example, four healthcare participants in a
hospital care team might create eight separate processes or
more, as shown in Figure 2. The main flow of information
among the healthcare participants is within two units: inpatient
care (patient and admission to medical department) and pri-
mary care (doctor, medical department, general practitioner).
Both units share information, and only authorized participants
such as medical staff could access the collected data. The
patient needs a general practitioner referral (A) for special-
ist treatment coverage, communication with laboratories and
radiology services, and sick leave. The patient uses the referral
(B) to the general practitioner’s acute-care services and makes
co-payments directly to care providers during their visits.
The general practitioner admitted the patient to the medical
department (C) to be examined and treated by a specialized
doctor (D:H). At the same time, the general practitioner
transmits prescriptions electronically to pharmacies and uses
electronic health records to store, access, and retrieve patient
data. Such flow of information is shared between the system’s
participants, and it might constitute one or more processes
that might include other sub-processes. For example, a nurse
directs a patient to a medical doctor who takes information
from the patient and records it, see Figure 2.
When referring the patient, a doctor sends a referral message
to the Health Registry Server. The message is stored in a
Repository (e.g., health, clinical, national, and statutory). The
doctor sends a referral message to a requested hospital, which
sends the patient’s information to the Registry Server for future
use. The flow of information could be direct flow, such as the
interaction between patients and physicians (e.g., doctor and
nurse), as shown in Figure 2. It could be an indirect flow
through central units such as funds and insurance companies,
as shown in Figure 1. In such a case, the hospital is responsible
for refunding and defining its policy.
The flow could be more divergent such as a patient needs
unavailable service in a hospital. In such a case, the hospital
would buy the service from another specialized hospital, which
generates a net of interacting hospitals with various processes
and sub-processes, including their dependency and precedence.
A massive amount of data from multiple components might
be generated and gathered to be stored and analyzed locally
or remotely (i.e., cloud servers) to manage the flow of infor-
mation.
Figure. 1. Healthcare Information Flow
Figure. 2. Possible Processes Between The Communicated Individuals
In such a system, the information shared between partici-
pants might be subjective to several perspectives, such as:
• Organizational and managerial perspective: organiza-
tional boundaries, system participants’ experience, variety
of resources, trust between participants within and across
organizations.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

• Technological perspective: heterogeneous resources, mul-
tiple software, various security techniques.
• Policy perspective: the attempts to review policy pro-
cesses in system workflow are challenging in resource
constraint settings with less accessibility of policy, variety
of policies, different policy versions, multiple policy path
dependencies, and fragmentation of health sectors.
• Political perspective: routine, legislation, and information
authority could limit health services offered by some
providers.
The poor share of information could have consequences
at different system levels. For example, at the computational
level, the system’s components resources (node’s CPU, mem-
ory, network) could be saturated for several reasons such as
security breaches, lack of resources, or process delay. Infor-
mation exchange delays might happen in a healthcare system
at the administrative level due to policy updates or lack of
information. A healthcare system could be bounded by having
many different policies that shape its system performance at
the communication level. For example, a policy might prohibit
general practitioners from obtaining a medical record directly
from the records of a department without the permission of a
hospital clinician. Electronic health records make it possible
for healthcare individuals to share essential information at the
security level. The share and open nature of interconnected
health records across various organizational structures might
allow access to sensitive medical data. For instance, medical
staff could override restrictions to access sensitive data that
were restricted in normal conditions when critical situations
occur.
IV. THE CHALLENGES OF HEALTHCARE POLICY CHANGE
AND INFORMATION FLOW MANAGEMENT
Due to the distributed nature and dependencies between
components of healthcare system clusters, safe interpretation
of the information exchanged between such heterogeneous
organizations, and healthcare systems might face several chal-
lenges such as changes in regulation, lack of functional in-
tegration, lack of support for delivery of information across
system components, leak of sensitive information, and lack of
interoperability among healthcare system components. In such
a case, policy violations might happen and lead to performance
degradation.
The Followings represent the challenges of healthcare and
digital healthcare systems related to policy management, pol-
icy propagation, information flow, policy change, healthcare
data storage, and information sharing focusing on monitoring,
detecting, and recovering information flow.
A. Policy Change and Information Flow
A healthcare policy defines the way information moves
throughout a system. The policy is designed to preserve
the confidentiality of data or integrity of data to prevent
information from flowing to nonauthorized healthcare par-
ticipants. However, healthcare applications involve dynamic
requirements, which motivates the development of various
kinds of dynamic policies as follows.
1) Domestic Regulations: Healthcare policy involves the
creation and implementation of laws, rules, and regulations
for managing nation’s healthcare system. Some factors could
condition information flow when a policy change propagated
to the system, such as domestic politics, including politi-
cal constraints, ideological preferences of politicians, policy
participants, and policy entrepreneurs. One way to improve
healthcare is through change policy, which involves decision-
makers and stakeholders from different institutions; however,
it is difficult to change policies because of dependency paths
between different institutions. Healthcare agencies might be
slow, bureaucratic, and inefficient. Once a country or a region
has started a policy change, the cost of a reversal is very
high. Moreover, in some areas of regulation, the division
of authority is not clearly outlined, a drawback that has
sometimes led to chaotic results. Any regulation that affects
the healthcare system also affects the quality of healthcare.
Thus, monitoring transparency in regulation is required to
ensure quality-assured, safe, and effective healthcare services.
A simple approach could be to provide interval forecasts of
the policy change/update impacts of legislation considering
cost and time.
2) Multiplicity of Policies: A healthcare system has several
policies composed of different rules with their constraints,
resources, parameters, and strategies. A change within policies
could influence the internal and external system processes.
Every process in a system might be executed in a given
run, making correlations among them nontrivial. For differ-
ent policies, the system might be re-analyzed in case of a
policy change to track dependencies between the system’s
processes at run-time and at the same time to use the collected
set of dependencies to check its processes against possible
correlations for potential indirect information flow. Healthcare
organizations find it difficult to effectively manage information
flows within and across healthcare systems as it flows within
and across diverse organizations. Thus, the change of policy
results in many problems such as inappropriate decision mak-
ing, less care management, poor quality assessment, ineffective
planning, increase in medical errors, high cost, and a decline
in the quality of patients’ care.
3) Resource Utilization: When a policy change occurs, a
system should cooperate correctly with the existing infras-
tructure to cope with the new applied rules and constraints
and avoid rewriting all existing code to account for infor-
mation flow constraints. Here, information flow congestion
could mainly happen due to the intensive use of resources.
Even though the policy rules are pre-specified, certain policy
alterations could sometimes cause intensive resource use.
Several static [21] and dynamic [22] analysis techniques are
used to track the change in information flow and policy
change; however, the literature studies neither provided run-
time dependency tracking nor addressed indirect flows [23]–
[26]. Moreover, current systems are not designed with an
automated mechanism to dynamically adapt to the change in
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

information flow policies [19][27].
The system should be able to predict future health services,
healthcare needs, and rates of utilization of services and
resources based on a foreknowledge acquired through a sys-
tematic process. The main idea is to monitor the current state
of system resources and deal with a workload based on the cur-
rent availability of the system cluster’s capacity to satisfy their
optimal performance parameters without causing performance
degradation. A good understanding of the healthcare system
requires analyzing the current and historical data to predict
future needs accurately. Thus, reliable health forecasting could
create alerts for the management of information flow and
scientifically allocate resources to reduce the costs of supplies
and resource redundancy.
4) Leak of Information: Another challenge for changing
policy is that it might allow information to flow from personal
data to public observers. Electronic IDs and tokens are used to
prevent leaks and theft of information. However, current works
[28] are not practical enough to handle the runtime policy
change, or their method was inconsistent with the decentral-
ization nature. Some works [29]–[31] rely on computationally
heavy modular exponential operations or elliptic curve point
multiplication operations. However, those works are very
complex as the number of involved calculations is enormous,
the structure of the data stored in the blockchain is difficult
to query within a blockchain, limiting data usage, and the
problem of efficiency remains to be solved. Noninterference is
utilized to keep the flow of information within the authorized
parties; however, many applications permit such downward
flows according to their defined security policy, and some valid
programs are rejected as insecure. Thus, specifying the kind of
policies that includes downgrading, determining the nature of
a downgrading mechanism, and the kinds of security guarantee
are challenging because current approaches are too restrictive
and challenging to enforce [32].
5) Lack of Interaction: Healthcare participants faced in-
teraction difficulties due to situational and organizational
factors. Lack of interaction leads to miscommunication and
duplicate work. The cost of upgrading the system with the
changed policy could be very high, which makes justifying
the return of investment a challenging task. The use of cloud-
based communication platforms like Unified Communications
as a Service (UCaaS) is highly effective in breaking down
communication barriers. However, the quality and availability
of UCaaS services are tied to an organization’s unique use
case and specific set of business demands. When degradations
in the quality of services occur, it is difficult to pinpoint
the source of the problems in such a complex environment,
making it challenging to ensure the quality of the healthcare
system participants experience. A key to successful infor-
mation flow while policy change is the seamless interaction
between healthcare participants across and within the system.
It is required to understand and control the overall effect
of governing policies on the system behavior. The system
should be self adaptable to the changes in policy and adjust
its flow accordingly so the system’s participants could receive
the information smoothly. The correctness of the adaptation
process should consider system stability, service availability,
and resource capacity. Strategies should also be in place to
help build the empathetic, relationship-building skills required
to understand the patient’s perspective.
B. Poor Sharing of Health Information
The Healthcare system requires collaborative efforts from
diverse healthcare providers and institutions to provide care
for patients; however, since a patient is no more a passive re-
cipient of care, the provision of high-quality services becomes
indispensable due to:
1) Tangled System Structure: Patients’ information is stored
in diverse registries and repositories across different health-
care organizations to simplify authorized access to healthcare
participants within the same institution. In such a system,
many participants are involved in delivering care services, each
having their interests, concerns, rules, and constraints. Some
works [33] only handled hierarchical system structures with-
out dealing with complex interrelationships between system
variables. Network analysis techniques such as the Bayesian
network [34] enable the estimation of the probabilities of
system states and their covariates. Graph pruning is utilized
to remove weak dependencies in the system structure [35].
However, it is challenging to choose prior probabilities and
their appropriate probability distributions in such a dynamic
system, especially in the presence of missing data.
Here, the conceptual framework must be set up clearly to
identify the hierarchical structure. However, it is difficult to
establish a relationship among all care entities as the system
has a hierarchical dependent nature. Failure to account for
the hierarchical structure could result in models that lead
to unclear and misleading interpretations of the relationships
under investigation, which results in additional costs in terms
of resources, protocol complexity, and performance.
Thus, fragmentation and duplication of patients’ information
might happen, which impedes the ability of diverse health-
care practitioners to share data and gain access to patients’
vital information. Accessing sensitive patients’ information
is complex and time-consuming for health care participants
as it results in high transaction latency and low transaction
throughput. Also, due to the dynamic nature of information
flow and the change within policy rules, the quality of in-
formation is variable and unreliable. Hence, authorization and
privacy should be dynamically adapted to the new policy rules
to share patient data among different institutions within the
system and give patients access to their records.
2) Information Inconsistency and Incomplete: Healthcare
providers are usually presented with incomplete and incon-
sistent information during care. In such a case, information
storage and retrieval problems might happen due to an infor-
mation gap between medical participants and patients. The
incomplete exchange of healthcare information during care
transitions might cause ineffective care and additional health-
care spending [36]. Here, rollback of process or correction is
one of the biggest challenges as it may lead to the waste of
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

many months or years of research. Detection mechanisms, as
the work in [37], could be utilized to identify inconsistency
in information. However, some mechanisms are not flexible to
be used in large-scale distributed systems, and they lack the
support for handling dynamic policy change.
3) Big Data Analytics in Healthcare: Another challenge is
utilizing different data formats. Medical data is not uniform.
Imaging data comes in all different formats, for example,
X-Rays will store differently from MRIs. Moreover, general
hospital images are different from specialist hospitals that
leverage more complex technology to ascertain more intricate
images. Here, it is not easy to ensure data captured is clean,
complete, accurate, and formatted correctly for use in multiple
systems. Thus, EHRs are less interoperable and not easily
deployable as there is no standard data format in the healthcare
industry. EHRs require efficient automated or manual updates
because medical data change minute-by-minute — this poses
challenges in determining how to update quickly without end-
user downtime and without slowing the system processes. A
series of templates should be developed and included in the
system’s architecture to create an EHR standard to support
an interoperable system. Thus, healthcare systems need in-
tegration of healthcare standards data models, such as Health
Level Seven (HL7), Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources
(FHIR), or open EHR archetype along with terminologies
like SNOMED-CT, to provide timely access to healthcare
information, reduce the administrative burden from providers,
offer one common integrated system across all care settings,
and to seamlessly share data across multiple settings (e.g.,
OpenHIE and IHE).
Different studies [13][20][38] explore approaches to solving
interoperability problems. However, there are difficulties in
adopting health standards and tools for adequate data repre-
sentation (ontologies, databases, clinical models) that ensure
healthcare professionals efficiently manage the data, such as:
• Unstructured text fields are not readable to the machines,
• The combination of text fields with health standards
was almost unanimous due to a low variety of semantic
healthcare web technology,
• The storage solution is related to the type of adopted
healthcare standard,
• The usage of use of ontologies impacts the choice of
storage solution since querying the ontological structure
is language-dependent,
• Data are sometimes not compatible for exchanging infor-
mation,
• Health and medical concepts and terms used across
the organization do not preserve their meaning when
externally shared,
• Healthcare applications that use common EHR standards
for data sharing might not ensure confidentiality and
privacy of patient’s sensitive health records that are shared
in closed and open networks.
Until information sharing is addressed adequately, poor
communication often causes cancellation of procedures, loss of
revenue, and inefficient resource utilization. Thus, healthcare
organizations need comprehensive auditing and tracking fea-
tures to guarantee compliance. Organizations need the ability
to perform patient record matching, where error and duplicate
rates are monitored, and any access to patients’ records is
detected. Hence, health participants and providers could share
sensitive patient data securely within and across systems with
the proper information protection strategies. Sharing health-
care information requires different levels of integration within
and across organizations. The need for securing EHR differs
within the same organization’s participants. A dynamic and
robust technique should be designed to permit the secured
sharing of sensitive health data in the disparate interoperable
healthcare domain. According to HealthIT [39], healthcare
participants should be provided with self-adaptable services
that allow them: to search for and access electronic health
information within their workflow, seamlessly integrate elec-
tronic data from inside and outside the healthcare system, and
set preferences and control how they can share the electronic
records, with whom, and for what purposes.
C. Healthcare Registry Management
One of the main information flow between system compo-
nents is information pathways between hospital care services
and specialist consultation. Along the path, different healthcare
providers are involved and use different electronic systems,
which are also used for different purposes within a single
organization. For instance, the municipality uses one electronic
medical record system for documentation, while hospitals
and primary healthcare services use another. In such cases,
various data types are used with no common format for
holding it commonly. The information flow among healthcare
participants, other organizations, and institutions needs to be
organized and visualized so that information can be accessed
at any time and in any place.
Due to the lack of integration between various system com-
ponents, health participants and patients might have limited
access and control over the collected data within a registry
network. In case registries have been developed and data
are collected, it might be challenging to modify the estab-
lished data collection procedures. A patient’s informed consent
should allow data to be shared within a registry network.
However, if there are established registries at a country or
region level, network models might be more efficient in terms
of costs and time. These registries are time-consuming and
resource-intensive to establish, particularly if large numbers
of patients or long-term follow-up data are needed. Moreover,
registries using network models might face some additional
challenges related to governance, data harmonization, data
sharing, and change management. Some registries incorporate
information from other data sources, such as electronic health
record data.
For multinational registries, linkage and access to other data
sources might be challenging due to varying requirements
and availability for accessing such sources [14]. Data records
that are available in certain countries might be restricted to
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

particular regions or localities and might be difficult to link
with individual patients.
D. Management of Policy Propagation in Multi-Cluster Sys-
tem
Healthcare policy poses rules and complex legal to protect
the health of individuals.
Policy rules are associated with policies to data flow steps.
Some rules and descriptions are needed to propagate policy,
such as a description of policies attached to data sources, a
description of data flow (the actions performed on the data),
and policy propagation rules (which actions do propagate a
given policy). This activity results in many numbers of rules
to be stored and managed.
As policies are associated with licenses, a suitable mecha-
nism is required to check the compatibility of licenses and
to validate constraints attached to components in a multi-
cluster system. Data Hubs are used to collect a large variety
of data sources and process them to implement the workflow
that connects data in their sources to applications that might
exploit these data. These systems create new challenges in
terms of the volume of data to be stored and require novel
processing techniques such as stream-based analysis to govern
data. Assessing what policies propagate from the licenses
associated with the data sources to the output of a given data-
intensive process is a significant problem. Policy rules could
be compressed using an ontology of the possible relations
between data entities [22].
However, the ontology matching problem could arise due to
finding the semantic mappings between entities of two given
ontologies. The coherency check algorithm allows effective
reasoning with a compressed rule base but assessing policy
rules’ coherence demands a partnership between participants
of different healthcare sectors and requires cache coherency
awareness.
A generic graph matching algorithm is used to match and
convert schema into directed labeled graphs and then uses fix-
point computation to determine correspondent entities (nodes)
in the graphs. However, the algorithm does not function
accurately:
• If there is no label for the graph arcs,
• In case the labels are almost identical, or
• If there are a few levels and most of the relations are
associated with the concepts at the top of the graph.
Besides that, several methods [26] are used to enforce
information flow policy propagation. Run-time mechanisms
that tag data with information flow labels have been employed
at operating system and programming language levels. Static
analyses have also been developed to ensure that informa-
tion flow within the system complies with policy rules. The
problem of false positives and negatives is less in the case
of dynamic analysis because they analyze by running the
test cases. However, dynamic analyses are inaccurate as they
cannot observe all execution paths. They require a large
number of test cases to ensure a certain confidence level in de-
tecting violations and to cover all information pathways. Thus,
to guarantee noninterference, the techniques either terminate
executions that might release sensitive information or ignore
updates that might leak information.
Another method to enforce information flow policy prop-
agation is through a security type system, which enforces
security properties within a system application. Hence, the
system allows the flow of information for the changed policy if
it is type-checked and contains no improper information flow.
Nevertheless, such methods are too strict for use in most
real-world applications, such as non-interference policy. Thus,
several approaches are proposed to control various policy
releases, such as information declassification and formal mod-
eling, so an active attacker might not manipulate the system to
learn more secrets than what passive attackers already know.
However, the performance of evaluating those approaches
is complex in the case of analytical methods or discrete
event simulation. Regardless of their dependability on specific
commercial-off-the-shelf simulation packages, more invasive
revisions of their model are needed, especially with policy
changes. Controlling policy change and its versions should
contemplate its relations with system configurations and tan-
gled clusters, considering the maximum capacity of the cluster
and cost.
E. Information Flow and Policy Change - Monitor
Monitoring information flow and policy change is a way to
consider the system state and the execution paths. Here, we
should consider the system’s current state and the executed
paths and non-executed paths to monitor the policy change and
ensure that sensitive data will not be revealed to unauthorized
parties.
Data label tags and semantic rules could be used to monitor
information flow for sequential processes and observe the
application’s inputs and current values in variables. Each
application input receives a tag, which reflects its security level
and the current value of the variable. Here, an evaluation of
rules is applied to return a value, and a tag is created to reflect
both all the previous information flow and the generated one
by the evaluation [23].
However, monitoring the information flow of changed pol-
icy and its prorogation is challenging in a multi-cluster en-
vironment because of the diversity of data structures, various
data type formats, dependencies among system components,
and the precedence between system components. Here, a
directional graph could be used to represent each subject
as a node, and the flow of information is represented as a
directed edge. The graph could be further refined by using
an information flow vector to divide the complex directional
graph into sub-layers and quantifying the flow of information
[25][26]. An authentication mechanism could be used to com-
pare authenticated credentials to a set of known credentials to
determine the access of authorized applications. Nevertheless,
massive amounts of data and rules might be generated, aggre-
gated, processed, and stored. Collecting a large variety of data
sources, and processing them to implement a workflow that
connects data, creates new challenges in terms of the volume
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

of data to be streamed, analyzed, managed, and stored. Such
data could be associated with new rules and constraints that
require policy rules to be adaptable to reflect and propagate
the new modifications to the system. Hence, it is challenging
to develop a monitoring technique that coordinates various
monitor instances running locally on the edge gateways and
optimizes the communication cost when processing the data
while minimizing the overhead of CPU, memory, and network.
Thus, coherency check algorithms, properties matching,
static analysis or tag checking algorithms allow practical
reasoning about the change of policy rules. However, several
challenges have arisen [21][22], such as identifying policy
properties to be monitored at different system levels. Changing
or updating a piece of data or a policy rule might alter
the hierarchical dependency between system components and
might affect the flow of information within the system. The
situation becomes complicated when hundreds of global regu-
lations, federals, states, and region-specific mandates with too
many updates and versions of policies. Every time a policy is
impacted by a change in regulation, it goes through a cycle of
updates, reviews, approvals, communication, and attestations.
Hence, when changes happen in a policy, the modifications
affect the system’s participants. Unless new policies become
established, organizational performance might be negatively
affected as participants become accustomed to new ways
of performing tasks or different expectations for personal
behavior. An overhead might happen to a system components
due to strangulation of the information flow in processes. In
such a case, the performance of services, applications, nodes,
and communication networks vary significantly depending on
runtime variations in running conditions such as availability
of resources and the network connection quality between
different application components distributed over the Internet.
Thus, several factors should be considered during policy
change/update, such as hierarchical dependency between sys-
tem components, the flow of information in processes, the
impact of policy changes on the system’s properties, and the
necessity of the change/update and its relevance.
Monitoring policy at every system’s stage helps identify
and address problems in information flow pathways. Hence,
a systematic and consistent solution is needed to integrate
policy change management to be forwarded faster and mitigate
compliance risks.
F. Information Flow and Policy Change - Detection
Dynamic detection is a technique that leverages metadata
tags to track the information flow and policy change among
different entities.
Information flow policies define the authorized paths
throughout a system. These policies are designed to preserve
confidentiality and integrity of data by associating labels and
rules to represent a security class with information and entities
containing that information and enforce some rules about the
conditions under which data could flow throughout the system.
Several techniques of information flow are proposed to
detect policy changes and to analyze them for signs of pos-
sible incidents such as violations of security policies or non-
acceptable use of policies [21][24][40]. Static and dynamic
analysis techniques are used for verifying a program’s compli-
ance with information flow policy. However, static analyses are
less precise than dynamic analyses, as they consider only the
executable flow paths, generate many false positives, and pro-
vide no runtime dependency tracking mechanism. Static and
dynamic analyses are combined to reduce the false positives
and minimize uncertainty within both information flow and
policy propagation that could arise due to lack of information,
growing scale, and complexity of the data. Thus, machine
learning techniques are used to build detection models that
characterize the activity of the system’s components at runtime
[41][42]; however, they require high computational power, and
they need to be trained from the beginning if new data arrive.
Hence, examining logs, identifying new rules and labels,
and checking tags during runtime are used to simplify detect-
ing illegal information flow and determine policy violations.
However, applying those mechanisms to data flow might be
a complex process as they often require merging data from
disparate sources. Such data merging might cause potential
disclosure of sensitive information, data redundancy, lack of
interoperability, shortfall of data sharing, workflow interrup-
tion, and barriers of interdependency between system’s pro-
cesses. Thus, to tackle those challenges, some factors should
be considered, such as: identifying properties that effectively
could be used to detect the policy change/update. Here, it
is difficult to detect the change in policies because of the
dependency between the system’s clusters and its components
and their impact on the system’s constraints and resources.
Moreover, the eligibility of policy’s change/update during
runtime should be checked to prevent illegal information flow
to the system’s components, as illegal flow might occur even
if every access request is authorized.
Because of the complexity of policy’s rules change/update,
and the varying degrees of security levels between clusters,
it is challenging to make these systems secure as security is
a crosscutting requirement scattered over distributed clusters.
A mismatch or local vulnerability between security mecha-
nisms adopted at different clusters might impact the flow of
information between clusters and cause an overall system’s
performance degradation. Thus, detecting policy change in
a distributed system requires keeping track of all processes,
rules, and resources and applying an authentication mechanism
to each cluster’s components.
Here, changing policy rules might allow unauthorized ac-
cess. Users acquire their necessary permissions by being
assigned membership to suitable roles; this might significantly
reduce the system’s overhead since users with similar access
requirements are grouped into the same set of roles, and the
requisite permissions are included in those roles. However,
in such a system, policy’s rules might be restricted to the
share of resources, the hierarchical directed or in-directed
relationship, and the precedence between multiple distributed
clusters. Hence, tags are used to indicate different security
policies with different instruction types; however, utilizing tags
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

might cause a waste of tag storage as
• Tags’ size grows with the incremental flow of data,
• Not all data are involved in computing, and
• Many tags might not be used at runtime.
Moreover, different tag propagation and tag check rules
might be customized according to corresponding instruction
types [24][43]. Here, performance overheads might occur, and
the complexity of tag storage might be increased due to the
utilization of extra detecting operations. That, in turn, intro-
duced high hardware overhead, high false positives/negatives
values, and a lack of flexibility for specific types of policy
reconfiguration for different program contexts (e.g., security
policy).
Other works, such as in [44], utilized prespecified heuristic
rules, which require experts to be defined based on the
historical knowledge of system behavior.
Thus, a dynamic approach for managing information flow
could be applied to cope with policy changes and eliminate
repeated and inefficient flows.
G. Information Flow and Policy Change - Recovery
Healthcare systems recovery is defined as ”the rebuilding,
restoration and improvement of the healthcare system’s com-
ponents and its core functions, in alignment with the principles
of building sustainable development” [12].
Healthcare system processes are performed sequentially or
simultaneously by various participants within and across the
system, and they are organized through several tasks in a
workflow. The workflow might be subject to vulnerabilities
such as malicious attacks. A malicious attacker might create an
illegal task or corrupt a task in the workflow. Such malicious
tasks would possibly corrupt data items accessed by some
benevolent tasks, or it might trigger other workflow tasks
due to dependencies and precedence between them. Moreover,
tasks that depend upon malicious tasks might be corrupted and
might affect the flow of information within the system.
Some literature studies investigated the recovery from ma-
licious attacks [45]. In such systems, a transaction executed
by a malicious attacker might corrupt other transactions in the
workflow. Techniques and algorithms are used for assessing
and recovering that damage, such as parsing a database log
to check which transactions are affected by malicious transac-
tions and undoing/redoing the affected transactions. Store the
dependent transactions in separate structures is also applied
to preserve a log from being traversed for damage assessment
and to be used later for repair. A backup service is utilized as
a way of recovery to allow restoring the system’s state after a
severe attack.
However, such techniques for recovering damage are not
adequate for workflows as transactions in a database are inde-
pendent entities. Hence, a workflow classification is utilized
to classify workflow into documents, processes, and system
workflows to identify potential types of attacks and to restore
the most recent consistent process state after a failure or
rollback of inconsistent execution of interrupted tasks [40].
Another recovery way is to resume the execution of the process
from the closest consistent point where the attack occurred
[46].
A recovery action could be taken on a particular occurrence
with an immediate response at the desired state or a set of
states to apply a recovery mechanism. Here, the system should
calculate its current state and capabilities depending on a set
of actions to transition from the current state to the desired
one. A resource controller could help assign spare resources
to the requesting cluster’s components. Once the resources are
reserved, the cluster regulates the allocation and reallocation
of the assigned resources considering their utility optimization
and cost reduction.
Alternatively, a recovery could be made by removing a
compromised task from the process, restoring the process to a
normal state, cleaning up corrupted data in data memory, and
releasing the resources taken by the compromised task.
Hence, for deciding which recovery action to take when a
policy change is detected, a mechanism should automatically
determine one or more recovery plans based on the type of
detected change, considering the control and information flow
among tasks across the impacted components in the system.
Here, constraints might be applied to choose an alternative
recovery action if the immediate previous action failed. In
contrast to ranked actions, the execution order is computed
dynamically at runtime; however, there are some challenges,
such as defining a domain-specific language to describe the
capabilities of each component in the system in terms of
actions, roles, responsibilities, and information pathways. In
such a case, high overhead during runtime might happen
due to various constraints on the flow of information across
distributed clusters.
Moreover, a deep understanding of the underlying infras-
tructure is required to develop a recovery-based strategy for
determining an optimal recovery plan and recommending a
set of successful recovery actions for a given violation. The
strategy should consider the system’s available resources,
allowable information pathways, and regulatory and business
constraints (e.g., computational budget). An executable model
of a recovery plan could be designed to carry out the re-
covery in a distributed and coordinated way across various
components in the system. Here, the system’s resources, status,
capabilities, and dependency between components should be
considered to check the extent of damage after a failure.
Furthermore, suppose all system policy parties’ response
ends, and the recovery phase begins. In that case, the consen-
sus of the system’s parties might take some time before the
recovery transition mechanism and structures are formalized,
even if all parties agree that the transition phase has begun.
Ensuring resilient and responsive healthcare systems are
vital to achieving the objective of Universal Health Coverage
(UHC) Vision 2023, and for advancing progress on the Sus-
tainable Development Goals (SDGs). Hence, creating effective
health systems requires well planned and well-implemented
recovery strategy.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

V. HEALTHCARE OPPORTUNITIES AND FUTURE
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The Healthcare system is a dynamic environment with
significant opportunities such as cost concerns, service qual-
ity, uncertainty in new technology, and complexity due to
diversity of tasks, diversity of care pathways, lack of sharing,
the vulnerability of patients, dependency, and relationships
between system’s components. The healthcare system aims to
improve, secure, and accelerate care services to participants.
The following explains the potential opportunities and future
research directions in healthcare systems, mainly focusing on
information flow and policy change share, security, monitor-
ing, detection, and recovery.
A. Cost Reduction
Several factors could aid in reducing healthcare costs, such
as utilizing information technology investments in the health-
care industry to increase profitability, quality of products, and
services.
Providing online healthcare services decreases the process-
ing costs of many activities compared with manual handling
operations. Such a way might reduce the number of inefficient
processes by allowing data sharing across multiple healthcare
sectors, pooling the skills and capacities of healthcare partic-
ipants for problem-solving, contributing to the elimination of
mistakes from manual procedures, and reducing the required
time for transactions.
Moreover, the cost of components, which are needed to
support capabilities such as sensing, tracking, and controlling
mechanisms, needs to be relatively inexpensive through uti-
lizing cost reduction strategies (e.g., service standardization,
performance tuning). Such strategies could prioritize patients’
health while examining opportunities to lower overall costs
and increase patient satisfaction.
However, the adaptability of the healthcare system might
complicate attaining the goal of reducing the overall cost, as
it is prone to inefficiencies such as unnecessary care, waste in
healthcare, unwarranted clinical practice variation, administra-
tive burden, and fraud. Thus, cost-containment policies might
be applied to target all aspects of the healthcare system, such
as prices, volumes, supply, demand, and market processes.
An effective financing system should estimate a potential
expenditure based on the volume of data and costs and might
use the estimation to change the number of funding sources
to meet budget constraints across different hospitals.
One of the cost reduction methods in the healthcare system
is reassessing the organization’s healthcare planning processes
to improve accountability and agility of the overall healthcare
participants and system’s processes. Another way is to use
an advanced cost accounting tool (e.g., Activity-based cost
analyses, marginal cost analysis, minimum pricing analysis)
to drive a deeper understanding of the system’s targets and
achieve them. Hence, an organization should invest in the
healthcare processes to educate healthcare leaders on the usage
of advanced cost accounting tools and understand the data.
The healthcare delivery system needs to automate both the
connection of healthcare devices and the data centralization to
reduce the cost of system management and patient care and to
optimize the healthcare system’s processes. An autonomous
healthcare system could drastically reduce the system’s cost
management, decrease patient care costs, and improve the
system’s performance through reallocating resources according
to the organization’s needs.
B. Healthcare System Services Quality
The quality of healthcare system service affects the satisfac-
tion of healthcare individuals and could increase the likelihood
of desired health outcomes. It consists of technical (type of
delivered service to a patient) and functional components
(service delivery process). These components contribute to
healthcare quality and affect the success of its services through
(1) providing direct and remote access to health and med-
ical records. (2) Enable automatic data sorting to enhance
the generation of information. (3) Reduce medical errors in
healthcare services. (4) Analyze causes of a system failure.
(5) Effectively communicate and collaborate with other health
professionals or institutions. (6) Regular monitoring of the
services based on importance and priority. (7) Avoid the
suspension of healthcare services. (8) Support standardized
treatment policies and protocols that minimize errors. (9) De-
velop a financing mechanism that supports continuous quality
improvement. (10) Enable prevention, detection, and response
to health security threats.
To increase the outcomes of healthcare and to minimize re-
source waste, the quality of healthcare system services should
include characteristics such as availability, compatibility, per-
formance, interoperability, accessibility, privacy, confidential-
ity, accuracy, reliability, and comprehensiveness [15]. The
system should allow continuous, convenient, timely access to
care services, compliance with clinical practice guidelines, and
support continuous monitoring of patient conditions. These
lead to accurate and comprehensive patient medical records,
which increase the efficiency of diagnosis and treatment ser-
vices.
Moreover, the ability to exchange and share records across
different departments and organizations leads to cost effi-
ciency, effective patient treatment, elimination of redundancy,
enhancement of doctor-patient relationships, and enables au-
thorized centralized care coordination to provide access to
high-quality people-centered health services.
The quality of healthcare services mainly depends on partic-
ipants’ knowledge and technical skills. Some barriers impact
the quality of the healthcare system, such as centralization,
bureaucracy, and hierarchical dependency among organization
and institution sectors. Such barriers might cause delays in
the provision of healthcare services and might lead to a
negative perception of the provided service quality in case
it is unnecessary by participants.
Thus, the healthcare system should focus on: the design of
participants-oriented-service processes, tracking whether the
system’s policies and processes are being met, and creating
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

collaborations within and beyond the system. In such case,
relational analysis (e.g., grey relational analysis, analytic hier-
archy process) [47] could be utilized to improve the quality of
healthcare system service delivery and to analyze the relations
between system’s services.
Furthermore, the quality of healthcare system services could
be impacted by a service failure such as a service breach
that might affect the service’s availability and reliability. The
severity of service failure and the occurrence or frequency of
failure should be measured to manage and recover the failure
according to the health quality and standards (e.g., CAHPS
6.P[48], Six Sigma Healthcare [49]).
Moreover, because of the heterogeneity inherent in services,
different participants within the same organization might ex-
perience various instances of service failure and its recov-
ery. However, if the service failure is detected early, the
system’s reliability and participants’ satisfaction would be
increased. Improving quality of health services requires good
communication and collaboration among healthcare providers
to provide effective and efficient services and promote shared
responsibility to deliver the highest-quality care.
C. Uncertainty in Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHTs)
IoT devices offer opportunities for healthcare provider or-
ganizations through providing remote tracking and monitoring
to reduce healthcare costs, optimize resources, and provide
accurate data collection.
As the number of connected IoT devices grows, the amount
of generated data increases and becomes more complex, which
requires a mechanism to analyze data and utilize repositories
that hold all volumes of information. Thus, healthcare organi-
zations find it challenging to adopt IoT because of:
• The lack of standards and security practices,
• The challenges of integrating data from IoT applications
into legacy systems,
• Inadequate privacy regulations,
• The use of expired infrastructure,
• Lack of consensus regarding IoT protocols,
• The high cost of implementing IoT technologies,
• Diversity in devices calculation and communication ca-
pabilities, and
• resources constraints.
Several factors might influence the occurrence of uncer-
tainty in IoT, such as:
1) Security and Privacy: Confidentiality and privacy are
important concerns in healthcare. Low security and misconfig-
ured device and network settings could affect patients’ privacy
and their data. The use of various providers mandated to
submit confidential data to law enforcement agencies, this
could affect the adoption and use of the technology. The
networks that transmit data are often highly heterogeneous
and are frequently managed by third parties, which makes
the protection of security and privacy and governance of this
data even more challenging. Moreover, an organization could
identify risks associated with IoT devices and should pre-
authorize the security team to help remove vulnerable devices
from the network during attacks. It could be aware of all assets
that can impact the security of the healthcare IoT network such
as limit access to the IoT network, separate network segment
for IoT devices, encrypt the network, protect the data, ensure
and manage the communication of authorized devices.
2) Hardware and Software Failures: Hardware and soft-
ware failures might put healthcare tasks at risk, as a delay
might occur to one or more processes, which might propagate
to the entire workflow. As a result, multiple devices might not
work well together, or the functionality of devices produced
by different manufacturers might have varying characteristics.
In such a case, a security breach in IoT might occur and leak
personal information to unauthorized participants or a device
malfunction. Furthermore, with different hardware solutions,
the software has to be timely updated to a safely stay at
its latest version and allows the aggregation of data from
various devices. Such constant updates require lots of effort
and might spawn many technical issues. Hence, policy should
strengthen current requirements for data exchange among
electronic health records, the emerging IoT devices, and solu-
tions. It might maintain an inventory of all healthcare systems
connected to the network so that organization could quickly
identify, and address risks associated with IoT devices.
3) Devices Resources Constrains: In healthcare, many de-
vices are connected, producing a massive amount of data
and information, which might affect the computational and
processing capabilities of devices. Offloading could be utilized
to partition and execute tasks between devices and edge
nodes to minimize energy consumption [50]. A mathematical
programming-based framework is utilized to allocate tasks
while satisfying operational constraints optimally [51]. How-
ever, those ways focus on optimizing limited system param-
eters (e.g., processing capacity and network bandwidth, and
couldn’t handle the dynamic nature of policy change.
4) Interoperability and Devices Heterogeneity: Many de-
vices now have sensors to collect data and often commu-
nicate with a server in their language. Each manufacturer
has its proprietary protocol, which means sensors made by
different manufacturers cannot necessarily communicate with
each other. Device management requires directories of devices’
functionality, protocols, terminologies, and standards compli-
ance. Interoperability is a significant challenge in creating
medical devices that easily connect with other devices and
sensors to health providers’ electronic medical record systems.
However, it takes time to corroborate such a massive amount
of data with the different terminologies and standards on every
system and might even yield inaccurate results. Moreover,
current health standards are challenging to use due to the
lack of adequate code for electronic medical records and
because they describe fixed timing of examination results, not
being a sequence of patient episodes. Thus, migrating to more
interoperable technical solutions should ensure continuous and
uninterrupted services and provide universal guidelines on
the consistency and agreement of data in a format, queries,
and synchronization. The solution should support workflow
consistency in how technology helps decision support, clinical
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

guidelines, rules, and user interfaces. It should provide an
approach that deals with different device calculation and
communication capabilities to share, understand, interpret and
use data without ambiguity. The solution should use low-cost
interfaces [52] and open APIs (such as HL7 and FHIR) to
solve the usability and cost issues as they distinctly define
security mandates and transmission protocols which lower the
risk of errors and have real-time ability to share and access
data.
D. Enhance Healthcare Services Security - Blockchain
The healthcare system involves many processes such as
emergency department operations, managing finances, and pa-
tient transfers to different facilities. Such processes constitute
one or more workflows, which might involve repetitive tasks
related to one or more aspects (e.g., patient transfers can
be plotted out as a series of conditional tasks). To provide
better internal controls that minimize risks, eliminate workflow
cycles, and reduce overhead, the healthcare system focuses
on protecting its processes and services against unauthorized
access, hardware theft, data manipulation, and common threats
and exposures. Thus, rules and principles are enforced to
regulate the access and transmission of data to healthcare
participants and providers. Here, blockchain techniques (e.g.,
public, private, hybrid, and consortium) appeared to provide a
secure, authentic, and transparent distributed technology that
could integrate the healthcare system’s services from multiple
nodes in the blockchain network to enhance their computation,
storage, and transactions processing. Furthermore, it provides:
• Better healthcare data-sharing,
• Assists in the diverse use cases of healthcare,
• Trace data shared within and across a business network
to provide well-controlled privileges to healthcare partic-
ipants.
To safely exchange healthcare information between au-
thorized participants, blockchain-oriented platforms [53], and
blockchain models [54] could be used to evaluate healthcare
data sharing requirements in different sources, validate data
accuracy and patient engagement, and improve the dissemi-
nation of accumulated information in a secure, interoperable
environment. Other models [55][56] are used to evaluate the
performance of new patient block components and system
configurations, improve data accessibility between healthcare
providers, and provide a secure runtime monitoring system.
Such a system enables healthcare participants to track the
healthcare status of their patients remotely while safely main-
taining the latest history of patients. Here, authorized partici-
pants only could view patients’ identities within the authorized
network. A hyperledger platform [55] is one of the techniques
that could be used to provide patient-controlled healthcare data
management.
To protect patients’ sensitive data from being tampered with
and to eliminate the cascading of malicious behavior to the
overall system, digital signature introduces another level of
authenticity. It uses a cryptographic operation that binds the
signature and the signed data by adopting the idea of the Public
Key Infrastructure (PKI) feature. A unique digital signature is
issued to lock the data and prevent any additional signatures,
annotations, or data fill-ins.
Another way is to use smart-contract-enabled blockchains
[56] like Ethereum to create digital currencies (tokens), which
could remotely monitor the healthcare system, and securely
identify, authenticate, and authorize system participants. Here,
smart-contract might be utilized to create representations of
existing health and medical records that are stored within
individual system components. The contract might contain
records of metadata ownership, permissions, data integrity,
relationships, and state transition functions to carry out policies
and enforce a set of rules regulating specific records access.
Hence, blockchain allows the distribution of EHRs among
different health care sectors to manage patient-sensitive infor-
mation through several nodes of an interconnected network.
However, correctly arranging the gathered data and defining
their dependency and precedence in a blockchain network
are problems due to the existence of private transactions
and the concept of cryptographic protocols that allow private
calculation of encrypted transactions to be accessible into the
blockchain. Thus, blockchain healthcare technologies could
optimize system performance while retaining small processing
and computation capabilities for data representation. More-
over, the most promising applications of blockchain in health-
care are for dynamic patient consent and identity management.
However, to enhance the healthcare sector, the healthcare
applications need to support big data scalability to deal with
the massive amount of health data, cross-border health data,
and their policies. As the volume of data and transactions
increases, a mechanism is needed to minimize the delay
of storing and processing massive data access transactions
considering the incomplete and missing data provided.
E. Improve Healthcare System Recovery
The ultimate goal of healthcare system recovery is to design
a system that can respond to the dynamic demands, perform its
functions effectively and sustainably, increase health systems
resilience, and mitigate the risk of future healthcare policy
change. Health system recovery is determined or influenced
by the typology of emergency care. Hence, to understand the
system’s processes and its tasks, it is mandatory to understand
the need for recovery and the emergency of recovery to
develop a recovery plan. The recovery might be based on
restoring the system to a specific point while investing in risk
reduction and strengthening preparedness for future hazards.
To enhance the healthcare system, some critical elements
for enhancing the system’s recovery could include:
1) Recovery Duration: Some criteria could be used to
assess the phase of recovery, such as urgency, sustainability,
and cost-effectiveness of the tasks being carried out. Recovery
duration is another criterion that could impact the recovery
phase. Once the initial recovery has been carried out, other
residual or outstanding activities could be integrated into
subsequent standard planning mechanisms. The duration of the
recovery phase could be a short-term or long-term recovery.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

However, differences in the types and evolution of emergencies
might increase due to an overlap between the two phases and
emergency response and recovery. Thus, dividing the recovery
process into phases is essential to facilitate standardization and
harmonization.
2) Recovery Conflicts: Conflicts are typically protracted,
and there might be an assortment of health participants with
different degrees of legitimacy from different organizations.
When multiple participants are involved, recovery might be
delayed, and efforts could be duplicated as recovery from
conflicts passes through a long process of restoring the capac-
ity of the health system’s components and core public health
functions. The process includes restoring the government and
communities’ capacity to rebuild and recover from crises
and preventing relapses. Moreover, a system with various re-
sources, capacities, and capabilities of its participants’ should
be supported by a government throughout each recovery phase
to avoid recovery conflict within and across the healthcare
organizations. Although it is critical to have a concerted health
sector recovery mechanism led by a government to focus
on funding and resources, a complete understanding of the
process is necessary to distinguish between conflict and non-
conflict-related emergencies.
3) Up-To-Date Recovery Mechanism: Hence, self-healing
systems could be adopted to take corrective recovery actions
and trigger an alert if a system does not satisfy constraints
while identifying lessons learned from healthcare members to
support future recovery. Thus, to meet recovery objectives,
developing a recovery plan should support dynamic monitor-
ing tools and evaluation mechanisms to measure the progress
of the recovery process and its outcomes. The plan might
identify funding sources for an early recovery plan and provide
a recovery strategy with contingency plans for different scenar-
ios. The development of a recovery strategy and plan should
be based on the results of the recovery assessments. Thus,
a recovery mechanism should adapt to the new integration
principles to ensure that the recovery is aligned with national
priorities across healthcare sectors to manage unavoidable
trade-offs between short and long-term recovery priorities
and economic and environmental policy goals. The recovery
mechanism should ensure that the recovery responsibilities,
including financial requirements and policy arrangements, are
transferred to support the recovery phase. In conjunction
with the recovery process, an assessment of post-recovery
is needed to determine the overall recovery funding needs.
Thus, adapting public financial management systems could
support the government and provide international best recovery
practices. The recovery mechanism should adapt to the new
health sector recovery roles, responsibilities, and priorities,
including those of the municipality, the district private health
sector, and partners. The recovery action should consider the
coordinated entities within and across the organizations, even
with prior regulations, strategies, mechanisms, and platforms.
4) Recovery Consistency: A consistent recovery between
healthcare system organizations and their participants helps
meet their perspective needs. The coordination and definition
of roles and responsibilities during recovery should be sup-
ported by national legislation or a memorandum of under-
standing before a recovery mechanism formalizes the roles or
before the failure spreads to the whole system. The recovery
mechanism should be confirmed with health sector partners
to be used for consulting stakeholders on the draft recovery
plan. The mechanism should provide a recovery guide for the
use of stakeholders to identify priority health sector repairs
with partners. The mechanism should allocate the cost and
time of immediate recovers required for the system. During
this period, a cost indemnity agreement should be designed
and agreed upon within and across healthcare organizations to
guarantee immediate recovery action.
5) Seamless Communication and Collaboration: As health-
care is a tangled system with multiple participants and proto-
cols, data-sharing protocols and agreements should be devel-
oped by organizations that have access to and stewardship of
required data. The recovery mechanism should consider the
variety of data-sharing protocols and agreements to facilitate
communications and collaboration and support real-time in-
formation flows between and among health organizations. The
mechanism should ensure consistent and up-to-date repair to
reduce duplication [16]. A gap evaluation analysis is required
to assess system capacity and capability to meet recovery
objectives and identify the differences between the current
state of the system and the desired one. The mechanism
should re-assess the initial needs and the recovery plan (inputs,
outputs, results), modify the process as required by results,
and disaggregate the indicators under observations. A recovery
index of health organizations (e.g., WHO and PAHO recovery
health index) could be used to assess the impact of recovery
on the system and provide oversight over health and safety
guidelines to repair the healthcare infrastructure. The recov-
ery should be related to the system’s architecture. Here, a
systematic way could be developed to provide a sound basis
for making objective decisions about design trade-offs and to
enable accurate predictions about the system’s capabilities and
qualities free from bias and hidden assumptions.
F. Develop Dynamic Monitor for Healthcare Information
Flow and Policy Change
Continuous monitoring of the health system’s services helps
identify bottlenecks in information flow. Such bottlenecks
could cause delays, overload, and blockages in workflow
processing, leading to dissatisfied health participants, loss of
revenue, time, and wasted resources. Continuous monitoring
creates a vast bulk of data that requires an expert system to
perform analysis and processing dynamically.
To monitor the change within policy and control its impact
on information flow, the interaction and the communication
mechanisms of persistent data, processes, and sub-process
should be analyzed and presented in various visual formats and
charts. Current monitoring tools cannot provide information
about patient health status, and they do not visualize all the
recorded data on the same platform [23][57][58].
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Furthermore, determining which system’s service is not
satisfactorily performing could make better decisions about
reconfiguring components, services, and resources to run pro-
cesses more smoothly. Heterogeneous computing resources
should be reconfigured and scaled according to the monitoring
data in a distributed environment. Here, system components
and services might contain some redundant processes and
dependencies, which introduce noise in a workflow that ad-
versely impacts the performance of inline and real-time system
analysis. Thus, noise reduction at the process level could be
used to reduce computational complexity and achieve better
system performance.
Hence, monitoring could be carried out at different system
levels to provide continuous information flow monitoring with
the policy rules that might change over time and incorpo-
rate every change into the system without causing service
interruption. A notification also might be triggered for any
workflow processes that might conflict with given policy rules
without re-analyzing the whole workflow. Thus, the monitor
mechanism should:
• Distinguish the discrete processing stages within the
processes.
• Describe the information flow mechanism through a
system.
• Characterize the type of data items that flow through the
processes.
• Identify violations within information flow and policy
rules.
• Find locations for inserting data validation monitors,
insert data collection points for later analysis, and dis-
tinguish between data dependencies and control depen-
dencies.
A monitor system should consider a real-time wireless trans-
mission connection between the monitoring tool and the mon-
itored device to improve the monitoring accuracy. Monitoring
properties associated with a potential risk prediction should be
further analyzed to overcome challenges such as unpredicted
faults, massive data streaming, and detection accuracy. The
amount of collected data from monitored properties is large
and intractable. Hence, it is required that the monitoring
system distinguishes between health degradation and faulty
measurements.
G. Continuous Detection for Healthcare Information Flow
and Policy Change
Detection is the process of comparing current normal pro-
cesses with the observed ones to identify significant deviations.
In such a case, policy properties (point-method) could be
identified in the monitored data and the information flow, or
a score (likelihood-ratio-method) could be associated with the
arrived data to indicate how likely there is a change in the
policy. In both methods, the main goal is to reduce detection
delay.
Furthermore, label-method might be used to detect the
policy change for each component in the system. However,
in a dynamic multi-cluster environment, statistical methods
do not provide accurate results due to the regular update of
the system’s processes and policy rules. They are ineffective
in detecting real-time noise changes given limited information
flow.
Here, multiple components could be existed within each
cluster in a system, along with dependencies and precedence
among them. In such a system, detecting the change in policy
rules might be difficult because all the flow of information and
processes among components should be understood according
to the updated policy. Thus, continuous policy change within
and across such a hierarchical system requires a complete
understanding of policy rules and needs to trace executed
and non-executed paths of information flow and processes.
Hence, a detection mechanism might be trained with sufficient
behavioral and temporal features, work on each sub-process,
and decide whether a policy is changed to avoid policy
conflict and prevent the system’s workflow delay or bottleneck.
According to [16][59], the detection mechanism should:
• Minimize the detection errors to provide an efficient
system that can be managed remotely.
• Support low computational complexity and few amounts
of memory to store training data.
• Be practical in health and medical applications to reduce
redundancy within the monitored parameters.
• Classify different types of policy change based on the
measured time series (e.g., regular time change, noisy
time change, short time change, long time change).
Moreover, the detection mechanism should be self-adaptable
to deal with dynamic changes within policies during runtime,
identify relevant changes, and compare policies across and
within a system. Once the change is detected, the mechanism
might give a participant the ability to modify the information
flow or policy rule during runtime and choose whether to
continue, alternate, or abort the execution of a process. The
detection should help spread the approved policy change to the
rest of the system, considering the consent of its participants
without causing policy conflict. For example, patients might
enter personal information into a system to know whether or
not they can get a refund for a surgery. The system provides
only a refund for a specific type of surgery. When the system’s
policy rules change to incorporate other types of surgeries, the
system should automatically update the rules and incorporate
the changes without affecting the system’s flow of information
and processes.
H. Policy of Data Sharing and Consent
In a healthcare system, the change in data collection and the
usage practices require the respective policy to be revised and
updated to reflect that change. In such a case, the system par-
ticipant’s consent is taken to be able to gather and process the
collected data. Hence, a policy should explain the implications
of granting or withholding consent to the participants so that
data could be gathered and shared safely between authorized
participants across and within systems. Thus, the data sharing
and consent policy should consider:
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

1) Comply With Standards: Data sharing of healthcare
participants should comply with legal requirements and se-
curity standards (e.g., ISO 27001, ISO/TC 215, ISO/TS 1360,
ISO/IEC 29100). Data sharing might require knowledge of
data formats, methods for securing data from malicious at-
tacks, knowledge of available data management tools and soft-
ware, and a complete understanding of the used applicable reg-
ulations and consent models. Thus, formal and comprehensive
information security policies with respective implementation
guidelines should be adopted to cover information security,
access to information and systems, application security, infor-
mation classification, and related security standards. The data
sharing policy should provide guidelines, including constraints
of regulatory requirements on when specific access conditions
should be implemented.
2) Policy Conflict Management: Policy conflicts could arise
due to conflicting requirements related to policy changes.
Here, participants have to understand the updated policy to
understand the changes, which is a complicated task. Thus,
most system participants cannot make informed decisions
about their privacy. Hence, analysis techniques (e.g., network
analysis) [60][61] are used to explore the structural features of
data sharing policy, map their relationships, and minimize the
delay cost of sharing data within a system. However, network
construction in healthcare systems might be complex and
time-consuming due to the time required to analyze various
activities, processes, sub-processes, and resource constraints
within the system. The main challenge relies on the variety of
policy representation forms at different levels of the hierarchy
converted later to different forms for processing, which add
complexity to the system structure and lead to inefficiency
concerns.
One way to handle the conflict is by utilizing static conflict
detection methods [62] to explicitly detect conflicting rules,
compare all the paired rules, and analyze the conflicting
probability of each pair of policy rules. However, this way
is not affected as with the increasing number of rules in
healthcare; the detection becomes inaccurate because of the
increasing size of the policy rules set.
Another way is to classify policy rules into a classification
tree [63] to detect the conflict by checking the conflict between
nodes and their inherited rules. Nevertheless, this way con-
sumes more memory, time, and space. It is less appropriate for
a system that needs to predict continuous change. Moreover,
the reproducibility of a tree is exceptionally sensitive as a
slight change in policy rules could bring an enormous change
in the tree structure.
A quantitative method using a linear combination of policy
change is used [64][65]. The method further abstracted policy
into a simple one and used a correlation matrix to detect the
conflict according to the matrix. However, this method is not
suitable for the dynamic nature of healthcare policy change as
the size of the matrix depends on the number of rules; hence
it is not suitable for a large number of rules.
Machine learning techniques (e.g., gossip learning tech-
nique, federated Learning algorithms, deep neural network)
addressed the dynamic policy change challenge [66]–[68].
Here, performance and convergence scale degradation might
happen because of the frequent change in policy and a lack of
communication in healthcare, which results in an overfitting
model. Moreover, such techniques under specific commu-
nication topologies could substantially impact the model’s
convergence speed in a decentralized environment when the
speed is correlated with the data distribution. The training and
execution of these models require extensive computational re-
sources [61] which could not be used in limited environments
with minimal performance.
Thus, there is a need to have standardization for data
formats, existing protocols, and algorithms to enhance the
reliability, interoperability, and modularity of the healthcare
system and its components.
3) Data Sharing Cost: Sharing data accelerates health
service delivery and promotes data reuse between healthcare
participants. Here, healthcare participants’ have preferences
to share data within and across the systems in a distributed
environment, which leads to an overload at the workflow and
system levels. Such overload might cause a delay in data
sharing among the system’s participants and might increase
the cost of sharing, including the time spent on a specific
process to share the data (e.g., reviewing and analyzing data).
Furthermore, the cost of data sharing might be impacted by
the dynamic change in the system’s processes and information
flow. Thus, the cost of sharing should be included in the
policy. The cost should consider the time spent on an activity
specific to sharing and reviewing data. The data sharing policy
should enclose other costs such as hardware, software, data
storage, and staff expenses, including a description of data
charges, if any, and how these are calculated. The policy
should address the requirements for metadata standard (e.g.,
HL7 Functional Model for EHRs) that varies by a health
organization, considering the cost of storage, data access, and
data management plan.
4) Automated Policy Compliance: An automated method
could be applied to detect data change policy based on identi-
fying and extracting the policy changes by considering prece-
dence, relationships, and dependencies between policies to
resolve the conflicts. The method could provide a self-adaptive
mechanism that automatically adapts the updated policy to
new data descriptions, rules, and regulations. The adaptive
mechanism ensures that participants’ rights and preferences
are protected as their data are being shared in a distributed
environment. Such a method could be promoted through pilot
initiatives and ad-hoc regulatory guidance, which enable case-
by-case deliberations throughout the diverse data types, and
the various uses of data. Moreover, the changes in data sharing
policy could be classified further to describe the severity levels
that reflect the impact of changes on participants’ privacy,
policy consent, and data quality. The adopted method could be
scalable to deal with the increasing data capacity and provide
privacy-preserving data sharing across and within systems.
Moreover, it could support various versions of data, provide
different levels of data access depending on the version, and
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

determine the best method of data sharing policy to ensure that
system participants could use the data and prevent confusion,
misuse, and misinterpretation.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Real-world digital healthcare systems are complex, hierar-
chical, and decentralized. In such systems, communications,
dependency, precedence, and information shared between sys-
tem clusters and their components, might be impacted by
changes in the policies that govern allowed data flows within
the system. Here, many barriers might strangulate the in-
formation flow and drastically impact the overall system’s
performance. Managing information flow and policy change in
such an environment generates massive amounts of data that
need to be aggregated, processed, and stored. At the same time,
optimizing the communication cost when processing the data
should be considered while minimizing the overhead in terms
of CPU and Memory. The paper provided a technical view of
the challenges, opportunities, and future research direction of
the information flow and policy change/update in healthcare
systems.
REFERENCES
[1] M. J. Page et al., “The PRISMA 2020 statement: an
updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews,” In-
ternational Journal of Surgery, vol. 88, no. April 2021,
pp. 105906, 2021.
[2] F. Chaib and P. Garwood, “WHO releases first guideline
on digital health interventions, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.who.int/news/item/17-04-2019-who-
releases-first-guideline-on-digital-health-interventions.
[Accessed: June 2022].
[3] Humanitas
Group,
“The
timeline
of
digital
health
-
Hunimed,
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.hunimed.eu/news/the-timeline-of-digital-
health/. [Accessed: June 2022].
[4] S. Kraus, F. Schiavone, A. Pluzhnikova, and A. C. Inv-
ernizzi, “ Digital transformation in healthcare: Analyzing
the current state-of-research,” Journal of Business Re-
search, vol. 123, no. February 2021, pp. 557–567, 2021.
[5] R. Sharma, and N. Kshetri, “Digital healthcare: His-
torical development, applications, and future research
directions,” International Journal of Information Man-
agement, vol. 53, no. August 2020, pp. 102–105, 2020.
[6] M. Senbekov et al., “The recent progress and applica-
tions of digital technologies in healthcare: a review,”
International Journal of Telemedicine and Applications,
vol. 2020, no. October 2020, pp. 1–18, 2020.
[7] Y. C. Lu, Y. Xiao, A. Sears, and J. A. Jacko, “A review
and a framework of handheld computer adoption in
healthcare,” International Journal of Medical Informat-
ics, vol. 74, no. 5, pp. 409–422, 2005.
[8] J. A. Powell, M. Darvell, and J. A. M. Gray, “The doctor,
the patient and the world-wide web: how the internet
is changing healthcare,” Journal of the Royal Society of
Medicine, vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 74–76, 2003.
[9] B. M¨uller, “Health and Care Futures Technology futures
,” Securing the future, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–26, 1999.
[10] H. S. Kim, I. H. Kwon, and W. C. Cha, “Future and De-
velopment Direction of Digital Healthcare,” Healthcare
Informatics Research, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 95–101, 2021.
[11] World
Health
Organization,
“Global
strategy
on
digital health 2020-2025, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/344249.
[Accessed: June 2022].
[12] World Health Organization and Regional Office for the
Eastern Mediterranean, Implementation guide for health
systems recovery in emergencies: transforming chal-
lenges into opportunities.
IGO Publishing, 2020.
[13] C. Marcos, A. Gonz´alez-Ferrer, M. Peleg, and C. Cavero,
“Solving the interoperability challenge of a distributed
complex patient guidance system: a data integrator based
on HL7’s Virtual Medical Record standard,” Journal of
the American Medical Informatics Association: JAMIA,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 587–599, 2020.
[14] M. B. Leavy and OMI, “Multinational Registries : Chal-
lenges and Opportunities,” Addendum to Registries for
Evaluating Patient Outcomes: A User’s Guide. 3rd ed.
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality, vol. 3, no. February 2018, pp. 1–19, 2018.
[15] WHO and WORLDBANKGROUP, Delivering Quality
Health Services: A Global Imperative.
OECD Publish-
ing, 2018.
[16] R. WHA74, “Strengthening WHO preparedness for and
response to health emergencies,” Seventy-fourth World
Health Assembly, vol. 31, no. May 2021, pp. 1–14, 2021.
[17] Health
IT,
“What
is
an
electronic
health
record
(EHR)?,
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.healthit.gov/faq/what-electronic-health-
record-ehr. [Accessed: June 2022].
[18] C. Kirchberger, “Overview of the national laws on elec-
tronic health records in the EU Member States and their
interaction with the provision of crossborder eHealth,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.04087, vol. 22, no. July 2014,
pp. 1–65, 2015.
[19] A. Kneck, M. Flink, O. Frykholm, M. Kirsebom, and
M. Ekstedt, “The information flow in a healthcare or-
ganisation with integrated units,” International Journal
of Integrated Car, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1–10, 2019.
[20] M. J. A. Salomi and P. B. Claro, “Adopting Healthcare
Information Exchange among Organizations, Regions,
and Hospital Systems toward Quality, Sustainability, and
Effectiveness,” Technol Invest, vol. 11, no. August 2020,
pp. 58–97, 2020.
[21] M. Hicks, S. Tse, B. Hicks, and S. Zdancewic, “Dynamic
Updating of Information-Flow Policies,” Proceedings of
the International Workshop on Foundations of Computer
Security (FCS), vol. 20, no. June 2005, pp. 7–18, 2005.
[22] E. Daga, A. Gangemi, and E. Motta, “Reasoning With
Data Flows and Policy Propagation Rules,” Semantic
Web, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 163–183, 2018.
[23] G. L. Guernic and T. Jensen, “Monitoring Informa-
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

tion Flow,” in Workshop on Foundations of Computer
Security-FCS’05, 2006, no. May 2006, pp. 19–30.
[24] K. Chen, X. Guo, Q. Deng, and Y. Jin, “Dynamic
Information Flow Tracking: Taxonomy, Challenges, and
Opportunities,” Micromachines, vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 1–16,
2021.
[25] M. Aydar, “Developing a Semantic Framework for
Healthcare Information Interoperability,” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Dept. Computer Science, Kent State Univ., Kent.,
2015.
[26] S. H. Han, A. Nasridinov, and K. H. Ryu, “Information
Flow Monitoring System,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, no. May
2018, pp. 23820–23827, 2018.
[27] G. Michael, “Trust, Authority, and Information Flow in
Secure Distributed Systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Faculty
of the Graduate School, Cornell Univ., NY., 2020.
[28] B. Juliana, T. Webber, B. Euan, and V. Andreas, “A
blockchain-based healthcare platform for secure person-
alised data sharing,” Public Health and Informatics:
Proceedings of MIE, vol. 31, no. May 2021, pp. 208–
212, 2021.
[29] L. Tian, C. Pin, and S. K. Ting, “Blockchain-Based
Healthcare Information Preservation Using Extended
Chaotic Maps for HIPAA Privacy/Security Regulations,”
Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 22, pp. 1–16, 2021.
[30] M. K. Elghoul, “A Review of Leveraging Blockchain
based Framework Landscape in Healthcare Systems,”
International Journal of Intelligent Computing and In-
formation Sciences, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 71–83, 2021.
[31] F. T. Lee, P. I. Chang, and S. T. Kung, “Blockchain-
Based Healthcare Information Preservation Using Ex-
tended Chaotic Maps for HIPAA Privacy/Security Reg-
ulations,” Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 22, pp. 10576,
2021.
[32] A. C. Myers and B. Liskov, “Protecting Privacy Using
the Decentralized Label Model,” ACM Transactions on
Software Engineering and Methodology, TOSEM, vol. 9,
no. 4, pp. 410–442, 2000.
[33] S. Mondal, and m. Nandini, “An efficient reachability
query based pruning algorithm in e-health scenario,”
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 94, no. 1, pp.
103171, 2019.
[34] G. T. Nguefack, “Using bayesian networks to model
hierarchical relationships in epidemiological studies,”
Epidemiology and health, vol. 33, no.
June 2011, pp.
1–8, 2011.
[35] J. Rodon, and S. Leiser, “Exploring the formation of a
healthcare information infrastructure: hierarchy or mesh-
work?,” Journal of the Association for Information Sys-
tems, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1–43, 2015.
[36] C. Diana, and M. A. Martins, “Inconsistencies in health
care knowledge,” IEEE 16th International Conference on
e-Health Networking, Applications and Services Health-
com, vol. 16, no. October 2014, pp. 37–42, 2014.
[37] R. Cruz-Correia et al., “Automatic detection of patient
data inconsistencies on integrated Health Information
System,” Ph.D. dissertation, Faculty of Medicine, Porto
Univ., Porto., 2006.
[38] N. Angula and N. Dlodlo, “Towards a framework to
enable semantic interoperability of data in heterogeneous
health information systems in Namibian public hospi-
tals,” Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing,
vol. 721, no. January 2018, pp. 835–845, 2018.
[39] Health IT, “Health Interoperability 2030: Individual and
Care Delivery Experiences, 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.healthit.gov/topic/interoperability/health-
interoperability-outcomes-2030. [Accessed: June 2022].
[40] Y. Wu, G. X. Yuan, and K. L. Ma, “Visualizing Flow
of Uncertainty Through Analytical Processes,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 2526–2535, 2012.
[41] Q. V. Dang, “Studying Machine Learning Techniques for
Intrusion Detection System,” in International Conference
on Future Data and Security Engineering, 2019, pp. 411–
426.
[42] Y. C. Chen, Y. J. Li, A. Tseng, and T. Lin, “Deep
Learning for Malicious Flow Detection,” IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
Communications, PIMRC, vol. 2017, no. October 2017,
pp. 1–7, 2018.
[43] M. Tiwari et al., “Complete information flow tracking
from the gates up,” Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, vol. 37, no. 1, pp.
109–120, 2009.
[44] M. Shana et al., “Dynamic Information Flow Tracking
for Detection of Advanced Persistent Threats: A Stochas-
tic Game Approach,” ArXiv, vol. abs/2006.12327, no.
June 2020, pp. 1–15, 2020.
[45] P. Ammann, S. Jajodia, and P. Liu, “Recovery From Ma-
licious Transactions,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1167–1185,
2002.
[46] J. Eder and W. Liebhart, “Workflow Recovery,” Proceed-
ings - 1st IFCIS International Conference on Cooperative
Information Systems, CoopIS, vol. 19, no. June 1996, pp.
124–134, 1996.
[47] E. Aydemir and Y. Sahin, “Evaluation of Healthcare Ser-
vice Quality Factors Using Grey Relational Analysis in a
Dialysis Center,” Grey Systems: Theory and Application,
vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 432–448, 2019.
[48] Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, “The
CAHPS Ambulatory Care Improvement Guide: Practical
Strategies for Improving Patient Experience, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.ahrq.gov/cahps/quality-
improvement/improvement-guide/improvement-
guide.html. [Accessed: June 2022].
[49] A. Ni˜nerola, M. V. Mar´ıa-Victoria, and H. L. Ana-
Beatriz, “Quality improvement in healthcare: Six Sigma
systematic review,” Health Policy, vol. 124, no. 4, pp.
438–445, 2020.
[50] L. Liqing, C. Zheng, and G. Xijuan, “Socially aware dy-
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

namic computation offloading scheme for fog computing
system with energy harvesting devices,” IEEE Internet
Things, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1869–1879, 2018.
[51] S. Souravlas, and K. Stefanos, “Scheduling fair resource
allocation policies for cloud computing through flow
control,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 1348, 2019.
[52] Vigyanix, “Mirth Connect Series: Introduction, 2010.
[Online].
Available:
https://vigyanix.com/blog/mirth-
connect-series-introduction/. [Accessed: June 2022].
[53] S. Jiang et al., “Blochie: A Blockchain-based Platform
for Healthcare Information Exchange,” in IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Smart Computing, SMARTCOMP,
no. May 2019.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 49–56.
[54] P. Pandey and R. Litoriya, “Implementing Healthcare
Services on a Large Scale: Challenges and Remedies
Based on Blockchain Technology,” Health Policy and
Technology, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 69–78, 2020.
[55] S. Tanwar, K. Parekh, and R. Evans, “Blockchain-Based
Electronic Healthcare Record System for Healthcare
4.0 Applications,” Journal of Information Security and
Applications, vol. 50, no. February 2020, p. 102407,
2020.
[56] K. N. Griggs et al., “Healthcare Blockchain System
Using Smart Contracts for Secure Automated Remote
Patient Monitoring,” Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 42,
no. 7, pp. 1–7, 2018.
[57] H. A. El Zouka and M. M. Hosni, “Secure IoT
Communications
for
Smart
Healthcare
Monitoring
System,” Internet of Things, vol. 13, no. February 2021,
pp. 1–14, 2021.
[58] J. Kharel, H. T. Reda, and S. Y. Shin, “An Architecture
for Smart Health Monitoring System Based on Fog
Computing,” Journal of Communications, vol. 12, no. 4,
pp. 228–233, 2017.
[59] Deloitte, “2022 Global Health Care Outlook Are we fi-
nally seeing the long-promised transformation?,” Deloitte
Global Health, vol. 4, no. 2022, pp. 1–52, 2022.
[60] R. Khelf, and N. Ghoualmi, “Intra and inter policy
Conflicts Dynamic Detection Algorithm,” Seminar on
Detection Systems Architectures and Technologies DAT,
vol. 1, no. February 2017, pp. 1–6, 2017.
[61] O. Salem, Y. Liu, M. Ahmed, and B. Raouf, “Online
anomaly detection in wireless body area networks for
reliable healthcare monitor,” IEEE journal of biomedical
and health informatics, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1541–1551,
2014.
[62] E. Syukur, S. W. Loke, and P. Stanski, “Methods for
policy conflict detection and resolution in pervasive
computing environments,” Policy Management for Web
workshop in conjunction with WWW2005 Conference,
vol. 14, no. May 2005, pp. 13–20, 2005.
[63] L. Xueting, “A Method of Conflict Detection for Security
Policy Based on B+ T,” IEEE Fourth International
Conference on Data Science in Cyberspace DSC, vol. 4,
no. June 2019, pp. 466–472, 2019.
[64] X. Yuping, and W. Shengli, and Y. Zhan, “Statistical
analysis of the linear combination method,” Journal of
Computational Information Systems, vol. 11, no. 18, pp.
6615–6620, 2015.
[65] J. Malczewski, “On the use of weighted linear com-
bination method in GIS: common and best practice
approaches,” Transactions in GIS, vol. 4, no.1, pp. 5–
22, 2000.
[66] L. Giaretta, “Pushing the Limits of Gossip-Based De-
centralized Machine Learning,” Master thesis., School
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, KTH.,
Sweden., 2019
[67] R. Miotto, F. Wang, S. Wang, X. Jiang, and J. T. Dudley,
“Deep learning for healthcare: review, opportunities and
challenges,” Briefings in bioinformatics, vol. 19, no. 6,
pp. 1236–1246, 2018.
[68] A. A. Abdellatif et al., “Reinforcement Learning for
Intelligent Healthcare Systems: A Comprehensive Sur-
vey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.04087, vol. 1, no. August
2021, pp. 1–31, 2021.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

