Automated Nursing Agent: 
A Software Agent for At-Home Elderly Care 
 
Amir Hossein Faghih Dinevari, Osmar Zaiane 
Department of Computing Science 
University of Alberta 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 
e-mail: {a.dinevari,zaiane}@ualberta.ca
 
 
Abstract—The global increase in elderly population is a concern 
for many developed countries. The concern has to do with the 
financial and infrastructure challenges to assist, take care, and 
manage the aging population that typically requires more care, 
specialized personnel, and expensive facilities. While the 
population is indeed aging, particularly in developed countries, 
many of the elderly prefer remaining at home instead of moving 
to 
nursing 
homes. 
It 
has 
been 
demonstrated 
that 
companionship, such as other residents or pets, can significantly 
help preserve mental and physical health of the elderly. There 
has been considerable interest in building computer programs 
that work as an intelligent personal assistant such as Siri and 
Google Now, but these typically serve as knowledge navigators 
to search for information or do simple tasks on a smartphone. 
We propose an intelligent software agent that runs on tablet 
devices and operates as a companion to the elderly, assisting 
them in information retrieval, reminding them of relevant 
events, and more importantly, conversing with them as a human 
would do. In this paper, we introduce the Automated Nursing 
Agent (ANA) and present the technical challenges developing 
such a software agent. 
Keywords-Software Agent; Intelligent Agents; Automated 
Conversation; Natural Language Processing. 
I. 
 MOTIVATION 
The need for companionship has been identified by many 
people and experts in psychology and geriatrics in different 
countries and cultures. Every human being feels the necessity 
of having a companion to some extent with whom to talk and 
share life events, and other important personal issues [1]. This 
need for having a companion is even more important for older 
people. Indeed, loneliness and social isolation can predict, for 
the elderly, declining health and poor quality of life [2]. Social 
interactions can reduce the mentioned effects of loneliness and 
social isolation. This is demonstrated to be true for the 
working people, let alone the elderly living alone [3][4]. 
Nowadays, thanks to advancements in healthcare and 
medicine, the life expectancy in developed countries has 
increased significantly [5][6]. Another noteworthy issue is the 
population decline in most of these countries [7]. These 
changes resulted in a higher percentage of elderly population 
compared to last decades. Many live assisted but many choose 
to live at home [8][9]. This trend will accentuate. According 
to the U.S. Census Bureau projections, by 2050, one-in-five 
Americans will be 65 or older, and at least 400,000 will be 100 
years or older [10]. Today, the 65 or older represent 13% of 
the US population denoting around 41 million people. With a 
growing number of elderly in developed countries, there are 
not enough caregivers or nurses to take care of this aging 
population [11]. In Canada, 92% of the 5 million seniors aged 
65 and over live in private homes [12]. Remaining at home 
will be encouraged for financial, social and health reasons. 
Services and facilities for the elderly, like nursing homes, will 
not always be available and the services cannot scale with the 
predicted demand of the senior population. Having a software 
agent at home could be a solution to help attenuate the need 
for companionship if this software agent running on a tablet-
like device can indeed converse in a fluent manner and 
provide the required access to information and remote 
assistance. 
The need for companionship has also been acknowledged 
for patients in hospitals [13][14]. Hospitals can be lonely 
places for patients. This is particularly more accentuated for 
older adults who may have few, if any, family members or 
acquaintances living close enough to visit them. Some 
hospitals even created Companion Care Programs where 
volunteers come to interact with patients, sharing small talk 
and activities.  
Aside from companionship, the elderly have various needs 
and their living conditions can vary from one individual to 
another. Thus, personalized care and attention are required. 
The elderly who can take care of themselves often choose and 
remain at home instead of joining care facilities. More often 
than not, they opt for pets as companions. Pets have proven to 
be beneficial for mental health in the case of lonely seniors 
[15][16], but their entertaining interaction falls short from 
intelligent and knowledgeable conversation. In many cases, 
while choosing to remain at home, some seniors are not totally 
autonomous and capable of looking after themselves, 
therefore, there is a need to have a family member or a 
caregiver to live with them or check on them frequently. When 
it is not possible, a software agent could communicate with 
caregivers in cases of emergency. Moreover, doctors, 
caregivers, or family members could remotely inquire about 
the state of the senior, communicating directly with the agent.  
We present here the architecture of a software agent, 
ANA, to attempt to remediate the current shortcomings. ANA, 
for Automated Nursing Agent, is a software agent running on 
Android tablet devices, specifically designed for the 
companionship of the elderly. ANA verbally tends to a person, 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

at home, in need. It looks after an elderly at home so as to 
promote health through companionship. Nursing is about 
providing care and is an integral part of the health care system. 
It encompasses the promotion of health, prevention of illness, 
and care of someone in physical or mental need. 
Unlike intelligent personal assistant software agents such 
as Apple Siri, Google Now, Microsoft Cortana, and many 
others, which are designed to answer information requests or 
to help owners of handheld devices to verbally express 
commands on their devices, ANA piggybacks on Google 
APIs for information requests but extends this capability by 
building a personalized knowledge base to provide 
personalized conversations with answers but also questions 
and general statements. We are currently focusing on 
conversations related to family, weather, health, and cooking.  
Moreover, ANA also reminds the senior about events and 
facts recorded in previous conversations, documents health-
related events, and is accessible remotely by authorized 
caregivers and family members. 
In Section 2, we first present some scenarios illustrating 
the usefulness of the agent and in Section 3, we discuss our 
methodology to address those scenarios. In Section 4, we 
conclude the paper and talk about the current state of our 
project. 
II. 
SCENARIOS 
ANA is not competing with intelligent personal assistants. 
In fact, it uses Google APIs to access information and search 
the Web knowledge. However, it adds new capabilities to 
make it more personal. For instance, it uses a database of jokes 
and learns to choose jokes to tell based on the appreciations of 
the previous jokes by the senior using reinforcement learning. 
Other activities provided by ANA include reading, playing 
games, and providing means to tell their life story. By 
encouraging the elderly to share life experiences, it improves 
the connection between the agent and the user. ANA stores 
personal information in a personalized knowledge base in 
addition to using a general knowledge base like Freebase [17] 
or Google Knowledge Graph [18]. In the following, we 
present some example scenarios using ANA. 
A. Scenario 1. Conversations initiated by the elderly 
One of the main characteristics that an intelligent system 
needs to have to be considered as a companion is the ability to 
have a normal, fluent conversation similar to human verbal 
interactions. There are three types of interactions in 
conversations: making a statement (declarative), asking a 
question (Interrogative), and giving an order (Imperative). 
1) Declarative statements 
There are different types of declarative statements. All the 
statements in talking about a past or future event or telling a 
story are considered declarative. People talk about how they 
are feeling, who they met, family members and friends, and 
also, the events that may happen during that day or in the near 
future. A person who is being talked to usually acknowledges 
the understanding of the story by saying some other 
declarative statements. This acknowledgment also shows that 
the person is interested in the story. Also, there can be some 
questions that may come up to the listener’s mind, in case of 
having some vague details in the story. It is very common to 
ask about some details when you are listening to someone. 
Also, people expect that the others that they are talking to 
remember some details of the previous conversations and 
when they are referring to those told stories later, that person 
remembers some of it and is not completely clueless. 
All these details should be implemented in our system to make 
elderly feel comfortable talking to a machine because without 
having these details, the conversation will seem unnatural and 
they would rather not use the system. ANA stores such 
information in a personalized knowledge base as well as a 
calendar for events and medical conditions. 
2) Interrogative statements 
Questions are considered as interrogative statements. 
There can be different types of questions that need different 
responses. In a normal conversation, it is usual to ask 
something personal from the person that we are talking to. 
Although the system that we are talking about is not a person, 
it should give some kind of a response that makes sense and 
keeps the conversation going. 
The other form of questions can be related to the person 
who is talking. They can ask about how they look or want to 
know your opinion about some related issues and problems. 
This kind of question is very hard to handle by a machine since 
it needs to have opinions about things that are happening 
around it, but like the previous type of question that we talked 
about, it needs to give answers that make sense. 
The third type of question is related to the subjects that 
have been talked about before and need remembering. To 
answer these questions, we should refer to the previous 
conversations that we had with the person. The system should 
gather information from conversations that it had with the 
person in order to answer these questions. Remembering 
details will make the conversations more natural and closer to 
what happens in real life. Even missing some details by the 
system is not a big deal since it can happen with real people 
too. 
Questions can be about general knowledge. They are 
easier to handle compared to the others that we have talked 
about. To answer these questions, we can check different 
online knowledge bases that are available widely. If the 
answer is not found, the machine says it does not know it. It is 
very unlikely that someone knows answers to every question 
hence our system is not an exception. This is similar to what 
current intelligent personal assistants do. Also, the goal is not 
answering questions but being a companion, so missing 
answers to some questions in this context is fine. 
There also can be other questions that are imperative in 
essence. These statements should be handled like imperative 
statements. 
3) Imperative statements 
All the commands and requests are considered imperative. 
Human beings are usually able to help each other with 
different tasks but it does not necessarily mean that they can 
help with all the tasks. Our system also does not need to 
address all the commands, but it is favorable if it can do as 
many as possible. Right now, having physical abilities in the 
system is not one of our goals. Controlling physical objects 
can be done by a computerized system, but there is a need for 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

additional equipment to add this capability, which is against 
our current objective of having a cheap system for end users. 
Even if the system is not going to do anything about physical 
commands, it will try to give some sort of suggestions or try 
to come up with a witty response. For other types of 
commands, the system should be able to do them easily. These 
commands can be things like calling, texting, sending an 
email, checking up some information online, finding a recipe, 
or reminding the person of something. After doing any of 
these 
commands, 
there 
should 
be 
some 
sort 
of 
acknowledgment for the action in a way that the person knows 
that the command is done. 
B. Scenario 2. Conversations initiated by system 
In Scenario 1 we considered responses that are necessary 
for a natural conversation, however, in a normal conversation, 
each subtopic can be initiated by both sides of the 
conversation. If someone is always asking questions or 
making statements while the other person just responds to 
each one of them, the conversation will be one-sided and 
boring. 
In order to avoid situations like this, we need to have 
functionalities in our system to sometimes initiate a 
conversation. One of the things that should be considered is 
that the subtopics in a discussion are usually related. Going 
completely off-topic can make the conversation feel 
unnatural. This is the case with chatterbots, software agents 
that are mostly built for fun.  
To find related topics, we can refer to previous 
conversations between person and system. To Start a new 
topic, the system searches for empty facts or attributes in its 
personalized knowledge base and creates a statement to 
initiate a conversation that leads to filling the missing facts. 
These facts will be used later for other conversations. 
Initiating conversation can be used for continuing current 
conversation after a long pause by the person. These long 
pauses are known as awkward silences and people try to fill 
them with starting a conversation. This human-like behavior 
can make the system very similar to a human companion. 
C. Scenario 3. Caregiving functionality and remote access 
In previous scenarios, we considered all the different 
characteristics that can make our system act like a human. 
While it is very interesting to mimic human behavior, the main 
purpose of this system is to ensure or improve the welfare of 
elderly when they live on their own and without direct human 
supervision. 
Keeping track of medication for elderly can be 
challenging. Caregivers usually remind them of taking their 
medicines and they make sure that they took them. They also 
keep track of what medicine they took and when they took it. 
This information can be helpful for doctors. If we implement 
all the necessary components to handle scenario 1 and 2, it is 
easy to add these functionalities since they can be 
accommodated in the form of statements. 
Caregivers also ask elderly about how they feel. Their 
responses in a period of time can be helpful in identifying 
unusual symptoms and patterns that can be caused by a 
disease. Like the previous case, it is also a very small 
extension to other scenarios that we have described. 
One of the vital functionalities that is easy to spot by a 
human is seeing something unusual in elderly. Based on the 
severity of the situation, caregiver contacts the appropriate 
person. This can be a little tricky to implement but it is 
necessary to have in our system. A red flag for the system can 
be unresponsiveness of the person which can be a trigger for 
contacting a family member, doctor, or an ambulance. The 
system should be able to deal with this kind of situations in 
real-time. 
Having a system keeping track of every aspect of elderly's 
life can be very helpful. This information can be monitored 
regularly by a doctor to see how well the person is doing and 
check on some unusual behavior patterns that can be a sign of 
a particular discomfort, disease, etc. Also, if it is necessary, 
this information can be viewed by family members to check 
on their loved ones and see how well they are doing. Because 
we have a computerized system, it can be possible to add 
remote access to this information via Internet to authorized 
people. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The system design is the first concern that we need to deal 
with. The system should be able to the cases that we have 
described in the previous section. In order to cover those 
functionalities, a server-client model is necessary. The server 
side architecture is not a concern since we do not need 
separate servers for each client. Each server can support 
multiple clients but for the client side, the device price and 
availability are important. Having a device that is 
manufactured in large scale and support many functionalities, 
while keeping the price low for end users can be an ideal 
choice. Tablet devices satisfy our criteria. They have a large 
screen which makes reading easier for elderly that have vision 
impairment. They are affordable and they support many 
functionalities for keeping information like task management, 
contacts, emails, calling, and much more. Because of the 
affordability of Android devices compared to others, we 
consider Android tablets for our current prototype. 
Most of the libraries that are dealing with natural language 
processing are designed to deal with text while input in 
Scenarios 1 and 2 is speech. To convert speech into text 
Android has built-in libraries for Speech to Text and Text to 
Speech conversion. We have used these libraries for current 
prototype. 
In Scenario 1, we have talked about different types of 
statements that our system may encounter. Classification is 
necessary for categorizing statements. We have used a 
classifier developed by Quinn and Zaiane [17] for this 
purpose. 
For all the statements, natural language processing is 
necessary to extract information that we need. We have talked 
about remembering information in the conversation. After 
processing of the statements, we store them in a database that 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

we call Personalized Knowledge Base (PKB). This 
information can be used as described in the scenarios. 
For answering questions, we first look into PKB. If we 
could not find the answer, we look in a global knowledge base. 
We are using Google Knowledge Graph as our general 
knowledge base. If look-up in general knowledge base was 
unsuccessful, the system is going to acknowledge that by 
saying it could not find the answer but it will show web search 
results for that question. For the imperative statements, all the 
necessary functionalities are included in the operating system. 
In Scenario 2, we talked about starting conversations by 
the system. It is achievable by going through some templates 
and PKB to find an appropriate conversation opener in both 
cases of starting a conversation from the beginning or 
continuing the conversation that is started by elderly. Also, 
there can be different pointers for knowing when the system 
should start a conversation or continue it. A long pause while 
the conversation is not ended or not interacting with the 
system for a long time can be a sign to start a conversation. 
For Scenario 3 all the cases except remote access can be 
considered an extension to Scenario 2. For calling people 
Android has communication abilities like phone calls that can 
take care of emergencies. The remote access part will be 
implemented by a Web-based user interface that can be 
accessed with all the internet enabled devices. To prevent 
unauthorized access, there will an authentication mechanism 
with unique identifiers. Figure 1 shows a simplified flowchart 
of the system. 
It may seem that implementing such a system is a trivial 
task but it is not. Natural language processing and information 
extraction from plain text or voice are very complicated tasks. 
They are research topics that are actively being worked on in 
universities and research centers. By checking projects like 
Siri, Google Now, and Cortana, which are being supported by 
huge technology companies, it can be concluded that the 
conversing ability for machines is in its primary stages. 
Companionship is important for the mental and physical 
wellbeing of an elderly. Seeking companionship can be 
disconcerting for seniors and often not possible. Building an 
intelligent automated software agent to converse with older 
people and provide information and verbal assistance is a goal 
of ours and would beneficial to society. We have started 
building a prototype but the undertaking is challenging and 
provides many interesting open research problems. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we talked about benefits of an automated 
system for elderly care, when they can live by themselves in 
their own places and. We talked about our proposed system, 
its specifications, and how we can implement it. Currently, we 
have a proof of concept prototype with some of these 
functionalities. We are working on improvements to the 
current system to be used in a field study. We will use the 
improved version to gather results about the effectiveness of 
the system and how people feel about conversations with the 
agent. 
If a system with these specifications can be accepted by 
people, it can reduce imposed costs to national health care 
system by increasing the percentage of elderly population. 
Also, it can reduce the number of caregivers or at least reduce 
their responsibilities and their working hours. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  
R. F. Baumeister and M. R. Leary, "The need to belong: desire for 
interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation," 
Psychological bulletin, vol. 117, no. 3, 1995, p. 497.  
[2]  
R. P. Meyer and D. Schuyler, "Old Age and Loneliness," Prim Care 
Companion CNS Disord., vol. 13, no. 2, 2011, pp. e1-e2.  
[3]  
B. Buunk and M. Peeters, "Stress at work, social support and 
companionship: Towards an event-contingent recording approach," 
Work and Stress, vol. 8, no. 2, 1994, pp. 177-190.  
[4]  
J. B. Unger, A. C. Johnson and G. Marks, "Functional decline in the 
elderly: Evidence for direct and stress-buffering protective effects of 
social interactions and physical activity," Annals of Behavioral 
Medicine, vol. 19, no. 2, 1997, pp. 152-160.  
[5]  
C. D. Mathers, G. A. Stevens, T. Boerma, R. A. White and M. I. 
Tobias, "Causes of international increases in older age life 
expectancy," The Lancet, vol. 9967, 2015, pp. 540-548.  
[6]  
S. Katz, L. G. Branch, M. H. Branson, J. A. Papsidero, J. C. Beck and 
D. S. Greer, "Active Life Expectancy," N Engl J Med., vol. 309, 
1983, pp. 1218-1224.  
[7]  
A. H. Gauthier, The state and the family: A comparative analysis of 
family policies in industrialized countries, Oxford University Press 
Catalogue, 1998.  
[8]  
P. Kemper, "The use of formal and informal home care by the 
disabled elderly," Health services research, vol. 27, no. 4, 1992, p. 
421.  
Figure 1. Flowchart of the system. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

[9]  
R. Bernabei, F. Landi, G. Gambassi, A. Sgadari, G. Zuccala, V. Mor, 
L. Z. Rubenstein and P. Carbonin, "Randomised trial of impact of 
model of integrated care and case management for older people living 
in the community," BMJ, vol. 316, no. 7141, 1998, p. 1348.  
[10]  P. D. Census Bureau, "Projections of the Population by Selected Age 
Groups and Sex for the United States," 2012. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.census.gov/population/projections/data/national/2012/ 
summarytables.html. [Accessed 2016.03.18].  
[11]  W. Lutz, W. Sanderson and S. Scherbov, "The coming acceleration 
of global population ageing," Nature, vol. 451, no. 7179, 2008, pp. 
716-719.  
[12]  Canada Statistics, "Living Arrangements of Seniors," 2011. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www12.statcan.ca/census-recensement/2011/as-
sa/98-312-x/98-312-x2011003\_4-eng.cfm. [Accessed 2016.03.18].  
[13]  J. J. Essen, F. Cardiello and M. M. Baun, "Avian Companionship in 
Alleviation of Depression Loneliness, and Low Morale of Older 
Adults in Skilled Rehabilitation Units," Psychological Reports, vol. 
78, no. 1, 1996, pp. 339-348.  
[14]  J. A. Carletti, "Volunteers provide companionship therapy under 
social service supervision," Psychiatric Services, vol. 15, no. 12, 
1964, pp. 691-693.  
[15]  F. Walsh, "Human-Animal Bonds I: The Relational Significance of 
Companion Animals," Family Process, vol. 48, no. 4, 2009, pp. 462-
480. 
[16]  T. F. Garrity, L. F. Stallones, M. B. Marx and T. P. Johnson, "Pet 
ownership and attachment as supportive factors in the health of the 
elderly," Anthrozoös, vol. 3, no. 1, 1989, pp. 35-44. 
[17]  "Freebase," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.freebase.com/. 
[Accessed 2016.04.15]. 
[18]  "Google Knowledge Graph Search API," [Online]. Available: 
https://developers.google.com/knowledge-graph/. 
[Accessed 
2016.04.15]. 
[19]  K. Quinn and O. Zaiane, "Identifying Questions & Requests in 
Conversation," in Proceedings of the 2014 International C* 
Conference on Computer Science & Software Engineering, 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

