 
 
From Theory to Reality 
Health Data Management in a Complex System
 
Eloria Vigouroux-Zugasti, Christian Bourret 
Laboratory of DICEN IDF  
University of East-Paris Marne-la-Vallée 
Val d’Europe / Serris, France 
Email: eloria.vigouroux-zugasti@u-pem.fr, 
christian.bourret@u-pem.fr 
 
 
 
 
 
Sylvie Parrini-Alemanno 
CNAM 
Paris, France 
Email: sylvie.parrini-alemanno@lecnam.net 
 
Abstract— With the recent promulgation of the General Data 
Protection Regulations (DGPS), data management is becoming 
a crucial strategic issue in organizations. The quality of data 
dissemination is of utmost importance in the healthcare 
environment. Indeed, medical confidentiality is closely linked 
to the dissemination of personal information inherent in the 
patient's record. Yet, how can a complex system, composed of 
multiple multidisciplinary actors (medical, paramedical, 
administrative, etc.), deal with the potential disclosure of 
personal data? What steps can be taken to manage this risk? 
How to ensure legal compliance with medical confidentiality, 
while ensuring the interoperability of professionals and the 
quality of care? To answer these questions, a case study was 
conducted in the Multidisciplinary Care House of Mimizan 
(France, Landes, New Aquitaine Region). The goal was to 
investigate the importance of data management for traceability 
of care. This medical organization is composed of medical and 
paramedical professionals, but also a relatively large 
administrative team for such an institution. Nevertheless, it 
manages to set up, at the initiative of the professionals, both 
flexible and structured processes, allowing optimal follow-up of 
patients, while guaranteeing respect for their personal 
information. 
Keywords— Health; Data; Patient Records; Quality; 
Confidential Medical Data; Territory; Organization. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The management of personal data, with the recent 
promulgation of the General Data Protection Regulations 
(GDPR - May 2018), is becoming a crucial and strategic issue 
for organizations. In the healthcare sector, where respect for 
medical confidentiality is closely linked to the dissemination 
of patients' personal records, data have to be managed with 
great care, in order to limit the risk of unfortunate disclosure 
or data loss and to tackle their specificity of very sensitive 
data (privacy challenges). 
However, the current French health organization tends to 
evolve to a collaborative working method. For the past ten 
years, French health authorities have been witnessing the 
emergence of some new organizations of health professionals 
and the exponential growth of groups of (para)medical 
professionals, attesting the growing complexity of health 
organizations [1]. This is particularly the case for 
Multidisciplinary/Multiprofessional Health Houses (MCHs), 
with 910 establishments active in France in March 2017, 
compared to only 240 in 2013 [2]. These establishments are 
made complex by the number of interacting actors they 
involve. They also tend to rely on the notion of sharing and 
circulating data, especially health information about patients. 
By doing so, they tend to improve patients’ health care and 
health monitoring. 
Does this new type of establishment pose some risks for 
private heath data policy?  As they are composed of many 
multidisciplinary 
actors 
(medical, 
paramedical, 
administrative, etc.), do not they increase the number of 
possible accidental disclosures or loss of confidential data? 
Thus, how could legal compliance guarantee medical 
confidentiality and manage the inherent risks, while ensuring 
the interoperability of professionals and the quality of care? It 
seems that the challenge is mainly about the ability of the 
French health system to increase its level of performance 
[10]. 
To answer these questions, a case study was conducted in 
the Multidisciplinary Care House of Mimizan (MCHM). To 
do so, an exploratory qualitative approach was conducted via 
focus groups with the whole team of the institution and via an 
interview with its two managers. The goal is to establish an 
inventory of good practices, particularly in terms of data 
quality management in complex health institutions. The 
analytical approach presented here is based on the structural 
level of MCH actions, in which resources (human and 
material) are mobilized to ensure a good coordination for 
patients’ care and confidential data policy [3]. MCHs are a 
recent and emergent phenomenon, with heterogeneous ways 
of working. The goal of this article is to explore one of the 
biggest and formalized MCH, from a exploratory point of 
view, in order to understand its organisation and its capacity 
to be considered as a model for other MCH. 
The rest of this article is structured as follows. In Section 
II, with the overall contextualization of the study. The Section 
III will present the institution selected for the study, the 
MCHM, in order to show how it is representative of the new 
health institutions needed in fragile territory. In Section IV, 
the article will analyse the quality processes inherent in the 
management of this institution’s data. The Section V will 
present the specifications of the MCHM. In Section VI, we 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
provide details on the general lack of use of the national 
digital health record. We conclude the article in Section VII. 
II. 
STUDY BACKGROUND 
In this section, the study background is explained. The 
specific context of the current French public health context 
and policy are also detailed for a better understanding of the 
study. 
A. Challenging health context 
In 2014, the population density of Landes fluctuated 
between 2 and 45 inhabitants/km², with an aging index 
among the highest in the region [4]. In 2015, 31.5% of 
Landes’ population was over 60 years of age, a great 
increase compared to 2011 [5]. According to the Regional 
Health Authority (RHA), in 2016, the rural population 
represented more than 50% of the whole Landes population. 
In addition, this region also has a medical demography and a 
density of specialists lower than regional and national 
averages, as well as a small number of health establishments. 
It also has few alternatives to the nursing homes for old 
people [4]. Therefore, old people’s loss of autonomy is more 
difficult to manage. According to RHA, 1/3 of liberal general 
practitioners were over 60 years old in 2017 [6]. This is a 
very problematic issue: combined with the difficulties of 
attractiveness of the territory, it becomes more and more 
difficult to maintain the number of practitioners in this area. 
The RHA demographic patterns of Landes health care show 
a highly unfavorable public health context: 
• 
White areas (towns located more than fifty 
kilometers away from a hospital emergency 
department), combined with an insufficient number 
of expert services (radiology, rheumatology, 
gynecology, 
allergology, 
pneumology, 
dermatology, etc.) 
• 
Medical desertification: unattractive territory for 
young 
(para)medical 
professionals 
(region’s 
remoteness from large cities, low internet coverage, 
few cultural offers, etc.). Doctors are struggling to 
find successors, despite administrative provisions 
and facilitations offered by health authorities. 
• 
Fragile areas: unequal distribution of health 
professionals in areas with an imbalance between 
the number of potential patients and the number of 
doctors, as well as areas where the advanced age of 
patients (or the doctor) would require urgent 
decisions. 
Facing these difficulties, some political representatives 
try to shed some light on the issue of medical deserts: in 
October 2018, the mayor of a small town called Ychoux 
proposed to prohibit, by municipal decree, his fellow citizens 
from falling ill, due to the lack of medical care in its 
surroundings. The study was conducted in this area for its 
relevance concerning the challenges France will have to face 
in the coming years. The main problem in France is getting 
young medical staff to settle in countryside areas, where 
living standards are less attractive than urban contexts. 
B. Management of de-materialized health data in a 
complex system 
Personal data, such as medical data, is defined by the 
French Data Protection Act, called Loi informatique et 
liberté, (paragraph 2, article 2) as an information relating to a 
person who is physically identified or who can be identified, 
directly or indirectly, by reference to an identification 
number or to one or more elements specific to him/her [7]. In 
addition, in order to make sense, this data must be processed. 
This process is defined by the same law (paragraph 3, article 
2) as a transaction or set of transactions, whatever the 
process used [7]: collection, recording, organisation, storage, 
modification, consultation, communication by transmission, 
etc. Data are also part of an exchange, characterized by the 
provision to several professionals, such as health staff, who 
are entitled to know everything about these data. Their goals 
are to insure the coordination and continuity of patients’ 
medical care [8]. 
However, the exploitation of personal data remains a 
sensitive subject. It directly affects the privacy of each 
individual [9], especially when it comes to medical data. In 
complex systems, such as MCH, there are several issues 
related to the management and to the protection of health 
data. From an organizational point of view, it is essential to 
set up procedures to secure access to data. Those procedures 
tend to limit the structural disorders that can affect the 
confidential standards of data, by establishing, for example, 
quality indicators. Measurement and management tools in 
health establishments are essential [10]. In addition, complex 
systems have a large number of stakeholders, but they do not 
have the same level of data access authorization. It increases 
the risks of fraudulent or accidental access to information. 
With the multiplication of MCHs, the French health 
sector must now face a multitude of risks related to data, 
which require close scrutiny of each elementary activity [1]. 
These establishments are the result of a clustering of health 
professionals who, until now, had been working alone. 
However, using common resources and administrative staff 
lead professionals to rethink their working methods, while 
insisting on control and rigour. The various stakeholders in 
the project have to develop fundamental procedures for 
collaborative work. This aims at reducing and optimizing 
work processes [1], while considering the topics of control 
and quality as the heart of these processes. Professionals, in 
this new context, must demonstrate that their services are 
delivered in a secure environment. This environment helps 
controlling the risks and meet the expectations/requirements 
of patients [10]. 
C. Multidisciplinary health centre: although need for a 
restructured health policy – from a political point of 
view 
MCHs are a model that catalyzes needs, from health 
professional, public decision makers and patient care points 
of view [3]. The creation of this type of institution represents 
the convergence of three complementary processes, 
identified by Autès and Dufay [11]: 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
• 
Movement initiated by health professionals to 
gather their activities within MCHs and health 
centers. 
• 
Reflection of local officials, concerned by the 
management of health in their districts, involved in 
logics of prevention, of permanence of care, of first 
aid and the continuum between outpatient services 
and hospitals. They also care about offering 
external and specialized consultations to the people 
living in areas where there is a shortage of health 
practitioners; 
• 
Necessary reorganization of the supply of care due, 
first, to the constraints of modern medicine and 
pathologies and, second, to the effects induced by 
the anticipated decline in medical demography. 
From a territorial point of view, the MCHM aims at 
meeting the four standards of public health action: 1) 
maintaining a local offer, 2) guaranteeing equal access to 
health for all, 3) ensuring continuity of care between the 
primary care offer and graduated hospital care 4) and, 
finally, strengthening health prevention policies. For local 
officials, the issue is to strengthen weakened health districts 
and care offer [11], by proposing long-term ways-out to 
solve the current problems. In addition, since MCHs are 
subjected to accreditation rules, by responding to quality 
indicators established by public health authorities [10], they 
contribute to an increased performance of districts’ medical 
management. 
III. 
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH 
In this section, the sampling and methodological 
procedures are presented. 
A. Why Study the MCHM? 
By definition, MCHs depend on specific contexts. It is 
important to identify the territory’s needs, to take into 
account the needs of its population and its state of supply.  
MCHM is considered as representative of this movement of 
territorial restructuring in the field of health, both in its 
conditions of implementation and in its daily functioning, 
structured around the interrelationships between territorial 
stakeholders [3]. Indeed, despite its recent implementation, it 
manages to meet the whole public health objectives, both 
mandatory and optional, imposed by the “RHA Inter-
professional Agreement” contract, particularly in terms of 
shared information systems, which are at the heart of the 
challenges related to data quality. The dynamic of the 
creation of the MCHM was, in the first place, launched by 
health practitioners themselves, in reaction to the progressive 
desertification of their territory and the challenges it involves 
[11]. The project of creating the MCHM began in 2004. The 
district’s doctors wanted to cluster their activities in a single 
establishment, to pool their administrative tasks and to offer 
a better access to care for their patients. This approach is in 
line with the observations of some researchers, who state that 
medical desertification in rural areas has been the main 
motivation for the mobilization of health professionals [11]. 
One of the main problems lays in Landes’ unattractiveness 
for doctors.  The mere proximity of the beach and the 
“sweetness of life” are not enough to attract young 
professionals willing to settle down. It is necessary to 
provide health professionals with some attractive and secure 
professional conditions of practice. 
However, the notion of attractiveness of the project is 
very important here [3]. Offering a young professional an 
isolated practice in a small town does not have the same 
appeal as a long-term position in a multidisciplinary 
institution, in which he or she could be supervised, advised 
and supported by administrative services, surrounded by 
colleagues and supported by financial and material resources. 
Collegiality and plurality of perspectives make the medical 
practice both more reassuring and richer [11], especially at 
the beginning of a career. This is the appeal proposed, in 
general, by MCHs and, in particular, by the case studied in 
this article, which is one of the biggest and dynamic MCHs 
in France. Its professionals have been recently asked to 
present their institution in the next National French Congress 
of MCH. This type of organizational dynamism is a 
movement widely desired and claimed by the younger 
generations of medical and paramedical professionals [11]. 
Moreover, Landes is the largest region of France, with a 
mainly rural territory and offers most of the current and 
forthcoming public health services presented in the 
contextualisation part of this article. Having such an 
innovative MCH in this kind of area is an example of how 
to deal with public health issues in other regions in France, 
especially concerning the rural ones. 
B. Methodological Approach and Sampling 
At the beginning of the survey, the goal was to identify 
the organizational model and rules implemented by the 
MCHM’s team, specially concerning working processes and 
data management. To do so, a qualitative approach has been 
chosen This method has been selected for its ability to 
investigate the practices and interpret the results. It considers 
that the “confrontation with the corpus is a necessary 
condition for the perception of social practices” [12]. The 
goal was also to confront the different points of view 
concerning the organizational processes. The potential 
divergences and discordances regarding the positions can be 
highlighted. Does a secretary think the same thing of the 
establishment than a doctor or paramedical worker? 
Concerning data privacy management, the heads of the 
MHCM in charge have been interviewed. They had to 
explain their choices in terms of data management policy, of 
coordination put in place and of emergency plans in case of 
unfortunate disclosure. 
Regarding the questions, all the members of the MHCM 
staff we asked about two common topics. The first was about 
the daily-work and its organization, both concerning the 
inner-group and the relationships with the other members of 
the MCHM (for example: secretary-secretary, secretary-
medical, etc.). The goal was to highlight relational and 
organizational dysfunctions. Secondly, all the staff members 
were asked about their own professional uses of patients’ 
health records, in terms of access of use and of transmission. 
The purpose was to identify good and problematic uses. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
The second questions asked for some more specific 
topics. The goal was to have a better understanding of each 
specific staff members (medical doctor, paramedical, 
administrative, etc.), to point out the benefits and the limits of 
their new work, management and organizational processes 
since they entered the MCHM. Four focus groups took place 
in December 2018, with the four specific staff members. 
Then, interviews were conducted in January 2018, with the 
head of the administrative staff and the heads of the MCHM. 
They all were realized in the MCHM, in the meeting room. 
The goal was to make the people feel comfortable and to 
prevent conversations from being heard by the patients or the 
other staffs’ members. This approach seemed relevant, as it 
helped people to speak freely. 
TABLE I.  
DISTRIBUTION OF THE INTERVIEWED SAMPLE 
Criteria 
Distribution 
Number 
% 
Gender 
Male 
14 
51,9 
Female 
13 
48,1 
Age 
25-35 
6 
22,2 
35-45 
7 
25,9 
45-55 
8 
29,7 
55-65 
6 
22,2 
Professional 
activity 
Medical doctors 
11 
40,7 
Paramedical staff 
8 
29,7 
Administrative staff 
5 
18,5 
Executive of 
administrative staff 
1 
3,7 
Executive of the 
MCHM 
(also doctors) 
2 
7,4 
 
C. Health Records Management in the Multidisciplinary 
Care House of Mimizan 
The MCHM brings together three main crews: doctors (8 
+ 2 regular substitutes + 1 trainee), paramedics (3 nurses and 
their collaborators, 2 physiotherapists, 2 podiatrists, 1 
psycho-motor therapists, 1 dietician) and administrative staff 
(5 secretaries, only working for doctors, managed by an 
executive). Including trainee doctors and nursing staff, the 
sample is composed of thirty individuals involved in the 
daily operations of the MCHM. They are all subjected to the 
institution's collective agreement, in which respect for 
medical confidentiality is clearly enshrined. Data is managed 
and stored on a specific medical database software, Weda 
[19], which is also used by the surrounding external 
collaborators (pharmacies, specialists, hospitals, etc.). The 
choice to use the same software aims at facilitating the 
medical and administrative aspects concerning the caring 
continuum. Each member of the MCHM has secure access 
provided by the software. These codes are not stored on the 
institution's digital devices, in order to limit the risk in case 
of theft or hacking. 
However, not all MCHM members have the same level 
of access to patients’ records. Doctors, as well as their 
secretaries, have full access to all the information 
concerning: files, auxiliary session schedules, secure 
messaging, etc. This is justified by the need for doctor/doctor 
and doctor/secretary interoperability, for the smooth 
functioning of the MCHM and good patient care. At the 
request of a patient or a staff member, restrictions may be 
applied to limit secretaries' or doctors' access to some 
records. All patients were asked about this sharing consent. 
Then come the paramedics, with a diffusion specific to 
each specialty. Their access is conditioned by the needs of 
their activity. A physiotherapist, for example, will have 
access to the patient's x-rays and related prescriptions; a 
nurse will have access to history, specialist contacts, blood 
test results or vaccines, depending on needs. These 
professionals do not have access to the content of visits, 
letters, prescriptions, unless some specific case discussed 
with the doctor. The accreditation of external professionals is 
aligned with the system applied within the institution, 
according to the needs of the patient, the activity or the 
specialty. Collaborative patient follow-up is governed by 
Multi-Professional 
Consultation 
Meetings 
(MPCMs), 
planned or impromptu, attended by all the professionals 
involved in the presented case. Each meeting is documented, 
stored via Weda and only accessible to the concerned 
professionals. Doctors and secretaries meet weekly to 
monitor performance and improve organizational quality 
processes. The doctors interviewed also associate these 
meetings with team management (trust, accountability, etc.), 
to ensure cohesion among all workers and to involve them in 
the administration of the MCHM. 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF DATA MANAGEMENT PROCESSES 
This section is dedicated to the analysis of MCHM data 
management concerning patients’ records. Thanks to the 
study, the main protagonists of this type of management 
tasks have been identified, such as the governance of the 
establishment, from a managerial point of view. 
A. Data Ethics and Dissemination Quality 
An organization can be defined as a set of recurring 
transactional programs that constitute transactional flows. 
They are driven by a set of conventions and rules in a given 
context [13]. For its proper functioning, given the complexity 
of its transactions, it is essential to give access to the right 
information, at the right time, to make a selective 
transmission 
of 
users, 
in 
order 
to 
fight 
against 
misinformation, over-abundance and deviant uses [9]. The 
principle of data management is based on the ability of actors 
to select information and analyze it, in such a way that it is 
only disseminated to its legitimate recipients. The interest of 
this approach is twofold. On the one hand, it allows a smooth 
organization of sharing actions, making the institutional 
processes efficient. On the other hand, it makes it possible to 
limit the risks linked to the poor dissemination of data, thus 
guaranteeing respect for confidential medical records. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
The ethical processing of information seems to be the 
starting point of the MCHM's data management strategy. 
Béranger defines it as a mechanism for the interpretation of 
data, by a person or an organization, that will lead to give a 
specific meaning to data [9]. By giving attention to 
information, by analyzing it, the heads of MCHM tend to 
give meaning and value to data, as well as to determine the 
logistics of action to be applied: censorship, global 
dissemination, limited dissemination, etc. In the medical 
sector, it is fundamental to establish a reflection on personal 
health data through an ethical prism “in order to [remove] 
doubt and control uncertainties” [9] and to manage the risks 
inherent in the nature of patients’ records.  It leads to speak 
of the non-maleficence nature of the MCHM's information 
strategy: access to data is examined according to the profile 
and nature of the user [9]. Data sharing is conditioned by the 
profile of the information receiver, ranging from full sharing 
to very limited access, depending on activity and needs. This 
improves the security, confidentiality and protection of such 
data [9], as well as the performance of the information 
management system. By analyzing the data, determining the 
conditions for sharing and clearly identifying the receivers, 
the quality of access to patients' personal data is guaranteed. 
B. Informational Lean Management: no Unnecessary 
Information 
The data processing method leads us to analyze the 
notion of lean in quality management. Lean School is 
defined as “the search for process optimization by chasing 
down everything that is inappropriate or superfluous” 
guaranteeing “performance by eliminating waste” [1]. This 
method is usually applied to inventory management (0 
stock), document management (0 paper), or logistics (0 
unnecessary transport, 0 waiting, etc.). This can be relied to 
information management, in order to analyze the transaction 
rationalization activities [13]. 
Indeed, 
the 
info-ethical 
treatment 
as 
previously 
mentioned tends towards a very low entropy, i.e. a degree of 
almost nil disorder [9]. A system in which information is 
transmitted without analysis increases the level of confusion, 
as well as the slowness of decision-making and the risks of 
accidental dissemination of personal records. On the 
contrary, in a complex system such as the MCHM, the 
implementation of a hierarchy in information management 
(doctors analyse and choose the criteria before disseminating 
information) makes the actions of all team members easier 
and more fluid, by sending them only the data that will be 
useful to them in the exercise of their activity. This is a kind 
of lean management, applied to information management. 
This data dissemination method tends towards the goal of “0 
useless information", in order to guarantee both respect for 
medical confidentiality (0 information poorly disseminated), 
the quality of patient care (0 information missing) and the 
fluidity of actions (0 dysfunction linked to poor information 
dissemination). This information management method seems 
to be perfectly adapted to the performance requirements of 
MCHM's missions, while benefiting the daily tasks 
(administrative and patient care). 
V. 
ORGANIZATIONAL PROCESSES: GUARANTEEING THE 
QUALITY OF DATA MANAGEMENT 
In this section, the organizational processes observed 
during the survey will be discussed, which refers to data and 
patients’ records management. 
A. The Human Relations Theory as a Leading Light 
In the MCHM, the mobilization of the whole staff tends 
to improve the processes’ efficiency [1]. The MCHM’s 
management method is based on the involvement of all 
teams in improving the life of the institution: meetings, 
taking into account opinions, professional development, 
empowerment, etc. This method seems to be similar to the 
collaborative processes set up within the MCHM, although 
the institution does not claim any particular managerial 
method: unexpected discussions, weekly team meetings, 
festive group cohesion events, etc. This team management 
aims at analyzing defects and dysfunctions, and then seeking 
solutions [1]. This tends to improve the overall functioning 
of the establishment, where, according to Zacklad, all 
persons involved in the transaction are in the position of   
(co-)director, (co-)beneficiary, (co-)recipient (principal) and 
(co-)recipient [13]. Emphasis is placed on freedom of 
speech, professional responsibilities, skills of each individual 
and, above all, the necessary trust between employees, which 
is considered essential by all MCHM staff. 
As Doucet points out, it is essential that the direction of 
quality action be collegial. This makes it possible [in 
particular] 
to 
respect 
responsibilities 
and 
involve 
departments [1]. As a large number of individuals have 
access to the institution's health data, the use of this 
collaborative and collegial approach is essential to the 
MCHM. The increase in performance can only be achieved 
through the collaboration with the departments involved in 
this approach. By soliciting and valuing all staff members, 
the MCHM ensures fine relationship management, but also 
encourages professionalism and accountability of each 
individual. They also do so by regularly reminding them of 
the need for secrecy and rigour (formally and informally), 
especially concerning the performance of their daily tasks 
relating to patient health records. Transactional relationships 
lead to overcome formal/informal oppositions by insisting on 
their complementarity [3]. 
B. Leadership: Team, Quality and Performance 
Management 
This managerial approach is in line with the objective of 
promoting confidentiality and trust with producers and 
suppliers of information, thus contributing to the control of 
risks and deviations of data [9]. However, for MCHM staff 
management to be effective, it must also deal with some 
leadership issues. Leadership and management of the 
institution must be provided by a person of influence who, 
thanks to his or her managerial skills is able to guarantee, 
effective cooperation and coordination, based on mutual trust 
[3]. The notions of cooperation and trust seem to be 
interdependent key resources for the management of 
complex systems. Cooperation relies on a clear commitment 
of each member of the group and is strengthened by trust and 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
by the working contract [14]. In a complex system, each 
member of the team contributes to the success of the 
institution goals, so it is important for all team members to 
be aware of the values their work involves, such as secrecy, 
efficiency, empathy, etc. [15] It is up to the leader to make 
the team understand these fundamental values defended by 
the institution, from which ethics rules of behaviour flow. To 
do so, in the MCHM, many meetings are held, with the 
whole staff or with some subgroups (doctors-doctors, 
doctors-secretaries, 
etc.). 
Managing 
does 
not 
mean 
dominating. It is rather knowing how to talk to teams and 
how to get them to work towards a common goal [16]. Even 
if some members sometimes complain about the high 
number of meetings, they seem essential for the good 
management of the institution. Those meetings allow the 
team to have some feedback on the work and outline all 
technical or relational issues. It helps the manager to resolve 
the disagreements before they worsen and help the team to 
work with fluency [16]. 
The operational management of the MCHM is based on 
the involvement of the two doctors, whom will here be called 
P. and T. The influence they have is based on their 
legitimacy within the team, gained through their seniority, 
their involvement in the project and their ability to organize 
the run of the institution. The team trusts in them. Trust is 
built over time and in the relationships. It is a capital that the 
two doctors accumulated through years [15]. They are well 
known by all the team members, sometimes for more than 
twenty years. They are also known for their emotional 
competencies [16], that combines feeling with objective 
cooperation skills. The long-term trust of the team gives P. et 
T. the ability to engage and influence each member of the 
group, which helps the team to solve complex issues [17] 
and aim for an outstanding performance of their work. P. and 
T. are complementary, both in terms of relational aspects and 
in the conduct of data establishment and management. 
However, for a good cohabitation, the roles must be clear 
and non-antagonistic [1]. The risk associated is the 
disappearance of authority representatives. The smooth 
running of the institution must be based on the clear 
identification of authority figures, to which the staff can 
refer. The figure of authority also allows to the control of 
practices, beyond the “self-control” by the operator himself, 
in which skills and responsibilities are assumed by 
himself/herself [1], but not objectified by an external point of 
view. Each member is a part of the system and they have to 
work toward the same goal for the institution to reach its 
goals and insure the quality of care [16]. 
However, this verification dimension, in order to ensure 
the quality of the tasks performed, is quite crucial when it 
comes to such sensitive data as those referred to in this 
article: respect for medical confidentiality, quality of 
transmission of information, management of the risks of 
records leakage, etc. Taking leadership within the MCHM 
then seems to represent an additional element in the 
performance of strategies to protect patient medical records. 
The leaders act here as an element of internal data protection 
control, which compliance must be assessed and objectified 
externally by a notational Data Protection Officer [1]. This 
perspective can also be considered by taking as a model the 
Zacklad 
cooperative 
transaction 
logic 
reading 
grid, 
framework for analysing action and practice at the meso 
level [13]. 
VI. 
GENERAL LACK OF USE OF THE NATIONAL DIGITAL 
HEALTH RECORD 
The MCHM tends to present organizational processes in 
accordance with public health requirements, while following 
effective procedures for the management of patients' 
personal records. It should, however, be noted that the 
national digital health folder (Dossier Medical Partagé - 
DMP) is not integrated into any of the care management 
approaches within this institution. The study case tends to 
reveal an attitude of rejection of this instrument by MCHM 
staff members. They themselves state that this folder “is not 
designed for medical practice”, although they admit the 
promising nature of such a tool. 
“In 
case 
of 
emergency, 
the 
DMP 
becomes 
counterproductive. Of course, all the information about the 
patient is included, but it is not sorted or classified. It is up to 
us to find the right information and, in emergency situations, 
we have something more important to do than sorting 
information” says E., one of the MCHM doctors. They also 
confess that they are disturbed by the additional and time-
consuming actions required to update the patients' DMP, 
since this platform does not provide any automatic 
downloading add-ons for the software they use. It seems that 
the DMP system is in contradiction with the practices of 
MCHM professionals, with regard to their quality 
management processes. This notion is closely linked to the 
need for procedural rationality of the care action, namely an 
“orientation of the activity”. In this orientation, the action is 
justified by taking into account the way in which the tools 
contribute to performance. It is partly defined by the quality 
of the realization process [13]. Doctors highlight a logic 
“inherent in our relationship with objects and our 
environment, which we judge according to their adaptation 
to our expectations and needs” [1]. Applying this to Doucet 
reasoning, it would seem that doctors judge the use of the 
DMP in terms of its field operability and its ability to meet 
the needs imposed by their profession.  
However, according to their statements, data’s quality 
processing on the DMP is incompatible with their needs. 
Charlotte Maday, in her article [14], uses the image of deep-
sea fishing: throwing a net on the ocean floor, collecting 
information indiscriminately and presenting it to users. This 
image seems to be applicable to doctors' feeling towards the 
DMP. By presenting the “raw” data, the system is not in line 
with their requirements for efficient data management. It 
does not fit their ethical approaches or the “informational 
lean”, the main data management strategies used within the 
MCHM. More broadly, DMP raises the need for co-
production concerning innovation and the necessary 
collaboration between producers and users to guarantee the 
quality of a product or a service. Bringing together the 
documents and data, for process governance, requires 
mastering the notion of a system but, above all, acting in a 
spirit of active collaboration [14]. The main issues related to 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
the DMP concern its digital features, ethical uses of data and 
the ability of professionals from various trades to collaborate 
on the same project. It represents a question to investigate, 
specially concerning the conception and the interoperability 
of various medical software. The goal is to ensure the 
performance of software and improve the quality of care. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The sharing procedures introduced at the MCHM raise 
questions about risk assessment. In this institution, different 
informational and managerial strategies were put in place to 
secure the exchange of personal data. However, during the 
investigation, it seemed that the process of quality of care 
evaluation and “information crisis” management protocols 
(accidental or fraudulent disclosure, for example) were 
relatively minor. Since its launch, the institution does not 
seem to have been confronted with a crisis of this type. Its 
youth and its efficient management can explain this situation. 
Emergency protocols to resolve this type of situation are 
non-existent in the MCHM. It is problematical, as this 
implementation is one the most important principles of 
evaluating the quality of care in France, since the publication 
of the law of 31 July 1991 [10]. 
In the field of health, apparently minor errors or failures 
can have vital consequences [1] or endanger a health care 
institution and its staff. The management of the quality 
approach of such an institution cannot be done without a risk 
management component, nor a more global and formalized 
evaluation 
aspect. 
The 
measurement 
principles 
are 
inseparable from the principle of quality management [10]. 
It, therefore, seems necessary to study this institution in 
greater depth in order to explore more obscure aspects of its 
management and to consider a global quality approach, in 
order to find criteria encouraging its external recognition, 
particularly in the management of personal data. 
It would also be interesting to study the management of 
the MCHM through the notion of emotional intelligence. 
Quality and data management rely to some rational 
perspectives. However, the others aspects of the institution 
depend on human and emotional aspects. The price for the 
lack of emotional intelligence can end up compromising the 
existence of the institution [16]. The study highlights some 
minor problems, especially concerning a doctor, who 
sometimes awkwardly criticizes his colleagues (doctors and 
secretaries). Until now, it has been resolved with discretion 
and fluency. However, this kind of criticism precedes the 
loss of trust in a team work [16]. The MCHM does not seem 
to be prepared for this kind of situation. Investigating 
emotional intelligence as a key resource could insure the 
stability and the fluency of the MCHM team. 
It would also be interesting to investigate, on a larger 
scale, other MCHs, in order to compare the results of this 
study with other territorial and technical contexts. The 
objective is also to consider the development of a single 
working model for all MCHs, specially concerning data 
privacy management. As each MCH has its own 
specifications (socioeconomical context, number of the staff 
members, equipment, competences, etc.) would it be possible 
and relevant to propose a single model to all of them? 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Doucet, Quality, University Press of France (Presses 
Universitaires de France), 2013. 
[2] The French Senate. Access to care: health innovation 
promoted 
in 
French 
territories, 
2017. 
[Online]: 
http://www.senat.fr/rap/r16-686/r16-68613.htm 
[Retrieved: 
January, 2020]. 
[3] A. Bartoli and J. Sebai, “Multidisciplinary Care Houses 
facing territorial coordination”, Gestion 2000, no. 6, p. 17-37, 
2015. 
[4] New Aquitaine Regional Health Authority, Population and its 
characteristics 
in 
New 
Aquitaine, 
2018. 
[Online]: 
http://www.nouvelleaquitaine.ars.sante.fr/la-population-et-
ses-caracteristiques-en-nouvelle-aquitaine 
[Retrieved: 
January, 2020]. 
[5] INSEE, Complete File – Landes (40), 2010. [Online]: 
https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/2011101?geo=DEP-
40#chiffre-cle-1 [Accessed: 23-October-2019]. 
[6] New Aquitaine Regional Health Authority, Key Metrics, 
2017. 
[Online]: 
https://www.calameo.com/read/003713143e21e889f9535?pag
e=3 [Accessed: 23-October-2019]. 
[7] French Data Protection Act. Loi informatique et liberté, Law 
n° 78-17 of January the 6th 1978 (Last modification: July 27th 
2019). [Online]: https://www.cnil.fr/fr/la-loi-informatique-et-
libertes#article2 [Accessed: 23-October-2019]. 
[8] L. Miguel-Chamion, “Protection of shared health data, 
International Journal of Bioethics, vol. 25, no. 3, p. 63-80, 
2014. 
[9] J. Béranger, “Data ethical value of health big data”, Les 
Carnets du numérique, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 109-32, 2016. 
[10] C. Vilcot and H. Leclet, Quality indicators in health: 
Certification and evaluation of professional practices, Second 
release, French Association of normalization, 2006. 
[11] M. Autès and M-G. Dufay, “Health Care Houses and 
territories layout: a dynamic to share”, Santé Publique, Vol 
21, special edition no. 1, p. 17-25, 2009. 
[12] L. Monnoyer-Smith, For a complex epistemology of 
information and communication sciences, presented at the 
16th 
SFSIC 
Congress, 
Paris. 
2008 
[Online]: 
https://www.sfsic.org/congres_2008/spip.php?article78, 
[Accessed: 23-October-2019]. 
[13] M. Zacklad, “Management as a scoping activity in a context 
of cooperative transactions”, Activité, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 192-
200, 2013. 
[14] G. Le Carnal, “Federating and stimulating energies, building 
trust to face crisis situations”, Inflexions, vol. 2, no°3, p. 153-
168, 2006. 
[15] G. Le Cardinal, “Trust as a fundamental element of society”, 
Revue Projet, Vol 2, no. 293, p. 65-71, 2006. 
[16] D. Goleman, Emotional intelligence, Bantam Books, 1996 
[17] D. 
Goleman, 
Working 
with 
emotional 
intelligence, 
Bloomsbury Publishing PLC, 1999. 
[18] C. Mayday, “Quality of data and Open data”, I2D 
Information, données documents, vol. 53, no. 4, p. 58-58, 
2016. 
[19] Software Weda. [On line]: https://www.weda.fr [Accessed: 
26-March--2020] 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

