Introducing eHealth Business Modelling Instruments for Implementing eHealth 
Technologies Based on an Integrated Approach with Human-Centered Design 
Maarten A.H. van Limburg 
Psychology & Communication of Health & Risk 
University of Twente 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
a.h.m.vanlimburg@utwente.nl 
Julia E.W.C. van Gemert-Pijnen  
 Psychology & Communication of Health & Risk 
 University of Twente 
 Enschede, The Netherlands 
 j.e.w.c.vangemert-pijnen@utwente.nl
 
 
Abstract- Many eHealth technologies struggle with their 
implementation. Too often a well-designed eHealth technology 
fails to be successful in practice. One way to assess the 
implementation early in the development of an eHealth 
technology is by eHealth Business Modelling. This paper 
introduces the use for business modelling in eHealth and what 
business models are. Followed by a brief description of the 
ceHRes roadmap, which is our development approach for 
eHealth technologies that connects Human-Centered Design 
with eHealth Business Modelling. We then focus on the 
business modelling part of this roadmap and describe the 
instruments we currently use for eHealth Business Modelling 
to work towards a sustainable implementation for an eHealth 
technology. With the resulting business model, the potential 
implementation of the eHealth technology can be assessed a 
priori with its relevant stakeholders and strategic choices for 
an optimal value co-creation can be made and operationalized. 
Keywords- business model; co-creation; collaboration; eHealth; 
evaluation; implementation; roadmap; stakeholder; 
value 
creation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
eHealth technologies are advancing towards a better fit 
with user needs and user behavior through User-/Human-
Centered Design, however the implementation of the 
technology often remains poorly prepared and executed. This 
results in a well-designed eHealth technology that still fails 
to be successful in practice [1]. Often the implementation is 
evaluated ex post, so after the eHealth technology is fully 
developed and already deployed in its environment or 
market. The lack of stakeholder involvement, lack of cost-
effectiveness analysis and uncertain sustainability leads to a 
suboptimal or even failing implementation.  
eHealth Business Modelling is a promising way to 
evaluate the implementation of an eHealth technology a 
priori – so already during its development - by co-creating a 
business model for the technology with the relevant 
stakeholders and with the goal of collaborative value (co-
)creation [2]. By involving the stakeholders in the 
implementation processes, the eventual implementation will 
better match with practice. It can be implemented in a way 
that matches their needs best. Besides, if stakeholders cannot 
cooperate already in thinking about a fitting implementation 
it is unlikely the value co-creation will go smooth either. 
User-/Human-Centered Design are good for improving 
the eHealth technology itself, to make the technology reflect 
the needs of its users [3, 4]. But, users are only one subset of 
the entire ecosystem around an eHealth technology; there are 
many more stakeholders that will influence the technology. 
Maybe not in defining the specifics of the technology per se, 
but its implementation will depend on collaboration and co-
creation of multiple stakeholders. Developing eHealth 
technologies is a multidisciplinary venture [5] where 
multiple stakeholders with multiple disciplines need to 
collaborate in the development of the technology but also in 
determining its implementation so it will ‘survive’ in 
practice. Basically anyone or any organization that affects or 
gets affected by the technology can be considered a 
stakeholder [6]. An eHealth technology faces many 
multidisciplinary 
stakeholders: 
policymakers, 
vendors, 
insurers, care organizations and care providers, home care, 
employers and patients [7]. These stakeholders all influence 
the implementation of the eHealth technology and thus 
influence the value of the entire technology. 
Value in eHealth can be diverse; it can be monetary value 
(e.g., revenues, cost reductions), quantitative value (e.g., 
treatment time, number of patients, etc) or benefits [8]. The 
benefits from eHealth technologies are often complex to 
address, especially when these benefits are on a social level. 
Such social benefits are difficult (or perhaps even 
impossible) to quantize or monetize towards the eHealth 
technology directly. For example, if an eHealth technology 
speeds up a certain treatment, healthcare professionals can 
treat more patients; these treatments can become cheaper for 
healthcare organizations or the insurers; patients get home 
quicker, they consume less time and resources from the 
healthcare system, employers can benefit as patients get back 
to work faster, etc. eHealth technologies that offer such 
social benefits are hard to finance as the benefits are too 
obscure or indirect for the stakeholders that are supposed to 
finance the technology. In other words, it is imperative to 
assess what benefits are possible and thus what value an 
eHealth technology can offer to its entire ecosystem of 
stakeholders and more importantly, what this value means to 
each stakeholder. All stakeholders need to be inspired to 
collaborate and co-create value for themselves and each 
other and need to discover how this co-created value can be 
properly divided among the stakeholders. This is important 
for the implementation as the eventual value co-creation 
134
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

determines whether the eHealth technology is considered 
sustainable and cost-effective.  
How this value co-creation is ultimately done can be 
described in a business model as it is geared to describe the 
total value creation with multiple stakeholders [9]. A 
business model can transcend just one focal organization and 
looks at how value can be co-created and shared with other 
stakeholders [9]. This makes it suitable for guiding an 
implementation for an eHealth technology. 
 
II. 
BUSINESS MODELS 
Attention for business models grew in the last decade 
when the methods of doing business became more complex 
and more networked due to globalization and the rise of the 
Web 2.0 that made a whole new range of value creating 
opportunities appear in the form of Internet-based products 
and services [10]. Prime examples of successful Internet 
companies are e.g., Google, eBay and Facebook that totally 
rely on making money through Internet services. These 
companies experimented with totally new business models 
that fitted these new opportunities that Web 2.0 brought [11]. 
Known as eHealth [12], the Internet is seen as a promising 
venture to reorganize current healthcare services. Healthcare 
services currently are under a lot of stress when it comes to 
their affordability, accessibility and quality [13]. Grossman 
even states that with the current organization of the 
healthcare system in the USA about 30 to 40% of the 
healthcare costs are spent on inefficiency [14]. In many cases 
the “business” of business models in eHealth lays not 
directly in making profit, but the real profit lays in reducing 
costs at other stakeholders. However new ideas to improve 
healthcare - and that captures these cost reductions at the 
right stakeholders - require attention for new business 
models that fit eHealth in order to successfully implement 
these new ideas [14]. 
A business model is defined as the rationale of how an 
organization creates, delivers and captures value [15]. As 
mentioned earlier, value is determined by the stakeholders as 
they want to benefit from the eHealth technology, then they 
consider the technology valuable. A business model contains 
a strategic and bird’s eye description of how stakeholders 
cooperate and co-create value, how the eHealth technology 
reaches its users and how the value can be offered in a 
sustainable and cost-effective way. Figure 1 shows the 
Business Model Canvas by Osterwalder, a currently popular 
business model ‘blueprint’ containing nine core concepts that 
constitute the whole rationale of value creation. Through 
market analysis, stakeholder needs assessments and various 
other instruments this canvas can be filled up with strategic 
choices that determine the rationale of value creation. The 
left side (key partners, key activities, key resources and the 
costs they generate) describes the organizational aspects of 
the value proposition, the right side (customer segments, 
customer relations, distribution channels and the revenues 
they generate) the customer/market side. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Business Model Canvas 
 
For example, a business model can describe how a tele-
dermatology website can reduce time at dermatologists by 
letting patients upload photos of their skin problems. They 
do not have to visit and the dermatologist can perform his 
diagnosis on the uploaded photo. This saves healthcare 
insurance companies and employers a lot of time and money. 
In this example the healthcare insurance companies have to 
pay a fraction of the original fee for dermatologists and, 
because of this optimization, benefit financially. Other 
benefits are that the dermatologists can diagnose more 
patients a day, patients can ‘see’ the doctor when it fits their 
schedule and there are even possibilities for social benefits 
that might interest health insurance companies, government 
and employers. This example shows that as long as all these 
stakeholders enjoy benefits from this tele-dermatology 
website they are willing to cooperate and collaborate. Here 
are opportunities for an eHealth technology. It is the 
challenge in defining a business model to find this ideal ‘fit’ 
for the stakeholders. The better this ‘fit’, the more value the 
business model yields and the implementation is more cost-
effective and sustainable. 
The market and technological possibilities evolve rapidly 
and these uncontrollable changes have consequences for the 
eHealth technology: The technology has to be kept up-to-
date technically and that it still meets the user needs, but also 
the implementation needs to be dynamic as the business 
model needs to be kept up-to-date too [16, 17]. That is why 
eHealth Business Modelling is a continuous process that 
carries on even after the eHealth technology is deployed. 
Stakeholders can come and go, their value needs can change 
over time, all these things need to be dealt with when 
business modelling. A good business model needs to be a 
continuous rediscovery by constantly evaluating and 
improving earlier made assumptions [16]. 
Despite the fact that every organization operates with an 
underlying business model (even if the organization never 
explicitly made one they still operate with certain strategic 
objectives that can be seen as a business model) and the 
currently growing attention for business models in popular 
literature [18], research into business modelling is still a 
novel phenomenon and in the eHealth context even more so. 
eHealth development requires methods how eHealth 
business models can be defined, what eHealth business 
models are possible, what these business models exactly 
mean to the implementation of different types of eHealth 
technologies, etc. 
 
135
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

III. 
CEHRES ROADMAP 
We developed the ceHRes Roadmap (Figure 2) that 
combines the principles of Human-Centered Design and 
eHealth Business Modelling in a holistic and interwoven 
approach.  
In each of these concepts both Human-Centered Design 
and eHealth Business Modelling have a set of instruments 
that can be used to develop and implement the eHealth 
technology. This combination of Human-Centered Design, 
eHealth Business Modelling and the technical development 
is similar to the idea behind Yusof’s HOT-fit framework 
[19], who states that eHealth technologies need to be 
evaluated on the Human, Organization and Technology 
dimensions. Our roadmap takes it further than evaluation but 
guides the entire development of an eHealth technology on 
the same dimensions.  
 
Figure 2.  CeHRes Roadmap 
 
 
The whole development of an eHealth technology goes 
through five concepts:  
 
contextual inquiry,  
 
value specification,  
 
design,  
 
operationalization, 
 
summative evaluation.  
 
Every step in between the concepts is also evaluated; 
hence the iteration loops in the figure. This evaluation is 
formative as it improves earlier findings and assumptions 
with new insights. 
The approach described by the roadmap allows the 
developed eHealth technology to be persuasive and sense-
making so that it meets its users’ needs and behavior and at 
the same time the attention for the business model makes the 
development of the eHealth technology value-driven by 
involving 
the 
relevant stakeholders. This way the 
implementation gets prepared during the whole development 
and is an important part of development. Developing a good 
eHealth technology but with a poor implementation forfeit a 
lot of potential value. 
 
 
 
IV. 
EHEALTH BUSINESS MODELLING INSTRUMENTS 
In this article we focus on the bottom part (Figure 3) of 
the roadmap, the eHealth Business Modelling part, and we 
will introduce the current lineup of eHealth Business 
Modelling instruments per each of the aforementioned five 
concepts. 
 
Figure 3.  eHealth Business Modelling Instruments 
 
 
A. Contextual Inquiry 
In this stadium it is important to prepare and plan the 
project as well as finding out whether what the exact 
problem is and if an eHealth technology is the right solution 
to this problem. 
First the project strategy needs to be determined. There 
will be certain predetermined goals, conditions and 
constraints (finances, time, etc) that will influence the project 
straight from the start and these have to be well documented 
and communicated in a project strategy. 
The next step is to analyze the problem. An eHealth 
technology is a solution for a certain problem. For example, 
by improving an inefficient process, by fixing inefficient 
information sharing, or by creating a new tool. It is 
dangerous to leap too quickly towards a solution as in those 
cases the technology might not properly solve the problem as 
the exact problem is more complex than assumed. The 
development 
of 
eHealth 
technologies 
is 
often too 
technology-driven, 
resulting 
in 
great 
state-of-the-art 
technologies but with problematic implementations. In order 
to take the proper action, the problem needs to be carefully 
assessed [20]. 
When the problem is understood it is possible to choose a 
focus on what problems the eHealth technology shall deal 
with and what solutions can be offered, obviously this focus 
needs to fit within the project strategy. 
Also while analyzing the problem, the persons or 
organizations that experience the problem become apparent. 
These people are all stakeholders [6] and influence the 
implementation. In a relationship diagram these stakeholders 
can be mapped (Figure 4). 
 
136
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Before starting with the actual development of the 
technology its implementation can already be explored in the 
‘ideation’-phase [15]. Obviously these ideated business 
models contain a lot of assumptions but the opportunities of 
the technology can be assessed and communicated with the 
stakeholders already to assess whether or not the eHealth 
technology can be made sustainable.  
 
B. Value Specification 
The eHealth technology will face different type of 
stakeholders each with their own value needs. How can these 
value needs be input for the implementation? What value can 
the technology offer? 
First, the salience of the stakeholders to the project can 
be ranked [21]. Obviously the value needs of important 
stakeholders will have more effect on the technology and the 
implementation than the value needs of less important 
stakeholders. In Figure 4 we gave the stakeholders from the 
tele-dermatology example a salience number in between 1 to 
5. 
 
Figure 4.  Stakeholder relational diagram 
 
 
The same ranking can be applied on all the value needs 
that stakeholders specify. Some value needs are considered 
more important than others. These rankings can be put in a 
value matrix that calculates weighted rankings taking the 
importance of stakeholders and the importance of value 
needs in account. This helps in comparing and accumulating 
value for the design phase. 
In 
the 
competence 
analysis 
the 
organizational 
consequences for offering these values can be surfaced by 
analyzing the necessary activities and resources. 
The next step is to find the optimal distribution of these 
competences. eHealth technologies need to deal with  
multidisciplinary stakeholders so some activities can best be 
performed by specific organizations. This will result in 
partnerships and possibly even in an open or networked 
business model [22, 23] where organizations depend their 
value creation on each other. For co-creation of value, 
willingness for continuous cooperation and collaboration 
among stakeholders is very important. Cooperation can lead 
for individual organizations to reach their goals more fully 
[23]. This continuous cooperation will determine the 
sustainability of the eHealth technology. 
Some value needs are vital for the success of the 
technology and its implementation (they will score very high 
in the value matrix). In management these elements are often 
referred to as Critical Success Factors. In order to monitor 
these factors later on in the evaluation, they have to be set 
first. 
 
C. Design 
After completing most of the analyses to understand the 
environment, stakeholders and value of the eHealth 
technology, this phase deals with synthesizing the actual 
business model. 
First, the value-function-cost matrix allows comparing 
value with estimated costs. With User-/Human-Centered 
Design the value can be specified into functional design 
conform the needs of the users. The development costs per 
value can be estimated. Functionalities that cost a lot of 
money but add little extra value to the technology and its 
implementation should be less interesting. Besides that, 
functionalities that score high in the value matrix should be 
prioritized to be developed first. 
Not all value can be captured with the technology itself, 
some value derives from offering services next to the 
eHealth technology. These service opportunities are part of 
the business model as they improve the overall value of the 
eHealth technology and implementation. 
The final stage of the design is to actually combine all 
insights from previous instruments together in a business 
model. There are various existing business model templates 
(Figure 1 for example) that can be filled up with the strategic 
choices that will yield the most optimal sustainability and 
cost-effectiveness for the eHealth technology. 
 
D. Operationalization 
The business model is a strategic tool; it still needs to be 
operationalized so that it can be put to practice. This can be 
done by specifying a business case based on the business 
model. A business case contains financial calculations, 
scenarios and is much more concrete in describing the 
activities, resources and planning necessary for the eHealth 
technology and its operationalization. 
 
E. Summative Evaluation 
Once the business model is operationalized and the 
eHealth technology deployed in practice, it is imperative to 
monitor the sustainability and cost-effectiveness. This can be 
done by monitoring the previously set Critical Success 
Factors and through technical monitoring tools that keep 
track of usage parameters.  
 
137
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

When it starts to show that the sustainability and cost-
effectiveness are becoming weaker, it is time to take action. 
A business model is a dynamic object and thus if it really 
shows necessary, changes have to be planned and made to 
the implementation of the eHealth technology and maybe 
also the eHealth technology itself. 
When small changes seem not enough anymore to keep 
the implementation sustainable, a big overhaul in the form of 
a total re-design is an option to improve or redo the eHealth 
technology and its implementation. This may sound drastic 
but technologies come and go, so a re-design is only a matter 
of time. 
 
V. 
FUTURE RESEARCH 
We are testing the eHealth Business Modelling 
instruments in various eHealth research projects. We see the 
eHealth Business Modelling as an opportunity to improve 
the 
sustainability 
and 
cost-effectiveness 
of 
the 
implementation of eHealth technologies. It is imperative that 
the current instruments fit multiple eHealth projects, add the 
right input in the implementation process, and can deal with 
the multidisciplinary nature of eHealth.  
Our current piloting projects are in various phases of the 
roadmap. Future publications will further specify the 
instruments one concept at a time, and our learning 
experiences from how they were applied on said pilot 
projects.  
 
Figure 5.  Current state of instruments in the ceHRes roadmap 
 
 
Also we will continue our research in the combination 
(Figure 5) of Human-Centered Design, and eHealth Business 
Modelling to improve our ceHRes Roadmap into a holistic, 
interwoven approach for successfully developing eHealth 
technologies.  
 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Attention for the implementation of eHealth technologies 
should not happen ex post of the development, but a priori 
and during the development. The development and 
implementation are strongly interwoven with one other and 
interdependent. Developing a technology that cannot be 
implemented is obviously not helpful and not really a 
worthwhile venture. Our roadmap combines eHealth 
development techniques and eHealth Business Modelling as 
implementation-approach to avoid such problems by making 
the development of the eHealth technology a value-driven 
process instead of the currently common technology-driven 
processes. 
We hope that with the instruments introduced in this 
article, the development and implementation of eHealth 
technologies can advance and that this implementation 
through business modelling improves the sustainability and 
cost-effectiveness. 
We are aware that a big challenge (and maybe even the 
biggest) 
in 
defining 
business 
models 
for 
eHealth 
technologies lays in finding an optimal ‘fit’ for all 
stakeholders. The goals and general need for eHealth 
technologies may be mutually accepted without much effort, 
but getting the stakeholders discuss their different needs and 
value perceptions and finding the right combination and right 
‘fit’ for the eHealth technology and its implementation is a 
complex and lengthy task.  
eHealth Business Modelling offers instruments that help 
finding these needs and how these needs can be transformed 
into value and eventually into a fitting business model that 
helps deploying the eHealth technology in its practice. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Nijland, N., et al., Evaluation of Internet-based technology for 
supporting self-care: problems encountered by patients and caregivers 
when using self-care applications. Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 2008. 10(2). 
[2] 
van Limburg, A. and J. van Gemert-Pijnen, Towards innovative 
business 
modelling 
for 
sustainable eHealth 
applications, 
in 
eTELEMED2010. 2010: St. Martin. 
[3] 
Verhoeven, F., When staff handle staph: user-driven versus expert-
driven communication of infection control guidelines. 2009. 
[4] 
Arsand, E. and G. Demiris, User-centered methods for designing 
patient-centric self-help tools. Informatics for Health and Social Care, 
2008. 33(3): p. 158-169. 
[5] 
Pagliari, C., Design and evaluation in eHealth: challenges and 
implications for an interdisciplinary field. Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 2007. 9(2). 
[6] 
Freeman, R., The stakeholder approach revisited. Zeitschrift für 
Wirtschafts-und Unternehmensethik, 2004. 5(3): p. 228-241. 
[7] 
Cain, M. and R. Mittman, Diffusion of innovation in health care. 
Oakland, CA: California HealthCare Foundation, 2002. 
[8] 
Wilson, B. and J. Athanasiou, The Value of Healthcare IT (HIT): A 
Practical Approach to Discussing and Measuring the Benefits of HIT 
Investments. 2007, Intel. 
[9] 
Zott, C. and R. Amit, Business Model Design: An Activity System 
Perspective. Long Range Planning, 2009. 
[10] Osterwalder, A., Y. Pigneur, and C. Tucci, Clarifying business 
models: Origins, present, and future of the concept. Communications 
of the association for Information Systems, 2005. 16(1): p. 1-25. 
138
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

[11] Rappa, M., Business models on the web. North Carolina State 
University (ecommerce. ncsu. edu), 2000. 13. 
[12] Eysenbach, G., What is e-health? Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 2001. 3(2). 
[13] Richardson, W., D. Berwick, and J. Bisgard, Crossing the quality 
chasm: a new health system for the 21st century. Institute of 
Medicine, Public Briefing, March, 2001. 1. 
[14] Grossman, J., Disruptive innovation in health care: challenges for 
engineering. Bridge-Washington-National Academy Of Engineering, 
2008. 38(1): p. 10. 
[15] Osterwalder, A. and Y. Pigneur, Business Model Generation. 1st 
edition ed. 2009: OSF. 
[16] McGrath, R., Business Models: A Discovery Driven Approach. Long 
Range Planning, 2009. 
[17] Teece, D., Business models, business strategy and innovation. Long 
Range Planning, 2009. 
[18] Google. 
Timeline 
of 
"business 
model". 
Available 
from: 
http://www.google.com/#sclient=psy&hl=en&tbs=tl:1&q=%22busine
ss+model%22&aq=&aqi=g5&aql=&oq=%22business+model%22&g
s_rfai=&pbx=1&fp=86f97ff2f190b178. 
[19] Yusof, M., et al., An evaluation framework for Health Information 
Systems: human, organization and technology-fit factors (HOT-fit). 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 2008. 77(6): p. 386-398. 
[20] 20. Weick, K., K. Sutcliffe, and D. Obstfeld, Organizing and the 
process of sensemaking. Organization Science, 2005. 16(4): p. 409-
421. 
[21] Mitchell, R., B. Agle, and D. Wood, Toward a theory of stakeholder 
identification and salience: Defining the principle of who and what 
really counts. Academy of management review, 1997. 22(4): p. 853-
886. 
[22] Chesbrough, H., Open Business Models - How to Thrive in the New 
Innovation Landscape. 2006: Harvard Business School Press. 
[23] Dahan, N., et al., Corporate-NGO Collaboration: Co-creating New 
Business Models for Developing Markets. Long Range Planning, 
2009. 
 
 
139
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

