Sleep Evaluation Inﬂuenced by Negative Emotions and Memories After Awakening
Among Adolescents and Young Adults
Huan Wen Lu
Faculty of Industrial Design
Eindhoven University of Technology
Noord-Brabant, The Netherlands
Email: klu@live.nl
SeungHee Lee
Faculty of Art and Design
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences
Univeristy of Tsukuba
Ibaraki, Japan
Email: seungheekansei@gmail.com
Abstract—This paper examined the inﬂuence of sleep expe-
rience on self-sleep evaluation among adolescents and young
adults. 64 participants (age between 16-27, 36 males, 28 woman)
have participated in a questionnaire study. Sleeping habits and
subjective sleeping experience have been mapped and analyzed.
In a follow-up study, three participants have been tracking their
sleep experience, daily activities and sleep hygiene. The results
have shown that the participants of both studies sleep less than
average, but within the margin for healthy sleep. However, 25,8%
of the participants evaluate their sleep as insufﬁcient or as an
unpleasant experience. The case study showed that the evaluation
process of sleep experience is unbalanced. Memories of bad sleep
and negative emotions have a bigger impact on sleep evaluation
scores. Memories of pleasant sleeping experiences are more easily
replaced by new thoughts and are often forgotten during the sleep
evaluation process.
Keywords– sleep hygiene; sleep evaluation; activity track-
ing; bad sleeping experience.
I. INTRODUCTION
Insufﬁcient sleep, difﬁculties waking up and a bad mood
are consequences of experiencing bad sleep. In the long run,
unpleasant sleeping experience and mental fatigue may lead to
sleeping disorder [1]. Out of this, only a small fraction of the
big group of problem sleepers has ofﬁcially been diagnosed
with a sleep disorder and are receiving professional help
and treatment [2]. The common sleeper is thus, unaware of
what good sleep and bad sleep implies. On the other hand,
information found on the internet is not always accurate or
is difﬁcult to understand for everyday people. As a result, the
difference between good sleep and bad sleep is therefore often
misunderstood [3]. Sleep can be inﬂuenced by many different
factors, where sleep hygiene and consuming behavior plays an
active role [4].
In recent studies regarding sleep quality perceptions, it has
been suggested that there is a wide variety in how accurately
insomnia sufferers perceive their sleep [5]-[8]. Insomnia suf-
ferers tend to underestimate the overall sleep time and have
a negative view on sleeping compared to normal sleepers.
Furthermore, investigations into sleep misperceptions have
shown that people with a healthy sleep hygiene have proven
to be more accurate to evaluate their sleep [9]-[11]. In this
regard, the goal of this study is to map down and analyze
the sleep data of adolescents and young adults to ﬁnd how
self-sleep evaluation is inﬂuenced by sleep experience.
The topic of this paper is introduced in section I. In section
II, the methodology, target audience and the setup of both
studies is explained. Section III shows the obtained results
and subject evaluation of both studies. The discussion and
conclusion are written in section IV and V.
II. METHODS
This study is divided into two parts: (1) the sleep evaluation
analysis of the younger generation in the area of Eindhoven
and (2) a case study of three subjects to ﬁnd how self-
sleep evaluation is inﬂuenced by sleep experience. Adolescents
and young adults were approached to participate in a survey
and share their past experiences, thoughts about sleep quality
and how they would evaluate their own sleep. Moreover,
people regardless of background, gender, or medical dossier
were allowed to participate in this questionnaire. The only
requirement was to be within the age group of 16 to 27 years
old.
According to the adolescents and young adults participating
in this study, they are facing more problems related to sleep
such as: feeling tired, insufﬁcient sleep, irregular sleep patterns
and stress. To look further into the case of sleep evaluation, a
speciﬁc case study is designed to track the sleeping experience
and consuming behavior of adolescents and young adults
outside a clinical environment.
A total of 64 participants (28 female) successfully ﬁlled
in the sleeping evaluation questionnaire. Figure 1 and 2
show the age distribution and occupation. The occupations
are distributed among three groups: 66% are in education or
training, 31% are employed, and 3% are unemployed and
not in education. Among this group, 16 participants (25,8
%) stated they have troubles regarding one, or more of the
following points: falling asleep, staying asleep, going to bed,
waking up, or tiredness. In all cases the participants were not
ofﬁcially diagnosed with any sleeping disorder.
The following statements were hypothesized: (1) Adoles-
cents and young adults do not have a clear overview of what
good sleeping experience means. The true deﬁnition of good
sleep is not clearly deﬁned, causing misunderstandings; (2)
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

sleep evaluation is inﬂuenced by time. The moment when it is
evaluated makes a difference in evaluation score. People have
different opinions about their sleep during the day; (3) only a
small percentage of the adolescents and young adults do have
(symptoms of) sleeping problems; (4) consuming and activity
behavior prior going to bed does have a measurable impact
on sleep experience. Physical exercise, caffeine and alcohol
consumption may have an inﬂuence on one’s sleep.
Based on the results of the sleep evaluation analysis, three
subjects were chosen out of the 64 participants to participate
in a case study. They were chosen from the initial group of
participants based on questionnaire results, Pittsburgh Sleep
Quality Assessment (PSQI) score and willingness to partic-
ipate. What is more, the subjects completed an interview
process, about their personal standing on the subject of sleep,
survey results and past sleeping experiences. They, consisted
of two non-problem sleepers and one problem sleeper, where
the last has not been diagnosed with a mental sleep disorder.
In this research, the following assumptions were made: a non-
problem sleeper is someone who (a) sleeps everyday at least
six hours; (b) falls asleep in less than 30 minutes; (c) is
sleeping in a bedroom environment; (d) is excluded from any
disorders or illnesses; (e) has a PSQI score of less than ﬁve.
A problem sleeper is deﬁned if he or she does not qualify for
at least one of the statements written above.
Figure 1. Age Distribution Participants
Figure 2. Occupation and Gender
A. Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire
Each participant was given a set of questionnaires to com-
plete in their own time. Included in the set were three different
questionnaires related to: sleep quality, sleep experience, and
daily activities for the past month. Moreover, questions were
based on different studies for diagnosing sleep disorders:
Pittsburgh Quality Sleep Index (PSQI) [12], Consensus Sleep
Diary (CSD) [13] and Stanford Sleeping Scale (SSS) [14]. The
questions in the survey were slightly modiﬁed to be applicable
to the public audience who is not familiar to mental sleep
disorders [15]. In the end, the participants were asked if they
would like to volunteer as subjects in the case study.
B. Case Study Procedure
Based on the results of the questionnaire study, three sub-
jects were chosen: two males (22 and 24), and one female (26).
One of the subjects (24/M), claimed to have sleep troubles
consisting of: falling asleep, irregular sleeping patterns and
feeling tired during the day. Au contraire, during the study, the
subjects were required to keep track of: (a) food, beverages,
medication, and tobacco consumed/used; (b) physical exercise
(what exercise and how long); (c) activities from at least
2 hours prior going to bed; and (d) sleep evaluation after
awakening. Furthermore, they did not change their sleeping
schedule, consuming, and activity behavior. Before starting
the experiment, the volunteers were guided on how to use
the tracking tools, interviewed about their thought of the
experiment, and a questionnaire related to sleep experience
was given to ﬁll in. Besides, two tracking tools were provided
to register the activities: (1) a notebook, consisting of questions
and feedback requests on their sleep, a blank table and
some additional blank comment space; and (2) a smartphone
application with questions related to their sleeping experience,
tracking option for consumables and activities and a comment
section (see Figure 3). Either one of the two diaries had to
Figure 3. Tracking Application: Rested Beta 0.2
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

be ﬁlled. Before starting the experiment, the volunteers were
guided on how to use the tracking tools, interviewed about
their thought of the experiment, and a questionnaire related to
sleep experience was given to ﬁll in.
The tracking application for the smartphone was created to
make tracking easier and accessible for the subjects. At the end
of the experiment, the subjects were once again interviewed
with the same questions as the pre-experiment interview and
were given the same questionnaire about sleep experience to
ﬁll in.
The results from all data provided by the participants and
subjects have been analyzed through a cause and effect study.
The relationship of consuming, activity behavior, and sleeping
evaluation were mapped into multiple subgroups and analyzed.
The groups consisted of occupation, age, and sleep evaluation
score.
III. RESULTS
The results from the sleep evaluation questionnaire are
shown in Figures 4, 5, and 6. These include sleep evaluation
score, bedtime, wake time, and a plot of sleep evaluation
against the total amount of sleep. In this regard, sleep eval-
uation is based on a [0-10] point scale, where 0 is the most
negative and 10 the most positive sleep experience. Partic-
ipants ﬁlled the questionnaire individually, without further
instructions, while questions left open were not taken into
account. From the aforementioned, the participants are divided
into sub-groups: (a) Good sleepers (8+), normal sleepers (5-
7), bad sleepers (4-); (b) student and non-student; and (c)
by age group: between 16 and 19 years old, consisting of
mainly students attending high school, from 20 to 23 years old,
consisting of mainly students attending university or college,
and 24-27 years old, consisting of mainly working adults.
The results are compared to guidelines given on sleep for
adolescents. According to previously published research, the
body has optimal rest and growth when adolescents sleep on
average eight hours per day. Healthy sleep is sleeping between
6 and 9 hours per day [16]. However, a different study reported
that only 15% of the adolescents are sleeping eight hours [17].
Among the participants, 14,5 % (9 out of 62) did sleep the
Figure 4. Sleep Evaluation Data 1
Figure 5. Sleep Evaluation Data 2
Figure 6. Sleep Time Versus Evaluation Score
recommended 8 hours of sleep per day. In the questionnaire,
certain sleep - wake behaviors were asked and are shown in
Figure 5 and 6. In overall, the participants in the age group
of 16-19 and 24-27 are the most satisﬁed with their sleep.
Participants aged from 20-23 experience the worst sleep.
The results from the case study are shown in Figure 7. A
diary study gave more accurate values in sleep wake times and
daily activities of the subjects. In addition, according to the
data sheet, it was clear that the subjects underestimate their
amount of sleep. The total amount of sleep is approximately
half an hour to an hour more than the time submitted at the
questionnaire. The subjects were always looking at the worst
case scenario. Therefor they were underestimating their total
sleep time.
Consuming and activity behavior having an impact on sleep
experience does not clearly show in the results from the
case study; likewise, interviews with the participants gave
different answers without a clear conclusion. Notwithstanding,
regular eating and drinking habits do have a small inﬂuence
on one’s sleep. In a different study, it was stated for optimal
sleep hygiene, food, drinks, and physical exercise is not
recommended prior bed time. In contradiction to the previous
statement, one of the subjects (26/F) was having intense
physical exercise 2-3 times per week prior going to bed. In the
after-interview, she clearly stated ”Physical exercise improves
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 7. Case Study Data Summary
my sleep experience, it helps me to fall asleep more easily
and it helps to clear my mind”.
The evaluation of sleep is inﬂuenced by memories and
feelings related to bad sleep. Subjects (22/M and 24/M) gave
their opinion that bad sleep has more impact on their morning
routine. The difference between good and bad sleep experience
cannot be compared as many factors affect this judgment. The
moment of evaluation is also very important. For example,
evaluating your sleep directly after waking up, will result in a
lower evaluation score; whereas doing it after taking a shower,
or having a morning coffee, will improve the evaluation score.
It has been stated by the subjects that memories of bad sleep
are stronger and more memorable, while memories of good
sleep are easily forgotten and replaced by new thoughts of
activities and events.
On another topic, the tracking application was favored over
the traditional paper notebook, during the two-week study:
all three subjects preferred to use the smartphone application.
One of the subjects (22/M) gave his opinion about activity
tracking: ”Tracking my activities gave me more insight about
my daily routines and consuming behavior. However, I did
not change my behavior a lot”. The subjects were interested
in sleep hygiene and behavior change, however, they were not
willing to change their own daily routines.
IV. DISCUSSION
The case study sampled sleep experience and activity be-
havior across multiple nights and outside clinical settings. The
ﬁndings found in this study are based on the results provided
by the participants, which are subjective statements and be-
lieves they have themselves. Moreover, the ﬁndings supported
previous studies about the sleep patterns of adolescents and
young adults, but a bigger sample size is required to give a
ﬁnal conclusion. Inevitably, the coherence between consuming
and activity behavior prior going to bed is unclear and cannot
be conﬁrmed in this study. Consuming and activity behavior,
a part of sleep hygiene, has on a certain degree effect on one’s
sleep. The positive effect has been stated in previous studies as
well, but sleep hygiene is due to contradictory result material
not used in this study. It can be concluded that activity and
consuming behavior do have a relation to sleep experience.
When reviewing the ﬁndings and implications discussed
herein, it is important to consider the limitations which may
have inﬂuenced these ﬁndings. The data is in all cases subjec-
tive information provided by the participants themselves. The
participants’ self-evaluation is based on own knowledge and
attitude towards sleep. People who are biased towards good
sleeping experience, are evaluating their sleep with more care.
As a result, these people were very satisﬁed with their own
sleep.
The other group has a more diverse opinion on sleep, these
individuals consisted mainly of college and university students.
Hence, due to projects, exams and social relations, there is
less structure in their sleep hygiene. Pressure from school,
social relationships and (part-time) work is in some cases more
important than sleep, which results in their sleep evaluation to
be below average. Subsequently, people with a more negative
view on sleep, are always looking at the worst case scenario.
As a result, they were underestimating their total sleep time
on a regular base. It is thought that, as a result of this study,
sleep evaluation is inﬂuenced by many more factors outside
of the domain of sleep. Negative emotions and memories do
have a signiﬁcant impact on sleep evaluation.
From the results of the sleep evaluation questionnaire, it
can be argued that: (a) adolescents and young adults of this
study do not reach the quota of sleep recommended for their
age group, but are within margin of healthy sleep behavior;
(b) subjective thoughts about sleep experiences are more
negative than the actual sleep experience. 25,8 percent of the
participants rate their sleep overall bad (less or equal than four
on the 10-point scale), and there are only ﬁve cases where
people sleep less than the norm of at least ﬁve hours; (c) most
of the people are misinformed about what good quality sleep
means. Their view on sleep in general very negative. This may
be caused by all the information available on the Internet about
various sleep disorders.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
Adolescents and young teenagers do sleep less, but within
the margin for healthy sleep. However, the evaluation process
of subjective sleep experience is unbalanced. Memories and
emotions related to unpleasant sleeping experience are more
memorable and present than pleasant sleeping experiences.
Pleasant memories are more easily replaced by new thoughts
and are often forgotten during the sleep evaluation process. As
a result, negative emotions and memories have more inﬂuence
on the results of subjective sleep evaluation.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In future studies, the domain of subjective sleep experience
is not only limited to factors as overall sleep time, wake time,
sleep quality, but factors as feelings, memories and emotions
could be included in addition. Following the Japanese trend
of design emotion, the approach of Kansei design, where
research and development are focused towards the customer’s
psychological feelings and emotions could be used as one of
the starting points.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like express their appreciation towards
the subjects and people involved in this research, TU\E, The
Netherlands for guiding and supervising the whole process,
and Lee Laboratory, Tsukuba University, Japan for supervising
the revision of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] American Sleep Disorders Association, American Sleep Disorders As-
sociation. International classiﬁcation of sleep disorders: Diagnostic and
coding manual. Rochester, MN: American Sleep Disorders, Rochester,
MN: American Sleep Disorders Association, 1991.
[2] A. L. Jr Chesson, R. A. Ferber, and J. M.Fry, ”The indications for
polysomnography and related procedures, ” Sleep, vol. 20, no. 6, pp.
423-87, June, 1997.
[3] A. R. Wolfson and M. A. Carskadon, ”Sleep Schedules and Daytime
Functioning in Adolescents”, Child Development, vol. 69, no. 4 pp. 875-
887, August, 1998.
[4] ZubiaVeqar, M EjazHussain. ”Sleep Quality Improvement and Exercise:
A Review”, International Journal of Scientiﬁc and Research Publications,
vol. 2, no. 8, August 2012.
[5] M. A. Carskadon, et al. ”Self-reports versus sleep laboratory ﬁndings
in 122 drug-free subjects with complaints of chronic insomnia”, Am J
Psychiatry, vol 133, no 12, pp. 1382-1388, December, 1976.
[6] J. D. Edinger, A. I. Fins. ”The Distribution and Clinical Signiﬁcance of
Sleep Time Misperceptions among Insomniacs”, Sleep, vol. 18, no. 4, pp.
232-239, May, 1995.
[7] E. Libman, L. Creti, R. D. Levy, W. Brender and C. S. Fichten, ”A
Comparison of Reported and Recorded Sleep in Older Poor Sleepers”,
Journal of Clinical Geropsychology, vol. 3, no. 3, 199-211, 1997.
[8] D. Schneider-Helmert, A. Kumar, ”Sleep, its subjective perception, and
daytime performance in insomniacs with a pattern of alpha sleep”,
Biological Psychiatry. vol. 37, no 2, 859-865, January, 1995.
[9] M. H. Bonnet and D. L. Arand, ”Physiological activation in patients with
Sleep State Misperception”, Psychosom Med. vol 5, no. 5, pp. 533-540,
September-October, 1997
[10] E. Hoddes, M. Carskadon, R. Phillips, V. Zarcone, W. C. Dement ,
”Total sleep time in insomniacs”, [Abstract] Sleep Research, vol 1, pp.
152, 1972.
[11] W. F. Seidel, et al. ”Daytime alertness in relation to mood, performance,
and nocturnal sleep in chronic insomniacs and noncomplaining sleepers”,
Sleep, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 230-238, 1984.
[12] D. J. Buysse, C. F. Reynolds, T. H. Monk, S. R. Berman and D.J.
Kupfer, ”The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI): A new instrument
for psychiatric research and practice”, Psychiatry Research, vol. 28, no.
2, pp. 193-213, May, 1989.
[13] E. Colleen, et al. ”The Consensus Sleep Diary: Standardizing Prospec-
tive Sleep Self-Monitoring”, Sleep, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 287-302, February
2012.
[14] A. Shahid, K. Wilkinson, S. Marcu, C. M. Shapiro, ”Stanford Sleepiness
Scale (SSS)”, STOP, THAT and One Hundred Other Sleep Scales, pp.
369-370, November 2011.
[15] A. J. Spielman, P. Saskin ,M. J. Thorpy, ”Treatment of chronic insomni-
aby restriction of time in bed”, Sleep, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 45-55, February
1987.
[16] “Teens
and
Sleep,”
2016,
URL:
https://sleepfoundation.org/sleep-
topics/teens-and-sleep [accessed: 2017-02-27].
[17] D. F. Kripke, et al. ”Mortality Associated With Sleep Duration and
Insomnia”, Arch Gen Psychiatry, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 131-136, February
2002.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

