Engaged Scholarship as Research Method: a Best Practice for evidence based IT-
innovations for People with Severe Dementia  
Elles Gyaltsen-Lohuis, Marike Hettinga 
Research group IT Innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
Email: {EGE.Lohuis} {M.Hettinga}@ windesheim.nl 
 
 
Abstract— Providing evidence for the added value of IT-
innovations in health care for people with dementia is most 
challenging. Questions on relevant outcome criteria, methods 
of measurement, qualitative methods and quantitative, and 
correct stakeholder management are some of the issues coming 
to the fore. This short paper shares the best practices and 
challenges met on two short-term studies on IT-innovations for 
people with severe dementia. The paper also includes the topics 
and questions to discuss in the workshop EviDem: Evidence 
based IT-innovations for People with Dementia, during the 
eTelemed, the Ninth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2017. 
Keywords: engaged scholarship; IT-innovations in health care; 
dementia; research method;  evidence. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 2015 and 2016 I conducted two studies on IT 
innovation in intramural care for people with severe 
dementia. The first study was on the effects of a remote 
sensor system as regards to 1. the quality of life and care of 
the client and 2. the efficiency of care by the care providers. 
The second study was on the effects of a social media 
application as regards to 1. the quality of life of the client 
and 2. the relationship between client and care provider. 
Both studies were small-scale, involving 12 to 24 clients 
with severe dementia and lasted six months. This short paper 
focusses on the methods used and the challenges met. 
II. 
ENGAGED SCHOLARSHIP AND ETHNOGRAPHY AS 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The study on IT innovation for people with dementia in 
an intramural setting focuses on a series of complex issues in 
a social setting. The IT innovation is supposed to generate 
different results for various stakeholders in the arena of care, 
and all stakeholders have different interests. Clients with 
dementia are mostly hoping the IT innovation will improve 
their quality of life and care. Formal care providers often 
want to be able to give better care with the IT innovation. 
Boards of management of care providers direct their 
attention to efficiency in care while IT innovators and also 
financers of the IT innovation have commercial stakes when 
it comes to innovation in care practices.  
At the same time the study on IT innovations is also 
supposed to contribute  to the body of scientific knowledge 
on design and implementation of IT innovation in care. So 
the research method used has to serve multiple stakeholders 
in both the practice and the science of care. To increase the 
capabilities to study complex problems and to create the 
kind of knowledge that advances both practice and science 
in care, I propose the method of engaged scholarship by Van 
de Ven [1]. Engaged scholarship is a participative form of 
research for obtaining the views of key stakeholders to 
understand a complex problem. By exploiting differences 
between the viewpoints of the stakeholders, I found that 
engaged scholarship produces knowledge that is more 
penetrating and insightful than when researchers work 
alone.  
Depending on the research purpose Van de Ven 
proposes 2 possible research perspectives: the ‘detached 
outsider’ and the ‘attached insider’ [1]. The purpose of my 
research was two-fold, namely to gain knowledge about the 
effects and the adaption of the IT innovation interventions 
together with the stakeholders and to gain knowledge about 
the complexity of intramural setting in which the IT 
innovation is launched. Therefore I chose the ‘attached 
insider’ view. 
The first aim of studying the effects and adaption of the 
IT innovation demanded an action/intervention research. 
Developed by Kurt Lewin in 1944 action research is a 
reflective process of problem solving whereby researchers 
and stakeholders work together to improve the community’s 
strategy, practices and knowledge of the settings in which 
they practice. The basis of this process is the participation of 
stakeholders in problem solving, using systematic methods 
of data collection, feedback, reflection and action [1]. By 
taking the perspective of the ‘attached insider’, I worked 
together with the key stakeholders to design and execute the 
research to ensure that all stakeholder’s interests were 
served the best possible way.  
The second aim, to gain insight in the complexity of the 
situation and to contribute to the body of scientific 
knowledge, required a collaborative basic research, another 
form of engaged scholarship [1]. This form of research 
entails sharing of power and joint activities among the 
researcher and stakeholders in order to co-produce 
knowledge about a complex problem or phenomenon. 
Taking again the perspective of the ‘attached insider’, I 
shared the daily life with the clients and care providers in 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the intramural setting for a period of time, discussing our 
experiences and our viewpoints, their perceived obstacles 
and analyzing our findings together. I gathered the 
experiences and knowledge of the diverse stakeholders 
involved through interviews, conversation, participation and 
observation.  To get a close and intimate familiarity with the 
stakeholders and their practices the key in the research 
strategy used here was participant observation, observing 
while playing a role within the group observed. 
III. 
CHALLENGES MET 
As Van de Ven notes, practicing engaged scholarship raises 
a number of challenges, two of which I also encountered 
while doing research in the intramural setting: divergent 
viewpoints and building relationships with stakeholders. 
Firstly, engagement generates divergent viewpoints that can 
be juxtaposing. In my research I incorporated the 
stakeholders’ viewpoints and I gathered data from all the 
stakeholders involved: the clients, their care providers – 
formal and informal -, the board of management, the IT 
innovation developers and the financers of the IT 
innovation. The viewpoints generated showed different 
stances – not only on the IT innovation itself as intervention 
but also on the results this IT innovation generated by the 
client with dementia. 
I found that reconciling these divergent viewpoints 
is not the point in this research. The point is to study and 
understand when and why these viewpoints are different. I 
tried 
to 
explain 
these 
differences 
by 
seeing 
the 
interconnectedness and webs of entanglement between the 
different dimensions of the processes in the daily lives of 
the clients and their care providers – formal and informal. I 
came to a holistic understanding from engaging all the 
stakeholders and analyzing their constantly evolving 
relationships.  
The second challenge was negotiating the research 
relationship by establishing and building relationships with 
stakeholders. My research was undertaken with all 
stakeholders but especially I needed to build a good 
relationship with the clients and their formal care providers 
with whom I would be working. I experienced that building 
this relationship takes time, mutual understanding and a 
subordinate position of the researcher. The clients and care 
providers in my research were never involved in any sort of 
research before. When I suggested this research to them I 
made sure that they  understood what it entailed from both 
sides, coming to work with them, talking  and sharing, 
explaining, reflecting and exposing personal details.  
The majority of the clients involved could not 
communicate and understand the implications of being 
involved in research. Their interests were represented by the 
care providers – formal and informal. The board, informal 
and the formal care providers had outlined their priorities as 
regards the clients: the wellbeing of the client at all stages of 
the research. This meant no intrusion, no upheaval, no 
insecurities in the clients’ environment. As soon as it 
became clear that the client had a negative reaction or was 
obstructed in his or her daily life, the research and IT 
intervention would be stopped. Keeping the daily routine as 
regular as possible was key to the wellbeing of the clients.  
We made the agreement that the clients’ wellbeing would 
always have precedent over any other issue that could in the 
study. All decisions made during the research were always 
guided by these principles. This way we made sure that all 
parties 
were 
contributors 
in 
working 
towards 
the 
development of the IT innovation and partners in the study.  
Taking the time to build the relationship, mutual 
understanding and a complete subordinate position from the 
researcher to the wellbeing of the client made all 
stakeholders feel secure and safe, contributing as much as 
what was within their reach and therefore ensuring the best 
results within the study. It also meant however that the 
length of the study and the schedule set was determined by 
the clients from day to day. For me as a researcher this 
imposed a definite time challenge in the research frame that 
was dictated by strict delivery dates and deadlines. 
IV. 
TOPICS AND QUESTIONS TO DISCUSS  
The other challenges that I experienced in my studies on IT 
innovations and people with severe dementia are: 1.  how to 
include the persons with severe dementia in the IT 
development and 2. how to take the constantly changing 
needs and abilities for persons with severe dementia into 
account while ensuring reliable research data. 
 
It is proven that including the persons with dementia in 
the development of IT innovations ensures a better 
product/service and a higher adaptation of the innovation 
[2]. However, people with severe dementia are often not 
able to participate in research due to the fact that dementia 
in a severe stage restricts their interaction with their 
environment. To ensure the best results, what is the best 
practice to include the persons with severe dementia in the 
IT development? 
 
During the research I experienced that the ability to 
interact with people with severe dementia can vary from 
hour to hour. One moment the person with severe dementia 
is able to interact and use the IT innovation provided, the 
next moment he or she is not able to due to the effects of the 
illness or the effects of the medication administered. This is 
an incredible challenge to both the client and the researcher. 
What is the best practice to take the constantly changing 
needs and abilities for persons with severe dementia into 
account while ensuring reliable research data?  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A.H. Van der Ven, Engaged Scholarship: A Guide for 
Organisational and Social Research. Oxford:: University Press, 
2007. 
[2]  M. Span, Developing an Interactive Web Tool to Facilitate     
Shared-Decision Making in Dementia Care Networks: A 
Participatory 
Journey. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://hdl.handle.net/1871/54018
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

