Concept Testing Toward a Patient-Validated Information Architecture 
Prototype Development of Healthtalk Norway 
 
Tore Høgås 
Centre for Quality and Development 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
e-mail: tore.hogas@telemed.no 
Torsten Risør 
Faculty of Health Sciences 
UiT The Arctic University of Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
e-mail: torsten.risor@uit.no 
Marianne Trondsen, Line Lundvoll Warth, Kari Dyb and Hege Andreassen 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research  
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
e-mail: marianne.trondsen@telemed.no, line.lundvoll.warth@telemed.no, kari.dyb@telemed.no  
and hege.andreassen@telemed.no 
 
 
 
Abstract—A Norwegian research group is adopting the 
Database of Individual Patient’s Experience of Illness (DIPEx) 
international methodology standards for collecting qualitative 
research into people’s health experiences and disseminating it 
on a web site. We are in the concept phase of developing the 
web site, and decided to build a topical ambiguous taxonomy 
together with a more clinically influenced taxonomy with top-
level labels “Health and lifestyle” and “Illness” for the 
information architecture of the web site. In this paper, we 
report from usability testing of the top-level label of the topical 
taxonomy. We ran qualitative and quantitative A/B tests on 
wireframe concept sketches. The two top-level labels were a 
generic variant, “Topic”, tested against the control variant, 
“Everyday life”. Both qualitative and quantitative tests 
indicate better results for “Everyday life” as the top-level label 
for the topical ambiguous taxonomy of the web site. While not 
fully conclusive, the results provide reasonable confidence in 
the more descriptive label “Everyday life” at this early stage. It 
is preferable in that it both seems to create a more coherent set 
of expectations amongst the users, and more closely matches 
the content of the web site. The concept test is therefore 
deemed a useful first step in a rigorous testing program to 
ensure that the development process is informed by a patient-
validated information architecture.    
Keywords- usability; information architecture; A/B testing; 
health experiences; qualitative research. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Internet is an increasingly important source of 
information for health purposes [1]. Evidence suggests that 
peer-to-peer exchange of health experiences has been one of 
its most transformational features [2] and is most likely to 
engage site users [3][4]. However, many web sites and other 
media sources present only a few anecdotal accounts or are 
skewed toward heroic or exceptional testimonials. Hence, 
there is a need for comprehensive research based collection 
and dissemination of patient accounts that includes the 
multiplicity of subjective everyday experiences. 
To meet this need, the project “Healthtalk Norway” will 
pilot the Database of Individual Patient’s Experience of 
Illness (DIPEx) methodology of health experiences research 
[5][6] in Norway, with the aim to “promote excellence of 
qualitative research into people’s experiences of health and 
illness” [7]. DIPEx, developed by the Health Experiences 
Research Group (HERG) at the University of Oxford, is a 
qualitative research methodology based on in-depth 
interviews with patients and carers, for developing, 
producing and systematizing knowledge on peoples’ health 
experiences. The core of the DIPEx methodology is a web 
site disseminating these health experiences to patients, 
carers, students, health professionals, health care services as 
well as the general public. Extracts from interviews are 
presented on the web site as video, audio, or text. 
Through the DIPEx International network, researchers in 
11 other countries have adopted the methodology, and at the 
time of writing, there are nine active web sites globally. A 
research group based at the Norwegian Centre for E-health 
Research (NSE) and with members from two Norwegian 
universities (UiT and NTNU) is currently working on a 
Norwegian Healthtalk web site. The first stage in this work is 
a feasibility study where one of the activities is to develop a 
prototype of the web site. Web development is an iterative 
process of creating and testing, often in four main phases: 
Concept, Prototype, Build, and Implement. To validate 
choices in functionality, content, structure, and design, it is 
important to employ a wide variety of tests throughout all 
four phases. In the following, we present results from 
usability testing in the very beginning of this process: 
concept development. 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

The starting point for the concept phase was a 
competitive audit of the nine active DIPEx web sites. The 
original United Kingdom site healthtalk.org was established 
by HERG in 2001 and has grown organically over the years, 
currently comprising more than 80 sections covering various 
conditions, 
diagnoses 
and 
health 
topics 
through 
approximately 250 interview excerpts. This means that its 
navigation is comprehensive, but has usability challenges 
because of scale. The other eight sites, in contrast, have very 
rudimentary 
navigational 
structures 
where 
individual 
diagnoses such as stomach cancer or epilepsy are listed as 
top-level labels, lacking any overarching categories. 
Therefore, they may face challenges as they grow. Hence, 
rather than duplicating existing web sites, we decided to start 
work on the information architecture for our site anew. 
The research question in this paper is in what way 
quantitative and qualitative concept testing can be a useful 
first step toward a patient-validated information architecture. 
Our objective is to present a model for information 
architecture that will be both suitable and scalable, as well as 
user friendly. To this end, Section 2 discusses information 
architecture considerations for this project in the context of 
expected user categories or idioms. Section 3 describes the 
method of concept testing in the usability field and how we 
applied it in our tests. In Section 5, the results from these 
tests are discussed, and conclusions from these tests are 
drawn in Section 6.  
II. 
INFORMATION ARCHITECTURE IDIOMS AND CONTEXTS 
In the context of web development, information 
architecture can be described as the discipline of organizing 
a web site’s information so that its users can find the right 
answers to their questions [8]. The challenge for a web site 
for the general public is to find organization schemes that are 
meaningful to a large and heterogeneous target audience, 
using labels that are relevant to and resonate with the user’s 
own categories. At the same time, these schemes must be 
robust enough to accurately represent current content and 
scalable enough that we can reasonably expect them to 
represent future content. 
In our case, there is an additional challenge: Users as 
patients are known to have several cognitive domains 
regarding health and present different parts of these domains 
in different contexts; collectively known as illness idioms 
[9]. This is often the case even for health care professionals 
who find that, as patients, their medical knowledge is not as 
helpful in resolving the relational and everyday challenges 
associated with being a patient (particularly with a chronic 
illness).  Thus, while at a clinic, specific questions about 
symptoms and medicine may take center stage in 
communication, whereas questions about managing cooking, 
driving a car or using the bathroom may be much more 
central in a home context. 
The content of the web site in question consists of 
people’s health experiences, which encompass both the 
clinical experiential field and most areas of everyday life. Its 
categories must therefore reflect the multiplicity of patients’ 
illness idioms. It is our aim to provide an alternative to 
official health information services and give prominence to 
patients’ everyday experiences. We therefore decided to 
implement a dual taxonomy organization scheme both in site 
navigation and in faceted search results to cater to search-
dominant users. 
First, to facilitate known-item searching we will use 
diagnoses/illnesses and predefined health and lifestyle topics 
as the primary taxonomy. This approximates an exact 
organization scheme, as there is a large degree of consensus 
around diagnostic classification. Moreover, this taxonomy is 
already in use at the official Norwegian health portal 
helsenorge.no. The Norwegian Directorate of Health has 
based the diagnoses/illnesses part of the taxonomy on the 
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) controlled vocabulary 
and used a variety of methods, including usability testing and 
web statistics analysis, to increase its usability for the 
Norwegian public and adding the health and lifestyle 
dimension. Additionally, since official health information is 
increasingly routed through this portal, many in the target 
audience will be familiar with this taxonomy when exposed 
to it on our web site.  
In addition, we decided on supplementing the primary 
taxonomy with a topical ambiguous organization scheme. 
This has the disadvantage of adding cognitive load for the 
user, i.e., added mental resources required to use the site 
[10]. However, it was judged necessary to account for the 
fact that so much of the information we want to convey from 
patient experiences does not fall within the clinical field as 
defined in the primary taxonomy, but is part of a different 
idiom for the same illness. Examples of such topics range 
from how one deals with getting a diagnosis to how one’s 
illness or health condition affects sex and intimacy. 
Additionally, this will support a common serendipitous mode 
of searching where the user has not necessarily formed a 
clear idea of what she is looking for.  
When designing a topical organizational scheme it is 
crucial to develop a typology that has a strong topical 
relevance relationship to its content. The stronger the topical 
relevance, the lower the cognitive load for the user. Topical 
relevance can be arrayed in three facets: the functional role 
of information, how information contributes to the user’s 
reasoning about a topic, and how information connects to a 
topic semantically [11]. When evaluating the topical 
relevance of a term in a taxonomy, we have to evaluate all 
three facets. 
III. 
TOP-LEVEL TOPIC LABEL TESTING 
Topical relevance is more important in the top level of a 
taxonomy than further down in the hierarchical structure, 
since the top-level label often also serves as a user’s 
navigational entry point. For the exact organization scheme, 
we appropriated the top-level labels from helsenorge.no as 
“Sykdom”, or “Illness” in English for the MeSH-based 
structure, and “Helse og livsstil” (“Health and lifestyle”) for 
other categories such as pregnancy, nutrition or smoking. 
We then needed to determine which top-level label 
would be the most appropriate for our topical ambiguous 
organization scheme. The first candidate was the generic 
label “Tema” (“Topic” in English). This label was judged 
strong in the facet of functional role, and has the advantage 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

of flexibility through being generic. The other was 
“Hverdag” (“Everyday life” in English). While less flexible, 
it was judged stronger in both the user reasoning and 
semantic facets of topical relevance. However, it was not a 
clear-cut decision as to which candidate would ultimately 
have the highest topical relevance. 
To find out in practice which candidate would result in 
the least amount of added cognitive load for users of the site 
we decided to run qualitative and quantitative A/B tests on 
wireframe concept sketches. An A/B test is a randomized 
experiment where users are exposed to one of two variants of 
a web site design. The variants are identical except for the 
one variation that is being tested, in this case the top-level 
label of the secondary taxonomy. Figure 1 is the wireframe 
of the generic (“Topic”) variant we tested, formally the 
control variant, i.e., the null hypothesis for statistical 
evaluation. Figure 2 is the wireframe of the treatment A 
(“Everyday life”) variant. 
As this is only the first phase in a longer development 
process of iterative designs, we used the Notable web-based 
test platform to conduct remote testing. For each A/B test, 
we only need to recruit a single pool of test users, and the 
platform itself randomizes which of the variants is shown to 
the users. 
 
Figure 1.  Wireframe of the variant with the “Tema” (“Topic”) label. 
 
Figure 2.  Wireframe of the variant with the “Hverdag” (“Everyday life”) 
label. 
A. Qualitative A/B Testing 
For the qualitative test we recruited users via email, 
phone calls, and social media, limiting self-selection bias by 
recruiting users of both genders, of varying ages and levels 
of education, and excluding users working in either the 
health sector or technology/new media. As the web site in 
question has a large target audience, i.e., the general public 
of Norway, additional profiling criteria were not deemed 
necessary for either of the two tests. The recruitment method, 
which was largely online, as well as the online test delivery 
itself, ensured a certain minimum of Internet expertise in the 
user pool.  
The minimum recruitment pool was set at five users per 
variant, following Jakob Nielsen’s findings, which indicate 
that usability testing yield the best results when conducted in 
an iterative process with only five users in each test [12]. 
The test started with contextualizing the task: “You will 
see a sketch of a new web site with patient experiences. The 
site navigation will have three categories of experiences, and 
we would like your feedback on one of these options.” The 
test then showed users the wireframe sketch with the label 
we were testing for highlighted, and the instructions: 
“Consider the highlighted menu option on this sketch. What 
do you think you would see if you clicked on that option?” 
We designed this open-ended question to determine topical 
relevance from the extent to which their responses match the 
intended meaning of the label. 
 
B. Quantitative A/B Testing 
For the quantitative test, we used social media for self-
recruiting, i.e., asking a large number of people to volunteer 
for testing without applying any kind of selection criteria. 
Self-recruiting tests inherently run the risk of self-selection 
bias toward users who are more Internet-savvy, especially 
when online. However, since A/B tests are a form of 
multivariate research, this risk does not apply [13]. Even if 
responders are above-average experienced Internet users, 
their bias applies equally to the two variants, so we still get 
meaningful data.  
The minimum requirement pool was set at twenty users, 
again following recommendations from Jakob Nielsen based 
on the findings that testing with twenty users gives you a 
confidence interval of maximum +/- 19%, while you would 
need as many as 76 users to reach +/- 10%. [14] 
While the qualitative test was designed to determine 
topical relevance through users’ written expression of 
reasoning about the label, the quantitative test focused on 
behavior in interacting with the label.  Thus, while the 
contextualizing introduction was similar, the task and 
instruction were different. Test users were shown the 
wireframe sketch without any markings and the instructions: 
“Imagine that you have a serious illness and need a practical 
question answered. Look at this image. Click where you 
would have clicked to find information on how this illness 
affects driving a car.” 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

IV. 
TEST RESULTS 
A. Results from Qualitative A/B Test 
The qualitative test received six responses for each 
variant, one more than the minimum requirement. The 
responses are translated and reproduced below with original 
punctuation preserved. 
Responses to the control variant, i.e., what respondents 
expected to find under the “Topic” label: 
1. What kind of illness 
2. Heart-warming stories 
3. Various diagnoses? (not obvious) 
4. Gender 
5. Meeting the doctor, monitoring after illness 
6. Symptomless. Now what? 
 
Responses to the treatment variant, i.e., what respondents 
expected to find under the “Everyday life” label: 
1. How the illness has changed my everyday life? 
2. How the illness affects my daily life 
3. This is how I live with my illness 
4. Living with the illness in my everyday life, ‘trying’ 
to live a normal life 
5. This is how I feel 
6. (Blank response) 
 
B. Results from Quantitative A/B Test 
The quantitative test received a total of 62 responses; 32 
for the control variant and 30 for the treatment variant. These 
results are summarized in the contingency tables below. We 
have defined “success” as a click on the label we were 
testing for, “Topic” and “Everyday life” respectively. Our 
definition of “failure” is any other click on the image. Table 
1 shows all collected results. Table 2 displays results filtered 
on responses where the user spent more than 10 seconds 
looking at the image before clicking.  
 
TABLE I.  
ALL RESULTS 
 
“Topic” 
“Everyday 
life” 
Marginal Row 
Totals 
Success 
10 
14 
24 
Failure 
22 
16 
38 
Marginal 
Column Totals 
32 
30 
62 
 
TABLE II.  
SPEED FILTERED RESULTS 
 
“Topic” 
“Everyday 
life” 
Marginal Row 
Totals 
Success 
3 
9 
12 
Failure 
19 
20 
39 
Marginal 
Column Totals 
22 
29 
51 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Qualitative Analysis 
Out of six responses to the “Topic” variant, three were 
irrelevant to the planned content of this taxonomy: “What 
kind of illness”, “Various diagnoses? (not obvious)”, and 
“Heart-warming stories.” The two first are obvious 
misunderstandings of what might be under the “Topic” label, 
since there already is a separate top-level label for “Illness.” 
One of them calls attention to the user’s uncertainty by 
adding the question mark and the parenthesis stating 
explicitly that the label is not obvious. The third answer 
seems to expect the type of content other sites skew towards; 
heart-warming stories of heroic endurance. The sites built 
with the DIPEx methodlology are not about such stories; 
they are about the unheroic and unfiltered experiences of 
regular people. 
The other three responses to this variant were relevant to 
varying degrees. Responses 5 and 6 in particular go beyond 
the clinical experiential field to what happens after an illness. 
Nevertheless, in sum these six responses indicate that the 
flexibility of the “Topic” label turns to plasticity, with widely 
varying understandings of its meaning. 
Turning to the six responses to the “Everyday life” label, 
we see that with the exception of the one blank response, 
they are all relevant to the intended meaning of the label. 
Three of them are even paraphrasing the label: “How the 
illness has changed my everyday life?”, “How the illness 
affects my daily life” and “Living with the illness in my 
everyday life, ‘trying’ to live a normal life.” As many as four 
responses make an explicit connection between this label and 
the adjacent “Illness” label of the other taxonomy, which 
indicates that the users’ reasoning is that the content behind 
this label is connected to, but different from, illnesses and 
diagnoses. Indeed, the interplay between the three top-level 
labels seems to be much more productive when the 
“Everyday life” label is used, than with the “Topic” label. 
It is also valuable input that two of the respondents to this 
variant introduces the subject “I” in their responses: “This is 
how I live with my illness” and “This is how I live.” In 
combination with the leading demonstrative pronoun “this”, 
it indicates that they have formed a quite strong 
identification with the level on a personal, emotional level. 
The same may be said of the response that contrasts “living 
with the illness in my everyday life” and “trying to live a 
normal life.” A diagnosis often represents a biographical 
disruption in the patient’s life, and we know that restoring 
normality and a coherent biography in times of illness is 
demanding emotional work [15]. 
The fact that four out of twelve responses in total are 
irrelevant or blank may indicate that they did not fully 
understand the task, which is a weakness in unmoderated 
online tests. Nevertheless, this weakness is the same for both 
variants, yet there is a clear difference in responses to two 
variants tested. While users’ free-form responses to the 
“Topic” label go in different directions, the “Everyday life” 
label elicits responses about relationships between illness 
and daily life, with indications of both an emotional 
component and changes induced in the patient’s life. The 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

label “Everyday life” thus creates a more coherent set of 
expectations in users along the facets of both users’ 
reasoning about the label and its semantic value. These 
expectations more closely match the content that we will 
publish on the web site, resulting in higher topical relevance. 
Seen as a whole, the results from the qualitative test also 
provides valuable insight into what kind of content 
prospective users would expect or even want from our web 
site. These expectations cover the entire spectrum from first 
meeting the doctor and getting a diagnosis, through the 
illness progression, and beyond. 
 
B. Quantitative Analysis 
The results from the quantitative test corroborate the 
indication that the “Everyday life” label has higher topical 
relevance for users tested. From the results in table 1 we can 
calculate a success rate of 0.31 for the control variant, while 
the treatment variant has a success rate of 0.47. The 
difference in success rates is 0.16, which is clearly in favor 
of the treatment variant; “Everyday life.” 
The speed filtered results in Table 2 are of interest based 
on the assumption that variance in cognitive load affects 
slow users, defined as users spending more than 10 seconds 
on deciding where to click, more strongly than fast users. In 
other words, if we are to reduce cognitive load as much as 
possible, responses from slow users are more important than 
responses from fast users, because its effect is amplified.  
These results show that the control variant has a success 
rate for slow users of 0.14, while the treatment variant has a 
success rate of 0.31. As expected, success rates are lower for 
slow users of both variants, yet the difference in success 
rates is slightly greater for slow users at 0.17. Thus, both 
contingency tables indicate higher topical relevance for the 
“Everyday life” label. 
However, there are two caveats to this indication. First, if 
we use the Fisher exact test to calculate the p-values for the 
contingency tables from the quantitative A/B test, they are 
0.297548 for the full results and 0.192494 for the speed 
filtered results. In both cases, the values are higher than the 
significance level of 0.1. or 10%. Therefore, while at least 
the speed filtered results are within the +/-19% confidence 
interval we have deemed acceptable for this test, they are 
technically not statistically significant. 
Second, an analysis of the failure clicks on click maps 
generated by the Notable test platform shows that there are 
more responses to the control variant that cannot be 
categorized as navigation-dominant behavior (i.e., focusing 
on navigational elements) or search-dominant behavior (i.e., 
focusing on the search box). Figure 3 shows the click map 
for the control variant with the “Topic” label. In contrast, 
figure 4 shows a more focused click map for the treatment 
variant with the “Everyday life” label. While the control 
variant received 11 clicks that are not on a navigational 
element or the search box, the treatment variant received 
only 4. 
A reasonable hypothesis for behavior that is neither 
navigation-dominant nor search-dominant in a task such as 
this is that these users did not fully understand the task. Their  
Figure 3.  Click map of the “Topic” variant. 
 
Figure 4.  Click map of the “Everyday life” variant. 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS WITH OUTLIERS EXCLUDED 
 
“Topic” 
“Everyday 
life” 
Marginal Row 
Totals 
Success 
10 
14 
24 
Failure 
11 
12 
23 
Marginal 
Column Totals 
21 
26 
47 
 
behavior does not correspond with the expected patterns of 
users who are actually trying to complete the task as given. If 
this is the case, we may have to define all these responses as 
outliers and exclude them from the contingency tables. Table 
3 shows this modified table of results, with failures defined 
as outliers excluded. 
From these results, we can calculate a success rate for the 
control variant of 0.48, while the treatment variant has a 
success rate of 0.53. Although the latter still has a higher 
success rate, the difference is minimal at 0.06. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have described an early web-based A/B 
test set of information architecture concept sketches. We 
found an indication in both quantitative and qualitative tests 
that “Hverdag” (“Everyday life”) is most likely a better 
choice than “Tema” (“Topic”) as the top-level label when 
creating a topical ambiguous taxonomy for a patient-oriented 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

web site. The data suggest that this label has a higher topical 
relevance and therefore results in lower cognitive load for 
users.  
We note that this indication is tempered by the two 
caveats discussed above. The collected data from the 
quantitative test is not statistically significant, and excluding 
outliers reduces the difference between the two variants 
dramatically. Regardless, the qualitative test gives a much 
stronger indication since it gives us insight into users’ 
reasoning about the top-level labels. In fact, that is why 
qualitative methods are often preferred in usability testing; 
because they do not only show that a given design is 
problematic, but provide insights into why there is a problem 
as well as how you can solve it [16]. Therefore, although test 
results are not fully conclusive, they have some value in 
providing reasonable confidence in the “Everyday life” top-
level label at this early concept stage. 
Going forward in the web development process, we will 
continue to employ a variety of quantitative and qualitative 
test methods to achieve patient validation of our information 
architecture and design decisions for the “Healthtalk 
Norway” web site prototype. While this first set of tests was 
delivered online for speed and convenience, we recognize 
the limitations of this delivery method and will in the rest of 
the process conduct usability tests in person as well. This 
experiment has shown that it is necessary to ensure that 
respondents understand tasks and to improve response 
registration. 
This rigorous testing program will be of importance for 
further refinement of our model for online presentation of 
qualitative research on people’s health experiences. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. K. Andreassen et al, “European citizens’ use of E-health 
services: A study of seven countries,” BMC Public Health 7, 
2007, p. 53. 
[2] S. Ziebland and S. Wyke, “Health and illness in a connected 
world: How might sharing experiences on the internet affect 
peoples’ health?” Milbank Quarterly,  90(2), 2012, pp. 219-
249. 
[3] E. F. France, S. Wyke, S. Ziebland, V. A. Entwistle, and K. 
Hunt, “How personal experiences feature in women’s 
accounts of use of information for decisions about antenatal 
diagnostic testing for foetal abnormality,” Social Science & 
Medicine, 72(5), 2011, pp. 755-762. 
[4] E. Sillence, P. Briggs, P. R. Harris, and L. Fischwick, “How 
do patients evaluate and make use of online health 
information?” Social Science & Medicine, 64(9), 2007, pp. 
1853-1862. 
[5] C. Pope, S. Ziebland, and N. Mays, “Analysing qualitative 
data,” BMJ 320, 2000, pp. 114-116. 
[6] S. Ziebland and A. McPherson, “Making sense of qualitative 
data analysis: an introduction with illustrations from DIPEx 
(personal experiences of health and illness),” Medical 
Education 40(5), 2006, pp. 405–414. 
[7] H. K. Andreassen, K. Dyb, M. V. Trondsen, and L. L. Warth, 
“Study protocol: Health talk Norway” Proceedings of the 13th 
Scandinavian Conference on Health Informatics, June 2015, 
Tromsø, Norway. 
[8] L. Rosenfeld and P. Morville, Information Architecture for 
the World Wide Web. O’Reilly & Associates, pp. 22-31, 
1998. 
[9] M. B. Risør, “Illness explanations among patients with 
medically unexplained symptoms: different idioms for 
different contexts,” Health, vol. 13 no. 5, Sept. 2009, pp. 505-
521, doi:10.1177/1363459308336794. 
[10] K. Whitenton, “Minimize Cognitive Load to Maximize 
Usability.” Available from: http://nngroup.com. 2013.12.22. 
[retrieved: 3, 2016] 
[11] X. Huang, “Developing a Cross-Disciplinary Typology of 
Topical Relationships as the Basis for a Topic-Oriented 
Information Architecture,” 20th Annual ASIS SIG/CR 
Workshop: 
Bridging 
Worlds, 
Connecting 
People: 
Classification 
Transcending 
Boundaries, 
2009, 
doi: 
10.7152/acro.v20i1.12884. 
[12] J. Nielsen, “Why You Only Need to Test with 5 Users” 
Available from: http://nngroup.com. 2000.03.19. [retrieved: 3, 
2016] 
[13] R. 
Dewey, 
Introduction 
to 
Psychology. 
Wadsworth 
Publishing, 
2004. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.intropsych.com. [retrieved: 3, 2016] 
[14] J. Nielsen, “Quantitative Studies: How Many Users to Test?” 
Available from: http://nngroup.com. 2006.06.26. [retrieved: 3, 
2016] 
[15] M. Bury, “Chronic illness as biographical disruption,” 
Sociology of Health and Illness, vol. 4, no. 2, 1982, pp. 167-
182. 
[16] C. Rohrer, “When to Use Which User-Experience Research 
Methods” Available from http://nngroup.com. 2014.10.12. 
[retrieved: 3, 2016] 
 
 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

