Improved Surveillance of Haemophilia Home Treatment Using Mobile Phones 
David Schmoldt 
Institute of Information Systems 
Philipps-University  
Marburg, Germany 
dschmoldt@raie.de 
Ulrich Hasenkamp 
Institute of Information Systems 
Philipps-University  
Marburg, Germany 
hasenkamp@wiwi.uni-marburg.de 
Andreas Rösch 
Institute of Information Systems 
Philipps-University  
Marburg, Germany 
aroesch@raie.de 
Wolfgang Mondorf 
Haemostas – Praxis für Blutgerinnungsstörungen 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
haemostas-frankfurt@t-online.de 
Hartmut Pollmann 
ITH – Institut für Thrombophilie und Hämostaseologie,  
Münster, Germany 
pollmann@haemophilie-zentrum.de 
 
 
Abstract—Haemophilia is an inherited blood coagulation 
disorder which results in permanent disability due to repeated 
bleeding and early death. The availability of plasma derived or 
recombinant coagulation concentrates reduces the symptoms 
of this disease and allows the patient to live an almost normal 
life. 
The 
missing 
coagulation 
factor 
is 
administered 
intravenously on demand in case of bleeding symptoms or as 
prophylactic regimen mostly three times per week. The 
German law and also the law of many other countries require 
thorough documentation of inhospital and patient home 
treatment. The common way of documentation is by paper 
diary. Professional control of home treatment is delayed until 
presentation at the haemophilia center and does not allow 
immediate monitoring of bleeding and treatment measures. 
Only the use of telemetric systems may provide possibilities for 
online documentation and therefore early recognition of 
critical bleeding episodes or concentrate use. In collaboration 
with medical experts on haemophilia treatment and on the 
basis of experiences with the electronic diary system 
“HaemoassistTM” as well as the use of the modern smartphones 
technology, a new telemetric system was developed at the 
Philipps-University in Marburg (Germany). This paper 
provides an overview of the new concept named “smart 
medication”. 
Keywords-Telemedicine; mobile phones; mobile application 
development; home treatment; chronic disease; Haemohilia. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Haemophilia is a rare x-chromosomal inherited disease 
with a prevalence of 1 in 20,000 males worldwide. The 
disease is characterized by the missing coagulation factor 
VIII (Haemophilia A) or IX (Haemophilia B) which 
untreated leads to spontaneous bleeding in major joints or 
soft tissue. Prior to the availability of factor VIII or IX 
concentrates the average life expectance was below 20 years 
of age. Repeated bleeding episodes led to progressive 
hemarthrosis and finally to often lethal cerebral hemorrhage. 
Since factor VIII and IX concentrates were available, life 
expectance and quality increased dramatically. Unfortunately 
transmission of HIV and Hepatitis C virus by plasma derived 
factor treatment in the early 80th led to a dramatic drawback. 
As the coagulation factor has to be administered on a regular 
base (prophylactic treatment) mostly three times per week or 
immediately in case of suspected bleeding (on demand) the 
patients are trained for self home treatment from early 
childhood on. However, haemophilia treaters need to 
monitor home treatment according to German law, to assure 
cost effective treatment. In spite of the small number of 
patients haemophilia treatment required nearly 1.5 % of the 
overall 
German 
health 
care 
budget 
in 
2010 
[1]. 
Documentation and monitoring of self home treatment is 
done by paper based protocols presented during consultation 
in the haemophilia center. They don’t allow immediate 
surveillance at the time of bleeding or treatment. Analyses of 
bleeding and treatment regimens are difficult and time 
consuming to obtain. Electronic devices have shown to be 
useful for online surveillance and further documentation [2]. 
Our aim was to improve and facilitate the use these devices.  
At first this abstract gives a short overview about the 
current situation in haemophilia home treatment. The second 
section explains the need of treatment documentation, its 
requirements and specifics. The third section describes the 
platform “smart medication”, with its three applications, 
security issues in handling patient data, and planed future 
extensions. Finally a conclusion is given in section four. 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
HAEMOPHILIA HOME TREATMENT 
Because of the contamination of the concentrates with 
blood-borne viruses (e.g., hepatitis viruses and HIV) in the 
past, every injection with human blood, plasma, and plasma-
derived products must be recorded [3]. In Germany, the 
Transfusion 
Act 
(“Transfusionsgesetz”) 
regulates 
the 
documentation and requires the following data: 
 
Identification number of the patient, full name, date 
of birth, and address; 
 
Batch number; 
 
Date and time of the injection. 
“The responsible haemophilia care center has to ensure that 
the data of the documentation can be used product- and 
patient-related” and that it can find and trace back any 
potential contaminated product [4]. The common way of 
documentation by the patient is to use a paper diary. Because 
of only occasional consultation (2-3 times per year) at the 
haemophilia center, bleeding and treatment problems are 
identified much later than they occur and are difficult and 
time consuming to analyze. As patients often live far away 
from the treatment center a higher frequency of consultation 
is not feasible. Patient hand written entries into the paper 
diary are often difficult to read and incomplete [5]. 
In contrast, entries into electronic devices allows the 
doctor to monitor the patients bleeding episodes and self-
treatment regimen from everywhere at any time. The 
recorded data could help the doctor to find abnormal 
bleeding pattern on a regular base. All data are saved and 
backed up central in server rooms to avoid the risk of loss 
[8]. Smart electronic algorithms allow early identification of 
bleeding and treatment problems (alert) or incomplete 
documentation. 
III. 
“SMART MEDICATION” – ASSISTANCE OF HOME 
TREATMENT 
An electronic diary for the documentation of the 
haemophilia home treatment named “HaemoassistTM” system 
was developed by Wyeth-Pharma GmbH. The electronic 
handheld was tested in the last 5 years with more than 100 
patients and the gained experience represent the basis for the 
development of the new system “smart medication” [6].  
A. The System “smart medication” 
“Smart medication” was solely developed as a scientific 
project in collaboration between the Philipps-University in 
Marburg, Germany, and Haemophilia treaters in Frankfurt 
and Münster, Germany. The established prototype is now in 
the process of presentation to industry for funding of the 
following pilot and outline process. Long term collaboration 
with insurance companies and federal institutions are in 
discussion (Figure 1). Google’s operating system Android 
for smartphones is currently the market leader worldwide 
and serves as initial basis for the following developments. 
“Smart medication” consists of the following components: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The concept of “smart medication” [10] 
 
 
Patients enter all bleeding and treatment data into a 
mobile device, which are then transmitted to the 
treatment center. The device can also be used as an 
emergency tool for direct contact (Phone call), 
transmission of text (SMS) or even photographs 
(e.g., swelling of joint) (Figure 3). 
 
Haemophilia treatment centers document any to a 
particular 
patient 
prescribed 
and 
dispensed 
concentrate batch by a mobile device allowing 
barcode scanning of the batch. The dispensed 
concentrate is electronically assigned to the patient 
stock and by this allows complete backtracking. 
Patients may find the available concentrate at their 
storage place but also as virtual storage on their 
mobile device. Treatment centers can early identify 
if the patient runs out of stock (low level) or does not 
document properly (higher than expected home 
stock). One of the main goals was easy and rapid 
application by the patient (Figure 2). 
 
A web-based monitoring tool allows the doctor an 
online overview of all treatment and bleeding data 
and simultaneous analysis of all treated patients 
(Figure 4). Emergency cases are presented as priority 
message. Defined electronic algorithms (alerts) 
allow rapid identification of bleeding and treatment 
problems as well as inappropriate documentation by 
the patient. Follow-Up data allow early identification 
of target joints (joints with repeated bleeding and 
progressive arthrosis). 
  
 
Patients 
Haemophilia Treatment 
Centers 
Service-Provider 
Smartphone 
Health Insurance Funds 
Pharmaceutical Companies 
smart medication 
Assistance for Home Treatment 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Figure 2. Factor consumption statistics 
 
Analysis of the aggregated data also allow 
comparison between patient files within one center 
as well as comparison to pooled data of the other 
participating centers (benchmarking).  
 
For the Health Insurance companies, Pharmaceutical 
Companies and the federal organizations (e.g., 
German Haemophilia Register) the system could 
provide anonymized and aggregated analyses and 
statistics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Screenshots of the applications. 
 
B. Security  
Especially the use of personal patient data requires a high 
standard of data security. During the development several 
safety functions were implemented in the system. Some of 
the most important are: 
 
A login per PIN/PUK. 
 
Encoded storage of the password per hash function 
(SHA-512). 
 
Encoded data communication per TLS/SSL-protocol 
 
Centralized data storage. 
 
A link between the application and the smartphone 
used. 
 
Validation of the entries on the phone and on the 
server. 
 
Consequent use of the recommendations of the 
German Federal Office for Information Security (see 
[11]). 
 
Patient overview 
 
 
 
Factor consumption 
 
 
 
Figure 4. The website [9]. 
 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. Future extensions 
For developing these applications we used the experience 
of the former system “HaemoassistTM” and worked together 
with several medical experts to enhance the benefit for the 
patient and medical attendance to a maximum. We used as a 
basis Google’s operating system Android. The next steps 
will be the adjustment and enhancement of the system by 
working 
together 
with 
some 
patients 
with 
severe 
haemophilia as test users, the preparation of the upcoming 
roll out in Germany and the hosting of the platform. The aim 
is also to migrate the application from Android to other 
operating systems like Apple’s iOS or RIM’s BlackBerry 
OS. Therefore the idea is to use HTML 5 and a cross-
platform like PhoneGap (see [12]) or Titanium (see [13]) to 
gain productivity and lower maintenance costs when 
implementing on multiple platforms.  
Besides the positive effects on the patient’s life and the 
advantage for the therapy we will analyze the monetary 
aspects of the employment of this electronic assistant system. 
We plan to work together with health insurance companies to 
explore the common costs of a patient with severe 
haemophilia in detail (e.g., the medicine consumption, the 
necessity of further treatments, and the need of visiting a 
haemophilia treatment center). The factor concentrates are 
some of the most expensive drugs. An unnecessary overuse 
induces high costs with no improvement for the patients’ 
health. In contrast a critical shortage can lead to an inability 
to work and thereby to even higher costs for the society. 
Therefore an optimized therapy can not only enhance the 
safety for the patient, but could also reduce the costs for the 
health care system. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The genetic disease haemophilia needs life-long medical 
attendance and treatment. Appropriate use of the required 
concentrate by self-home treatment improves life expectance 
and quality of life dramatically. However, close monitoring 
of home treatment by the haemophilia center is still 
mandatory. The still common use of paper based diaries 
doesn’t allow early identification of bleeding or treatment 
problems and are difficult to read and time consuming for 
further analyses. Modern mobile devices offer a simple and 
sustainable solution and can reduce the time and effort for 
patients own documentation but also for documentation by 
haemophilia treatment centers.  
The intention of the system “smart medication” is to 
provide a full managed service platform for the patient and 
the responsible doctors. It provides an application for the 
patient to record all necessary information easily, fast, and 
secure, and offers emergency functions like sending 
messages and photographs, contacting the doctor directly, 
and initiating alerts autonomously. The recorded information 
fulfills the legal requirements in Germany and allows a 
location-independent monitoring at any time. 
Medication management allows a complete trace back of 
any concentrate given to the patient for self-treatment. Every 
data is consolidated, saved in an electronic file, and can be 
monitored online with the web application. By real-time data 
processing bleeding and therapy is analyzed at an early stage 
and may prevent the development of possible target joints in 
future [7].  
In conclusion, the electronic documentation system 
“smart medication” can improve the quality of bleeding and 
treatment documentation. Early analysis of treatment 
problems has a high potential to improve self-home 
treatment and prevent subsequent health problems such as 
progressive joint damage and disabling hemorrhage. This 
may also lead to reduced treatment costs in future [4]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Osterloh, „Gesundheitshaushalt 2010: Das bisschen Haushalt“, 
available 
at: 
http://www.aerzteblatt.de/v4/archiv/artikel.asp?id=73234, 
last 
accessed: Aug. 2011. 
[2] W. Mondorf, B. Siegmund, R. Mahnel, H. Richter, M. Westfeld, A. 
aller, H. Pollmann, “Haemoassist™- a hand-held electronic patient 
diary for haemophilia home care” in Haemophilia, 15(2), 2009, pp. 
464-472. 
[3] Jeanne M. Lusher, “Hemophilia: From Plasma to Recombinant 
Factors”, in 50 Years in Hematology: Research That Revolutionized 
Patient Care, Washington, DC, Dec. 2008, pp. 25-27. 
[4] Bundesministerium 
der 
Justiz, 
“Transfusionsgesetz: 
§14 
Dokumentation, Datenschutz, § 19 Verfahren“, availavle at: 
http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/tfg/index.html, last accessed: Aug. 
2011. 
[5] D. Schmoldt, B. Siegmund, H. Pollmann, W. Mondorf, A. Rösch, 
„smart medication – Eine telemetrische Smartphone-Applikation für 
die 
ärztlich 
kontrollierte 
Heimselbstbehandlung 
in 
der 
Hämophilietherapie“ in e-Health 2012, Solingen, Germany, in press. 
[6] B. Siegmund, W. Mondorf, R. Klamroth, M. Westfeld, J. Tuischer, H. 
Pollmann, „Das Heamoassist®-System“ in e-Health 2010, Solingen, 
Germany, 2009, pp. 134 – 137. 
[7] K.-H. Beck, J. Holzschuh, A. Klein, „Qualitätssicherung in der 
Hämophiliebehandlung aus Sicht des MDK“, in: Hämostaseologie 
Supplement 2010 (41), Stuttgart, Germany, 2010, pp. 76 – 80. 
[8] A. Rösch, D. Schmoldt, W. Mondorf, H. Pollmann, „Implementation 
of a telemetric smartphone application for improved surveillance of 
hemophilia 
home 
treatment“, 
available 
at: 
http://www.isth2011.com/prgrm-common/abstracts/html/01130.html, 
last accessed: Aug: 2011 [XXIII Congress of the International Society 
on Thrombosis and Heamostasis, Kyoto, Japan, July 23-28, 2011]. 
[9] “Deutsches Hämophilieregister (DHR) - Was ist das DHR?”, 
available at: http://www.pei.de/DE/infos/fachkreise/dhr/dhrnode.html, 
last accessed: Aug. 2011. 
[10] D. Schmoldt. „Prototypische Entwicklung einer telemetrischen 
Smartphone 
Applikation 
für 
die 
ärztlich 
kontrollierte 
Heimselbstbehandlung am Beispiel der Hämophilie“, diploma thesis, 
Philipps-Universität, Marburg Jan. 2011. 
[11] “Federal 
Office 
for 
Information 
Security”, 
available 
at: 
https://www.bsi.bund.de/EN/TheBSI/thebsi_node.html, last accessed: 
Nov. 2011. 
[12] “PhoneGap”, available at: http://www.phonegap.com/, last accessed: 
Nov. 2011. 
[13] “Titanium 
Mobile”, 
available 
at: 
http://www.appcelerator.com/products/titanium-mobile-application-
development/, last accessed: Nov. 2011. 
[14] Myung-kyung Suh,Chien-An Chen, Jonathan Woodbridge, Michael 
Kai Tu, Jung In Kim, Lorraine S. Evangelista, Majid Sarrafzadeh. A 
Remote Patient Monitoring System for Congestive Heart Failure . 
Journal of Medical Systems (JOMS), June 2011. 
[15] Marilyn J. Field, Jim Grigsby. Telemedicine and Remote Patient 
Monitoring. JAMA, October 2011. 
 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

