Towards a National Clinical Decision Support Framework for Norway: Expert 
Assessment and Proposed Architecture  
Luis Marco-Ruiz, Kristian Malm-Nicolaisen, Alexandra Makhlysheva, Rune Pedersen 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
University Hospital North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
emails: [luis.marco.ruiz, alexandra.makhlysheva, kristian.nicolaisen, rune.pedersen]@ehealthresearch.no 
  
 
Abstract— Computerized Clinical Decision Support (CCDS) is 
an important component for making available latest medical 
evidence at the point of care. With the aim to gain knowledge 
on the best approaches for implementing a nation-wide CCDS, 
we performed a survey by sending an extensive questionnaire 
about CCDS architectures, use of standards, and use of 
terminologies to international experts and CCDS vendors. The 
responses to the questionnaire were analyzed and mapped to 
the requirements of the Norwegian health IT context. With this 
correspondence between responses and requirements, we 
designed a national architecture with the components needed 
for providing CCDS at a national scale in Norway. The 
architecture leverages different components aiming to allow 
supporting several standards and terminologies, performing 
both 
national 
and 
local 
governance, 
reusing 
CCDS 
functionality, and adapting CCDS modules to local contexts. 
Keywords- E-health Services; Clinical Decision Support; 
Clinical Guidelines; Computerized Clinical Decision Support; 
Interoperability; Software Architecture; Electronic Health 
Records. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Learning Healthcare System concept has motivated 
efforts in different areas of the health Information 
Technology (IT) realm worldwide [1]–[3]. Examples are the 
general adoption of Electronic Health Records (EHRs), the 
development of health data analytics platforms, the 
development of data reuse networks, and the definition of 
large-scale clinical decision support frameworks [3]–[5]. In 
this context, Norway has allocated significant funds to build 
momentum for advancing medical informatics [6]–[9]. 
EHRs have been adopted to enable data reuse including 
highly structured formats, such as openEHR [10]; projects 
for data reuse have been funded setting the basis for what 
later has become a national primary care research network 
[7]; and several initiatives have provided knowledge on best 
approaches for Computerized Clinical Decision Support 
(CCDS) interventions [11]–[14]. CCDS systems are 
software systems designed to provide useful information at 
the point of the clinical workflow when it is needed. 
Previous projects about CCDS have provided very valuable 
knowledge specifying requirements and success factors 
during EHR adoption. However, when it comes to building 
a large-scale national infrastructure to govern and manage 
CCDS systems, knowledge about their architecture and 
organization is still needed. On the one hand, it is needed to 
better understand how to optimally leverage the plethora of 
technologies, clinical information standards, and biomedical 
terminologies; and, on the other hand, it is needed to 
determine 
how 
to 
organize 
the 
development 
and 
management of CCDS algorithms. The Norwegian context, 
is complex as a result of a mixture of legacy and recently 
introduced Health Information Systems (HIS) that operate 
using 
different 
clinical 
information 
standards 
and 
terminologies. For example, the main vendor of hospital 
information systems relies on a free text EHR, and has been 
evolving it into an openEHR-based EHR [10]. The Central 
Norway Regional Health Authority, recently procured Epic 
for its introduction in the incoming years. Regarding 
terminologies, Norway uses the International Classification 
of Diseases (ICD-10), the International Classification of 
Primary Care (ICPC-2), and other well established 
terminologies [15]. In addition, Norway has recently 
become a member of SNOMED International [16]. 
Currently, the aim is to pilot parts of SNOMED-CT for 
clinical use in the Central Norway Health Region. This 
scenario poses requirements for CCDS systems that need to 
be able to work in a multi-standard environment with 
various 
Clinical 
Information 
Models 
(CIMs) 
and 
terminologies.   
In order to design strategies for this scenario, the Norwegian 
Directorate of E-health (NDE) requested a survey from the 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research in order to get 
information about CCDS, clinical information standards, 
and biomedical ontologies. Thus, in 2017, we performed a 
study enquiring CCDS experts and vendors about different 
topics that directly affect CCDS infrastructures. A summary 
of the results was published in two reports [17] [18]. In this 
paper, we provide a more detailed and deep analysis of the 
responses, and we map them to the Norwegian scenario 
drawing an architecture that leverages, on the one hand, the 
advise from experts and, on the other hand, the requirements 
of the Norwegian scenario. The remaining of the paper is 
organized as follows. Section 2 presents the methods for 
performing the survey and analyzing the results. Section 3 
presents the results of the analysis of the questionnaires by 
inductively analyzing them and collating the information to 
form main categories of recommendations, observations, 
and future perspectives. It also provides the architecture 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

designed using the information gathered for covering the 
Norwegian requirements regarding the CCDS domain. 
Finally, Section 4 discusses the architecture proposed and 
relates it to previous studies. 
II. 
METHODS 
We performed a survey as part of two studies performed 
for the Norwegian Directorate of E-health during 2017 [17] 
[18]. The survey was sent to 25 experts and vendors on 
CCDS. Among the representatives invited to participate, 
there were researchers, consultants, and vendors. Thirteen 
respondents were vendors and 12 were experts in CCDS or 
biomedical ontologies. The invited participants were known 
companies, researchers, and consultants of the CCDS arena. 
It was a requirement for the invited participants to be 
involved in CCDS projects that had been deployed 
in an operational environment, and not only in research 
academic projects. 
Of the 25 invited participants, 11 responded agreeing to 
participate. Of these, finally 9 provided the completed 
questionnaire requested. We sent a word document with all 
the questions to be answered that the respondents could edit 
freely without a word limit.  The complete questionnaires 
are available at the previously published reports [17] [18].  
Eight participants provided extensive information about 
the topics and the architecture of their CCDS interventions. 
Respondents provided schemas and detailed descriptions in 
their CCDS interventions. In addition, all participants 
shared impressions and their future vision regarding the 
CCDS arena. Among the participants that agreed to 
participate, we received 8 completed questionnaires. Four 
questionnaires corresponded to researchers involved in 
small CDS companies and research, and 4 corresponded to 
major vendors. One of the respondents was an expert on 
biomedical ontologies who participated as an active 
developer of them, but that did not have experience with 
CCDS. This respondent completed only the part of the 
questionnaire associated with ontologies and not CCDS. We 
collated the results by marking the topics that appeared in 
each of the responses. We proceeded inductively grouping 
the topics identified in main categories and subcategories. 
This categorization was used to report the results that 
follow.  
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Overview 
We identified the following main categories and 
subcategories: a) software architecture and information 
standards, with the subcategories architecture, and clinical 
information standards; b) biomedical terminologies, with 
subcategories role of terminologies in CCDS and ontology-
based terminologies; c) Organization, governance, and 
shared 
development, 
with 
subcategories 
authoring, 
governance frameworks, and local adaption/customization; 
and, d) Knowledge base (KB).  The best design factors 
identified in the survey were used to develop the proposed 
architecture. The following describes, first, each of the 
categories identified in the survey and, second, the 
architecture developed from the survey results and adapted to 
the Norwegian context. 
 
B. Software Architecture and Information Standards 
1) Architecture  
Respondents considered the following aspects if the 
architecture as critical: speed, concurrent support for many 
clients, high availability and error tolerance, support for 
interoperability standards, and support for both EHR and 
population queries. With this regards, all the respondents 
agreed that, in general, Service Oriented Architectures 
(SOAs) were the optimal choice for fulfilling the mentioned 
requirements in large and distributed CCDS environments. 
That is because SOAs encapsulate CCDS functionality 
making it available to various clients through a Web service, 
thus enabling concurrent support, easier fault tolerance, 
interoperability, and support for queries over disparate 
systems.   
  
More specifically, the use of RESTful stateless Web 
service architectures is also seen as beneficial for 
simplifying the architecture. Both synchronous and 
asynchronous ways of operating are needed. One respondent 
wrote that, in general, SOA is better but it is important to 
understand 
the 
requirements 
because 
the 
optimal 
architecture may be a mixture of some approaches (SOA, 
stand-alone, process oriented, etc.).  
Another advantage of the encapsulation provided by 
SOAs concerns the inference engine and logic specification 
mechanisms.  When it comes to the decision algorithm, 
respondents considered that SOA allows encapsulating any 
algorithm implemented in any technology inside the Web 
service. This algorithm is then exposed through a standard 
API based on information standards. This way, SOA 
alleviates the need of a separate formalism (e.g., Arden 
syntax) that is later translated into the language used by the 
inference engine. For example, openCDS operates directly 
with JBoss Drools instead of using another specification 
formalism for abstracting the logic representation [19].  
One respondent considered that, although for reusing 
CCDS functionality SOA was the optimal solution, 
embedding the CCDS functionality within the EHR had 
advantages too. The reason is that embedded CCDS provides 
better performance due to the possibility of performing pre-
processing of data structures that makes significant data are 
rapidly available when a CCDS triggers.  
2) Clinical Information Standards 
 Standardization of CCDS was considered essential by all 
respondents but with subtle differences. Most respondents 
considered standardization of the CCDS data schema, a.k.a. 
Virtual Medical Record (VMR), and the SOA payload as 
paramount for all CCDS systems. Standardization was seen 
as a way to communicate the payload of Web service 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

messages in and out of the CCDS Web service in a 
normalized way that all clients can understand. This 
approach makes the CCDS client (often an EHR) responsible 
for committing to that standard data format. 
Recalling the previous section, one of the respondents 
indicated the advantage for embedding CCDS into the EHR, 
but acknowledged the need for standardization in a national-
level CCDS. Another respondent leveraged both views by 
relying on openEHR for both the VMR and the EHR. This 
approach can directly reference the same standard 
information schema that the EHR relies on. In order to 
implement such design, both the EHR and the CCDS system 
need to work on the same set of openEHR archetypes or rely 
on effective abstraction mechanisms. However, this is not 
always easy to achieve having CCDS and EHR operating at 
different levels of granularity. It is likely that several 
standards will coexist and that transformation mechanisms 
will need to be provided as discussed below. 
The role of HL7 Fast Healthcare Interoperability 
Resources (FHIR) is considered very relevant as a standard 
for sharing patient data extracts with CCDS Web services. 
For CCDS interoperability, FHIR is the preferred standard 
by respondents since they claimed it to be the one with the 
highest acceptance rate across vendors. In addition to the 
FHIR standard, there is the library for authentication and 
integration, SMART [20]. SMART on FHIR was seen as a 
positive but not critical addition on top of FHIR. One of the 
respondents considered it to be particularly useful for 
authentication; while other pointed out the value regarding 
its applications deployment framework. For example, one 
respondent remarked the possibility of using SMART for 
showing context-specific data with graphical user interfaces 
(with relevant data, literature, etc.). Regarding the 
implementation of the VMR, one respondent mentioned HL7 
vMR as a very comprehensible standard; however, the same 
respondent also pointed out that it had a low adoption rate. 
Noteworthy, the open source initiative openCDS has 
developed conversion mechanisms from HL7 vMR to FHIR 
[19]. Two respondents used proprietary formats, and one 
used openEHR archetypes.  
A 
standard 
mentioned 
for 
embedding 
CCDS 
functionality in the EHR was CDS Hooks [21]. Respondents 
considered CDS Hooks a useful and disruptive standard for 
embedding CCDS requests in the appropriate part of the 
clinical workflow. Thus, it may allow some context 
awareness if it is used in the appropriate way. One 
respondent pointed out that CDS Hooks still needed to be 
extended and constrained. Actually, while writing, it is a 
Standard for Trial Use (STU) release in its version 1.0 [21].  
Several respondents pointed out that for new CCDS 
developments CDS Hooks should be seriously considered 
since it allowed to perform workflow aware CDS actions 
(triggering at a precise point of the clinical workflow) and 
accelerate CCDS implementations. 
Another relevant topic is the management of CCDS systems 
in environments where several information standards coexist. 
This is the Norwegian case where openEHR is used for 
structuring EHRs in secondary healthcare and FHIR is 
recommended for EHR extracts exchange [22]. In this case, 
the respondents pointed out the complexity of the scenario 
and the need for implementing transformation methods 
among different standards. To that end, several solutions 
were proposed. One respondent mentioned that, for this kind 
of complex scenarios where iso-semantic models were 
present, a common agnostic representation would be needed. 
Another respondent indicated that when several information 
models are present, the messages will need to be written 
using a normalized model of choice, which is preferred by 
the national centralized system. Client systems not 
supporting such a model natively will need to transform to 
and from that model in order to consume the national CCDS. 
C. Biomedical Terminologies and Ontologies 
1)Role of terminologies in CCDS 
 Respondents considered that terminologies play a critical 
role. Respondents agreed that the CCDS main function is to 
avoid ambiguity and allow identifying the same concept in 
multiple ways, thus providing a standardized way to define 
CDSS criteria at the points of care, population management 
queries, and predictive analytics. For coherence, the 
management of terminologies should be centralized if 
possible. Terminologies are essential for expressing the 
semantics of patient data and the recommendations captured 
within terminology concepts, therefore the inferences over 
terminology concepts are needed within any CCDS.  
Terminology concepts have been used for content binding 
providing the subset of possible values to fill a specific slot 
in a CIM, but also as a semantic binding for specifying the 
meaning of a specific element of the CIM. The use of CIMs 
in combination with terminologies is not a clear issue and, as 
we pointed out in previous studies, it is still dependent on the 
needs for automatic interpretation of clinical data [23] [24]. 
With regards to terminologies, the situation is similar to 
the one of CIMs. Proprietary terminologies will need to be 
mapped to the reference value sets used by the national 
CCDS.  The value sets used by guidelines need to be 
governed and maintained.  
2) Ontology-based terminologies 
 We asked our respondents about the use of ontology-
based terminologies. We use the word ontology in the 
computer 
science 
sense, i.e., 
classifications with 
some description 
logics 
or 
model-theoretic 
semantics underpinning.  The only ontology used by the 
respondents was SNOMED-CT. 
 
Most respondents considered that ontology-based 
terminologies such as SNOMED-CT could be useful for the 
maintenance of complex terminologies, the maintenance of 
CCDS rules, and the definition of mappings across terms 
from different terminologies. Regarding mappings among 
terminologies, respondents also pointed out that mappings 
and transformations should be made with caution. One 
respondent warned that, for example, “topical steroids and 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

systemic steroids have different contradictions”; thus, 
“mapping all drugs that contain steroids may lead to 
inappropriate recommendations from CCDS systems”. The 
same respondent made two observations about the 
definitions of value sets using SNOMED-CT. The 
respondent pointed out that SNOMED-CT has many 
inconsistencies in its logical structure; and, for this reason, a 
better way to proceed is to manually curate the concepts into 
explicit value sets than using logic definitions over 
SNOMED-CT for defining subsets. 
We asked our respondents about the use of other 
ontology-based terminologies, e.g., for allowing EHRs to 
support genomic medicine, but all of them agreed on the fact 
that this aspect is considered as not crucial at the moment. 
SNOMED-CT has sparse support for molecular biology and 
more specific ontologies would be needed for that. One 
respondent actually said that simpler CCDS functionality 
that does not require complex semantic analysis should be 
first implemented.  
Curating and pre-processing of ontologies into the 
internal CCDS format is common. Also, implementing 
support for third party terminologies is needed due to the 
amount of proprietary code systems. Other vendor 
considered a better solution to be in an inside-system 
embedded for performance without a specific Terminology 
Server (TS).  
The use of the logic underpinning of SNOMED-CT was 
rather sparse. As the expert in ontologies indicated, currently 
the formal semantics of SNOMED-CT are used for the 
maintenance of the terminology itself, e.g., when defining 
new concepts. The only use from its underlying logic model 
was 
subsumption. 
Subsumption 
(“is-a” 
relationships) 
reasoning is considered useful for facilitating the setup and 
maintenance of rules in CCDS, but respondents observed 
that in order to truly use this capability, a supportive 
infrastructure is needed. SNOMED queries would require the 
SNOMED OWL representation and a classifier. 
D. Organization, Governance, and Shared Development 
1)Authoring 
 For implementing a national CCDS infrastructure 
respondents indicated that there should be a sufficient 
collaboration among clinical centers. Those centers should 
discuss about the national clinical practice guidelines to base 
the computerized CCDS on. According to them, authoring 
tools are needed so that different stakeholders can 
collaborate in a distributed manner having discussions and 
defining 
clinical 
decision 
algorithms. 
Respondents 
considered that a national portal with narrative and semi-
structured guidelines can be helpful in the CCDS 
development. In addition, two respondents indicated that 
measuring and monitoring the impact of CCDS interventions 
would be needed to clarify their effect and decide on their 
long-term maintainability. Another respondent recommended 
the locally deployed CCDS environment for performance. 
For Computer Interpretable Guidelines (CIGs) one 
respondent recommended to start by defining the goals that 
the CCDS intervention pursues and then, once the goal is 
clear, to identify the steps towards improving that goal. 
Other vendor with CIGs implementation experience pointed 
out that for each clinical guideline, a medical specialist is 
appointed. That specialist is often a national or regional 
leading figure that already has active participation in 
guidelines development. That specialist is the one 
responsible for the acceptance and follow-up of the 
deployment. 
2) Governance frameworks 
 Respondents agreed that the architecture for the 
governance framework should enable access to terminology 
services, access to evidence-based guidance, and access to 
editorial tools   for the development and maintenance of 
CCDS content. Respondents pointed out that CCDSs need to 
be shared and contrasted among organizations. To that end, 
organizations should gradually incorporate more CCDS 
modules performing pilot interventions and running studies 
to evaluate them. Thus, gradual adoption of CCDS was 
considered as an important factor. 
A mixed model for governance was recommended. On 
the one hand, a centralized governance body for guidelines 
development and governance should be settled. On the other 
hand, smaller local governance bodies should exist in the 
institutions that could actually make use of the CCDS 
services. The editorial teams should have cross-membership 
between the central and local governance bodies. The 
centralized workgroup would coordinate subgroups and 
delegate work to the other CDS editorial groups. 
3) Local adaption/customization 
 One 
respondent 
recommended 
for 
a 
maximum 
standardization without too much localization to work 
defining 
guidelines 
incrementally 
from 
narrative 
to 
structured format. The same respondent proposed a layered 
organization of rules. In such organization, the most internal 
levels of the CDSS represent goals, while more external 
levels represent recommendations. The latter are adapted as 
local workflows (indicating when and who to show 
recommendations to). 
Respondents also agreed on clinical guidelines to be built 
via consensus, and once their content is agreed, they should 
be pushed to the EHR with the consent from clinical users. 
Consequently, respondents recommended to start with non-
controversial content and develop reusable CCDS modules 
from parts that are not dependent on the local context.  These 
modules will become the building blocks of more complex 
CCDS to be adapted in the local context. 
E. Knowledge Base and Inference Engine 
In this section, we summarize the responses with regards 
to the KB and the inference engine. By KB we mean the set 
of rules that conform a CCDS algorithm to provide a 
recommendation (in the case of rule-based systems); or the 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

statistical model that performs an estimation/prediction (in 
the case of statistical or machine learning models). 
Regarding 
the 
specification 
of 
medical 
decision 
algorithms, rule-based and logic-based methods (i.e., rules-
based and ontology-based ones) are seen as the most 
intuitive and efficient ones. Respondents considered logic-
based methods as intuitive and simpler for knowledge 
management. Graph structure formalisms such as GLIF 
were considered difficult to implement and integrate. In 
addition, latest approaches such as FHIR Plan Definition are 
considered more flexible and easier to translate to different 
inference engines. Several respondents considered that the 
formalism of specification could be the one provided by the 
technology to perform the inferences (e.g., JBoss Drools). To 
that end, it should be hosted in a Web service, and it should 
be made accessible through a standard API.  
Respondents considered statistical methods to be 
important but more effort intensive for certain scenarios. 
Some systems report to use rules but trigger the invocation of 
a statistical model when necessary. Nevertheless, all 
respondent pointed out that the use of machine learning and 
statistical models are becoming increasingly relevant and 
those should be considered when appropriate. 
F. Proposed National Architecture for Norway 
Following the opinions and comments from the 
respondents, we draw a general architecture covering the 
requirements to be fulfilled in the Norwegian scenario for 
building a nation-scale CCDS framework. The schema in 
Figure 
1 
depicts 
the 
architecture 
proposed 
for 
a 
national centralized CCDS service.   
At the top of the figure, it is shown a national governance 
committee that uses a common online authoring tool for 
designing CCDS modules based on best practices. CCDS 
modules are minimal stand-alone algorithms that serve a 
CCDS purpose in a context and that may be combined 
forming more complex CCDS flows. The national 
governance and editorial committee depicted use semantic 
interoperability resources provided by external repositories. 
These resources are of two main types: a) externally curated 
and approved terminology value sets; and, b) CIMs that may 
be FHIR profiles approved for national use, or openEHR 
archetypes published by the Norwegian Clinical Knowledge 
Manager. The governance and editorial committee use these 
artifacts imported through the authoring tool as the data 
schemas referenced by the decision logic that they define. 
This coupling of algorithms, CIMs, and terminologies, 
should be done through a proper graphical user interface that 
shows only the relevant information. Fine-grained technical 
details should be managed by the backend automatically. 
The Norwegian context currently has organizations that 
base their developments on openEHR , FHIR, or both. The 
authoring tool allows for building CCDS algorithms that 
reference one standard or the other, thus creating a CCDS 
library where some algorithms use openEHR as a VMR and 
the others use FHIR as a VMR. For example, algorithms 
aiming for performing CDS in hospitals that belong to the 
regions working with an openEHR-based EHR should be 
written taking nationally published archetypes as a basis. 
Conversely, regions or services using FHIR may ask the 
editorial committee to prioritize the design of the algorithm 
using FHIR as an information schema for the VMR.  Since 
CCDS modules require lots of professionals to be developed, 
their cost is very high. This poses a need for performing 
transformations among openEHR and FHIR in order to allow 
clients to use algorithms regardless of the standard they are 
based on. In Figure 1, the cloud between the FHIR and 
openEHR boxes represents transformation software. This 
way, a system operating in FHIR should be able to invoke a 
CCDS algorithm that was designed using an openEHR 
VMR. The client will invoke the FHIR endpoint (interaction 
n) and, internally, the received FHIR payload will be 
transformed into openEHR compliant extracts (interaction i) 
to execute the algorithm. Once a response is provided, data 
will be transformed back into FHIR compliant data 
(interaction i) and returned in the SOA payload to the client 
(interaction n). For openEHR clients with the need to invoke 
a FHIR-based CCDS algorithm the situation is the inverse.  
When an algorithm is not logic- or rule- based, the 
statistical models component is invoked in a similar way to 
the described above (see interaction lines j and k). Statistical 
models should be imported in Predictive Model Markup 
Language and approved by the governance and editorial 
board. In some cases, as described by one respondent, rule or 
logic-based 
algorithms 
delegate 
some 
part 
of 
the 
computation to a statistical model. In this case, the presented 
architecture allows the models that contain logic-based 
models to do so (see interaction lines i and m).  
The Web service layer represents the interface offered 
online to the clients of the CCDS framework. Two main 
endpoints should be offered, one based on FHIR compliant 
payload, and the other based on openEHR-compliant 
payload. This way, different iso-semantic models used by 
clients can be utilized. For example, Hospital C represents a 
hospital in Central Norway health region where openEHR is 
not adopted, thus interoperation is based on FHIR. The 
national framework should allow such hospital to consume a 
CCDS module developed by other regions that rely on 
openEHR. This is possible by using the transformation 
mechanisms previously described. 
Finally, the human-like figures at the extremes of the 
bottom of the figure represent local governance and editorial 
committees that are responsible for approving and, if needed, 
adapting certain CCDS module to their organization local 
context. As recommended by the respondents, these 
committees should coordinate their actions with the national 
governance and editorial committee in order to properly 
escalate the CCDS interventions and developments (see 
interaction lines a and b). When adaption to the local context 
has been performed, the new modified modules should be 
made available for contrasting them with other deployments. 
This is shown in the layered architecture represented in the 
two logic CCDS modules. In that approach, CCDS modules 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

are layered, containing on the top layer a “core” set of the 
main goals to fulfill. Secondly, there is an implementation of 
the parts of the CCDS actions that are common to all 
contexts and that are uncontroversial. Finally, these logic 
components are specialized each into a more superficial layer 
that is exposed to the clients. These superficial layers are the 
ones adapted to the local context of each organization when 
needed. This adaption is performed with exhaustive control 
from the committees in order to minimize deviations from 
the original algorithm and guarantee future scalability and 
governance. It is important to understand that, although the 
figure shows only one Web service, there may be several 
instances of the CCDS Web service with different 
collections of the CCDS modules available. Currently, this is 
achievable by using containers technologies such as Docker 
and Kubernetes.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The proposed architecture attempts to agree with many of 
the principles for already published best practices. For 
example, Kawamoto et al. [25] recommended the SOA 
architecture for large-scale CCDS. We believe that the recent 
developments in openCDS will help in setting a reference for 
that [25]. Actually, many of the components required to 
build a national CCDS infrastructure could be borrowed 
from openCDS and openEHR GDL [26]. Since both are 
open-source projects, many of their components could be 
merged to build the multi-standard framework presented.  
Regarding the internal structure of CCDS modules, the 
layered architecture of CCDS modules is based on the 
concepts proposed by Boxwala et al. [27], but in the most 
internal layer, instead of narratives,  we prioritize the 
inclusion of the main goals to achieve in the clinical setting 
as recommended by one respondent and proposed elsewhere 
[28]. The transformation mechanisms between FHIR and 
openEHR can be based on previous research [29]. 
Despite machine-learning has recently received lots of 
attention, our respondents considered that for CCDS there 
are some “low hanging fruits” to be focused on before 
building complex artificial intelligence frameworks at 
national scale. In addition, as pointed by Fox [28], logic 
formalisms have demonstrated to be as good as Bayesian 
methods for specifying medical knowledge. This does not 
imply that we should not perform research in machine 
learning. But it means that we still need to be able to deploy 
large-scale CCDS frameworks where the most pressing 
challenges are related to governance, adaption to local 
contexts, 
and 
different 
information 
and 
knowledge 
representation formats. We believe that once these 
requirements are clear and a proper edition and governance 
framework is in place, most machine-learning algorithms 
will fit in the framework. These algorithms will complement 
logic-based CCDS modules when required, thus leveraging 
the best from both logic and statistical methods. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was funded by the Norwegian Centre for E-
health Research. We would like to thank all the respondents 
for the time devoted to explain their valuable opinions, 
experiences, and points of view. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Friedman and M. Rigby, “Conceptualising and creating a 
global learning health system,” Int. J. Med. Inf., vol. 82, no. 
4, 
pp. 
e63-71, 
Apr. 
2013, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2012.05.010. 
[2] 
Institute of Medicine (US) Roundtable on Evidence-Based 
Medicine, The Learning Healthcare System: Workshop 
Summary. Washington (DC): National Academies Press 
(US), 2007. 
[3] 
A. Budrionis and J. G. Bellika, “The Learning Healthcare 
System: Where are we now? A systematic review,” J. 
Biomed. Inform., vol. 64, pp. 87–92, December 2016, doi: 
10.1016/j.jbi.2016.09.018. 
[4] 
“PCORnet,” 
PCORnet. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.pcornet.org. [Accessed: 19-Mar-2020]. 
[5] 
B. Haarbrandt et al., “HiGHmed – An Open Platform 
Approach 
to 
Enhance 
Care 
and 
Research 
across 
Institutional Boundaries,” Methods Inf. Med., vol. 57, no. S 
1, pp. e66–e81, Jul. 2018, doi: 10.3414/ME18-02-0002. 
[6] 
A. Budrionis, L. Marco-Ruiz, K. Y. Yigzaw, and J. G. 
Bellika, “Building a Learning Healthcare System in North 
Norway,” in Proceedings from The 14th Scandinavian 
Conference on Health Informatics 2016, Gothenburg, 
Sweden, April 6-7, 2016, pp. 1–5. 
[7] 
“PraksisNett,” Universitetet i Bergen. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.uib.no/nb/praksisnett. 
[Accessed: 
24-Nov-
2019]. 
[8] 
K. Y. Yigzaw, A. Michalas, and J. G. Bellika, “Secure and 
scalable deduplication of horizontally partitioned health 
data 
for 
privacy-preserving 
distributed 
statistical 
computation,” BMC Med. Inform. Decis. Mak., vol. 17, no. 
1, p. 1, March 2017, doi: 10.1186/s12911-016-0389-x. 
[9] 
S. Van de Velde et al., “A systematic review of trials 
evaluating 
success 
factors 
of 
interventions 
with 
computerised clinical decision support,” Implement. Sci., 
vol. 13, no. 1, p. 114, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1186/s13012-018-
0790-1. 
[10] 
B. Christensen and G. Ellingsen, “Evaluating Model-Driven 
Development for large-scale EHRs through the openEHR 
approach,” Int. J. Med. Inf., vol. 89, pp. 43–54, May 2016, 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2016.02.004. 
[11] 
S. Van de Velde et al., “The GUIDES checklist: 
development of a tool to improve the successful use of 
guideline-based computerised clinical decision support,” 
Implement. Sci., vol. 13, no. 1, p. 86, Jun. 2018, doi: 
10.1186/s13012-018-0772-3. 
[12] 
L. Marco Ruiz, J. A. Maldonado, R. Karlsen, and J. G. 
Bellika, “Multidisciplinary Modelling of Symptoms  and 
Signs  with Archetypes and SNOMEDCT for Clinical 
Decision Support,” in Stud Health Technol Inform., Madrid, 
2015. 
[13] 
L. Marco-Ruiz, J. A. Maldonado, V. Traver, R. Karlsen, and 
J. G. Bellika, “Meta-architecture for the interoperability and 
knowledge 
management 
of 
archetype-based 
clinical 
decision 
support 
systems,” 
in 
2014 
IEEE-EMBS 
International Conference on Biomedical and Health 
Informatics 
(BHI), 
2014, 
pp. 
517–521, 
doi: 
10.1109/BHI.2014.6864416. 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[14] 
L. Marco-Ruiz et al., “Combining Multivariate Statistics 
and the Think-Aloud Protocol to Assess Human-Computer 
Interaction Barriers in Symptom Checkers,” J. Biomed. 
Inform., Sep. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2017.09.002. 
[15] 
R. Pedersen, C. Granja, and L. M. Ruiz, “The Value of 
Clinical Information Models and Terminology for Sharing 
Clinical Information,” presented at the eTELEMED 2016, 
The 
Eighth 
International 
Conference 
on 
eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2016, pp. 153–159. 
[16] 
“SNOMED Home page,” SNOMED. [Online]. Available: /. 
[Accessed: 18-Mar-2020]. 
[17] 
L. 
Marco-Ruiz, 
K. 
Nicolaisen, 
R. 
Pedersen, 
A. 
Makhlysheva, and P. A. Bakkevoll, Ontology-based 
terminologies for healthcare - Impact assessment and 
transitional consequences for implementation, 1st ed., vol. 
1. Tromsø: Norwegian Centre for E-health Research, 2017. 
[18] 
A. Makhlysheva, K. Malm-Nicolaisen, L. Marco-Ruiz, P. 
A. Bakkevoll, and R. Pedersen, Klinisk beslutningsstøtte - 
Vurdering av standard og arkitektur, vol. 1, 37 vols. 
Tromsø, Norway: Norwegian Centre for E-health Research, 
2017. 
[19] 
“OpenCDS.” [Online]. Available: http://www.opencds.org/. 
[Accessed: 18-Mar-2020]. 
[20] 
J. C. Mandel, D. A. Kreda, K. D. Mandl, I. S. Kohane, and 
R. B. Ramoni, “SMART on FHIR: a standards-based, 
interoperable apps platform for electronic health records,” J. 
Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. JAMIA, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 899–
908, Sep. 2016, doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocv189. 
[21] 
“CDS Hooks.” [Online]. Available: https://cds-hooks.org/. 
[Accessed: 19-Mar-2020]. 
[22] 
Direktoratet for e-helse, “Anbefaling om bruk av HL7 FHIR 
for datadeling,” Oslo, Norway, Mar. 2019. 
[23] 
L. Marco-Ruiz and R. Pedersen, “Challenges in Archetypes 
Terminology Binding Using SNOMED-CT Compositional 
Grammar: The Norwegian Patient Summary Case,” Stud. 
Health Technol. Inform., vol. 245, p. 1332, 2017. 
[24] 
L. Marco-Ruiz and R. Pedersen, “The Patient Summary 
Case: Challenges in Archetypes Terminology Binding 
Using 
SNOMED-CT 
Compositional 
Grammar,” 
in 
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference 
on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, Athens 
(Greece), 2019, pp. 49–55. 
[25] 
K. Kawamoto, T. Hongsermeier, A. Wright, J. Lewis, D. S. 
Bell, and B. Middleton, “Key principles for a national 
clinical decision support knowledge sharing framework: 
synthesis of insights from leading subject matter experts,” J. 
Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. JAMIA, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 199–
207, 2013, doi: 10.1136/amiajnl-2012-000887. 
[26] 
N. Anani, R. Chen, T. P. Moreira, and S. Koch, 
“Retrospective checking of compliance with practice 
guidelines for acute stroke care: a novel experiment using 
openEHR’s Guideline Definition Language,” BMC Med. 
Inform. Decis. Mak., vol. 14, no. 1, p. 39, May 2014, doi: 
10.1186/1472-6947-14-39. 
[27] 
A. A. Boxwala et al., “A multi-layered framework for 
disseminating knowledge for computer-based decision 
support,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 18, no. 
Supplement_1, 
pp. 
i132–i139, 
Dec. 
2011, 
doi: 
10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000334. 
[28] 
J. Fox, “Cognitive systems at the point of care: The CREDO 
program,” J. Biomed. Inform., vol. 68, pp. 83–95, Apr. 
2017, doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2017.02.008. 
[29] 
J. A. Maldonado et al., “Concept-Based Exchange of 
Healthcare Information: The LinkEHR Approach,” in 2011 
First IEEE International Conference on Healthcare 
Informatics, Imaging and Systems Biology (HISB), 2011, 
pp. 150–157, doi: 10.1109/HISB.2011.18. 
 
 
 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1.  Architecture for the edition, governance, and deployment of CCDS in the Norwegian context. 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

