A Diary Study of Smart Phone Notiﬁcation System For College Students
Ji Wang∗, Qingyao Zhang, Qinqing Gong†, SeungHee Lee∗, §
∗Kansei,Behavioral and Brain Sciences
Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences
University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan, 305 0005
Email: wangji@kansei.tsukuba.ac. seungheekansei@gmail.com
†School of Psychology
Shaanxi Normal University, Xi’an, China, 710062
Email: qingyaozhang@outlook.com purivy0430@sina.com
Abstract—Smart phone can support a variety of functions in
people’s daily life. Notiﬁcation is one of the basic core function of
smart phone user experience. This research explored the college
students ’ behaviors when they deal with the notiﬁcation system
of smart phone. In order to know the behaviors of user, this study
conducted a diary study method to record the information about
notiﬁcation users received from the smart phone. Before the one
week diary study, a pre-experiment interview was conducted, the
results of interview shown that they have a negative evaluation
to receive notiﬁcations (disruptive). Hierarchical linear model
analyses on the diary contents suggested that the current task
types had signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the college students’ evaluation
on notiﬁcation disruptive. The evaluation on the importance of
notiﬁcation content can predict user’s evaluate on the disruptive
of notiﬁcation content.
Keywords—notiﬁcation system; smart phone; dairy study; user
experience.
I. INTRODUCTION
Smart phones have become an integral part of college
life, current smart phone can support a variety of functions.
Notiﬁcation is one of the basic core functions of smart phone.
Notiﬁcation is used to drive the users attention to the content
of a notiﬁcation message and remind user about something. As
the media for user to communicate with the outside world, it
is difﬁcult to measure the importance of notiﬁcation. However,
many users feel pressure for the notiﬁcation system. Previous
studies have shown a core problem with notiﬁcations was that
users tend to drop their current task to check the notiﬁcation
instead [1]. In the work context, this can be explained by the
fact that notiﬁcations interrupt workers. Information workers
ﬁnd it difﬁcult to return to a previous task after having been
interrupted by a notiﬁcation. They report higher subjective
workloads when receiving notiﬁcations during phases of fo-
cused work. However, previous studies have also shown that
people value notiﬁcations. Those studies also suggested that
notiﬁcations vary in different levels of importance [2]. A diary
study was conducted to explore the extent to what kinds of
notiﬁcations are needed by college students. Dairy method
have high ecological value as they carried out in the users
real environments [3]. It helps the researchers to get in-depth
understanding of users day to day jobs and environment diary
study can be used which involves participants reporting their
activities over a speciﬁc period of time in their normal daily
lives addressing the when, the what and the how. This study
will use diary method, which will record daily events of
the user deal with the notiﬁcations accurately. It helps to
understand how the notiﬁcation usage changes over the time
(Compared to a traditional in lab usability study where this
study typically gather information on ﬁrstly time usage of a
system or product) and the kinds, frequency of notiﬁcation and
so on.
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section I introduces
the essence of the smart phone and notiﬁcation system. In
section II the method of the experiment is introduced. Section
III reports the result of the diary study on the smart phone
notiﬁcation system. In Section IV, the analysis and discussion
of the diary study results are presented. Finally, in Section V,
the conclusions of this research are laid out.
II. METHOD
A. The Participants
Fourteen participants from Shannxi Normal University took
part in this experiment , 8 female and 6 male, with the age
distribution 18-24 years old (M = 20, SD = 1.96). 2 out of 14
participants (one female and one male) interrupted the diary
collected during the study,so this study totally collected twelve
participants’ data.
B. Device
All the mobile phone (provided by participants) used in this
experiment with the version above Android OS 4.3 or iOS
8.1 ). Participants were required to install Smartisan Notes (A
notetaking app.User can add picture in the notes and download
this APP in Apple Store or Google Play for free). Participants
should set on their phone notiﬁcations system in the mode that
the notiﬁcations come and it can show on the lock screen.
C. Procedure
Pre-experiment interview was conducted to know the
background
information
about
participants
smart
phone
notiﬁcation interview questions included :
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Q1: How many app installed on your phone?
Q2: These types of app (social network/ video and
image/education/payment/online
shopping
service),
how
many of each kind app and how you set the notiﬁcation
systems of these app ?
Q3: Share a recent experience about the Notiﬁcation affect
( disturb) your study or work ?
Dairy study:
Contents of dairy collection as shown in Figure 1
Figure 1. The Example of Dairy Content
Each participants took the records of dairy content for one
week [2].
III. RESULT
In this experiment, pre-experiment interview were con-
ducted for 14 college students, they installed 11 to 42 ap-
plications (M = 23.64 , SD = 9.39) in their smart phone.
These applications can receive notiﬁcations when connected
network. Based on the previous survey of applications types,
we classify the applications into: social networks, video and
images education, entertainment, payment and life services.
We collected a total 739 notiﬁcation messages information
from 12 participants in one week. Coding scheme: gender
codes are: 0 = female, 1 = male; grade codes are: 1 = freshman,
2 = sophomore, 3 = junior students, 4 = senior students.
There are 21 categories in current task, 9 categories in
location and 21 categories in notiﬁcation sources. Based on the
real life situation (classiﬁcation of apple store applications),
we coded the current task again. To facilitate the analysis of
the hierarchical linear model, we did the dummy coding for
current task, location, notiﬁcation sources. Current task was
coded as 4 dummy variables location was coded as 3 dummy
variables, the notiﬁcation sources was coded as 4 dummy
variables.
To test the the relationship between notiﬁcation sources and
the importance of the notiﬁcation ( short for importance ) ,
we built the multilevel random slopes model in this study.
Results showed that the mean value at level 2 of dummy
variables entertainment, life service, and education achieved
signiﬁcant difference (P < 0.05) , indicated that the source
of the notiﬁcation message affects participants evaluation
about the importance and urgency of a speciﬁc message.
Speciﬁcally, compared with the notiﬁcation from the social
networks, the notiﬁcation from entertainment and eduction
applications were considered less important, life services
application notiﬁcations were more important. Additionally,
there was no signiﬁcant difference between the importance of
notiﬁcation from social networks and life services applications.
The result of primary data was shown in Figure 2. It shows
the average rating of disruptive at different times of the whole
day. Morning and afternoon periods were more disruptive
than other periods, because it was the study time for college
students.
Figure 2. The Average Rating of Disruptive at Different Times
IV. DISCUSSION
From the dairy content, we found that college students
interact with their smart phone all the time in their daily life.
They basically put attention to the notiﬁcations when they
came. This ﬁnding is consistent with previous study[1], even
though the importance of those notiﬁcation content were not
high. Hierarchical linear model analyses was conducted on
the diary contents, the results shown the current task types
had signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the college students evaluation
on notiﬁcation disruptive. When college students focused on
current tasks, especially those tasks correlated with study, the
interrupt caused by dealing with notiﬁcation make college
students rated the disruptive of notiﬁcation in a high score.
This study also found he change in on the importance of
notiﬁcation content can predict users evaluate on the disruptive
of notiﬁcation content. The results of this study can give
suggestion to the college students to deal with the notiﬁcation
system. For instance, when students are carrying out study
or work task they can choose to set the notiﬁcations system
to Do not disturb or Mute mode, it will reduce the times of
notiﬁcation interrupt the current task.
V. CONCLUSION
This research carried out a dairy study to explore college
students evaluations about the notiﬁcations of their smart
phones. It suggests a new usage model for smart phone man-
ufacturers to develop in their devices for college students. The
notiﬁcation sources were categorized into four categories, they
were, listed in descending order of importance, life services,
social networks, entertainment and education. Additionally,
the current activity affects participants’ evaluation about the
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

interference of the notiﬁcations. Speciﬁcally, when they were
studying or working, they considered the notiﬁcations are more
noisy. Due to the limitation of sample size, a wider range
of participants–including ofﬁce staff, programmers and other
brain-workers, could yield an opportunity to more broadly
generalize the results.
REFERENCE
[1] M. Czerwinski, E. Horvitz, and S. Wilhite , A diary study of task
switching and interruptions, in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 2004, pp. 175-182, 2004.
[2] A. Sgirazi et al. , Large-Scale Assessment of Mobile Notiﬁcation,
in proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems. ACM, 2014, pp. 3055-3064, 2014.
[3] A. Sigh and S. Makhorta, A researchers guide to running diary studies,
in proceedings of APCHI 2013, pp. 296-300, 2013.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

