Designing User Friendly Mobile Application to Assist Cancer Patients in Illness 
Management 
 
Jelena Mirkovic, Haakon Bryhni 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
jelena.mirkovic@medisin.uio.no 
haakon.bryhni@nunatak.no 
Cornelia M. Ruland 
Center for Shared Decision Making and Nursing Research 
University Hospital 
Oslo, Norway 
cornelia.ruland@rr-research.no
 
 
Abstract— Mobile terminals are well suited for providing 
information to patients at the point of need. In the CONNECT 
(Care Online: Novel Networks to Enhance Communication 
and Treatment) project, we have developed a mobile 
application, called Mobile WebChoice, as a part of a patient 
support tool that enables patients’ access to a help and support 
system while they are away from hospital between treatments 
and during rehabilitation and recovery periods. Through our 
work we address research questions regarding: development of 
a user-friendly mobile application, user’s expectations and 
requirements from the patient support system, and usability 
issues that affects acceptance of mobile applications in 
patients’ 
health 
management 
process. 
We 
have 
used 
participatory design methods that included interviews and 
usability testing with patients and health personnel. As a 
result, we identified main usability requirements that must be 
taken in consideration when developing and adjusting patient 
support systems for mobile access and saw that patients find 
the mobile application useful and the patients are ready to 
accept it as an integrated part of their health management 
process.  
Keywords- 
mobile 
application 
development; 
health 
management; patient support system. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Due to the increasing costs related to health and long-
term care and higher demand for healthcare personnel, there 
is increasing need for innovative methods and new 
approaches in interacting with healthcare services [1]. 
Mobile technology can offer great advantages for access to 
healthcare information. Widespread acceptance of mobile 
phones and their ability to provide access to services 
independent of time and user’s current location make mobile 
terminals well suited for timely delivery of healthcare 
services to healthcare providers and patients. 
Also, patients are becoming more and more involved in 
the management of their own healthcare conditions with 
support and help from healthcare professionals [2]. Using 
new technologies they become more informed about their 
current conditions and care process, and can become an 
important participant in the process of planning and 
management of their own care. Mobile devices can enable 
patients to collect, store, and transmit clinical data to 
healthcare professionals and provide better and more 
complete insight in their health status. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II gives a 
brief overview of related work, Section III presents research 
questions we are addressing in our research work, Section IV 
describes research methods that are utilized together with 
results received through the mobile application development, 
Section V describes results from usability testing, Section VI 
presents discussion of the results and finally, Section VII 
gives a summary and conclusion of our research. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are numerous projects that address utilization of 
mobile phones in healthcare management and it is shown 
that mobile phones can provide help for patients to 
understand the effects of their illness and treatment, and at 
the same time find a balance between seeking professional 
care and depending on their self-care abilities (e.g., 
[3][4][5]). Some researchers also describe how patients 
accept mobile health applications and feedback from patients 
regarding functionality and ease of use (e. g., [6][7][8]). 
Besides the research related to feasibility of mobile health 
applications and their potential to provide better patients’ 
health management, we found less research addressing 
functionality and usability issues that have to be addressed 
during the development process (e.g., [9][10]). What we still 
found missing is research regarding more complex patient 
support systems, where patients are able to access the system 
over different terminals (mobile, PC, tablet PC). Most of the 
work addressing this issue in the healthcare area is 
describing development of mobile applications intended to 
be used by healthcare personnel (e.g., [11][12]). Some 
general guidance for developing and adapting a mobile 
application to a web version as [13][14][15] is present, but 
still we did not find the work addressing usability and 
mobility in the context of health support tools intended for 
patients use. We see that these systems are very specific, and 
users’ needs can vary greatly from one person to other, so 
developing a system that is not just useful but also easy to 
use and adapted to users’ specific needs and different 
terminal capabilities is very important for acceptance of the 
service. 
64
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

III. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
As part of the CONNECT (Care Online: Novel Networks 
to Enhance Communication and Treatment) project it is 
developed 
an 
Internet-based 
support 
system 
for 
communication and information sharing between and among 
patients and care providers, and patients are enabled to 
access the system over different terminals (tablet PCs, 
stationary PCs, laptops or mobile phone). Through 
development, adaptation and testing of the system and its 
components our main goal has been to identify key factors 
that are related to successful adoption, implementation and 
maintenance of this kind of tools in a real world practice. In 
this paper we are addressing research issues regarding 
development process, adaptation and integration of a mobile 
application in a patient support system. The main research 
questions that we address here are: (1) what interface 
requirements and adjustments are needed for the mobile 
application to provide patients with context-sensitive, 
adaptive interfaces and seamless, easy access to healthcare 
information independent of their current location, (2) how 
does previous knowledge and experience with other parts of 
the patient support system affect understanding and 
operation of the mobile application, (3) what are patients’ 
opinions regarding mobile access to the health support 
systems and the application’s usefulness and ease of use,  (4) 
what are patients opinions regarding acceptance of the 
mobile application as one type of access to the health support 
system in their own health management. 
IV. 
THE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION METHODS 
To 
address 
set 
research 
questions 
we 
utilized 
participatory design methods that included interviews and 
usability testing with patients and health personnel. Phases of 
the process are: development and evaluation of the 
application interface design, low fidelity usability testing 
with patients, development of an user interface, expert 
reviews and high fidelity usability testing with patients. In 
this section we will describe each phase in more details. 
A. Previous work 
Previous to our work, the support tools Choice and 
WebChoice are developed as part of the CONNECT project 
[16]. The Choice tool enables patients to report their 
symptoms, health problems and concerns while in the 
hospital, rate the degree of distress and prioritize their needs 
for care from health care providers. The WebChoice tool 
allows patients to monitor symptoms through the Internet 
over time, and provides access to evidence-based self-
management options tailored to their reported symptoms as 
well as a communication area where patients can ask 
questions to a clinical nurse specialist and exchange 
experiences with other cancer patients. After development of 
these tools, the next step in the project was to investigate 
how the support system could be enhanced with mobile 
access, enabling use independent of time and place. It was 
decided that only a limited set of functionalities from the 
WebChoice application should be made available in the 
mobile application (messaging, registration of problems and 
an advice module) due to limitations of mobile terminal, and 
the first draft of design screenshots was developed. 
B. Development and evaluation of the interface design 
In the first step of the mobile application development we 
revised and adapted the first version of the application design 
screenshots that are developed in previous phase of project. 
We used general guidelines that we found in the literature 
(e.g., [17][18][19]) and in the same time tried to follow the 
recommendation given from mobile device and mobile 
operating system manufacturers (e.g., [20][21][22][23]).  
One additional requirement that we set for our specific 
case is adaptation of the mobile application interface to be 
similar to the web version (some of the guidelines that we 
used are described in [13][14][15]). In this manner we 
adjusted the interface not only for general users but also to 
users with previous knowledge of other parts of the system 
and to provide them the feeling that they are accessing the 
same system through different terminals.  
We adapted interface design screenshots using previously 
mentioned guidelines, but at the same time tried to find a 
good balance between general recommendations for mobile 
application design and specific requirements set for this type 
of applications. Some of the usability issues from the 
previous design version that we addressed and corrected are: 
provision of information to users regarding content on the 
screen (using scrollbars to give feedback about additional 
content that is not visible on the screen, and enabling users to 
always know where they are in the application through status 
bars and titles), consistency in name and place of commands 
(using just two-three standard commands per screen require 
us to keep consistent patterns and clear names) and text size 
adaptation (finding right balance between text size and 
amount of information on the screen to provide good 
readability). 
C. Review of interface design by patients 
When the main interface design screenshots has been 
created and reviewed, we organized usability testing with the 
low fidelity paper prototype. In the usability testing four 
patients participated [24]. During the test participants looked 
at 
nine 
interface 
screenshots 
representing 
different 
functionalities of the mobile application. They were asked 
about their opinions regarding the interface design (size of 
the text, colors, organization of element on the screen) and 
understanding of the interface functionalities. 
Some conclusions from participants’ feedback are: 
1) When adapting interface from bigger screen to 
smaller, choosing the content that should be 
transferred requires cooperation with users and 
finding out what are their expectation from the 
specific system. For this type of systems we saw that 
all text that present description and do not give extra 
knowledge to users should be omitted (or transferred 
to a specific help page). For example, the login 
screen should be without introduction text and 
menus should contain just main command’s names 
(without any clarifications).  
65
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

2) Transferring extensive menus with deep structure on 
one screen (as in web applications) is not acceptable 
in the mobile application. The better solution is to 
make submenus, but there are still problems in 
connecting a few screens to correspond to the 
functionality of menu selection in a web application, 
and find the right level of granularity and amount of 
information to show per screen. To solve this 
problem, we used icons identifying the hierarchical 
menu level. 
3) Having in mind that the amount of information per 
screen is very limited, it is very easy for the user to 
get lost in the application and do not understand 
what to do next. Providing users feedback regarding 
current place in the application help, but additional 
adjustments of menus and screens using familiar 
concepts from the web application helped the user to 
transfer previous user experience to the mobile 
application. 
4) Even though content and concepts from the web 
application is transferred to the mobile application, 
in some situations it is better to adjust screens to 
more resemble standard mobile functionalities, like 
text input, menu organization and command 
organization. Other interface elements, such as 
colors and application specific icons should not be 
changed. 
5) When adapting interface for small screens, the usage 
of right colors is very important. Colors on one hand 
could enable additional emphasis on more important 
interface elements, but just transferring the same 
colors from a web to a mobile version could result in 
low readability and clarity. In our example we saw 
that users had problems with reading text in bright 
color on dark background as implemented on the 
web version. 
6) Selecting the right text size present important issue 
as we saw from previous steps, because there is need 
for a right balance between text size and amount of 
the text on the screen. From the users’ feedback we 
saw that using one font size through all application is 
not good approach, but rather the size should be 
adapted depending on the screen size, resolution and 
amount of information on the screen. 
7) Using icons and images should be very limited. If 
they are used just for descriptive purpose, and do not 
provide any other additional information to users 
they should be omitted (for example in menus when 
used in addition to the text). On the other hand in 
some situations it is convenient to use them to show 
some status or information to the user on the manner 
that is similar to the PC or other mobile applications 
(e.g. status about mail). 
We saw that some of the results are in accordance with 
general 
mobile 
user 
interface 
development 
recommendations, but others are very specific for utilization 
in the context of the mobile applications in healthcare. 
D. Development of the mobile application 
For developing the mobile application we used Java 
Platform, Micro Edition (Java ME) [25]. The choice of the 
Java ME developer platform enabled us to make user-
friendly and well-designed user interface adjusted for the 
majority of mobile terminals. 
During application development we used mobile design 
screenshots that are developed in previous phases. Also 
while the mobile application was in the development phase, 
a new design interface was implemented for the WebChoice 
application; so the design of the mobile application was also 
adjusted to it keeping in mind previous gained knowledge 
about users and their specific needs. During development we 
made the application to dynamically change the interface 
according to the screen size of the device, so the main 
organization of the text on the pages stays the same 
regardless of the mobile device the application is running on. 
We also additionally addressed the problem of font size by 
making the user interface more comfortable for reading of 
longer texts. For example, if a patient reads text describing a 
self-management advice, he/she is able to change the font 
size, font type and orientation of the text and in this manner 
adjust it for better readability. This is normally not possible 
in a Java ME environment, which only support one font and 
3 sizes. Our goal was to make the interface flexible and 
readable regardless of mobile phone limitations, like screen 
size 
and 
limited 
navigation 
possibilities. 
Additional 
adjustments are also made so the mobile application can 
support touch screens without a specific keyboard on the 
device. 
We decided to develop a basic design of our application 
according to some general design recommendations as stated 
previously, but in this phase of development process we also 
implemented some device specific adjustments to change 
dynamically based on the device type. For example, in our 
application the right soft key command is used as a rule as 
back button (that is recommended in the guidelines for Nokia 
phones) but for writing text in input fields characters 
assigned to input keys are dynamically adjusted to device 
type. 
 For development of this kind of mobile application, 
using just standard Java ME libraries do not provide enough 
flexibility. To overcome this limitation, we used the Faster 
Imaging library [26] that enables virtualization of the mobile 
terminal. The program library offers improved visual display 
quality, improved font handling and performance for image 
and interface intensive applications and is designed to 
execute on top of all Java ME virtual machines supporting 
Mobile Information Device Profile (MIDP) version 2.0 and 
Connected Limited Device Configuration (CLDC) version 
1.1 available in almost all Java-enabled phones. A key 
challenge for us was to provide handling of text and images 
on a mobile device, with minimal requirements to the 
terminal, and using the proposed architecture we succeeded 
to leverage different character fonts and provide virtual 
machine 
independent 
display 
with 
low 
processing 
requirements, since only very basic operations and only 
integer arithmetic is used. Text is represented in a highly 
66
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Module 
Screenshots 
Login 
and 
main menu 
 
 
Registration 
 
 
Messaging 
 
 
Figure 1.  Screenshots of the application’s modules. 
compressed format that enable faster rendering. The 
readability and visual quality is preserved down to very 
small 
character 
size 
by 
performing 
“smooth-edge” 
technology that provides anti-aliasing with special attention 
to color blending, consistent view quality independent of 
rotation and scaling, scalable line thickness and non-
isometric text handling. 
E. Expert reviews 
After prototype has been finished, we organized expert 
reviews with nurses that were involved in development and 
research work on other patient support tools, and are well 
acquainted with the Choice and WebChoice applications.  
We utilized a heuristics evaluation and recruited four 
evaluators [27]. Guidelines that evaluators used for testing 
are based on the recommended heuristics for web 
applications [27], and we added heuristics specially 
addressing 
mobile 
device 
and 
mobile 
application 
characteristics found in [19][28].  
The four evaluators were given the list with heuristics 
and short pre-evaluation session was conducted where the 
heuristics are explained in more details. They were asked to 
test the application in duration of one to two hours and note 
all nonconsistencies with the guidelines. After testing we 
organized a short debriefing session where evaluators 
described their experience of the process, and presented their 
results. Based on received feedback final corrections and 
adjustments were made on the application before start of a 
usability testing with patients.  
Most of the feedback we received was regarding small 
interface adjustments, and more convenient organization of 
the content on the screen. Also, additional propositions were 
made to name commands more clearly and according to their 
specific functions and context in which they are used. 
Additionally, adding advanced features for the application 
navigation is proposed. 
F. Usability testing 
When we finished all previously described phases in the 
application development process, and addressed all usability 
requirements and problems that were identified we continued 
with a high fidelity usability testing with patients. A couple 
of screenshots of the mobile application that is used in the 
usability testing are shown in the Figure 1.  
In this study we performed the usability test of two 
application scenarios. In the first scenario participants 
performed testing on just the mobile application, while in the 
second scenario participants performed testing first on the 
web application on the PC before they started testing on the 
mobile version. In the study participated ten patients, five for 
each application scenario. User group of ten patients is not 
large enough that represent general user population, but we 
think that it is large enough to get some first feedback 
regarding usability issues, acceptance and user needs from 
mobile applications used as part of the patient support tools.  
The study was conducted on a Nokia 5310 phone with 
installed Mobile WebChoice application and access to the 
Internet. The test was conducted one participant at the time 
in an enclosed environment with minimum background 
noise.  
1) Test Process Design and Data Collection Method 
On the beginning of the test participants were briefly 
introduced on the objectives on the study and the CONNECT 
project. They were informed that they would be recorded on 
a video while performing tasks for later analysis. Also, they 
were asked to try to perform tasks on their own, based on 
their previous knowledge of the mobile phones and 
computers, and to take time as they think it is needed. 
Participants were asked to think out loud during the tasks, 
and if unavailable to progress on a given task to ask for a 
help, but only after trying to perform the task first on their 
own.   
The group of participants that tested both the mobile and 
web version of the application first received the list of tasks 
to perform on the web application on a desktop PC. After 
performing the tasks on the web application participant 
continued with mobile application testing.  
Prior to the mobile application testing, participants 
performed pre-training exercise on the mobile phone. The 
task list was then given to the participants. During the test, 
every participant has been asked to perform a total of seven 
tasks. The tasks were grouped in four groups, based on the 
main functionalities of the application. For each task the 
67
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

 
Figure 2.  Task completion time for both user groups. 
time, number of errors and number of requested help were 
measured. Between the tasks and at the end of the testing 
participants were asked the set of questions to gain more 
subjective and qualitative feedback regarding interface 
design, general impressions regarding the application and it’s 
usefulness and acceptance in their everyday health 
management, and answers and comments were recorded. The 
groups of tasks were designed as follows:  
• 
Login to the application (task 1) 
• 
Send the message to the nurse (task 2-3) 
• 
Register specified problems (task 4) 
• 
Find advices regarding previously selected and 
specified problems (task 5-8). 
2) Targeted respondents  
All participants in the study were women between 30 and 
60 years old and in treatment for a breast cancer. Only one 
participant previously heard about the CONNECT project, 
and participated in previous organized usability studies. 
Average age of all participants was 46.5 years (average age 
for first group that tested just the mobile application was 49 
years, and the second group that tested the mobile and the 
web version was 44 years). All of participants owned their 
mobile phone, eight owned Nokia phones, one Sony 
Ericsson phone and one HTC phone. According to their 
subjective opinions the eight participants had average 
previous experience with mobile phones usage and the 
remaining two participants had above average user expertise 
with a mobile phone. 
V. 
RESULTS FROM USABILITY TESTING 
In this section we present results recorded during the 
usability testing. 
A. Quantitative results  
The task completion times for both user groups are 
illustrated and compared in the Figure 2. We can see that for 
the most of the tasks completion time vary by the small 
values. The only higher variation in the task completion time 
can be observed for the task four (registration task).     
In the Tables I and II are presented numbers of errors 
participants had while performing tasks and number of times 
they requested assistance while performing tasks. Here we 
also see the highest difference for the registration task. 
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF ERRORS 
Task number 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Sum 
Mobile version 
0 
0 
0 
2 
1 
2 
0 
0 
5 
Mobile and Web version 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
2 
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF REQUESTED ASSISTANCE 
Task number 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Sum 
Mobile version 
3 
0 
2 
12 
1 
3 
0 
0 
21 
Mobile and Web version 
4 
0 
1 
4 
0 
1 
0 
1 
11 
B. Qualitative results  
Through the qualitative feedback we tried to identify 
main usability problems.  
1) Task analysis – Login to the application and main 
menu 
In general, participants did not have many complaints 
and problems regarding login functionality. Participants that 
owned Nokia phones managed to identify option for 
changing a text input type very quickly, but others requested 
help before completing the task. This problem was 
previously identified so the key for changing the text input 
type is assigned dynamically in the application dependent on 
the type of the mobile phone the application is running on. 
That was one of the limitations of the study because 
participants did not test application on their own phone, 
which would offer them probably more familiarity with the 
standard mobile phone functionalities. One participant 
suggested that it would be useful for her to have a dictionary 
option while writing a text.  
All of the participants understood the main menu. Some 
of them commented that it is very simple, clear and easy to 
understand. For the six participants size of the text was good 
for reading, and four commented that they do not have 
problems reading but they recommend little bigger text to 
facilitate reading for them and for other potential users. All 
of the participants were satisfied with used colors, and just 
one complaint that the soft key menu is too dimmed.  
In the main menu we used shortcuts (that are presented as 
numbers in the brackets after the menu item names) and 
enable more experience to move through the application 
more quickly. Three participants understood the meaning of 
numbers as shortcuts. 
2) Task analysis – Send the message to the nurse 
All participants understood the organization of this 
functionality and they were satisfied how it is working. It 
was very easy for them to find all the functions and perform 
required tasks. Two participants that tested the web 
application earlier stated that it is very good that the mobile 
version is similar to the web version. One also stated that it is 
very good that standard mobile phone functions are used, so 
she was already familiar with key functions like text input. 
Just two participants have stated that they would prefer 
bigger letters while for others the size of the text was good 
68
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

for reading. Three participants had problems identifying an 
option for writing a new message. One complained that the 
soft key menu is dimmed and other suggested to make this 
option more visible by emphasize it. All of participant also 
stated that now when they know where this option is they 
would not have problem using it. 
3) Task analysis – Register specified problems 
All of the participants were satisfied how organization of 
the problems were implemented. One that used the web 
version previously stated that it is very similar to how 
registration is organized there, and “if one see it on the big 
screen it is easier to recognize and understand it on the small 
screen also”. Two of the participants stated that they were a 
little confused, but if they will use this application regularly 
it would be easier to perform this task. 
All of the participants were satisfied with the text size, 
and one just commented that it could be little bigger but then 
there would be less space for the text on the screen and that 
would be a bigger problem for her. 
Just one participant stated that the task was little 
complicated for her (she used the web version previously) 
but the rest of them said that the task was not complicated. 
Also they said that they would be able to perform it again. 
Three participants had problems finding the option for 
going to the next step in the registration process (two that 
used just the mobile and one that used the web version also), 
but this was more because they did not know and/or did not 
remember the name of the next step. Other participants stated 
that they did not have problems finding option for the next 
step, and one said that “this way is very similar to an usual 
use of mobile phones and very intuitive.” 
4) Task analysis – Find advice regarding previously 
selected and specified problems 
None of the participants had major complaints and 
problems performing tasks in this module. All of the 
participants said that they think it is not difficult to perform 
tasks. Four of them stated that they had little problems 
understanding it for the first time, but still thought the tasks 
was not difficult to perform. All of the participants said that 
they would be able to perform the task again. One participant 
said that “it looks much like the standard options on a 
phone”, so she did not have problems finding the right 
options. 
In the application we implemented functionalities for 
changing font size and orientation of the text when there is 
much text on the screen, and seven participants stated that 
they see these options very useful and that they would use 
them. Two said that they personally would not use these 
options, but still think that they are useful for others. One 
said that she would not use it and she thinks it is not so 
important. 
5) Qualitative results – application usefulness and 
acceptance 
After testing the mobile application most of the 
participants were very satisfied how it is working and seven 
of them stated that they think the mobile application is useful 
and that they would use it for monitoring their health 
condition. One of them said that if she has a web application 
available she would prefer to use the web application instead, 
but if not she would use the mobile application because she 
finds it also useful. One stated that she would not use the 
application because it is too slow for her, but if it was faster 
she would probably use it. One stated that she is not sure if 
she would use it and that she would have to try it and see. 
When asked about usefulness of the application all the 
participants stated that they think the application is useful. 
Two participants said that today they use paper and pen to 
note when they have some problems and questions, and 
afterwards use this list as a reminder during consultation 
with the doctor. In these situations they think this kind of 
patient support system would be very useful because it will 
help them not to forget questions for doctors and nurses. 
Two participants stated that they do not want to call the 
hospital when they have minor health related problems 
because they are not sure how serious the problems really 
are, and access to this system could provide them first 
guidance and feedback if they need to make a trip to the 
hospital. Two participants stated that they liked the fact that 
the mobile application is always available, because they are 
not often in situation to use a PC. They said that now they 
have more free time, so for them using the mobile 
application would be very convenient. One participant stated 
that a positive side of the application is provision of a large 
amount of good and quality information that could help her 
monitoring her condition from one day to another, and not to 
just focus on a current problem. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
From the previous results we can see that the majority of 
participants are very positive regarding the mobile 
application as part of patient support system, and most of 
them think the application is very useful. After the first 
contact with the application most of the participants thought 
that if they are given the opportunity they would use it to 
monitor their health condition in addition to the web version. 
Most of the participants stated that they would prefer the web 
version, but they would use the mobile version if they do not 
have a PC with them. Also, they identified some advantages 
of the mobile version and found possible scenarios and 
situations where the mobile application could be more 
usable. There is also a question, if they would use the mobile 
application more if they were provided just mobile without 
web access. To find acceptance of just a mobile version, a 
new application should be developed that is optimized only 
for mobile operation.  
From our usability testing we saw that users were able to 
use the application also when they did not have previous 
experience with the web application, but previous knowledge 
and experience help them in understanding functionalities 
better and performing tasks in shorter time period. Based on 
this, we do not recommend making a mobile application 
similar to a web-based application, but the interface should 
be familiar. We recommend to use the same colors, 
command names, menu items and icons/logos, but the 
presentation and interaction should be different, and leverage 
the capabilities of the mobile terminal. 
69
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

From the qualitative feedback we gained participants 
comments and thoughts regarding functionality modules, and 
identified usability problems, additional requirements and 
expectations that could influence acceptance of the system. 
The module that had the biggest difference in quantitative 
measurement was the registration module and we tried to use 
qualitative feedback to identify the reasons for this. As we 
saw that there were no major usability complaints, we 
concluded from participants’ comments and video recording 
that the major issue was that they did not understand the 
registration process and they did not read the introduction 
text that were given to them on the screen before the 
registration process started. They stated that the interface for 
each step is organized well, and the command for going to 
the next step was not hard to find, but the problem was to 
understand what is the next step that should be performed. 
This explains also difference in completion time, because 
participants that had performed the task before on the web 
version knew which options to look for going to the next step 
of registration. From this we saw that a more detailed 
description is needed in the beginning of the tasks, so the 
process is understood before registration is started. 
Additionally, when creating instructions and support 
documentation this module should be addressed carefully 
and in more detail.  
We saw that the functionalities provided in the mobile 
application should be a subset of functionality offered by the 
traditional web or pc/tablet application. In this way, the 
application can be very simple, providing only the most 
important functionalities that are suitable for mobile use. 
One patient stated: “Basics were there. For me, as a not so 
frequent user of a mobile phone, it is very important to keep 
the application simple. Too many choices would probably 
make it more complicated and I would get lost.”  
From the participants’ feedback we saw that following 
traditional design guidelines for development of mobile 
applications is not sufficient when creating a user friendly 
and intuitive application. General guidelines are often in 
contradiction to each other (especially if they are from 
different mobile OS or phone manufacturers) and it is 
difficult to identify which guidelines are important. This is 
why we have proposed a selection of general guidelines, 
which has shown to be important to users during our patient-
based testing. We suggest balance of requirements such as 
providing back options, consistency of command names, 
feedback to user where they are in the application, and 
organizations of menus. In addition, we have proposed new 
guidelines for adaptation of a general mobile application 
across terminals. This includes adapting size of the text 
dependent of amount of content of the screen; avoid the use 
of icons and text for additional descriptions, allowing users 
to change font size and orientation of the text, and the use of 
shortcuts. One issue that we specially addressed during 
development of the application was finding the right balance 
between size of the text on the screen and amount of 
information on the screen. Most of the users were satisfied 
with the selected text size. Some of them stated that having 
little bigger font would be even better, but that would affect 
readability of the text. From this feedback and the previous 
experience from the application development process we 
conclude that in the situation where there is large amount of 
text on the screen, it is better to use smaller text size and in 
this manner make text easier to read and understand. On the 
other hand, where there are just menus or small amount of 
information, it is better to use bigger font size. 
The platform developed in the project provides unique 
support for adaptation to any mobile terminal, without 
requirements for a particular screen size. New methods for 
text manipulation has been developed, and as an example, 
we support arbitrary fonts with arbitrary size scaling in the 
application and the platform can adapt to most navigation 
methods, as for example navigation buttons, stylus, soft-
keys, only numeric keys, and even touch screens in a 
consistent way. Thus, all patients can use their own mobile 
phone, and the application maintains an intuitive look and 
feel across terminals.  
We finally observe that the mobile application is more 
suitable for younger people that are more acquainted with 
mobile technologies. One participant suggested that this 
application is most appropriate for the user group from 20 to 
50 years. Our impression from this study where the mean age 
of participants was 46,5 years with average experience with 
mobile technology is that the application is very well 
accepted, easily understood and not seen as too complicated 
for everyday use. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper our main goal was to show the main user’s 
requirements, expectations, acceptance and usefulness of a 
patient support tool that is accessible over mobile phone in 
addition to a web version. For development of the mobile 
application we used participatory design methods where we 
involved patients, usability and design experts, and also 
health providers that are well acquainted with patients needs. 
We saw that the mobile application we developed has good 
acceptance by a group of ten breast patients that participated 
in our usability study. We saw that most users accept a 
mobile application in addition to a web or tablet application. 
We think this is a very important fact, because until now 
mobile applications are often developed as a stand alone 
patient support tool and all system functionalities are 
provided through just one application. We recommend that a 
mobile application should be just a part of a more complete 
system including other types of terminals such as web or 
tablet for home/hospital use, and identifying guidelines for 
mobile application design and functionalities represent a new 
area in development of patient support systems. 
We see that there are certain limitations and 
shortcomings in our usability study that can be addressed 
through future work, such as performing usability testing 
with a larger user group with different age ranges. Valuable 
feedback could be also gained from potential users with 
special needs, for example people with vision and motoric 
problems. Our plan for the next stage in the project is to start 
a pilot study where the group of patients will be offered both 
the mobile and web version of the support tool, and study 
differences in usability, usefulness and usage patterns. 
70
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

In [29] it is described results of a clinical trial that 
showed “less symptom distress, depression, and better self-
efficacy for the patients that used Internet support system 
through the WebChoice application”. We have proposed a 
selection of design guidelines for mobile applications for 
health care, and how the application should be aligned to 
existing web and tablet applications to improve usability and 
flexibility. We claim that an intuitive mobile application is 
an important part of a health management system for 
patients, and may result in faster recovery and better 
flexibility for patients and higher efficiency of healthcare 
providers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been funded by The Research Council of 
Norway under Grant Verdikt 176823/S10 - Communication 
and Information Sharing between Patients and Their Care 
Providers. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Protheroe, A. Rogers, A. P. Kennedy, W. Macdonald, and V. Lee, 
“Promoting patient engagement with self-management support 
information: a qualitative meta-synthesis of processes influencing 
uptake”, Implementation Science 2008, vol 3(44), October 2008, 
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-3-44. 
[2] 
M. E. Radina, A. C. Ginter, J. Brandt, J. Swaney, and D. R. Longo, 
“Breast Cancer Patients' Use of Health Information in Decision 
Making and Coping”, Cancer Nursing, Nobember 2010, doi: 
10.1097/NCC.0b013e3181faab7c. 
[3] 
J. Mirkovic, H. Bryhni, and C. Ruland, “Review of projects using 
mobile devices and mobile applications in healthcare”, Proc. 
Scandinavian conference on Health Informatics, 2009. 
[4] 
M. E. Larsen, J. Rowntree, A. M. Young, S. Pearson, J. Smith, J., O. 
J. Gibson, et al. “Chemotherapy side-effect management using mobile 
phones”, Proc. Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2008, 
pp. 5152-5155, doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2008.4650374. 
[5] 
J. Finkelstein and J. Wood, “Mobile eLearning Platform for 
Interactive Patient Education”, Proc. 2009 International Conference 
on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, IEEE Computer Society 
(2009), pp. 23-27, doi: 10.1109/eLmL.2009.24. 
[6] 
L. McCann, R. Maguire, M. Miller, and N. Kearney, “Patients’ 
perceptions and experiences of using a mobile phone-based advanced 
symptom management system (ASyMS) to monitor and manage 
chemotherapy related toxicity”, European Journal of Cancer Care, 
vol. 18(2), March 2009, pp. 156-164, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2354.2008.00938.x. 
[7] 
J. N. Stinson, G. Z. Petroz, G. Tait, B. M. Feldman, D. Streiner, P. J. 
McGrath, and B. J. Stevens, “e-Ouch : Usability testing of an 
electronic chronic pain diary for adolescents with arthritis”, The 
Clinical journal of pain, vol. 22(3), Mar-Apr 2006, pp. 295-305, doi: 
10.1097/01.ajp.0000173371.54579.31. 
[8] 
A. Ahtinen, E. Mattila, A. Vaatanen, L. Hynninen, J. Salminen, E. 
Koskinen, and K. Laine, “User experiences of mobile wellness 
applications in health promotion: User study of Wellness Diary, 
Mobile Coach and SelfRelax”, Proc. Pervasive Computing 
Technologies 
for 
Healthcare, 
2009, 
pp. 
1-8, 
doi: 
10.4108/ICST.PERVASIVEHEALTH2009.6007. 
[9] 
C. C. Tsai, G. Lee, F. Raab, G. J.  Norman, T. Sohn, W. G. Griswold, 
and K. Patrick, “Usability and Feasibility of PmEB: A Mobile Phone 
Application for Monitoring Real Time Caloric Balance”, Proc. 
Pervasive Health Conference and Workshops 2006, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers (2007), pp. 173-184, doi: 10.1007/s11036-007-
0014-4. 
[10] E. Arsand, R. Varmedal, and G. Hartvigsen, “Usability of a Mobile 
Self-Help Tool for People with Diabetes: the Easy Health Diary”, 
Proc. Automation Science and Engineering, 2007, pp. 863-868, doi: 
10.1109/COASE.2007.4341807. 
[11] P. Yu and H. Yu, “Lessons learned from the practice of mobile health 
application development”, Proc. Computer Software and Applications 
Conference, 2004, pp. 58-59, doi: 10.1109/CMPSAC.2004.1342675. 
[12] T. Gegg-Harrison, M.  Zhang, N. Meng, Z. Sun, and P. Yang, 
“Porting a cancer treatment prediction to a mobile device”, Proc. 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2009, pp. 6218-6221, 
doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5334551. 
[13] H. N. Chua, S. D. Scott, Y. W. Choi, and P. Blanchfield, “Web-page 
adaptation framework for PC & mobile device collaboration”, Proc. 
Advanced Information Networking and Applications, vol.2, 2005, 
IEEE 
Computer 
Society 
(2005), 
pp. 
727-732, 
doi: 
10.1109/AINA.2005.348. 
[14] M. Palmblad and B. Tiplady, “Electronic diaries and questionnaires: 
Designing user interfaces that are easy for all patients to use”, Quality 
of Life Research, vol. 13(7) ,2004, pp. 1199-1207, doi: 
10.1023/B:QURE.0000037501.92374.e1. 
[15] B. Falchuk, “Visual and interaction design themes in mobile 
healthcare”, 
Proc. 
MobiQuitous 
2009, 
pp. 
1-10, 
doi: 
10.4108/ICST.MOBIQUITOUS2009.6751. 
[16] C. Ruland, A. Jeneson, T. Andersen, R. Andersen, L. Slaughter, B. 
Schjødt-Osmo, et al, “Designing Tailored Internet Support to Assist 
Cancer Patients in Illness Management”, AMIA Annual Symposium. 
Chicago, IL, pp. 635-639, 2007. 
[17] M. Jones and G. Marsden, Mobile Interaction Design. John Wiley & 
Sons, 2006. 
[18] B. Barbara, Designing the Mobile User Experience. John Wiley & 
Sons, 2007. 
[19] H. Sharp, Y. Rogers, and J. Preece, Interaction Design: Beyond 
Human-Computer Interaction. Wiley, 2007. 
[20] S60 
UI 
Style 
Guide, 
available 
on:   
http://www.forum.nokia.com/info/sw.nokia.com/id/04c58d5a-84c3-
42db-83d5-486c1cf3e6b3/S60_UI_Style_Guide_v1_3_en.pdf.html, 
October 2010. 
[21] Series 
40 
U 
Style 
Guide., 
available 
on: 
http://www.forum.nokia.com/info/sw.nokia.com/id/73e935fe-8b59-
43b2-ab3e-1c5f763672db/Series_40_UI_Style_Guide.html. 
[22] Mobile 
developing 
and 
design 
guidelines, 
available 
on:  
http://wiki.forum.nokia.com/index.php/Mobile_developing_and_desi
gn_guidelines, December 2010. 
[23] Sony 
Ericsson 
UI 
Rulebook, 
available 
on:  
http://developer.sonyericsson.com/wportal/devworld/downloads/dow
nload/dw-102212-uirulebook?cc=gb&lc=en, December 2010. 
[24] J. Nielsen and T. K. Landauer. “A mathematical model of the finding 
of usability problems”, Proc. INTERACT '93 and CHI '93 conference 
on Human factors in computing systems, ACM Press (1993), pp. 206-
213, doi: 10.1145/169059.169166. 
[25] Java 
Platform, 
Micro 
Edition 
(Java 
ME), 
available 
at: 
http://java.sun.com/javame/downloads/, December 2010. 
[26] Fast, 
high 
quality 
imaging 
on 
any 
device, 
available 
at:  
www.fasterimging.no, December 2010. 
[27] J. Nielsen, Heuristic evaluation. Usability inspection methods. John 
Wiley & Sons, 2004, pp. 25-62. 
[28] E. Bertini, S. Gabrielli, and S. Kimani, “Appropriating and assessing 
heuristics for mobile computing”, Proc. Advanced visual interfaces 
2006, 
ACM 
 
Press(2006), 
pp. 
119-126, 
doi: 
10.1145/1133265.1133291. 
[29] C. M. Ruland, E. Borosund, and C. Varsi, “User requirements for a 
practice-integrated nurse-administered online communication service 
for cancer patients”, Studies in health technology and informatics, 
vol. 146 (2009), pp. 221-225, doi: 10.3233/978-1-60750-024-7-2.
 
71
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

