A Proposal of Remote Rehabilitation System for Cerebrovascular Patients 
Combined with Video Call Center 
 
Yoshitoshi Murata, Shuhei Nagasawa, Akimasa Suzuki 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp, g031i122@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp, suzuki_a@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
 
Abstract— Japan’s low birthrate and rapidly aging population 
are causing medical expenses to take up ever more of the 
national budget. As the result, rehabilitation therapy is being 
shifted from hospital-care to home-care. We thus propose a 
remote rehabilitation system combined with a video call center 
to make up for the shortage of rehabilitation therapy done by 
visiting physiotherapists. In this paper, we focus on 
cerebrovascular patients and adopt MS-KINECT for home 
usage to measure strain of the upper body. Measuring tools 
and expression formats of measured data are also introduced. 
Keywords- rehabilitation; remote rehabilitation; motion 
capture; KINECT; video call center 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Japan’s low birthrate and rapidly aging population are 
causing medical expenses to take up ever more of the 
national budget. To suppress this increase in medical 
expenses, medical treatments, including rehabilitation, are 
being shifted from hospital-care to home-care. The amount 
of rehabilitation therapy in a home done by a visiting 
physiotherapist is limited by law and is insufficient for 
patients to recover completely. We thus propose a remote 
rehabilitation system combined with a video call center to 
make up for the shortage of rehabilitation done by visiting 
physiotherapists.  
Sixty-two percent of rehabilitation patients suffer from 
cerebrovascular diseases [1]. These diseases also have the 
longest rehabilitation term as shown in Figure 1 [1]. 
Therefore, we focus on cerebrovascular patients in the first 
part of our research.  
 
Figure 1. Total points of the national healthcare insurance (NHI) according 
to the duration of feeding period from treatment start date in Japan 
In case of cerebrovascular disease, most patients have 
paralysis on one side of the body, and their bodies lean and 
twist to the paralysis side. Also, because of unusual muscle 
strain, their hands and feet become stiff. In some cases, 
muscles of the upper body go into convulsions. 
In case of a hand or foot, a joint angle is easy to measure 
with a protractor. However, a joint angle of a body is very 
difficult to measure with a protractor, because the joint angle 
combines the lead and the twist. A motion monitoring 
system, Vicon [2], that uses multiple video cameras, has 
been introduced to big hospitals and rehabilitation centers. 
Unfortunately, it is too expensive for a small facility to 
introduce. As a matter of course, it is impossible to adopt for 
a remote rehabilitation system, because the remote 
rehabilitation system is used personally. 
It is very difficult for patients to continue the self-
rehabilitation at home, so our system has two features to help 
them continue: 
 
A patient can check data to see the effect of 
rehabilitation. 
 
A call center operator guides patients through the 
therapy and encourages them with images and 
conversation through the Internet. 
We believe that patients should see practical data 
showing them getting better and hear a person’s voice to 
improve their morale and to motivate them to continue 
rehabilitation. 
After introducing related works in Section 2, we describe 
the concepts and features of the remote rehabilitation system 
in Section 3. Expression formats of the ante-flection, lean, 
and twist of the body are explained in Section 4. Measuring 
applications for the ante-flection, lean, and twist of the body 
are described in Section 5 and evaluated in Section 6. The 
key points are summarized in Section 7. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In 
this 
section, 
we 
introduce 
existing 
remote 
rehabilitaion systems, tools for measuring the strain of 
upper body, and MS-KINECT usage applications adopted in 
rehabilitation. 
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A. Remote rehabilitaion systems 
Traditionally, 
remote 
rehabilitation 
has 
been 
administered between a therapist and a patient through a 
video conference system or video phones, without using 
measuring and monitoring tools [3]. In accordance with 
evolution of remote monitoring tools, robotics and virtual 
reality technologies, they are combined with video 
conference system. Holden et al. applied virtual reality 
technologies to their telerehabilitation system [4]. Carignan 
reported rehabilitation system for which robotics was 
applied including remote rehabilitation [5]. Bradley et al. 
reported investigations of 
the design, control and 
implementation of a form of the intelligent exoskeleton, 
web-based strategies and robotics for remote rehabilitation 
[5]. In these researches, therapists directly guide or coach 
patients through their systems. Therefore, existing remote 
rehabilitation systems can shorten convey time for a visiting 
therapist. However, these systems are insufficient to make 
up for the shortage of therapists. 
B. Measurement tools for the strain of upper body 
Vicon is one of the most famous companies in the 
motion capture industry. They can measure complex 
motions of joints in a body [2]. Vicon’s system needs plural 
specialized video cameras, and know-how is needed to 
measure motions of joints. Thus, this system is too 
expensive for a small rehabilitation center or an individual 
to purchase and operate. Akimoto et al. developed a 
measurement tool for scoliosis [7]. It uses MS-KINECT to 
measure undulations on a body. This tool can express 
measurement data with an image, a graph, and numerical 
data and store them. Jing Tong et al. developed new 
scanning technology that can fully scan the body and show 
VR images of it [8]. It uses three MS-KINECTs. However, 
they did not account for measuring the lean and twist of a 
body. Burba et al. applied MS-KINECT to measure 
breathing rates derived from motions of the chest, and the 
number of shakes of tapping the knee derived from motions 
of the knee [9]. 
C. Applications adopted MS-KINET to rehabilitation 
Garrido et al. applied MS-KINECT rehabilitations for 
patients who have trouble with their sense of balance [10]. 
They express the lean of the body by an image of the 
balance scale and show arrows to correct a patient’s posture. 
There are also many video games for rehabilitation that 
use MS-KINECT [11], [12], [13]. 
III. 
CONCEPT OF REMOTE REHABILITATION SYSTEM 
Our remote rehabilitation system is based on the 
following ideas: 
 
Practical data that shows the patients getting better 
will more effectively encourage them to continue 
rehabilitation than simply giving them vague 
information such as “you are a little better than 
yesterday”. 
 
Hearing a person’s voice is likely to cheer patients 
up. 
Additionally, we plan to employee non-professionals as 
operators instead of physiotherapists to hold down operation 
costs.  
We introduce roles of a physiotherapist and operator, 
and necessary functions to realize above concepts. 
A. Roles of a physiotherapist and operator 
Roles of a physiotherapist are as follows: 
 
Teaching operators how to guide patients through 
rehabilitation and supervising the operators.  
 
Deciding and changing therapy programs on the 
basis of diagnostics data and measured data. 
Roles of an operator are as follows: 
 
Monitoring motions of a patient and measuring 
joint angles by the measuring tools.  
 
Coaching a patient in how to move his or her body 
using the administration tools and therapy contents 
on the basis of therapy programs.  
B. Necessary functions 
As shown in Figure 2, this system comprises following 
components: 
 
Administration tools: An operator uses these tools 
to guide patients. 
 
Measuring tools: An operator uses these tools to 
measure joint angles. 
 
Supervising tools: A physiotherapist uses these 
tools to coach operators. A physiotherapist can 
monitor how an operator is coaching patients and 
instruct him or her in therapy with these tools. 
 
Communication 
exchange 
application: 
This 
application connects a patient with an operator. 
This application works on a video conference 
server. 
 
Therapy contents: Presentation contents to explain 
how to train, or training content such as video 
games for rehabilitation. 
 
Patient database: Patient data which include profile 
data, measured data, therapy programs, and 
coaching video are stored and managed by this 
database. The access permission policy for this 
database has to be decided by the management 
organization of this system.  
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The supervising tools and communication exchange 
application are newly added to introduce operators to the 
remote monitoring system. However, existing remote 
rehabilitation systems have also same roles for the other 
components. As a matter of course, practical functions of 
these components are different in each system. 
 
 
Figure 2. System concept of the remote rehabilitation 
 
IV. 
EXPRESSION FORMATS 
In this paper, strain of the upper body is shown from the 
ante-flexion, lean, and twists. We describe how to express 
the ante-flexion, lean, and twist in this section. 
A. Ante-flexion 
In the case of a skeleton model of the pre-packaged 
program in MS-KINECT, measuring points on the spine are 
the neck and the navel. However, these points are not 
sufficient to express the ante-flexion. Therefore, we add 
three measuring points between the neck and the navel as 
shown in Figure 3 and measure the depth of each point. We 
decided to express the ante-flexion as shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 3. Skeleton model used in this research 
 
 
Figure 4. Expression format of the ante-flexion 
B. Lean 
We express the lean of the upper body with both a line 
connecting the right shoulder and the left shoulder and a line 
connecting the right hip and the left hip from the front view. 
Two types of front view formats are considered to express 
the lean of the upper body. One is making a triangle 
between the right shoulder, left shoulder, and navel, and a 
triangle between the right hip, left hip, and navel as shown 
in Figure 5 (a). The other is that both a line connecting both 
shoulders and a line connecting both hips are plotted on the 
X-Y plane on which middle points of both lines are plotted 
on the origin as shown in Figure 5 (b).  
We asked 30 people which expression more easily 
explained the lean of the upper body. Results of answers to 
this question are shown in Table 1. Most respondents chose 
the triangle expression format. 
 
(a) Triangle expression format 
 
 
(b) No triangle expression format 
Figure 5. Expression format for the lean of upper body 
 
C. Twist of upper body 
We express the twist of the upper body with both a line 
connecting both shoulders and a line connecting both hips 
from the top view. Two types of top view formats are 
considered to express the twist of upper body. One is 
plotting positions of the head and navel in addition to the 
above mentioned two lines as shown in Figure 6 (a). The 
other is plotting just the above mentioned two lines on the 
X-Z plane in which middle points of both lines are plotted 
on the origin as shown in Figure 6 (b). We asked 30 people 
which expression more easily explained the twist of the 
upper body. Results of answers to this question are shown in 
Table 1. Most students chose the lines-only plotting format. 
On the other hand, 9 of 14 workers who responded chose 
the relative position consideration format. Every healthcare 
worker (3 people) said that positions of lines of the 
shoulders and the hips relative to the head were important to 
understand the twist. They all chose Figure 6 (a). 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
(a) Relative position consideration format 
 
(b) Lines-only plotting format 
Figure 6. Expression format for the twist of upper body 
TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF QUESTIONNAIRE ABOUT WHICH EXPRESSION 
FORMATS ARE EASIER TO UNDERSTAND 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Lean 
Students 
15 
1 
Workers 
13 
1 
Twist 
Students 
0 
16 
Workers 
9 
5 
V. 
MEASURING TOOLS 
We developed a tool for measuring the strain of the 
upper body that will be a component of our remote 
rehabilitation system. We use MS-KINECT, Kinect for 
Windows SDK 1.7, and WPF framework in this tool. 
A. Ante-flexion measuring application 
Depth of the neck, the navel, and three points that divide 
the neck and the navel into four equal parts are measured in 
this application. The number of measuring points can be 
increased. An example picture of the display is shown in 
Figure 7. A video image is shown for a call center operator 
to easily guide a patient on the upper-right portion of a 
display. Measured data include error caused by the curve of 
body and clothes. Therefore we recommend measuring not 
the front view but the back view as shown in Figure 8.  
 
Figure 7. Example of front view measuring the ante-flection 
 
Figure 8. Example of back view measuring the ante-flection 
 
B. Lean measuring application 
Since most respondents chose the triangle expression 
format as shown in Table 1, we adopted it. We showed 
numerical angles between the X axis and the line connecting 
both shoulders and between the X axis and the line 
connecting both hips to make practical data easy to 
understand as shown in Figure 9.  
 
Figure 9. Example of measuring the lean 
C. Twist measuring application 
Since 30% of healthcare workers chose the relative 
position consideration format and 70% of them chose the 
lines-only plotting format in Table 1, we designed both of 
them. We showed numerical angles between the X axis and 
the line connecting both shoulders and between the X axis 
and the line connecting both hips to make practical data 
easy to understand, the same as the lean. Example 
screenshots are shown in Figure 10. 
 
(a) Example of the relative position consideration format 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
(b) Example of the lines-only plotting format 
Figure 10. Example of measuring the twist 
VI. 
EVALUATION OF MEASURED DATA 
Since the depth value in MS-KINCT is the shortest 
distance between the X-Y plane on the depth measuring 
camera and a measuring point, a tape measure or an acoustic 
measure is not useful. Hence, we evaluated the angle of the 
ante-flection, lean, and twist by comparing between values 
measured by MS-KINECT and by a big protractor (see 
Figure 11). We fixed a string to a protractor that had a 
weight at one side for indicating it was the perpendicular to 
the earth. 
 
Figure 11. Protractor used in this research 
 
A. Ante-flexion 
The horizontal bar of the protractor is set on the floor. A 
rectangular board is fastened to the vertical bar; and an 
upper body is placed along with the rectangular board to 
remove influence derived from the curve of the body as 
shown in Figure 12.  
 
Figure 12. Measuring image of the ante-flection 
 
Figure 13. Measured data of the ante-flection 
We varied the angle between the horizontal bar and the 
vertical bar from 0 to 15 degrees. Data measured by the 
ante-flexion measuring application corresponding to an 
angle of a protractor is shown in Figure 13. We measured 20 
samples. Average and standard deviation data are plotted on 
the graph. Errors are a few degrees, which would be small 
enough for practical use. 
B. Lean 
The angle between the X-axis and the line connecting 
both shoulders was varied from -20, -10, 0, +10, +20 
degrees instead of the lean angle. These values were 
measured by the protractor fitted on both shoulders from the 
back. We measured the lean of the body by the lean 
measuring application, and measured data is shown in 
Figure 14. There are no errors. 
 
Figure 14. Measured data of an angle between X-axis and a line connecting 
both shoulders 
C. Twist 
We measured the angle between the X-axis and a line 
connecting both shoulders from the top view. The horizontal 
bar of the protractor is fastened to both shoulders, and the 
vertical bar points to the MS-KINECT to remove the 
influence derived from the curve of the body as shown in 
Figure 15. We also measured the line of hips the same as the 
line of shoulders. Measured data is shown in Figure 16. 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Errors for the right rotation in both the shoulders and the 
hips are very small. However, errors for the left rotation are 
a few degrees. We are not sure of the reason for this 
difference. 
 
Figure 15. Measuring image of the twist 
 
(a) Measured data for the shoulders 
 
(b) Measured data for the hips 
Figure 16. Measured data of the twist 
VII. CONCLUSION 
We proposed a remote rehabilitation system combined 
with a video call center to make up for the shortage of 
rehabilitation therapy done by visiting physiotherapists. We 
focused on cerebrovascular patients and adopted MS-
KINECT for home usage to measure the strain of the upper 
body. We also proposed to express strain of the upper body 
by dividing the ante-flexion, lean, and twist and developed 
an application for measuring them. In the results of 
evaluating these measuring applications, their measurement 
errors are sufficiently small.  
We are still in process of completing the remote 
rehabilitation system. The concept that is employing non-
professionals as operators instead of physiotherapists to 
hold down medical expenses is novel. This concept 
probably would suppress increment of medical expense; and 
affect institutions of the national healthcare insurance. New 
business schemes thus have to be created in addition to 
developing the system to introduce as a service. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks to Mr. Isamu Morohashi and Mr. Hiroki 
Yamashita, physiotherapists at the Iwate Rehabilitation 
Center, for their useful suggestions to develop measuring 
tools. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Investigation for an actual state of a medical examination, Ministry of 
Health, Labour and Welfare, 
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/shingi/2007/11/dl/s1128-14h.pdf (in 
Japanese). 
[2] VICON, http://www.vicon.com/. 
[3] David M. Brennan, Sue Mawson, and 
Simon Brownsell, 
“Telerehabilitation: Enabling the Remote Delivery of Healthcare, 
Rehabilitation, and Self Management,” IOS Press, Advanced 
Technologies in Rehabilitation, 2009. 
[4] Maureen K. Holden, Thomas A. Dyar, and Lilian Dayan-Cimadoro, 
“Telerehabilitation Using a Virtual Environment Improves Upper 
Extremity Function in Patients With Stroke,” IEEE, Transactions on 
neural system and rehabilitation engineering, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 36-42, 
2007. 
[5] Craig R. Carignan, and Hermano I. Krebs, “Telerehabilitation 
robotics: Bright lights, big future?,” JRRD vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 695–710, 
2006. 
[6] D.A. Bradley et al., “Nexos: Remote Rehabilitation Using an 
Intelligent Exoskeleton,” Gerontechnology Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. 71-80, 
2005. 
[7] Toshinari Akimoto et al., “Development of Measurement System for 
Scoliosis Using 3D Camera,” IEEJ transactions on electronics, 
information and systems 133(11), pp. 2082-2088, 2013-11 (in 
Japanese). 
[8] Jing Tong, Jin Zhou, Ligang Liu, Zhigeng Pan, and Hao Yan, 
“Scanning 3D Full Human Bodies Using Kinects,” IEEE, 
Transactions on visualization and computer graphics, vol. 18, no. 4, 
pp. 643 – 650, 2012. 
[9] Nathan Burba, Mark Bolas, David M. Krum, and Evan A. Suma, 
“Unobtrusive Measurement of Subtle Nonverbal Behaviors with the 
Microsoft Kinect,” IEEE, Virtual Reality Conference 2012, 2012. 
[10] Juan Enrique Garrido, Irma Marset, Victor M. R. Penichet, and Maria 
D. Lozano, “Balance Disorder Rehabilitation through Movement 
Interaction,” IEEE, 7th International Conference on Pervasive 
Computing Technologies for Healthcare and Workshops, 2013. 
[11] Shih-Ching Yeh et al., “A study for the application of body sensing in 
assisted rehabilitation training,” IEEE, 2012 International Symposium 
on Computer, Consumer and Control, 2012. 
[12] Belinda Lange et al., “Interactive Game-Based Rehabilitation Using 
the Microsoft Kinect,” IEEE, Virtual Reality 2012, 2012. 
[13] Marientina Gotsis et al., “Mixed Reality Game Prototypes for Upper 
Body Exercise and Rehabilitation,” IEEE, Virtual Reality 2012, 2012. 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

