FrailSafe eCRF 
Clinical Data collection tool 
 
Luca Bianconi, Cristiana Degano, Matteo Toma, Fabio Podda 
Research Business Unit 
Gruppo SIGLA S.r.l. 
Genova, Italy 
e-mail: frailsafe@grupposigla.it 
 
 
 
Abstract—In the context of European funded FrailSafe project, 
to 
enhance 
the 
clinical 
data 
collection 
processes 
in 
geographically distributed trials centers, an eCRF software 
platform has been designed and implemented. The most 
important features are synthetically described. 
Keywords: eCRF; Cloud; eHealth; Monitoring; Data 
collection.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Case Report Form (CRF) may be defined as “a 
printed, optical or electronic document designed to record all 
of the protocol” [1]. Extending this definition, a CRF could 
be described as a tool designed to collect data about a patient 
state during a clinical trial, e.g., the patient information, the 
measurements and others. It represents a significant 
instrument for the performance of a clinical trial and its 
efficiency could positively affect the success of a medical 
research.  
CRF is designed for improving the collection of data in 
compliance with a research protocol and with regulatory 
requirements. Moreover, the researchers should be able to 
test the hypothesis or answer the trial related questions. A 
CRF represents suitably the essential contents of the defined 
research and study protocol. 
A flexible eCRF has been implemented for FrailSafe 
project to provide the partners devoted to clinical research of 
such features. 
II. 
FRAILSAFE ECRF 
In the current global scenario of FrailSafe project, the 
development of an electronic CRF (also known as eCRF) has 
been preferred over a usual paper CRF for the following 
benefits: 
• 
Eliminate unnecessary duplication of data. 
• 
Reduce the possibility for transcription errors. 
• 
Encourage entering source data during a subject’s 
visit, where appropriate. 
• 
Eliminate transcription of source data prior to entry 
into an eCRF. 
• 
Facilitate remote monitoring of data. 
• 
Promote real-time access for data review. 
• 
Facilitate the collection of accurate and complete 
data. 
• 
Possibility to have auto generated data (test results, 
calculate formulas, etc.). 
• 
Easier data export and data analysis. 
 
As mentioned above, the eCRF aims to support the 
clinical researchers during the trials by providing them a web 
application (appearing in this case as a plain website) 
through which tracking and managing the process of visiting 
the participants and enhancing the related data collection, as 
depicted in Figure 1.   
With the objective of supporting the trial processes in 
mind some functional features are needed. 
These are: 
• 
Users Management. 
• 
Participants Management. 
• 
Trials Management. 
• 
Devices Management. 
• 
Data Collection. 
For enhancing the quality, the reliability, the usability 
and the security to reach the common goal, some other 
aspects of the application have been taken into consideration 
while designing the software.  
They are detailed in the following sub-paragraphs. 
A. Cross-platform and Multi-device 
The eCRF is a web application. This means it behaves 
and looks like a common website and that it can be used 
through any simple web browser (e.g., Chrome, Firefox, 
Internet Explorer, Safari and Opera); thanks to that, it is 
immediately available on every device providing a web 
browser and an Internet connection (laptop, smartphone, 
tablet, etc.), not needing any further technical requirements. 
A mobile-first approach has been followed in the design of 
the UIs. 
B. Authentication and Encryption of Data 
Security 
is 
guaranteed 
through 
the 
usage 
of 
authentication means, i.e., a username and a password are 
needed for accessing to the application and its resources – 
and through data encryption. Data is encrypted before being 
stored on database and, in communication, a standard 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

protocol for secure communication over a computer network 
is adopted to protect the privacy and the integrity of 
exchanged data. 
C. Data quality 
In the eCRF, the clinical staff collects the patient 
information during the trial in the same ways and means as if 
doing it on paper - that is through questionnaires, forms, etc. 
– but displayed instead on a device screen. During the data 
addition or before saving, the system checks the coherence of 
the data and in case something is not correct it helps the user 
with feedbacks. For example, the participant information 
cannot be inserted in the system if all the mandatory fields 
are not filled or it is not allowed to type characters in a field 
that is a measurement value, etc. 
D. Multilanguage 
The eCRF system, for the FrailSafe project, is used in 
three different countries (France, Greece, Cyprus); so the 
system can support the different languages to help the 
clinical staff and the participants to avoid translation errors 
or misunderstandings during the trials execution. 
III. 
CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE 
For guaranteeing a perpetual availability of the system to 
the clinical staff, the eCRF is hosted on remote servers. On 
these latter the collected data, thus, are stored securely and 
can be used by the system and by the researchers to succeed 
in the medical research carried on by FrailSafe. 
Moreover, the efficiency and the security of the system 
rely on a number of Cloud services and features.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In conclusion, this web application is designed and 
implemented for assessing correctly the objectives of the 
project and of the related medical research. Moreover, it is 
worthy to add that the designing and the implementation of 
the eCRF has been an important experience for those having 
contributed to its design and implementation. It proved to be 
a good example of interdisciplinary and collaborative 
production of a technological tool. It has seen the close 
participation of clinical and ICT partners, from different 
countries, making them willingly and passionately working 
together to reach a common goal, i.e., implementing the 
clinical trial protocol by the mean of an ICT instrument – 
showing evidently the benefits of sharing different 
backgrounds and skills. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Gruppo SIGLA Research Team thanks the FrailSafe 
Consortium for the commitment and energy in the 
collaboration whose, the eCRF is the successful outcome. 
FrailSafe is funded by the European Commission under 
H2020 - PHC-21-2015 - Advancing active and healthy 
ageing with ICT: Early risk detection and intervention. 
Project ID: 690140. 
For further details, refer to [2]. 
 
Figure 1.  Main Clinical Staff dashboard 
REFERENCES 
[1] Guideline for Good Clinical Practice, ICH Harmonised 
Tripartite Guideline, 1996. 
[2] www.frailsafe-project.eu 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

