An Educational Platform for Direct Communication between the National 
Competent Authority and Healthcare Professionals in Croatia 
Katarina Gvozdanovic, Adam Galkovski, Darko Krnic, Arian Rajh, Dubravka Sudic  
Agency for Medicinal Products and Medical Devices 
Zagreb, Croatia 
e-mail: {kgvozdanovic, dkrnic, arajh, dsudic}@halmed.hr, adam.galkovski@gmail.com  
 
 
Abstract—This 
article 
describes 
the 
OPeN 
system, 
a 
pharmacovigilance system developed by the Croatian Agency 
for Medicinal Products and Medical Devices, its current 
update, and gives insight into relevant information and the 
educational function of the application. 
Keywords - Education for Healthcare Professionals; Drug 
Safety; OPeN System; Pharmacovigilance  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The paper “OPeN: Linking the National Adverse 
Reactions Database with Clinical IT Systems in Croatia,” 
presented at the Tenth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (eTELEMED) in March 
2018 in Rome, described the OPeN system, its functioning 
and role in the Croatian public healthcare system [1]. This 
paper describes the further investment of resources for the 
existing application and ongoing development of its 
informational and educational functions. Accordingly, this 
paper presents an update of the work presented at the 
eTELEMED conference. The educational module was 
planned as a result of Phase 3 of developing the OPeN 
system.  
The OPeN system is a pharmacovigilance system 
developed by the Agency for Medicinal Products and 
Medical Devices of Croatia (HALMED). OPeN is an 
abbreviation of “online platform for electronic reporting of 
adverse drug reactions (ADRs)” (or in the Croatian language, 
Online Platforma za elektroničku prijavu Nuspojava). It is 
based on the Croatian National Adverse Reactions Database, 
maintained by HALMED. OPeN aims to achieve integration 
with the Croatian Central Health Information System 
(CEZIH), and which includes the exchange platform named 
Healthcare 
Networking 
Information 
System 
(HNIS), 
Electronic Healthcare Record (EHR), patient register, 
Register of Healthcare Professionals (HCPs), a messaging 
subsystem, online patient healthcare website, and specialized 
services related to e-prescriptions, e-laboratory referrals, e-
booking for hospital admittance, and other interconnected 
functions [2].  
Pharmacovigilance (PhV) as a discipline depends on 
spontaneous reporting, data mining and similar techniques, 
as well as direct reporting from clinical systems. Although 
Croatia is one of the top ten countries in the world for the 
number of Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs) per million 
inhabitants, spontaneous reporting by HCPs and patients is 
generally recognized as an insufficient resource for 
pharmacovigilance protective mechanisms in public health 
[3].  The OPeN system is used for transferring PhV data to 
the national adverse reactions database, both Information 
technology (IT) solutions are complementary and are 
maintained by HALMED. Currently, OPeN is used by 
HALMED’s internal experts and external HCPs. HCPs use 
the module to transfer PhV data whereas HALMED’s staff 
use it for processing data.  
This paper serves as a follow-up of our previously 
presented research. In Section II, we describe methods and 
functionalities of the new OPeN module. In Section III, we 
discuss the trustworthiness of the possible data sources on 
drug safety information. The goal of the new OPeN module 
and its key indicators are set and defined in Section IV. 
Finally, in Section V, we offer our conclusions related to the 
education of HCPs, reliable data sources and the role of 
national competent authorities (NCAs), which have drug 
marketing and post-marketing related mandate.  
II. 
METHODS 
In 2017 and 2018, HALMED developed a web-based 
application called OPeN with the aim of automating the 
reporting of ADRs by HCPs directly using proprietary IT 
systems at their workplaces. This simplifies the process of 
sending ADR data to HALMED. It also accelerates the 
process of assessing and processing ADR data given that 
ADRs are directly reported to the PhV department and do 
not have to pass through administrative channels prior to 
reaching the PhV department. As previously planned, Phase 
3 of developing the OPeN system includes development of 
the educational module to serve as a platform for ongoing 
education of HCPs. The underlying idea is to offer HCPs 
the opportunity to learn about medicines at their workplace 
or home without the need to attending courses.  
The module will feature a web interface with a login 
function requiring a user’s first name, last name or medical 
license number and a password. Once a HCP is logged in, 
the OPeN system has been designed to identify them based 
on their license designation. A list of all active HCPs in 
Croatia has been integrated into OPeN and is updated every 
two weeks by the Croatian Institute for Public Health, which 
in cooperation with HALMED shares the information. The 
list of HCPs contains information on the HCP’s first and last 
name, type of HCP (pharmacist, physician), specialization, 
and institution (including geographic data). Additional data, 
such as contact information is obtained from professional 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

associations 
of 
pharmacists 
(Croatian 
Chamber 
of 
Pharmacists, CCPH) and physicians (Croatian Medical 
Chamber, CMC), which then enables HALMED to directly 
send links to target HCPs and referencing educational 
materials. 
The basic workflow of the OPeN system is shown in 
Figure 1. After logging in, HCPs choose whether to access 
the ADR reporting or educational module. The educational 
module, which is the focus of this paper, contains webinars, 
surveys and questionnaires designed by HALMED’s 
employees. Every test covers a different topic and is 
customized by staff from HALMED’s pharmacovigilance 
department. Authors can choose from a number of questions 
in the particular test, type of questions (e.g., multiple choice, 
single choice, free text) with the ability to select the correct 
answer. In some cases, for specific safety issues, input may 
be sought from members of academia at the relevant 
faculties. 
 
Figure 1. OPeN’s educational module workflow 
The involvement of academia, besides the opportunity to 
share their knowledge on relevant topics, additionally raises 
an awareness of the OPeN educational platform in an 
academic setting, and thus guaranteeing that future HCPs 
become familiar with the platform from the start of their 
careers. Once the test is created, a link referring to the test 
location is sent via e-mail to a prepared list of recipients or 
HCPs. The recipients are chosen based on their specialty, 
location or type of HCP (physicians or pharmacists). HCPs 
receive an e-mail with a link to the test and basic 
information on the topic, medicines to be covered, specific 
safety issues, and the like. By clicking on the link, they are 
directed to the OPeN educational module, more precisely, to 
a specific test and educational materials necessary for 
successful learning. Alternatively, they can log into the 
system and browse the educational module, without 
receiving a prior e-mail notification. 
Every test, along with the available educational materials, 
is stored in the OPeN database and can be searchable by key 
words. Individual HCPs can view information on all 
available tests created by HALMED, regardless of whether 
they have taken the test or not. However, they can view only 
results from their own tests. If needed, they can retake the 
test any time. In certain situations, the only limited time 
frame given to HCPs to take the test is for particularly 
important safety issues requiring immediate communication 
and actions.  
HALMED’s employees have at their disposal additional 
functionalities, such as the ability to post various types of 
educational material (videos, films) to the module, and 
placing links to documents published on the HALMED 
website. The authors of the test set a threshold for passing 
the test, where each person that passes the test is awarded 
ongoing education points as a HCP. The grade system is 
proposed to and then agreed with the boards of HCP 
chambers. 
HCPs will also be able to track the number of continuous 
education points they received on the OPeN platform, 
including points awarded in the ADR reporting module. 
One of the main features of the OPeN education platform 
is the ability to analyze test results and assess the outcome 
of educational activities. All results can be analyzed for an 
individual HCP and also based on aggregated data (e.g., test 
results for physicians or pharmacists, specialist or non-
specialists, 
hospitals 
or 
primary 
care, 
and 
other 
comparisons). This leads to precisely targeting knowledge 
gaps, better knowledge on medicines for HCPs and 
hopefully better patient safety.  
III. 
DISCUSSION 
Up to date, accurate and practical information is necessary 
in ensuring that drugs are prescribed safely and effectively. It 
also promotes improvements in prescribing practices, 
minimises harm to patients and facilitates decision making 
based on valid information [4]. Generally speaking, HCPs 
should have immediate access to high quality evidence-based 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

information on medicines. This may include prescribing 
information or critical safety information on medicines.  
HCPs have at their disposal various sources of 
information on medicines; however, not all sources are 
equally regarded as useful or relevant. There is usually the 
issue of credibility of the source, or updates and redundancy. 
Information on medicines can be communicated by different 
stakeholders 
including 
the 
pharmaceutical 
industry, 
scientists, 
regulators, 
professional 
chambers, 
learned 
societies, and the like. According to Molimard et al. [5], 
communicating information on medication often utilizes 
tools and messages that are not adapted to the target 
audience. This is further hindered due to a lack of knowledge 
in 
communication 
techniques 
and 
the 
fact 
that 
communication on safety information is subject to regulatory 
or legal requirements [5]. Various factors related to 
communication strategies, such as trust in the sender of 
information, may influence the acceptance of information 
[6]. 
According to a study published by Piening et al. [7], 
HCPs indicated that they preferred safety information to be 
issued by the Dutch regulatory agency (MEB), the Dutch 
Pharmacovigilance Center or their own professional 
associations via e-mails, in medical journals and using 
electronic prescribing systems - as the preferred channels for 
the distribution of information on drug safety.  
The results of project SCOPE which aims to describe and 
improve pharmacovigilance practices in the EU indicate that 
current safety communication practices seemed to be broadly 
similar among European medicinal products regulators, i.e., 
NCAs [8][9]. NCA safety communication is mainly 
restricted to communicating safety issues directly through 
bulletins or newsletters and indirectly through approval and 
coordinating 
the 
dissemination 
of 
dear 
healthcare 
professional communication (DHPC) and educational 
materials [8]. DHCP and educational materials cover 
significant safety issues and are usually distributed by the 
pharmaceutical company following NCA content approval. 
Both communications are distributed to individual HCPs and 
may also be made available on the NCA website [8]. 
Awareness of the existence of these materials varies among 
HCPs in different EU member States (MSs) and even among 
different types of HCPs (e.g., general practitioners or 
cardiologists).  
In Croatia, there are 3,800 active pharmacists and almost 
14,500 physicians. HALMED has been actively involved in 
providing important safety information to HCPs at seminars, 
workshops and congresses, safety committee meetings as 
well on its website. The drawback of seminars, workshops 
and congresses has been the fact that they are resource 
intensive, whereas the difficulty in presenting information on 
the website is limited impact and reach based on our website 
analytics and metrics. In general, actions undertaken by 
HALMED have been somewhat restricted in terms of one-
way safety communication to HCPs without the ability of 
measuring the impact of such activities. Upon consideration 
of all these factors, HALMED decided to develop an on-line 
platform for HCPs in order to enhance direct communication 
with HCPs and provide them with information on medicine-
related fundamental safety issues. We are not aware that a 
similar platform exists in other EU member states. With 
regards to Croatia, there are a few educational platforms for 
HCPs, with “Pliva Zdravlje” being one of the most popular 
(https://www.plivazdravlje.hr/). This particular platform is 
operated by a local pharmaceutical company and covers 
topics relevant to physicians and pharmacist, while not 
necessarily related to medicines. However, some physicians 
view this platform as lacking credibility, something that is 
not be the issue with the HALMED education platform [7]. 
The HALMED platform is planned to be an extension of 
the already existing ADR reporting system for OPeN. The 
OPeN education module acts as an IT infrastructure 
providing two-way communication with HCPs. It also 
enables hosting of webinars, questionnaires and surveys as 
ongoing education on medicines for HCPs. Webinars are 
developed 
by 
employees 
at 
the 
HALMED 
pharmacovigilance department along with members of 
academia from relevant faculties. Topics covered include 
information on important safety issues regarding medicines 
such as restrictions on indications, severe adverse reactions, 
change to the benefit-risk ratio, and the like.  
Expected benefits for HALMED include:  
 
Establishing closer cooperation with HCPs by 
providing a two-way communication platform 
 
Increasing the reach of safety communication on 
medicines 
 
Rationalization of internal resources  
 
Establishing HALMED as a trusted source of safety 
information 
 
Promoting the importance of medicine safety 
monitoring, including ADR reporting 
 
Measuring information uptake by measuring both 
process and knowledge indicators 
 
A convenient and modern education format 
appealing to younger HCPs 
 
The ability to measure demographic characteristics 
of respondents, establish a correlation with their 
knowledge in order to adapt and focus the safety 
message  
 
The ability to additionally focus on educational 
activities based on analysis of the results of taken 
tests 
 
Reduced administrative burdens – consecutive 
education points are automatically assigned to 
individual HCPs after completion of assignments, 
webinars and tests 
 
Increasing cooperation between HALMED and all 
areas of the Croatian health system, starting with 
academia 
where 
future HCPs 
receive 
their 
education and right through to professional 
chambers and the Institute of Public Health, thus 
ensuring that stakeholders cooperate on important 
safety issues 
Expected benefits for HCPs include:  
 
Drug safety information provided by trusted source 
 
Up to date information on medicines safety  
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Convenient communication and education format – 
electronic communication, the ability to set MS 
Outlook reminders 
 
Convenience of receiving education at one’s own 
pace, without physically attending courses. This is 
especially convenient for HCPs in remote locations, 
like islands or rural areas 
 
Customized overview of educational history 
 
Continuous education points  
IV. 
RESULTS 
Our aim is to establish a drug risk management system, 
able to face and respond to public health challenges in terms 
of safe drug use, with particular emphasis on issues such as 
antimicrobial resistance and vaccination hesitancy. With the 
help of HALMED's online tools, HCPs are informed about 
the latest safety information on safe drug use. 
We have set ourselves a rather ambitious goal. In 2020 
we plan to reach a minimum of 30% of all HCPs in Croatia. 
In 2021, our plan is to reach a minimum of 50% of all HCPs 
in Croatia through webinars, questionnaires and surveys 
using our platform. Further development of this tool will 
provide us with the opportunity to: 
 
Participate in national and international initiatives 
dealing with safe drug use, especially vaccine 
hesitancy and antimicrobial resistance 
 
For every additional risk minimization measure, an 
explanation will be provided via video or audio by 
a member of HALMED’s PhV team  
 
Every emerging safety issue will incorporate a 
video or audio recording 
 
Based on our platform and authority, we will 
endeavor to increase vaccine coverage 
 
We will facilitate development of the vaccination 
information center on our platform 
 
Our platform enables us to support policies to 
combat antimicrobial resistance 
Key performance indicators that indicate success include: 
 
Increased public trust in HALMED’s competence  
 
An increase in the number of queries about safe 
drug use, especially vaccines and antimicrobial 
resistance  
 
Successful cooperation with national institutions 
and bodies, healthcare workers and patient 
associations 
 
An increased number of public campaigns with 
participation from HALMED, especially on issues 
regarding antimicrobial resistance and vaccination 
hesitancy 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Development of an additional software educational 
module is an update and expansion of the existing OPeN 
system. As we had reasonably presumed based on previous 
cooperation with HCPs, and based on the study of Piening 
et al. shows, HCPs consider NCA to be a more reliable 
source of various material on drugs, which also includes 
educational material, when compared to other sources. 
Moreover, HCPs have begun using HALMED’s online 
website, and are becoming acquainted with its interface and 
usability. HALMED has had a lot of experience in 
educating HCPs, and this function is derived from its 
mandate. Therefore, its modernization through the use of a 
modern portal tool, such as OPeN, was an obvious option. 
The expansion of the educational function of OPeN will 
help HALMED achieve the stated benefits and key 
performance indicators, take advantage of the stated 
opportunities and strengthen its role in the national health 
domain. Finally, the benefits for HCPs, in receiving a 
quality education in an efficient manner, will result in 
benefits 
to 
patients, 
improved 
patient 
care, 
and 
consequently, patient health.     
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Rajh, D. Sudic, and K. Gvozdanovic, “OPeN: Linking the 
National Adverse Reactions Database with Clinical IT 
Systems in Croatia.” In eTELEMED 2018: The Tenth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine, IARIA, March 2018, pp. 54-59.  
[2] 2016 Annual Report Ericsson Nikola Tesla Group General 
Report. (2016). From: 
https://www.ericsson.hr/documents/20181/21890/ar2016_en_
general.pdf/495d6bff-e782-4878-ba8a-6cfc9603f082  
[Retrieved: December, 2018] 
[3] HALMED. Adverse Drug Reaction Report for 2016 [Online], 
From:  
http://www.halmed.hr/fdsak3jnFsk1Kfa/ostale_stranice/Izvjes
ce-o-nuspojavama-za-2016.pdf [Retrieved: December, 2018] 
[4] European Medicines Agency. Guideline on good 
pharmacovigilance practices (GVP) Module XV—safety 
communication. From:  
http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Sci
entific_ guideline/2013/01/WC500137666.pdf [Retrieved: 
December, 2018] 
[5] M. Molimard et al. “Information and communication on risks 
related to medications and proper use of medications for 
healthcare professionals and the general public: precautionary 
principle, risk management, communication during and in the 
absence of crisis situations”. Therapie. 2014 Jul-Aug; 
69(4):355-66. doi: 10.2515/therapie/2014045. Epub 2014 Aug 
8. 
[6] M. K. Lindell, and R.W. Perry. “The protective action 
decision model: theoretical modifications and additional 
evidence”. Risk Anal.2012;32(4):616–32. 
[7] S. Piening et al. Healthcare Professionals’ Self-Reported 
Experiences and Preferences Related to Direct Healthcare 
Professional Communications. Drug Saf. 2012 35: 1061. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03261992  
[8] S. T. de Vries et al. “Communication on Safety of Medicines 
in Europe: Current Practices and General Practitioners’ 
Awareness and Preferences”. Drug. Saf. 2017 40:729–742 
[9] S. T. de Vries et al. “Safety Communication Tools and 
Healthcare Professionals’Awareness of Specific Drug Safety 
Issues in Europe: A Survey Study”. Drug. Saf. 2018 41: 713–
724 
 
 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-688-0
eTELEMED 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

