Database Reengineering of the Registry of Tuberculosis 
 
Peter Benedik 
SRC Infonet d.o.o. and 
University of Maribor 
Faculty of Organizational Sciences 
Kranj, Slovenia 
peter.benedik@gmail.com 
Vladislav Rajkovič 
University of Maribor 
Faculty of Organizational Sciences 
Kranj, Slovenia  
vladislav.rajkovic@fov.uni-mb.si 
Andraž Jakelj 
The University Clinic of Pulmonary  
and Allergic Diseases Golnik  
Golnik, Slovenia  
andraz.jakelj@klinika-golnik.si 
Mirjana Kljajić Borštnar 
University of Maribor 
Faculty of Organizational Sciences 
Kranj, Slovenia  
mirjana.kljajic@fov.uni-mb.si 
 
Uroš Rajkovič 
University of Maribor 
Faculty of Organizational Sciences 
Kranj, Slovenia  
uros.rajkovic@fov.uni-mb.si 
Marjana Pikec 
SRC Infonet d.o.o.  
Kranj, Slovenia  
marjana.pikec@infonet.si
 
 
Abstract—Registry of tuberculosis is intended to record the 
clinical path of the treatment and for reporting statistics to the 
Institute of Public Health regarding the patients with 
tuberculosis. It has been entrusted to the University Clinic of 
Pulmonary and Allergic Diseases Golnik. To improve the 
efficiency of work a proposal of changes has been made to the 
database model of the registry of tuberculosis. The chosen 
methodology of information system development is based on 
the principle of the prototype modeling. It includes all 
necessary steps from the inventory of the work processes, 
collection of the maximum data set, development of the entity 
relational scheme, graphical user interface, risk analysis and 
logical access control. The proposed approach will not only 
increase the efficiency in the process view of organization and 
informatics but also reduce costs and make it more user 
friendly. 
Keywords- tuberculosis; register; clinical path; database; 
computer solutions 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
Tuberculosis (contagious airborne disease caused by 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis) is still one of the leading 
causes of death for adults [1]. TB (Tuberculosis) causes 49 
new cases and kills 7 people every hour in the EU alone [1]. 
Escalating HIV infection as well as negligence in TB 
control have caused an increase in TB incidence over the 
last decade in both developing and developed countries 
[1,13]. 
Moreover, 
several 
other 
factors 
such 
as 
homelessness, poverty, lack of infrastructure in public 
health, and inadequate access to health services have played 
an important role in worsening the situation. The 
management aspect of the TB control is one of the most 
important issues to consider in the prevention of TB 
infection, in particular, in urban setting. Management in 
terms of surveillance of tuberculosis aims to provide 
information to local teams to drive control efforts and, 
nationally, to inform policy. It is through surveillance that 
the general trends in cases can be determined.  
The register of tuberculosis (RTB) records the course of 
treatment of patients with tuberculosis at a national level [6]. 
The data collection process of the tuberculosis treatment is 
recorded manually and is therefore quite time consuming. 
The aim of the proposed solution is to improve the process 
and design a new database, which would no longer require 
manual data entry through paper forms. It would provide 
direct data collection through e-forms. This would contribute 
to the promptness of the RTB, reduce possibility of errors in 
data entry and provide greater patient privacy. The following 
contribution shows systematic steps that were necessary to 
design the database model, graphical user interface and data 
access control. 
 
This paper shows to show systematic steps that were 
necessary to design the database model, graphical user 
interface and data access control of Database Reengineering 
of the Registry of Tuberculosis. The first two sections of 
this paper provide the backdrop for understanding the 
nessety of Reengineering of the Registry of Tuberculosis 
and importance of the tuberculosis distribution, its influence 
1
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

on healthcare system and society. Section III reveals 
working methods used for constuction of new database, 
while Section IV illustrates how a prototype solution was 
developed.  
II. 
AIM AND PURPOSE 
With the proposed solution we aim to renew the RTB 
database by capturing the processes in e-form. The program 
is designed to be used throughout Slovenia, with the Golnik 
Hospital acting as the administrator of the RTB. The 
proposed solution assures interoperability with any system, 
i.e. for home care and system "computer beside the bed". 
Medical staff can enter data into the system directly at the 
site of treatment, using personal digital assistants (PDAs). 
Although this program is in a prototype stage new database 
and PDAs approach plays an important role in ensuring that 
high quality data can be quickly and reliably collected from 
numbers of patients who are distributed over different 
geographic areas in Slovenia. The proposed solution will 
allow different hospitals or individuals that need to record 
data of tuberculosis in dispersed locations to be able 
electronically capture data at the point of collection.  
As this project is in a prototype form and was not yet 
implemented, we can not measure its true potential and 
benefits but, as shown within developed countries, personal 
digital assistants (PDAs) have promise as a new technology 
that can increase the quality and efficiency of data collection 
[14]. 
This 
study 
suggests 
that 
the 
design 
and 
implementation of the PDA intervention play a key role in a 
system’s success.  
 
Our research can be compared with the research taken 
in Peru by Joaquin et al. [15], where they implemented PDA 
approach for gathering data on multidrug resistant 
tuberculosis 
(MDR-TB) 
patients. 
They 
found 
that 
implementing information solution with PDAs approach 
decrease processing times, frequency of errors (as there is 
no transcription from paper based form to electronic one) 
and substantial reduction in the delays from collection to 
entry of laboratory results. Also it reduces workload for 
those involved in data collection and processing.      
 
To better understand the importance of the new 
database and PDA approach we must look at simple case 
that is taken daily at RTB. Patients with latent form of 
tuberculosis are required to submit a monthly sputum 
sample at local health center or hospital. The sputum sample 
and smear result are then sent to the Golnik Hospital. The 
laboratory monitoring process begins with a smear 
microscopy test. Timeliness and accuracy of reporting 
laboratory results for these samples are essential to 
determine if a patient is responding to treatment and, if not, 
to alert physicians to the possible need for medication 
changes. In each health center the team records the smear 
test result on a paper form and in each regional laboratory 
the team records both the culture result and the smear result 
sent by the health center on a similar paper form. These 
forms are then sent to RTB where the culture and smear 
results are veriﬁed and retyped into the information system 
that collects data. The major disadvantages of this paper-
based method are the delays in processing and entering 
laboratory results and data quality issues stemming from 
multiple opportunities for transcription errors.  
To avoid problems discussed above, the proposed 
solutions are integrated in the existing hospital information 
system. This way, later transcriptions of data become 
unnecessary, what reduces the possibility of transactional 
errors and assures data integrity. Furthermore, with the 
proposed solution we can avoid the paper records and 
therefore lower the storage costs and times for processing of 
patients’ data [4], while significantly improving the quality 
of the whole process [1]. A user-friendly web application 
enables users to add and delete data records about patients 
anywhere and at anytime.  
 
Our proposed solution can be compared with ETR.Net 
(The electronic Tuberculosis Register) which is an electronic 
tuberculosis register designed for TB/HIV surveillance, 
program monitoring and evaluation. The system consists of a 
database which is accessed by the user via the software 
interface, custom developed for the Microsoft Windows 
environment. Its main implementations are in East African 
countries like Botswana, Guatemala, and Mozambique. It is 
a stand alone windows application there fore those not 
allowed any connection with clinical information system 
neither can be accessed trough internet. 
III. 
WORKING METHODS 
The construction method is based on the prototype 
modeling [3, 7]. Through interviews with the healthcare 
teams we have obtained the framework for functionality 
requirements. Critical analysis of the existing processes for 
data inputs and their processing provided insights regarding 
the existing ways of working with the registry exposed the 
requirements and the users’ wishes. Based on the results of 
the current situation analysis, we constructed a prototype 
data model (ER diagram) which forms the basis for the 
construction of all required functionalities. We developed a 
graphical user interface with logical access control to enter, 
edit, view and analyse data about treatment of tuberculosis 
which can connect the web application and database registry. 
IV. 
DEVELOPMENT OF A PROTOTYPE SOLUTION 
A. Current Situation Analysis 
The analysis of the current situation included the 
inventory process, paper documents and forms that support 
these processes substantially. In accordance with the analysis 
we defined five main processes as shown in Figure 1: A1 - 
The medical examination of the patient, A2 – Lab testing, 
A3 - Notification of tuberculosis, A4 – Medical treatment of 
tuberculosis, A5 – Final reports. 
2
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

B. Data Model 
The analysis of the current situation allowed us to obtain 
the information that is important for understanding the 
contents of the work processes. With the maximum set of 
data we were able to devise an entity relational model for 
RTB. The entity relational model is made in IDEF1X 
notation [11], which makes the informational structure of the 
applications easier. Through normalization and 5th normal 
form we created 21 entities which are related and form a 
complete data model for RTB as shown in Figure 2. 
C. Graphical User Interface 
In order to access and display data and information, it 
was necessary to make an integrated graphical user interface 
which provides a graphical look and navigation pages. The 
graphic interface is designed with the CSS technology which 
stands for Cascading Style Sheet [5]. Figure 3 shows the 
design of the master websites and its tabs. 
Users of the RTB web application are divided into three 
groups: doctors, administrative staff of the RTB and select 
laboratories. 
Each of the intended users has a personal account, 
username and password. This is then reported to the system 
via the login page. The web application window displays 
data, links and information adjusted to each user 
individually. The adjustments are made in terms of links, 
options and levels of access as well as rights for modifying, 
deleting or adding new information or data. The two groups, 
namely doctors and administrative staff, have access to the 
RTB through the patient page shown in Figure 4. 
D. Ensuring Data Security 
Due to the data sensitivity, it is important to ensure 
adequate protection against intrusion attempts or deliberate 
disclosure of data. The critical risk analysis showed that 
despite the changes and additional security modifications, 
there are still certain external security risks. To ensure that 
the access is restricted, we added the logical access control to 
the RTB web applications. 
This includes the set up of the systematic logical access 
control and the appropriate use of various tools, such as the 
firewall, intrusion prevention systems and intrusion detection 
systems [2, 8] to control access to the RTB database from an 
external network. To establish a logical access control it is 
necessary to distinguish between the subjects and the objects 
of the Golnik Hospital’s own information system KOPA. A 
subject represents an entity that can perform an activity 
within the information system (physician, administrator, 
laboratory), while an object represents an entity of 
information system that the subjects are accessing. The 
access should be monitored.  
Logical access control is divided into means of 
identification, authentication, authorization and logging [10]. 
This way the safety of data entry is ensured, the access of 
unauthorized persons is denied, and unauthorized disclosure 
of patient’s data is prevented. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The proposed solution includes a proposal for 
reengineering of the registry database for tuberculosis at the 
Golnik Hospital. For this purpose we designed a database 
model that can be realized in any relational DBMS 
(DataBase Management System) such as Oracle, MySQL, 
DB2 and others. This enables the independence of the 
DBMS used, faster performance, and flexibility [7]. The 
proposed solution is interoperable with the other hospital 
information systems and programmed for exchanging data 
via graphical user interface or database. In the future it is 
crucial to continuously improve data access control at both 
organizational and application levels. The solution will help 
the RTB to become more efficient in terms of data integrity 
and price-performance as well as more user-friendly in terms 
of efficient data entry and anyplace/anytime access. The 
proposed solution closely follows the ideas of eHealth [12]. 
As such it can serve as an example of good practice for other 
health institutions in Slovenia and across Europe. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partly financed by the European Union, 
namely the European Social Fund with contract number P-
MR-09/94. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. K. Andreassen, T. Sørensen, and P. E. Kummervold, eHealth 
trends across Europe 2005-2007, WHO/European survey on E-health 
Consumer Trends, Project report. Tromsø: Norwegian Centre for 
Telemedicine, University Hospital of Norway, 2007. 
[2] British standard BS7799-3: Information security management 
systems. London: British Standards Institution, 2006.  
[3] C. Coronel, S. Morris, and P. Rob, Database Systems: Design, 
Implementation, and Management, 9th ed. Florence, KY: Course 
Technology, 2009. 
[4] G. Eysenbach, “What is e-health?” Journal of Medical Internet,  
vol. 3, no. 2, 2001, doi: 10.2196/jmir.3.2.e20 Available at: 
http://www.jmir.org/2001/2/e20/ (10.1.2010). 
[5] D. Hammond, Web browser CSS support. D. Hammond, 2010. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.webdevout.net/browser-support-css 
(10.1.2010). 
[6] Hospital Golnik KOPA, Papers and lectures / 13th regular annual 
consultation on the treatment and monitoring of TB patients in 
Slovenia. Ljubljana, 2008. 
[7] T. McLellan, Data Modeling: Finding the Perfect Fit, An Introduction 
to Data Modeling. IslandNet, 1995.  
[8] A. Nash, B. Duane, D. Brink and C. Joseph, PKI: Implementing and 
Managing E-Security. Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill, 2001. 
[9] K. Schmeh, Krypotogrphie und Publik-Key-Infrastrukturen im 
Internet. Bochum: Wiley, 2001.  
[10] B. Shneiderman, C. Plaisant, M. Cohen and S. Jacobs, Designing the 
User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction, 
5th ed. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, 2009. 
[11] J. F. Sowa, “The Challenge of Knowledge Soup” in Research Trends 
in Science, Technology and Mathematics Education, J. Ramadas and 
S. Chunawala, Eds. Mumbai: Homi Bhabha Centre, 2004, pp.55-90.  
[12] European Commission C, Updated Work Programme 2009 and Work 
Programme 2010, ICT – Information and Communications 
Technologies, FP7 Cooperation Work Programme. European 
Commission C, 2009. Available at: ftp://ftp.cordis.europa.eu/ 
pub/fp7/ict/docs/ict-wp-2009-10_en.pdf (10.1.2010). 
3
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

[13] T. Prammananan, W. Arjratanakool, A. Chaiprasert, N. Tingtoy, M. 
Leechawengwong, 
Second-line 
drug 
susceptibilities 
of 
Thai 
multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates, Int J Tuberc 
Lung Dis, 2005; 9:216-9. 
[14] D.S. Buck,D. Rochon, J.P. Turley, Taking it to the streets: recording 
medical outreach data on personal digital assistants,  Comput Inform 
Nurs, 2005, pp. 250—5. 
[15] A. B. Joaquin, T. Cohen, P. Rodriguez, J. Kim, S.F. Fraser, Personal 
digital assistants to collect tuberculosis  bacteriology data in Peru 
reduce delays, errors, and workload, and are acceptable to users: 
cluster randomized controlled trial, International Journal of Infectious 
Diseases, 2009, pp.410–418. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The treatment process in the frame of RTB. 
 
 
4
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

 
Figure 2.  Entity-relational model of the RTB’s database. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Site map of the RTB. 
5
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

 
 
Figure 4.  Patient data entry form taken from the RTB. 
6
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

