Ontology- and Model-Based Quality Indicators Designing Framework 
 
Osamu Takaki 
Gunma University Hospital 
Gunma University 
Maebashi, Japan 
takaki@gunma-u.ac.jp 
Izumi Takeuti 
Research Institute for Secure Systems 
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 
Technology 
Tsukuba, Japan 
takeuti@ni.aist.go.jp 
Noriaki Izumi 
Intelligent Systems Research Institute 
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology 
Tsukuba, Japan 
n.izumi@aist.go.jp 
 
Abstract—Though quality indicators play an important role in 
assessment of medical service quality of hospitals, there still 
exists no universal framework to collect or select adequate 
quality indicators for certain assessment of medical service 
quality. This paper provides a set of models called "Medical 
Service Assessment Models (MSAM)" that help collect 
adequate quality indicators to assess medical service quality 
from the patients’ viewpoint. To this end, we focus on a set of 
semantic patterns of medical service quality assessment and 
develop an ontology called "Medical Service Assessment 
Ontology (MSAO)", which is a vocabulary to construct MSAM 
based on the patterns. The framework consisting of MSAM 
and MSAO plays a role in guidelines for collecting adequate 
quality indicators to assess medial service quality from the 
patients' viewpoint, and helps explain the basis for the 
collection of quality indicators. 
Keywords-quality indicator; medical service assessment; 
ontology 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Quality indicators play an important role in assessment of 
medical service quality of hospitals. Recently, medical 
assessment organizations such as the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality (AHRQ) [1], the National Institutes of 
Health (NIH) [11] and the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) [12] have provided a 
lot of quality indicators to hospitals and toolkits to calculate 
values of their indicators based on data in medical databases 
in hospitals. Moreover, they have compared the values above 
on the international scale. Such comparisons will expand in 
the future. 
However, there still exists no universal framework to 
collect or select adequate quality indicators for certain 
assessment of medical service quality, and hence, each 
medical assessment organization provides a series of quality 
indicators in its own and it is not easy to fairly compare 
medical service qualities based on quality indicators.  
This paper provides a set of models that help collect 
adequate quality indicators to assess medical service quality 
from the patients' viewpoint. The models are called "Medical 
Service Assessment Models (MSAMs)". To this end, we 
focus on a set of semantic patterns of medical service quality 
assessment and develop an ontology that is a vocabulary to 
construct MSAM based on the patterns. The patterns and 
ontology 
are 
called 
“Medical 
Service 
Assessment 
Description Patterns (MSADPs)” and "Medical Service 
Assessment Ontology (MSAO)", respectively. MSAMs are 
constructed with instances of concepts and properties in 
MSAO. MSAO is developed by an ontology developing tool 
“Semantic Editor” [5]. 
The framework consisting of MSAO and MSAMs plays 
a role in a guideline for collecting adequate quality indicators 
to assess medial service quality from the patients' viewpoint, 
and helps explain the basis for the collection of quality 
indicators. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 explains MSADP. Section 3 introduces MSAO 
based on MSADPs, and Section 4 introduces MSAMs based 
on MSAO. Section 5 explains how to design quality 
indicators based on MSAMs. Sections 6 and 7 explain 
related works and the conclusion. 
II. 
MEDICAL SERVICE ASSESSMENT 
DESCRIPTION PATTERNS 
Medical Service Assessment Description Patterns 
(MSADPs) are semantic patterns of medical service quality 
assessment, which are obtained from organizing assessors’ 
thinking how to assess medical services of medical staff in 
hospitals. 
MSADPs consist of the following patterns.  
1. 
What types of medical staff and instruments are 
there in the hospital? 
2. 
What types of patients have been accepted by the 
hospital? 
3. 
What treatments have been executed to the 
patients? 
4. 
What results have the patients obtained after the 
treatments? 
5. 
In the 4th phase above, how do the results differ 
from estimates? 
MSADPs can be considered to be semantic or description 
patterns of Donabedian's assessment of medical service 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

quality based on the aspects of "constructions, processes and 
outcomes" of medical services [4] plus acceptance situations 
of patients. One can also consider that MSADPs are 
organized from the patients’ viewpoints. Therefore, the 
viewpoint of medical service quality assessments based on 
MSADPs might be limited more than Donabedian's 
viewpoint. However, by limiting the scope of the assessment, 
the way to design quality indicators based on MSADPs can 
be more systematic than Donabedian's method. 
III. 
MEDICAL SERVICE ASSESSMENT ONTOLOGY 
The purpose of this paper is to provide a set of models to 
design adequate quality indicators for assessment of medical 
service quality according to MSADPs. To this end, we 
introduce Medical Service Assessment Ontology (MSAO), 
which is a vocabulary to construct the models. 
A. Patients 
In MSAO, a patient denotes a type of people who share 
common problems, and problems are mainly classified into 
problems to be solved by medical services and others called 
background problems (Fig. 1). The former denotes mainly 
diseases, while the latter is classified according to age, 
pregnancy or congenital disorders. 
In Fig. 1, yellow (highly-colored) rotundate rectangles 
describe concepts, while pink (softly-colored) rotundate 
rectangles with dotted lines describe attributes of concepts. 
For example, a concept “patient” has two attributes 
“background” and “target disease”, and “background” has 
the range “background problem”, which is a subclass of 
“problem”, where the range of an attribute denotes the set of 
values of the attribute. 
B. Patients’ Values and Purposes 
A value denotes what a patient wants in solving his/her 
problems (diseases). A value consists of 8 types of value 
components in Fig. 2 on the next page. A purpose is regarded 
as a value plus criteria to attain its value components (Fig. 2). 
 
C. Medical Services 
A medical service denotes what is executed to a patient 
to solve his/her problem(s). Medical services are mainly 
classified into events and activities (Fig. 3 on the next page). 
An event is a set of one or multiple activities or smaller 
events, while an activity is what a medical staff directly 
executes on the spot. For example, a surgery is regarded as a 
medical service, while laparotomy is an activity by an 
operating surgeon in a surgery. 
A service in Fig. 3 has four attributes: “target purpose”, 
“approach”, “tool”, and “then” that indicates the next service 
of the service. A process of a medical service is a path 
consisting of events or activities to attain the medical service.
Figure 1.  Patients and their problems (Partial)
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

One can develop process models of medical services by 
combining instances of medical service concept (cf. Fig. 8 on 
the last page).  
D. Medical staff, instruments and facilities 
Medical service providers consist of medical staff, 
instruments and facilities (Fig. 4). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Values and purposes (Partial). 
 
Figure 3.  Medical services. 
 
Figure 4.  Medical service providers (Partial). 
Medical staff are doers or people in charge of a medical 
service. For example, doctors, anesthetists, radiologists and 
nurses are typical medical staff. On the other hand, 
instruments and facilities are hospitals' resources used by 
medical staff in medical services. In this paper, a medicine is 
regarded to be one of those instruments. For example, MRI 
is an instrument, while an operation room is a facility. 
E. Patient outcome 
A patient outcome denotes a state of a patient that might 
change through an activity (Fig. 5 on the next page). Patient 
outcomes are classified into (i) completion, (ii) completion 
with potential risk, (iii) failure, and (iv) emergency, 
according to degrees of activity attainments, risks that 
patients might have through the activity and costs that 
patients pay for the activity attainments. “Completion” 
denotes a patient outcome that is obtained by a complete 
activity with no problem. “Completion with potential risk” 
denotes a patient outcome from which the next activity is 
feasible but which has some potential risk(s) that might be 
actualized in the future. “Failure” denotes that the doer could 
not complete the activity. Finally, "emergency" denotes that 
the patient falls into critical situations such as the patient's 
death by the activity. An accident denotes a negative 
outcome that a patient conclusively has. Possible outcome 
(or possible accident) is a pair of a patient outcome (or 
accident, respectively) and its possibility. 
 
“Completion 
with 
potential 
risk”, 
“failure” 
and 
“emergency” have attributes “risk outcome” and ”risk 
accident” whose ranges are possible outcome and possible 
accident respectively, which means that, if these types of 
patient outcomes occur, then (negative) patient outcomes or 
accidents might occur in the future. Moreover, “failure” and 
“emergency” have an attribute “result” with range “fatal 
accident”, which denotes a serious accident that might halt 
the medical service including the activity. 
IV. 
MEDICAL SERVICE ASSESSMENT MODELS 
In this section, we explain Medical Service Assessment 
Models (MSAMs). MSAMs show situations related to 
medical services from the viewpoints of the five patterns of 
MSADPs, and they are constructed with instances of 
concepts in MSAO. Thus, we will explain MSAMs 
according to the five patterns above. 
Prior to constructing MSAMs, one has to set a main 
service such as "an open abdominal surgery of stomach 
cancer" that he/she will assess eventually. 
The main service above is called a conclusive service. 
The conclusive service is set by using concepts of patients in 
MSAO, as follows. 
1. 
Set problems of patients to make clear a conclusive 
medical service for stomach cancer patients. 
2. 
Set a type and/or stage of target cancer in order to 
make clear the problem to solve by the medical service. 
3. 
Set background problems of target patients. (As an 
example, we here consider all patients of stomach cancers 
with stage II.) 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 5.  Outcomes of patients (Partial). 
 
4. 
Set values and purposes for the patients according 
to the 8 types of value components in Fig. 2. Then, one can 
also set attainment criteria of patients' satisfaction about the 
values. 
5. 
Finally, set a conclusive medical service as well as 
an approach of the conclusive medical service. 
As an example of a conclusive medical service, we here 
consider an open abdominal surgery of stomach cancer. In 
the following subsections, we construct MSAMs based on 
the conclusive medical service above. 
A. Medical Service Provider Model 
A Medical Service Provider Model (MSPM) is a model 
that shows provisions for a given conclusive medical service. 
The model is employed to design quality indicators in the 
first phase of MSADPs.  
MSPM consists of medical staff, instruments, facilities 
and dependency relationships between them. Here, a 
"dependency relationship" means a relationship between a 
medical service or a thing related to a medical service such 
as an instrument or a facility and what plays an exclusive 
role for the service or the thing. The dependency relationship 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

is a transitive relationship. Therefore, for example, the 
medical staff "operating surgeon" is an exclusive medical 
staff of an event "open abdominal surgery of stomach 
cancer". Fig. 6 defines the dependency relationship by the 
properties "exclusive ...". 
 
Figure 6.  Dependency relationships. 
Fig. 7 shows an example of MSPM that indicates 
exclusive or significant medical services, instruments, 
facilities and medical staff for open abdominal surgery of 
stomach cancer. Since each instance in Fig. 7 is connected by 
dependency relationship labelled by "exclusive ...". All 
instances in Fig. 7 are exclusive or significant for the 
conclusive medical service. 
For example, the small event "diagnosis of the primary 
tumor" is an exclusive component event of the surgery above, 
"MRI" and "CT" are exclusive instruments for the diagnosis 
and "radiologist" is an significant staff who can exclusively 
use the instruments. Therefore, the small event, instruments 
and staff above are all exclusive for the surgery. 
 
Figure 7.  MSPM for open abdominal surgery of stomach cancer (Partial). 
B. Patient Model 
A Patient Model (PM) is an instance of a patient's 
concept of MSAO. Thus, the content is what we already 
have explained in Section 3.1. Here we give an example of a 
PM "patients of stomach cancers". Moreover, as examples of 
patients' purposes we give (1) life extension, (2) recovery of 
life function, (3) recovery of physical function and (4) 
alleviation of physical and mental pain caused by diseases. 
C. Medical Service Process Model 
From a given conclusive medical service such as "open 
abdominal surgery of stomach cancer", some concrete 
approach and constraints of the medical service can be 
decided. According to such an approach and/or constraints, 
one can construct a process model of the medical service, 
which is called a Medical Service Process Model (MSPrM). 
The example of an MSPrM is partially shown in Fig. 8 on 
the last page. 
Fig. 8 shows a process from “diagnosis of primary 
tumor” to “surgery performance”. Each small event or 
activity that constitutes the conclusive medical service is 
assigned to a person in charge or a doer. For example, the 
small event in Fig. 8 "performance of surgery" consists of 
eight activities and the person in charge of the small event is 
a "doctor", while the activity "general anesthesia" in 
"performance of surgery" is assigned to a doer, an 
"anesthesist". Moreover, some small events and activities are 
assigned to instruments and/or facilities. 
D. Patient Outcome Model 
A Patient Outcome Model (POM) shows the status of a 
patient that chances by activities and/or events according to 
the process of the conclusive medical service. A POM is 
expressed as a list that consists of possible statuses of a 
patient through the last small medical service that constitutes 
the conclusive medical service. A status of a patient through 
a small medical service that constitutes the conclusive 
medical service is determined based on the completion 
degree of the service, potential risks and costs caused by the 
service. 
A POM is constructed through the following steps. 
1. 
Given an MSPM, PM, and MSPrM, sort out patient 
outcomes by considering the completion degrees, potential 
risks and costs of the small services that constitutes the 
MSPrM under the assumption that all services above are 
executed acceptably. The patient outcomes above are 
desirable ones. 
2. 
Pick up small events or activities that are not easy 
to complete with no potential risk and no high cost. Thus, 
add the undesirable outcomes that are caused by the failure 
of such small events and/or activities. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In the case of open abdominal surgery of stomach cancer, 
one may obtain undesirable patient outcomes including the 
following outcomes: 
i. 
Tumor excision with a certain level of bleeding,  
ii. 
Tumor excision with surgical site infection,  
iii. 
Tumor excision with light damage to abdominal 
organs,  
iv. 
Excessive tumor excision,  
v. 
Deficient tumor excision and  
vi. 
Failure of tumor excision by severe damage to 
abdominal organs or blood vessel. 
V. 
DESIGN OF QUALITY INDICATORS BASED ON 
MSAMS 
In this section, we explain the way to design quality 
indicators based on given MSAMs that are obtained in the 
previous section. As well as the previous section, we 
consider "open abdominal surgery of stomach cancer" as a 
conclusive medical service. Thus, we will explain how to 
design quality indicators to assess the quality of the 
conclusive medical service above in the following 
subsections. 
A. Design of QIs based on MSPM 
By virtue of the MSPM that is obtained in Section 4.1, 
one can clarify significant medical staff, instruments and 
facilities of the given conclusive medical service. Thus, 
quality indicators can be defined to be what indicate the 
status of the resources above.  
For example, it is valuable for assessment of the 
conclusive medical service quality to calculate quality 
indicators that indicate acceptance situations of medical staff 
"radiologist", 
"cancer 
physician" 
and 
"anesthetist", 
instruments "MRI" and "CT" and a facility "operation room", 
which are shown as exclusive resources in the MSPM (Fig. 
7). 
B. Design of QIs based on PM 
By virtue of the PM obtained in Section 4.2, target 
patients of the given conclusive medical service can be 
figured out. In the case of "stomach cancer patients", quality 
indicators can be defined to be what indicate acceptance 
number of patients who are characterized by instances in the 
PM above. 
C. Design of QIs based on MSPrM and POM 
By virtue of the POM that is obtained in Section 4.4, one 
can clarify remarkable patient outcomes, especially, 
undesirable ones (i, …, vi in Section 4.4). Thus, it is valuable 
to define quality indicators that indicate frequency of the 
undesirable patient outcomes above. 
For example, the number of surgeries that need a certain 
amount of blood transfusion or time-lengths reflects the 
frequency of the undesirable outcomes i and iii. On the other 
hand, the number of surgeries that need certain lengths of 
hospital stays reflects the frequency of the outcome that 
force patients to bear the burden such as the outcomes iii and 
iv. The rate of SSI is directly related to the outcome ii. 
Finally, the rate of hospital readmissions and re-surgeries 
reflect the frequency of the outcomes v and vi. 
Finally, we explain how to design quality indicators that 
correspond to the third step in MSADPs by using MSPrM 
and POM in Sections 4.3 and 4.4. Through the two models 
above, one can associate remarkable undesirable outcomes 
i, ...,vi and small events and/or activities in the MSPrM. Thus, 
quality indicators that indicate level of skill of such services 
are important ones of the third pattern of MSADPs. 
For example, degree of conformance of scales of tumors 
in diagnoses before surgeries to scales of tumors that surgery 
doctors actually excised is related to frequency of the 
outcomes iv and v in Section 4.4. Thus, the degree of the 
conformance above may be an important indicator of surgery 
doctors' skills. 
Moreover, the executing rate of additional activities or 
small events that prevent the outcomes i,...,vi are also 
important quality indicators of the third pattern of MSADPs 
D. Comparison of QID-FW and TDD-FW 
The designing framework of quality indicators explained 
in the previous sections, which we call QI-designing-FW or 
QID-FW, can be regarded as an analogy of a test-driven 
development framework (TDD-FW) of information systems. 
The following table shows correspondence relationships of 
components of QIDFW and TDD-FW. 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF QID-FW AND TDD-FW 
 
QID-FW 
TDD-FW 
1 
Medical staff 
System users 
2 
Patients 
Data 
3 
Medical instruments and 
facilities 
Information systems 
4 
Medical services 
Accumulation of data 
through information 
systems 
5 
Medical service 
provider models 
Use case diagrams 
6 
Patient models 
Data models 
7 
Medical service 
process models 
Business process models 
8 
Patient outcome models 
Models obtained by 
integration of use case 
scenarios 
9 
The model constituting a 
patient outcome models 
Use case scenarios 
10 
Quality indicators 
Tests 
 
The 1st to 3rd items in Table 1 are components that exist 
initially in working places, while the 5th to 9th items are 
models or specifications. From the viewpoint of medical 
informatics, medical services can be regarded as creation 
and/or modification of patients' data. Thus, the 1st to 3rd 
components of QID-FW can be regarded as the same 
components of TDD-FW in Table 1. Therefore, medical 
service provider models in QID-FW correspond to use case 
diagrams in TDD-FW, which show relationships between 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

users and information systems. Moreover, patient models can 
be considered to be data models (more properly, master data 
models), while medical service process models can be 
considered to be business process models that shows 
workflows with information systems. Though there do not 
exist well-known models in TDD-FW that directly 
correspond to patient outcome models, components of a 
POM, which show outcomes of activities in a medical 
service, can be represented by use case scenarios. 
On the other hand, a test in the TDD-FW plays the role of 
a criterion of an information system or a service with the 
system. So, quality indicators can be regarded as tests in the 
TDD-FW. 
In TDD-FW, developers create efficient tests (or test 
cases) systematically based on requirement specifications 
that consists of the 5th to 9th models of TDD-FW in Table 1. 
Thus, the methodology in QID-FW to design quality 
indicators, which is based on the idea of tests (test cases) 
designing in TDD-FW, can be considered to be at least 
partially reasonable and systematical way to design a set of 
quality indicators. 
VI. 
RELATED WORK 
The paper [4] is one of the representative researches on 
what quality of medical service is and how to measure 
medical 
service 
quality. 
Moreover, 
one 
can 
take 
representative researchers such as Collopy [2], Copnell [3], 
Mainz [8, 9] and Mainz et al. [10] for development and 
improvement of quality indicators. These results play 
significant roles in researches how to express medical service 
quality as numerical values. This paper introduces a 
framework based on MSAO and MSAM to effectively 
employ the methods that the previous researchers have 
developed in order to obtain ideal standard of medical 
service quality. 
On the other hand, one can take the papers [6] and [7] for 
instances of development frameworks of ontology for 
medical 
information 
systems. 
By 
combining 
these 
frameworks and MSAO, one can establish a framework to 
define ideal quality indicators and to calculate the values of 
the quality indicators based on data in medical information 
systems. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In order to design adequate quality indicators for 
assessment of medial service quality from the patients’ 
viewpoint, and to explain the basis for the design of quality 
indicators above, this paper provides the following products: 
1. 
A set of semantic patterns of medical service 
quality assessment, which is called "Medical Service 
Assessment Description Patterns (MSADPs)". 
2. 
A set of models called "Medical Service 
Assessment Models (MSAMs)" that help collect adequate 
quality indicators to assess medical service quality from the 
patients’ viewpoint. 
3. 
An ontology called "Medical Service Assessment 
Ontology (MSAO)", which is a vocabulary to construct 
MSAM based on MSADPs. 
Moreover, we also briefly explain the way to design 
quality indicators based on the framework consisting of the 
three products above (see Section 5). 
On the other hand, the method of our framework to 
construct patient outcome models is still highly dependent on 
individual skills, and it has not yet been sufficiently 
systematic. Thus, our next subject will be to develop a more 
systematic method to construct patient outcome models. 
Moreover, it is necessary to make our designing 
framework easier for users including medical staff to use. To 
this end, we will be required to develop a tool that assists 
users to make medical service assessment models, and to 
evaluate the acceptability of the framework among medical 
staff. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by a JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number 24500167. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
AHRQ, 
“Agency 
for 
Healthcare 
Research 
and 
Quality”, 
http://www.ahrq.gov/index.html, [Retrieved: 11, 2013]. 
[2] 
B. T. Collopy, “Clinical indicators in accreditation: An effective 
stimulus to improve patient care”, International Journal for Quality in 
Health Care 12(3), 2000, pp. 211-216. 
[3] 
B. Copnell, V. Hagger, S. G. Wilson, S. M. Evans, P. C. Sprivulis, 
and P. A. Cameron, “Measuring the quality of hospital care: an 
inventory of indicators”, Intern Med J. 39(6), 2009, pp. 352-360. 
[4] 
A. Donabedian, “Explorations in quality assessment and monitoring, 
Vol. 1, the definition of quality and approaches to its assessment”, the 
Foundation of the American College of Healthcare Executives, 1980. 
[5] 
K. 
Hasida, 
“Introduction 
to 
Semantic 
Editor”, 
http://i-
content.org/semauth/intro, (in Japanese), [retrieved: 11, 2013]. 
[6] 
Kaiser, C. Akkaya and S. Miksch, “How can information extraction 
ease formalizing treatment processes in clinical practice guidelines? 
A method and its evaluation”, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 
39(2), 2007, pp. 151-163. 
[7] 
T. Mabotuwana and J. Warren, “An ontology-based approach to 
enhance querying capabilities of general practice medicine for better 
management of hypertension”, Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 47 
(2), 2009, pp. 87-103. 
[8] 
J. Mainz, “Defining and classifying clinical indicators for quality 
improvement”, Int J Qual Health Care 15(6), 2003, pp. 523-30. 
[9] 
J. Mainz, “Developing evidence-based clinical indicators: a state of 
the art methods primer”, International Journal for Quality in Health 
Care, 15(1), 2003, pp. i5-i11. 
[10] J. Mainz, A. M. Hansen, T. Palshof, and P. D. Bartels “National 
quality measurement using clinical indicators: The Danish national 
indicator project”, Journal of Surgical Oncology 99(8), 2009, pp. 500-
504. 
[11] NIH (2013) National Institutes of Health (NIH), http://www.nih.gov/,  
[retrieved: 11, 2013]. 
[12] OECD, “OECD Health Data 2013 Definitions, Sources and Methods”, 
http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/Table-of-Content-Metadata-
OECD-Health-Data-2013, [Retrieved: 11, 2013]. 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 8.  MSPrM of open abdominal surgery of stomach cancer (Partial). 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

