A Monitoring and Feedback Tool to Support Patients in  
Achieving a more Active Lifestyle  
The development of portable technology embedded in primary care 
Renée Verwey, Sanne van der Weegen, Marieke Spreeuwenberg, Huibert Tange,  
Trudy van der Weijden, Luc de Witte  
Department of Health Services Research (HSR) 
School for Public Health and Primary Care (CAPHRI). Maastricht University 
r.verwey@maastrichtuniversity.nl, s.vanderweegen@maastrichtuniversity.nl, m.spreeuwenberg@maastrichtuniversity.nl, 
h.tange@maastrichtuniversity.nl, trudy.vanderweijden@maastrichtuniversity.nl, l.dewitte@maastrichtuniversity.nl
 
 
 
Abstract—The paper describes the process of development of 
an innovative monitoring and feedback tool to improve the 
level of physical activity of chronically ill patients. The tool 
aims to support chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and 
diabetic patients’ self-management in achieving an active 
lifestyle. The tool consists of a sensor that transfers data to a 
Smartphone; subsequently the Smartphone is connected to a 
server. Patients wearing the sensors will receive feedback on 
their Smartphones based on pre-set activity goals. Use of the 
tool will be embedded in a healthcare model to be executed by 
practice nurses in primary care. Both the tool and the 
healthcare model are developed in an iterative way based on 
user requirements research. An intensive cooperation has been 
set up between the research team, two enterprises that produce 
the 
technology, 
healthcare 
professionals, 
and 
patient 
representatives. From the very first phase onwards, patients, 
professionals, and technology developers are actively involved 
in the project in order to increase the probability of effective 
use of the tool in practice. The tool will be validated and tested 
in pilot studies. Eventually a randomized controlled trial will 
be set up to measure the effects of embedding the tool in 
primary care. 
Keywords—physical 
activity; 
accelerometer; 
persuasive 
technology;  self-management support; primary care. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A quarter of all people in the Netherlands suffer from a 
chronic disease such as chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) or diabetes. The number of people with 
diabetes is increasing most of all. It is estimated that in 2025, 
seven percent of the total Dutch population will have a 
diagnosis of diabetes [1]. For a lot of people with COPD or 
diabetes it is very hard to be sufficiently active. People with 
COPD suffer from shortness of breath and people with 
diabetes are often overweight. This makes exercise more 
difficult. Nevertheless, physical activity is very important for 
COPD and diabetic patients because it improves their quality 
of life and long term prognosis.  
Most patients with COPD or diabetes are treated in 
primary care by general practitioners and practice nurses. 
According to guidelines and care standards, stimulating 
physical activity should be a central element in the treatment 
of people with COPD or diabetes [2][3]. The level of success 
regarding this element of the care process depends for the 
greater part on the degree to which patients succeed in 
executing their self-management role. Therefore, healthcare 
providers should involve the patient in decisions on self-
management, and together with the patient should seek 
lifestyle interventions that fit with the motivation, needs, and 
capabilities of the patient [4][5].  
An example of a lifestyle intervention is self-monitoring 
of physical activity using a pedometer or an accelerometer. 
This is often identified as an effective approach towards 
behaviour change [6][7].  Use of technology for long term 
monitoring and feedback could support patients in achieving 
a more active lifestyle and could also help care providers to 
coach patients in establishing this behavioural change more 
easily. In the project It’s LiFe! (an acronym for Interactive 
Tool for Self-management through Lifestyle Feedback!) an 
innovative monitoring and personalized feedback tool will be 
developed and tested. The tool aims to support COPD and 
diabetic patients in achieving an active lifestyle as part of 
their self-management. The project started in September 
2010 and will last four years.  
Nowadays there are tools on the market that try to 
improve people‟s level of activity, such as the Fitbit®, but 
those tools do not give continuous feedback on people‟s 
mobile phones [8]. In 2009 Klasnja et al. reported on the 
UbiFit. This tool (the flower phone) does contain similar 
features [9]. In this project we analyse such exercise tools 
with the aim of identifying the underlying principles of 
persuasive technology [10]. During the development, as far 
as possible, effective principles will be merged into the It‟s 
LiFe! tool. Furthermore, one of the most basic assumptions 
about the combination of technology and lifestyle 
interventions is that it will only succeed when the technology 
is actually part of care services in which healthcare 
professionals see patients‟ levels of activity as a “vital sign” 
and are aware of the need to promote exercise [11]. This is 
the reason why a healthcare model (HCM) will be developed 
on the basis of which practice nurses will simultaneously 
support patients‟ self-management to achieve a more active 
lifestyle.  
During the first stage of the project the following 
research questions were answered: 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
What feedback and information do patients need to 
optimally support them in their self-management 
role and how should the feedback to the patient be 
presented in order to promote optimal use of the tool 
and optimal patient compliance? 
 
What information do professional caregivers need to 
optimally support patients in their self-management 
role and how should the information generated by 
the system be presented in order to stimulate use of 
the tool and patient compliance? 
 
How can the use of the monitoring and feedback tool 
to support patients in maintaining a healthy lifestyle 
be integrated in an HCM that is based on the 
principles of patient involvement, shared decision 
making, 
and 
current 
insights 
into 
disease 
management and the chronic care model?  
In this work-in-progress paper the methods and some 
preliminary results of the first year will be described and 
plans for the upcoming years will be explained. 
II. 
METHODS 
To design useful technology that meets the needs of 
patients and healthcare professionals, it is important to 
involve both parties in a very early stage of the development 
process. A user centred design strategy was used during the 
first phase of the project in which the tool and an HCM were 
developed. Several strategies for designing medical devices 
were combined into a specific model tailored to this project 
[12]. This model is depicted in Figure 1. The model was used 
to specify the steps to be taken to define the user 
requirements.  
Defining the user requirements was an iterative process 
that started with identifying the users and their context. The 
general project idea was developed together with several 
experts and business partners. Subsequently general use 
cases were written from the perspectives of a COPD patient, 
a diabetic patient, and a practice nurse. They were narrative 
stories of the use of the tool embedded in daily living and in 
daily practice. During interviews with patients and healthcare 
professionals, end users were asked to give their opinions 
about the use cases.   
 
Figure 1. User requirements model. 
Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 15 
people with COPD or diabetes. After analysing the 
interviews the use cases were modified and specified. The 
results of all interviews were verified and explored in two 
focus groups, in which the interviewees participated. The 
data were supplemented by interviews with 15 healthcare 
professionals. After analysing the data using NVivo and 
open coding, general themes emerged and these results were 
input for the user requirements document. 
Furthermore, two members of the research team are 
patient representatives who gave feedback on every step in 
the process. In addition two expert meetings took place, in 
which project plans and progress were presented to people 
with a broad range of expertise in COPD and diabetes care, 
sensor technology, general practice, human movement, and 
health promotion and implementation science. All experts 
provided their feedback on the course of the project.    
The technological development of the tool is an ongoing 
process taking place in collaboration with two companies: 
Maastricht Instruments BV and Sananet Care BV. There are 
in fact two parallel paths in the project: the research team of 
Maastricht University conducts research and “feeds” the 
technical team with information about user requirements for 
the tool so that gradually the elements of the technology 
evolve. This continuous interaction between the two teams is 
a unique aspect of this project.  
Simultaneously with the technological development, the 
HCM is being developed (the Self-management Support 
Programme). This was done by conducting a literature study 
and furthermore through 15 semi-structured interviews with 
general practitioners, physiotherapists, nurse specialists in 
diabetic and pulmonary care, and practice nurses. 
III. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
A. Technology 
The original project idea was that the tool should consist 
of three parts: a sensor with a 3D accelerometer, a mobile 
phone, and a server/website for both patients and care 
providers. The patient would receive three types of feedback 
on the mobile phone concerning: 
1. the amount of activity; 
2. the amount of activity in relation to an activity goal; 
3. the response of a practice nurse based on the measured 
activity. 
The user requirements study provided the details for this 
framework.  
Patients have indicated that the sensor should be small, 
discreet, and shockproof and that it should measure 
accurately. The mobile phone should have a large screen so 
that patients can read information easily. Furthermore 
patients opted for a mobile phone with a touch screen. 
Personal activity goals will be set in minutes per day in 
consultation with the practice nurse. Patients would like to 
set goals that are achievable and adapted to their abilities. 
The immediate feedback patients want to see is the 
percentage of minutes that they have been active during the 
day compared to their activity goal, presented as an image 
and in colour. In their opinion it is not necessary to see the 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

data on the level of intensity and history of activities directly. 
They appreciated an option in the system in which they can 
fill in details themselves so that they can give reasons why 
they did not succeed in achieving their goals. They preferred 
to receive mostly positive feedback and limited negative 
feedback. Patients said that they want to receive a neutral 
response from the system when they achieve their goals. 
Negative feedback is not necessary; when negative results 
occur, they said they would probably already feel guilty and 
would not want to be further stressed by the system. 
Based on the requirements the following tool was 
developed. The sensor has the same dimensions as a match-
box and contains a 3D accelerometer. The patient wears the 
sensor somewhere around the hip (clipped on a belt or in the 
pocket). The sensor is wirelessly connected to an Android 
Smartphone with a touch screen. An application called It‟s 
LiFe! will be installed on the Smartphone. The application 
consists of a widget which fills the home screen of the 
Smartphone. The widget shows a bar that continually fills as 
the participant moves closer to his or her activity goal of that 
particular day.  
In the first fortnight of use, a baseline measurement will 
take place to give insight into the “normal activity pattern” of 
the patient. Based on this insight the patient will set an 
activity goal in minutes per day during a face to face 
consultation with the practice nurse.  
While using the tool the patient gets feedback messages 
via the application. On the phone the patient can get more 
information about his or her activity level such as the degree 
of intensity during a day, a week, and a month. At some 
specific moments, for example, during the baseline 
measurement or when goals are reached, the patient can start 
dialogue sessions on the application to give more 
information about how activities are experienced. Based on 
this information the patient gets “intelligent” answers, tips, 
feedback, and reminders on the phone. The results of 
participating patients will be sent to the general practice so 
that practice nurses can respond to this information. The 
different types of feedback are depicted in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. It‟s LiFe! tool feedback types 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. It‟s LiFe! tool feedback types. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Self-Management Support Model with five A‟s 
(Glasgow et al., 2002; Whitlock et al., 2002). 
 
B. Self-management Support Programme  
Based on a literature study a model was proposed (see 
Figure 3). The model gives an outline of how the contact 
between patient and practice nurse proceeds. Practice nurses 
will use a consultation approach to coach patients in their 
self-management regarding physical activity based on a “five 
A‟s cycle” counselling technique (assess–advise–agree–
assist–arrange) [13]–[15]. During the interviews, healthcare 
professionals were asked to give their opinions about specific 
aspects of this approach such as using motivational 
interviewing, risk assessment, and goal setting. 
The interviews with professionals gave insight into “care 
as usual” for COPD and diabetic patients, the opinions of 
professionals 
about 
the 
Self-management 
Support 
Programme (SSP), and their attitudes regarding the use of 
technology and anticipated barriers and facilitators when 
implementing the technology in primary care. Most practice 
nurses reacted positively: “With this tool I can give these 
patients something tangible to help them improve their daily 
activity levels.” 
Both patients and professionals agreed that the sensor 
should measure accurately. Professionals often stated that 
patients tend to overestimate their normal physical activity.  
A remarkable difference between the results of the patients 
and those of professionals was that, in the opinion of most 
professionals, elderly patients find it very difficult to use 
technology, whereas the patients did not mention this  
 
Feedback 3
Feedback 2
Feedback 1
Terminal
(web application)
Coach
Cell Phone
(web application +
feedback app.)
3D opnemer
Patient
Activity = Total acceleration / second +
Targets (XML files)
Notes / questions 
responses
SANANET ONLINE
Blue Tooth
GSM / UMTS
TCP/IP wired
Values / scores
Reply / advice
Terminal
(web application)
Notes / questions 
responses
HIS
Patient data
Activity = Total acceleration / second  
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

difficulty in such a way. The opinions of the professionals 
about the potential of the system to give a personal response 
to patients between consultations varied. 
At the time of writing, the latest draft of the Self-
management Support Programme has now been presented to 
a panel of experts. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Supporting self-management regarding physical activity 
is part of the healthcare services of general practices. Both 
the technology and an HCM are being developed in an 
iterative way based on user requirements research. Intensive 
cooperation between the research team, technical team, and 
patient representatives increases the probability of successful 
use of the technology. The development is an ongoing 
process; in the upcoming years the technology will be 
validated and tested and a randomised controlled trial (RCT) 
will be set up to measure the effects of embedding the tool in 
primary care. 
During the second year of the project the usability and 
validity of the prototype will be tested in a lab environment. 
In addition, the tool and the SSP will be tested in a pilot 
study of 20 patients from two general practices. At the time 
of writing, this part of the project is in preparation. 
In the last two years of the project an RTC will be set up 
to measure the effects of embedding the tool in primary care. 
There will be three branches in the trial, each with 80 
patients from eight different general practices: one group will 
receive “care as usual”, one group will receive only the care 
described in the SSP, and one group will receive the 
complete intervention with both the SSP and the tool. The 
primary outcome measures will be physical activity and goal 
attainment. The secondary outcome measures will be quality 
of life and self-efficacy. Physical activity will be measured 
objectively by an accelerometer differing from the one 
developed in this project. Additionally, physical activity will 
be measured subjectively by a questionnaire as part of the 
SSP.  
This project focuses on patients with COPD or diabetes 
who are treated in primary care, but if their effectiveness is 
proven, the tool and the model could also be used by patients 
with other chronic conditions. Furthermore the tool sensor 
could be extended by measuring other parameters. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The project is funded by Zon MW in the programme 
“New Instruments for Healthcare”. The two companies 
involved in the development are: 
• 
Maastricht Instruments BV  
Oxfordlaan 70, 6229 EV Maastricht, the Netherlands  
www.maastrichtinstruments.nl  
• 
Sananet Care BV  
Rijksweg Zuid 22A, 6131 AP Sittard, the Netherlands 
www.sananet.nl  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Hoeymans 
N. 
and 
Melse 
J.M., 
Rijksinstituut 
voor 
Volksgezondheid en Milieu, Ministerie van Volksgezondheid 
Welzijn en Sport. “Gezondheid en determinanten: deelrapport 
van de VTV 2010 van gezond naar beter,” (“Health and 
determinants: report section VTV 2010 from healthy to 
better,”) Houten: Bohn Stafleu Van Loghum, 2010. Retrieved 
from 
<http://www.vtv2010.nl/deelrapporten/gezondheid--
determinanten/ >23.11.2011. 
[2] Long Alliantie, “Zorgstandaard COPD,” (“Care standard 
COPD,”) Amersfoort: Long Alliantie Nederland, 2010. 
Retrieved from < http://www.longalliantie.nl/zorgstandaard-
copd >23.11.2011. 
[3] “NDF care standard: transparancy and quality of diabetic care 
for people with diabetes type 2,” Amersfoort: Nederlandse 
Diabetes 
Federatie, 
2007. 
Retrieved 
from 
< 
http://www.diabetesfederatie.nl/start/zorgstandaard/diabetes-
care-standard/download.html > 23.11.2011. 
[4] Bodenheimer T., Lorig K., Holman H., and Grumbach K., 
“Patient self-management of chronic disease in primary care,” 
JAMA, vol. 288, no. 19, 20 Nov. 2002, pp. 2469–2475. 
[5] CBO, “Zelfmanagement, samen werken aan zorg die bij de 
patient past,” (“Self-management, working together towards 
patient 
centred 
care,”) 
2011. 
Retrieved 
from 
 <http://www.zelfmanagement.com/ >23.11.2011. 
[6] van Achterberg T., Huisman-de Waal G. G., Ketelaar N. A., 
Oostendorp R. A., Jacobs J. E., and Wollersheim H. C., “How 
to promote healthy behaviours in patients? An overview of 
evidence for behaviour change techniques,” Health Promot. 
Int., vol. 26, no. 2, Jun.2010, pp. 148–162. 
[7] Tudor-Locke C. and Lutes L., “Why do pedometers work?: a 
reflection upon the factors related to successfully increasing 
physical activity,” Sports Med., vol. 39, no. 12, 2009, pp. 
981–993. 
[8] Khan K. M., Weiler R., and Blair S. N., “Prescribing exercise 
in primary care,” BMJ 2011;343:d4141. 
[9] “Introducing 
the 
new 
fitbit 
ultra.” 
Retrieved 
from 
 <http://www.fitbit.com/product >23.11.2011. 
[10] Klasnja P., Consolvo S., McDonald D. W., Landay J. A., and 
Pratt W., “Using mobile & personal sensing technologies to 
support health behavior change in everyday life: lessons 
learned,” AMIA Annu. Symp. Proc., 2009, pp. 338–342. 
[11] Fogg B. J., Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to 
Change What We Think and Do. Amsterdam; Boston: 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2003. 
[12] Shah S. G. and Robinson I. “User involvement in healthcare 
technology development and assessment: structured literature 
review,” Int. J. Health. Care. Qual. Assur. Inc. Leadersh. 
Health Serv., vol. 19, no. 6/7, 2006, pp. 500–515. 
[13] Whitlock E. P., Orleans C. T., Pender N., and Allan J., 
“Evaluating primary care behavioral counseling interventions: 
an evidence-based approach,” Am. J. Prev. Med., vol. 22, no. 
4, May 2002, pp. 267–284. 
[14] Glasgow R. E., Funnell M. M., Bonomi A. E., Davis C., 
Beckham V., and Wagner E. H., “Self-management aspects of 
the improving chronic illness care breakthrough series: 
implementation with diabetes and heart failure teams,” Ann. 
Behav. Med., vol. 24, no. 2, Spring 2002, pp. 80–87. 
[15] Glasgow R. E., Emont S., and Miller D. C., “Assessing 
delivery of the five „As‟ for patient-centred counselling,” 
Health Promot. Int., vol. 21, no. 3, 2006, pp. 245–255. 
 
 
 
 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

