Different Ways of Engaging the End-Users in mHealth Services 
Lessons learned from Swedish case of “Health in Hand” Project
Yan Hu, Sara Eriksén 
Department of Creative Technologies 
Blekinge Institute of Technology 
SE-371 79 Karlskrona, Sweden 
Email: {yan.hu, sara.eriksen}@bth.se 
Jenny Lundberg, Hanna Tuvesson, Lina Nilsson 
Linnaeus University 
Vaxjö/Kalmar, Sweden 
Email: {jenny.lundberg, hanna.tuvesson, 
lina.nilsson}@lnu.se 
Cecilia Fagerström 
Blekinge Center of Competence 
Blekinge County Council 
SE-371 81 Karlskrona, Sweden 
Email: cecilia.fagerstrom@ltblekinge.se 
Malin Hofflander 
Hofflander Consult AB 
SE-294 95 Sölvesborg, Sweden 
Email: malin@hofflander.se
Abstract— mHealth services are becoming common all over the 
world. However, the acceptance and use of mHealth services 
are not always as expected. In this paper, we discuss the lessons 
learned from our recently finished research project “Health in 
Hand”. Based on the Swedish case study on using mHealth 
services to support patients with Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) in 
living a healthy life, we propose strategies for engaging the 
end-users in mHealth services. These strategies include moving 
user-driven participation from the margin to the center, 
building up a professional education team to support both 
patients 
and 
healthcare 
providers, 
strengthening 
user 
motivation through gamification and supporting the sharing of 
knowledge within and between different user groups. We 
believe that these strategies could improve the design of 
mHealth services through higher user engagement. 
Keywords-mHealth; user engagement; type 2 diabetes; 
lessons learned; strategies. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
We have collaborated in an interdisciplinary Indo-
Swedish research and development project, “Health in 
Hand” [1], concerning design of mobile services for health 
promotion and disease prevention. The Swedish case within 
the project focused on how to support people with type 2 
diabetes (T2D) in living a healthy life through mobile 
technologies. In this case, a mobile application for 
communication 
of 
blood 
sugar 
values, 
etc., 
and 
comprehensible overview of health history, for self-
management and a supportive dialog with healthcare 
providers, was studied. In this paper, we will present lessons 
learned from the Swedish case study in the project. 
There are about 400 000 Swedes, or 3-4% of the 
population, who have diagnosed T2D. The risk of T2D 
increases among elderly people. Among those over 75 years 
old, an estimated 10% or more have T2D [2]. Diabetes is 
becoming more and more common, not only in Sweden but 
around the world. 
mHealth is already being used to monitor a variety of 
conditions of chronic disease [3]. The use of mHealth tools 
itself engages more people to focus on improving their 
health. Research shows that mobile based interventions with 
clinical feedback for patients with diabetes improve 
glycemic control (HbA1c) in the short-term, compared to 
standard care or other non-mHealth approaches [4]. 
This paper presents some points on how we should 
engage the end-users in mHealth services for sustainable use, 
based on our experiences from the Swedish case study in the 
“Health in Hand” project. Section 2 provides a brief 
background of global T2D and global guidelines for 
managing older people with T2D. Section 3 gives an 
overview of our experiences from our Swedish case, while in 
Section 4, we propose some strategies to engage the end-
users in mHealth services. The conclusion and future work 
are presented in the last section. 
II. 
BACKGROUD 
A. T2D: A global epidemic in aging populations 
T2D is a chronic progressive disease resulting from an 
imbalance between insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion. 
It is the most common form of diabetes, responsible for at 
least 90% of all cases of diabetes [5]. T2D is a lifestyle 
disease which typically hits people as they grow older. The 
number of diagnosed cases of T2D has increased rapidly 
worldwide during recent decades, to an extent that has lead 
researchers to speak of a global epidemic [6]. In 2015, 
according to statistics from the International Diabetes 
Federation (IDF) [5], 1 in 11 adults worldwide had diabetes, 
and it was estimated that by 2040 this would have reached a 
level of 1 in 10 adult worldwide living with diabetes [5]. In 
2015, approximately 12% of global health expenditure was 
spent on diabetes. Yet, at that time, IDF also estimated that 1 
in 2 adults with diabetes was undiagnosed. 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Global Guideline for managing older people with T2D 
In 2013, IDF, recognizing the relative lack of clinical 
trials and guidelines concerning elderly people with T2D, 
published a global guideline specifically focused on 
managing older people with diabetes [7]. The guideline was 
developed to provide clinicians with recommendations that 
assist in clinical management of a wide range of older adults, 
not only those who are relatively well, but also those who, 
due to frailty, or dementia, or both, are functionally 
dependent. “While there is increasing recognition that 
diabetes care for all people should be individualized it is 
apparent that for many older people with diabetes, care is 
sub-optimal and often fragmented leaving a substantial 
portion of adults with unmet clinical and social need.” [7] 
The guideline takes as its starting point that informal 
caregivers are often the primary source of everyday advice, 
emotional support, and practical help for a large number of 
older people with diabetes, although this is often overlooked 
by healthcare professionals involved in diabetes care. One of 
the key principles underpinning the guideline refers to 
quality use of medicines, including using non-medicine 
options first if possible, pharmacovigilance, and de-
prescribing. Further, the guideline uses three main categories 
for older adults with diabetes when it comes to determining 
how to manage their care: those who are independent, those 
who are dependent, and those who have a life expectancy of 
less than 1 year and need end of life care.  
III. 
LESSONS LEARNED FROM THE PROJECT 
Admittedly, when the “Health in Hand” project started in 
2014, we were focused, in the Swedish case study, on 
developing mobile services for supporting people with T2D 
in managing their diabetes and developing and maintaining a 
healthy lifestyle. We aimed to include not only people with 
T2D but also family members and informal caregivers, as 
well as healthcare providers, as important actors and 
participants in the design process. Our aim was to contribute 
to transforming healthcare delivery through co-construction 
of mobile health services which focus on factors that support 
human health and well-being [8] [9], and not only, or 
primarily, on factors that cause disease (pathogenesis). We 
were using Participatory Design (PD) as a research method, 
of which one of the goals was to promote participatory 
design for mHealth development with the local design of 
design methods, techniques, and tools. 
A.  Challenges facing Swedish diabetes healthcare 
From our case study, we found that there are several 
challenges faced in Swedish diabetes healthcare.  Most of the 
patients diagnosed with T2D do not measure their blood 
glucose regularly. Instead, they are called in to the primary 
care centers or clinics to have it measured once or twice a 
month. For security reasons, which currently preclude the 
use of e-mail and mobile messaging, the healthcare providers 
spend a great deal of time calling patients on the telephone or 
sending them regular mail. This results in unnecessary visits 
if the values are normal, while, on the other hand, for 
patients whose values are abnormal, visits should have 
occurred earlier. Some patients measure their blood glucose 
themselves at home, but in many cases there is little or no 
support for recording and sharing their values with their 
healthcare providers.  
B. mHealth for people with T2D  
Our study, with its focus on people aged 65 and older 
who have been diagnosed with T2D, and healthcare teams 
working with this group of patients, eventually opened our 
eyes to issues of functional impairments due to aging (such 
as poor eyesight, stiff fingers, difficulties in remembering 
passwords or how to do things from one time to the next on a 
mobile phone), as well as to multiple comorbidity among an 
aging population. Managing a healthy lifestyle, for many of 
these people, involved not only managing T2D but also 
managing other health- and aging-related issues, making the 
situation in which they were expected to use mHealth 
services more complex than we had anticipated. Even 
healthy elderly patients who are diagnosed with T2D but are 
not simultaneously having to cope with other chronic 
diseases may have varying needs concerning mHealth 
services – and these individual needs could vary over time. 
Basically, the art of engaging end-users in the design, 
development and sustainable use of mHealth services hinges 
on identifying these users’ perceived needs and addressing 
them in ways that can make a difference in everyday life for 
the individual end-user. End-users bring valuable insights 
about user needs and use context which can inform not only 
design and development of mHealth services, but also 
choices concerning how these services might be introduced 
and implemented more successfully in a healthcare context. 
One of the people with T2D whom we interviewed 
mentioned that we should perhaps focus on “windows of 
opportunity” for providing mHealth for people with T2D, 
rather than clustering them all in one category and trying to 
reach them all, at all times. “When you are diagnosed with 
T2D,” he said, “it comes as a shock. For about 6 months, you 
are shaken and trying to adjust to living with this disease, 
which can potentially be fatal. During those 6 months, you 
are especially susceptible to trying to change your lifestyle.” 
Those 6 months, he suggested, would be the best time to 
introduce the mHealth services, because that is when the 
person diagnosed with T2D is looking for a lifeline. This 
brings us back to trying to develop ways to communicate 
with and understand the needs of people with different 
conditions, and to listen to their point of view.  
Even with great interest and motivation to use mobile 
services in home-based T2D healthcare, older people with 
T2D felt that they were encumbered by a lack of awareness, 
knowledge and support for self-management. One T2D 
patient we interviewed said: "For most patients who have 
T2D, it is not necessary to go for a check-up at the hospital 
very often, we can check blood glucose at home ourselves if 
we are taught to do so. In addition, we can measure our 
blood glucose at home whenever we don't feel well. If I find 
any values abnormal, I could communicate with the nurses 
as soon as possible." She suggested that there should be a 
technical support team with professionals who have 
knowledge, both of healthcare and diabetes care, and 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Information Technology (IT), to educate users before 
delivery of mHealth services. 
C. mHealth for healthcare support team 
In Sweden, the healthcare support team for patients with 
T2D includes healthcare providers, both in hospitals and 
primary healthcare centers, and informal caregivers, as well 
as family members. This support team was supposed to 
cooperate for providing patient-centered healthcare for T2D 
patients through mHealth services. However, from our study, 
we found that at least until now, the promotion of mHealth 
services is still coming from hospital healthcare workers. In 
our case, doctors or hospital nurses have been given the 
access right to the data recorded through the mobile 
application by the patient. In most situations, patients are 
suggested by the doctors to use the mobile application. The 
patients therefore get the impression that the healthcare 
provider should teach and support them when using mHealth 
services. One doctor in a diabetes center mentioned, "IT has 
developed so fast that if we ask our patients to try a new 
technology, like a mobile application, it seems that we also 
have the responsibility to teach them to use it, but, actually, 
we are not good at technology either.” The lack of 
knowledge and competence about IT risks reducing the 
enthusiasm about mHealth services over time.  
From the case study, we also found that each healthcare 
worker works with approximately 3–5 different IT systems 
in their daily work, and some amount of repeated work is 
involved. For example, identical information about a patient 
is updated manually in these different systems. Not only 
does this cause extra work and frustration, it is also a security 
risk in that the information may deviate across different 
systems. The main tool for digital communication between 
healthcare workers is an internal journal system that serves 
to share patients’ data among different healthcare providers. 
Due to security and privacy legislation and concerns, not all 
the data are shared by all the healthcare providers. Although 
most T2D patients were taken care of by other healthcare 
providers than hospital staff, such as primary healthcare 
center staff, or informal care givers, until now, at least in 
Blekinge, these groups of healthcare providers have no 
access to the T2D data recorded from mobile applications. 
These kinds of interoperability problems are another big 
challenge for mHealth services in Swedish healthcare.  
IV. 
STRATEGIES TO ENGAGE THE END-USERS IN MHEALTH 
SERVICES 
On the one hand, Sweden’s population is ageing; in 2040, 
nearly one in four Swedes will be 65 years or older [10]. On 
the other hand, Sweden aims to “be best in the world at using 
the opportunities offered by digitization and eHealth to make 
it easier for people to achieve good and equal health and 
welfare, and to develop and strengthen their own resources 
for increased independence and participation in the life of 
society [3]”. Therefore it is essential to provide social and 
health care to elderly people through digitization and 
eHealth. mHealth services, as one of the potentially effective 
ways, will play a significant role in future elderly healthcare. 
How to engage the end-users in mHealth services, especially 
mHealth for older people, for sustainable use, needs to be 
addressed and further explored. 
A. User-driven design method of mHealth services 
As we mentioned before, PD was our overarching 
research method in the Health in Hand project. One of the 
project goals has been to promote participatory design for 
mHealth services development. From our study, we found 
that PD fits quite well with the current patient-centric 
paradigm which is commonly referred to in nursing and 
caring for patients with chronic disease, e.g., T2D. PD in a 
healthcare context concerns not only the technical platform 
and solutions, but also the work practices in different 
healthcare organizations. To sustain long-term engagement 
in a patient-centric mHealth project, user-driven participation 
should, we argue, be moved from the margin to the center 
[11]. When the patients, such as older people with T2D, are 
engaged in co-design mHealth services, it enables them to 
learn more about their condition and about developing and 
sustaining a healthy lifestyle despite their chronic illness. It 
also allows them to have a say in deciding what kind of 
mHealth support they need and want, in a constructive 
dialogue with healthcare providers and other involved 
stakeholders. When designing a new mHealth service, it is 
often useful to consider whether the design goal can be 
achieved by fostering creative uses of services they already 
are familiar with and using. In the project, we could not just 
simply bring different new mHealth services to be tested and 
used in a clinical setting at the hospital or a primary 
healthcare center, as this would be adding to the frustration 
and heavy work load of the healthcare providers rather than 
supporting their work [12]. Instead, we chose a mHealth 
service which was already partly implemented at the hospital 
as a starting point for further prototyping to explore user 
needs and how they could be managed with a further 
enhanced mHealth service.  Although we mainly focused on 
healthcare workers on the T2D team and relatively healthy 
T2D patients, end-users with special needs should also be 
taken into account for early design phase participation.  
B. Professional education team to support 
Lack of IT knowledge of end-users seems to be a great 
challenge when it comes to user engagement in mHealth 
currently.  Not only elderly people mentioned this, but also 
healthcare providers were reluctant to engage with mHealth 
services due to what they perceived as their lack of IT 
knowledge. Patients expected the healthcare providers to 
teach them to use the mHealth service, but in most situations, 
the healthcare providers had neither knowledge nor time to 
do so. Most of them required more time to learn to use the 
new technology themselves. From this, we drew the 
conclusion that there is a need for some kind of a 
professional education team to educate and support the end-
users of mHealth services, especially concerning technical 
issues, but also concerning content and how to interpret 
various health indicators etc. Different educational programs 
should be designed to address different groups of end-users. 
A support center for mHealth services should also be set up 
when these services are delivered to large populations. 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. Strengthen end-users’ motivation of mHealth services  
In the future, concerning design of patient-centric 
mHealth services, strengthening the patients’ motivation is 
one of the key factors for achieving long-term use of the 
services. In many cases of chronic disease, patients are 
suggested to do physical exercise as a main method of 
controlling their condition. And one of the future needs of 
elderly care is effective preventive healthcare [10]. 
Gamification in mHealth services is one approach which is 
being tested. Mobile games have shown promise of being a 
successful way of influencing health behaviors recently [13].  
A successful mobile game for health, especially for older 
people, will not only influence the health behaviors, but also 
support elderly people in having fun by playing games. 
Normally, the factors affecting users’ motivation and 
engagement in games for entertainment depend on 
experienced game developers. For those games for health, 
we still need excellent game developers to design highly 
attractive games or game elements. Additionally, the input of 
healthcare providers and behavioral scientists will be 
essential to delivering an effective mHealth service [13].  
D. Knowledge sharing among healthcare providers 
Current Swedish eHealth services have, to some extent, 
achieved sharing of patients’ information among healthcare 
providers. To deliver an effective patient-centric and 
empathetic healthcare for older people, who often have more 
than one chronic disease, or complex health conditions, 
information sharing is not enough. Knowledge sharing, 
which is about transferring of ideas, experiences, skills, 
practices etc. among healthcare providers is needed. 
Knowledge sharing about what kinds of interaction works 
best in specific situations with a specific person among 
healthcare providers will help to cope with different special 
situations. It will not only improve the work practices of 
healthcare providers [14], but also increase the sustainable 
use of mHealth services by patients with different special 
conditions and in specific situations.  
V. 
CONCLUSION  
In this paper, we have introduced a Swedish case study 
from our recently finished research project “Health in Hand”, 
which is focused on transforming healthcare though mHealth 
services. We have listed several points based on lessons that 
we have learned from the case study. We conclude that, to 
promote mHealth services, sustaining end-users’ engagement 
is crucial. Form our experiences, we propose that applying 
user-driven design methods, having professional education 
about and support for use of mHealth services, improving 
users’ motivation through games and support for sharing 
knowledge among healthcare providers could make some 
contribution to high end-user engagement in mHealth 
services in the future.  
Digitalization of healthcare needs to be supported on all 
levels of health care organizations. There is also a need to 
reserve time and space for testing new ways of working. We 
have several projects in the planning stage on end-user 
engagement in mHealth services. In the future, the suggested 
strategies presented in this paper will be drawn up and 
further explored within these projects. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank all the healthcare professionals and staff at the 
Blekinge County hospital and the primary care centers, the 
Blekinge Diabetes Association and the people with T2D who 
took part in the Swedish case study of the Health in Hand 
project. We also gratefully acknowledge the grant from the 
Swedish Innovation Agency VINNOVA (#2013-04660). 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Eriksén, M. Georgsson, M. Hofflander, L. Nilsson, and J. 
Lundberg, “Health in hand: Putting mHealth design in context,” in 
2014 IEEE 2nd International Workshop on Usability and 
Accessibility Focused Requirements Engineering (UsARE), 2014, 
pp. 36–39. 
[2] 
“Type 
2-diabetes,” 
Diabetes.se. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
/diabetes/lar-om-diabetes/typer/typ-2/. [Accessed: 22-Feb-2018]. 
[3] “Vision for eHealth 2025,” Ministry of Health and Social 
Affairs, Sweden, Mar. 2016. 
[4] S. Kitsiou, G. Paré, M. Jaana, and B. Gerber, “Effectiveness of 
mHealth interventions for patients with diabetes: An overview of 
systematic reviews,” PLOS ONE, vol. 12, no. 3, p. e0173160, Mar. 
2017. 
[5] “International Diabetes Federation - What is diabetes.” 
[Online]. Available: https://www.idf.org/about-diabetes/what-is-
diabetes.html. [Accessed: 22-Feb-2018]. 
[6] W. H. Herman and P. Zimmet, “Type 2 diabetes: an epidemic 
requiring global attention and urgent action,” Diabetes Care, vol. 
35, no. 5, pp. 943–944, 2012. 
[7] “International Diabetes Federation. IDF Global Guideline for 
Managing Older People with Type 2 Diabetes.” [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.idf.org/e-library/guidelines/78-global-
guideline-for-managing-older-people-with-type-2-diabetes.html. 
[Accessed: 22-Feb-2018]. 
[8] B. Lindström, “Salutogenesis – an introduction.” [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.centrelearoback.org/assets/PDF/04_activites/clr-
GCPB121122-Lindstom_pub_introsalutogenesis.pdf. 
[Accessed: 
22-Feb-2018]. 
[9] A. J. Mahmud, E. Olander, S. Eriksén, and B. J. Haglund, 
“Health communication in primary health care-A case study of 
ICT development for health promotion,” BMC Med. Inform. Decis. 
Mak., vol. 13, no. 1, p. 17, 2013. 
[10] “Elderly care in Sweden,” sweden.se, 14-Jun-2013. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://sweden.se/society/elderly-care-in-sweden/. 
[Accessed: 14-Feb-2018]. 
[11] V. Righi, S. Sayago, A. Rosales, S. M. Ferreira, and J. Blat, 
“Co-designing with a community of older learners for over 10 
years by moving user-driven participation from the margin to the 
centre,” CoDesign, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 32–44, Jan. 2018. 
[12] S. Eriksén, M. Hofflander, L. Nilsson, C. Borg, M. 
Georgsson, and J. Lundberg, “Transforming Healthcare Delivery: 
ICT Design for Self-Care of Type 2 Diabetes,” Des. Self-Care 
Everyday Life, p. 17, 2014. 
[13] D. King, F. Greaves, C. Exeter, and A. Darzi, 
“‘Gamification’: Influencing health behaviours with games,” J. R. 
Soc. Med., vol. 106, no. 3, pp. 76–78, Mar. 2013. 
[14] S. S. R. Abidi, “Healthcare knowledge sharing: purpose, 
practices, and prospects,” in Healthcare Knowledge Management, 
Springer, 2007, pp. 67–86. 
 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

