A Qualitative Study of Parents` Experiences of Information Exchange 
between the Tertiary Health Service and the Child`s Local Support Team 
using Videoconference 
Merete Kristin Tschamper (MPhil)  
Dept. of children and youth, Division for Neuroscience, 
National Center for Epilepsy  
Oslo University Hospital  
Oslo, Norway 
E-mail: meretek@ous-hf.no 
Wenche Schrøder Bjorbækmo (PhD)                                   
Dep. of Health Science  
The University of Oslo  
Oslo, Norway 
E-mail: w.s.bjorbakmo@medisin.uio.no 
 
Abstract - In this study, four children with rare, epileptic 
condition 
including 
intellectual 
disability 
were 
interdisciplinary assessed in the National Center for Epilepsy 
(SSE). The results of the assessments were communicated to 
the children`s local support service using videoconference (VC) 
with the parents present. The purpose for this study was to 
obtain a deeper insight into parents` experiences with 
information exchange using VC. Methods: In-depth interviews 
were performed with five parents within a week after the VC. 
The generated material was analyzed with a thematic 
hermeneutic 
research 
approach. 
Results: 
The 
local 
participation increased from 2-6 in traditional face-to-face 
meetings to up to 22 participants in the VCs. The parents 
described how the increased participation ensured a direct, 
oral 
information 
exchange 
that 
prevented 
treatment 
misunderstandings. The parents were relieved from the 
responsibility to inform all professionals involved in the local 
community. In addition the parents suggested this increased 
the 
multidisciplinary 
collaboration 
and 
facilitated 
a 
comprehensive approach to the children`s complex situations. 
The parents experienced increased user-involvement in the 
process of arranging the VC compared to traditional face-to-
face consultants. Some parents had started to initiate VC 
themselves.  Conclusion: VC was considered a more potent tool 
for information exchange between providers than face-to-face 
meetings due to the increased local participation and that 
everyone 
was 
assured 
to 
get 
the 
same 
information 
simultaneously. However a crucial prerequisite seem to be that 
the professionals from the tertiary health service had clinical 
knowledge of the child and tailored the information exchanged 
according to each child and family`s needs.  
Keywords-Parent; chronic disease/illness; epilesy; disability; 
videoconference; patient education. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Epilepsy in combination with disability is a condition 
that causes various needs for long-term multidisciplinary 
support. Research show that parents with chronic ill children 
experiences the lack of information exchange between the 
child`s providers as one of the main stressors leading to 
inadequate treatment of the child [1]-[3]. Among other 
services SSE provides a nationwide and interdisciplinary 
assessment- and treatment service for people with rare 
epileptic conditions. A disease is defined rare in Europe 
when it affects less than1 in 2000 of the general population 
[4]. Each condition affects the patient individually and there 
is a need for tailored treatment. SSE, together with The 
National Center for rare, epilepsy related disorders (NK-SE), 
are legally required to educate the patients, their relatives, 
and the patient`s local support service in order to ensure 
optimal treatment [5][6]. Norway is aerially a relatively large 
country 
with 
a 
widely 
distributed 
population. 
Communication between patients and providers using VC 
bridge geographical distances and thus holds the potential to 
be cost-efficient with a broader multidisciplinary scope for 
information 
exchange 
than 
traditional 
face-to-face 
consultants [7]-[10]. Although SSE and NK-SE increasingly 
use VC to exchange information as an alternative to 
traditional face-to-face meetings, scant attention has been 
paid to the parents` experiences with VC as an arena to 
exchange information about their child`s condition and care 
[11]-[13]. There is a need for a deeper understanding of how 
parents of chronic ill children experiences information 
exchange using VC. A deeper insight into the parents` 
experiences may have implications for adjusting standard 
practice to better meet their needs. The findings are likely to 
be transferable beyond the current context. 
 
II. 
INTERDISCIPLINARY ASSESSMENT 
An interdisciplinary assessment in SSE normally 
contains 17 days of hospitalization. According to each 
child`s individual need, this might include a medical 
assessment performed by a pediatrician and a nurse specialist 
in epilepsy, a cognitive assessment performed by a 
psychologist and a special educator, a motor assessment 
performed by a physiotherapist and an occupational 
therapist. The parents also have the opportunity to consult a 
social worker while hospitalized for advice concerning legal 
rights for benefits and support. At the end of the 
hospitalization the results of the assessment, along with 
recommendations for treatment and educational interventions 
are communicated to the parents and the child`s local support 
service either in a meeting face-to-face at SSE or using VC.  
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

III. 
VIDEOCONFERENCE 
VC is a virtual way of meeting that can be used to 
exchange information, and provide support and care. The 
security of sensitive information is ensured through the 
Norwegian Health Net [14]. In this study the local 
participants met in VC rooms at the municipal Labour- and 
Welfare departments. The professionals from SSE or NK-SE 
participated from a VC-room at Oslo university Hospital. 
The VCs lasted from 1, 5 to 2, 5 hours. 
A. Participants in the VCs  
The parents participated in the VC concerning their 
child. They had the choice whether to participate while 
hospitalized at SSE or at home after discharge. The 
multidisciplinary professionals responsible for assessing 
each child participated from a VC-room at SSE.  
The special educators responsible for the educational 
assessment were responsible for arranging the VC in 
cooperation with the parents. The parents decided whom to 
invite locally. The local participants were multidisciplinary 
supporters from the children’s local support service. 
According to each child`s individual need, that might 
include teachers and assistants, municipal physiotherapists, 
health 
visitors, 
representatives 
from 
the 
municipal 
educational and psychological counseling service, social 
educators and assistants from respite care-homes. In one VC 
a grown up sibling, an aunt together with representatives 
from the municipal Labour-and Welfare department 
participated.  
B. Content of the VCs  
The results from the interdisciplinary assessments, 
together with treatment options, were presented and 
discussed with the local participants in the VC. Another goal 
for the information exchange was to discuss possible 
facilitation of the child`s environment to prevent seizures, 
contribute to optimal development and quality of life. The 
parents were present in the VC. According to practice they 
were informed about the results of the assessments in 
advance of the VC.  
 
IV. 
METHODS 
The empirical material stems from in-depth interviews 
exploring the parents’ experiences of the VC. The thematic 
hermeneutic analyses of the interview identified several 
themes of which three is presented in this article. 
A. Inclusion criterions 
The parents participating in the study have a child aged 
5-12 with a rare epileptic condition that include moderate to 
severe intellectual disability. The study included 5 parents 
who`s child had recently undergone an interdisciplinary 
assessment at SSE followed by an information exchange 
with the local support service using VC. In order to provide a 
nuanced description of specific cases, the parents fitting the 
inclusion criterions were strategically chosen consecutively 
as they were admitted to SSE. Only one parent had 
experienced information exchange using VC at SSE before. 
Three of the parents had experienced multiple traditional 
face-to-face meetings in SSE exchanging information with 
the child´s local support service. One of the children had 
been hospitalized in SSE for the first time. 
B. Collecting of data and analyses 
In-depth interviews were performed with four mothers 
and a father within a week after the VC. The interviewer did 
not attend the VCs. The interview guide had few and open 
questions that aimed to explore how the parents experienced 
the use of VC for information exchange. The interviews 
were transcribed verbatim and analyzed with a thematic 
hermeneutic research approach [15]. Three of the initial 
themes identified were: A) VC an efficient tool to exchange 
information 
between 
multidisciplinary 
providers 
B) 
Increased parental control and involvement C) The impact of 
the relationship with the professional arranging the VC.  
 
V. 
FINDINGS 
In the following, the results from three of the identified 
themes will be presented.  
A. VC an efficient tool to exchange information between 
multidisciplinary providers  
In the VC there were from 10 to 22 local participants 
compared to 2-6 in former face-to-face meetings at SSE. 
According to the parents, the direct information exchange 
and discussions between the professionals prevented 
treatment misunderstandings that occurred when the local 
support service only received written reports. In addition, 
the parents experienced an increased multidisciplinary 
collaboration that facilitated a comprehensive approach to 
the child`s complex situation. Finally the parents saved time 
not having to attain meetings explaining the reports from 
SSE to the local providers.  
B. Increased parental control and involvement 
The parents experienced increased control and user-
involvement in the process of arranging the VC. As almost 
all the invited local professionals participated, the scope for 
the information exchange widened. Some of the parents 
actively used the VC as an arena to inform not only the 
providers of care and education, but also other providers 
like social workers, family members or the principal on the 
local school.  Some parents had started to initiate VC 
themselves by contacting personnel at SSE or NK-SE.  
C. The impact of the relationship with the professional 
arranging the VC  
The parents suggested that the positive and trusting 
relationship they had established with the professional 
arranging the VC was important for the quality of the 
information exchange. They also considered it crucial that 
the professional from SSE and NK-SE had clinical 
knowledge of their child in addition to special scientific 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

knowledge of the rare, epileptic conditions in order to tailor 
the information to the child and family`s needs. 
 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
For the parents in this study the most important issue was 
that the VC increases the local participation. The increased 
local participation enabled a direct information exchange 
between providers from different levels of the health 
service, school and social services in a way that would not 
have been possible without this technology. Thus The VC 
offers an arena for the participants to relate, share 
experiences and co-shape their knowledge of the child´s 
situation and needs. The possibility for the local providers to 
ask clarifying questions directly to the professionals 
prevented misunderstandings in the follow-up treatment.  
However, this outcome seemed to depend upon the 
quality of the interaction created between the participants in 
each VC. As the interactions in the VC are dynamic, the 
parents experienced the quality of the interaction differently 
from each other. To ensure that misunderstandings in the 
follow up treatment are prevented, the participants need to 
contribute and ask question – this requires a dialogue. 
Without dialogue the VC becomes an arena simply for 
information transfer – not for information exchange.  
Whereas some of the VCs in this study seem to have a 
relaxed ambiance where the local participants asked 
questions and contributed, others seem to have been tense, 
with less interaction. The parents suggest the local 
participants might feel insecure talking in the virtual space 
in front of a camera with the whole local support team 
present. The VCs with the most dialogue seemed to be the 
ones were the participant communicated at regular basis 
using VC.  The communication in the VC where the 
participant met for the first time a mother described as “a 
monologue.” In this VC the local participants listened 
without responding.  If the local providers do not provide 
any feedback, it is impossible for the participants from SSE 
or NK-SE to correct potentially incorrect impressions. Thus, 
it is possible that the VC might create, not prevent, 
misunderstandings. 
The parents’ relationship with the providers seemed 
important for their experiences of the quality of the 
information exchange. It seemed crucial for the parents to 
have a trusting relationship with the professional arranging 
the VC, and for them to share the same opinion regarding 
the child`s condition. According to the parents, the 
professionals organizing the VC recognized and used the 
parents’ experiential knowledge of the child as a basis for 
the information exchange. The parents’ opinion and the 
professionals’ clinical understanding of the child´s situation 
seem to have united during the hospitalization in SSE/SS.  
The parents explained that they trusted the professionals 
at SSE or NK-SE to describe the child`s needs in a tailored 
way. They also appreciated the way they were included in 
all stages of organizing the VC. This, and the fact that they 
decided whom to invite locally, seemed to increase the 
parents’ sense of control of the information being 
exchanged in the VC.  
The parents also appreciated that the child was 
interdisciplinary assessed during one hospitalization. This 
facilitated a comprehensive approach to the child and 
family`s needs.  
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
The parents considered the VC a more potent tool for 
information exchange between providers than face-to-face 
meetings due to the increased local participation. However a 
crucial prerequisite seem to be that the professionals from 
SSE and NK-SE had clinical knowledge of the child and 
tailored the information exchange according to the child and 
family`s needs. In this qualitative study the sample was not 
designed to be statistically representative. However the 
findings are consistent with other research concerning the 
use of VC in information exchange for patient with long-
term conditions [7]-[10], [16]. The importance of a trusting 
relationship between the patients and the providers for the 
interaction to be successful is also consistent with previous 
research [17][18].  There is a need for further studies of the 
conditions that needs to be present in order to ensure the 
quality of the information exchange using VC. The long-
term effect on the treatment of the child and whether the use 
of VC reduces hospitalizations also needs to be investigated.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the parents and the providers who 
participated in this study. The study was conducted in 
collaboration with The National center for rare, epilepsy 
related disorders, Oslo University Hospital and Solberg 
School, Norway.  
 
REFERENCES 
  
[1] Gundersen T. 'One wants to know what a chromosome is': the 
internet as a coping resource when adjusting to life parenting 
a child with a rare genetic disorder. Sociology of health & 
illness. 2011;33(1):81 
[2] Grut L, and Kvam M. Facing ignorance: people with rare 
disorders and their experiences with public health and welfare 
services. Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research. 
2013;15(1):20-32  
[3] Pelentsov LJ, Fielder AL, Laws TA, and Esterman AJ. The 
supportive care needs of parents with a child with a rare 
disease: results of an online survey.(Report). BMC Family 
Practice. 2016;17(1) 
[4] What 
is 
a 
rare 
disease? 
[Available 
from: 
http://www.rarediseaseday.org/article/what-is-a-rare-disease  
[5] Pasient-brukerrettighetsloven. 
Pasient- 
og 
brukerrettighetsloven. 
LOV-1999-07-02-63: 
Helse- 
og 
omsorgsdepartementet; 1999 [Sist endret: LOV-2014-06-20-
41 
fra 
01.01.2015:[Available 
from: 
https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/1999-07-02-63 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[6] Spesialisthelsetjenesteloven. 
Spesialisthelsetjenesteloven. 
LOV-1999-07-02-61 Oslo: Helse- og omsorgsdepartementet; 
1999 
[Available 
from: 
https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/1999-07-02-61 
[7] Cameron MPL, Ray R, and Sabesan S. Physicians’ 
perceptions of clinical supervision and educational support 
via videoconference: a systematic review. Journal of 
telemedicine and Telecare. 2014, Vol. 20(5) 272–281 
[8] Lindberg B, Nilsson C, Zotterman D, Soderberg S, and Skar 
L. Using information communication technology in home 
care for communication between patients, family members, 
and 
healthcare 
professionals: 
a 
systematic 
review. 
International journal of telemedicine and applications. 
2013;2013:31 
[9] Hagen 
K. 
Users’ 
Experiences 
with 
Clinical 
Video 
Conferencing at a Resource Centre for Rare Disorders 
[Master]: University of Tromsø, Norway; 2010 
[10] Gentles SJ, Lokker C, and McKibbon KA. Health information 
technology to facilitate communication involving health care 
providers, caregivers, and pediatric patients: a scoping review. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research. 2010;12(2):e22 
[11] Chi NC, and Demiris G. A systematic review of telehealth 
tools and interventions to support family caregivers. Journal 
of Telemedicine and Telecare. 2015;21(1):37-44 
[12] McLean S, Protti D, and Sheikh A. Telehealthcare for long 
term 
conditions. 
BMJ: 
British 
Medical 
Journal. 
2011;342(7793):374-8 
[13] Åkesson K, Saveman BI, and Nilsson G. Health care 
consumers' experiences of information communication 
technology: A summary of litterature. International Journal of 
Medical Informatics. 2007;76(9):633-45 
[14] Norsk 
Helsenett 
SF. 
[Available 
from: 
https://www.nhn.no/helsenettet/video/Sider/default.aspx  
[15] Braun V, and Clark V. Successful qualitative research: a 
practical guide for beginners. LA: SAGE. 2013 
[16] Steel K, Cox D, and Garry H.Therapeutic videoconferencing 
interventions for the treatment of long-term conditions. 
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 2011;17(3) 109-117 
[17] Wade V, and Eliott J. The role of the champion in telehealth 
service development: a qualitative analysis. J Telemed 
Telecare 2012;18:490–492 
[18] Carlisle K, and Warren R. A qualitative case study of 
telehealth for in-home monitoring to support the management 
of type 2 diabetes. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare  
2013;19(7) 372–375 
 
 
1)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

