Developing Nations’ eHealth and Telemedicine: Lessons Learned, Especially for 
Africa 
S. Wynchank 
Telemedicine & mHealth Division 
 Medical Research Council 
Cape Town, South Africa 
SWynchank@mrc.ac.za 
Jill Fortuin 
Telemedicine & mHealth Division 
Medical Research Council 
Cape Town, South Africa 
Jill.Fortuin@mrc.ac.za 
 
Abstract—Telemedicine is being steadily introduced into 
African and other developing countries.  The associated 
problems encountered often differ markedly from those in 
developed countries and merit study to facilitate application in 
all emerging nations.  An overview and analysis of lessons 
learned from such pilot and other telemedicine projects is 
given in this communication and the consequent application to 
future programmes will be outlined.  From this survey 
telemedicine and eHealth projects are deemed appropriate for 
developing nations, if allowance is made for their special 
conditions in the projects’ strategic planning.  
 
Keywords-component; telemedicine; eHealth; developing 
country   
  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Developing nations are starting to apply increasing 
numbers of telemedicine (TM) and eHealth projects to 
provide partial solutions to their problems of providing 
appropriate public health service.  This provision must serve 
many socio-economically deprived persons living in remote 
rural areas, with poor infrastructure, often far from doctors, 
hospitals and specialist medical services.  Very frequently 
few funds are available for any health services and the 
health-care personnel often lack experience and knowledge 
of information and communication technology (ICT).  This 
challenging base necessitates careful thought in initiating 
TM projects, normally inspired by, or in collaboration with, 
advanced nations‘ TM.  eHealth is the use of ICT to convey 
medical information and permit certain medical services. 
Since it can involve many aspects of health services, such as 
health 
education, 
management, 
promotion, 
disease 
prevention, research and relevant population data collection, 
it is sometimes considered a broader activity than TM, 
which has a generally accepted definition as concerned with 
medical activity, or a function related to healthcare practice, 
where participants are not at the same physical location and 
they communicate using ICT.   
The general ICT status of a developing nation is no 
guarantee that a country‘s eHealth will be adequate. A Thai 
comment on its eHealth foundations describes them as 
inadequate, even though ICT applications are in general of a 
high standard and widespread throughout Thailand [1]. But 
whatever the overall ICT situation, TM practitioners must 
have appropriate knowledge of ICT.  This often lacks and in 
both Venezuela [2] and India [3] it has been noted that such 
basic knowledge frequently is deficient in primary health-
care centres.  There is a similar situation in South Africa 
where ICT expertise is overall of a standard comparable to 
most Western nations.  However its distribution (as is true 
of the distribution of public health service facilities) is 
concentrated in urban regions.  In rural areas primary 
health-care is usually supplied by clinics (over 4000 in all), 
directed by nursing sisters.  Their ICT experience is often 
woefully inadequate for effective operation of a TM link, 
for there is currently insufficient material in the national 
nursing curriculum.  This situation is reflected in most 
developing countries.  When the eHealth of a region of 
emerging nations is studied, the lack of effective inter-
nation TM links can be due to a deficiency in fruitful 
contacts between the relevant researchers, practitioners and 
policy makers. This was the conclusion of a Canadian study 
of the TM in 12 East Asian countries [4].  Although many 
TM projects have been reported in developing countries, 
most are not sustainable. For example the South African 
Minister of Health announced in 2010 that of 86 TM 
projects initiated, only 38 were functioning, because of 
inadequate connectivity and insufficient ―coordination and 
management of the necessary work‖ [5]. In India there is a 
similar sentiment and in part this is because of inadequate 
evaluation and analysis of TM, for ―no studies have been 
conducted to identify precise reasons why eHealth solutions 
have not been adopted in the Indian primary health centres‖ 
[3]. Evaluation of such projects is universally acknowledged 
as a very difficult undertaking, although a suggestion has 
been made that application of a suitable mathematical model 
may aid in providing useful information [3].  Another 
difficult, though necessary, consideration is the question of 
quantitative cost benefits and cost effectiveness.  Although 
some economic advantages of TM are clear, such as reduced 
transport costs for patient referral and obtaining radiology 
and pathology opinions easily, in developing and other 
nations, elucidation of economic impacts is often not 
straightforward.  Reasons for their complexity include the 
difficult estimation of cost advantages of TM, which 
provides services totally unavailable previously.   
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

This paper considers recent, selected, representative 
eHealth activities in developing countries, emphasising 
Africa, with a view to establishing principles for successful 
introduction of specific programmes.  To do so there are 
considerations of collaborations with developed countries, 
how and why evaluations are essential, contributions of 
technology and distance education in medicine.     
 
II. eHEALTH PLANNING FOR A DEVELOPING 
COUNTRY 
 
      A crucial attitude for the introduction of TM anywhere 
is to respond to ―the pull of needs, not the push of supply‖ 
[6].  Regrettably in emerging countries some donor nations, 
which manufacture TM equipment or individual vendor 
companies, may encourage, or insist upon, purchases of 
unsuitable 
devices 
and 
render 
the 
TM 
projects 
unsustainable. So attention should be paid to ―local experts, 
rather than external commentators‖ when disagreement 
occurs [6].  All potential stakeholders should be involved, 
for obstacles to successful eHealth can be ―as simple as 
ignorance or as complex as political or national lack of 
vision and leadership‖ [7].  An example of extensive 
ignorance comes from a survey of Libyan physicians 
concerning TM.  Those ‗confused‘ or ‗unaware‘ in 2008 
were respectively 54% and 15% [8].  In such cases 
corrective action must be taken.  A useful and most 
acceptable first application of TM is often the provision of a 
second opinion, as was found in the UAE in 2007 [9]   
When a developing country TM network is being planned, it 
is important to consider any existing regional networks of 
all forms of health-care and to coordinate them [10].  An 
example of where this was not done sufficiently well exists 
in South Africa (which has the world‘s highest number of 
HIV infected persons) where some of the 9 provincial 
databases for HIV patient information, etc., were found to 
be incompatible and unable to exchange data [11].  This 
clearly can be remedied, but only after considerable and 
unnecessary expense and effort.  
        An overall strategy to set up a TM project is first to 
identify the service or other activity required in terms of 
needs, then to commence properly controlled pilot studies to 
establish feasibility and to quantify health-care benefits, if 
practical, and with these data to estimate the consequences 
of large scale deployment, in terms of cost, benefits, etc 
[12].  Often, as found in Pakistan, there will be a need for 
eHealth readiness tools and an appropriate ―process of 
change management‖ [13].  Another approach was used in 
the Balkans after 10 years‘ of war, which destroyed much of 
the existing medical system [14].  An initial healthcare 
assessment, an e-learning programme and 7 years‘ 
experience with a virtual hospital, together were confirmed 
as very successful [15].  Objectives of a TM project should 
be to delineate it in terms of small modules and ―to keep the 
deliverables within sight‖ [16].  In all nations when there are 
eHealth programmes set up, licensure and practice 
regulations must be reviewed for all those health 
professions, which are involved [17].  However although in 
China there are now 3 large, wide-ranging TM networks 
functioning [18], there have not been any resultant changes 
in legislature [19], which could affect teleconsultations.  
These Chinese projects are associated with extensive 
medical distance learning programmes administered by 13 
medical universities, in which 1.6 million persons had 
participated by 2010.  In contrast to the teleconsultation 
situation, the distance learning is controlled by appropriate 
legislation and the necessary accreditation [19].   
 
III. NORTH-SOUTH COLLABORATION 
 
        A frequent way for developing countries to enter the 
TM world is to collaborate with a nation that already has 
established TM.  This contrasts with the way TM initially 
grew in developed nations, where there was no networking 
with foreign centres of excellence, as is indicated in a 
German-Estonian project [20].  The European Union has 
such an agreement with India and this emphasises distance 
medical education.  However one difference between the 
two parties is that the participating European healthcare and 
TM are usually public while the Indian partners are mainly 
private and there are consequent European ―sensitivities 
associated with commercialising healthcare‖. [21].   A wide 
range of disciplines has benefitted from such initial 
mentoring.  These include surgical pathology, between Italy 
and Zambia [22], dermatology between USA and Egypt 
[23], paediatric neuro-oncology between Canada and Jordan 
[24], pathology between Germany and Iran [25] and 
retinopathy diagnosis and care between USA and Peru [26].  
Important points are that for the Peruvian project non-
ophthalmologists were trained to provide images, the 
Jordanians found ―videoconferencing is a feasible and 
practical twinning tool in paediatric neuro-oncology with a 
potentially major impact on patient care‖ [24] and the 
Egyptian participants needed only a 5Mp mobile phone 
camera and access to Email.  This gave about 75% 
agreement with face to face consultations and was the first 
report of m-teledermatology.  All these projects were 
successful.  An extensive Swiss TM partnership, the RAFT 
project, was initiated in 2000 by the University of Geneva, 
with collaboration from UNESCO and the WHO, as a 
French Language African Telemedicine Network in Mali.  It 
was rapidly extended to 17 other Francophone African 
countries and then more slowly to 5 English speaking 
African nations.  It links 45 healthcare institutions (mainly 
tertiary and district hospitals) allowing a wide range of tele-
education interactive courses and teleconsultations and also 
supports medical laboratory quality control support, 
cooperative data bases, satellite enabled rural TM and tele-
echography.  It uses the iPath platform for pathology and 
other asynchronous consultations, mainly for difficult cases.  
The RAFT network has proved sustainable for individual 
healthcare districts, with 50 000 to 200 000 inhabitants [27].   
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

        When any form of healthcare is transferred between 
different nations, cultural differences must be taken into  
\consideration.  Even between two western nations this was 
demonstrated as essential after a phone based USA project 
for chronic care was made available in the UK and Italy. In 
both the USA and UK the use of phone and care managers 
proved successful, but in Italy additional face to face 
consultations proved essential for cultural reasons [28].  
Chronic conditions account for about 60% of deaths 
worldwide and, according to the WHO, are largely 
preventable So since mobile phone usage in Africa and 
other developing areas is increasing very rapidly it is likely 
that 
such 
programmes, 
with 
appropriate 
cultural 
modifications, will be introduced there too, for they both 
significantly improved health and reduced need of other 
medical facilities.     
 
IV. SOUTH-SOUTH COLLABORATIONS 
 
      The pan-African e-Network, an extensive TM network 
linking Indian and African medical institutions, mainly 
concerned 
with 
tele-education 
but 
also 
with 
teleconsultations, is described in the next section.  There are 
also some Indian TM links, dealing with tele-education, to 
emerging countries in South Asia.  A smaller Chinese 
eHealth programme is planned with Africa, but it has not 
been formalised yet.  The Balkans eHealth network, 
mentioned above, is active in Kosova, Albania, Macedonia 
and Montenegro and includes healthcare assessment tele-
education 
and 
establishing 
national 
TM 
networks.  
Extensions to other nearby nations are planned [14].  South 
Africa has a few individual links to nearby nations and more 
are planned.  However there is also a regional network being 
established 
to 
make 
available 
surveillance 
for 
communicable diseases (HIV, TB, etc) and notification.  
This results from cooperation with the Southern African 
Development Community, the African Development Bank 
and WHO/AFRO.  The power of such a surveillance 
network has been proven on a much smaller scale, with 
previous success of an Indian Ocean Island TM network, 
which provided early recognition of an outbreak of bubonic 
plague in Madagascar and so prevented an epidemic. 
 
V. TECHNOLOGY 
 
      India, alone amongst emerging nations, has a satellite, 
―exclusively for purposes of healthcare‖ [29] and this is 
used in an ambitious south-south TM project, the pan-
African e-Network, associating India with 47 of the 54 
nations in the African Union.  It involves 5 medical 
universities for tele-education and 15 super speciality 
hospitals in India.  Participants in Africa are 4 medical 
universities for tele-education, 45 learning centres, 4 super 
speciality hospitals plus 40 other hospitals.  Currently there 
is 1 hour per day for teleconsultations, which will be 
available for 5 years and so far $125 million have been 
spent on this project [30].  A lesser TM collaboration, which 
exists with emerging South Asian nations, is concentrating 
on distance learning and the provision of digital medical 
libraries [31].  TM equipment used in advanced countries is 
often insufficiently robust for use in remote regions of 
developing countries and this is an important consideration 
when setting up TM links.      
        Electronic medical records (EMRs) have greatly aided 
effective practice of medicine, especially when associated 
with TM.  However it is not necessary to invest in elaborate 
and costly software to set up an EMR data base.  A home-
made, modular and effective system has been described in 
Serbia [32] and another for use in primary health-care 
facilities in Indonesia, that uses only open source software 
[33].  As everywhere in the developing world, the reliability 
of electrical power supplies is important, with ways of 
coping with power outages are often required, as has been 
reported from Haiti, for a HIV patient data base [34] 
       As mentioned, evaluation of any TM project is usually 
difficult to do and especially so in developing countries.  
But sometimes there are clear benefits indicated.  One such 
is the reduction of the burden of eye disease in South Africa, 
as the result of a collaborative project with the UK [35].  
More typically an extensive review of 43 projects involving 
650 institutions, which have served over half a million 
patients in Colombia found that although ―many projects 
seem to have had a positive effect, none of them had been 
rigorously evaluated‖ [3].  Even in the USA, whose eHealth 
activities are legion and have inspired and parented many 
projects in developing countries, when 250 eHealth 
programmes were examined it was concluded that they 
needed a detailed evaluation to determine their impact on 
quality, safety and efficiency and how to ensure such impact 
could be positive, in terms of value and sustainability  [36].     
 
VI. TELE-MEDICAL EDUCATION 
 
      Tele medical education can range widely from use of 
minimal web-based tools to virtual reality and a 
telepresence-based collaborative learning environment and 
even the simplest techniques have proven very useful indeed 
in developing nations.  Indian policy in this respect is to 
ensure that use of the Indian satellite and free bandwidth 
supplied by the government, will significantly aid social 
development through eHealth [37].  In Australia there is 
much use of such training for all types of allied health 
professionals working in remote areas, who previously 
learned on-the-job.  A videoconferencing programme, 
initially intended for therapy assistants and extended to 
others, has proved successful and it indicated that a 
standardised qualification is frequently not the best 
approach for therapy assistants [38].  Necessary flexibility 
in training can be built into distance learning programmes 
and this can be extended elsewhere.  The RAFT tele-
education service is now available for 16 hours monthly, 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

with an average of 18 institutions participating per course.  
About 75% of the courses are now produced in Africa and 
there have been over 300 courses offered since 2003.  
Recent RAFT educational activities include the training of 
remotely located non-radiologist healthcare workers in use 
of ultrasound [39] and successful use of a computerised 
patient simulator in continuing medical education for health 
professionals as part of a pilot study [40]. The simulator has 
been appropriately adapted for African usage. Many other 
tele medical education programmes have been successfully 
completed throughout the world and some in developing 
countries have been reviewed elsewhere, together with an 
analysis of their benefits [41].  There is a general consensus 
that tele-education is a very valuable and practical 
application of eHealth techniques in developing countries.    
  
VII. DISCUSSION 
       There are shortages of doctors, nurses and other allied 
healthcare professionals in developing countries, especially 
in Africa. This presents great difficulties in establishing and 
maintaining acceptable healthcare and is an important 
matter with serious consequences.  Also available funds and 
health associated infrastructure are often lacking and serious 
diseases are prevalent there.  eHealth is considered an 
important means of alleviating this dismal situation.  But it 
is not usual for developing nations to have a general eHealth 
strategy, particularly in Africa, so experience from previous 
work can be beneficial.  Since there are few local funds for 
capital costs to set up TM, the approximately 300 eHealth 
projects now underway in Africa usually receive external 
funds.  So it is rare for them to have built-in sustainability or 
scalability.  Many have started as research projects and so 
will probably last only as long as the donor funds remain 
available.  Few African TM activities are funded by their 
governments.  Hence it is clear that before an eHealth 
project is introduced, there must be careful planning to 
avoid unsustainability, with all potential participants to be 
consulted [42].  In developing countries appropriate legal 
and regulatory issues related to TM must be considered 
[43], but this has not always been done.  In China, with 
major eHealth activity, there is virtually no specific 
legislation concerning TM, although in contrast for over a 
decade there has been strict control concerning tele-
education and necessary accreditation [19].   However a 
detailed treatment of legislation, ethics, confidentiality, etc., 
will be given elsewhere.   
       The medical conditions managed by emerging nations‘ 
TM are varied and naturally they often tend to concentrate 
on those conditions most prevalent there (e.g., HIV, TB, 
malaria and other infectious conditions).  These often differ 
from those of developed nations, but medical afflictions 
associated with modern western life are also steadily 
increasing throughout the world (e.g,. cardiovascular and 
neoplastic 
conditions, 
non-communicable 
illnesses 
reflecting life style, etc.).  These, and many rarer medical 
problems, have benefitted from TM.  A drawback in Indian 
oncology care is poor infrastructure and teaching.  There is 
improvement for this in the Uttar Pradesh province of India 
(where over 100 000 new oncology patients present 
annually and about 70% of them need radiotherapy), 
according to the results of a recent 2 year audit of a 
videoconference based tele-education scheme for registrars 
[44].  TM can also be most effective in out-patient 
pulmonary medicine.  A videoconferencing link with a 
telenurse 
resulted 
in 
satisfactory 
remote 
physical 
examination and management of 92% of patients who 
presented at the remote site [45].  There is recent interest in 
neuropsychiatric disorders, which account for over 20% of 
adult global disease.  One form of coping with this is due to 
consultative-liaison 
psychiatry 
(―the 
psychiatric 
subspeciality devoted to practice of psychiatry in non-
psychiatric settings‖.)  After a pilot introduction using non-
physician mental health-care providers in rural South 
Australia who liaise with psychiatrists using telepsychiatry, 
this was found to be a feasible form of care.  Then it was 
successfully introduced into Ethiopia, to aid training of 
mental health-care providers and to offer a rudimentary 
psychiatric service [46]. A recent additional important 
finding, from rural California [47] is that a pilot 
asynchronous telepsychiatric service has been shown to be 
feasible, with clear relevance for developing countries [48].      
       The need for a specific eHealth project must be 
unambiguously identified and its aims scrupulously 
detailed.  Equally essential are the practical matters of 
ensuring thorough preparation and training of all personnel 
involved and that technical and other backup are made 
available, while the project continues.  A local champion is 
an ideal part of its management, as is prevention of the 
impression that the project will simply increase the 
workload, without additional remuneration.  (The latter 
perception is a frequent consequence of inadequate 
preparation of those associated with the TM project.)  An 
audit of the pre-TM situation is also necessary, if practical, 
in order to facilitate later appraisal.  After the introduction it 
is necessary to monitor progress.  These injunctions are 
related to lessons learned from projects mentioned and 
many others, which confirm this experience and have been 
described elsewhere [41].   
      Telemedical disciplines of a developing country eHealth 
project frequently differ from those of wealthier nations, 
which now usually have an emphasis on sophisticated 
radiology, access to patients‘ EMRs, home care and 
teleconsultations seeking specialist opinions for those in 
remote areas.  All these have a place in poor countries, 
where there is usually more concern to support primary 
health-care, which, before the advent of a TM facility, was 
rudimentary or often absent.  In South Africa, for example, 
most rural health-care is provided by simple clinics staffed 
by nurses, perhaps with an assistant.  Such clinics are visited 
rarely or never by a doctor.  Transport facilities for medical 
consultations are often poor and expensive with the 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

destination distant, perhaps over a hundred km.  So TM is 
seen by the government as an important aid to improve the 
situation. Tele-education is another valuable eHealth 
activity, which can be commenced soon after the 
establishment of TM links.   
      Benefits obtained from a developing country‘s TM 
project in its early stages can include the provision of 
second opinions [49].  But even when the project is running 
it often does not result in a general increase in referral rates 
and only about 1/100 of 1% of the potential demand for 
those in developing countries who could benefit from TM 
are believed to do so [49].  Various explanations for this 
have been given and include the professional participants 
being overworked and too busy to refer, or their fear of 
losing control of their patients‘ care.  This can possibly be 
countered 
in 
developing 
countries 
by 
vigorous 
demonstration of the results of better training and having 
eHealth networks within the country, which indubitably 
improve health outcomes, are cost effective and sustainable 
[11].  Lessons learned for application to future programmes 
are many and, as sketched above, include thorough 
preparation, adaptation of equipment to local needs, 
appropriate choice of eHealth applications, inclusion of 
distance learning and provision for monitoring.  eHealth has 
been shown to be a complex subject and to ensure its 
success the factors which must be considered in developing 
countries (and elsewhere) include primarily healthcare 
benefits, but also sustainability, scalability, costs, careful 
consideration of local needs and customs, safety and 
effectiveness.  Considerations of all these factors must be 
part of the planning and execution of early stages of any 
eHealth project to determine that it will succeed.  Taking 
note of all this can ensure that eHealth has a bright future in 
developing countries.   
 
VIII. 
CONCLUSION 
 
       To avoid the failure of a developing country‘s eHealth 
project, very careful preparation must be made, to ensure it 
meets a valid need, is sustainable and appropriately 
monitored.  Then it is clear that projects appropriate for 
emerging nations can be successful in their specific 
situations, which may differ from those of more wealthy and 
technically advanced countries.   
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
B. Kijsanayotin, N. Kasitipradith, and S.Pannarunothai, 
―eHealth in Thailand: the current status,‖ Stud Health Technol 
Inform. 2010;160(Pt 1):376-80.  
[2] 
A.Zambrano, M. Huerta, M. Diaz, and T. Vivas, 
―Telemedicine network physical connection design for remote 
areas. Case Baruta—El Hatillo,‖ Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol 
Soc. 2008;2008:759-62. 
[3] 
S. 
Chattopadhyay, 
―A 
framework 
for 
studying 
perceptions of rural healthcare staff and basic ICT support for e-
health use: an Indian experience,‖ Telemed J E Health. 2010 Jan-
Feb;16(1):80-8.   
[4] 
S. Varghese, and R.E. Scott, ―Categorizing the telehealth 
policy response of countries and their implications for 
complementarity of telehealth policy,‖ Telemed J E Health. 2004 
Spring;10(1):61-9.   
[5] 
A. Motsoaledi. ―Opening remarks,‖ 1st South African 
Telemedicine Conference‖, Sept 2010, Cape Town, South Africa.   
 [6] 
S. M. Edworthy, ―Telemedicine in developing countries: 
May have more impact than in developed countries,‖ BMJ. 2001 
September 8; 323(7312): 524–525. 
[7] 
R. Latifi, ―The do's and don't's when you establish 
telemedicine and e-health (not only) in developing countries,‖ Stud 
Health Technol Inform. 2008;131:39-43.   
[8] 
R. Wootton, and M. L.Bonnardot, ―In what circumstances 
is telemedicine appropriate in the developing world?‖ JRSM Short 
Rep. 2010 Oct 1;1(5):37.   
[9] 
N. Al-Qirim, ―Realizing telemedicine advantages at the 
national level: cases from the United Arab Emirates,‖ Telemed J E 
Health. 2007 Oct;13(5):545-55.  
[10] 
J. M. Overhage, L. Evans, and J. Marchibroda, 
―Communities' readiness for health information exchange: the 
National Landscape in 2004,‖ J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2005 Mar-
Apr;12(2):107-12.  
[11] 
T. Sørensen, U. Rivett, and J. Fortuin, ―A review of ICT 
systems for HIV/AIDS and anti-retroviral treatment management 
in South Africa,‖ J Telemed Telecare. 2008;14(1):37-41.  
[12] 
R. Wootton, ―The possible use of telemedicine in 
developing countries,‖ J Telemed Telecare. 1997;3(1):23-6.  
[13] 
S. Khoja, R. Scott, and S. Gilani, ―E-health readiness 
assessment: promoting "hope" in the health-care institutions of 
Pakistan,‖ World Hosp Health Serv. 2008;44(1):36-8.  
[14] 
Doarn CR, et al., ―Third intensive Balkan telemedicine 
and e-health seminar: current principles and practices of 
telemedicine and e-health--clinical applications and evidence-
based outcomes,‖ Telemed J E Health. 2009 May;15(4):379-86.  
[15] 
R. Latifi, "‘Initiate-build-operate-transfer‘ - a strategy for 
establishing sustainable 
telemedicine programs not only in the developing countries,‖ Stud 
Health Technol Inform. 2011;165:3-10.  
[16] 
S. P. Sood, ―Implementing telemedicine technology: 
lessons from India,‖ World Hosp Health Serv. 2004;40(3):29-30.  
[17] 
S. Hardin, and D. Langford, ―Telehealth's impact on 
nursing and the development of the interstate compact,‖ J Prof 
Nurs. 2001 Sep-Oct;17(5):243-7. . 
[18] 
Z. Wang, and H. Gu, ―A review of telemedicine in 
China,‖ J Telemed Telecare. 2009;15(1):23-7.  
[19] 
J. Zhao, Z. Zhang, H. Guo, L. Ren, S. Chen, 
―Development and recent achievements of telemedicine in China,‖ 
Telemed J E Health. 2010 Jun;16(5):634-8.  
[20] 
F. Köhler, et al., ―Health telematics/telemedicine in the 
republic of Estonia,‖ Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2004 Apr 30;129 
Suppl 1:S17-20.  
[21] 
R. Chanda, ―India-EU relations in health services: 
prospects and challenges,‖ Global Health. 2011 Feb 10;7(1):1.  
[22] 
F. Pagni, F. Bono, C. Di Bella, A. Faravelli, and A. 
Cappellini,  ―Virtual surgical pathology in underdeveloped 
countries: the Zambia Project,‖ Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2011 
Feb;135(2):215-9.   
[23] 
K. Tran, et al., ―Mobile teledermatology in the 
developing world: implications of a feasibility study on 30 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Egyptian patients with common skin diseases,‖ J Am Acad 
Dermatol. 2011 Feb;64(2):302-9.  
[24] 
I.Qaddoumi,et al., ―Impact of telemedicine on pediatric 
neuro-oncology in a developing country: the Jordanian-Canadian 
experience,‖ Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2007 Jan;48(1):39-43.  
[25] 
M. Mireskandari, G. Kayser, P. Hufnagl, T. Schrader, and 
K. Kayser, ‖Teleconsultation in diagnostic pathology: experience 
from Iran and Germany with the use of two European 
telepathology servers,‖ J Telemed Telecare. 2004;10(2):99-103.  
[26] 
A.H. Skalet, et al., ―Telemedicine screening for 
retinopathy of prematurity in developing countries using digital 
retinal 
images: 
a 
feasibility 
project,‖ 
J 
AAPOS. 
2008 
Jun;12(3):252-8.  
[27] 
A.Geissbuhler, C. O. Bagayoko, and O. Ly, ―The RAFT 
network: 5 years of distance continuing medical education and 
tele-consultations over the Internet in French-speaking Africa,‖ Int 
J Med Inform. 2007 May-Jun;76(5-6):351-6.  
[28] 
P. Azarmina, G. Prestwich, J. Rosenquist, and D. Singh, 
―Transferring disease management and health promotion programs 
to other countries: critical success factors,‖ Health Promot Int. 
2008 Dec;23(4):372-9.  
 
[29] 
K. Ganapathy, ―Telemedicine in the Indian context: an 
overview,‖ Stud Health Technol Inform. 2004;104:178-81.  
[30] 
K. Ganapathy, A. Ravindra,―Telemedicine in India: the 
Apollo story,‖ Telemed J E Health. 2009 Jul-Aug;15(6):576-85.  
[31] 
S. K. Mishra, L. Kapoor, and I. P. Singh, ―Telemedicine 
in India: current scenario and the future,‖ Telemed J E Health. 
2009 Jul-Aug;15(6):568-75.  
[32] 
S. Sucurovic, ―Implementing security in a distributed 
web-based EHCR (Electronic Hlth Care Record),‖ Int J Med 
Inform. 2007 May-Jun;76(5-6):491-6.   
[33] 
I.T. Pambudi, T. Hayasaka, K Tsubota, S. Wada, and T. 
Yamaguchi, ―Patient Record Information System (PaRIS) for 
primary health care centers in Indonesia,‖ Technol Health Care. 
2004;12(4):347-57.   
[34] 
W. B. Lober, et al., ―Three years experience with the 
implementation of a networked electronic medical record in Haiti,‖ 
AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2008 Nov 6:434-8.    
[35] 
K. Johnston, C. Kennedy, I. Murdoch, P. Taylor, and C. 
Cook, ―The cost-effectiveness of technology transfer using 
telemedicine,‖ Health Policy Plan. 2004 Sep;19(5):302-9.   
[36] 
J. M. Marchibroda, ―Health information exchange policy 
and evaluation,‖ J Biomed Inform. 2007 Dec;40(6 Suppl):S11-6.  
[37] 
A.K. Mahapatra, S. K  Mishra, L. Kapoor, and I. P. 
Singh, ―Critical issues in medical education and the implications 
for telemedicine Technology,‖ Telemed J E Health. 2009 Jul-
Aug;15(6):592-6.  
[38] 
B.J. Goodale, S. Spitz, N. J. Beattie, and I. B. Lin, 
―Training rural and remote therapy assistants in Western 
Australia,‖ Rural Remote Health. 2007 Jul-Sep;7(3):774.   
[39] 
C. 
O. 
Bagayoko, 
et 
al., 
―Deploying 
portable 
ultrasonography with remote assistance for isolated physicians in 
Africa: lessons from a pilot study in Mali.‖ Stud Health Technol 
Inform. 2010;160(Pt 1):554-8. 
[40] 
G.  Bediang,  C.  O. Bagayoko, M-A Raetzo, and A. 
Geissbuhler, ―Adaptation of a Computerized Patient Simulator for 
Continuous Medical Education of Isolated Care Professionals in 
Sub-Saharan Africa,‖ Yearb Med Inform 2010:47-54.  
[41] 
S Wynchank, and J Fortuin, ―Africa‘s Telenursing today 
(and tomorrow?),‖ Int J Advances Life Sci. 2010; vol 2: pp 165-
174.  
[42] 
P. Yellowlees, ―How not to develop telemedicine 
systems,‖ Telemed Today. 1997 May-Jun; vol 5(3): pp 6-7.   
[43] 
A.M. El Gatit, et al., ―Effects of an awareness symposium 
on perception of Libyan physicians regarding Telemedicine,‖ East 
Mediterr Health J. 2008 Jul-Aug;14(4):926-30.  
[44] 
S. Agrawal, et al. ―Training the trainees in radiation 
oncology with telemedicine as a tool in a developing country: a 
two-year audit,‖ Int J Telemed Appl. 2011; 2011: 230670. 
[45] 
T. Raza, M. Joshi, R. M. Schapira, Z. Agha, ―Pulmonary 
telemedicine--a model to access the subspecialist services in 
underserved rural areas,‖ Int J Med Inform. 2009 Jan;78(1):53-9. 
[46] 
A.M. Bauer, et al., ―Tackling the global mental health 
challenge: a psychosomatic 
medicine/consultation-liaison 
psychiatry 
perspective,‖ 
Psychosomatics. 2010 May;51(3):185-93.    
[47] 
A.Odor, et al., ―PsychVACS: a system for asynchronous 
telepsychiatry,‖ Telemed J E Health. 2011 May;17(4):299-303.  
[48] 
A.Bauer, et al., ―The role of psychosomatic medicine in 
global health care,‖  Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2011 Feb;13(1):10-7.   
[49] 
R. Wootton, ―Telemedicine support for the developing 
world,‖ J Telemed 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

