 
Investigation on the Use of the PE873 Conductive Ink for Surface EMG 
Measurements 
 
Andrea Federico, Marco Belcastro, Pasqualino Torchia, Salvatore Tedesco, Brendan O’Flynn 
Wireless Sensor Networks Group, Micro & Nano System Centre 
Tyndall National Institute, University College Cork  
Cork, Ireland 
e-mail: andrea.federico@tyndall.ie, marco.belcastro@tyndall.ie,  pasqualino.torchia@tyndall.ie,  salvatoretedesco@tyndall.ie, 
brendan.oflynn@tyndall.ie  
Abstract—Nowadays, 
wearable 
devices 
are 
part 
of 
everyone’s life and their popularity is constantly increasing. 
With diverse applications, spanning from healthcare to fitness 
tracking, more and more wearable devices are being developed 
which can send and receive information in real-time.  
To date, electric cables represent the most stable form of 
communication in terms of reliability and resistance. However, 
for wearable systems, cables restrict movement and introduce 
additional noise and movement artefacts on wearable sensing 
systems. Wireless devices, on the other hand, can be 
comparatively complicated in design, manufacturing and use. A 
possible strategy, to improve communications in wearable 
systems, is the adoption of conductive inks able to conduct 
electrical signals, these can be printed on fabric without the 
movement restriction normally associated with traditional 
wired systems. The use of such conductive inks in wearable 
sensors may, therefore, lead to a more comfortable method of 
monitoring health data (heart rate, muscle contraction etc.) 
throughout the day. In this paper, the properties of the 
promising conductive ink PE873 (manufactured by DuPont) are 
tested and analysed. The conductive ink electrical properties are 
studied in relation to stretching, folding and washing tests. The 
electrical performance of the ink printed onto the selected fabric 
is assessed and presented. Furthermore, an optimized printing 
procedure, aiming at improving the connection performances, is 
suggested and the development of a novel system able to read 
muscle contractions, based on PE873, is demonstrated, thus 
showing that this conductive ink is a promising solution for 
stretchable electrical connections in the wearable field. 
 
Keywords—Wearable systems; textile electronics integration; 
conductive ink; interconnections; DuPont. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Many of the wearable products currently available on the 
market have been developed for monitoring of health, well-
being and fitness. Such systems, e.g. smart watches and wrist 
bands, can provide information about physical activity (e.g., 
steps, calories burned, etc.) and physiological parameters 
(pulse rate, blood oxygen levels, Blood pressure etc.). The 
constant   monitoring of a subject’s health status is a desirable 
feature for clinical and health-related applications, such as 
rehabilitation or the management of chronic diseases. This can 
be clearly observed by the amount of research outputs 
produced in the wearable field on health monitoring [1]-[3].  
In particular, the interest in sensor-embedded clothing is 
constantly increasing enabled by recent advancements in 
materials and technology, in particular flexible and printed 
electronics. For example, biosignals, such as surface 
electromyography (EMG) or electrocardiography (ECG), can 
be directly collected from the location of interest (e.g., upper 
or lower limbs) by means of smart garments, such as fully 
sensorized shirts or shorts with integrated electrodes [4]-[6].  
One of the most attractive features of those wearable 
devices is the capability to transmit data in real-time without 
the need of physical connections. On the other hand, wireless 
communication (e.g., ZigBee, Bluetooth, etc.) can be 
comparatively unreliable [7], relatively expensive and more 
complex in terms of design, manufacturing and use. Thus, 
simpler and less expensive solutions are required to make such 
systems universally accessible and affordable. To date, 
electric cables and copper wires have represented the best 
form of connection in terms of reliability and resistance; 
however, the presence of cables on wearable devices might 
restrict body movements and prevent the execution of specific 
physical tasks, as well as introduce additional noise and 
movement artefacts. 
One of the possible solutions to this problem might come 
from the new generation of conductive ink [8] which are 
coming on the market and which are increasingly accessible 
to system designers. This type of ink can be directly printed 
on fabrics, and it can be washed and stretched several times 
while maintaining appropriate electric resistance. Generally, 
conductive ink is composed by a conductive material, 
thermoplastic polyvinylbutyral terpolymer binder and a glycol 
ether solvent [9] and, typically, conductive ink based on  silver 
metal particles, which shows the best conductivity [10].  
Although modern inks have an electrical conductivity 
comparable to copper [11], the reliability of conductive inks 
in wearable devices is still a critical issue, due to the change 
in electrical resistance caused by mechanical strain [12]. 
To address this problem, specific technical aspects need to 
be considered, such as the relationship between the viscosity 
of the ink and the porosity of the fabric. For example, viscous 
inks do not permeate well into porous textile structures [13]. 
Moreover, the electrical performance is also affected by the 
different direction of the fabric wires. As shown in [14], when 
comparing the electrical features under large strains 
performed in two different directions (e.g., parallel and 
perpendicular to the fibre bundles), the resistance of the 
printed line differs of a factor up to 20 between the two 
scenarios.  
At present, the market of conductive inks is still limited, 
and performances reported by the manufacturers do not take 
into consideration the electrical properties of such materials 
under specific mechanical stress, e.g., ink tested on stretchable 
substrate or textile materials. Therefore, the present work aims 
at investigating the suitability of a conductive ink available on 
the market to be used as an electrical connection on both 
stretchable and unstretchable fabric by testing the electrical 
performance of the material in both conditions. Furthermore, 
the opportunity to adopt the conductive ink in a system able to 
monitor muscle contractions has been also assessed in a 
practical scenario. In order to investigate the suitability of a 
conductive ink in creating robust electric connections for 
surface EMG acquisition with a wearable device, the 
conductive ink was used to create an electrical connection on 
a stretchable strip of fabric between a conductive electrode 
(point A), which transduces the myoelectric signal from the 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

skin, and “snap” connectors (point B) mounted on a custom 
printed circuit board (PCB), which connects the ink to the 
EMG measuring device. Moreover, a printing process and 
associated 
performance 
assessment 
procedures 
were 
developed to assess the system.  
The 
manuscript 
is 
organized 
as 
follows. 
The 
methodologies adopted for the system development (ink 
selection, connection process, 3D printing, etc.) are described 
in Section II, while Section III shows the results obtained over 
different test conditions. Section IV presents a discussion of 
these results and conclusions are drawn in Section V. 
II. METHODS 
A. Conductive Ink Characteristics 
Despite the market of conductive ink being still in its 
infancy, a number of companies have already produced 
conductive inks and pastes for photovoltaics, power 
electronics, displays, automotive, antenna design and others, 
but few products on the market have been developed for 
stretchable e-textile [15]. For this work, the conductive ink 
selected for analysis is the Intexar PE873 produced by DuPont 
(DuPont de Nemours, Inc., Wilmington, Delaware, USA). 
The selection was mainly made based on the waterproof 
capability of such ink which, by the time of this work, was a 
feature available only on a very limited range of similar 
product. Its physical and composition properties are shown in 
Tables I-II. 
TABLE I.  
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES 
Test 
Properties 
Sheet Resistivity (mΩsq/25m) 
(5m Dried Print Thickness on 
ST505 PET Film) 
< 75 
Resistivity After Crease 
(ASTM F1683, 180 deg, 1 cycle, 
2kg) 
< 5% 
Abrasion Resistance 
(ASTM D3359 Pencil Hardness) 
1 H 
Adhesion (Tape Cross Hatch) 
(ASTM D3359 w/3M Scotch 
Tape 600) 
No transfer 
Clean-Up Solvent 
Ethylene Diacetate 
Encapsulant 
PE771 / PE773 
TABLE II.  
COMPOSITION PROPERTIES 
Test 
Properties 
Solid (%) @ 150°C 
60 - 65 
Viscosity (PaS) Brookfield RVT, 
#14 spline, 10rpm, 25°C 
50 - 80 
Density (g/cc) 
2.0 
Coverage (cm2/g @ 5 m) 
Coverage (cm2/g @ 10 m) 
350 
175 
Dried Print Thickness (microns) 
8 - 12 
Thinner 
DuPont™ 8260 
B. Ink-Sensor Connection 
Point A of the overall system is represented by the 
electrode made via a conductive and biocompatible fabric 
(produced by Swift Textile Metalizing LLC, Bloomfield, CT) 
and placed on the bottom side of the fabric, which is in contact 
with the skin, and on the top side. Regarding the connection 
between the top and bottom side of the fabric electrodes, to 
ensure a robust connection the conductive ink was sandwiched 
between the two conductive layers, acting as a glue (Figure 1). 
On the other hand, point B are snaps integrated in to the 
PCB design so as to connect with the MyoWare Muscle 
Sensor (Advancer Technologies LLC, Raleigh, USA), placed 
on the top side to monitor muscle contractions. To connect the 
strips of conductive ink with the reading electrodes of the 
EMG sensor, a PCB layout with three pads on the top and the 
bottom layer was designed. The top pads connect the PCB to 
the MyoWare by the means of snap buttons, soldered on top. 
The bottom pads, instead, connect the PCB with the ink paths 
(Figure 2a). As soldering on fabric is not possible, a chemical 
compound has been identified to connect the PCB and the ink 
paths (Figure 2b). The conductive epoxy 8331-B (produced 
by MG Chemicals, Burlington, Ontario, Canada) was chosen 
due to its suitable characteristics of low electric resistance, 
high water resistance, and short working life. 
 
 
Figure 1. Sandwich structure for collection of EMG signal 
 
Figure 2. a) PCB with snap buttons soldered on top (top). b) Connection 
between PCB and fabric via 8331-B epoxy (bottom) 
C. 3D Printed Support 
From a design methodology perspective, a system 
designer needs to consider that electronics embedded into 
clothing can be under significant strain due to body physical 
movements, thus the use of epoxy on its own does not 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

guarantee a reliable strong grip due to flexing and cracking. 
To ensure the stability of the communication, a mechanical 
enclosure was designed to support the electronics. It consists 
of two 3D printed parts, obtained via fuse deposition model 
technique using polylactic acid (PLA), which can be screwed 
together to work as a clamp (red components of Figure 3). 
D. Ink-Printing Process 
In order to evenly spread the conductive ink only across 
the conductive paths, namely the narrow strips that connect 
the fabric electrodes with the PCB, a custom mask was 3D 
printed. The mask was design to act as a “stencil” to confine 
the ink only within the designed geometry. The final design of 
the mask is shown in (Figure 4a). An important element of the 
3D printed mask is a small step added on the bottom face 
(Figure 4b), which allowed more pressure on the fabric 
surface in order to avoid possible leakage of the ink. The final 
system is shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 3. 3D printed support (exploded view) 
 
Figure 4. 3D printed mask 
 
Figure 5. Developed system (top and bottom view) 
 
E. Test Protocol 
Three different tests have been carried out on the 
conductive material once deposited and cured on the textile 
material in the present investigation: stretching, folding, and 
washing.  
The stretching test was divided in three steps: resistivity 
measurements in rest position, in a stretched position, and 
finally in rest position again. The second test investigated the 
impact of folding the garment along the conductive trace, in 
which the resistivity was measured after each folding 
procedure. The washing test consisted in testing the electrical 
performance of the material after washing at a selected 
program in a standard domestic washing machine: synthetic 
garment (2 hours) with a temperature of 30°C and a detergent 
for coloured garments. 
III. RESULTS 
To test the performance of the conductive ink, several test 
samples were made for analysis. The tests were made on two 
types of fabrics: unstretchable and stretchable materials. 
Resistance measurements in the following tests were 
conducted 10 times and the average value is presented with 
the related standard deviation shown on the graphs as error 
bars. The ideal condition was to obtain a resistivity near to 1 
Ohm, which is comparable to standard cables resistivity. 
Stretching results are shown in Figures 6-7, while folding 
results are illustrated in Figures 8-9, and washing test in Figure 
10. 
The present work aimed at investigating the suitability of 
the DuPont PE873 conductive ink to be used as an electrical 
connection on stretchable and unstretchable fabric by testing 
the electrical performance in both conditions across different 
test. This section briefly discusses the results obtained with the 
implemented experimental protocol. 
 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 6. Stretching test results for unstretchable fabric 
 
 
Figure 7. Stretching test results for stretchable fabric 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Folding test results for unstretchable fabric 
 
Figure 9. Folding test results for stretchable fabric 
 
Figure 10. Washing and stretching test results for stretchable fabric 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A. Stretching Test 
Figure 6 illustrates the resistance changes for the 
stretching test for an unstretchable fabric. Initially, the 
measured resistivity is 2.5 Ohms in the rest position, which 
increases to 8 Ohms after stretching the fabric of 5% its length 
(e.g., 1 cm). However, when returning to a rest position, the 
resistivity measured is slightly larger than initially obtained. 
This behaviour is amplified when longer stretching are applied 
and the measured electrical resistance when applying the 
maximum stretching of 20% (e.g., 4 cm) is over 30 Ohms. 
The same behaviour is shown when performing the test on 
the stretchable fabric (Figure 7), even though the resistivity 
values measured are generally higher compared to the 
previous fabric. It is worth noticing the behaviour of the ink 
over one day in rest position. Indeed, after 24 hours, the 
resistivity decreases of 1.08 Ohms and 3.26 Ohms for the 
unstretchable and stretchable fabrics, respectively, thus 
showing an adaptation of the textile fibres. 
B. Folding Test 
The results for the folding test are displayed in Figures 8-
9. In both cases, the resistivity measured grows with the 
number of foldings; however, the unstretchable fabric shows 
better results. As an example, after the 60th folding, its 
resistivity (51.4 Ohms) is less than half than the resistivity 
measured from stretchable fabric after the 40th folding (126.6 
Ohms).  
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. Washing Test 
After washing, the stretching test was carried out on the 
sample according to the previously described procedure.  
At the first attempt, the mechanical stress of the washing 
procedure was enough to cause an open circuit on the 
conductive track. To this purpose, it is important to specify 
that every sample analysed was developed with only one layer 
of ink; therefore, as a possible solution, samples with more 
than one layer of conductive ink were made [16]. Moreover, 
to increase the conductivity of the stretchable fabric, it was 
decided to apply the ink while the fabric was stretched. The 
results achieved from using this methodology are shown in 
Figure 10. Using this new ink-printing method, the resistivity 
value of the conductive trace after washing is still 
unsatisfactory. However, the resistivity before and after 
washing is lower than the results obtained in the stretching 
test. This test was carried out only on the stretchable fabric, 
which was the worst between the two cases. 
Overall, it can be concluded that the performance of the 
PE873 conductive ink is acceptable only in a small range of 
mechanical strain, thus conductive ink is still not able to 
provide results comparable to standard cables in a wearable 
solution requiring significant stretching capability (such as 
lycra shorts for instance with integrated sensors for example). 
One of the biggest issues is the ink penetration in the textile 
fibres, which deeply impact on the conductivity [16]. DuPont 
has now made available a new series of conductive inks, 
which promise better performance, as shown in Figure 11.  
 
 
Figure 11. PE874 and PE873 mechanical and electrical performance 
compared 
In the picture, the characteristics of the PE873 and of the new 
generation ink (PE874) are compared. Furthermore, DuPont 
has also produced a stretchable TPU (thermoplastic 
polyurethane) film, which works as a printing surface and is 
characterized by high recovery and composed of a melted 
adhesive layer for bonding to fabric. 
V. CONCLUSION 
Conductive inks have the potential to represent a possible 
efficient and inexpensive solution for solving the 
interconnection issues typical of smart wearable garments 
with embedded sensors and electronics. In this paper, the 
features 
of 
the 
promising 
conductive 
ink 
PE873 
(manufactured by DuPont) were tested and analysed across 
several experiments (stretching, folding and washing) by 
measuring the electrical performance of the ink. Furthermore, 
the methodologies adopted for implementing an optimized 
printing procedure were discussed.  
Even though this investigation presented mixed results, it 
can be concluded that the performance of the PE873 
conductive ink was acceptable in a limited range of 
mechanical strain. The next-generation conductive inks, and 
improved printing procedures, can potentially ensure better 
performance of printed connections, thus making it a 
desirable technology in the field of wearable devices in the 
coming years.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This publication has emanated from research supported by 
a research grant from the Enterprise Ireland (EI) funded 
project SKYRE under grant number CF-2015-0031-P. 
Aspects of this publication have emanated from research 
conducted with the financial support of Science Foundation 
Ireland 
under 
Grant 
number 
12/RC/2289-P2, 
and 
13/RC/2077-CONNECT, which are co-funded under the 
European Regional Development Fund.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R.K.Y. Tong, Wearable technology in medicine and health 
care, Academic Press, Elsevier, 2018. 
[2] T. Loncar-Turukalo, E. Zdravevski, J. Machado da Silva, I. 
Chouvarda, and V. Trajkovik, “Literature on wearable 
technology for connected health: Scoping review of research 
trends, advances, and barriers,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 21, no. 
9, e14017, 2019. 
[3] S. Tedesco, J. Barton, and B. O’Flynn, “A review of activity 
trackers for senior citizens: Research perspectives, commercial 
landscape and the role of the insurance industry,” Sensors, vol. 
17, no. 6, pp. 1277-1316, 2017. 
[4] C. Chen et al., “Novel flexible material-based unobtrusive and 
wearable body sensor networks for vital sign monitoring,” 
IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 19, no. 19, pp. 8502-8513, 2019. 
[5] J. Shi et al., “Smart textile-integrated microelectronic systems 
for wearable applications,” Adv Mater, e1901958, 2019. 
[6] S. Tedesco et al., “A multi-sensors wearable system for remote 
assessment 
of 
physiotherapy 
exercises 
during 
ACL 
rehabilitation,” IEEE ICECS, Genoa, Italy, 27-29 Nov 2019. 
[7] A. Kos, V. Milutinović, and A. Umek, “Challenges in wireless 
communication for connected sensors and wearable devices 
used in sport biofeedback applications,” Future Generation 
Computer Systems, vol. 92, pp. 582-592, 2019. 
[8] H. Yan, W. Cai, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Review of 
conductive inks in printed electronics,” Beijing Gongye Daxue 
Xuebao/Journal of Beijing University of Technology, vol. 43, 
pp. 1117-1122, 2017. 
[9] A. Vena, E. Perret, and S. Tedjini, Chipless RFID based on RF 
encoding particle, 1st edition, ISTE Press – Elsevier, 2016. 
[10] K.R.R Venkata, A.K. Venkata, P.S. Karthik, and P.S. Surya, 
“Conductive Silver Inks and its Applications in Printed and 
Flexible Electronics,” RSC Advances, vol. 5, pp. 77760-77790, 
2015. 
[11] C. Maxfield, Bebop to the Boolean Boogie, 3rd edition, 
O’Reilly, 2009. 
[12] A. Christopoulos and G. Tsamasphyros, “Strain measurements 
using electrically conductive silver paint,” Sensor Letters, vol. 
12, 2014.  
[13] S. Hasan, K. Inhwan, H. Soewardiman, and J.S. Jur, “Inkjet 
Printing of Reactive Silver Ink on Textiles,” ACS Applied 
Materials & Interfaces, vol. 11, pp. 6208-6216, 2019. 
[14] Jin H. et al., “Enhancing the performance of stretchable 
conductors for e‐textiles by controlled ink permeation,” Adv 
Mater, vol. 29, no. 21, 1605848, 2017.  
[15] https://www.idtechex.com/en/research-report/conductive-ink-
markets-2019-2029-forecasts-technologies-players/665 
[retrived: Dec, 2019]. 
[16] M. Stoppa and A. Chiolerio, “Testing and evaluation of 
wearable electronic textiles and assessment thereof,” in 
Performance testing of textiles, Woodhead Publishing Series in 
Textiles, pp. 65-101, 2016.
 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

