Pharmer – Towards Semantic Medical Prescriptions
Ali Khalili
Institute of Informatics
University of Leipzig, Germany
khalili@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
Bita Sedaghati
Institute of Pharmacy
University of Leipzig, Germany
bita.sedaghati@uni-leipzig.de
Abstract—The recent proliferation of Linked Open Data
that enables the integration of multiple disparate data sources
brings into the spotlight a new generation of knowledge
management applications. Particularly in the domain of phar-
maceutical research and development, many efforts have been
done to create a linked open drug data. In this paper we
present the Pharmer as an approach to facilitate the creation
of semantic prescriptions. Semantic prescriptions are intelligent
e-prescription documents enriched by drug-related meta-data
thereby know about their content and the possible interactions.
In an e-health system, semantic prescriptions provide an in-
teroperable interface which helps patients, physicians, pharma-
cists, researchers and companies to collaboratively improve the
quality of pharmaceutical services by facilitating the process of
shared decision making. Pharmer provides different views for
the different personas involved in the process of e-prescribing.
It employs datasets such as DBpedia, DrugBank, DailyMed and
RxNorm to automatically detect the drugs in the prescription
and to collect multidimensional data on them. Eventually it
warns of the possible drug interactions in the prescription. We
evaluate the feasibility of the Pharmer by conducting a usability
evaluation and report on the quantitative and qualitative results
of our survey.
Keywords-Semantic prescription; e-prescription; semantic
annotation; e-health;
I. INTRODUCTION
As reported in MedicineNet [1], medication errors are
the most common type of medical errors in health care.
Errors such as improper dose of medicine, adverse drug
interactions, food interactions, etc. often stem from invalid
prescriptions and unawareness of the patients. Electronic
prescriptions which are recently gaining attention in the e-
health domain, are one of the solutions proposed to solve
these type of errors. While even nowadays traditional paper
prescriptions are commonly used, e-prescriptions offer sev-
eral advantages. In an e-prescription system, prescriber elec-
tronically sends an accurate, error-free and understandable
prescription directly to a pharmacy from the point-of-care.
Reduction in medication error and decline in adverse drug
events are more highlighted consequences of e-prescribing.
During the recent years, the adoption of e-prescriptions
has been spreading rapidly. To illustrate, the Australian
government started launching of e-prescription from March
2007 [2]. A system called epSOS [3] which performs the use
of e-prescriptions all around Europe, is currently passing the
extensive practical testing phase. The e-prescribing incentive
program performed in US [4] is another example in this area.
As a reporting program it uses a combination of incentive
payments and payment adjustments to encourage electronic
prescribing by eligible professionals.
One of the main challenges of e-prescription systems is
the heterogeneity of available information sources. There
exist already different sources of information addressing
different aspects of pharmaceutical research. Information
about chemical, pharmacological and pharmaceutical drug
data, clinical trials, approved prescription drugs, drugs ac-
tivity against drug targets such as proteins, gene-disease-
drug associations, adverse effects of marketed drugs, etc. are
some examples of these diverse information. Handling these
dynamic information within current e-prescription systems
without blurring the border of the existing pharmaceutical
information islands is a cumbersome task. On the other hand,
Linked Open Data as an effort to interlink and integrate these
isolated sources of information is obtaining more attention
in the domain of pharmaceutical, medical and life sciences.
Combining the best practices from Linked Open Data
together with e-prescription systems can provide an op-
portunity for patients, researchers as well as practitioners
to collaborate together in a synergic way. A consequence
of introducing linked data in health care sector is that it
signiﬁcantly changes the daily duties of the employees of
the health care sector. Therefore the most challenging aspect
will not be the technology but rather changing the mind-set
of the employees and the training of the new technology[5].
Furthermore, the information generated via that approach
can be employed as a data source for researchers. Drug
companies are also able then to take the advantage of
considering these informative statistical data.
Semantic prescriptions as introduced in this paper are
a proposed approach to utilize semantic web technologies
in e-prescription systems. As intelligent prescriptions, they
can automatically handle the medical errors occurring in
prescriptions and increase the awareness of the patients
about the prescribed drugs and drug consumption in general.
Semantic prescriptions also enable the creation of more
efﬁcient and effective search approaches for drug discov-
ery and consumption. We created a tool called Pharmer
as a showcase application to facilitate the process of se-
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

mantic prescription generation. Pharmer adopts a bottom-
up approach for enriching the normal e-prescriptions with
semantic annotations using a set of predeﬁned datasets from
linked open data.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows:
Section II, Section III and Section IV provide a background
on the basic concepts such as Linked Open Data, Semantic
Content Authoring and E-prescriptions employed in this
paper. In Section V, we describe the Pharmer as a solution to
effectively create semantic prescription. Then we discuss the
possible beneﬁts of Pharmer in Section V-C. To better clarify
the use cases of the Pharmer system, an example scenario
is drawn in Section VI. In Section VII, Pharmer usability
evaluation results are reported and ﬁnally Section VIII
concludes with an outlook on future work.
II. LINKED OPEN DATA
In computing, Linked Data describes a method of publish-
ing structured data so that it can be interlinked and become
more useful. It builds upon standard Web technologies such
as HTTP and URIs, but rather than using them to serve
web pages for human readers, it extends them to share
information in a way that can be read automatically by
computers. This enables data from different sources to be
connected and queried [6]. Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor
of the Web and Linked Data initiator, suggested a 5 star
deployment scheme for Linked Open Data: 1) make your
stuff available on the Web (whatever format) under an open
license, 2) make it available as structured data (e.g., Excel
instead of image scan of a table), 3) use non-proprietary
formats (e.g., CSV instead of Excel), 4) use URIs to identify
things, so that people can point at your stuff, 5) link your
data to other data to provide context.
Particularly in the areas of health care and life sciences
with the wealth of available data, large scale integration
projects like Bio2RDF [7], Chem2Bio2RDF [8], and the
W3C HCLS’s (Health Care and Life Sciences) Linked
Open Drug Data (LODD)[9] have not only signiﬁcantly
contributed to the development of the Linked Open Data
effort, but have also made social and technical contribu-
tions towards data integration, knowledge management, and
knowledge discovery.
There are already many interesting information on phar-
maceutical research available on the Web. The sources of
data range from drugs general information, interactions and
impacts of the drugs on gene expression, through to the
results of clinical trials. LODD[10] has surveyed publicly
available data about drugs, created Linked Data representa-
tions of the data sets, and identiﬁed interesting scientiﬁc and
business questions that can be answered once the data sets
are connected.
One of the use cases of LODD datasets is authoring of
Semantic Prescriptions which are prescriptions enriched by
linked open data.
III. SEMANTIC CONTENT AUTHORING
A Semantic Document is an intelligent document (with
explicit semantic structure) which “knows about” its own
content so that it can be automatically processed in un-
foreseen ways. Semantic documents facilitate a number of
important aspects of information management [11]. For
search and retrieval, they provide more efﬁcient and ef-
fective search interfaces, such as faceted search [12] or
question answering [13]. In information presentation, they
support more sophisticated ways of ﬂexibly visualizing
information, such as by means of semantic overlays as
described in [14]. In information integration, they provide
uniﬁed views on heterogeneous data stored in different
applications by creating composite applications such as
semantic mashups [15]. For personalization, they provide
customized and context-speciﬁc information which better
ﬁts user needs and will result in delivering customized
applications such as personalized semantic portals [16]. For
reusability and interoperability, they facilitate exchanging
content between disparate systems and enabling applications
such as executable papers [17].
The above beneﬁts, however, come at the cost of increased
authoring effort. A Semantic Authoring User Interface is a
human accessible interface with capabilities for writing and
modifying semantic documents which are either.
• fully semantic in the sense that their original data model
uses a semantic knowledge representation formalism
(such as RDF, RDF-Schema or OWL) or
• based on a non-semantic representation form (e.g.
text or hypertext), which is enriched with semantic
representations during the authoring process.
Medical prescriptions are a good candidate to be enriched
by semantic annotations. Semantic prescriptions enable the
traditionally written prescriptions to be utilized in novel
ways as discussed above. In the following sections, we ﬁrst
describe the e-prescriptions and then discuss how they can
be enriched as semantic documents.
IV. E-PRESCRIPTIONS
E-health has evolved and emerged recently in many
forms. E-prescription is one of those forms and deﬁned
as a computer-generated prescription utilized by health-care
providers. E-prescribing as it is commonly called, is the use
of an automated data entry system to generate a prescription
that is then transmitted through a special network to a
pharmacy in such a way that the data goes directly into
the pharmacy’s computer system. It plays an important role
in improving the quality of patient care. For the prescriber,
e-prescribing happens when a physician uses a computer
or handheld device with a software that allows him or
her to (with the patient’s consent) electronically access
information regarding a patient’s drug beneﬁt coverage and
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

medication history; electronically transmit the prescription to
the patient’s pharmacy of choice; and, when the patient runs
out of reﬁlls, his or her pharmacist can also electronically
send a renewal request to the physician’s ofﬁce for approval.
In order to see an increase in both quality and efﬁciency
that can be attributed to e-prescribing, the system must be
capable of performing key functions related to:
• Medication selection/decision support capabilities (e.g.,
diagnosis-based medication menus, evidence based in-
formation, drug interaction checking, safety-alerts, for-
mulary checking, prescription renewal, and dosage cal-
culation).
• Patient-speciﬁc information capabilities (e.g., current
patient medication list, access to patient historical data,
patient identiﬁcation).
• System integration capabilities (e.g., connection with
various databases, connection with pharmacy and phar-
macy beneﬁt manager systems).
• Educational
capabilities
(e.g.,
patient
education,
provider feedback).
One of the main challenges of the current e-prescription
systems is the heterogeneity and evolving nature of available
information sources. There exist already different sources of
information addressing different aspects of pharmaceutical
research. Handling these dynamic information within current
e-prescription systems without blurring the border of the
existing pharmaceutical information islands is a cumbersome
task.
V. PHARMER: SEMANTIC AUTHORING OF MEDICAL
PRESCRIPTIONS
Pharmer is an application created as a proof of concept
for the authoring of semantic prescriptions. The Pharmer
implementation is open-source and available for download
together with an explanatory video and online demo at [18].
Pharmer adopts a bottom-up approach [19] for enriching the
normal e-prescriptions with semantic annotations using a set
of predeﬁned ontologies.
A. Architecture
The Pharmer system architecture is depicted in Figure 1
and consists of three layers:
Document Layer: This layer includes the traditional e-
prescription document plus two components as Drug De-
tection and Drug Information Collector. Drug detection
component performs the natural language processing (NLP)
of the e-prescription document to detect the terms referring
to a drug in the prescription. The component uses DBpedia
spotlight [20] and BioPortal annotator [21] NLP services
to parse and analyze the text looking for known drugs. It
is conﬁgurable so that users can easily add other existing
NLP services for drug detection. When user is writing the
prescription, this component asynchronously performs the
Document Layer
Semantic Layer
Application Layer
Drug 
Detection
Drug Information 
Collector
Annotator
Authoring UI
Visualizer
Fact Extractor
Interaction Finder
prescription
Semantic prescription
- Instructions
- General 
  Information
NLP Services
DBpedia 
Spotlight
BioPortal 
Annotator
Linked Open Drug Data
Figure 1.
Architecture of the Pharmer system.
drug recognition and adds the related annotations as real-
time semantic tagging.
Another component in this layer is drug information
collector which grabs all the information regarding a speciﬁc
drug from Linked Open Data. To pursue this, it utilizes
datasets such as DrugBank, DailyMed and RxNorm (avail-
able at [9]) by sending federated SPARQL queries.
Semantic Layer: There are two main components in
this layer namely Annotator and Authoring UI. The an-
notator component handles the automatic annotation and
embeds the general information of the drugs as meta-data
into the e-prescription. Annotator adopts the RDFa format.
RDFa (Resource Description Framework in attributes) is
a W3C Recommendation that adds a set of attribute level
extensions to XHTML for embedding RDF metadata within
web documents. RDFa fulﬁlls the principles of interoperable
metadata such as publisher independence, data reuse, self
containment, schema modularity and evolvability.
The authoring UI component provides users with a set
of input forms to manually embed the meta-data related to
prescription instructions into the prescription document.
Application Layer: This layer provides a set of ap-
plications on top of the generated semantic prescriptions.
Interaction Finder checks the possible interactions between
the prescribed drugs and warn the prescriber about them.
Visualizer is responsible for graphically representing the em-
bedded semantics of a prescription (e.g. as depicted in ??).
The Fact Extractor generates the RDF/Turtle representation
of the semantic prescriptions.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B. Features
The main features of Pharmer can be summarized as:
• Providing Different Semantic Views. Semantic views
allow the generation of different views on the same
metadata schema and aggregations of the knowledge
base based on the roles, personal preferences, and local
policies of the intended users. Pharmer suggests two
types of views: generic and domain speciﬁc views.
Generic views provide visual representations of drug
information (e.g. as information view depicted in Fig-
ure 2 or graph view. Domain speciﬁc views address
the requirements of a particular domain user (e.g.
a researcher need speciﬁc views for visualizing the
atomic structure of chemical compounds).
• Real-time Drug Tagging. Real-time tagging means cre-
ating drug annotations while the user is typing. This
will signiﬁcantly increase the annotation speed [22].
Users are not distracted since they do not have to
interrupt their current authoring task. Pharmer has a
client-side component which interacts with the server
asynchronously to make real-time tagging possible.
• Drug Suggestion. When searching for a drug, Pharmer
suggests the similar drugs by taking into account the
history of search terms.
• Automatic Drug Annotation. Automatic annotation
means the provision of facilities for automatic mark-up
of prescriptions. The automatic process of annotating
in Pharmer is composed basically of ﬁnding drug
terms in prescription using an NLP service, mapping
them against an ontology, and disambiguating common
terms.
C. Pharmer Stakeholders
As depicted in Figure 3, Pharmer approach is very ver-
satile and can be applied in a vast number of use cases
by different stakeholders. The arrows in the ﬁgure can be
summarized as the following:
1) The physician diagnoses the disease and writes the
corresponding semantic prescription using the Pharmer.
The patient’s medication history is available to the
physician as well.
2) Pharmer utilizes the Linked Open Data as its integrated
information source.
3) The researcher can analyze the stored semantic pre-
scriptions data.
4) Drug companies utilize the Pharmer data store in order
to balance their production and distribution according
to the market taste and demand.
5) The pharmacist veriﬁes the prescription and hands in
the medication to the patient.
6) The patient inquires drug information and can contact
the related physician and pharmacist.
Figure 2.
Screenshot of the Pharmer application.
The main beneﬁt of using semantic prescriptions is the
persistent connection to up-to-date drug information coming
from multiple dynamic data sources. So, when a change
occurs to a drug (e.g. change in its effects or interactions)
the semantic prescription automatically adopts to this new
change. Once writing a prescription it is very critical to
consider drug interactions. Drug interactions are divided
to three categories namely food-drug, drug-drug and drug-
plant interactions. Coadministration can either be synergistic
or antagonistic which respectively increase or decrease the
drugs effect. The interactions may sometimes lead to change
in the drug effect. By applying semantic prescriptions, all
types of drug interactions are prevented and the probability
of errors in prescriptions are reduced to a great extend.
A semantic prescription is a self-contained document
which is aware of its content and is connected to the linked
open data. In contrast to database-oriented e-prescriptions,
semantic prescriptions can easily be exchanged among other
e-health systems without need to changing their related
infrastructure hence enabling a connection between physi-
cians, pharmacists, patients, pharmaceutical researchers and
drug companies.
Furthermore, semantic prescriptions increase the aware-
ness of patients. They provide patients with all the related
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Patient 
Pharmacist 
Researcher 
2 
4 
5 
1 
3 
Linked open data 
Physician 
Drug company 
6 
Figure 3.
Pharmer ecosystem.
information of the prescribed drugs thereby mitigating the
possible misuse of drugs. In addition, semantic prescriptions
support shared decision making (SDM) by allowing patients
and service providers to make health care decisions together.
They connect the best scientiﬁc evidence available with the
patient’s values and preferences.
VI. EXAMPLE SCENARIO
As a scenario; a 63 year old man with the history of MI
(Myocardial Infarction) and type 2 diabetes visits a heart and
coronary specialist complaining about frequent headaches
and heavy head feeling. The specialist, after general in-
spection and monitoring vital signs, asks for a blood test.
He then considers symptoms including high blood pressure
(sys/dias:158/95 mmHg) and high Fasting Blood Sugar (150
mg/dl). He diagnoses high blood pressure plus severe type 2
diabetes. Thereby, The patient proﬁle is deﬁned in Pharmer
by patient’s information besides diagnosis. “no weight loss”
is mentioned as a preference in the patient’s proﬁle. Re-
gardless of the patient’s preferences, the physician would
prescribe Metformin as a drug of choice. However, since
the major side effect of Metformin is weight loss, the
physician replaces Metformin with Rosiglitazone.
Considering the medication that the patient took before
(Glibenclamide only), The specialist dispenses a new
semantic prescription by entering the following drugs:
• Rosiglitazone 4 mg Oral Tablet once daily
• Glibenclamide 5 mg Oral Tablet bid
• Atenolol 50 mg Oral Tablet once daily
He then checks for the possible drug interactions by
clicking the attributed button in the Pharmer software. As the
Pharmer is connected to linked open data it is capable of rec-
ognizing the most recent updated drug interactions. He ﬁnds
out that Sulfunyl Urea class drugs (here Glibenclamide)
are not compatible to be coadministrated with beta-blockers
(here Atenolol). So, he needs to replace it with another
drug. Using the Pharmer and its connection to linked open
data, the physician can ﬁnd the possible alternatives. Then
he decides to choose Captopril as replacement. The
semantic prescription is then sent to the patient’s pharmacy
of choice. There, pharmacist is able to review the semantic
prescription and comments on that directly in the system
so that the physician is also aware of the corresponding
changes. Pharmacist comments may cause minor or major
modiﬁcations in the semantic prescription. For instance, us-
ing the Pharmer she is able to check the appropriate dose of
each medicine or suggest cheaper alternatives (if possible).
In this case, as the Rosiglitazone elevates cardiovas-
cular risks, the pharmacist suggests Rosiglitazone to
be replaced by Pioglitazone. This change happens as a
realization of the shared decision making between physision,
pharmacist and patient. Thereafter, patient who was referred
to the pharmacy takes the prescribed drugs. Before he starts
taking the tablets, he enters in Pharmer system with his ID
as patient. There, he is able to observe drug information
embedded in the error free semantic prescription besides
the preferred time and drug intake instructions. He is also
informed about the possible food interactions. The patient’s
proﬁle completes as he visits physicians or ask for reﬁlls.
Furthermore he is followed up by the physician and the
pharmacist via the Pharmer. After 2 months the patient visits
another specialist for his recurrent symptoms of diabetes.
The specialist via the Pharmer accesses to the patient’s
medical proﬁle and increases the anti-diabetic drug dose.
A researcher in an academy research institution investi-
gates Captopril (as an Angiotansion II antagonist) effect
on preventing diabetes recurrence. Having the data from the
aforementioned patient follow up along with other similar
patients allows investigator to lead her goal. In this case, for
example, the Captopril along with anti-diabetic drugs
led to diabetes recurrence. Observing all the corresponding
patient proﬁles will either conﬁrm or reject the research
assumption.
A drug company manager requires to determine the
compliance rate of Captopril in the market in order to
balance the production based on market demand. Applying
the Pharmer allows him to simply access to these data and
decide how to go on with this product. He is also able to
collect the evidence which may prevent further dispense of
Captopril by physicians or consumption among patients.
VII. EVALUATION
In order to determine whether we succeeded to facilitate
the creation of semantic prescriptions using Pharmer, we
performed a usability user study with 13 subjects. Subjects
were drawn from 3 physicians, 4 pharmacist, 3 pharmaceu-
tical researchers and 3 students. We ﬁrst showed them a
tutorial video of using different features of Pharmer then
asked each one to create a prescription with Pharmer. After
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 4.
Usability evaluation results for Pharmer (0: Strongly disagree,
1: Disagree, 2: Neutral, 3: Agree, 4: Strongly agree).
ﬁnishing the task, we asked the participants to ﬁll out a
questionnaire which consisted of two parts: feature usage
questions and usability experience questions.
We used the System Usability Scale (SUS) [23] to grade
the usability of Pharmer. SUS is a standardized, simple, ten-
item Likert scale-based questionnaire giving a global view of
subjective assessments of usability. It yields a single number
in the range of 0 to 100 which represents a composite
measure of the overall usability of the system. The results
of our survey (cf. Figure 4) showed a mean usability score
of 75 for Pharmer which indicates a good level of usability.
Participants particularly liked the integration of functionality
and the ease of learning and use. The conﬁdence in using
the system was slightly lower, which we attribute to the
short learning phase and diverse functionality. In addition
to quantitative results, we also collected a number of user
suggestions. For instance some users suggested to provide
a print-friendly document with all the patient’s desired
information.
VIII. CONCLUSION
Providing a consistent connection between patients, physi-
cians, pharmacists, pharmaceutical researchers and drug
companies is a crucial step towards enhancing the quality
of knowledge management and thereby e-health services
in the pharmaceutical domain. With Pharmer, we presented
in this article an approach for implementation of Semantic
Prescriptions as intelligent medical prescriptions to improve
the integration and interoperability of e-prescribing systems
with other e-health services. Semantic prescriptions includes
the important meta-data about the content of a prescription
which will increase the awareness of their consumers.
We see the work presented in this article as an initial
step in a larger research agenda aiming at promoting the
authoring and annotation of semantically enriched medical
documents. Regarding future work, we envision to extend
the Pharmer application towards different modalities, such
that the annotation of images and other medical objects
is supported. Furthermore, we aim to integrate the other
existing linked open datasets (e.g. related to publications,
laboratories or insurance documents) into the Pharmer to
extend its stakeholders.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Melissa Conrad Stoppler. Last visited date: 28/11/2012.
[Online]. Available: http://www.medicinenet.com/script/main/
art.asp?articlekey=55234
[2] Medicare. Last visited date: 28/11/2012. [Online]. Available:
http://www.medicareaustralia.gov.au/
[3] epsos : the european ehealth project. Last visited date:
28/11/2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.epsos.eu/
[4] Electronic prescribing (erx) incentive program. Last visited
date: 28/11/2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.cms.gov/
erxincentive
[5] J. Puustj¨arvi and L. Puustj¨arvi, “The challenges of electronic
prescription systems based on semantic web technologies,” in
ECEH, 2006, pp. 251–261.
[6] C. Bizer, T. Heath, and T. Berners-Lee, “Linked Data
- The Story So Far,” International Journal on Semantic
Web and Information Systems (IJSWIS), vol. 5, no. 3, pp.
1–22, 2009. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.4018/
jswis.2009081901
[7] Bio2rdf. Last visited date: 28/11/2012. [Online]. Available:
http://bio2rdf.org/
[8] Semantic web in systems chemical biology. Last visited
date: 28/11/2012. [Online]. Available: http://chem2bio2rdf.
wikispaces.com/
[9] Linking open drug data (lodd). Last visited date: 28/11/2012.
[Online]. Available: http://www.w3.org/wiki/HCLSIG/LODD
[10] M. Samwald, A. Jentzsch, C. Bouton, C. Kallesoe, E. Wil-
lighagen, J. Hajagos, M. Marshall, E. Prud’hommeaux,
O. Hassanzadeh, E. Pichler, and S. Stephens, “Linked open
drug data for pharmaceutical research and development,”
Journal of Cheminformatics, vol. 3, no. 1, 2011.
[11] A. Khalili, S. Auer, and D. Hladky, “The rdfa content editor
– from wysiwyg to wysiwym,” in COMPSAC 2012, 2012, pp.
531–540.
[12] D. Tunkelang, Faceted Search (Synthesis Lectures on Infor-
mation Concepts, Retrieval, and Services).
Morgan and
Claypool Publishers, Jun. 2009.
[13] V. Lopez, V. Uren, M. Sabou, and E. Motta, “Is question
answering ﬁt for the semantic web? a survey,” Semantic Web
? Interoperability, Usability, Applicability, vol. 2, no. 2, pp.
125–155, September 2011.
[14] G. Burel, A. E. Cano1, and V. Lanfranchi, “Ozone browser:
Augmenting the web with semantic overlays,” ser. CEUR
Workshop Proceedings ISSN 1613-0073, vol. 449, June 2009.
[15] A. Ankolekar, M. Kr¨otzsch, T. Tran, and D. Vrandecic, “The
two cultures: mashing up web 2.0 and the semantic web,” in
WWW 2007.
ACM Press, 2007, pp. 825–834.
[16] M. Sah, W. Hall, N. M. Gibbins, and D. C. D. Roure,
“Semport ? a personalized semantic portal,” in 18th ACM
Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia.
Sheridan print-
ing, 2007, pp. 31–32.
[17] W. M¨uller, I. Rojas, A. Eberhart, P. Haase, and M. Schmidt,
“A-r-e: The author-review-execute environment,” Procedia
Computer Science, vol. 4, pp. 627 – 636, 2011, iCCS 2011.
[18] Pharmer project page. Last visited date: 28/11/2012. [Online].
Available: http://code.google.com/p/pharmer/
[19] A. Khalili and S. Auer, “User interfaces for semantic
content authoring: A systematic literature review,” 2012.
[Online]. Available: http://svn.aksw.org/papers/2011/journal
SemanticContentAuthoring/public.pdf
[20] Dbpedia spotlight. Last visited date: 28/11/2012. [Online].
Available: http://spotlight.dbpedia.org/
[21] Bioportal annotator. Last visited date: 28/11/2012. [Online].
Available: http://bioportal.bioontology.org/annotator
[22] R. Heese, M. Luczak-R¨osch, R. Oldakowski, O. Streibel,
and A. Paschke, “One click annotation,” in Scripting and
Development for the Semantic Web (SFSW), 2010.
[23] J. Lewis and J. Sauro, “The Factor Structure of the System
Usability Scale,” in Human Centered Design, ser. LNCS.
Springer, 2009, vol. 5619, ch. 12, pp. 94–103.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

