Evaluation of a Context-Specific Communication System Based on Smartphones 
A field study of use and nurses’ expectations 
Trine S Bergmo1, Elin Johnsen2, Monika A Johansen1,3, Terje Solvoll1 
1Norwegian Centre for E-health Research, University Hospital of North Norway, Norway 
2Health Services Development, Innovation and Implementation, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway 
3Telemedicine and E-health Research Group, Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway  
Tromsø, Norway  
Trine.bergmo@telemed.no 
Elin.Jonsen@telemed.no 
Monika.alise.Johansen@telemed.no 
terje.solvoll@telemed.no 
 
 
Abstract—This 
project 
evaluates 
a 
context 
aware 
communication system designed for use in hospitals. This 
communication system aims to increase and improve the 
communication and information exchange between nurses, 
between nurses and physicians, and between physicians. In this 
paper, we focus on nurse-to-nurse communication. Nurses in 
the oncology department at the University Hospital of North 
Norway tested the system. The aim of this field study is to 
investigate the expectations, consequences and experiences of 
using the phone system in a clinical setting.  The study uses a 
multi-method research approach including both quantitative 
and qualitative data. We use a before-and-after study design, 
with data from questionnaires, interviews and logs as well as 
step count measurements. In this paper, we describes the 
phone system and how it can be used. We also report on the 
nurses’ expectations and presents some preliminary findings 
on system usage and the before-and-after step count 
assessment. 
 
Keyword- 
hospital 
communication 
systems; 
context 
awareness; nursing; e-health; work practices; ICT in hospitals; 
work effinecy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Working in a hospital environment requires highly 
mobile personnel. Health care personnel depend on effective 
modes of communication and information exchange to 
provide high quality services [1][2][3]. In a clinical setting, 
gathering the right information can be complex, requiring 
frequent conversations and discussions [4]. However, 
research has shown that communication in hospitals suffers 
due to poor practices and inefficiency; caused by an 
insufficient infrastructure, such issues emerge particularly 
when the need for communication is urgent [4][5][6].  
Most hospitals rely on a mobile communication 
infrastructure with devices dedicated for each role, with 
pagers being the most common mobile communication 
device. Generally speaking, mobile phones are not widely 
used in hospitals, with personnel using wired/wireless 
phones and personal digital assistants (PDA) in addition to 
their pagers [7]. To ameliorate communication issues, more 
extensive use of mobile phones could offer a solution by 
improving accessibility and communication [4][6][8]. 
Compared to pager use, important advantages can be 
achieved with texting and voice services. Decreasing 
communication delays may lead to improved patient care 
while reducing the risk of medical errors [6]. Studies have 
shown that wireless phones can overcome most of the 
limitations of pagers, thus facilitating communication within 
hospital settings [9]. 
Despite the advantages of mobile phones, there are also 
well-known downsides to the usage of such devices. For 
instance, the increased availability and accessibility can 
overload key human resources, such as senior physicians and 
on-call staff [2][9]. Only a few staff members carry wireless 
phones due to the assumption that phones are more 
interruptive than pagers [2][7]. Therefore, before introducing 
wireless phones as standard hospital equipment, it is 
important to evaluate usability and user satisfaction and to 
assess impacts on work practices. 
 Our study investigates how the use of one such system, 
the CallMeSmart (CMS) system, influences nurse-to-nurse 
communication and affects work practices at the Oncology 
Department (OD) at the University Hospital of North 
Norway (UNN). In this paper, we describe the technology, 
present the pilot study and report on preliminary results. We 
discuss results regarding nurses’ expectations towards the 
phone system, patterns of use and time use, as measured by 
step count. 
The paper now proceeds into Section II, which provides 
background information and includes an overview of the 
local context as well as the use of phone systems in clinical 
work. Section III outlines the materials, research setting and 
methodology of this study. Section IV provides an overview 
of our results. Section V discusses implications and 
limitations. Finally, conclusions and future work are detailed 
in Section VI.  
II. 
BACKGROUND  
CallMeSmart 
is 
a 
context-sensitive 
mobile 
communication system developed for hospital use. The 
system aims to reduce unnecessary interruptions from 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

mobile devices in situations where disruptions should be 
avoided. These situations include, for instance, times when 
health personnel is involved in surgery (dressed in sterile 
clothing), doing patient examinations at outpatient clinics, 
or having conversations with patients/relatives in designated 
rooms.  
Context-sensitive systems for hospitals represent a 
promising application domain. Hospital staff depend on a 
wide and reliable communication infrastructure for the 
exchange of different types of data, such as patient reports, 
lab tests and work shifts. They also depend on this 
infrastructure 
for 
text, 
voice 
and 
alarm 
services. 
Management of this information is difficult and requires 
avoidance of a wide variety of problems in order to properly 
meet the needs of hospital professionals. Context-sensitive 
applications for mobile communication seem to promise a 
valid solution that could also move some workers’ activities 
over to computers. 
The 
phone 
system 
focuses 
on 
context-sensitive 
interfaces, middleware and new interaction forms for mobile 
devices that support multi-modal communication in 
hospitals. These devices support media, such as voice 
services, text-messaging and paging services, in an efficient 
and non-interruptive manner. They also enable support for 
individual and role-based contact on a single device. That is, 
users only need to carry one device for both personal and 
role-based communication, which enables other users to, for 
example, contact someone assigned to “on-call” duty in a 
specific department, even if they do not know the identity of 
that person. At the same time, the system seeks to balance 
between availability and interruptions while enabling acute 
calls and alarms to go through. 
The phone system senses the context automatically from 
different sensors, calendar information and work schedules. 
It makes changes to the health care worker’s availability and 
the phone’s profile according to the collected contextual 
information. At the same time, the caller is given feedback 
about the health care worker’s availability, thereby making it 
possible for the caller to force through an emergency call or 
to forward the call to another available health care worker at 
the same level. The system is based on ideas from earlier 
studies on interruptions in combination with ideas from 
Solvoll (2013) [10]. A first version of the system is ready 
and has been tested in lab settings with physicians/nurses as 
test users. The tests were performed as scenarios derived 
from real situations. The feedback was mostly positive, and 
the input was used to improve and further develop the 
system, moving from prototype to production [10]. A more 
detailed description of the system, including figures that 
itemise the functionality, architecture, interruption reduction 
and compatibility with other existing systems can also be 
found in Solvoll (2013) [10].  
Management at the Oncology Department at the 
University Hospital of North Norway has decided to invest 
in mobile communication devices to save time and improve 
patient care. Currently, all phone communication at the 
department 
occurs 
through 
wired/wireless 
landline 
telephones. People on call also carry pagers. The nurses have 
no mobile devises to help them exchange information. To 
ease the situation in the department, management has 
decided to invest in the CallMeSmart system. As part of this 
initiative, we proposed a study to investigate the 
expectations, consequences and experiences of using the 
phone system in a clinical setting.  
The purpose of this evaluation is to assess the impact and 
experiences of using a context-aware communication system 
at a hospital department (the Oncology Department). The 
main research question can be put as follows: Will work 
practices at a hospital ward be improved by using local smart 
phones? We will investigate these aspects:  
 
 
System usage 
 
Nurses’ expectations  
 
Changes in time use  
 
Changes in work practices  
 
Nurses’ experiences  
 
In this paper, we report results from the three first aspects 
outlined above. Changes in work practices and nurses’ 
experiences are reported in a separate paper [11].   
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS  
In this section, we present details on the materials and 
methods used to investigate system usage, nurses’ 
expectations and changes in time use. It also provides 
detailed information regarding how to use the phone system 
and the research setting.   
A. Using the phone system  
Users are provided personal accounts that they can access 
from any phone connected to the system. Users log on using 
personal login credentials. Configuration and personal data 
(like contact lists, messages and phone logs) are temporarily 
stored on the phones – only as long as the user is logged into 
the system. All personal data are stored on the user profile. 
The profile is downloaded to the phone when the user logs 
on and deleted from the phone when the user logs off. In all 
cases, the user’s data are stored in the system and protected 
so that other users cannot access this information. 
Authentication is based on Lightweight Directory Access 
Protocol (LDAP) and is compatible with Active Directory 
(AD), meaning that each user can potentially use his or her 
ordinary username and password from the hospital 
information system to log in to the phone system. The users 
can make and receive calls in a one-to-one configuration, or 
in a one-to-many configuration for conference calls. A user 
cannot receive or start a second call without hanging up the 
first one.  
The system silently offers ‘delivered’ and ‘read’ 
acknowledgement for each message. Messages are stored on 
the users’ profiles, which means that whenever the user is 
logged on, his or her messages are available on the phone 
through the profile. 
 Before the nurses started to use the phone system, they 
were provided an introduction and training lasting 
approximately five minutes. The phone system’s inventor 
visited the ward for the first two days after the first nurses 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

started using it to provide more support if needed. The only 
support required involved creating accounts for new users.  
B. The setting  
The study site was the Oncology Department at the 
UNN. The department offers chemotherapy, radiation 
therapy, hormone therapy, other symptomatic treatment and 
palliative care. Nurses follow national guidelines for 
treatments with the goal of curing as many people as 
possible of their cancer or to prevent or delay the 
development of the disease. 
The Oncology Department includes a ward with 25 beds 
and about 120 employees, including nurses, nurse assistants 
and medical doctors. The ward treats and cares for patients 
between the ages of 16 and 95 years old. Most of these 
patients are seriously ill and in need of heavy care. In 
addition, about ten patients stay at the patient hotel 
connected to the hospital. The nurses’ work schedule is 
organised in three shifts: the day shift includes 10 nurses, 
the afternoon shift has 5 or 6 nurses, and the night shift has 
3 nurses. 
C. Methods  
This evaluation study follows a multi-method research 
approach using both quantitative and qualitative data. We 
recognise that randomisation is the most robust method of 
avoiding systematic bias, but this method was not possible 
for this evaluation. To randomise the nurses into two groups 
would require the nurses to switch between their usual mode 
of communication and the new phone system. Such a switch 
between the intervention and usual care is unlikely to 
succeed [12].  
We have collected data before and after the introduction 
of the phones. The data were collected from phone logs and 
we registered the nurses’ step count. We utilised an 
anonymous survey to explore the nurses’ expectations of the 
system. The survey was made accessible to the nurses on 
duty prior to implementing the communication system. The 
survey included a one-sided questionnaire and was placed in 
a cardboard box in the main corridor close to the nurses’ 
station. The questionnaire included questions about their 
expected changes in work practices as a result of using the 
phone system. They were first asked to name three changes 
they anticipated in their own work. Then, they were asked to 
specify which of the changes they thought were most 
important and why. The questionnaire included questions 
about when they expected the phone system device to be 
most used (during the day or night shift) and in which 
situations. Furthermore, the nurses were asked if they 
expected the phones to be used inside or outside the ward 
location. All questions in the questionnaire were open 
ended. Two of this paper’s authors categorised the answers.  
To analyse if the phone system saved time for the 
nurses, we measured the step counts before and after 
introducing the phone system. Twenty-five nurses received 
the Fitbit step count, carrying it in their uniform pockets 
during their shifts. Different nurses used the step count 
before and after. It was not possible to measure the step 
count for the same nurses before and after the phone system 
was introduced. The main reason for this limitation was that 
the shift plan for the study period was already made. 
The steps were monitored one week before and one 
week after the introduction of the phone system (in 
December 2016).  
Fitbit One tracks all steps taken, stairs climbed, calories 
burned and distances travelled (see figure 1). The results 
from each day were stored digitally and displayed as an 
activity from midnight one evening until the following 
midnight. This feature implies that if a nurse was working 
the night shift, data from two different data collection screen 
dumps had to be summarised to measure the steps over the 
whole shift. Likewise, data from one screen dump sometimes 
had to be divided if the nurse had two consecutive night 
shifts. Data from the step counts were reported in an Excel 
sheet. Data regarding calories burned was considered 
irrelevant and not reported.  
We also collected logs of the system usage, including 
how many messages and phone calls were sent/performed on 
which date and at what time of day.  
IV. 
RESULTS  
In this section, we report on the nurses’ expectations and 
presents some preliminary findings on system usage and the 
before-and-after step count assessment. 
A. Expectations 
A total of 11 nurses completed the questionnaire. All 
respondents answered the first part of the questionnaire, 
except one who did not specify the change perceived to be 
most 
important. 
All 
respondents 
expressed 
positive 
expectations. No one voiced any concerns. Expectations 
revolved around two main themes: phone use would save 
time and reduce disruptions and interferences in daily tasks. 
As reasons for these expected benefits, the nurses pointed to 
improved information and communication flow in their work 
practices. They expected changes in time use as a result of 
spending less time walking around and searching for 
colleagues. Furthermore, they noted that fewer paper 
messages and a more "orderly” information flow would 
improve their work practices. They seemed to assume that 
fewer messages would be lost or forgotten; instead of having 
to use several stages to deliver messages, the process of 
Figure 1. Screen dump from Fitbit One for a nurse working two 
consecutive night shifts 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

sending questions and receiving answers/feedback would be 
streamlined. They expected that the system would make it 
easier to get in contact with colleagues and cause fewer 
interruptions during reports and rounds. The nurses could 
also "mark themselves as busy" when in a sterile setting or 
working with a patient, for instance. 
All respondents envisaged situations where they expected 
to use the phone system. This response applied both when 
the nurse would be with ‘their own patients’ (patients for 
whom they have a special responsibility) and with other 
nurses’ patients. They also reported that they believed the 
system would be useful in the following situations: during 
patient admittance, patient examinations, shift handovers, 
and while sending and receiving messages from secretaries, 
medical doctors and other colleagues.  
     Several nurses expected to use the phone system 
especially in the daytime, but some assumed that they would 
benefit most from the phone system during night shifts. 
Most nurses estimated that they would use the system inside 
the ward location, not outside.  
B. Phone logs   
We also collected phone log data regarding the use of 
both the message and phone services. Figures 2 to 5 show 
the total usage of the system since implementation, from 
December 16th to January 21st. Figure 2 shows the total 
usage during the day from zero (midnight) until 23:59. 
Figure 3 shows the total number of messages sent during the 
day. Nurses send messages on all shifts, with a peak during 
the day shift between 9 and 10 am. Figure 2 compared with 
Figure 3 reveals that nurses only use the message function 
during the night shift, omitting the call function. Figure 4 
shows the total number of phone calls during the same 
period. We can see that there were almost no phone calls 
between December 19th and January 3rd. Figure 5 shows the 
number of messages sent per day from December 16th to 
January 21st. A few messages were sent on December 21st 
due to a false alarm, but this error was fixed the following 
day. The system was not used during the Christmas 
holidays.  
C. Step count  
Before the phone system was introduced, we measured 
the steps of 21 nurses from 80 shifts, 24 afternoon shifts and 
56 day shifts. The day shift resulted in 369,589 steps over 
446 hours, and the afternoon shifts in 150,600 steps over 
171 hours. After the phone system was introduced, we 
collected steps from 13 nurses on 82 shifts, 27 afternoon 
shifts and 55 day shifts. The day shift resulted in 334,017 
steps over 411 hours, and the afternoon shifts led to 174,445 
steps over 197 hours.  
We found no significant difference in step count after 
implementing the phone system. Using a t-test, the mean 
number of steps per hour before and after was 838 and 830, 
respectively (P = 0.82).  
 
Figure 2. Total number of actual calls at certain times of the day from 
December 16th to January 21st  
 
Figure 3. Total number of actual messages divided by time of the day from 
December 16th to January 21st 
 
Figure 4. Total number of actual calls for each day from December 16th to 
January 21st 
 
Figure 5. Total number of actual messages for each day from December 
16th to January 21st 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

V. 
DISCUSSION  
In this paper, we have evaluated a hospital phone system 
at the Oncology Department at the main hospital in 
Northern Norway. We found that the nurses believed that 
phone use would save time and reduce disruptions and 
interferences during their daily work. They also envisaged 
fewer paper messages and a more "orderly” information 
exchange. The logs show that phone use increased over time 
and that the system was most frequently used during the day 
shift with a peak at 9 and 10 am. However, we did not find 
that nurses spent less time walking around looking for 
colleagues.  
The results of the survey suggest that the nurses believed 
the phone system would make the information and 
communication flow more efficient while improving work 
practices. 
Furthermore, 
they 
emphasised 
that 
this 
improvement would not only benefit the nurses themselves 
by saving time and reducing disruptions, but it would also 
improve patient care. The nurses believed that they would 
spend less "unnecessary time" on getting messages and 
questions to the right people. Fewer interruptions might also 
reduce stress according to the nurses. Furthermore, they 
noted the stress they felt when they had "to run after" people 
or when they "must remember" things. They also expressed 
frustrations over "not finding" or "forgetting to pass on a 
message". It seems logical that when nurses spend less time 
and energy on getting and passing on information, it 
benefits the patients. The patients would have easier access 
to the nurses who would experience fewer interruptions 
during patient treatment and care. The nurses suggested that 
the phone system would make them more time efficient and 
thereby improve patient care. 
However, we found no significant difference in step 
count after implementing the phone system, a result that 
must be seen in light of several methodological limitations. 
The step count was measured over a short period, one week 
before and one week after the system was introduced. Steps 
were measured in December. Perhaps more importantly, the 
“after” measurements were collected the last week before 
the Christmas holidays, which might have affected the 
results as normal workloads are reduced around the 
holidays. Furthermore, collecting the measurements right 
after the phones’ introduction might have been too soon to 
capture an effect. It is reasonable to assume that the users 
need more time and practice to learn how to use the phone 
system before we can expect a change in work habits.   
It should also be noted that a few messages were sent on 
December 21st due to an alarm going off. Caused by a bug 
in the system, the issue caused the nurses stop using the 
system for a day. The bug was fixed the same day, but due 
to the upcoming holidays and less activity at the department, 
several of the nurses were not aware that the system was up 
and running again. This situation might explain the system’s 
lowered use during the holidays.  
We did not record the nurses’ exact workload for these 
two weeks; such information would include how many 
patients each nurse had in his or her care and how much 
care these patients needed. In addition, the nurses were 
given very little training in using the system. The phone 
logs show that system use has increased over time since we 
measured the steps, which might indicate that the nurses did 
not know the full functionality of the system at the time. 
When the nurses become more experienced in using the 
system, a change in work habits and practices may follow. 
Another possible explanation for the low use and the lack of 
difference in step count is that the nurses will run as much 
as possible independent of any technological system due to 
their eagerness to help as many patients as possible [13]. 
This finding could imply that more patients might receive 
better treatment and care due to the new phone system.  
Another limitation is that it was not possible to measure 
the step count for the same nurses before and after the phone 
system was introduced. The main reason for this limitation 
was that the shift plan for the study period was already 
made. Some of the nurses working the first week (before 
data) were off work during the second week (after data). 
Another reason for this limitation is the short time period 
allotted for this pilot study. 
Therefore, future studies are necessary. Data should be 
collected in different departments, and over longer periods, 
both before and after introducing the new system. Before 
the “after” data is collected, the nurses should be given time 
to become familiar with the phones and their functionalities. 
The data collected should be from periods with equal 
workloads, and data on step counts should be collected from 
the same nurses before and after. These changes would 
improve the validity of the results.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
In this paper, we have reported some preliminary results 
from a pilot study evaluating the introduction of a phone 
system in one hospital department. We found that the nurses 
believed that phone use would save time and reduce 
disruptions and interferences in their daily work. The logs 
show that phone use increased over time and that the system 
was most frequently used during the day shift with a peak at 
9 and 10 am. However, we did not find any time savings, as 
measured by reduced step count.  
The next step in this evaluation is to collect interview 
data and measure use and step count over a longer time 
period. Future research questions will also investigate if the 
phone system influences the quality of patient care as well 
as the nurses’ perceived safety of information exchange and 
productivity at the hospital ward.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the personnel at the Oncology 
Department at the University Hospital of North Norway for 
participating in this study. We also want to thank Stein Olav 
Skrøvseth for his valuable input.  
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

REFERENCES 
[1] 
E. Coiera, "Communication Systems in Healthcare," Clin 
Biochem Rev, vol. 27, pp. 89-98, May 2006. 
[2] 
J. Scholl, P. Hasvold, E. Henriksen, and G. Ellingsen, 
"Managing Communication Availability and Interruptions: A 
Study 
of 
Mobile 
Communication 
in 
an 
Oncology 
Department," in Pervasive Computing, ed, 2007, pp. 234-
250. 
[3] 
J. Bardram and A. Doryab, "Activity Analysis: Applying 
Activity Theory to Analyze Complex Work in Hospitals," 
presented at the Proceedings of the ACM 2011 conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work, Hangzhou, China, 
2011. 
[4] 
E. Coiera and V. Tombs, "Communication Behaviours in a 
Hospital Setting: An Observational Study," BMJ, vol. 316, 
pp. 673-676, February 28, 1998 1998. 
[5] 
M. A. Munoz, M. Rodriguez, J. Favela, A. I. Martinez-
Garcia, and V. M. Gonzalez, "Context-Aware Mobile 
Communication in Hospitals," Computer, vol. 36, pp. 38-+, 
2003. 
[6] 
R. G. Soto, L. F. Chu, J. M. Goldman, I. J. Rampil, and K. J. 
Ruskin, "Communication in Critical Care Environments: 
Mobile Telephones Improve Patient Care," Anesth Analg, 
vol. 102, pp. 535-41, Feb 2006. 
[7] 
K. J. Ruskin, "Communication Devices in the Operating 
Room," Curr Opin Anaesthesiol, vol. 19, pp. 655-9, Dec 
2006. 
[8] 
P. A. Spurck, M. L. Mohr, A. M. Seroka, and M. Stoner, 
"The Impact of a Wireless Telecommunication System on 
Time Efficiency," J Nurs Adm, vol. 25(6), pp. 21-26, Jun 
1995. 
[9] 
T. Solvoll and J. Scholl, "Strategies to Reduce Interruptions 
from Mobile Communication Systems in Surgical Wards," 
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 14, pp. 389-392, 
2008. 
[10] T. Solvoll, "From Being Interrupted by Mobile Devices to 
Callmesmart - a Context-Sensitive Communication System 
for Mobile Communication in Hospitals," University of 
Tromsø, Vitenskapelig artikkel 978-82-8236-100-2, 2013. 
[11] E. Johnsen, T. S. Bergmo, M. A. Johansen, and T. Solvoll, 
"Evaluation of a Context Specific Communication System 
Based on Smartphones:  Nurses’ Uses and Experiences " in 
Scandinavian Health Informatics, Shi 2016, ed: Linköping 
University Electronic Press, 2016. 
[12] M. Campbell, R. Fitzpatrick, A. Haines, A. L. Kinmonth, P. 
Sandercock, D. Spiegelhalter, and P. Tyrer, "Framework for 
Design and Evaluation of Complex Interventions to Improve 
Health," BMJ, vol. 321, pp. 694-6, Sep 16 2000. 
[13] E. Jovanov, K. Frith, F. Anderson, M. Milosevic, and M. T. 
Shrove, "Real-Time Monitoring of Occupational Stress of 
Nurses," Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 
EMBC, 2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE, 
2011, pp. 3640-3643. 
 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

