Proposal of Gait Monitoring Shoes Based on Comparative Analysis of Walking Gait 
Cycle between Normal People and Stroke Patients 
 
Shohei Yoshida 
Graduate School of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University Graduate School 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-mail: g231n034@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Yoshitoshi Murata 
Faculty of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-mail: y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp, 
 
Abstract— Elderly people have an increased risk of falling and 
consequently injuring themselves. The prevention of falls is one 
of major important issues to keep healthy life, because a fall is a 
main reason for them to hospital administration or a residential 
care. Motion capture systems are a key component to prevent 
falls. We comparably analyzed walking gait cycle between 
normal people and stroke patients using a wearable device (WD) 
to detect warning signs of falls. In this paper, we experimentally 
clarify to which body part a WD is best attached and what kind 
of signs are useful to prevent falls.  We also develop a pair of 
shoes with a WD in each heel in accordance with results of pre-
experiment. 
Keywords-falls; trip; wearable device; hemiplegia; guit; shoes. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Percentage of elderly people in the population is 
increasing in the world [1]. As the number of elderly increases, 
the number of functionally impaired people, such as 
cerebrovascular patients who have one side paralysis, will also 
increase. These people have an increased risk of falling and 
consequently injuring themselves [2]. Falling down is one if 
the main reasons for them to be hospitalized or placed in 
residential care. 
There are many researches related to a fall for elder people. 
The World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe 
analyzed these studies and classified fall risks amongst elderly 
people by history of falls, age, gender, living alone, ethnicity, 
medicines, medical conditions, impaired mobility and gait, 
sedentary behavior, psychological status - fear of falling, 
nutritional deficiencies, visual impairments, and foot 
problems [2]. Stroke patients, such as a cerebrovascular 
disease especially are at substantially high risk of falling 
[3][4][5][6]. The higher frequency of falls for them due to 
weak muscles, one-side paralysis, and toes pointing down. For 
people with impaired mobility and gait, tripping is a major 
cause of falls [7][8], so we focus on tripping in this paper. 
Since weak muscles, one-side paralysis, and toes pointing 
down strongly appear in the movement of leg and foot, motion 
capture for them are a key component to analyze impaired 
mobility and gait and useful to prevent tripping and conduct 
therapy and rehabilitation of hemiplegia.   
Weijun Tao et al. reviewed gait analysis technologies 
based on wearable sensors that were the accelerometer, 
gyroscope, electromagnetic tracking system, magneto-
resistive sensors, flexible goniometer, sensing fabric, force 
sensor, and sensors for electromyography. They mentioned 
that fall risk estimation is an important application of gait 
analysis using wearable sensors [9]. However, they did not 
describe about motion of gait for elderly people or stroke 
patients.  
Stacy J. Morris Bamberg et al. developed a prototype shoe 
in which several kinds of wearable sensors, such as 
accelerometer, gyroscope, force sensor, bidirectional bend 
sensor and so on [10]. The calibrated sensor outputs were 
almost same as results obtained simultaneously from a 
biological motion measuring equipment. They calculated the 
maximum pitch (angle between the shoe sole and floor at the 
toe-off timing), minimum pitch (angle between the shoe sole 
and floor at the heel-strike timing), the stride length from 
output of accelerometers and gyroscopes. They also compared 
the maximum pitch, minimum pitch and stride length between 
the healthy gait and parkinsonian gait. There were differences 
on mean value of calculated data between the healthy gait and 
parkinsonian gait. However, considering standard deviation of 
calculated data, such differences were small. They also did not 
measure and analyze motions of gait for elderly people or 
stroke patients. 
Farzin Dadashi et al. measured motion of gait for many 
elderly people with shoe-worn inertial sensors and provided 
normative values for a clinician to measure reference gait 
parameters [11]. They analyzed motion of gait and clarified 
the difference in gait parameters, such as the clearance 
between a shoe sole and floor, gait speed, stride length 
between males and females by considering the effect of age 
factors. However, their data did not show differences clearly 
between the male and female, and the effect of age factor. And, 
they did not investigate data for stroke patients or analyze 
reasons for tripping. 
Mourad Benoussaad et al. introduced a method to robustly 
estimate foot clearance during walking using a single inertial 
measurement unit (IMU) placed on the subject’s foot [12]. In 
their paper, the foot clearance was the height of ankle from a 
floor. However, the toe clearance is more critical for tripping. 
And, they did not measure the toe clearance for stroke patient 
or analyze reasons for tripping.  
Here, we focus on extracting warning signs of tripping for 
stroke patients, such as cerebrovascular patients. We got 
output data of an acceleration sensor and gyroscope sensor in 
the wearable device (WD), Sony SmartWatch 3, mounted on 
the front part of a foot to estimate the kicking power and 
change of angle between a foot and floor.  We noticed that an 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
angle velocity at the terminal stance and an angle at the 
terminal swing show clearly differences between unimpaired 
student and stroke patients. After that, we develop a pair of 
shoes built a WD on. 
In the next section, we consider how people trip on a flat 
floor. Different features between physically unimpaired 
students and stroke patients are extracted from measured data 
in Section III. The best body part to which a wearable device 
(WD) can be attached is described in Section IV. We 
introduce a pair of shoes with a WD in each heel and example 
data measured using them in Section V. Conclusions are 
summarized in Section VI.  
II. 
CONSIDERATION OF TRIPPING FACTOR 
When the swing foot progression is unexpectedly 
obstructed, a trip occurs that leads to a forward rotation of the 
body and eventually might cause a fall.   
Mourad Benoussaad et al. measured the minimum toe 
clearance (MinTC) to avoid tripping. MinTC is a critical value 
to clear obstacles on the ground or floor. However, elderly 
people, especially those who have had strokes, sometimes trip 
on flat ground or floors, not obstacles. In this section, we 
consider reasons a person trips on flat ground or floors. We 
divide the normal walking gait cycle into eight phases the 
same as Weijun Tao et al. as shown in Fig. 1 [9]: (1) initial 
contact (heel-strike timing), (2) loading response, (3) mid-
stance, (4) terminal stance (toe-off timing), (5) pre-swing, (6) 
initial swing, (7) mid-swing, and (8) terminal swing. 
 
 
Figure 1. Normal walking gait cycle (See a right foot) 
 
Most stroke patients have weak muscles and are hard to 
raise their toe. Therefore, they are at risk of three types of trips. 
- 
Case 1: A toe touches the floor first instead of a heel 
at phase 1. Since phases 2-5 are skipped, the toe is 
dragged along the floor. When the dragging strength 
is stronger than the person’s muscular power, he/she 
trips (Fig. 2(a)). 
- 
Case 2: Kicking power of the front part of a foot is 
insufficient at phases 4 and 5 to raise the heel and toe 
up from the floor. In this case, a person does not swing 
but shuffles. When the frictional force between a shoe 
sole and the ground or floor is stronger than his/her 
muscular power, he/she trips (Fig. 2(b)). 
- 
Case 3: A toe touches the floor due to it pointing down 
during the swing phases (5-8), and the knee goes 
further forward than the foot. When the dragging 
strength is stronger than the person’s muscular power, 
he/she trips (Fig. 2(c)). 
 
 
Figure 2. Cases of tripping 
 
The above problems suggest that the kicking power at 
phases 4 and 5 and the angle between the foot and a floor are 
critical parameters. 
 
III. 
EXTRACTION OF WARNING SIGNS FOR TRIPPING 
In this section, we experimentally investigate whether the 
kicking power at phases 4 and 5, and the angle between the 
foot and lower limb are critical parameters. 
A. Experimental method 
Since kicking power must be expressed as the angle 
velocity or the acceleration for the foot, we mounted a WD 
which had an accelerometer and gyroscope on the foot. In this 
experiment, we used Sony SmartWatch 3 as a WD which is 
mounted on the front part of a foot with Velcro tape as shown 
in Fig. 3. This mounting position was same as one in Farzin 
Dadashi’s experiment [11]. The sampling rate was 40 msec.  
We measure angle velocity for up and down directions of 
the front part of the foot (X axis of a 3D gyroscope). We also 
adopted a three-point moving average of the angle velocity to 
calculate the angle, because output values extremely change 
up and down. Therefore, the angle for X axis Anglexn at time 
tn is calculated as follows. 
     (1) 
Gxn is the value of angle velocity for X axis at time tn. We 
also recorded video and measured locations of a patient’s 
knee, ankle and foot by using Microsoft-KINECT to monitor 
their motions (Fig. 4). The UNIX time is introduced to 
synchronously measure data with a WD and MS-KINECT. 
Before measuring, we investigated the measuring 
accuracy of Sony SmartWatch 3 using a slant rule as shown 
in Fig. 5. We measured data five times. Calculated angles vs. 
angles given by the slant rule are listed in Table I. These data 
showed calculated angles were so accurate. We noticed drift 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
errors of a gyroscope that increase the value by 0.2 rad. /sec. 
during a WD sets on a flat floor. However, each measurement 
lasted less than 20 sec. Therefore, we think the effect of the 
drift error is negligible.  
Participants were five physically unimpaired students and 
five stroke patients. Every stroke patients in this experiment 
had one-side paralysis, and trained periodically at a 
rehabilitation facility. Some of them used a wheel chair and 
could not walk by himself before training. They walked along 
a straight line to MS-KINECT. A WD was attached on the 
front part of foot on the paralysis side. We measured data for 
each stroke patient two times.  
             
 
           (a) WD: Sony SmartWatch 3       (b) WD mounted on foot 
Figure 3. Measuring device and WD mounting method  
 
    
             
 
(a)  MS-KINECT set up in  (b) WD mounted on stroke patient 
    rehabilitation facility 
Figure 4. Measurement environment in rehabilitation facility 
 
 
Figure 5. Slant rule 
TABLE I. ACCURACY OF CALCULATED ANGLES 
Given angle 
(degree) 
Calculated angle 
(degree) 
SD 
(degree) 
+50 
+49.00 
0.45 
+40 
+39.17 
0.74 
+30 
+28.92 
0.51 
+20 
+19.58 
0.63 
+10 
+9.21 
0.58 
0 
0.21 
0.15 
-10 
-9.72 
0.58 
-20 
-19.47 
0.34 
-30 
-30.70 
0.56 
-40 
-40.57 
0.41 
-50 
-50.54 
0.53 
B. Measured data and consideration 
Fig. 6 and 7 show examples of change of angle velocity, 
angle, and acceleration for a physically unimpaired student 
and a stroke patient. Data for two steps are plotted.  
Each flat period (roughly the center period) in these 
figures is when the entire shoe sole touched the floor; this 
period corresponds to phases 2 (loading response) and 3 
(mid-stance). The reason that the value during this period is 
not zero is that the WD measures the angle between the front 
part of the foot and the floor, which depends on the person 
and shoe. Therefore, we reset this angle for the gait 
monitoring shoes described in Sections IV and V when the 
entire shoe sole touched the floor. This processing enables the 
WD to measure the angle between the back of the foot and 
the floor. This value does not depend on person or shoe. 
The maximum angle velocity at timing A means the 
kicking power from phase 4 (terminal stance) to 5 (pre-
swing), and the minimum angle at timing B means the angle 
to the floor at phase 8 (terminal swing). This processing 
removes the drift error of the gyroscope. 
Lower angle velocity at A in Fig. 6 is about 420 deg./sec. 
On the other hand, higher angle velocity at A in Fig. 7 is about 
250 deg./sec. Thus, a physically unimpaired student and a 
stroke patient obviously differ in terms of gait. The stroke 
patient clearly has weaker kicking power at phase 4 (terminal 
stance) than the physically unimpaired student.  
Higher angle at B in Fig. 6 is about -18 degree. On the 
other hand, lower angle at B in Fig. 7 is about -8 degree. Thus, 
a physically unimpaired student and a stroke patient 
obviously differ in terms of the angle to a floor at phase 8 
(terminal swing). This shows that it is difficult for a stroke 
patient to raise his or her toe at the terminal swing phase. 
 
 
Figure 6. Changes of angle velocity, angle, and acceleration for physically 
unimpaired student  
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Figure 7. Changes of angle velocity, angle, and acceleration for stroke 
patient 
 
The other hand, the acceleration basically change 
corresponding to the angle velocity and angle. However, they 
have much noise, and their amplitudes are not stable. 
Tables II and III list the averages and standard deviations 
(SDs) of measured data for angle velocity at timing A and 
angle at timing B. The angle velocity at timing A is clearly 
different between unimpaired students and stroke patients. 
There is a big difference between them in the angle at timing 
B, however this value would be sometimes overlapped each 
other. 
We also measure the cadence for a gait using the WD and 
MS-KINECT. In this paper, we define the cadence as the 
number of steps per minute. We estimated the cadence 
derived from an average of 10 intervals between one timing 
A and the next A, which are peak angle velocities of a step, 
when a WD is used.  Estimated cadence is listed in Table IV. 
A physically unimpaired student and stroke patient do not 
obviously differ in terms of cadence. 
As the result of this experiment, we decided to adopt the 
change of angle velocity and angle between a foot and floor 
to detect warning signs of falls.  
TABLE II. ANGLE VELOCITY AT THE TERMINAL STANCE 
Participant 
Average (deg./s) 
SD (deg./s) 
Student 
509.36 
18.91 
Stroke patient 
342.06 
86.52 
 
Table III. Angle at the terminal swing  
Participant 
Average (deg.) 
SD (deg.) 
Student 
-17.76 
8.02 
Stroke patient 
-7.45 
8.02 
TABLE IV. ESTIMATED CADENCE  
Participant 
Average (steps/m) 
SD (steps/m) 
Student 
46.4 
5.0 
Stroke patient 
49.0 
6.2 
 
IV. 
SUITABLE WD ATTACHING POSITION 
A WD has to be attached somewhere on a body during 
walking to detect signs of tripping to prevent a fall. A WD 
was attached to the front part of the foot in Section III. 
However, it is difficult for a WD to firmly be set at this place 
for a long time because it is easily detached. Therefore, we 
studied which position is the best to detect the change of 
angle velocity for a foot and angle between a foot and floor. 
We attached WDs to a heel and a lower limb as shown in Fig. 
8.  
For this test, we used STEVAL-WESU1 by STMicro-
electronics (See Fig. 9) as a WD instead of Sony SmartWatch 
3. This wearable unit includes four sensors: 
- 
3D-accelerometer, 
- 
3D-gyroscope, 
- 
3D-magnetometer, 
- 
MEMS pressure. 
This device is 37 x 40 x 8 mm and weighs 9.6 g. 
We inserted STEVAL-WESU1 into the heel of a shoe as 
shown in Fig. 8 (a) (details in Section V). Angle velocity and 
acceleration data of STEVAL-WESU1 are sent to and 
processed by an Android smartphone. The sampling rate was 
40 ms. We adopt a three-point moving average to remove 
noise. 
We requested three unimpaired students to walk with 
their normal gait. Since their data change was basically the 
same, graphs of one participant are shown in Fig. 10 and 11. 
Both plotted lines in Fig. 10 are similar in shape to those in 
Fig. 6. Timing A and B correspond to timing A and B in Fig. 
6. Timing B in Fig. 10, which is the angle at the terminal 
swing, is shown more clearly than that in Fig. 6. On the other 
hand, timing C in Fig. 11 shows the kicking power from 
phase 4 (terminal stance) to 5 (pre-swing) is the same as 
timing A in Fig. 6 and 10. However, the angle at timing D in 
Figure 11 is between not the foot and floor but a single limb 
and the vertical line to the floor. The plotted angle in Fig. 11 
clearly shows a change of angle for the single limb. 
As the result of this experiment, we decided that the heel 
was the best position to place a WD. 
 
(a) Heel                                     (b) Single limb 
 
Figure 8. WD attaching position  
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
Figure 9. STEVAL-WESU1 by STMicroelectronics 
 
Figure 10. Angle velocity and angle data at heel in normal walk 
 
 
Figure 11. Angle velocity and angle data at single limb in normal walk 
 
V. 
GAIT MONITORING SHOES 
As described in Section IV, we determined the heel of a 
shoe is the best place to measure angle velocity of the foot 
and angle between the back part of a foot and the floor. We 
inserted a WD (STEVAL-WESU1 by STMicroelectronics) 
into soles of both shoes. And, we also developed a gait 
monitoring application for Android smartphone which 
measures and stores the angle velocity and angle as shown in 
Fig. 12. The upper part shows ID of WD for the right and left 
shoe, and the lower part shows angle velocities at A in each 
step for right foot, angle at B in each step for right foot, angle 
velocities at A in each step for left foot, and angle at B in each 
step for left foot. In this application, direction of angle is 
turned. When these graphs were measured, a participant 
played a stroke patient who had a one-side paralysis for the 
right side of the body. Therefore, most strength of angle 
velocity at A for right foot were smaller than that for left foot. 
And, most amplitude of angle at B for right foot were smaller 
than that for left foot. 
 
Figure 12. Gait monitoring application for Android 
 
We experimentally monitored walking for two 
participants. They were unimpaired people. They walked and 
played the three types of trips in Fig. 2. Example measured 
data are shown in Fig. 13. Therefore, curves of angles in these 
graphs have different discontinuity to those in other graphs at 
the sole of a shoe touching a floor.   
In (1); toe touching the floor first instead of a heel, and 
(2); shuffling, shapes of angle velocity resemble that of the 
normal walk shown in Fig. 10. However, maximum values of 
angle velocity and minimum angle in a cycle in Fig. 13 (1) 
and (2) are much smaller than those in Fig. 10. Their absolute 
minimum values are also much smaller than those in Fig. 10. 
This feature must show that when muscle strength is weaker, 
more trips occur. 
 
 
(1) Toe on floor at the initial contact 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
(2) Shuffle instead of swing 
 
 
(3) Toe collision with floor at the initial swing 
Figure 13. Example measured data for tripping with gait monitoring shoes 
 
 In (3), a toe dragging the floor due to it pointing down 
at the initial swing, the swing did not start smoothly. The red 
circle in Fig. 13 (3) shows this situation clearly. In the case 
of a normal walk, angle velocity rapidly decrease from the 
pre-swing to the initial swing. However, in (3), the angle 
velocity limply decrease on the way. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We comparably analyzed walking gait cycle between 
normal people and stroke patients using a wearable device 
(WD) to detect warning signs of falls. The results of 
experiments for physically unimpaired students and stroke 
patients show that the angle velocity at the terminal stance 
phase and the angle between the back of foot and a floor at 
the terminal swing are critical parameters. We determined a 
shoe heel to be the best place to place a WD, inserted WDs 
into heels of a pair of shoes, and showed data measured using 
them. We plan to develop a warning system using the 
proposed shoes for fall prevention. More data of above 
critical parameters for stroke patients in daily life including 
tripping conditions will be measured to develop such system. 
REFERENCES 
[1] World 
Population 
Ageing: 
1950-2050, 
Population 
Division, 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations, 
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/worldageing19502050
/ [retrieved: Fe, 2017]. 
[2] World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe, “What are the 
main risk factors for falls amongst older people and what are the most 
effective interventions to prevent these falls?,”   
http://www.euro.who.int/en/data-and-evidence/evidence-informed-
policy-making/publications/pre2009/what-are-the-main-risk-factors-
for-falls-amongst-older-people-and-what-are-the-most-effective-
interventions-to-prevent-these-falls   [retrieved: February, 2017] 
[3] F. A. Batchelor, S. M. Mackintosh, C. M. Said, and K. D. Hill, "Falls 
after stroke," Int J Stroke, Vol. 7, pp. 482-90, 2012. 
[4] G. S. Verheyden, V. Weerdesteyn, R. M. Pickering, D. Kunkel, S. 
Lennon, A. C. Geurts, and A. Ashburn, "Interventions for preventing 
falls in people after stroke," Cochrane Database Syst Rev. (5), 
CD008728, 2013. 
[5] J. A. Tutuarima, J. H. P. van der Meulen, R. J. de Haan, A. van Straten, 
and M. Limburg, "Risk Factors for Falls of Hospitalized Stroke 
Patients," Stroke, Vol. 28, pp. 297-301, 1997. 
[6] R. Teasell, M. McRae, N. Foley, and A. Bhardwaj, "The Incidence and 
Consequences of Falls in Stroke Patients During Inpatient 
Rehabilitation: Factors Associated With High Risk," Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil Vol. 83, 2002. 
[7] R. K. Begg, O. Tirosh, C. M. Said, W. A. Sparrow, N. Steinberg, P. 
Levinger, and M. P. Galea, "Gait training with real-time augmented 
toe-ground clearance information decreases tripping risk in older adults 
and a person with chronic stroke." Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 
Vol. 8, Article 243, 2014. 
[8] A. J. Blake, K. Morgan, M. J. Bendall, H. Dallosso, S. B. Ebrahim, T. 
H. Arie, P. H. Fentem, and E. J. Bassey, "Falls by elderly people at 
home: prevalence and associated factors," Age Ageing; Vol. 17, pp. 
365-72, 1988. 
[9] W. Tao, T. Liu, R. Zheng, and H. Feng, "Gait Analysis Using Wearable 
Sensors," Sensors, 12(2), 2012, pp. 2255-2283. 
[10] Stacy J. Morris Bamberg, Ari Y. Benbasat, Donna Moxley 
Scarborough, David E. Krebs, and Joseph A. Paradiso, "Gait Analysis 
Using a Shoe-Integrated Wireless Sensor System," IEEE Transaction 
on Information technology in Biomedice, Vol. 12, No. 4, 2008. 
[11] F. Dadashi, B. Mariani, S. Rochat, C. J. Büla, B. Santos-Eggimann, and 
K. Aminian, "Gait and Foot Clearance Parameters Obtained Using 
Shoe-Worn Inertial Sensors in a Large-Population Sample of Older 
Adults," Sensors 2014, Vol. 14, pp. 443-457, 2014. 
[12] Mourad Benoussaad, Benoît Sijobert, Katja Mombaur, and Christine 
Azevedo Coste, "Robust Foot Clearance Estimation Based on the 
Integration of Foot-Mounted IMU Acceleration Data," Sensors 2016, 
2016. 
[13] William P. Berg, Helaine M. Alessio, Eugenia M. Mills, and Chen 
Tong, "Circumstances and consequences of falls in independent 
community-dwelling older adults", Age Ageing, Vol. 26, pp. 261–268, 
1997. 
 
 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

