Nursing Telecare: Public Stories and Practices 
Annemarie van Hout, Marike Hettinga 
Research Group ICT-innovations in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
a.van.hout@windesheim.nl 
Jeannette Pols 
Medical Ethics, department of General Practice 
Academic Medical Centre 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
a.j.pols@amc.uva.nl
 
 
Abstract - There are high expectations on the use of telecare. In 
this paper, we look into the way these expectations are 
expressed in what we call public stories and how these stories 
relate to telecare practices. We have conducted  a quick search 
on the public stories of care organizations and policy 
documents and ethnographic research on nursing telecare 
practices in a homecare organization. Public stories tend to 
describe telecare as a phenomena that is here, that is 
autonomous and has positive outcomes. The nursing practices 
show that telecare has effect on care as we know it. With the 
technology come all kinds of changes in care, brought on by 
the technology and its users. Telecare needs care professionals 
and patients to make it fit by tinkering with it, which leads to 
good care. This is not a part of the public story, a discrepancy 
that can cause governmental policies to be unfit for day-to-day 
practices. 
Keywords-nursing telecare; policies; ethnografy 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The use of technology to be able to care at a distance 
(telecare) leads to new forms of care, which raise broad 
attention. Telecare is embraced by governments and some 
care organizations, looking for new opportunities to reduce 
cost. The context is a time of rising care demands and 
declining personnel, leading to rising health care costs [1]. 
Innovations like telecare seem promising out of the problems 
healthcare is facing. 
 
Telecare brings new products and players along. 
Diabetes patients, for example, are active players in these 
new forms of care, when they use technology to monitor 
themselves. New services are offered, like house monitoring 
systems, which aim at making persons feeling more safe. A 
recurrent example of improved organization is tele-
dermatology. Nurses or general practitioners take a picture of 
a wound or skin disease and the dermatologist evaluates it at 
a distance. It safes trouble and time for patients and doctors, 
as the patient does not have to go to the hospital. These new 
forms of care aim at improving the organization of care. 
 
We sketch a different dynamics between the hopes 
of (governmental) organizations on how telecare will solve 
future problems of healthcare and the new care practices that 
come along with the technology. We see these hopes 
narrated in different appearances, like governmental policies 
or care organization’s leaflets, which we call public stories. 
We aim to relate these public stories to the care practice. The 
governmental and organizational policies have a guiding 
influence on healthcare, which makes it important to know 
whether it fits the care practice it is made for. We focus on 
nursing care with research that is founded in a PhD-project.  
The project’s main research question is: how do public 
stories of telecare relate to nursing practices of telecare? We 
conducted ethnographic research in a project in a home care 
organization, where a team of oncology nurses initiated and 
implemented telecare. With this study we want to broaden 
the research on telecare. The leading form of research for  
government and insurance companies are effect studies, for 
example randomized controlled trials (RCT’s). Effect studies 
isolate particular variables to learn about the effects of the 
new care. Is the newly used device enhancing quality of care, 
are patients more satisfied or does it prevent rehospitalization 
[2][3]? Effects are not exclusive or open for interpretation 
[3] and some of these studies also describe examples of 
friction [4]. Patients and nurses have different experiences 
for example about how the telecare experiment influences 
the care relationship. In these studies such outcomes are 
shown as side effects; changes in care relationships are not 
object of study. Other studies do aim at new forms of care, 
but they use different tactics of research, like ethnography. 
The design of a RCT’s is not flexible, and innovations, like 
telecare technologies are , do not stay the same over time [5]. 
It demands for forms of research that can go along with the 
fluid ways of innovation. Examples are found around the 
theoretical insights of Science and Technology Studies, from 
where we draw extensively. Important starting point is that 
technology is not neutral but it is part of the (care) relations 
between people. Just a grab from a very rich pot of theory 
and research: technology is tinkered with to get it right [6], 
people use it in other ways than it was designed [7] and 
people get attached to technical devices [8]. 
 
In this article we take a first step, in relating nursing 
telecare practices and public stories. 
 
II. 
METHOD 
In this section we will discuss the PhD project and the 
methods used for the fieldwork on both the public stories and 
the nursing practices. 
A. The project 
The nurses of a homecare organization started a telecare 
project because they wanted to monitor patients more closely 
without being more intrusive. At the same time patients 
would be facilitated to contact nurses more often. Being able 
to see each other would add an extra advantage over the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

phone. For this goal they used an existing system, made up 
by a computer and webcam. When the patient starts the 
computer, a screen appears that shows different buttons. The 
nurses designed this screen and filled it with information 
related to cancer, like specialized information on food. One 
of the features of the system is an digitalized questionnaire 
on symptoms of patients, on which results the nurses 
evaluated whether extra contact was necessary. In the second 
half of the PhD project observations and interviews will be 
conducted in a nursing telecare practice in mental health 
care. For the public stories, no fieldwork is exercised yet, 
apart from the quick search which is described in the next 
paragraph. 
 
B. Public stories 
For the public stories on telecare so far a quick search has 
been done, based on early research design ideas. The search 
we performed aimed at getting an insight in different ways in 
which telecare is reported on. We used two sources: at first 
we retrieved policy documents which were assembled over 
the last six years. We selected three documents from leading 
and influential institutions (two research institutions and a 
council) [10][11][12]. We searched for descriptions and 
definitions of telecare or eHealth. The samples we used in 
the results are exemplary for how policy documents define 
telecare. Secondly we performed a quick scan using a 
common 
internet search engine 
to see how care 
organizations present themselves. We looked in to websites 
that hit the descriptions ‘telecare’, ‘care at a distance’ or 
‘care and technology’. The search was limited to Dutch 
websites. A website was included when it told something 
about the function, promises or applications of telecare 
(n=10). Whenever possible, terms and results are translated 
in this article. 
C. Nursing Practices 
A team of homecare nurses specialized in palliative care, 
mostly for patients with cancer was followed for 18 months. 
They initiated a project to introduce telecare in their work. A 
computer with a designated website and a webcam were 
introduced to patients.  Part of this research was aiming at 
the changes telecare would bring to the nurses care. In order 
to do so, intensive observation on house calls (‘care as 
usual’) was performed (n=14). Most of these patients turned 
out to be candidates for participation in the project. After the 
start of the telecare, in some cases observations continued 
during house calls, as the telecare project often was subject 
of discussion during the house calls (n=8). Patients needed 
extra instruction or nurses were curious how patients went 
through the system. The contact between patients and nurses 
while using the system for care at a distance were also 
observed (n=19). Field notes were taken during the 
observations and patients and nurses were interviewed 
(n=12). 
For these 
interviews, 
we 
performed 
auto-
ethnographic interviews [9]. Respondents were asked to tell 
about and reflect upon their (professional) activities. Patients 
were approached for participation in the research by the 
nurses, accompanied with a letter of the researcher, which 
explained the goal of the research and the procedures for 
acceptance or refusal.  
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Public stories on telecare 
A striking result from our quick search on telecare stories 
in the public domain is that those stories are mainly positive. 
Care organizations, to start with, that offer telecare, 
announce it in different ways, like leaflets or on the internet. 
Our first example is an arbitrary one, as are many more can 
be found on YouTube. In this little film we found a still as 
shown in figure I. 
In the still you can see a text box. It says (in Dutch, but 
translated by the authors): ‘After the conversation I feel 
better and I can face the day feeling good’.   
 
Figure 1.  Still of a Youtube movie. 
The short movie shows Yvonne, a middle-aged woman 
who tells about her illness and how the new technology (a 
videophone) helps her through the day. It is a telephone with 
a screen and she uses it to ‘phone’ her caregiver twice a day. 
Notwithstanding the much broader impact of such care than 
just this still, it does show a very positive opinion of a client. 
Positive in a promising way: life will be better when the 
device is used. Whenever short movies likes these are spread 
on the internet, along a certain story on telecare is told to the 
public. 
The positive story though can be found in research or 
governmental reports as well [10][11]. Most of them 
consider telecare as here to stay. The recent years reports 
handle subjects of concern or give advice that stem from this 
reference point. The 'National Institute for Public Health and 
the Environment' [12] for example pleas for risk 
management of eHealth, including a system to report 
failures. Such a plea can also be read as a confirmation of 
eHealth as an establishment, as it needs risk management 
and a matching system. That eHealth can be considered an 
establishment is not so much a surprise, but this example 
shows how it turns up in reports as well. 
Another example of the settlement eHealth as a positive 
innovation is the way it is defined. The perceptive reader has 
already noticed that a slight change in discourse just took 
place. Where we talked about telecare up till now, in this 
section the word eHealth is introduced. eHealth is the 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

language used in most results of our quick search, so we 
choose to use it in this section too. One example is of the 
‘Dutch institute for health services research (NIVEL)’ [13]. 
They, as do others [14], use the following definition:  
‘eHealth is the use of new information and communication 
technologies and in particular internet technology to support 
and enhance health and healthcare’. In this definition eHealth 
is not just here to stay, but also a very positive development, 
as it will support and enhance care.  
It is in definitions like these the public story manifests 
itself prudently. Obviously, the definition itself doesn’t 
exclude any critical remarks on eHealth. They are not 
mentioned, but the positive effect is. Our aim is not to 
disclose opposite camps, as the discussion on telecare and its 
effects on care is not helped by contradictions. It is helped by 
nuances. The question is whether this widespread definition 
is giving enough room for nuances. 
Our analysis of public stories is very short, as fits a work 
in progress. The analysis shows a very positive way of 
representing telecare (or eHealth). It is here to stay, it 
enhances health and healthcare and it leaves patients 
satisfied. Just by caring from a distance, good care is given. 
But what is happening in nursing practices? 
 
B. Nursing practices and telecare 
The data of the nursing practices allows for different 
lines of thought. On the analysis of the pre-telecare house 
calls an article is written which is currently under review 
[15]. This article is on the role of materiality in care. 
Building on the earlier mentioned insights of Science and 
Technology Studies, this article shows how materiality plays 
an important role in care as we know it. In this article, we 
focus on the materiality in people’s homes in the pre-telecare 
phase. Things in people’s homes are part of their lives and 
turn out to be part of the given care. By introducing 
materiality as an active and important player in the care 
relationship between patients and nurses, ideas can be 
formed on how the relationship will change when telecare is 
used.  
Another line of thought around materiality is on how 
nurses and patients handle the telecare device that was 
introduced in the project. Part of the application is the digital 
questionnaire. With this questionnaire nurses expect to be 
able to monitor patients more frequently. In the next citation, 
nurse Annet talks about her expectations of the digital 
questionnaire: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During the project nurses noticed that different things 
happened when patients started to use the questionnaire 
Nurse Katja makes a deal with mister Compaan: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Compaanis not feeling happy with the instructions 
and uses the questionnaire differently, which forces nurse 
Katja to adapt as well. Together they use the technology in 
an unexpected way. These examples show how materialities 
play an active role in care and how technology leads to new 
forms of care, which ask for adaption and tinkering by nurses 
and patients. 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Our quick analysis of public stories on telecare shows 
quite a positive image of telecare. This is not undermined by 
the insights in nursing practices, but public story and practice 
do not seem to match. Public stories tend to describe telecare 
as a phenomena that is here, that is autonomous and has 
positive outcomes. The nursing practices show that telecare 
has effect on care as we know it. Telecare needs care 
professionals and patients to make it fit. It leads to good care 
when patients and nurses succeed. This tinkering needs time 
and effort, which is not talked about in the public story.  
As this is a work in progress and as the fieldwork has not 
been exercised completely, these conclusions are open to 
changes. The conclusions are not just preliminary because of 
the unfinished fieldwork, but also because we have made 
correlations that are open for discussion. To start with: what 
is the relation between public stories and nursing care 
practices? The line of thought we introduced is that the 
fieldwork on telecare practices indicates that with telecare 
comes tinkering, which needs time and space. We also 
suggested that tinkering and the necessary time is not part of 
the public story. That suggests that whatever nursing care 
needs, should be part of the public story. As if battles are 
fought there. Maybe that is an unjust assumption. Base for 
this thought is for example a starting point on telling stories: 
stories are an inextricable part of relations [16] and therefor 
of society. The way stories are told influence public opinion 
and hence end up in governmental policies.  
 
Still a lot of questions can be asked. What are the 
effects of public stories on the health care system? How are 
public stories read and written down the best way? What 
insights can be added on any of these questions or what 
questions should also be raised? As our research continues 
some questions may be answered, as others inevitably will 
be raised. 
 
 
 
 
The USD [questionnaire] is to me the core of the 
program…even when you ask a lot of questions at the 
house call… still some things are not mentioned… 
research shows that people underreport and when you 
structure these questions… Both them and us will see 
the relations between things. The beauty of this system  
is that we get a signal whenever a symptom becomes a 
burden. So this is an extra aid to guard. 
Mister Compaan fills in an average grade for a day. 
Nurse Katja keeps explaining to mister Compaan that 
the USD [questionnaire]  is designed to register how he 
feels at that moment, at the actual moment he fills in the 
answers, but she fails. Eventually she proposes to do it 
his way. She will evaluate mister Compaans results in 
that way (field notes house call). 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

REFERENCES 
[1] European Commission . “Communication from the 
commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the 
Europlian Economic and Social Committee and the 
Committee of the regions. eHealth Action Plan 2012-2020”. 
Innovative Healthcare for the 21st century. COM (2012) 736. 
[2] K.H.  Bowles, D.E. Holland, D.A. Horowitz. “A comparison 
of in-person home care, home care with telephone contact and 
home care with telemonitoring for disease management”. 
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare. 2009 15: 344. 
[3] R. Janssen, H. Prins, A. van Hout, J. Nauta, L. van der Krieke, 
S. Sytema and M. Hettinga, “Videoconferencing in Mental 
Health Care”, paper for eTelemed 2015. 
[4] L. Brewster, G. Mountain, B. Wessels, C. Kelly and M. 
Hawley. “Factors affecting frontline staff acceptance of 
telehealth technologies: a mixed-method systematic review”. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing. 2013 70(1): 21-33. 
[5] J. Pols, Care at a Distance: On the Closeness of Technology. 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Amsterdam University Press, 
2012. 
[6] M. Winance. “Practices of experimenting, tinkering with, and 
arranging people and technical aids”, in Care in Practice. On 
tinkering in clinics, homes and farms. A. Mol, I. Moser and J. 
Pols, Eds. Verlag 2010: Bielefeld, pp 93-118. 
[7] M. Akrich. ‘The De-Scription of technical objects’,  in 
Shaping technology / building society. Studies in 
sociotechnical change. W.E. Bijker and J. Law, Eds.  
Cambridge (MS), London (GB) 1992: The MIT Press, 225-
258. 
[8] I. Moser and J. Pols. Cold technologies versus warm care? On 
affective and social relations with and through care 
technologies. Alter - European Journal of Disability research. 
2009 3 (2): 159-178. 
[9] J.Pols. “The heart of the matter. About good nursing and 
telecare”. Health Care Analysis . 2010 18: 374–388. 
[10] Dutch Healthcare Authority (NZa) “Advice E-health. 
Changes for e-health in medical special care”. 2013. 
[11] Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sports. “Health in sight. 
National memorandum health policy”. 2011 
[12] H.C. Ossebaard, A.C.P. de Bruijn, J.E.W.C. van Gemert-
Pijnen and R.E. Geertsma. “Risks related to the use of 
eHealth Technologies. An exploratory study”. RIVM Report 
2012 360127001 
[13] J. Krijgsman et al.”eHealth, further than you think. eHealth 
monitor 2013 (eHealth, verder dan je denkt. eHealth monitor 
2013)”. Nictiz and NIVEL. The Hague, 2013. 
[14] RVZ (Council for Public Health and Health Care) (2002) E-
health in sight. Advice of the Council for Public Health and 
Health Care to the Minister of Health, Welfare and Sport (E-
health in zicht. Advies uitgebracht door de Raad voor de 
Volksgezondheid en Zorg aan de minister van 
Volksgezondheid, Welzijn en Sport). 
[15] A. van Hout, J. Pols and D. Willems. “Shining trinkets and 
unkempt gardens. About the materiality of care.” 
Unpublished. 
[16] A.W. Frank. “The standpoint of storyteller”. Qualitative 
Health Research. 2000 10 (3): 354-365 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

