APPLYING the STOF BUSINESS MODEL FRAMEWORK in EHEALTH 
INNOVATIONS
 
R.A. Menko, S. Visser, R. Janssen, M. Hettinga 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences  
 Research group  ICT innovation in Health Care 
P.O. Box 10090, 8000 GB Zwolle, The Netherlands 
{ra.menko, s.visser, tjwm.janssen, 
m.hettinga}@windesheim.nl 
 
T. Haaker 
Novay 
P.O. Box 589, 7500 AN Enschede, The Netherlands 
timber.haaker@novay.nl 
 
 
Abstract— eHealth solutions create opportunities for 
improving efficiency and quality in health care. Still 
many eHealth innovations never get beyond the project 
phase. A business model approach can help eHealth 
entrepreneurs and innovators to bridge the gap between 
Buzz (ICT as a promise for better care) and Business 
(viable eHealth services and business models). The 
research group ICT Innovation in Health Care 
developed a business model approach based on three 
components: the STOF business model framework, the 
innovation process and relevant success factors for 
eHealth innovations. This resulted in the development of 
an online eHealth innovation Matrix (eHix). The 
approach is illustrated by an actual eHealth case. 
Keywords- business models; innovation;  guidelines;   success 
factors 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The research described in this paper focuses on how to 
embed eHealth innovations in routine care. Nowadays there 
is still a discrepancy between the opportunities offered by 
innovative eHealth applications and the reality of routine 
health care. 'End-of-project' all too often means ‘end of 
innovation’. This has also been observed by others [1] and 
although plenty of suggestions have been made for 
improvement, a comprehensive approach which supports 
innovators in bridging the gap between project and routine 
practice is still lacking.  
IT-related business model innovations have become key 
factors in achieving structural innovation in  
healthcare [2]. A business model approach can therefore be 
used as an instrument to bridge the gap of innovative 
eHealth ideas to successful IT-based care services. The 
approach described in this paper is a combination of 
business model design, the phases in the innovation process 
and generic and eHealth specific success factors. These 
three components combined result in what we have called 
the eHealth innovation Matrix (eHix).  
By combining the phases in the innovation process with a 
business model approach (based on the STOF Framework 
[3,4]) the future challenge of embedding the innovation in 
routine care gets attention throughout the various activities.  
Success factors play an important role in business model 
design [3]. Success factors (SFs) can be described as “the 
key areas where things must be right for the business model 
to flourish” [4]. The success factors indicate to what extent a 
business model is capable of creating value for customers 
and capturing value by the network of stakeholders.  
Well-known and lesser known success factors for eHealth 
innovation receive a better place in the innovation process 
by linking them with the correct phase and the right 
business model domain, thus avoiding pitfalls and 
underestimation of non-technical requirements. 
The eHix is a combination of the STOF framework 
(Section II) and the phases in the innovation process 
(Section III). When combined, a matrix model (Section IV) 
is created that can be used to allocate the SFs (Section V) 
which are extracted from generic, market specific and case 
specific studies. 
A case study called DiMove will be used to illustrate the 
added value of eHix. DiMove is a Real time Medication 
Monitoring (RTTM) service for patients with epilepsy.  
II. 
STOF FRAMEWORK 
The basis for the development of the methodology is to 
consider eHealth innovation as a service innovation rather 
than 
technological 
development. 
For 
successful 
implementation of eHealth services a healthy business 
model is required. We therefore use a business model 
approach. A business model is essentially a description of 
how organizations offer innovative services in an 
economically viable way. There are several business model 
frameworks available [5]; of these we used the STOF 
framework. 
The STOF framework [3,4] describes a business model 
in terms of four interrelated domains, i.e. the service domain, 
technology domain, organisation domain and finance 
domain.  
The service domain gives a description of the service 
offering, its value proposition and the market segment at 
which the offering is targeted. The Technology domain gives 
a description of the technical functionality required to realize 
the service offering. A description of the structure of the 
multi-actor value network required to create and provide the 
service offering and describe the focal firm’s position within 
the value network can be found in the Organization domain. 
The Finance domain describes the way a value network 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

intends to generate revenues from a particular service 
offering and of the way risk, investments and revenues are 
divided among the various actors in a value network. 
Figure 1 shows the perspectives and examples from the 
four business model domains. For example, data streams 
transferred over networks and the end-user applications and 
devices co-determine the required functionality in the 
technology domain.    
 
Domain 
Perspective 
Example 
 
Figure 1. Business model domains, perspectives and examples 
   
III. 
INNOVATION PHASES 
There are many models  in use to describe the innovation 
process [1, 6, 7]. We have chosen a model which is based on 
the innovation phases of Cooper [7] and which uses five 
innovation phases, each with its own goals and approaches, 
i.e.: inventory phase, design & development phase, 
experimental phase, pilot phase and implementation phase. 
The innovation process begins with the inventory phase. 
The purpose in this phase is to make an inventory of the 
needs and conditions of the users for whom the new service 
will be created. The next phase, design and development, 
focuses on thinking about the business model and how the 
technology will be designed and developed. This is 
followed by the experimental phase in which some users try 
out the new application, often in laboratory setup. 
Subsequently, in the pilot phase, more users will be 
involved to work with the new service in their daily 
practice. When successful, the process ends with the 
implementation phase. Figure 2 shows the five innovation 
phases and examples. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Innovation phases and examples 
IV. 
MATRIX MODEL 
The five innovation phases can be combined with the four 
business model domains to form a matrix with 20 cells, the 
eHealth innovation matrix (Figure 3). The matrix allows to 
allocate distinctive SFs to each cell. A cell describes the 
essential steps and choices in the innovation process for a 
specific area within the business model in a specific phase 
and can therefore be matched with success factors for 
eHealth innovations. These SFs will be identified in the next 
step to complete the eHix innovation matrix. 
  
 
Figure 3. Combining business model domains with the innovation phases 
V. 
SUCCESS FACTORS FOR EHEALTH INNOVATIONS 
The third and final step of the approach is the 
identification of possible success factors for eHealth service 
innovations. The success factors can be divided into three 
groups, Generic Success factors, Industry and market 
specific success factors and Case specific success factors  
[8]. 
A. Generic Success Factors 
A number of generic success factors need to be satisfied 
by any business model for it to be viable. For example, does 
the business model create value for the customers and does 
it create value for the (business) actors? A business model 
that obviously creates value for the customer does not 
necessarily create value for other actors participating in the 
business model and therefore may not always be viable.   
One of the most important SFs is the “match to customer 
needs” [9]. In different studies this SF correlates strong with 
the actual success of the innovation. For eHealth 
applications, customers may include patients, doctors, 
medical 
specialists, 
caregivers, 
or 
health 
insurance 
companies. It is therefore important to determine who the 
customers are and their interests and requirements. Urban 
and Hauser added one success factor that emerged in several 
studies, ”time to market”. This SF is especially important in 
industries where the lifecycles are short and frequent 
innovation must fit a moving window of technology or 
market performance [10]. This SF applies to eHealth 
services as well, as these services are usually based on the 
products of the fast moving ICT industry.  
B. Industry and market specific success factors 
The industry and market in which a business model and 
innovative concept is deployed, i.e. the business context, 
often comes with its own success factors as well. For 
example the care market requires new care solutions to be 
‘evidence based’, i.e. with clinically proven value, before 
they are admitted to the care market.  
An expert meeting can be an efficient instrument for 
gathering Industry and  market specific SFs. To this end, one 
typically invites different stakeholders and experts such as 
actors involved in the business model, researchers, market 
specialists, end-users representatives, financial experts, 
innovation specialists or technology experts. A recent expert 
Design & 
Development 
Experimental  
Pilot 
-Usability 
-Start design  
  business model 
-Invest in  
  resources 
-Reliable  
  technology 
-Training facilities 
-User support 
-Evidence based  
  medicine 
-Business model 
Inventory 
Implementation 
-Openness 
-Technology and 
  market scan 
-Needs research 
Value proposition 
Target group 
Service 
Technology 
Organization 
Finance 
Customer or End-user 
Market Segments 
Rate and Effort 
Functionality  
required 
Cost structure 
Profit potential 
Structure of  
value network 
Devices 
Applications 
Data 
Revenues 
Pricing 
Perfomance indicators 
Actors 
Roles 
Interactions 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

meeting organized by our research group delivered the SFs  
shown in Table 1. 
TABLE 1. SUCCESS FACTORS DELIVERED BY EXPERT MEETING 
 
Success factors 
Service 
Strengthening primary care 
Involve patients 
Lifecycle management 
Patient central 
Keep it simple 
Technology 
Proven technology 
Organizational 
Direct contact with customers 
Avoid network complexity 
Financial 
Avoid 
application 
for 
grant 
before 
structural plan is created 
pricing strategy: dirty cheap in beginning 
C. Case specific success factors 
Finally the specific case at hand may come with its own 
success factors. The innovation in itself may entail specific 
SFs due to for example the use of a specific technology. 
Specifically the issues regarding the adoption of the 
technology, the technological developments and the 
reliability of the chosen technology should be addressed. 
Case specific factors can also be more specified versions of 
generic or industry specific success factors. We will discuss 
examples of case specific SFs in the next section, where we 
apply the eHix in the specific case of real-time medication 
monitoring for epilepsy patients. 
Now each combination of a business domain and a 
innovation phase can be coupled with SF's, completing the 
eHix.  
 
Figure 4. eHix with success factors 
VI. 
THE DIMOVE CASE 
This section illustrates the method explained earlier in 
this paper by a specific practical case. First we provide a 
description of the DiMove case. This case has gone through 
all innovation phases and is now in the implementation 
phase. Then we provide the designed business model based 
on the STOF framework and match the business model 
design with the earlier mentioned success factors. The last 
section contains an enumeration of the most important 
“lesson learned” based on this case study. 
A. The DiMove service 
DiMove [11,12] is an eHealth solution for assisting 
patients with epilepsy in taking their medication. For 
patients with epilepsy it is important to take the medication 
at regularly set times. A Dutch study into the medication use 
of people with epilepsy found an adherence of 65% [13]. 
Some patients frequently forget taking the medication at the 
correct time, which can lead to the occurrence of more 
epileptic seizures. DiMove uses a smart medicine box in 
combination with a web application  (Real time Medication 
Monitoring, or RTTM) [15].  The medicine box will send a 
message to a server when the box is opened. The messages 
are wirelessly transmitted by GPRS or SMS. A message 
contains information about the time of opening, an 
identification of the user, an identification of the drug if the 
patient uses different types of drugs, and any  other desired 
information. The RTMM works wherever there is a 
connection with a GSM network. Approximately 20 seconds 
after opening the box, the information is processed, stored 
and available in the DiMove application. The details of that 
message are stored in a central database and are accessible 
via a secure Internet account. When the patient forgets to 
take his or her medication he or she will receive a text 
message as a reminder to take the medication.  
 
Figure 5. RTMM concept 
B. The DiMOVE business model 
1) Service domain 
This part of the STOF Frameworks describes the service 
offering, the value proposition and the possible market 
segments of the DiMove service. DiMove is offered as a 
support program for epilepsy patients. The patient uses the 
RTMM device for real time monitoring of medication use. 
The DiMove Support Program includes a web-based user 
interface that provides overviews of medication use and 
seizure history, an electronic diary to record seizures, and 
distribution of regular summary reports to monitor use of 
the DiMove program. The application also supports sending 
questions to patients and for patients to send answers back 
to health care professionals. 
The program starts with a consultation during which the 
epilepsy patient receives instructions about the DiMove 
Support Program. A dedicated health care professional 
monitors the patients that use the program. The customers 
who will actually pay for the DiMove service are 
specialized clinics for treating patients with epilepsy. They 
can use DiMove as a service for some of their patients. The 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

DiMove service also provides extra information for their 
medical specialists. So the users of the service are the 
patients and the specialists. 
DiMove assumes that patients who got acquainted with 
RTMM during their treatment in an epilepsy clinic may also 
want to continue their subscription once hospital treatment 
has ended. In the Netherlands there are 120.000 epilepsy 
patients [15]. The potential target market for DiMove is 
10.000 patients, as patients have to be able to operate the 
DiMove technology (mobile phone and web application). It 
is easy to see that the concept is also suitable for many other 
users of medical drugs (in solid form) with a chronic illness. 
This could considerably increase the market potential of 
DiMove. The value proposition for the patient is medication 
adherence.  
For the medical professional the service provides more 
detailed information about the use of the medication by the 
patient and the possible effects of the medication based on 
adjustments in the medication. Health organizations can 
improve the effectiveness of their treatments and create 
competitive 
advantage 
compared 
to 
other 
health 
organizations.  The value proposition for parents of a child 
with epilepsy is an enhanced sense of security because the 
child is less likely to forget to take medication. The parents 
can receive a text message as well, if they want. 
 
2) Technology domain 
The technology domain contains a description of the 
technical functionality required to realize the service 
offering. Some relevant variables in this domain are: the 
technical architecture, network accessibility, needed devices 
and applications.  
DiMove’s technical functionality consists of five main 
components: 
1. a standard cell phone that is able to receive and display 
text messages; 
2. a medicine box that is able to send a signal to a server 
when it is opened; 
3. a web application that is accessible for the patient, 
caretaker and medical professional, 
4. a server where the data is stored, 
5. the mobile internet connecting the box, the application 
and the server. 
The technology used in the DiMove service is proven and 
relatively simple  and therefore reliable. Reliability is 
important because the service intends to deliver complete 
and accurate information about the use of medication. The 
messages sent by the RTMM  device are wirelessly 
transmitted by GPRS or SMS. SMS has proven to be a 
reliable 
communication 
service. 
Another 
advantage 
compared to, for example, using a 3G network, is that the 
client can use a standard telephone instead of a smartphone. 
Almost every cellphone is able to send and receive SMS. In 
most cases the client already has a cellphone and doesn’t 
need (or want) to buy  an expensive smartphone with mobile 
internet subscription.  
 
3) Organization domain 
This part of the business model contains a description of 
the different actors in the network needed to deliver the 
eHealth service and the position of these actors in the value 
network.  
Actors: Evalan is the supplier of the hardware and the 
developer of the DiMove concept. Evalan is also responsible 
for the marketing, sales and technical support. SEIN is a 
specialized clinic in the Netherlands for epilepsy treatments. 
SEIN is the paying customer for Dimove and provides the 
DiMove support program to its patients. SEIN is also 
responsible for the development of the medical protocol for 
the support program. Other actors of interest are the 
pharmaceutical industry (for instance by offering a package 
deal, DiMove in combination with the medication), 
insurance companies (extra service for their customers with 
epilepsy) and the NVN (Dutch Society for Neurologists). 
The NVN determine the standard treatment for epilepsy 
patients in the Netherlands. If the NVN would decide to 
include the DiMove concept in the standard treatment for 
epilepsy, all care providers would have to make use of 
DiMove. 
Actors' strategic interests: For SEIN and other epilepsy 
clinics the strategic interest is mainly providing extra 
service to their clients and getting more detailed information 
about their patients to improve their treatments. Evalan is 
trying to get a solid market position in the Dutch health 
market and a stable starting point for further development of 
the DiMove concept. Our research group at Windesheim is 
studying how to design and implement eHealth solutions 
like DiMove and aims to spread this knowledge towards 
other projects and publications. 
Organizational Arrangements: The cooperation between 
the partners is specified by a term sheet. This term sheet 
summarizes the main commercial terms and conditions of 
the Collaboration Agreement for the development, testing, 
and commercial exploitation of the DiMove Program. SEIN 
is responsible for the training and guiding of the healthcare 
professionals and is supporting the marketing of the 
DiMove service. Evalan Is accountable for the sales and 
marketing of the DiMove concept and responsible for 
further development of the DiMove service and the 
technical support during the exploitation. 
 
4) Financial domain 
The financial domain describes the way the service 
intends to generate revenues and the way risk, revenues and 
investments are divided among the various actors in 
network. Revenues: The revenue model at this moment is a 
subscription, based on a monthly fee per medicine box. 
Financial arrangements: There are also arrangements about 
how to divide the revenues among the initial DiMove 
partners. For a period of seven years each partner receives a 
development fee as a percentage of the sales revenues.  
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

C. The success factors for DiMove 
In section V three levels for finding success factors were 
described. Table 2 contains some of the success factors for 
each of these levels that are relevant for DiMove. The next 
paragraphs describe the success factors for DiMove for each 
level. 
1) Generic success factors 
Table 2 shows three important generic success factor for 
DiMove. Understanding of the potential target group(s) is a 
success factor mentioned in many studies [4, 8]. Much is 
known already about DiMove’s target group, namely 
epileptic patients. The same applies for a clear value 
proposition. DiMove has a clear value proposition for the 
different users (doctors and patients), namely improved 
medication adherence.  
The business model variable Actors has a positive effect 
on the success factors “Understanding potential target 
group” and “Contribution to improvement of quality of 
care”. The current partners in the  DiMove development 
know the target group very well. One of the largest 
specialized epilepsy clinics in the Netherlands is involved in 
this project. They have considerable experience with 
treating epilepsy patients and have the necessary expertise 
to provide evidence that the DiMove support program 
indeed improves the quality of care. 
Little research has been done to identify other potential 
target groups. So it is recommended to investigate possible 
other target groups to increase the market potential and 
make the business model more viable. 
 
2) Industry specific success factors 
The 
contribution 
of 
eHealth 
solutions 
towards 
improvement of quality and efficiency in healthcare is a 
considered an important success factor. The ability to reduce 
the costs of health care after implementation of the 
innovation is also a strong success factor.  The costs of 
health care continue to increase due to aging of the Dutch 
population. There is considerable political interest to reduce 
the costs and improve the efficiency in health care at this 
moment. Cost effectiveness was an  issue in this case, 
although a proper cost effectiveness study has not been 
performed for this specific target group. In this case 
DiMove is not a new treatment but an instrument for the 
medical specialists and the client to improve the 
effectiveness of the standard treatment. During the design of 
DiMove SEIN conducted a pilot including 48 patients. The 
preliminary results showed improvements in medication 
adherence and experienced quality of life, and a decreasing 
frequency of epileptically seizures.  
Another important success factor in health care is the 
opinion of health care professionals, especially medical 
specialists. The neurologists of SEIN are part of the NVN 
(Dutch Society for Neurologists). SEIN is enthusiastic about 
the potential of DiMove and they are lobbying to include 
DiMove in the Standard Treatment for epilepsy. When this 
succeeds the DiMove service is eligible for reimbursement 
by health insurance companies. This can increase the market 
potential of DiMove because health care organizations like 
SEIN can use the service for their customers and get 
reimbursement from the insurance companies. Now SEIN is 
paying for the service using their own financial resources. 
 
3) Case specfic success factors 
In the DiMove case the specific success factors were 
discovered by conducting a business model workshop with 
the different project members of the DiMove project. The 
participants consisted of a professor of eHealth innovation, a 
technology specialist, a supplier of hardware and software, a 
manager of an epilepsy clinic, and a health innovation 
broker. The goal of the workshop was finding a viable 
business model for DiMove, but the results of this workshop 
also contained some case  specific success factors for 
DiMove. The three most relevant case specific success 
factors are listed in Table 2.  
TABLE 2 SUCCESS FACTORS DIMOVE 
 
Success factors for DiMove 
Generic 
SFs 
 
Understanding of potential target market(s) or 
target group(s) 
Clear value proposition(s) 
Creating a team with knowledge and experience 
Industry 
specific 
SFs 
Contribution to improvement and efficiency in 
health care 
Support of opinion leaders 
Support and training facilities 
Case 
specific 
SFs 
Proven technology 
Market situation 
Technology adoption among target group and 
health professionals 
  
For DiMove the market situation is important. In the 
Netherlands the concept is unique, but there are some 
international initiatives that can compete with the DiMove 
concept using different approaches. These initiatives are 
from two multinationals with the capabilities and resources 
to introduce their concepts on the Dutch market fast. 
DiMove is tailored towards epilepsy patients, a relatively 
small niche market. This creates a knowledge lead for 
DiMove, and because the market size for this niche is small, 
it is probably less interesting for big multinationals. To keep 
track of competitors is an important case specific success 
factor for DiMove. Another success  is adoption by the 
target group, patients and health professionals, and being 
able to understand and use the DiMove technology. Pilots 
concluded that the target group is enthusiastic about using 
DiMove. Having the support of the medical staff and 
especially the treating doctor was found to be important. 
VII. LESSONS LEARNED AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
A. Lessons learned 
A workshop based on the eHix with the different actors 
involved in the development of DiMove resulted in the 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

awareness of possible other target groups for the service. 
For example home care organizations could be an 
interesting target market for a concept like DiMove. These 
organizations deliver care to patients who often need to take 
many different kinds of medication.  The workshop also 
created a broader perspective on the impact of the service 
for different stakeholders like the pharmaceutical industry, 
caregivers like parents and relatives, and insurance 
companies.  This actually lead to initiative to start the lobby 
with the NVN (Dutch Society for Neurologists) mentioned 
earlier.   In an evaluation session the owner of Evalan, the 
entrepreneur behind DiMove, stated that one of the most 
important success factors for implementing eHealth services 
like DiMove is the need to have a health care supplier acting 
as a partner during the development of the eHealth service. 
The support of opinion leaders, for instance the medical 
specialists, was also mentioned by him to be an important 
success factor.  
This case study doesn’t validate the effects of the mentioned 
success factors. Therefore more evidence about the 
contribution of the success factors to an actual successful 
market introduction of health services like DiMove is 
needed. For instance, a retrospective approach might be 
used to establish the effects of the mentioned success factors 
in a range of different cases, including the further 
development of DiMove. 
B.  Further research 
In the previous paragraphs we identified the success 
factors that are relevant for services like DiMove. This 
actually represents only one dimension of the eHix. The 
other dimension are the five innovation phases. The current 
version of the eHix (www.ehix.nl) offers two functionalities: 
the eHix Scan and a Tools Library. The instruments in the 
Tools Library are grouped by cell and consist of templates, 
checklists, approaches, examples and references with which 
the required steps in the innovation process can be followed 
as closely as possible.  
The eHix Scan  consists of a questionnaire with which 
entrepreneurs and project owners can establish the status of 
their project and the designed business model. The scan’s 
questions are connected to the cells of the eHix matrix. 
After completing the questionnaire, the results show the 
status of the project by color coding the cells in the eHix 
matrix. Red cells need attention, and the tools in these cells 
provide the project owner with some instruments or 
templates to improve the status of the project. Green cells, 
on the other hand, indicate that the most important factors 
are taken into account. In January 2013 the development of 
a new version of the eHix starts. This version will integrate 
the mapping of the success factors for eHealth services to 
the cells of the matrix model, as presented in this 
publication. The questionnaire of the eHix scan will then be 
based on the success factors instead of deliverables like a 
project plan or business plan. The online toolbox will be 
targeted more specifically to eHealth entrepreneurs, helping 
them to design robust and viable business models for their 
eHealth innovations. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors wish to thank the province of Overijssel for the 
financial support of this project. Furthermore, they would 
like to thank the eHealth SMEs who participated in several 
expert meetings. Special thanks to Henk Schwietert of 
Evalan, the entrepreneur behind DiMove. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Broens, T. (2007). Determinants of successful 
telemedicine implementations: a literature study. 
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 13: 303–309. 
[2] Haaker, T. (2010). Business modellen voor ICT-
intensieve zorginnovatie. Nictiz Kennisartikel 10025. 
[3] Bouwman, H. et al. (2008). Mobile service innovation 
and business models. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer. 
[4] Faber, E. & Vos de, H. (2008). Creating successful 
ICT Services. Enschede: Telematica Instituut. 
[5]   Osterwalder, A., & Pigneur, Y. (2005) Clarifying 
business models: origins, present, and future of the 
concept, Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, Volume 15[6] 
Hansen, M., & 
Birkinshaw, J. (2007). The Innovation Value Chain. 
Harvard Business Review, 85(6), pp. 121–33. 
[6] Verschuren, P., & Hartog, R. (2005). Evaluation in 
Design-Oriented Research. Quality & Quantity, Vol. 
39, p. 733–762. 
[7] Cooper, G. (2009). EFFECTIVE GATING Make 
product innovation more productive by using gates 
with teeth . Marketing Management Magazine. 
[8] Haaker, T. et al. (2012). Creating Robust Business 
Models. Enschede: Novay. 
[9]  Urban, G. L., & Hauser, J. R. (1993). Design and 
marketing of new products. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. 
[10] Clark, & Fujimoto. (1989). Reducing the Time to 
Market: The Case of the World Auto Industry. Design 
Management Journal, volume 1; p49-57. 
[11] Evalan. (n.d.). dimove. Retrieved February 15, 2013, 
from http://www.dimove.com/ 
[12] Hettinga, M et al. (2012), Real Time Medication 
Monitoring with customized SMS reminders for 
people 
with 
refractory 
epilepsy, 
eTELEMED 
proceedings 2013. 
[13] Kunwar, R., Therapietrouw onder de leden van de 
EVN,  
         2010, Epilepsie Verenging Nederland: Ede. 
[14] Vervloet, M., et al., SMS reminders improve 
 
adherence   to oral medication in type 2 diabetes 
 
patients who are real time electronically monitored. 
 
Int. J. Med. Inform., 2012. 81(9): p. 594-604 
[15] (n.d.). Epilepsie Vereniging Nederland. Retrieved 
February 
15, 
2013, 
from 
http://www.epilepsievereniging.nl 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

