Medicinal Product Data Standardisation – Prerequisite for Efficient Data Exchange 
Between Stakeholders and Impact on the (Inter)National Health Systems   
Medicinal Product Data Standardisation in the Agency for Medicinal Products and Medical Devices 
(HALMED) 
Sanja Grčić Plečko1, 2  
1Agency for Medicinal Products and 
Medical Devices (HALMED), Zagreb, 
Croatia 
 2Faculty of Information Studies in 
Novo Mesto, Novo Mesto, Slovenia 
e-mail: 
Sanja.GrcicPlecko@halmed.hr 
Maja Fatiga1, 3 
1Agency for Medicinal Products and 
Medical Devices (HALMED), Zagreb, 
Croatia 
 3University of Zagreb, Faculty of 
Organisation and Informatics, Varaždin, 
Croatia 
e-mail: Maja.Fatiga@halmed.hr 
Dubravka Sudić1 
1Agency for Medicinal Products and 
Medical Devices (HALMED), Zagreb, 
Croatia 
e-mail: Dubravka.Sudic@halmed.hr 
 
Abstract - The authors describe challenges and learnings in the 
process of refactoring internal system for tracking the records 
of marketing authorization procedures and medicinal product 
database in the Agency for Medicinal Products and Medical 
Devices (HALMED) in order to comply with ISO IDMP 
(International Organization for Standardization, Identification 
of Medicinal Products) standards. HALMED’s plans include 
the medicinal products data model reconstruction, user 
interface adaptation, changes on the synchronization processes 
and establishing connection with SPOR (Substances, Products, 
Organisation and Referentials) data management services. In a 
response to the introduction of the ISO IDMP set of standards, 
the EMA (European Medicines Agency) initiated the SPOR 
data management service project, with the objective to provide 
the framework for standardization and structured data in 
medicinal products description. 
Keywords – health informatics; ISO IDMP; SPOR; 
Substances Management Services; Products Management 
Services; Organisations Management Services; Referentials 
Management Services; UNICOM; EMA. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 Medicinal products identification is a global challenge: 
healthcare stakeholders at each medicinal product life-cycle 
stage are capturing in their information systems different sets 
of data, using different codebooks, different languages, and 
even different abbreviations to describe medicinal products. 
Simple example might be pharmaceutical form described as 
“Film-coated tablet” that can be presented as “Coated 
tablet,” “Tablet,” or even “Tabl.” or “Tbl.”. The same 
product might be available in different countries with 
different dosage strengths and package sizes, under different 
brand names.   Even the same name might identify different 
products [1]. Suppose a patient has to take a drug prescribed 
by a doctor in his/her home country while visiting another 
county, where drug with the same brand name is not 
available. The question is whether the adequate replacement 
drug could be dispensed. Re-identification of medicinal 
products might be challenging due to insufficient data on the 
prescription or to unreadable data due to the language barrier 
or just different terminology and types of data used to 
describe medicinal products. When an inappropriate drug 
replacement is dispensed, patient’s safety might be 
jeopardized and the worst possible outcome might be 
adverse drug reactions [2].  
Covid-19 pandemic has shown the importance of 
introducing 
“univocal 
global 
identification 
(named 
Pharmaceutical Product IDentifier or PhPID) as foreseen in 
the ISO/CEN suite of IDMP standards. The requirement is 
supported for all medicinal products by the FDA (U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration) and by EMA, and facilitated by 
the EU Innovation Project UNICOM” [3]. 
EC Regulation (EU) 520/2012 (articles 25 & 26) [4] is 
addressing the above-described challenges by requiring 
national competent authorities in EU and Marketing 
Authorization Holders (MAHs) to apply the ISO IDMP 
standards for identification of medicinal products.  
ISO IDMP standards were introduced with the goal to 
have a standardized set of drug information across the world, 
across regulatory and medicinal communities, with the aim 
to fulfil a need in much wider health care areas. The 
standards were developed by the International Organization 
for 
Standardization (ISO) 
in 
cooperation 
with 
the 
International Council for the Harmonization of Technical 
Requirements for Pharmaceutical Products for Human 
(ICH), Health level Seven (HL7) and many other 
international stakeholders and experts [5][6]. ISO IDMP 
consists of five Health Informatics – Identification of 
Medicinal Products standards that were initially published in 
2012 [7][8][9][10]: 
• 
ISO 11615 — Data elements and structures for the 
unique identification and exchange of regulated 
medicinal product information; 
• 
ISO 11616 — Data elements and structures for the 
unique identification and exchange of regulated 
pharmaceutical product information; 
• 
ISO 11238 — Data elements and structures for the 
unique identification and exchange of regulated 
information on substances; 
• 
ISO 11239 — Data elements and structures for the 
unique identification and exchange of regulated 
information on pharmaceutical dose forms, units of 
presentation, routes of administration and packaging; 
• 
ISO 11240 — Data elements and structures for the 
unique identification and exchange of units of 
measurement.  
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Besides preparing an EU IDMP Implementation guide 
[13], EMA has established the SPOR data management 
services 
(Substances, 
Products, 
Organisation 
and 
Referentials) [11][12]. These management services should 
ensure that all EU stakeholders are using the same value sets 
for substances, organisations and referential data (dose 
forms, units of measurement, units of presentation, routes of 
administration)  [14].  
Although EMA provided an EU Implementation guide 
[15], complying with the EC Regulation (EU) 520/2012 
(articles 25 & 26) requires the national agencies to design a 
strategic plan for data management. Such a plan requires 
significant resources in terms of time, subject matter experts 
and financial resources. [16] Besides performing a detailed 
analysis of internal business processes and the assessment of 
data required by other healthcare stakeholders in order to get 
the required set of medicinal product data, other important 
tasks need to be fulfilled:  the current data model used in 
medicinal product database should be evaluated, user 
interface reconstruction should be considered and data must 
be corrected, standardized and mapped or replaced with the 
terms and codes of the SPOR value sets.   
In this article we describe the approach and experience of 
the HALMED in refactoring its information system in order 
to comply with ISO IDMP standards. We believe it will be 
instrumental to support other agencies planning their road to 
ISO IDMP compliance and will also contribute to solve the 
global challenge of medicinal products identification. 
In Section II, we describe the background and challenges 
related to deficiencies in data model of IT system for 
marketing authorisation processes and medicinal product 
database in HALMED. In Section III, we describe the initial 
step of our project of standardization of medicinal product 
data in HALMED (defining master data set for medicinal 
product identification).  In Sections IV and V we focus on 
the analysis of the results and on the plan for the refactoring 
of the current IT system. Next planned steps and preliminary 
conclusion are provided in Sections VI and VII. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND CHALLENGES 
HALMED is the Croatian national competent authority 
that provides regulatory services pertaining to medicinal 
products, medical devices, homeopathic medicinal products 
and certain aspects of veterinary medicinal products in 
accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Croatia. 
In 2010, HALMED started to build its own IT system to 
support marketing authorization processes and its medicinal 
products database, called NRL (abbreviation for Nacionalni 
Registar Lijekova, i.e., National Medicinal Products 
Registry).  It was decided that the medicinal products 
database should be based on the data model described in 
RDM 3.0 model (Reference Data Model published by 
EMA), that was confirmed as good practice at that time. As 
the original RDM data model has a lower sophistication level 
then the ISO IDMP data model, medicinal products are not 
described with the level of granularity expected for data 
exchange in the future EU medicinal products database. For 
instance, the current data are insufficient for cross-border e-
prescription exchange. Currently the medicinal product 
packaging is described with just a couple of descriptive text 
fields, and not with the structured data described in ISO 
11615 standard [17], on the base of which the EU 
Implementation guide [18] has been prepared.  
Consequences: data exchange with other healthcare 
stakeholders in the country or abroad is either not possible or 
very limited or needs to be performed manually. Even 
internal processes that rely on medicinal products data are 
missing essential information. For example, data that 
describe medicinal product packaging is essential for the 
process of calculating maximal wholesale price based on the 
comparable medicinal products’ prices from reference 
countries. Each medicinal product packaging from a 
reference country could be considered the same as domestic 
packaging if it has the same active substance, the same 
strength, the same pharmaceutical dose form [33][34], and 
the same pack size as the domestic packaging. From the 
listed attributes, the biggest challenge is to compare the 
packages themselves, especially while in the medicinal 
products database (that is used for list of domestic products) 
in internal system called NRL-PKL-PhV (PKL stands for 
Provjera Kakvoće Lijekova, i.e., Medicinal Products Quality 
Control and PhV stands for Pharmacovigilance), packages 
are described with just two descriptive text fields. There is 
no data describing the container, its volume and whether the 
vial is for single or multiple use. Standardized description of 
units of presentation is missing, as is the quantity of 
pharmaceutical product in the container, the number of 
containers in package, etc., etc.  
A. Description of the IT system at HALMED for core 
business processes and medicinal product database 
NRL system has been developed as a Web-based 
application that consists of a database, a Web interface, and 
Web services for integration with other internal IT systems. 
Although HALMED’s IT systems have been developed and 
upgraded in phases over the years, they are all interconnected 
with the services for data exchange and automation of 
process tasks, so that users are enabled to carry out all steps 
required for a business process via only one application – 
their core business process application. All process 
documents are stored on DAIS (Digitalni Arhivski 
Informatički Sustav, i.e., Digital Archival Information 
System) 
[36][37], 
HALMED’s 
Enterprise 
Content 
Management System built on IBM FileNet, and accessed 
directly from NRL. HALMED used to receive marketing 
authorisation applications documentation in paper form and 
those documents were then digitized, enriched with 
metadata, stored on DAIS and made accessible directly 
through the NRL application. Through Web services, the 
system is also connected with the other HALMED’s systems 
such as the filing system (Centrix), Archival Management 
System (Pismohrana) and invoicing system, so users can 
complete all their tasks within one interface. 
Over the years, the NRL system, built to support 
medicinal products marketing authorization processes, has 
grown and even became integrated with two other internal 
systems that rely on the same medicinal products data into 
one system called NRL-PKL-PhV. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

That system supports core business processes:  
• 
Case 
tracking 
for 
marketing 
authorization 
procedures (tracking of all procedural phases, 
tracking of deadlines and tasks completed by 
assessors, supporting the Committee for Medicinal 
Products processes, business reporting). 
• 
Pharmacovigilance 
tasks 
(Risk 
Minimization 
Measures (RMM) and Referral procedures). 
• 
Inspectorate activities related to planning and 
executing medicinal products sampling, quality 
control of medicinal products (Human and 
Veterinary) in the Official Medicines Control 
Laboratory (OMCL) (filing incoming samples, 
sample analysis and analysis task assignment, 
reagent management and management of standards, 
reporting of results and filing outgoing documents) 
[19]. 
NRL-PKL-PhV system (as shown in Figure 1) consists of 
three applications that share the same user interface, 
database, document store on DAIS, administration tools, and 
codebooks 
(referential 
lists). 
The 
latter 
are 
daily 
synchronized with SPOR RMS (Referentials Management 
Services) [20][21] by using the Application Programming 
Interface (API) lists and EUTCT (European Union 
Telematics Controlled Terms) substance list.  
 
Figure 1. NRL-PKL-PhV system 
 
In order to be able to capture all necessary data 
describing medicinal products, HALMED had to decide on 
the best pathway to ensure full compliance with ISO IDMP 
standards: either by building a new system up from the 
scratch or either by refactoring the old NRL system.  
HALMED considered on one hand that medicinal product 
data stored in NRL-PKL-PhV were not yet exchanged with 
other national-wide eHealth systems and on the other hand 
that a number of very complex processes were already 
supported by the system developed over the years. 
HALMED decided thus to opt for a refactoring of the 
NRL-PKL-PhV system, resulting in the reconstruction of the 
data model, the adaptation of the user interface, and the 
modification of the synchronisation processes.   
With the decision to undertake a NRL-PKL-PhV system 
refactoring, new questions arose about the complexity and 
the quality of the data used up to then.  
III. 
ANALYSIS 
OF 
THE 
MASTER 
DATA 
SET 
AND 
RECONSTRUCTION OF THE DATA MODEL 
In order to better understand the business needs, all the 
processes that rely on the medicinal product data were 
thoroughly analysed. Besides the NRL-PKL-PhV system, 
that is supporting above mentioned processes, the following 
additional processes utilize medicinal products data:  
• 
Calculating the maximal wholesale price of 
medicinal products,  
• 
Granting authorizations for parallel imports of 
medicinal products,  
• 
Giving approval for entry and importation of 
medicinal products and for emergency entry and 
importation of medicinal products.  
The Master data set for medicinal product was defined 
after a number of workshops with subject matter experts, 
resulting in a thorough analysis of internal processes that 
generate or utilize medicinal products data. In addition, 
requests from external consumers of medicinal products data 
were analysed.   
When defining the master data set, we also analysed the 
data models described in ISO IDMP standards. First and the 
most frequently used in our analysis was the ISO 
11615:2017 for the unique identification of regulated 
medicinal product information [17]. When it came to 
questions on how to describe complex compositions of 
pharmaceutical products, ISO 11238:2018 [22] was studied 
for deeper understanding of Substances identification data 
and ISO 11616:2017 [23] for Pharmaceutical Product 
information. 
During the process of drafting NRL-PKL-PhV system 
refactoring plan, we obtained very valuable guidance 
through the EU Implementation Guide v.2.1 [15] where all 
the medicinal product data that are required by EMA for 
future PMS (Products Management Services) and medicinal 
product data exchange are described with full details. 
Relying on the results of the analysis of processes 
utilizing medicinal products data, a detailed assessment of 
current data model was performed, resulting in a thorough 
comparison with ISO IDMP standards (especially ISO 11615 
for medicinal product [17]) in order to detect the gaps. First 
findings have shown two important refactoring areas: 
• 
Packaged Medicinal Product: Manufactured Item 
(and its composition) should be introduced into the 
data model, as well as Packaging Item (Container) 
and Device  
• 
Pharmaceutical Product needs some adjustments: 
mandatory specification of the modifiers for 
chemical substances; introduction of Specified 
substance (for proteins and biologicals) and 
Strength (Reference Strength as Presentation and 
Concentration strength were already implemented). 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

After thorough analysis of the current data model, ER 
(Entity Relationship) diagrams and restructured data models 
were prepared for Packaged Medicinal Product and for 
Pharmaceutical 
Product. 
In 
the 
next 
section 
the 
reconstruction plan for Packaged Medicinal Product is 
described in more details. 
Analysis has shown that the data set defined in the EU 
Implementation Guide [15] was sufficient with the exception 
of some additions like Specified Substances and some 
physical characteristics of containers and devices. 
The whole process and methodology of refactoring 
internal system with medicinal product database, in order to 
comply with ISO IDMP standards, is shown on Figure 2. 
A. Reconstruction of data model related to Packaged 
Medicinal Product 
On Packaged Medicinal Product ER diagram (Figure 3) 
we colour-coded the entities:  
• 
Red rectangles are those entities that should be 
introduced in currently implemented data model 
(Device, 
Packaging 
item 
(container) 
and 
Manufactured Item) 
• 
Yellow rectangles would need some adjustments 
(Packaged 
Medicinal Product, Pharmaceutical 
Product, Ingredient), 
• 
Green rectangles are already compliant with ISO 
standards (Medicinal Product and Substance): 
 
Figure 3. Entity Relationship Diagram: Packaged Medicinal Product 
As for the user interface (UI) reconstruction, on tab 
“Packaging” (both in the module where medicinal product 
 
Figure 2. The methodology of refactoring internal IT system and medicinal product database in order to comply with ISO IDMP standards 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

data can be reviewed and in module for case management) 
changes should be made that enable: 
• 
Input of more Packaged Medicinal Products (i.e., 
outer packages) 
• 
Input of more Package Items (Containers) with the 
possibility of copying data from existing Package 
Items 
• 
Input of Devices with possibility of copying data 
from existing Devices 
• 
Input of Manufactured Items with possibility of 
copying data from existing Manufactured Items 
• 
Input of Ingredients for Manufactured Items: 
Substance and Specified Substance, with the 
Strengths and Reference Strengths (concentration 
and presentation) 
• 
Copying/relating Ingredients for Manufactured 
Items and Ingredients for Pharmaceutical Products. 
In Sections III.A.1) - III.A.3) the introduction of new 
entities is described in more details. 
 
1) Introduction of a new entity in the data model: 
Container 
When introducing Container as new entity in the data 
model, the following aspects need to be considered (Figure 
4): 
• 
Container can have zero or more Containers that are 
referencing it as parent.  
• 
Container can be referenced by different Devices or 
Manufactured items.  
• 
Attributes that are describing Container: Container 
Type, Material and Quantity should be added to the 
data model. 
 
Figure 4. Entity Relationship Diagram: Packaging Item (Container) 
2) Introduction of a new entity in the data model: Device 
There are two possible relationships between Device and 
Package Item (Figure 5): 
• 
The medical device is integrated and contains the 
medicinal product for administration (e.g., pre-filled 
syringes, pre-filled pen). In this case Device is also 
the primary packaging/package item container for 
the medicinal product. 
• 
Device as independent element contained within 
secondary packaging (for example in outer box). 
 
Figure 5. Entity Relationship Diagram: Device 
3) Introduction of a new entity in the data model: 
Manufactured Item 
Manufactured Item is the product as it is authorised and 
before transformation into the administrable pharmaceutical 
form [18].  
 
Figure 6. Entity Relationship Diagram: Manufactured item 
When introducing Manufactured Item as new entity in 
the data model (Figure 6), following attributes that are 
describing Manufactured Item should be introduced: Dose 
Form, Unit of presentation, Quantity. 
B. Reconstruction of the data model related to 
Pharmaceutical Product 
In the Pharmaceutical Product entity relationship diagram 
(Figure 7), red rectangles are those entities that need to be 
introduced in the currently implemented data model 
(Manufactured 
Item, 
Device, 
Strength 
(Presentation, 
Concentration)); yellow ones are those that need some 
transformation 
(Pharmaceutical 
Product, 
Ingredient, 
Reference Strength (Presentation, Concentration)) and green 
ones are those that don’t need any changes (Medicinal 
Product, Substance and Administrable Dose form). 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 7. Entity Relationship Diagram: Pharmaceutical Product 
Reconstruction activities related to Pharmaceutical 
Product should include the introduction of new entities in the 
data model: Specified Substance; Strength (presentation) and 
Strength (concentration); also, the user interface needed 
reconstruction so that Strength (presentation) and Strength 
(concentration) could be recorded, as well as the Specified 
Substances. Reference strength (presentation) and Reference 
strength (concentration) needed to be migrated to new 
database tables. 
The structure of related tables currently enables data 
entry for the majority of entities, but does not (fully) comply 
with ISO IDMP data model. The Ingredients table should be 
thoroughly analysed and, based on findings, new table 
structure and relations should be defined, as well as data 
migration.  
Pharmaceutical Product name/description is necessary 
when medicinal product has more than one Pharmaceutical 
Product and currently, in many cases, this is not recorded in 
the correct form (physical characteristics plus units of 
presentation). 
In the next section of this paper, the transition to SPOR 
RMS referential lists for internal codebooks is described. 
IV. 
INTRODUCTION OF RMS REFERENTIAL LISTS  
In order to ensure data consistency in describing 
medicinal products, common referential lists (codebooks) 
should be used. Fortunately, HALMED has been using 
EUTCT lists [24] for internal codebooks from the early 
stages of NRL system development and those codebooks 
were synchronized on a daily basis. Table 1 shows the 
EUTCT lists that were used in marketing authorisation 
processes and related NRL lists. 
Until recently, it was allowed to add user-defined terms 
in NRL-PKL-PhV codebooks. Planning for transition to 
RMS lists requires assessment of different scenarios: 
• 
Codebooks with EUTCT terms and no custom-
added terms 
• 
Codebooks based on EUTCT lists and with user 
added terms 
• 
Custom codebooks in NRL-PKL-PhV system 
• 
Introduction of new RMS codebooks to NRL-PKL-
PhV system (no codebooks were used) 
 
TABLE 1 EUTCT 
LISTS 
THAT 
WERE 
USED 
IN 
MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION PROCESSES 
EUTCT list 
NRL codebook 
Substance (still in usage) 
Tvari 
Country 
Države 
Dosage Form Category 
Grupe farmaceutskih 
oblika 
Dosage Form 
Farmaceutski Oblici 
Units of Measurement 
Jedinice mjere 
Route of Administration 
Put primjene 
Authorisation Status 
Registracijski status lijeka 
Marketing Status 
Status lijeka na tržištu 
Ingredient Role 
Vrste sastojaka 
Container 
Vrste pakiranja 
Supply 
Mjesto izdavanja 
Legal Status for the Supply 
Način propisivanja 
Special Precaution for 
Storage 
Uvjeti čuvanja 
Quantity Operator 
Operatori količine 
 
Different scenarios related to the usage of the codebooks 
and the associated implementation steps are described in 
Sections IV.A - IV.D. In all the described scenarios, we 
consider an automatic daily synchronisation with the 
Referentials Management Services via the Application 
Programming Interface (API). 
A. Codebooks with EUTCT terms and no custom-added 
terms 
In the case of internal codebooks that were synchronized 
with EUTCT lists (no longer allowing custom-added 
additional terms), transition to RMS lists started with the 
detection of corresponding items in the RMS SPOR list. In 
the NRL-PKL-PhV system, changes to the database (adding 
new fields for RMS list) and user interface were made. In 
order to keep the record of the change of localized terms, 
term versioning was introduced, and likewise for the three 
other scenarios, as described in Section IV.E.  
B. Codebooks based on EUTCT lists and with user-added 
terms 
For user-added terms, we performed a data cleansing, 
deactivating user-added terms and disabling the possibility of 
adding new custom terms in the codebook. After detecting 
the corresponding RMS list, all necessary changes were 
made in database and user interface. For data cleansing and 
for mapping old terms to RMS terms, a custom-made 
administration tool was used. 
C. Custom codebooks 
Before connecting to corresponding RMS list,  data 
quality analysis and data cleansing were performed; all the 
changes in database structure and user interface were also 
completed so that the new RMS list could be imported and 
custom (old) terms mapped with RMS terms and redundant 
terms could be deactivated.  
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

D. Introduction of new RMS codebooks to NRL-PKL-PhV 
system 
Business experts with the IT team are continuously 
assessing the RMS referential lists and are prioritizing their 
adoption in NRL-PKL-PhV system. Reconstruction of the 
database and changes in system functionalities were only 
introduced once a full agreement had been reached on the 
final RMS list.  
During the data model reconstruction, introduction of 
new RMS lists should be planned, based on the entity’s 
attributes.  
E. Term versioning in internal codebooks 
With the introduction of RMS lists, SPOR and NRL term 
versions are stored separately in internal codebook. That 
intermediary step is needed as the old terms cannot be 
changed before the product information documents are 
officially changed. This requires a new submission by the 
Marketing Authorisation Holder. Until then, old terms 
remain intact and NRL users are being informed about the 
term change via an e-mail notification (Figure 8). Moreover, 
users are also notified in the user interface: on the status bar 
of the opened case and/or medicinal product (Figure 9) and 
on the list of terms in the field where it appears (Figure 10). 
Besides, in the search engine both old and new term versions 
are detectable.  
 
  
Figure 8. Localized term versioning – e-mail notifications 
 
Figure 9. New term indicated on status bar 
Old terms are displayed in red letters when they appear in 
the user interface and in drop down lists. In marketing 
authorization application for a new medicinal product, only 
new terms will be shown on all lists (Figure 10). 
 
Figure 10. Indication of old term version in use 
V. 
USER INTERFACE RECONSTRUCTION 
In following paragraphs, proposed changes in user 
interface are described.  
A. Packaged Medicinal Product 
During the marketing authorisation procedure HALMED 
is allocating a unique Marketing Authorisation Number to a 
Medicinal Product and that number will not change during 
the whole Medicinal Product life-cycle, regardless of 
changes on the product name, marketing authorisation holder 
or any other data. Furthermore, all packaging’s of the same 
medicinal product are designated with a packaging digit code 
(from 01 to 99) and with the Marketing Authorisation 
Number of the Medicinal Product, followed by the 
packaging digit code. These elements together are forming 
the Marketing Authorisation Number for Packaging. In the 
NRL-PKL-PhV system, all packaging of the same medicinal 
product are listed in one tab in the module Medicinal product 
list (Središnji podaci o lijekovima) and in the module 
Processing applications (Obrada predmeta). Currently in the 
“Packaging” only a few descriptive text fields are available 
so this tab should be reconstructed in order to enable entering 
all data for Packaged Medicinal product.  
The proposed solution is to introduce a hierarchical tree-
list grid (Figure 11) for the presentation of all the levels of 
Medicinal Product Package data:  
• 
from outer package 
• 
containers inside outer package,  
• 
containers inside containers,  
• 
devices that might be included in outer package or 
in container,  
• 
integral or co-packed device.  
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The tree-list ends on the level of immediate container 
with details about the manufactured item and its 
composition. Furthermore, all additional attributes like shelf 
life and special precautions for storage will be visible in the 
grid, often with concatenated values from more fields that 
were used to describe the entity. For example, for the 
presentation strength, all data entered in separate fields 
(fields: Quantity operator, Strength (Presentation single 
value or low limit) - numerator and denominator, Strength 
(Presentation high limit) - numerator and denominator) in the 
pop-up will be presented in one field on grid Manufactured 
Item composition Strength (Presentation) as shown on Figure 
12.  
Adding data for new outer packages, containers, devices 
and manufactured items will be enabled with new buttons 
positioned above the grid. For editing, the pen symbol on the 
left edge of the grid opens the same pop-ups. Each pop-up 
consists of text fields, such as fields for the description of 
outer packages or manufactured items. In addition, there are 
fields with controlled number values and fields controlled by 
drop down lists where only the attributes from RMS 
reference lists would be available for selection.  
While the Medicinal Product could have more 
packaging’s that might be similar in their components, the 
user will be able to copy data from one outer packaging / 
container / device / manufactured item to the other in order 
to save time for entering all the required details. 
Composition of Pharmaceutical Product is currently 
presented via the tab “Ingredients,” where Substances and 
Reference Strengths (concentration and presentation) are 
recorded. In the reconstructed user interface, adding and 
editing Specified Substances and Strengths (concentration 
and presentation) are enabled and a very similar solution will 
be 
implemented 
for 
capturing 
Manufactured 
Item 
composition. 
Dialog boxes for adding and editing information about 
the 
Manufactured 
item 
and Pharmaceutical product 
composition facilitate the definition of the Ingredient role 
(for e.g., substance (or ingredient) with the role of precise 
active substance, excipient…), adding Substance and/or 
Specified 
Substance 
and 
describing 
their 
Strength 
(Presentation and Concentration) and Reference Strength 
(Presentation and Concentration) (Figure 13).  
 
Figure 12. UI mock-up: Manufactured item composition 
 
Figure 13. UI mock-up for Manufactured item composition editing pop-ups 
(adding reference substance and strength) 
 
Figure 11. Packaged Medicinal Product – proposed UI (user interface) mock-up 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

For a significant number of medicinal products, the 
Pharmaceutical Product composition and the Manufactured 
item composition would be the same and the plan is to 
enable copying composition data for some or all substances 
and strengths from one to another. 
VI. 
FURTHER WORK 
The work presented in this document is just the 
beginning of the refactoring of the current system, step one 
on the Figure 14. This refactoring is relying heavily on the 
assessment of internal business processes which are 
generating or utilizing medicinal product data and on the 
thorough analysis of the gaps in the data model of the current 
system, in comparison with the data model provided by the 
ISO IDMP standards. Besides data model reconstruction and 
user interface adaptation, connection to the new RMS 
referential lists that are used to describe medicinal product 
packages should be established; and this is also needed for 
SMS (Substances Management Services) and future PMS 
(Products Management Services). In order to make this 
effective, applications that will send and receive data from 
future PMS and which receive substance data from SMS, 
will be programmed using FHIR (Fast Healthcare 
Interoperability Resources). [25][26][27][28] Moreover, web 
services will be built to send data from the HALMED 
database to the national medicinal product dictionary 
database that is part of the EU funded project eLijekovi [32]. 
 
Figure 14. The process and the impact of HALMED IT system refactoring 
on national and EU wide healthcare systems 
VII. CONCLUSION  
The complexity of the processes related to the marketing 
authorisation of medicinal products and to the production of 
reliable medicinal product data is immense. It implies taking 
into account different healthcare stakeholders and their 
activities and processes that are utilizing data in different 
medicinal product life-cycle stages. The more obvious ones 
are prescribing, capturing patients’ medical records and 
dispensing but there are many others. It also implies 
dispensing the products that are prescribed in another 
country where the same product is registered with different 
brand name, or the same brand name is used for a completely 
different medicinal product.  
The possibility of uniquely identifying medicinal 
products globally [29] is becoming top priority, as was 
demonstrated by the need of tracking the global use of 
COVID-19 vaccines during the pandemic [3]. The cross-
border mobility scenarios where e-prescriptions and patient 
summaries would be easily exchanged between countries 
offer a unique opportunity of getting closer to this ultimate 
goal, with direct positive impact on patients’ safety[3][30].  
With the introduction of the ISO IDMP set of standards, 
EMA initiated the SPOR project to define four domains of 
master data in regulatory processes: Substance, Products, 
Organisations and Referentials [9]. RMS lists and OMS 
(Organisations Management Services) organisations registry 
are ready to use while SMS and PMS are expected to 
become available soon for substance and medicinal products 
data exchange. The UNICOM project (funded by the 
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
program under grant agreement No 875299) is an essential 
accelerator of the ISO IDMP standards implementation. Its 
ambition is to improve patient safety by ensuring that “any 
medicine and what it contains can be accurately identified 
anywhere in the world.”  The project gathers 40 partners 
representing all the actors of the value chain. 11 participating 
National Medicines Authorities are concretely experimenting 
ISO IDMP implementation; together they build a common 
understanding of what needs to be done towards successfully 
implementing IDMP, and how to learn from each other and 
share best practices.   [30].  
Nevertheless, the implementation process is very 
demanding for the industry, the healthcare organisations or 
the regulators. It requires a deep assessment of all internal 
business processes that rely on medicinal product data and an 
analysis of external stakeholder’s dataset needs so that a 
master data set can be defined; Organisations need to 
become acquainted with the ISO IDMP data models and the  
EU IDMP Implementation guide [13][31]. One of the first 
decisions to be made is whether an entirely new system (off-
the-shelf or custom made) needs to be implemented or 
whether the old system can be refactored. HALMED opted 
for the refactoring of the existing system NRL-PKL-PhV. It 
consists of three distinct applications that are sharing the 
same 
medicinal 
products 
database, 
same 
document 
repository, referential lists, administration tools and 
integration services to other HALMED’s information 
systems. Significant adaptations of the user interface are also 
needed in order to enable entering and reviewing medicinal 
product data related to Packaging, Manufactured item and its 
composition and the Pharmaceutical Product composition. 
Once the old data model and the user interface reconstruction 
will be fully completed and the new RMS referential lists 
introduced, HALMED will then be able to exchange all data 
required by the EU IDMP Implementation guide with the 
Product Management Services. Moreover, as part of the EU 
funded project eLijekovi, the future national medicinal 
product database (that will be foundation for all the future 
eHealth services consuming medicinal products) will be built 
in accordance with the ISO IDMP set of standards. By 
complying with ISO IDMP standards, the national medicinal 
product database will significantly impact the Croatian 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

eHealth system in general. It will provide an essential 
contribution to data interoperability   throughout the Croatian 
healthcare systems and therefore enable a meaningful and 
quality data exchange between all stakeholders.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Authors presented challenges and learnings from ISO 
IDMP standards implementation project at the Agency for 
Medicinal Products and Medical Devices of Croatia 
(HALMED). The project is funded by HALMED and is 
partially supported by the UNICOM project that has received 
funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research 
and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 
875299 [30];  R. H. Vander Stichele (I~HD) and L. Nicolas 
(EHTEL) have kindly accepted to review this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. A. Stroetmann, “The univocal identification and safe 
dispensation of medicinal products across Europe – 
challenges and solution proposal,” MS Med Inform Biom 
Epidemiol 2017, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 1–15, 2017. 
[2] 
K. A. Stroetmann, “Meeting the semantic challenge of the 
globally unique identification of medicinal products - the 
openMedicine approach,” Stud. Health Technol. Inform., vol. 
209, no. January, pp. 170–174, 2015. 
[3] 
R. H. Vander Stichele, C. Hay, M. Fladvad, M. C. J. M. 
Sturkenboom, and R. T. Chen, “How to ensure we can track 
and trace global use of COVID-19 vaccines?,” Vaccine, vol. 
39, no. 2, pp. 176–179, 2021. 
[4] 
European Commission, “Implementing Regulation (EU) 
520/2012,” Off. J. Eur. Union, vol. 2012, no. 520, pp. 5–25, 
2012. 
[5] 
K. Koshechkin, G. Lebedev, and F. Eduard, “Implementation 
of IDMP standards as a means of creating a unified 
information space in the field of drug circulation,” Procedia 
Comput. Sci., vol. 176, pp. 1745–1753, 2020. 
[6] 
W. Goossen, J. T. Costa, C. Hay, M. Melgara, and R. 
VanderStichele, “Deliverable 1.3: Initial openMedicine 
infostructure,” Project openMedicine, Available from EC 
Research 
& 
Innovation 
Participant 
portal: 
https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/documents/downloa
dPublic?documentIds=080166e5a98384a6&appId=PPGMS. 
[7] 
M. Anelli, M. Dollen, X. Fournie, E. Ghanem, and Z. 
Koberidze, “Pharmacovigilance in 2020: boldly shaping the 
future - an overview Part 2: Identification of Medicinal 
Products 
(IDMP) 
implementation,” 
EUCROF 
Pharmacovigilance Working Group, pp. 1–12, 2018. 
[8] 
European 
Medicines 
Agency, 
“Products 
Management 
Services - Implementation of International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) standards for the identification of 
medicinal products (IDMP) in Europe: EU Implementation 
guide Version 2.1 - Introduction,” 2021. 
[9] 
European Medicines Agency, “Data on medicines (ISO IDMP 
standards): 
Overview” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-
regulatory/overview/data-medicines-iso-idmp-standards-
overview. [retrieved: March, 2022]. 
[10] S. Tranchard, “Revised IDMP standards to improve 
description of medicinal products worldwide” [Online]. 
Available: https://www.iso.org/news/ref2234.html. [retrieved: 
March, 2022]. 
[11] European Medicines Agency, “European Medicines Agency 
(EMA) master data management roadmap  Substance, 
Product, 
Organisation 
and 
Referential 
data” 
EMA/730453/2014. London: European Medicines Agency; 
23 
April 
2015. 
Available: 
http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Ot
her/2015/04/WC500186290.pdf. 
[12] European 
Medicines 
Agency, 
“Substance, 
Product, 
Organisation and Referential (SPOR) master data.” [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-
regulatory/research-development/data-medicines-iso-idmp-
standards/substance-product-organisation-referential-spor-
master-data. [retrieved: March, 2022]. 
[13] “EU IDMP Implementation guide - version 2.1.” [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-
regulatory/research-development/data-medicines-iso-idmp-
standards/spor-master-data/substance-product-data-
management-services#eu-idmp-implementation-guide---
version-2.1-section. [retrieved: March, 2022]. 
[14] R. Munnik, “The clock is ticking on European data standards 
for medicinal products,” Life Sci. Lead., vol. 2, pp. 2–5, 2021. 
[15] European Medicines Agency, “EU IDMP Implementation 
guide 
- 
version 
2.1.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-regulatory/research-
development/data-medicines-iso-idmp-standards/spor-master-
data/substance-product-data-management- services#eu-idmp-
implementation-guide---version-2.1-section. 
[retrieved: 
March, 2022]. 
[16] M. Kloft, A. Herrmann, and J. Werner, “Identification of 
medicinal products - how to turn a compliance project into a 
strategic initiative with additional benefits.” [Online]. 
Available: https://globalforum.diaglobal.org/issue/november-
2019/identification-of-medicinal-products/. [retrieved: April, 
2022]. 
[17] International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization, 
“ISO 
11615:2017, Health informatics — Identification of medicinal 
products — Data elements and structures for the unique 
identification and exchange of regulated Medicinal Product 
information,” 2017.  
[18] European 
Medicines 
Agency, 
“Products 
Management 
Services - Implementation of ISO standards for the 
identification of medicinal products (IDMP) in Europe: EU 
Implementation guide v.2.1 - Chapter 2: Data elements for the 
electronic submission of information on medicinal products.” 
[Online]. Available: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-
regulatory/research-development/data-medicines-iso-idmp-
standards/spor-master-data/substance-product-data-
management-services. [retrieved: March, 2022]. 
[19] HALMED, “Agency for Medicinal Products and Medical 
Devices of Croatia. About HALMED.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.halmed.hr/en/O-HALMED-u/Osnovni-podaci-i-
dokumenti/Djelatnosti/. [retrieved: March, 2022]. 
[20] European Medicines Agency, “Referentials Management 
Services 
(RMS).” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-regulatory/research-
development/data-medicines-iso-idmp-standards/spor-master-
data/referentials-management-service-rms. [retrieved: March, 
2022]. 
[21] European 
Medicines 
Agency, 
“RMS 
(Referentials 
Management 
Services).” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://spor.ema.europa.eu/rmswi/#/. 
[retrieved: 
March, 
2022]. 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[22] International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization, 
“ISO 
11238:2018, Health informatics - Identification of medicinal 
products - Data elements and structures for the unique 
identification and exchange of regulated information on 
substances,” 2018. 
[23] International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization, 
“ISO 
11616:2017 - Health informatics - Identification of medicinal 
products - Data elements and structures for the unique 
identification and exchange of regulated Pharmaceutical 
Product information,” 2017. 
[24] “EUTCT 
lists.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://eutct.ema.europa.eu/eutct/showAvailableListsDisplay.d
o?guestuser=true. [retrieved: March, 2022]. 
[25] HL7, “Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources.” [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.hl7.org/fhir/. 
[retrieved: 
March, 
2022]. 
[26] European Medicines Agency, “Product Management Service 
(PMS) - Implementation of International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) standards for the Identification of 
Medicinal Products (IDMP) in Europe - Chapter 1: 
Registration requirements,” 2021. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-regulatory/research-
development/data-medicines-iso-idmp-standards/spor-master-
data/substance-product-data-management-services. [retrieved: 
March, 2022]. 
[27] European 
Medicines 
Agency, 
“Products 
Management 
Services - Implementation of ISO standards for the 
Identification of Medicinal Products (IDMP) in Europe: EU 
Implementation guide Version 2.1 - Chapter 6: Technical 
specifications on structure and format,” 2021. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-
regulatory/research-development/data-medicines-iso-idmp-
standards/spor-master-data/substance-product-data-
management-services. [retrieved: March, 2022]. 
[28] European 
Medicines 
Agency, 
“Substances, 
Products, 
Organisations, Referentials (SPOR) - SPOR API v2 
Specification,” 
February, 
2020. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-regulatory/research-
development/data-medicines-iso-idmp-standards/spor-master-
data/substance-product-data-management-services. [retrieved: 
March, 2022]. 
[29] V. A. Perkins, “IDMP: an international standard for lifecycle 
data management,” Appl. Clin. Trials, vol. 26, no. 4/5, 2017. 
[30] “UNICOM.” [Online]. Available: https://unicom-project.eu/. 
[retrieved: March, 2022]. 
[31] A. Williams, “Preparing – at last – for IDMP adoption : how 
life sciences should ensure readiness,” Journal for Clinical 
Studies, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 16–17, 2022. 
[32] “eLijekovi – Integrirani informatički sustav za upravljanje 
lijekovima 
(KK.02.2.1.01.0011)” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://zdravlje.gov.hr/elijekovi-integrirani-informaticki-
sustav-za-upravljanje-lijekovima-kk-02-2-1-01-0011/5394. 
[retrieved: April, 2022]. 
[33] R. Vander Stichele and D. Kalra, “Aggregations of substance 
in virtual drug models based on ISO/CEN standards for 
Identification of Medicinal Products (IDMP).” Stud Health 
Technol 
Inform. 
2022 
May 
25;294:377-381. 
doi: 
10.3233/SHTI220478. PMID: 35612100. 
[34] R.H. Vander Stichele, J. Roumier, and D. van Nimwegen, 
“How granular can a dose form be described? Considering 
EDQM standard terms for a global terminology.” Appl. Sci. 
2022, 12, 4337. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
[35] „Preparations for eCTD and implementation of digital 
archival 
information 
system“ 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.safu.hr/en/news/preparations-for-ectd-and-
implementation-of-digital-archival-information-system. 
[retrieved: May, 2022]. 
[36] A. Rajh, T. Karlović, and R. Gospodnetić, “IPA 2009 TAIB: 
Preparations for eCTD and implementation of Digital 
Archival Information System”, project, 2014. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.researchgate.net/project/IPA-2009-
TAIB-Preparations-for-eCTD-and-implementation-of-Digital-
Archival-Information-System. [retrieved: May, 2022]. 
[37] A. Rajh and H. Stančić, “Planiranje, izgradnja i uspostava 
digitalnog arhiva (Planning, development and implementation 
of a digital archive)”. Arhivski vjesnik. 51. 41-62. 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-984-3
eTELEMED 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

