Leveraging Technology to Advance Patient Engagement in a Mental Health Care 
Setting 
 
Wendy Odell, Sanaz Riahi 
Ontario Shores Centre for Mental Health Sciences 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Email: odellw@ontarioshores.ca, riahis@ontarioshores.ca 
 
 
Abstract— In 2010, Ontario Shores implemented a fully 
integrated electronic medical record (EMR) with the aim of 
enhancing 
patient 
safety 
and 
quality 
of 
care. 
The 
implementation of the EMR has created opportunities to 
leverage health IT to make further improvements to the 
quality of care we provide to our patients, including improving 
patient engagement through improved access to personal 
health information and enabling alternative care delivery 
models. This paper will provide an overview of the strategies 
Ontario Shores has employed to foster patient adoption and 
ongoing engagement including the launch of an EMR-
integrated patient portal that enables patient and proxy access 
to clinical data, implementation of a mobile (mHealth) 
experience for patients to manage their care with actionable 
interventions through a secure mobile cloud technology 
platform, and the piloting of a virtual clinic, which will utilize 
e-therapy that will maximize access and utilization of evidence 
informed virtual treatments.    
Keywords- mental health; patient engagement; patient portal; 
mobile health; virtual health. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) reports 
that approximately 1 in 5 adults in the U.S., 1 in 5 youth 
(aged 13–18) and 13% of children (aged 8–15) experience a 
severe mental disorder at some point during their life [1]. 
Yet, only about 40% of adults and 50% of children with a 
mental health condition received mental health services in 
the past year [1].  In the Canadian context, over 650,000 
children in Ontario alone suffer from a mental health 
disorder, and suicide is cited as the second leading cause of 
death among youth aged 10-19 years, according to the 
Mental Health Commission of Canada [2]. 
Ontario Shores Centre for Mental Health Sciences 
(Ontario Shores), the first Healthcare Information and 
Management Systems Society (HIMSS) Davies Enterprise 
Award recipient in Canada and the first HIMSS EMRAM 
Stage 7 organization in behavioural health worldwide [3], is 
a recognized leader in the assessment and treatment of those 
living with complex and serious mental illness. Ontario 
Shores supports the belief that it is essential to both the 
health of individuals and their communities to more fully 
engage patients in their mental health care [4]. Studies have 
shown that those suffering from mental illness experience 
better outcomes and improved quality of life when they 
become self-empowered participants in their care [5].  
Understanding this, Ontario Shores continuously pursues 
new and innovative ways to promote, measure, and improve 
patient engagement. 
This paper will provide an overview of three strategies 
Ontario Shores is employing to advance patient engagement, 
including the launch of an EMR-integrated patient portal, 
implementation of an offline mobile (mHealth) experience 
for patients to manage their care (with actionable 
interventions through a secure mobile cloud technology 
platform), and the piloting of a virtual clinic, which will 
utilize e-therapy.  
In section II, we outline the approaches that were 
employed to address patient engagement within a mental 
health setting. In section III, we highlight some of the 
challenges that we experienced with the implementation of 
these health IT solutions. Sections IV and V discuss some of 
the outcomes and conclusions that have been achieved to 
date as a result of implementation of these eHealth solutions 
including 
increased 
patient 
satisfaction, 
improved 
treatment/clinical outcomes, improved patient engagement 
and savings realized as a result of administrative efficiencies. 
II. 
THE APPROACH/METHODOLOGY 
In early 2014, Ontario Shores launched the HealthCheck 
Patient Portal. The implementation of the portal was aimed at 
enhancing patient access to their personal health information, 
bridging the existing gaps related to active engagement and 
partnership between patients, families and health care 
providers, evolving current practices and culture from having 
the provider as the “keeper of the information” to one where 
the provider and the patients are partners in care. It supports 
the paradigm shift towards patient-driven care.  
Inpatients, outpatients and proxy users are able to access 
the portal from any device with an internet connection and 
can view, print or share personal health information found 
within the portal with other providers in the circle of care [6]. 
Functionality within the HealthCheck patient portal (Figure 
1) includes E-views of reports, discharge summaries, 
allergies, and ambulatory medication, E-visits whereby 
secure messages can be sent to the patient’s clinician, and E-
requests for prescription renewals (Figure 2) [6].  
 
 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 1. Healthcheck patient portal main page tabs and functionality 
 
 
Figure 2. View of e-request prescription renewal in Healthcheck Patient 
Portal 
 
Leveraging this engagement solution, Ontario Shores has 
continued to drive patient engagement forward by partnering 
with a technology based company that offers secure mobile 
and cloud technology platforms that will integrate with the 
EMR. It will enable a mobile remote-patient-monitoring 
health application that delivers personalized interventions to 
individuals in support of their care plans, thus supporting 
patients through interactive strategies. Not only will this 
solution enable patients to be actively engaged in their care 
through the completion of various behaviour assessment 
scales, meal assessments, and thought/behaviour trackers, it 
will also support predictive analytics capabilities, enabling 
clinicians to more proactively monitor patients and respond 
to changes in behaviours and assist with identifying patterns 
and triggers that could prompt early clinical interventions, 
the development of effective coping strategies, and possibly 
avoid hospital admissions. Figure 3 illustrates Ontario 
Shores’ mobile health technology solution.  
 
 
Figure 3. Ontario shores' mobile health technology patient engagement 
solution 
 
Ontario Shores is also designing and implementing a 
virtual clinic as an adjunct to the current ambulatory 
Traumatic Stress Clinic following a stepped-care approach. 
The virtual clinic is aimed at bridging the long wait times for 
this clinic with the goal of maximizing patient access to care, 
utilizing evidence-informed virtual treatments, while more 
efficiently utilizing clinical resources. The virtual clinic has 
the potential to target improved population health, to 
optimize the patient experience and increase value for 
money. 
III. 
CHALLENGES/BARRIERS 
Transparency is an essential component for a healthcare 
organization interested in achieving improved patient 
engagement. One of the many benefits of patient portals is 
that they promote transparency. With this increased 
transparency, however, effectively integrating change 
management strategies to support clinicians with the 
transition to the use of a patient portal is paramount to how 
clinicians perceive the implementation of the portal. Recall 
that this is a paradigm shift for both patients and  
clinicians, and patient access to records can be a sensitivity 
for clinicians who feel that their practice may be called into 
question. At Ontario Shores, clinicians required education 
and support with shifting their documentation practices to 
ensure that it supported the transition from documentation 
that focused solely on sharing information with the treatment 
team and/or community partners to one which is aimed at 
achieving a partnership in care with patients via transparent 
and meaningful personal health information. 
In addition, limitations related to functionality are also at 
play, which can impact adoption by patients and 
endorsement by clinicians. Currently, the portal system does 
not provide access to the full EMR (progress notes are 
currently not viewable, for example) and therefore portal 
users may still be required to submit a request for 
information to view components of their EMR that are not 
currently viewable. 
Additional barriers and risks include patient access and 
adoption of technology (internet access, mobile tablets or 
phones, Personal Computers (PCs), language barrier, visual 
and auditory disabilities). Patients with complex health needs 
may also experience difficulty in learning or using the 
mobile applications. These risks can be managed by 
providing training and guidance on content as well as 
ensuring a comprehensive accessibility plan.  
It is also important to note the role that device selection 
plays in adoption. Planning for the availability of devices for 
the implementation is integral to the process. Engaging end 
users, both patients and clinicians, in device selection is also 
essential 
to 
successful 
adoption. 
Devices 
that 
are 
cumbersome to use will have a negative impact on patient 
adoption and clinician endorsement. 
 
 
 
 
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 4. Complexity associated with integrating PHI with the EMR 
and mHealth solutions 
 
Finally, overcoming interoperability challenges is central 
to a successful implementation. The complexity of 
integrating patient health information with the EMR and 
mHealth solutions must be well understood. Figure 4 
demonstrates the flow of information that needs to occur in 
order to interface the eHealth solutions with the EMR. 
IV. 
OUTCOMES ACHIEVED TO DATE 
Following implementation of the patient portal, a 
rigorous benefits evaluation research study was conducted to 
assess the impact of the portal on patient engagement, 
satisfaction, and health outcomes. The results of this 
evaluation provide implications for enabling active patient 
participation in their care through transparent access to their 
Personal Health Information (PHI). They also point to 
increased 
patient 
activation, 
improved 
organizational 
productivity, and greater administrative efficiency. 
Using the Mental Health Recovery Measure (MHRM), a 
robust 
self-reporting 
instrument 
designed 
to 
comprehensively assess the recovery process for patients 
with serious mental illness, along with other system-
generated reports to evaluate the impact of the patient portal 
implementation, Ontario Shores saw a nearly 10% decrease 
in missed appointments for portal users, an 86% reduction in 
portal users’ release of information requests (Figure 5), and 
an administrative time savings of between 10.5 and 40 hours 
per portal user. In addition, statistically significant 
improvements were seen in portal users in six domains of the 
MHRM scores following six months of portal access 
including basic functioning, overall well-being, spirituality 
and advocacy/ enrichment (Figure 6).  
 
 
2014 Total ROI 
Requests Made 
2015 Total ROI 
Requests Made 
Total ROI 
Percentage 
Decrease 
23 
3 
86% 
 
 
Figure 5.  Portal users total frequency of requests of information (ROI) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Mean scores of domains on the Mental Health Recovery 
Measure (MHRM) at pre and post-enrolment to the Healthcheck Patient 
Portal 
 
The implementation of our mobile technology solution, 
currently underway, has the potential to advance and support 
areas of patient engagement that do not currently exist at 
Ontario Shores, such as tailoring engagement to each 
patient’s unique learning style, continued care and therapy 
using asynchronous methods that do not rely on traditional 
face-to-face interactions, creating a feedback loop to 
clinicians that enables predictive monitoring, meeting the 
unique needs related to patient instructions, discharge 
education needs, and supporting a seamless transfer of care.  
Expected outcomes include improved treatment and 
medication adherence, decreased missed appointments as a 
result of appointment reminders, and improvement in the 
quality of care plans that support an increased understanding 
of the triggers that lead to behavioural or emotional 
difficulty. Additionally, we expect to see improvement in 
Recovery Assessment Scale-Revised (RAS-R) Scores, which 
measures a patient’s sense of recovery in five domains-
(1)personal self-confidence and hope, (2) willingness to ask 
for help, (3) goal and success orientation, (4) reliance on 
others, and (5) life view beyond their symptoms [7]. The tool 
is used to facilitate collaborative, recovery-oriented practice 
and measure recovery-focused outcomes over time that will 
enable clinicians to make data-driven decisions to support 
care planning and assist patients in formulating recovery-
oriented goals [7]. Figure 7 shows the percentage of patients 
that have had an RAS-R score increase by greater than 5 pre-
implementation on the pilot units/programs. 
 
 
Figure 7. Pre-implementation % of patients that had an RAS-R score 
increase by greater than 5 
 
Likewise, our virtual clinic is also in the implementation 
phase and the evaluation will form the basis for 
recommendations 
to 
expand 
virtual 
care 
delivery. 
Ultimately, the aim of this model is to address the growing 
 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

number of patients on the waitlist (currently 247), which will 
improve patient flow and access to services as well as 
decrease the average wait time for treatment, currently 391 
days. Outcome indicators that will be tracked include a 
clinically significant change in Post-Traumatic Stress 
Disorder (PTSD) Severity, which will be assessed using the 
20-item PTSD Checklist (PCL-5) scale which will assess the 
20 DSM-V symptoms of PTSD, a change in depression 
severity which will be assessed using the Patient Health 
Questionnaire 9 (PHQ-9), and in-person services avoided 
(i.e., increased efficiency) based on the percentage of 
patients that will not require formal, in-person services 
because they experienced improvement by using the virtual 
clinic. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Ontario Shores has made substantive strides towards 
improving patient satisfaction. One early adopter of the 
portal indicated “[j]ust having my own access has given me 
freedom as a patient.” This type of qualitative feedback is 
indicative of patients feeling increased autonomy as a result 
of having access to their PHI. Additionally, users indicated 
that “[t]his system is very helpful for appointment 
reminders”, which is supported by the downward trend in 
overall 
missed 
appointment 
percentages 
post-portal 
implementation. Missed appointments among portal users 
decreased by 9% in comparison to non-users who decreased 
by 6%. In 2015, users accounted for 26% of 4948 total 
missed appointments compared to non-users who accounted 
for 74%. In addition, users accounted for 958.5 hours 
planned for appointments that were not fulfilled or 0.5 full-
time equivalent (FTE), while non-users accounted for 2752.5 
hours planned for appointments or 1.4 FTE.  
In terms of the impacts that these strategies have had on 
improved 
patient 
outcomes, 
statistically 
significant 
improvements were seen in portal users within the following 
six domains of the MHRM scores following six months of 
portal access: overcoming stuckness, basic functioning, 
overall 
well-being, 
new 
potentials, 
spirituality, 
and 
advocacy/enrichment. These results add to the body of 
knowledge and literature, as there are currently very limited 
studies focusing on the impacts of patient portals on users 
among the mental health population.  
Given the vital role that predictive analytics can play in 
the area of mental health, the collection of application usage 
data, self-reported assessments and behavior tracking 
through the mHealth app, clinicians can track patient 
behaviors, identify triggers and can proactively implement 
preventative interventions to avoid hospital admissions and 
emergency room visits. 
Additionally, patients can be directed and prompted with 
adaptive behaviours to improve self-care using the app. 
Patients can participate in manualized therapies at their 
convenience through their mobile device anytime and 
anywhere. By incorporating this type of technology into 
patient care, we are realizing goals around enhancing access 
to quality mental health care. 
In terms of additional value for money post portal 
implementation, the organization saw a decrease of 86% in 
the frequency of ROIs compared to non-users who saw a 
decrease of 57%. Users contributed to an organizational time 
savings from managing requests of between 10.5-40.0 hours. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Canada Health Infoway, 
who provided financial support and the framework and 
guidance for the benefits evaluation for the HealthCheck 
patient portal implementation. 
The authors would also like to acknowledge Ontario 
Centres of Excellence who are providing funding for the 
mHealth solution project through the AdvancingHealth 
program. 
REFERENCES 
[1] “National Alliance on Mental Illness,” 2016, URL: 
http://www.nami.org/Learn-More/Mental-Health-By-the-
Numbers [accessed 2017-02-27]. 
[2] “Working with Children and Youth with Complex Mental 
Health Needs. Canadian Mental Health Associations,” 2015, 
URL: 
http://www.complexneeds.ca/about-the-project/ 
[accessed 2017-02-27]. 
[3] HIMSS 
Transforming 
Healthcare 
through 
IT. 
2015. 
http://www.himss.org/news/ontario-shores-centre-mental-
health-sciences-selected-2015-himss-enterprise-davies-award-
recipient  [accessed 2017-01-09]. 
[4] S. Greenfield, S. Kaplan, and JE. Ware Jr,  “Expanding 
patient involvement in care: Effects on patient outcomes,” 
Ann 
Intern 
Med, 
vol. 
102, 
pp. 
520-8, 
1985, 
doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-102-4-520. 
[5] M. Farkas, “The vision of recovery today: what it is and what 
it means for services,” World Psychiatry, vol. 6, pp.68–74, 
2007. 
[6] S. Kipping, M. I. Stuckey, A. Hernandez, T. Nguyen, and S.  
Riahi, “A Web-Based Patient Portal for Mental Health Care: 
Benefits Evaluation,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 18, November 
2016. URL: https://www.jmir.org/2016/11/e294 [accessed 
2017-02-27]. 
[7] P. Burgess, J. Pirkis, T. Coombs, and A. Rosen, “Australian 
Mental Health Outcomes and Classification Network Sharing 
Information 
to 
Improve 
Outcomes- 
An 
Australian 
Government funded initiative Review of Recovery Measures, 
version 
1.01,” 
February 
2010, 
URL: 
http://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/communityproviders/docs/re
view_recovery_measures.pdf [accessed 2017-02-27]. 
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

