Protecting Patient Privacy when Sharing Medical Data
Stefan Benzschawel
CR SANTEC - Public Research Center Henri Tudor
Luxembourg-Kirchberg, Luxembourg
stefan.benzschawel@tudor.lu
Marcos Da Silveira
CR SANTEC - Public Research Center Henri Tudor
Luxembourg-Kirchberg, Luxembourg
marcos.dasilveira@tudor.lu
Abstract— This paper describes a national eHealth platform 
concept  with  a  multi-level  privacy  protection  in  order  to 
improve the security and privacy of medical information on 
their  storage  locations  as  well  as  during  the 
exchanging/sharing processes. The key idea is to classify and 
split-up data into different servers. A Trusted Third Party 
server manages personal identifying data together with the 
related  pseudonyms  while  the  medical  information  server 
manages the related medical data assigned to pseudonyms. The 
well known IHE-XDS profiles are enriched by  Public Key 
Infrastructure, symmetric and asymmetric encryption together 
with  pseudonymization  methods.  IHE-XDS  promote  the 
interoperability level and the extensions increase the security 
level.
Keywords—  eHealth;  Patient  Privacy;  Electronic  Health 
Records; Secure Patient Data Storage
I.
 INTRODUCTION
Healthcare technologies are moving from isolated and 
autonomous solutions to more interoperable ones. The main 
expectations of this change are to provide better ways to 
exchange and share medical information and to improve the 
quality of services offered to the patients. 
In this context, medical data is supposed to be available 
online where healthcare professionals can access it at any 
time and from any place. Basically, it will be transmitted 
over Internet, dedicated Virtual Private Networks (VPN), 
and  hospital  networks.  The  on-line  access  to  medical 
information  can  have  two  major  consequences:  it  can 
support healthcare professional to take better decisions; it 
can  increase  the  risk  of  loss  of  privacy  and  malicious 
attacks. The goal of designing and implementing eHealth 
platforms is to reinforce the former consequence and to 
reduce or eliminate the second one. This paper focuses on 
the strategy to widely reduce the malicious attacks’ risk and 
to assure the privacy of patients during the storing and 
exchange  (sharing)  of medical  information by using the 
eHealth platform.
Some  cryptographic  protocols  have  proved  their 
efficiency to provide data-security for communications over 
networks but they do not fully prevent attacks to users’ 
computers or servers. An eHealth platform has to deal with 
these  risks,  control  authentication,  authorization,  and 
integrity.  Several  countries  are  implementing  different 
solutions to satisfy these needs, but the evolution of the 
applications, methods and laws had forced some of them to 
review partially or completely their approaches. 
The terms “central” and “decentral” mostly refer to the 
location of the information repositories. In enlarging this 
interpretation towards different components of a system, the 
term “central” refers to a system where the components are 
in one location, managed by one staff of administrators. The 
term “decentral” then refers to a distributed system. The 
security advantage of decentral systems is that an attacker 
will  get  only  a  part  of  the  stored  information.  The 
disadvantage  is  that  the  components  (satellites)  of  the 
distributed system may not be protected in the same “best” 
way, as one can do for a centralized system. 
The proposed solution respects both aspects – (1) avoid a 
single attack point and (2) data-security for the satellites' 
data. If the information stored in one satellite is unusable for 
an attacker as long as information from other satellites is 
missing, thus the  hacked  information of one  satellite is 
worthless alone. This paper describes a secure IT-platform 
based on this idea. It protects the stored information against 
external  intruder  attacks  as  well  as  against  internal 
administrator attacks. The layout is based on the IHE-XDS 
[1] profile, extended  with pseudonymization, encryption, 
and signature functionalities. 
Patients' data are distributed within the system in two 
main parts: One for storing the medical information under 
pseudonyms and the other for mapping the pseudonyms to 
the patients' identity data. The benefit is: if one part of data 
is stolen, the information is useless. Neither the mapping 
table nor the medical database with pseudonyms is really 
useful alone. 
In the case where medical data contains additional person 
identifying information, like a name printed on an X-ray 
picture, then the medical data (i.e., the X-ray) is encrypted 
and stored under a pseudonym. 
The access to the stored information is realized with a 
web application. As the web-server in the Internet is a high 
security risk, the patient's identifying data are hidden against 
the web-server. Illegal server logs on the web-server are 
useless.  Also  to  avoid  illegal  web-server  logs,  the 
transferred medical results are encrypted on their way over 
the web-server.
The platform is protected against unauthorized access by 
multiple security levels. The initial login is done with a 
108
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

personal ID-card. A user&role directory guards the legal 
access to the system. 
Finally, an elaborated consent management protects any 
undesired  access  on  the  base  of  the  patients'  will.  The 
special case of an information access during an emergency 
situation of the patient implies sending an information about 
the data access to the patient, his family doctor or any other 
named contact person.
In  the  next  section,  some  related  works  are  shortly 
presented  and  discussed.  Section  III  introduces  the 
architectural approach.
II.
RELATED WORK
Data stored in and transmitted through an Internet-based 
platform are confronted with a set of attack possibilities. In 
health care domain, medical data and personal data can be 
exchanged and managed by services provided in a platform. 
It also includes privacy and data protection. Patients want to 
be sure that their personal and medical information is not 
misused. They want to know how their data is utilized, 
disclosed, and protected, and the degree of control they will 
have over the dissemination of this information. They are 
also worried about possible undesirable economic and social 
consequences from the misuse of such information [2][3]. 
Users of healthcare  services  are unwilling to have their 
personal information distributed other than for purposes of 
clinical care and they would like to be consulted before their 
information is released. The right to decide which personal 
information  can  be communicated  to  others  and  under 
which conditions constitutes their privacy rights and need to 
be implemented in the platform system. Assuring privacy 
implies that the platform needs to deal with, at least two 
attack risks eavesdropper and server intruders or curious 
insiders [4]. Three potential types of attackers are described 
in [4]:  Client intruder, which attack the client computer 
(e.g., trojan); Eavesdropper, which compromise or owns a 
subset of communication’s nodes to collect and analyze 
messages that are routed over them;  Curious insider or 
server intruder, this attackers have administrative privileges 
and can access all data in the server.
For the client intruders’ risk, we assume that users are 
responsible for the protection of their own system and of 
data saved in their computer. The access to the platform is 
protected by a system based on the electronic cards that 
provides identification and signature services. If an intruder 
steals the identity of the user he will need to have his card 
and know his  password to use the platform. Other countries 
have  also  adopted  electronic  cards  for  health  data 
management and patient identification (eCard in Austria[5], 
eGK in Germany[6], Vitale in France[7], etc), this type of 
card has shown its efficacy  in banking domain and are 
widely accepted by users.
The other two types of attacks are directly related to the 
security strategy of the platform. Cryptography (e.g., Public 
Key Infrastructure) is commonly used in eHealth platforms 
to avoid eavesdropper, however a communication protocol 
should  be  defined  to  avoid  that  encrypted  data  and 
decryption keys cross the same node without a specific 
protection. The Belgium platform deals with this problem 
by implementing an end-to-end communication [8], then the 
private key is expected to never leaves the client computer. 
However, this solution does not allow sharing data when the 
receiver is unknown. For example, a prescription cannot be 
accessed by a pharmacy if the pharmacy was not chose by 
patient/doctor at the moment of the e-prescription creation.
In  Luxembourg  [9],  the  eHealth  platform  has  been 
designed to store (temporarily) medical data, and users will 
be able to access this data. In this case, the information 
cannot be encrypted with the public key of the (unknown) 
receiver and saving unencrypted data will open a door for 
server intruders or curious insiders attacks. The protocol 
proposed  in  this  paper  deals  with  this  situation  using 
symmetric encryption associated to asymmetric encryption 
for the symmetric keys [10], an identity and role control 
system and a pseudonymization of unencrypted data [11]. 
This encryption technologies are well known by Network 
administrators,
 
however,
 
associating
 
it
 
with 
pseudonymization techniques are not usual, as much as we 
know  the  proposed  solutions  use  proprietary  message 
structures. As semantic interoperability is an important step 
to promote sharing/exchange of information in the medical 
domain, the contribution of our work is the association of 
these technologies within the IHE-XDS profile.
Ideally, privacy is assured if a consumer uses a resource 
or  service  without  disclosing  his  consumer  identity;  the 
resource  or  service  can  be  used  multiple times  without 
others being able to link these uses together (unlinkability) 
or observe that this resource is being used (unobservability) 
[2]. In medical domain, it can be illustrated by a doctor 
accessing a set  of data of one patient stored in several 
repositories. The system need to assure that nobody else can 
know  that  all  these  data  belongs  to  the  same  patient 
(unlinkability). Or, when a patient access his own data, the 
system  should  assure  that  nobody  will  observe  it 
(unobservabiity), because if the user (patient) is associated 
to the data, the unlinkability criteria is lost. The encryption 
and the pseudonymization techniques can  not solve this 
problem. An organizational strategy is necessary to improve 
the privacy of patients, and this is another contribution of 
the paper.
The  eHealth  architecture  detailed  in  the  next  section 
shows  how  privacy,  hiding  users’  identity  and  assuring 
authenticity/integrity of  documents and  messages  can  be 
established.  The  approach  is  based  on  a  multi-level 
architecture  where:  users  are  authenticated  by  a  trust 
authority and associated to a set of rights access; data are 
pseudonymized; non-anonymized documents are encrypted; 
strict sequences of activities are provided; and messages are 
stored encrypted for audits purposes.
109
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

III.
ARCHITECTURAL OVERVIEW
The main components of the proposed eHealth platform 
are presented in Figure 1. Some components (e.g., LDAP, 
CA, STS, etc.) are omitted to improve the visibility and the 
architecture explanation. The technology used to implement 
these components are out of the scope of this paper. The 
architecture  was  defined  to  support  centralized  and 
decentralized information repositories, based on the IHE 
XDS infrastructure profile with a central registry, one or 
more  centralized  repositories  and  one  or  multiple 
decentralized repositories. 
The  heart  of  this  platform  is  the  Central  Medical 
Registry (CMReg). Each document provided by the primary 
systems  is  registered  in  the  CMReg  with  its  physical 
location in one of the repositories. For illustration, Figure 1 
shows  two  centralized  repositories:  (1)  the  Centralized 
Medical Data Repository (CMDRepo) stores unencrypted 
information without any person identifying data; and (2) the 
Internal Document  Management  System (Int. DMS) that 
stores encrypted medical information, which may contain, 
as well, person identifying data. External storage of data is 
also  supported  by  the  platform.  For  example,  Primary 
Systems may decide  to use their own repositories (Ext. 
DMS), placed in a DMZ (Demilitarized Zone) from their 
network.  Those  external  repositories  always  contain 
encrypted information.
This organization allows normalizing data storage and 
data retrieving within all data repositories. CMReg keeps 
meta-data of all information registered in the platform, what 
makes the CMReg a potential target for malicious attacks. 
Protecting  the  CMReg  is  one  priority  of  our  security 
strategy. A set of components is combined to improve the 
security  of  the  system.  In  order  to  describe  the  data 
exchange protocol, it is assumed that an existing Public Key 
Infrastructure (PKI) is in place and each registered entity 
has  a  public/private  identity  key  pair.  The  notations 
introduced in Table 1 are used.
Table 1: Notations
Notation
Meaning
PI
Patient Identifying Data (name, address, sex, …)
MD
Medical Data (lab results, diagnosis, …)
EU
End User. Can be patients, health providers, 
researchers, etc.
SK
Symmetric key
Tk
Token
ps
Pseudonym
(m)SK
Message encrypted with a symmetric key
(m)U
PK
Message encrypted with the public key of a user U
A.
User identification
Two  groups  of  users  are  considered  for  the  eHealth 
platform, according to the role that they play: (1) Primary 
Systems,  who  uses  the  platform  to  send  medical  data 
produced by healthcare providers (ex., laboratory results, x-
rays, or discharge letters) via the “Push” web-service; (2) 
End Users, healthcare professionals or patients that use the 
platform to acquire stored medical information. 
The procedure to use the platform is the same for both 
groups. Users need an electronic card (eID for short) for 
authentication and for data integrity (through e-signature of 
documents). 
The access to the system requests the following steps: 
Figure 1: Architecture of the Platform
110
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

1.
Users holding their eID to request an “entry ticket” 
to the Secure Token Service (STS). The user can request 
an entry token via Web (i.e., as data consumer through a 
Web-client – right side of Figure 1) or via an Intranet 
(i.e., as data producer through HealthNet – left side of 
Figure 1). The request message is signed on  user's side 
and encrypted with the STS public key.
User → STS: (eID)STS
PK
2.
STS  verifies the signature with the certification 
authority (CA). If refused, the user’s access is denied.
STS → CA: (eID)CA
PK 
CA → STS: (Check result)STS
PK
3.
STS  requests  access  rights  information  to 
Lightweight  Directory  Access  Protocol  (LDAP) 
manager. The answer is a set of roles that this user can 
play.
STS → LDAP: (eID)LDAP
PK 
LDAP → STS: (roles)STS
PK
4.
STS prepares the entry ticket, encrypts it with the 
user’s public key and sends it to the user.
STS → User: (entry ticket)User
PK
For the client, the entry ticket will give the access to a set 
of Web-applications in the Web-Server and for the Primary 
Systems, it will allow them to use the “Push” web-services 
provided by CMReg system. 
This protocol requires that users are pre-registered at 
STS, that they have an eID recognized by a certification 
authority (CA) and that he uses this eID during the whole 
process (entry and service request). Data (e.g., the entry 
ticket) will be rendered encrypted and the user needs his 
private key to decrypt. This strategy protects users from eID 
stealers.
B.
Pseudonymization
As medical data are registered in the CMReg, they are 
associated to pseudonyms and stored in one of the data 
repositories. The mapping between  pseudonyms and the 
corresponding person identifying data is stored in a Trusted 
Third Party (TTP). We use the term TTP for the mapping 
software and TTP driver for the organization that operates 
this software. The mapping between the person identifying 
data and the pseudonyms must never be disclosed. To assure 
this, a «token» is used and all communication is encrypted. 
The psedonymization service  can  be summarized  in the 
following 6 steps:
1.
The  Primary  Systems  (PrS)  provides  a  clean 
separation  of  person  identifying  data  and  its  related 
medical data (i.e., two separated documents are created). 
The medical data may be unencrypted but without any 
person-identifying information, or encrypted.
2.
The person identifying data is sent  to the TTP 
together with a token. PrS → TTP: (Tk,PI)TTP
PK
3.
The medical data (or a reference to the medical 
data) is sent to the CMReg (Push service) with the same 
token.  The  document  itself  is  stored  in  one  of  the 
repositories. PrS → CMReg: (Tk, MD)CMReg 
PK
4.
The TTP generates a pseudonym, stores it besides 
the person identifying data and waits for the CMReg 
asking for the pseudonym.
5.
The  CMReg  sends  a  request  to  TTP  with  the 
“token” and gets back the generated pseudonym:
CMReg → TTP: (Tk)TTP 
PK
TTP → CMReg: (Tk,ps)CMReg 
PK
6.
CMReg  establish  a  mapping  between  the 
pseudonym  and  the  (encrypted)  document  with  the 
medical data. The pseudonym becomes part of the meta-
data of the document and is not visible outside of the 
platform;
Additional security packs can be used to improve the 
privacy of patients. For example:
•
Scheduled pseudonym exchange: The pseudonyms 
will be exchanged on a regular basis each hour or if 
necessary in shorter intervals. The stolen mapping table 
of a hypothetical evil TTP administrator only works if 
the hypothetical evil PMIP administrator has stolen the 
medical databases during the same time interval. If this 
extension gets necessary further elaboration concerning 
the switching time has to be done.
•
Multiple pseudonymization: To further enlarge the 
trust  level,  multiple  pseudonymization  steps  are 
possible. The first pseudonymization service maps real 
identities to pseudonyms. The second pseudonymization 
service  maps  the  first  pseudonym  to  a  second 
pseudonym. The n-th pseudonymization service maps 
the (n-1)-th pseudonym to an n-th pseudonym. Each 
pseudonymization mapping is hosted by an independent 
trusted N-th party.
•
A combination of scheduled pseudonym exchange 
and multiple pseudonymization with different 
pseudonym exchange intervals of the different levels is 
possible.
111
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

C.
Encryption/Re-Encryption
When the separation of person identifying data and the 
related medical data is not possible (e.g., X-ray image), the 
privacy is guaranteed by a combined encryption strategy. It 
consists of 5 steps: 
1.
The  medical  document  (MD)  is  symmetrically 
encrypted with a symmetric key generated by the PrS – 
one for each document, respectively;  
{(MD)SK}
2.
The symmetric key is encrypted with the public 
key of TTP; 
{(SK)TTP
PK}
3.
The encrypted document and the encrypted key is 
stored together in one of the repositories.
4.
When  requested  by  an  authorized  user,  the 
encrypted key of the document is separated from the 
document, sent to TTP, which will be in charge of re-
encrypting the key with the public key of the legal 
requester, and regrouped with the document:
CMReg → TTP:  ((SK)TTP
PK,EU)TTP
PK   
TTP → CMReg:  ((SK)EU
PK) 
5.
Both, the encrypted document and the re-encrypted 
key, are sent to the end-user.
CMReg→EU: {(SK)EU
PK, (MD)SK}
This  distributed  encryption/re-encryption  strategy 
prevents both insiders’ server attacks and eavesdroppers. 
The repositories store the encrypted documents with the 
encrypted  keys.  The  re-encryption  of  the  encrypted 
symmetric keys is done at the TTP side. The TTP never has 
access to the encrypted document while the repository never 
has access to a disclosed symmetric key. For eavesdroppers 
of the repository or eavesdroppers of the TTP the same 
argument holds like for the corresponding administrators. 
Only with simultaneous access to TTP and repository the 
information  can  be  disclosed.  In  this  process,  the 
pseudonym of the patient can  differs from  one primary 
source to another, what improve the unlinkability of the 
solution.
D.
Hiding information from the servers’ administrators
Two types of files with medical data are stored in the 
platform  one  unencrypted/pseudonymized  and  the  other 
encrypted/pseudonymized. At least 4 servers compose the 
platform infrastructure (TTP, CMReg, Repositories, Web-
server). TPP and Repositories are protected by the trick 
described above. The Web-server is often the main target of 
attacks because it is used to transmit data to/from the end 
user.  A  malicious  administrator  may  install  an  illegal 
logging, catching the requests containing patient names and 
catching  the  results  containing  medical  data  for  those 
patients. With a simple strategy, after cumulating this log 
information,  the  administrator  may  associate  the  set  of 
health data with patients’ identity. To prevent this, patient 
identifying data are encrypted with the public key of the 
TTP. Then the web-server only transmits the information to 
the TTP. And the TTP has one additional step to do: it has 
to decrypt the patient identifying data. Then it continues by 
looking-up and providing the pseudonyms and waiting for 
the CMReg request for the pseudonym-list. An analogous 
tunneling method is applied for result transmission over the 
web-server to the receiver.
E.
Consent and User Management
A secure token service with a healthcare related LDAP 
guards the access to the whole system. Users need to be pre-
registered and associate to a set of access rights to use the 
applications  of  the  system.  An  elaborated  consent 
management system protects medical information from any 
unwished  access  on  the  basis  of  the  patient's  will.  For 
example:
•
for all documents, for an episode, for a 
medical case; 
•
for all doctors, for all doctors of a special 
discipline, for named doctors;
•
for exchange over borders;
•
for access in emergency case;
•
…
A specific consent description language [12] has been 
proposed  to  declare  consents.  CMReg  checks  the 
conformance of an access first with the patients' consent 
declaration  for  each  requested  document.  Patients  can 
access the system via web-applications and their identity 
will  be  substituted  by  a  pseudonym  define  by  TTP 
(following the same process described in 3.2).
F.
Trustful statistics
Pseudonymized  results  in  the  platform  offers  the 
possibility of using data for statistics analysis without the 
risk of data protection violations. Therefore a preparation 
process  is  necessary  to  exchange  the  internal  used 
pseudonyms by other pseudonyms created for the statistics 
purposes. Internal  used  pseudonyms are  supposed  to be 
hidden from external users. Statistics analysis can use a 
predefined set of not encrypted medical data that must not 
contain  patient  identity  information.  If  further  statistical 
research has to be done, where personal data like age and 
sex are necessary, exceptions can be created. But, it may 
require  special  authorizations  from  public  authorities  in 
order to guarantee citizens’ privacy. 
112
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This  paper  has  presented  an  architecture  for  eHealth 
platforms that combine different methods for data protection 
in order to improve the security level and assure the privacy 
of patient’s data.
The  architecture’s  concept  was  developed  based  on 
standards  protocols  and  proposes  some  extensions  for 
multi-level  privacy  protection.  The  extensions  consist 
mainly on the communication with the Trusted Third Party 
server and are shown to be necessary when considering 
potential  intern  attacks  (malicious  administrators).  A 
“ticket” based protocol is proposed to assure authentication 
of users. It is associated with an electronic card (provided 
by  a  certification  authority)  that  offers  signature  and 
identification services. 
The architecture was designed to promote exchange and 
sharing of medical data and to collect/store data for statistics 
finalities. Thus, the collected data could not be encrypted, 
but  the  identity  of  the  patients  is  never  exposed.  The 
proposed  approach  uses  pseudonymization  methods  for 
hiding  patient’s  identifying  data.  But,  during  the  data 
exchange process, even pseudonymized data are encrypted 
using PKI solutions to avoid eavesdroppers attacks. As the 
platform was not conceived to provide P2P communication, 
a strategy to safely store unanonymized data was necessary. 
An association of symmetric and asymmetric encryption is 
proposed, which involves at least two different servers to 
provide the necessary information to the end user. This 
approach has shown to be efficient against insiders’ servers 
attacks and against client intruders that try to steal the client 
identity.
Future  works  are  planned  to  improve  the  identity 
protection when the patient should be able to access his own 
data.  This  particular  increase  the  risk  of  eavesdroppers 
attacks  over  the  web-server  because  the  identity  of  the 
patient is known (equal to the requester identity). We are 
also working on the implementation of the platform and on 
the validation with case studies specified with user groups.
V.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank their partners from the Health Ministry 
of  Luxembourg  for  their  very  helpful  advises  and  for 
providing insights into organizational and legal aspects of 
the eHealth platform.
VI.
REFERENCES
[1] IHE Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise. IT infrastructure 
technical framework vol.1 (iti tf-1) integration profiles. 
Technical report, 2007. Last access: 10/12/2010 
http://www.ihe.net/Technical_Framework/upload/IHE_ITI_T
F_4_0_Vol1_FT_2007_08_22.pdf 
[2]  G. Bansal, F. Zahedi, and D. Gefen, "The impact of personal 
dispositions on information sensitivity, privacy concern and 
trust in disclosing health information online," Decision 
Support Systems, vol. 49, 2010, pp. 138-150.
[3]  R. Au and P. Croll, "Consumer-Centric and Privacy-
Preserving Identity Management for Distributed E-Health 
Systems," Proceedings of the 41st Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2008), 
2008, pp. 234-234.
[4] D. Slamanig and C. Stingl, "The Degree of Privacy in Web-
based Electronic Health Records," ECIFMBE 2008, J. Vander 
Sloten, P. Verdonck, M. Nyssen, and J. Haueisen, (Eds.), 
2008, pp. 974-977.
[5] Last access: 10/12/2010 
http://www.chipkarte.at/portal27/portal/ecardportal/start/ 
startWindow?action=2&p_menuid=51682&p_tabid=1
[6] Last access: 10/12/2010 http://www.telematik-
modellregionen.de/content/
[7] Last access: 10/12/2010 http://www.sesam-
vitale.fr/programme/programme_eng.asp
[8] Last access: 10/12/2010 
https://www.ehealth.fgov.be/binaries/website/en/20100531_en
.ppt 
[9] S. Benzschawel, H. Zimmermann, M. Da Silveira, U. Roth, A. 
Jahnen, “IT infrastructure for National Electronic Health 
Records in Luxembourg – Acceptance occurs when benefits 
outweigh disadvantages.” Global Telemedicine and eHealth 
Updates: Knowledge Resources, vol. 3, Malina Jordanova and 
Frank Lievens (Eds.),  2010, pp. 141-145
[10] D. Galindo and E. R. Verheul, “Pseudonymized Data 
Sharing”. Privacy and Anonymity in Information 
Management Systems. J. Nin, J. Herranz (Eds.). Series: 
Advanced Information and Knowledge Processing, vol. 0, Part 
3, 2010, pp. 157-179, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-84996-238-4_8 
[11] T. Neubauer and J. Heurix, “A methodology for the 
pseudnymization of medical data”. In press. International 
journal of medical informatics, 2010, 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2010.10.016
[12] C. Pruski, “e-CRL: A Rule-based Language for Expressing 
Patient Electronic Consent,” eTelemed 2010, Second 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine, 2010, pp.141-146.
113
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

