Patient Satisfaction with Remote Consultation at a Chronic Pain Unit 
 
Anabela Marques, Marcos Pacheco 
da Fonte 
CHEDV - Centro Hospitalar de entre 
Douro e Vouga, E.P.E. 
Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal 
e-mail: anabela.marques@chedv.min-
saude.pt, 
pachecoanestesista@gmail.com 
Mafalda Oliveira 
UCSP Oliveira do Douro 
Oliveira do Douro, Portugal 
e-mail: mafalda.i.s.oliveira@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
Duarte Duque 
2Ai – School of Technology 
IPCA 
Barcelos, Portugal 
LASI – Associate Laboratory of 
Intelligent Systems, Guimarães, 
Portugal 
e-mail: dduque@ipca.pt 
 
 
Abstract — The COVID-19 pandemic represented and 
unprecedented global health crisis, forcing the reorganization 
of healthcare systems worldwide to respond to intensive care 
units created to treat COVID patients. Therefore, all 
outpatient and elective interventional procedures have been 
reduced or interrupted to reduce the risk of viral spread. The 
Centro Hospitalar de Entre o Douro e Vouga (CHEDV) 
Chronic Pain Unit (CPU), confronted with cancellations of all 
consultations and procedures, considered as non-essential or 
urgent, as well as the dramatic reduction in human resources, 
which were reallocated to essential activities, decided to start 
teleconsultation. Besides enabling the follow-up of patients, 
preventing the degradation of their clinical condition, it was 
intended to avoid a feeling of abandonment by the patients. 
This study aimed to measure patient satisfaction with 
teleconsultation during the Pandemic, and to understand the 
influence of sociodemographic variables on satisfaction, as well 
as to envision possible improvements in healthcare services. 
The results indicated a high level of patient satisfaction with 
the telemedicine. Despite high satisfaction most patient prefer 
to continue face-to-face consultation in the future. Data 
analysis revealed no statistically significant difference between 
patient satisfaction and demographic variables. 
Keywords - telemedicine; patient satisfaction; chronic pain. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The first cases of infection with Sars-CoV-2, a virus from 
the coronavirus family, were detected in late 2019 in the 
Chinese city of Hubei. The zoonosis, referred as COVID-19, 
quickly spread around the world. In March 2020, this 
outbreak was declared a pandemic by the World Health 
Organization [1]. 
The COVID-19 pandemic represented and unprecedented 
global health crisis, forcing the reorganization of healthcare 
systems worldwide to respond to intensive care units created 
to treat COVID patients. Therefore, all outpatient and 
elective interventional procedures have been reduced or 
interrupted to reduce the risk of viral spread [2]. The 
shutdown of pain services in conjunction with the home 
lockdown has affected chronic pain management worldwide 
with and additional impact on patient’s psychological health 
[3]. 
In Portugal, the first State of Emergency was declared 
between March 22 and May 2, 2020. During that period, all 
the non-oncological non-urgent procedures were postponed. 
In the CHEDV were attended hundreds of COVID-19 
patients and all the anesthesiologists were reallocated to the 
intensive 
care 
unit, 
emergency 
services 
and 
emergency/major surgery. 
The CHEDV CPU is constituted by anesthesiologists 
who belong to the Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine 
Service, with the support of other specialties such as 
Rehabilitation, Psychiatry, Psychology and Oncology, when 
appropriate. It provides healthcare to 340,000 inhabitants, a 
population spread over a large perimeter [10]. 
Until March 2020, the CPU appointments were carried 
out on a face-to-face basis. Confronted with cancellations of 
all consultations and procedures, considered as non-essential 
or urgent, as well as the dramatic reduction in human 
resources, which were reallocated to essential activities, it 
was decided to start teleconsultation. Besides enabling the 
follow-up of patients, preventing the degradation of their 
clinical condition, it was intended to avoid a feeling of 
abandonment by the patients. Therefore, during the first State 
of Emergency declared in Portugal, all scheduled patients of 
this unit were submitted to a teleconsultation by a senior 
physician or pain nurse. 
For patients, this new consultation experience, where the 
interaction between the patient and clinician is performed 
without direct observation, may have a negative impact on 
the level of patient satisfaction. 
Patient satisfaction can be defined as the degree of 
congruence between expectation and experience [4]. The 
quality of the service delivery experienced is defined as the 
gap between the expectation and the actual experience of 
costumers [5]. 
The level of patient satisfaction in the CHEDV chronic 
pain consultation had never been analyzed. Methodologies to 
assess patient satisfaction in telemedicine are unspecific, and 
the comparison and interpretation of results can be a problem 
[6]. In general, the more positive the perception of an 
intervention in telemedicine, the greater the likelihood of its 
use and benefit in clinical practice. While there have been 
studies 
examining 
the 
correlation 
between 
patient 
satisfaction and the implementation of telemedicine, as well 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

as its impact on patient outcomes, there is a dearth of 
research focusing specifically on individuals with chronic 
pain [7, 11]. 
Recently, a study designed to understand the acceptance 
of telemedicine by chronic pain patients during the COVID-
19 Pandemic in Switzerland has been published, which 
demonstrates the relevance of the topic [8]. 
The purpose of this work is to measure patient 
satisfaction with teleconsultation during the Pandemic, and 
to understand the influence of socio-demographic variables 
on satisfaction, as well as to perspective possible 
improvements in the provision of healthcare services. 
This paper is structured as follows: Section II outlines the 
methodology used in the study, including a description of the 
participants, study design, and survey questions. Section III 
then provides a detailed account of the statistical analysis 
carried out on the data collected. Moving on to Section IV, 
the results obtained are presented and analyzed in detail. 
Section V delves into a discussion of these results, exploring 
their implications and significance. Finally, the paper 
concludes with an acknowledgement section and a summary 
of the main findings and their implications in the conclusion 
section. 
 
II. 
METHODS 
A retrospective, descriptive, cross-sectional cohort 
survey was conducted. 
A. Participants And Study Design 
The study was previously proposed and approved by the 
Ethics Committee of the Entre o Douro e Vouga Hospital 
Center. 
The patients' population consisted of all the patients 
previously followed in the CPU that were submitted to a 
teleconsultation by a senior pain doctor during the first state 
of emergency due to Covid-19 Pandemic, declared in 
Portugal between March 22 and May 2, 2020. 
From the universe of patients, those who fit at least one 
of the following exclusion criteria were not considered for 
the study: 
• 
Patient deceased at the time of the questionnaire; 
• 
Family member of a professional from CPU; 
• 
Hospitalized patient; 
• 
Incomplete questionnaire or misunderstandings; 
• 
Nursing consultation; 
• 
Patient discharged from CPU; 
• 
Under 18 years of age. 
Patients who met the criteria for inclusion in the study 
were contacted by telephone in order to answer the 
questionnaire. The telephone contact was made by a health 
professional other than the physician responsible for the 
patient. This was done to avoid possible conditioning of the 
response. 
All selected patients gave informed consent and agreed to 
participate in the study. The patients who met the inclusion 
criteria were asked to complete a questionnaire. The 
questionnaire consisted of 12 simple questions, as shown in 
Table I. The questions were grouped by theme, each with 5 
possible answers, according to a 5-point Likert scale (1 - 
totally disagree / 5 - totally agree): 
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONS ASKED IN THE SURVEY 
1.TECHNICAL PROBLEMS (Techn probl) 
I had no technical problems in performing the consultation. 
2. OBTAINING A PRESCRIPTION (Obt Presc) 
I had no difficulty in obtaining a prescription. 
3. UNDERSTANDING THE PRESCRIPTION (Underst Presc) 
I had no trouble understanding the changes in the prescription. 
4. THE IMPORTANCE OF PAIN (Pain import) 
I felt that my pain was valorized by my doctor. 
5. CONSULTATION DURATION (Time) 
During the consultation I had the time I needed to express my 
symptoms. 
6. SAFETY AND CONFIDENTIALITY (Safety) 
During the consultation I felt my confidentiality was not threatened. 
7. COMMUNICATION (Communication) 
I clearly understood the explanations given to me. 
8. CONFIDENCE (Confidence) 
I am confident that my doctor was able to assess my symptoms during 
the phone consultation. 
9. LACK OF PHSYCAL CONTACT (Physcontact) 
I think the lack of physical contact was not a problem for the course of 
the consultation. 
10. OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE CONSULTATION 
I am very satisfied with the healthcare provided to me in the Chronic 
Pain Unit. 
11. ACCEPTANCE OF TELECONSULTATION (Acceptance) 
I wouldn't mind if the next appointment was by telephone. 
12. FEAR OF SEVERE CORONAVIRUS INFECTION 
(FearCOVID) 
I am afraid of becoming seriously ill due to COVID-19. 
 
III. 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
Data analysis was performed using IBM® SPSS® 
Statistics Software. Continuous variables were represented 
with means and standard deviations. Interval data were 
calculated using Student test. 
Spearman correlation between the listed items were 
calculated (Table III). A correlation of between [0.2, 0.4) 
was considered weak, [0.4, 0.6) moderate, [0.6-0.8) strong, 
and very strong between [0.8, 1]. 
The p-values were calculated with a chi-square test for 
categorical data and a t-test for continuous data. A p-value of 
less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. 
Missing data or unanswered survey questions were 
excluded from statistical analysis. 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IV. 
RESULTS 
262 patients were submitted to a remote consultation 
between March 22 and May 2, 2020. From these, 47 were 
excluded from our study: 22 had only nursing appointment; 2 
were relatives from CPU professionals; 3 refused to 
participate in the study; 13 don’t complete or understand the 
questionnaire; 1 was hospitalized at the time of the survey; 3 
patients died; and 3 were discharged from the CPU. 
A. Sample Characteristic 
215 patients met the inclusion criteria for the study. The 
mean participant age was 61.58 (+/-14.96). Regarding 
gender, the participants were mostly female (171 patients, 
corresponding to 79.53% of the sample). 58 of the patients 
have been in follow-up for less than 6 months (26.97%) and 
61 for more than 5 years (28.37%). 
The statistical analysis is presented in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
DESCRIPTION OF THE SOCIO-DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES OF 
THE STUDY PARTICIPANTS 
Patient Characteristics and Demographics 
Gender 
 
Feminine 
171 (79,53%) 
 
Masculine 
44 (20,47%) 
Age 
 
Average 
61,58 (+/-14,96) yrs 
Marital Status 
 
Married 
160 
 
Divorced 
21 
 
Single 
18 
 
Widowed 
16 
Education 
 
Illiterate 
9 
 
Basic 
106 
 
Secondary 
91 
 
Higher 
9 
Employment Status 
 
Disability pension 
15 
 
Employed 
58 
 
Pensioner 
94 
 
Sick leave 
24 
 
Unemployed 
24 
 
80.9% of the followed patients, i.e., 174 patients, were 
independent in the Activities of Daily Living (ADL) – 
Barthel Score Index. Only 5 patients (2.3%) were very 
dependent or totally dependent on ADL. Most patients were 
followed for non-oncological pain 94% (202) and 
predominantly from musculoskeletal causes 48.4% (104). 
93% of patients totally agree/agree with the statement " I 
had no technical problems in performing the consultation”. 
Also, within the dimension of technical difficulties, 86% 
reported no problems in obtaining the prescription, and 
87.4% in understanding the changes to the prescription. In all 
those questions there was always patients who neither agreed 
nor disagreed with this statement (8.4%, 9.8% and 11.6%, 
respectively). 
85.1% agree/strongly agree that the clinician valued their 
complaints during the remote consultation. A total of 7 
patients totally disagreed with this statement. 
Regarding the time required for the consultation, 80.5% 
of the patients felt that the consultation had taken an 
adequate duration. 
Considering the current health status and compared to the 
previous 6 months, 40.5% (87) of patients felt no change in 
their condition, 35.8% (77) felt better, 18.6% (40) affirmed 
they felt worse, 3.7% (8) felt much better and 1.4% (3) 
considered themselves much worse. 
After socio-demographic and descriptive statistical 
analysis, 
further 
statistical 
analysis 
was 
conducted. 
Regarding the question “I am very satisfied with the 
healthcare provided to me in the Chronic Pain Unit”, it was 
found that 93% of the patient sample was satisfied/very 
satisfied with the provided services in the CPU. 
Correlations were examined between the patient's overall 
satisfaction and other items. The results are presented in 
Table III. 
TABLE III.  
CORRELATION BETWEEN PATIENT SATISFACTION WITH 
CPU AND OTHER ITEMS. 
Patient Satisfaction 
Correlation Coef 
p-value 
FOLLOW UP TIME 
(Fol time) 
0.025 
0.712 
CURRENT HEALTH STATUS 
(Cur health) 
0.169 
0.13 
TECHNICAL PROBLEMS (Tech 
prob) 
0.285 
0.00 
OBTAINING A PRESCRIPTION 
(Obt presc) 
0.258 
0.00 
UNDERSTANDING THE 
PRESCRIPTION 
0,292 
0.00 
THE IMPORTANCE OF PAIN 
(Pain import) 
0.481 
0.00 
CONSULTATION DURATION 
(Time) 
0.475 
0.00 
SAFETY AND 
CONFIDENTIALITY (Safety) 
0.276 
0.00 
CONFIDENCE (Confidence) 
0.410 
0.00 
LACK OF PHISYCAL 
CONTACT (Physcontact) 
0.446 
0.07 
ACCEPTANCE OF 
TELECONSULTATION 
(Acceptance) 
0,476 
0.08 
FEAR OF SEVERE 
CORONAVIRUS INFECTION 
(FearCOVID) 
0,41 
0,21 
AGE 
0,63 
0.04 
 
There is a strong correlation between the patient age and 
their level of satisfaction (Cor: 0.67; p>0.05), with older 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

patients found to be the most satisfied with the services 
provided at the CPU. 
In addition to the analysis presented above, the data was 
used to search for correlations between other variables. A 
correlation was found between patient age and the difficulty 
in understanding the changes in the prescription (Spearman = 
0.010, Pearson's R = 0.027). 
We also found an association between the education level 
and the existence of technical difficulties in carrying out the 
consultation or understanding the changes in prescription 
(Spearman = 0.07; Pearson's R = 0.02). 
A correlation was found between fear of Sars-CoV-2 
infection and acceptance of future teleconsultation. It was 
also observed an association between patient satisfaction and 
confidence (Confidence), consultation duration (Time) and 
the lack of physical contact (Physcontact). 
The statistical result suggests that there is a weak linear 
association between physical dependence in activities of 
daily living (ADL) of the patient and the impression that the 
lack of physical contact with the clinician by teleconsultation 
had on the evolution of the disease. The Pearson's Chi square 
test was used to examine this association, with a linear 
association value of 0.047. 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The results indicated a high level of patient satisfaction 
with the telemedicine. 93% of the patients considered very 
satisfied/satisfied with the consultation by telephone. 
Data analysis revealed no statistically significant 
difference between patient satisfaction and demographic 
variables: gender; age; and marital status. 
The follow-up time in the unit also does not seem to 
influence the patients' degree of satisfaction. Only 2.3% (n: 
5) of patients consider themselves very unsatisfied with 
teleconsultation. 
86.51% had no technical difficulties in performing the 
consultation, obtaining the prescription (86.04%) or 
understanding the changes in the prescription. However, we 
found a statistically significant relation between the age of 
the patients and the existence of technical difficulties in 
carrying out the consultation and obtaining a prescription. 
Regarding safety and privacy 86.98% (187) felt safe or 
totally safe during the consultation process. 
Examining discrepancies in patients’ perceptions and 
experiences 
with 
the 
services reveals 
whether 
the 
expectations of users were fulfilled, or whether they were 
disappointed by the care they received. Generally, 
expectations are shaped by prior knowledge, beliefs, and 
experiences. However, in telemedicine a high degree of 
uncertainty is associated, due to the lack of previous 
experience and unfamiliarity with the technology. If we add 
to these factors the uncertainty and fear that surrounded 
society due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have exceptional 
characteristics, which may have altered the patients' 
perception in some of the dimensions of the consultation. 
The population served by our unit also has relevant 
characteristics: is an elderly; rural; poor; and highly 
dependent on others for access to health services. The 
distance between home and hospital can be more than 50 km. 
Thus, accessibility can become a problem. 
On the other hand, we detected a high fear of Sars-Cov-2 
infection in this age group, which may have conditioned the 
results of the satisfaction survey. A question arises: Where 
patients satisfied with teleconsultation or with the fact that 
they had less risk of infection by not travelling to the health 
services? 
During the first phase of the COVID-19 pandemic in 
Portugal, all non-essential services were closed. Thus, most 
chronically ill patients were left without a follow-up, which 
may have led to a feeling of abandonment, with possible 
worsening of physical and psychological symptoms. 
The fact that a senior chronic pain physician, although 
not the attending physician, met the connected patient and 
worried 
about 
his/her 
health 
condition, 
may 
have 
conditioned the patient’s satisfaction with the consultation. 
This analysis, although not part of the objectives of this 
work, may affect the results. This can be deduced from the 
interpretation of the answer to the question on maintaining 
teleconsultation in the future: only 29% prefer this scenario. 
The percentage of patients who do not know how to answer 
(17%) stands out, belonging to the global uncertainty 
scenario. A question regarding the “maintenance of 
teleconsultation in a non-pandemic scenario” would have 
been pertinent, although not asked in this study. 
In terms of future perspective, we can consider the role 
that teleconsultation will have in the daily practice and if it 
can be a valid alternative to traditional consultation. 
Although this was not the object of this study, it is 
undeniable that it should be considered as an option, 
depending on the circumstances, both medical (type of 
consultation) and patient (in elderly patients, with travel 
difficulties, with stabilized pathology). The use of new 
digital tools in favor of medicine is important. Thus, 
according to the patient's possibilities and the hospital's 
availability, the introduction of video calls, or the use of 
mobile applications, may improve the quality of the 
consultation and the outcome of treatments. 
Nevertheless, 
our 
study 
is 
conditioned 
by 
the 
circumstances of the COVID-19 pandemic, so this should be 
the subject of new studies, rather than the conclusion of the 
present work. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The main purpose in assessing patient satisfaction and 
experience is to try to understand how the patient was 
treated, what their perception of the quality of care was, and 
to identify areas for improvement to achieve better 
outcomes. 
The primary outcome measure of this retrospective, 
descriptive, cross-sectional cohort survey, is to determine the 
level of satisfaction of the patients submitted to a phone 
consultation during the first state of emergency in Portugal, 
due to COVID-19 pandemic. Based on the results, we 
conclude that the vast majority are satisfied/very satisfied. 
Data analysis revealed no statistically significant 
difference between patient satisfaction and demographic 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

variables (gender, age, marital status). Most patients reported 
no difficulties in obtaining an appointment, obtaining a 
prescription, or understanding changes to prescriptions. 
However, we found a statistically significant relation 
between the age of the patients and the existence of technical 
difficulties in carrying out the consultation and obtaining a 
prescription. 
Prospecting future improvements, we also pretend to 
evaluate telemedicine as an alternative to traditional in-
person follow up in a Chronic Pain Unit. In this scenario, 
68.4% of our sample prefer teleconsultation instead of 
traditional consult. 
Is telemedicine a reliable alternative to traditional 
physical consultation in a Chronic Pain Unit in Portugal? It 
can certainly play a significant role, although always adapted 
to the needs of the population it serves. Data on patients who 
preferred to continue with the traditional consultation was 
not analyzed and should be the subject of further research, 
developed in a post-pandemic context. 
How the fear for COVID-19 affected patients' 
satisfaction with teleconsultation is a question that could be 
asked. Although the answer was not the subject of this study, 
we can conjecture that the impact may have been significant. 
Whether by maintaining contact with the health services at a 
time of general confinement in which feelings of 
abandonment and isolation were frequent, or by avoiding 
visits to hospital, reducing the risk of viral transmission, it is 
possible that patient satisfaction with teleconsultation has 
been overestimated. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper was partially funded by national funds, 
through the FCT/MCTES of the projects UIDB/05549/2020 
and UIDP/05549/2020 and project SmartHealth, NORTE-
01-0145-FEDER-000045, supported by Northern Portugal 
Regional Operational Programme (Norte2020), under the 
Portugal 2020 Partnership Agreement, through the European 
Regional Development Fund (ERDF). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Direção-Geral da Saúde, “COVID-19”. [Online]. Available: 
https://covid19.min-saude.pt. [Accessed: 13-Mar-2023] 
[2] F. Puntillo et al., “Impact of COVID-19 pandemic in chronic 
pain management: looking for the best way to deliver care,” 
Best Practice & Research Clinical Anaesthesiology, vol. 34, 
no. 3, pp. 529-537, Sep 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.bpa.2020.07.001. 
[3] C. Wang et al., “Immediate psychological responses and 
associated factors during the initial stage of the coronavirus 
disease (COVID-19) epidemic among general population in 
China,” Int J Environ Res Public Health, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 
1729, Mar 2020, doi: 10.3390/ijerph17051729. 
[4] E. L. La Monica, M. T. Oberst, A. R. Madea, and R. M. Wolf, 
“Development of a patient satisfaction scale,” Research in 
Nursing & Health. Vol 9, no. 1, pp. 43-50, Mar 1986, doi: 
10.1002/nur.4770090108. 
[5] A. P. Parasuraman, V. A. Zeithaml, and  L. L. Berry, 
“SERVQUAL: A multiple-item scale for measuring consumer 
perceptions of service quality,” Journal of Retailing, vol. 64, 
no. 1, pp. 2-40, 1986. 
[6] F. Mair and P. Whitten, “Systematic review of studies of 
patient satisfaction with telemedicine,” BMJ, Vol. 320, no. 
7248, 
pp. 
1517-1520, 
Jun 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1136/bmj.320.7248.1517. 
[7] R. M. H. A. Huis in 't Veld, S. M. Kosterink, T. Barbe, A. 
Lindegard, T. Marecek, and M. M. R. Vollenbroek-Hutten, 
“Relation between patient satisfaction, compliance and the 
clinical benefit of a teletreatment application for chronic 
pain,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 16, no. 6, 
pp. 322-328, 2010, doi: 10.1258/jtt.2010.006006. 
[8] M. A. Harnik, L. Blättler, A. Limacher, F. Reisig, M. G. 
Holtforth, and K. Streitberger, “Telemedicine for chronic pain 
treatment during the COVID-19 pandemic: do pain intensity 
and anxiousness correlate with patient acceptance?”, Pain 
Practice, vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 934-942, 2021, doi: 
10.1111/papr.13071. 
[9] J. Perez, K. Niburski, M. Stoopler, and P. Ingelmo, 
“Telehealth and chronic pain management from rapid 
adaptation to long-term implementation in pain medicine: A 
narrative review,” PAIN Reports, Vol. 6, no. 1 pp. e912 Mar. 
2021, doi: 10.1097/PR9.0000000000000912. 
[10] Faculdade 
de 
Medicina 
da 
Universidade 
do 
Porto, 
“Instituições Afiliadas da Faculdade de Medicina da 
Universidade do Porto – Centro Hospitalar De Entre o Douro 
e 
Vouga”. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://afiliacoes.med.up.pt/index.php/instituicoes/afiliadas/8-
chedv?id=8 [Accessed: 01-Mar-2023] 
[11] C. S. Kruse, N. Krowski, B. Rodriguez, L. Tran, J. Vela, and 
M. Brooks, “Telehealth and patient satisfaction: a systematic 
review and narrative analysis,” BMJ Open, vol. 7, no. 8 
pp.e016242, Aug 2017, doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016242. 
 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-080-3
eTELEMED 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

