 
Synchronous and Asynchrounous Medical Problem Solving 
“The use of videoconference and a discussion forum for collaboration among health care professionals 
in Norway”
Line Lundvoll Warth and Rigmor Furu 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
line.lundvoll.warth@telemed.no and rigmor.furu@telemed.no 
 
Abstract—The 
use 
of 
synchronous 
and 
asynchronous 
telemedicine technology for medical probl]em solving is often 
treated as a question of functionality. The objective of this 
paper 
is 
to 
explore 
how 
the 
use 
of 
synchronous 
videoconference (VC) and asynchronous discussion forums for 
medical problem solving in Norway contributes to sharing 
knowledge in order to solve medical problems. A secondary use 
of qualitative data is analyzed in order to explore interactions 
over a period of time. The results illustrate, by in-depth 
analysis of interactions, the importance of the interface 
between questions and answers, when seeking to expand 
knowledge 
and 
learning. 
Hence, 
synchronous 
and 
asynchronous collaboration represent different opportunities 
for expanding knowledge. Even though they both can facilitate 
regularly use, and continuing problem solving, synchronous 
collaboration is an engagement for here and now problem 
solving, which affect the regularity and the types of medical 
problems discussed. The paper is relevant for the topic of the 
conference, discussing social relations and processes in 
telemedicine 
practice. 
When 
considering 
implementing 
technology for knowledge sharing, it’s a need to keep in mind 
that the practice affects the learning opportunities, and the 
knowledge shared. 
Keywords—aysncronous; 
syncronous; 
medical 
problem 
solving; videoconference; discussion forum. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Using different telemedicine tools for collaboration 
allows for both synchronous and asynchronous access to 
distributed 
knowledge. 
Synchronous 
tools 
allow 
professionals to collaborate instantly from different places, 
requiring same-time participation. Asynchronous tools 
enable collaboration whenever wanted, capturing the history 
of interaction, to be shared and distributed to a greater 
number 
of 
professionals. 
Diverse 
synchronous 
and 
asynchronous use of telemedicine tools has been investigated 
extensively. In the 90tees the research outlined i.e., the 
differences between telemedicine applications in terms of 
their synchronous or asynchronous nature [1], becoming 
more related to specific services, i.e. wound treatment [2], 
audiology [3] and, more specifically, how feasible, cost-
effective and reliable asynchronous monitoring and 
synchronous videoconference (VC) are when compared with 
one another [4]. The discussion of synchronous and 
asynchronous use of telemedicine is often treated as a 
question of comparison to traditional care, and further as a 
comparison to each other by its functionality. Hence, often 
with the focus on its capacity, and not on how the social 
processes is an outcome of the way they are organized. 
Knowledge sharing and medical problem solving studies 
compare face-to-face, synchronous, and asynchronous 
learning, and have deemed the face-to-face format as a more 
valuable form of interaction [5]. Asynchronous participants 
have rated their experience more positively overall [6], as 
supporting successful distance education, providing access to 
learning materials from any place at any time [7], and have 
claimed that asynchronous applications are most likely to 
provide real change in the practice of medicine [1]. 
Discussing asynchronous and synchronous medical problem 
solving is most often attached to education settings, and not 
as a part of daily practice. These discussions compare which 
of the two approaches is more suitable for collaboration and 
knowledge sharing, not focusing on the content in the 
interaction using the tools, or affecting the outcome of the 
medical problem. 
The manner in which professionals interact while 
collaborating is of great importance when exploring medical 
problem solving. Often, when considering different types of 
technology for learning and knowledge sharing the 
functionality of the technology are evaluated as important.  
Here, we explore medical problem solving, and how 
professionals in daily practice share knowledge in order to 
solve medical problems using synchronous VC and an 
asynchronous 
discussion 
forum 
among 
health 
care 
professionals in Norway.  Instead of focusing on the 
functionality, we emphasize the importance of the 
organization and the social processes of collaboration. The 
research question is: how does the organization of the 
collaborative work affect the learning opportunities and what 
characterize collaboration adjusted for knowledge sharing? 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Section two presents the theoretical approach which 
constitutes the framework for the paper, as the perspectives 
create premises for understanding medical problem solving 
in practice. Section 3 describes the method, illuminating the 
utilization of the data and how the data was collected for the 
purposes of the original work. In section 4, the results are 
discussed in accordance with a focus on interactions when 
health care professionals use synchronous and asynchronous 
technology. Section 5 is the discussion and the paper 
concludes in section 6 with suggestions for future research. 
II. 
FRAMEWORK AND MATERIALS 
The empirical field is framed by analyzing the activity in 
the context in which it occurs [8], namely the VC meetings 
and the discussion forums, and exploring the ways in which 
professionals together create meaning through mutual 
interaction.  
A. Videoconference as a tool 
VC realizes synchronous “here and now” pictures. Four 
times a week, the GPs in a local medical centre and the 
specialists 
at 
a 
hospital 
discussed 
and 
exchanged 
information and knowledge about patients under treatment. 
As the VC was a part of the morning meeting in a medical 
department, all the health professionals who participated in 
the morning meeting also participated in the VC. The GP on 
duty participated, sometimes with a nurse as observer in the 
local medical centre in which the patient was staying.  
B. Discussion forum as a tool 
In the discussion forum, the health professionals were 
able to post questions (regarding rehabilitation of the 
elderly), answer questions, exchange experiences at work 
and reflect together, independent of time and place. The 
discussion forum enables writing and asynchronous 
cooperation. Interdisciplinary health professionals from both 
primary health care and specialist health care participated. 
Both methods of collaboration, synchronous and 
asynchronous, make it possible to transform culture into a 
common activity. In IV Results, the collaboration is 
analyzed according to how problems are handled. Dilemmas 
in the conversation, expressed as choices [9], may either 
lead to a break down of the conversation [10] or may close 
the gap in the conversation [11]. When closing the gap, a 
common meaning of the activity is created. If the gap is not 
closed, the conversation breaks down. The written text in 
the discussion forum will be treated and analyzed as written 
expressions, and dilemmas will be made visible in the 
conversations. These analytic tools constitute the framework 
for the empirical analyses. 
III. 
METHODS 
In 2014, we gathered materials from two larger studies 
conducted in Norway in the period from 2006-2010 [12] and 
2007-2009 [13], with the purpose of focusing on the 
interaction during problem solving using VC and a 
discussion forum. The study discussing VC as a tool are 
based on an analysis of observations of 42 meetings, held 
during a five-month period. All meetings were video 
recorded, transcribed, and analyzed. The findings were 
discussed in eight semi-structured interviews with the 
participants in the recorded meetings.  
The study of the discussions forum is based on periods 
of weekly observations in the discussion forum stretched out 
over one year. During this period, 35 written posts and 43 
answers were registered. The posts were organized 
thematically from the text-based material. All the text in the 
discussion forum was copied and stored. The main focus of 
the observations of the discussion forum was to gain insight 
into how participants presented a theme to discuss and how 
they concluded or ended the discussion. 
Traffic data revealed 20 visitors in the discussion forum, 
7 of whom also participated in the discussion forum. All 7 
persons were interviewed in a semi-structured interview. 
The purpose of the interviews was to map health 
professionals’ experiences in participating in the discussion 
forum and how they made use of the forum. 
Here, the focus is on the interaction between 
participants; the materials in this article thus do not include 
statements from the interviews. The excerpts are chosen 
because they represent issues in which dilemmas and 
experiences 
are 
exchanged. 
Contradictions 
in 
the 
conversations constitute a potential to develop knowledge 
[14]. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Syncronous medical collaboration 
This medical conversation takes place over a period of 
three days. The three episodes presented here constitute 
each day of the consultations. The GP works together with a 
nurse at the local medical center. The synchronous VC is 
part of the morning meeting at the medical department at a 
hospital nearby. Several specialists participate, and two of 
them are involved in the conversation. The result is an 
analysis of how the problems are handled. 
 
GP- General Practitioner, N- Nurse, SP1- Specialist 1, SP2- 
Specialist 2. 
 
1st consultation 
 
1. GP. “His name is xxx, he came from you, 
completed 
the 
treatment 
with 
clostridium. 
Infection, diarrhea, infection of the intestinal… 
eh…I haven`t spoken with him, but… eh… I don`t 
know when he arrived”. 
2. GP. “He has been here for several days”? 
3. N. “He has been here for several days”? 
4. GP. “He arrived on the 3rd, yes, from the medical 
department in your hospital. And here it is… He 
has completed the treatment. He is not into 
antibiotics now, but he has experienced a 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

recurrence of his diarrhea, has bouts of fever of 
higher than 39°c in the evening. No fever this 
morning. He hasn`t had a fever this weekend 
either…So I don`t know if he will stay or not, or 
what …”. 
5. SP1. “I can`t remember him right now…”. 
6. SP2. “Give him a new treatment with Flagyl for 10 
days”. 
7. GP. “Yes…”. 
8. SP2. “Give him a new treatment with Flagyl for 10 
days”. 
9. GP. “Okay, how much”? 
10. SP2. “One tablet, 400 mg, 3 times a day, over a 
period of 10 days”. 
11. GP. “Okay, is this per os”? 
12. SP2. “Per os, yes”. 
13. GP. “Per os, yes”. 
14. SP2. “Tell me if this doesn`t have any effect in a 
couple of days”. 
15. GP. “Okay, in 10 days”? 
16. SP2. “Yes”. 
17. GP. “Yes, ok. We’ll do that”. 
 
The consultation begins by presenting the patient, a man 
who had completed the treatment of an intestinal infection, 
and was transferred from the hospital to the local medical 
center (1). The GP caters to the nurse (2), who informs him 
that the patient arrived one week ago (3) and completed 
treatment from the medical department (4). The GP shares 
that no antibiotic was given due to the recurrence of diarrhea 
and fever (4). The GP describes the situation that arose this 
weekend, and proceeds to seek out advice as to how to face 
this development (4). SP1 cannot remember the actual 
patient (5); SP2 follows up by recommending a treatment of 
antibiotics for the recurrence of the infection (6). The GP 
confirms this (7), and SP2 specifies that the treatment is to 
continue to be administered over 10 days (8). The GP 
requests information about the dose (9), and the specialist 
suggests the amount (10). The GP then proceeds to ask 
whether the treatment is to be given orally (11), which the 
specialist (13) and the GP confirm (13). In light of his 
expectation of the immediate effect of the treatment, SP2 
recommends that the GP contact him again if the patient 
does not respond to treatment within a couple of days (14). 
The GP asks for new information and confirmation that the 
treatment should be administered for a total of 10 days (15) 
in spite of the fact that the effects should be apparent after 
only a couple of days. SP2 confirms this (16), and the GP 
agrees to follow these recommendations (17).  
 
2nd consultation 
 
18. GP. “Xxx, who saw you with a chlostridium 
infection after treatment with antibiotics, infection 
after treatment with antibiotics, experienced a 
recurrence. We started with 400 mg of Flagyl x 3 
after advice from xx (SP2), which was very 
successful. After 2 days, the recurrence subsided, 
and… he is now functioning normally”. 
19. SP1. “Seven days, xx (SP2), or 10”? 
20. SP2. “Since this is the second time, 10 days”. 
21. GP. “10 days then? I was about to ask about that. 
Then we will do so! It turned when we started up 
again…”. 
22. SP1. “That`s great! It is always good to receive 
information about how things turn out”. 
 
The GP reports that the patient they discussed two days 
ago has responded positively to the treatment, and that the 
patient has now regained normal functions (18). SP1 asks if 
they decided to proceed with the treatment for seven or ten 
days (19). SP2 justifies his earlier recommendation of ten 
days thus: since this is the second time, 10 days is necessary 
(20). The GP confirms that the treatment will continue for a 
total of 10 days (21) and that this statement is based on the 
fact that the patient improved immediately after the treatment 
began. SP1 confirms the development and the fact that it is 
good to be informed about this development and the effect of 
treatment on patients whom they have discussed and treated 
(22). 
 
3rd consultation 
 
23. GP. “He has improved considerably. I believe that 
we will send him home over the weekend”. 
24. SP1. “Has he been using Flagyl for another week 
or something in addition to the primary treatment 
or...”? 
25. GP. “Yes, he received Flagyl for a total of 10 days, 
400 mg x 3. He will finish the treatment during the 
next week. He is completely free of symptoms at 
the moment. This turned out very well so we’ll 
send him home next week”. 
26. SP2. “Yes, yes”. 
 
Three days later, the GP reports that the patient whom 
they had discussed previously and who was being treated 
was now cured (23). SP1 asks for information: whether this 
was the patient who got received extra doses of antibiotics 
(24). The GP confirms this and the fact that the cure was 
administered over a period of 10 days (25). In addition, he 
shares the most recent plan for the patient, namely, to send 
him home next week (25). The SP2 agrees with this course 
of action (26). 
The tree consultations illustrate how the problems are 
handled, using the analytic tools for our framework. In the 
first episode, the GP identifies two dilemmas. The first is 
related to the treatment of the patient (1,4) and the second to 
medical information tools (1), when he is uncertain about 
which day the patient arrived. The GP is the individual who 
conveys the medical problem and identifies the dilemma. 
The specialists use their knowledge and experience (6) from 
similar cases to recommend further treatment, and to share 
how quickly the patient should respond (14). 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

In the second episode, the GP responds to the 
recommendations from the specialist from two days earlier; 
and shares that the patient responded as desired and expected 
(18), and the specialist is pleased to receive feedback on his 
ratings (22). The specialists also discuss the course of action 
with one another and explain that normally, a 7-day 
treatment may be prolonged until 10 days if the patient has a 
back flipping infection (19,20). In the third episode, the GP 
follows up on the two past consultations by sharing that the 
patient has responded well to the treatment (23, 25), and that 
the patient is ready for discharge. Here, the collaboration 
adjusted for learning and knowledge sharing is characterized 
by engaging here and now, identifying and solving dilemmas 
during the conversation. 
B. Asyncronous medical collaboration 
Excerpt A is a text from the discussion forum, in which 
three participants have written one post each, regarding 
persons with dementia and in pain. The participants in the 
discussion forum have a common base; a post from a health 
professional regarding pain assessment. 
 
A1 Excerpt A, informant 1 
A2 Excerpt A, informant 2, etc. 
B1 Excerpt B, informant 1, etc. 
(…) Text left out 
 
Excerpt A 
 
16.02 : 12:21. A1. “I know that several of you have met 
persons with dementia and you have not been sure about 
how to complete a pain assessment. Was the rule of thumb 
for xx (name) useful? (facial expressions/sounds/defense 
mechanisms)”. 
 
06.03 : 07:53. A2. “About 12 forms of pain assessment exist 
for persons with dementia, no single method has been 
validated. They are under development, and none of them 
are recommended in international literature. That is why we 
are working on this case – but it will take time! You can 
read more about it in xx (reference)”. 
 
23:03 : 18:51. A3. “We have a type of pain assessment scale 
for the elderly called the “observation based scale of pain 
for the elderly”. I believe that this type of pain assessment is 
a good method by which to assess pain among the elderly. If 
you have trouble finding this pain assessment scale, you 
may contact me at xx (name) hospital, and I will have it 
sent/faxed over to you”. 
 
This excerpt begins with a dilemma among the 
participants, about how to complete a pain assessment for 
persons with dementia. A1 asks about a general rule of 
thumb. Facial expressions/sounds/defense mechanisms are 
useful rules for handling pain assessments. A2 answers that 
several different forms of pain assessment exist with 
different qualities. The dilemma is that none of these forms 
of pain assessment has been validated, and A2 refers to 
knowledge in the international literature. A third participant, 
A3, has had some experience in the workplace with using 
forms of pain assessment, and will share this with the other 
participants. 
This asynchronous excerpt demonstrates how the 
participants gave their input to an issue in the period of 
February 16th until March 23rd. The written text allows the 
participants to discuss issues independent of time, but it 
results in no immediate follow up, nor does it address the 
need for knowledge in the moment. The feedback given is 
anchored in written knowledge to which the participants 
refer. 
Excerpt (B) presents posts on the theme of nutritional 
status and discussions on using the diet registration form. 
 
Excerpt B 
 
08.02: 13:20. B1. I wonder if there are many (…) who use 
this method of analyzing nutritional status in the hospital, 
who performs this analysis and how it is followed up. 
 
08.02: 13:29. B2. In the report (name), the “food card” is a 
document used to describe the nutrition of the elderly, 
which gives an indication of the actual problem. Another 
form of documentation is a nutrition protocol related to the 
ADL form. I would like to come into contact with someone 
who has experience using this. 
 
09.02: 13:28. B3. xx (name and title) presented the form of 
diet record used at xx (hospital). It can be found in archive 
xx (name). 
 
22.02: 08:40. B4. “In the presentation given by xx (name 
and position), she gave an overview of the use of PEG-
probes/tubes in different countries. In Norway, it has been 
used very rarely, which I interpret as good news. From 
personal experience, I know that it is not unusual for 
patients in nursing homes to be malnourished. Could this be 
because of the underuse of PEG-probes?” 
 
06.03: 07:52. B5. “The question as to the use of nutrition 
tubes in different countries is debated and difficult to 
answer. (…); nevertheless, this question is crucially 
important to discuss! There may very well be patients in 
nursing homes who are not adequately nourished, which is 
not desirable! There are several reasons for this 
circumstance (…): certain diseases can make meeting 
nutritional needs difficult (apoplexia, fungia infections in 
the mouth, cancer, and ulcus, among other things); patients 
may give up on eating and may refuse to eat because of the 
limits of age, including weakness, dementia, depression, and 
psychiatric disease; or health personnel may not follow up 
enough due to bad food routines, bad food offerings, 
insufficient vitamins, and the like or a lack of staff and thus 
not enough time to feed the patients or to sit down with 
them. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

It is not appropriate to deny the use of a nutrition tube that 
might be useful for the patient. (...) On the other hand, it is 
extremely important to seek out the cause of the patient’s 
poor nutrition (...). A PEG probe is not always the right 
solution. A study of pathology in Oslo (...) shows that a 
relatively large number of the elderly who were dying were 
malnourished because as life was ebbing out, eating became 
less important, which is a natural response (…). Other 
countries face the challenge that (…) there are not enough 
staff/health personnel. (...) Nutrition tubes may be a cheap 
solution compared to paying for educated healthcare 
personnel. In Norway, twice as many healthcare personnel 
work in health institutions compared to Germany and 
Austria, and in the USA, over 80% of employed nursing 
assistants have an education of over 75 hours. They often 
must consider other decisions compared to those faced by 
nurses in Norway”. 
 
      Excerpt B extends over a period from the 8th of February 
until the 6th of March. The discussion begins when B1 
discusses a certain method by which to assess nutritional 
status, and asks whether any of the other participants suggest 
using another method, who uses this method and how. 
Another participant (B2) follows up on the question by 
referring to a report that describes the “food card”, which 
may be the answer to B1’s dilemma. Another possible form 
of documentation is also mentioned, namely, the use of a 
nutrition protocol related to an ADL form. The participant 
who brings up this method asks for a response from anyone 
with experience in using this specific form. Participant B3 
doesn`t answer the questions directly but refers to a form that 
registers diet that is used by others and that is stored in an 
archive. 
After several weeks, the topic of diet is returned to in the 
discussion forum because of a presentation about the use of a 
specific type of tube (PEG) used as a tool for eating (B4). 
This tube is rarely used in Norway, which the participant 
regards as a positive thing. Health personnel have a lot of 
experience with patients suffering from malnutrition, which 
gives rise to the following dilemma: In which cases is it 
correct to deny patients the use of a tube as a means of 
assistance with eating when the patient is malnourished? 
After several weeks, B5, who held the presentation, 
addresses the problem. B5 believes this to be a good 
question, one that leads to several dilemmas that are difficult 
to resolve. B5 offers several explanations as to why patients 
are often not well nourished: due to different diagnoses, the 
patient may have different incentives to deny eating or there 
may be a lack of follow-up from health personnel.  
B4 relates the question to the fact that feeding tubes are 
rarely are used in Norway, and B5 relates the answer to 
national and international experiences. First, B5 refers to 
research-based knowledge from Norway, and states that 
patients in the last phase of life eat less. Second, B5 refers to 
economic aspects in international health care, including the 
fact that using feeding tubes may be a cheaper solution than 
hiring employees with education. Third, nursing staff in 
other countries may less education compared to nurses in 
Norway, which may be one of the reasons why feeding tubes 
are used more frequently in other countries compared to 
Norway. Here, the dilemma is presented, and the knowledge 
gap is tried to be solved by one way transmission of 
knowledge. 
According 
to 
our 
analytic 
tools, 
this 
collaborative work breaks down, as there are no follows up-
either by questions or by confirmation on how this 
knowledge fitted into practice. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Both synchronous and asynchronous tools represent 
possibilities for sharing and discussing medical problems. 
Compared to previous literature, we do not valuable the 
form of interaction [5] or their positivity [6]. As the results 
illustrate, the oral (VC) and the written (discussion forum) 
communication exemplifies that the organization of tools 
and the tools itself contribute to different patterns of 
interaction.  
In the VC collaboration, the GP has questions about 
patients under treatment as the consultations are running. In 
the conversation, dilemmas arise about treatment choices. 
The GP has questions and informs about the patient’s 
condition, while the specialists recommend treatment and 
explain their treatment suggestions. The GP follows up by 
asking whether more knowledge is needed. Hence, the 
medical problem is solved rather than staying unsolved. The 
consultation takes place over several days, during which the 
same patient‘s recovery is discussed through new questions 
or information as to how the treatment is progressing. The 
specialists are informed of how their recommendations work 
in practice. 
The discussion forum also presents questions related to 
patient treatment in practice. As illustrated in the excerpts, a 
question is raised by one participant, and other participants 
follow up on these questions. The questions are of a more 
general form, rather than seeking out knowledge to be put 
into practice in the moment. Follow up questions are 
generally not posed in the discussion forum. Members in the 
forum who wish to do so may participate. In principle, the 
questions are not posed to a specific member. The members 
refer to their own experience justified by written resources, 
i.e., international literature and the elaboration of a scheme 
for registration. The communication does not continue 
(excerpt A), so we do not know how this knowledge is 
experienced by the participants at work. Excerpt 5 is an 
example of one participant (which included a speech about 
the theme of B4’s question) reflecting on a dilemma about 
the use of a probe.  
The written contribution has similarities with the 
medical conversation, as the health care workers explain and 
argue on the basis of their experience and knowledge. The 
discussion forum gives participants the opportunity to catch 
up on the knowledge exchanged, based on referenced 
literature, whenever they wish to do so. This procedure 
differs from the use of VC, in which the journal at the GPs 
is used as a basis for knowledge exchange. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

B5 exchanges knowledge related to solving the medical 
dilemma, reflecting different treatment options. No concrete 
treatment suggestions are made, and if the knowledge 
exchanged is put into practice, the results are not shared 
afterwards. There is thus no feedback as to whether or not 
the dilemma is, in fact, solved in practice. 
The episodes and excerpts analysed illustrate oral and 
written communication over the course of several days. The 
conversation includes the same participants over several 
days, while the written forum enables several participants to 
join the conversation. In the written discussion forum 
presented here, the participants make one contribution each, 
over an indefinite amount of time. VC is an interface 
between questions and answers, in a pre-booked period of 
time. The participants have a common point of reference in 
a specific problem in the VC meetings. The discussion 
forum has a mutual theme of reference, which was 
previously raised as a result of a joint meeting.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
In this paper, we have presented several interactions 
among professionals sharing knowledge in order to solve 
medical problems. Early literature in the field claimed that 
asynchronous applications are most likely to provide real 
change in the practice of medicine [1]. The results illustrate 
that in-depth analysis of such interactions gives insight into 
this type of collaboration in new ways. This article 
illustrates the importance of the interface between questions 
and answers, when seeking to expand knowledge and 
learning. The organization of the collaborative work affects 
the learning opportunities as asynchronous discussions 
include several participants and allow for collaboration over 
time whenever wanted. Meanwhile, in-moment interactions 
enable information and knowledge sharing that can prompt 
changes in treatment, illustrating the opposite of Alleley’s 
[1] findings, who account for real change in the practice of 
medicine using asynchronous applications. 
Asynchronous discussion forums are often non-
authorized according to data protection, so discussions 
where biographical data appears cannot be discussed, as 
discussed in VC meetings. This also excludes the use of 
journals during the collaboration. Non-commitment to be 
available in the moment, also exclude discussions of acute 
medical problems. 
When 
considering 
implementing 
technology 
for 
knowledge sharing, it’s a need to keep in mind that the 
practice affects the learning opportunities, and the 
knowledge 
shared. 
Synchronous 
and 
asynchronous 
collaboration have a tremendous capacity for information 
exchange and knowledge sharing. Research is needed to 
gain a better understanding of how healthcare professionals 
can work together in everyday practice and how the 
organization of their collaborative work affects their own 
engagement.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
E. 
B. 
Allely, 
"Synchronous 
and 
asynchronous 
telemedicine", J Med Syst, 19(3): p. 207-12, 1995. 
[2] 
R. K. Chittoria, "Telemedicine for wound management", 
Indian J Plast Surg, 45(2): p. 412-7, 2012. 
[3] 
W. Swanepoel de and J.W. Hall, 3rd, "A systematic 
review of telehealth applications in audiology", Telemed 
J E Health, 16(2): p. 181-200, 2010. 
[4] 
F. Verhoeven, et al., "Asynchronous and synchronous 
teleconsultation for diabetes care: a systematic literature 
review", J Diabetes Sci Technol, 4(3): p. 666-84, 2010. 
[5] 
M. 
Kunin, 
K.N. 
Julliard, 
and 
T.E. 
Rodriguez, 
"Comparing face-to-face, synchronous, and asynchronous 
learning: postgraduate dental resident preferences", J 
Dent Educ, 78(6): p. 856-66, 2014. 
[6] 
E. C. Buxton, "Pharmacists' perception of synchronous 
versus asynchronous distance learning for continuoing 
education programs", Am J Pharm Educ, 78(1): p. 8, 
2014. 
[7] 
N. Stergiou, et al., "Using a web-based system for the 
continuous distance education in cytopathology", Int J 
Med Inform, 78(12): p. 827-38, 2009. 
[8] 
A. I. Mørch,  K.A. Nygård, and S.R. Ludvigsen, 
"Adaption and generalisation in software product 
development, in Activity Theory in Practice. Promoting 
learning across boundaries and agencies", H. Daniels, et 
al., Editors, Routledge: New York. p. 184-206, 2010. 
[9] 
M. Billig, et al., "Ideological Dilemmas. A Social 
Psychology of Everyday Thinking", London: Sage 
Publications Inc., 1988. 
[10] 
S. Bødker, "Applying activity theory to video analysis: 
how to make sence of video data in human-computer 
interaction, in Context and Consciousness. Activity 
Theory and Human-Computer Interaction", B. Nardi, 
Editor, The MIT Press: London, England. p. 147-174, 
1996. 
[11] 
S. R. Ludvigsen, et al., "Intersecting trajectories of 
participation: Temporality and learning, in Learning 
across sites: new tools, infrastructures and practices", S. 
Ludvigsen, Editor, Pergamon Press: Oxford. p. 105-122, 
2010. 
[12] 
L.L. Nilsen, "Læring og utvikling av kunnskap i 
medisinske samtaler. Bruk av videokonferanse mellom 
allmennleger og spesialister" [Learning and development 
of 
knowledge 
in 
medical 
talk. 
The 
use 
of 
videoconferencing between GPs and specialists], in 
Fakultet 
for 
humaniora, 
samfunnsvitenskap 
og 
lærerutdanning, 
Institutt 
for 
lærerutdanning 
og 
pedagogikk [Faculty of Humanities, Social Sciences and 
Education, Department of Education], Universitetet i 
Tromsø [University of Tromsø], Tromsø. p. 107, 2011. 
[13] 
R. 
Furu, 
"Helsearbeideres 
deltakelse 
i 
virtuelle 
fagnettverk; et instrument for faglig refleksjon" [Health 
professionals participates in virtual communities; a tool 
for reflection], University of Bergen, 2009. 
[14] 
Y. Engeström, "Expansive Learning at Work: toward an 
activity- theoretical reconceptualization", Journal of 
Education and Work, 14(1): p. 129-152, 2001. 
 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

