Technology in Health Care 
A new research and teaching subject in collaboration between nursing science and engineering 
Britt Östlund 
Department of Technology and Health 
Royal Institute of Technology, KTH & 
Swedish Red Cross University College, SRCUC 
Stockholm, Sweden 
e-mail: britt.ostlund@sth.kth.se 
 
Gunilla Björling, Janet Mattsson, Sara Stridh, Madeleine Sahlström 
Swedish Red Cross University College, SRCUC 
Stockholm, Sweden 
 
 
Abstract— Today, health care systems face a number of 
challenges related to technological developments. This 
work in progress is a new Swedish initiative for 
collaboration between nursing science and engineering 
focusing digitization, demographics and participation. 
The initiative aims at understanding how digitization 
affects patients and health care professionals and the 
role of engineers and how this collaboration proactively 
contributes to systems that support caring and nursing. 
The presentation expects input on the programs 
substance and boundaries and whether this initiative is 
fruitful to create sustainable health care systems. 
Keywords; collaboration, nursing science, caring science, 
engineering, patient support, digitization.  
I . INTRODUCTION 
Today, health care systems face a number of challenges 
related 
to 
technological 
developments. 
The 
Global 
Commission on Education of Health Professionals for the 
21st Century describes a mismatch between the care offered 
and people's demands and needs; lack of cooperation; 
discontinuous care chains; tenacious hierarchies, and not 
least, a focus on technology founded on flawed 
understanding of the context in which the technology is 
used [1]. The gender system that locks structures what 
perceived as male and female work is deemed particularly 
difficult to change. Significant is also the lack of good 
examples of how to meet these types of challenges. Other 
publications confirm these results, reporting on a lack of 
accuracy in technological support for health care, not least 
the confidence in individual solutions. There are reports on 
an imbalance between the success factors in health care - 
increased life expectancy and better treatments - and the 
expectations of what you want done and what to expect [2] 
[3]. At the same time, the belief in technology as the 
ultimate solution still prevails. The Swedish Society for 
Nursing identifies a lack of knowledge about the impact of 
technology on caring interventions. To meet this, they 
emphasize individual health as an important aspect to 
investigate and call for possibilities to actively participate in 
design, implementation and assessment of new technology 
[4] [5]. Others stress the economic values of returning to 
patient centred strategies [6]. To mention one example, 
creating digital health care records and digital information 
to citizens are among the most difficult tasks to accomplish 
despite 
the 
wide 
access 
to 
Internet 
and 
digital 
infrastructures. Google declared a few years ago that their 
investment in Google Health was one of their biggest 
failures due to its complexity [7]. Instead they are now 
developing databases focusing on health and aging sciences. 
Another way to meet these challenges is through 
multidisciplinary initiatives between scientific disciplines 
and between academy and industry.  Today there are a 
number of examples of international multidisciplinary 
collaboration, e.g., the Bio design Fellowship program at 
Stanford University since 2003 which is also implemented 
in Sweden as The Centre for Technology in Medicine and 
Health (CTMH). These types of commitments are key 
elements in promoting interdisciplinary research and 
development in medicine focusing problem-solving in 
general. However, it is rarer to find a technology focus in 
relation to nursing and caring.  
Section 2 describes the rationale behind the organization 
of a new collaboration between engineers and nurses to 
meet the challenges pointed out above. Section 3 describes 
the aim more in specific with emphasis on digitization 
effects 
on 
inter-professional 
collaboration 
and 
the 
dependency on active patients to make technology work in 
their social context. In section 4 and 5 some arguments are 
presented to why nursing and critical technology research is 
a relevant combination to set the agenda for this new 
collaboration. Section 6 summarizes the main conclusions. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. NEW INITIATIVE TO MEET THE CHALLENGES  
With this background we would like to present a new 
Swedish initiative for collaboration between nursing science 
and engineering, initiated jointly between KTH, the Royal 
Institute of Technology and SRCUC, the Swedish Red 
Cross University College in Stockholm. The reason for 
submitting this work in progress at this conference is to 
gather input and comments on two main issues. The first 
one is whether this is a fruitful strategy to create more 
sustainable health care systems. The second issue is how we 
in a multidisciplinary collaboration can work to define 
“Technology in health care”, its substance and its 
boundaries.  
The collaboration between KTH and SRCUC is 
implemented in parallel with a new interdisciplinary 
postgraduate program - Technology in Health Care (in 
Swedish: Teknisk vårdvetenskap) at KTH and as a part of 
the nursing science program curriculum at SRCUC.  The 
Nursing Science program at SRCUC will therefore have a 
unique technological profile, added to its 150 year tradition 
of training nurses. At KTH, the Department for Technology 
and health will be given new opportunities for research into 
how technology works in caring settings.  
The aim of the collaboration is to create sustainable and 
effective systems of health care through increased 
knowledge 
about 
how 
technology 
affects 
people's 
opportunities to regain their health and more proactive 
nurses and engineers participating in design and innovation 
processes which also enhance patient safety. The technology 
focus is digitization encompassing both biomedical 
engineering used by health care professionals in hospitals, 
and home health care systems, as well as digital tools used 
by both health care professionals, citizens at home and in 
mobile settings. Demographic developments will be key 
focusing on children and older populations, the groups that 
will increase the most until 2050. Many projects fall outside 
the boundaries of eHealth, yet include the combination of 
technical skills and caring skills to solve the problem at 
stake. Digitization is central. It is estimated that within a 
decade, the majority of the world’s population will have 
accesses to virtually all the world's information in a machine 
that fits in its own palm. These profound changes occurring 
within one generation naturally has a great impact on the 
Red Cross, which together with the Red Crescent, is the 
world's 
largest 
non-profit 
organization 
(97 
million 
members). Digital media, robots and sensors, create new 
opportunities to practice disaster response and care, in 
dangerous situations and in the monitoring of health. 
The SRCUC-KTH collaboration was initiated jointly in 
2012, a professor was installed 2014 and 2016 we are 
moving from preparations and discussions to research and 
education activities supported by structures for training, 
qualification, publication and projects.  
III. 
PROGRAM CONTENT AND GOALS 
The aim is to understand how digitization affects patients 
and healthcare professionals and proactively contribute to 
functioning systems that support caring and nursing. With 
digitization we refer to the on-going development from a 
hospital- and function-based organization focused on 
patients, diseases, wards and elimination of risks with single 
technical applications, towards a focus on health, home 
health care such as cancer and palliative care, monitoring 
and communication on distance, digitized and accessible 
patient care records requiring active patients and citizens 
and more of inter-professional collaboration and teamwork 
between health care professionals. These shifts in the way 
care and contacts with citizens are understood is underway. 
Our analysis goes even further, focusing on-going 
developments and implementations of patient safety outside 
hospitals and between hospitals and homes, distance surgery 
and design of self-care devices, the use of robotics, 
genetically guidance and other new roles for nurses. The 
critical input from this program to influence this 
development is a proactive approach including the ability to 
collaborate with engineers, initiate and formulate relevant 
research questions. The theoretical foundation for this 
critical input will be Science-Technology-Studies research 
providing insights on the configuration of users and contexts 
and from Informatics and Implementation science providing 
knowledge on participation in implementation of health 
information systems. This is expected to offset the dominant 
paradigm of deterministic and paternalistic views leading up 
to a mismatch between the care offered and people's 
demands and needs; lack of cooperation; discontinuous care 
chains; tenacious hierarchies, and not least, a focus on 
technology founded on flawed understanding of the context 
in which the technology is used. The research environment 
at KTH and SRCUC in which this program is developed 
include other programs which will be expected to make 
considerable input to the multi-disciplinary approaches, 
such as care logistics engineering, ergonomics, monitoring, 
nursing and public health. 
To be proactive requires knowledge about technological 
developments and the ability to collaborate with engineers 
and participate in design and innovation processes both for 
healthcare professionals and concerned citizens. The first 
attempts to joint learning opportunities for engineers and 
nurses were successful and will continue this year The 
exercise is organized as a part of the curriculum in which 
students in nursing and students to become medical 
engineers collaborating around a report from the Swedish 
Accident Investigation Authority about a serious failure at a 
Swedish hospital involving medical technology and a 
patient. The meeting received very positive feedback and 
created a broader perspective on each other's responsibilities 
and the role of technology in a real life setting. For the 
moment the research group includes one professor from the 
engineering department with a STS-background, two PhD in 
medicine and nursing, one PhD in medical education related 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to informatics, three assistant professors, two PhD students 
and two project employed persons. The first six years of this 
collaboration is based on joint funding from KTH and 
SRCUC and from external funding. For the moment the 
external funding include a China-Sweden collaboration 
building home health care and housing for ageing 
populations; development of medical devices and patient 
safety funded by Swedish and Norwegian foundations; child 
intensive care developments funded by Karolinska hospital; 
digital ethics funded by Swedish foundations; and Age 
Management funded by Swedish Industry and a Swedish 
Research Council. The professor leading this group has for 
thirty years been dedicated to research and development in 
aging, technology and design and was responsible for ten 
years for the Ageing and design program at Lund 
University, where she still holds a visiting professorship. 
Her publications include a range of projects with old people 
participating in design and implementation. The first articles 
in this context were published by Mattsson & Stevens [15] 
[16] and Björling on coated endotracheal tubes and central 
venous catheters with focus on patient safety [17] [18]. 
During the same period Östlund published several articles 
on robotics and ethics [19] [20] [21].  
The result of this program are expected to reinforce the 
participation of citizens and health care professionals in 
designing future health care, and as a consequence 
broadening the innovation capability in health care and 
citizens' trust and confidence in the health care system. The 
most tangible results in the short term is expected to be 
technology that does not impair care but that facilitates and 
enhances people's opportunities to recover and maintain 
their health. 
IV. 
THE RELEVANCE OF NURSING AND CARING SCIENCES 
Nursing is central in the development of future health 
care. In the Nordic countries, nursing as a research subject, 
have for thirty years, developed in parallel with “caring 
sciences”. Both have been expansive including caring 
informatics and caring theory. Nursing, which is the broad 
international field, has its focus on guiding nurses in 
practice such as routines and regulations and patient safety. 
Caring sciences, published in Journals, such as the 
Scandinavian JN for Caring Sciences among other JN, 
originate from phenomenology and the interest to 
understand principles for utilization [8] [9] [10]. Caring 
science is today related to person-centred care, self-
sufficiency and independence.  Especially since the core of 
caring has been revealed as central, holistic, individualized 
and at the same time providing expert physical care 
combined with fulfilling emotional needs in an adaptive 
environment [11]. As digitization increasingly moves in to 
the realms of health and self-care, the relationship between 
the caregiver and the individual citizen, patient or care 
receiver, becomes more important. Result from innovation 
and implementation research have not yet been applied in 
this field but can be important to promote”self-care 
management, personalized medicine” and consequences of 
the demographic development [12] [13].  
V. 
TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
Technology development today is leading to greater 
complexity. We are now entering a new phase where it is 
more about interconnected systems and no longer just 
individual applications. Today, the use of different types of 
IT applications is not unknown to anyone in health care. 
“APPS”, digital patient records, alarms, sensors for 
monitoring health, social robots, “robocats”, digital 
incontinence, 
remote 
surgery, 
decision 
support 
for 
diagnosis, balance training for stroke sufferers are all 
examples of products that can add value”. Many of these 
examples have been shown to increase the quality of care 
and have already become successful business solutions. At 
the same time, this raises awareness about the fact that 
individual technical artefacts are hardly the solutions to the 
health care problems. This leads to a number of questions 
which need to be addressed: How can we permanently and 
sustainably integrate new applications in health care? What 
is the best way to implement accurate solutions in health 
care with a comprehensive and ongoing digitization?  
Another important question concerns what is called the 
technological imperative in relation to caring values: are we 
always obliged to do what can be done in terms of 
technological development? Or can we find ways to criticize 
such deterministic views? Although technology is closely 
associated with the development of modern medical care, 
the relationship to technological development is divided 
[14]. Here is a criticism that high-powered specialization 
risks creating problems and become counterproductive. The 
German philosopher George Henry Gadamer asserted, for 
example, that it is precisely in highly developed technical 
civilizations that the phrases "quality of life" and "whole" 
are expressed, because something has been lost (15). 
Meanwhile, with a critical perspective on technology 
development, we can see that technology has a special 
attraction and that it has become a force for change. It also 
becomes apparent that a narrow technical perspective 
sometimes tends to give healthcare professionals the role of 
managing technology instead of people. It also contributes 
to the technological imperative i.e., what is possible to be 
measured must be measured even if the benefit is unclear.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This short paper suggests that a program based on 
multidisciplinary 
collaboration 
between 
nursing 
and 
engineering is one of the key strategies to make digitization 
in health care sustainable. Although this can be expected to 
solve many of the problems addressed in the literature it is 
not enough. A theoretical reflection is also needed that 
questions the prevailing paradigm where technology is 
regarded as a tool independent of the influence of the 
context in which it is used. Such critical input will open up 
for more proactive strategies including the understanding of 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

how digitization affects patients and how to increase 
participation in design and implementation of health 
information systems.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Frenk et al. “Health professionals for a new 
century: transforming education to strengthen health 
systems in an interdependent world,” The Lancet vol. 
376, no. 9756, pp. 1923-1958, 2010.  
[2] I. R. Hallberg, “Moving nursing research forward 
towards a stronger impact on health care practice,” 
International Journal of Nursing Studies, vol. 46, pp. 
407-412, 2009. 
[3] Swedish Society of Medicine, Onödiga eller skadliga 
åtgärder i svensk allmänmedicin – ett 
diskussionsunderlag, [Unnecessary or harmful actions in 
Swedish general medicine - a basis for discussion], 
Swedish Society of Medicine, Stockholm 2013. 
[4] Swedish Society for Nursing: 
- 
Kunskapsluckor inom omvårdnad. En första inventering 
[Gaps within caring. A first inventory], Stockholm 2013.  
- 
Strategi för sjuksköterskors arbete med eHälsa [Strategy 
for nursing and eHealth], Stockholm 2012. 
- 
Värdegrund för omvårdnad [Valuebased caring], 
Stockholm 2010. 
[5]S. Bakken, “Informatics for patient safety: a nursing 
research perspective,” Annu. Rev. Nurs. Res, vol. 24: pp. 
219–254, 2006.  
[6] M. E. Porter and E. Olmsted Teisberg, “Redefining 
Health Care. Creating Value-Based Competition on 
Results,” Harvard Business Review Press, Boston Mass. 
pp. 98-148, 2006. 
[7] R. Kurzweil, The Singularity is Near. New York: 
Viking, 2005. 
[8] V. Sorlie, L. Jansson and A. Norberg, “The meaning 
of being in ethically difficult care situations in paediatric 
care as narrated by female Registered Nurses,” Nordic 
College of Caring Sciences, vol. 17, pp. 285-292, 2003.  
[9] L. Fagerstrom, K. Eriksson and I. B. Engberg, ”The 
patient's perceived caring needs: measuring the 
unmeasurable,” Int. JN. Nurs. Pract, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 
199-208, 1999.  
[10] P. E. Benner, C. A. Tanner and C. A.  Chesla, 
Expertise in nursing practice : caring, clinical judgment 
& ethics, 2rd ed., New York: Springer Pub. 2009. 
[11] J. Mattsson, M. Forsner, M. Castrén and M. Arman, 
“Caring for children in pediatric intensive care units: An 
observation study focusing on nurses’ concerns,” Journal 
of Nursing Ethics, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 528-538, 2013.  
[12] L. Damschroeder et al. “Fostering implementation 
of health services research findings into practice: a 
consolidated framework for advancing implementation 
science,” Implementation Science, vol. 4, no. 50, pp.1-
15, 2009. 
[13] I. R. Hallberg, ”Omvårdnadsvetenskapen i ett 
framtidsperspektiv [Caring science in future 
perspectives],” In E. Hamrin, M. Kihlgren, A. Rinell 
Hermansson and G. Östlinder (eds.), När omvårdnad 
blev vetenskap. De första decennierna  [When caring 
became science. The first decades], Stockholm: Liber 
AB, pp. 328-337, 2014. 
[14] H. Eriksson, ”Vårdvetenskap för en postmodern tid 
[Caring Sciences for a Postmodern Era],” In Eriksson, H 
(ed.) Vårdvetenskap och postmodernitet [Caring 
Sciences and Postmodernity], Lund: Studentlitteratur,   
pp. 29-48, 2014. 
[15] J. Y. Mattsson and L. Stevens, “Development of an 
individual assessment instrument for critical care nursing 
students,” Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 54-61, 2017. 
[16] H. Engstrand and J. Mattsson, “The non-verbal 
communication in handover situations are the spice 
between the lines, to understand the severity of the 
patient´s condition,”  Journal of Nursing Education and 
Practice, vol. 7, no. 5, pp.1-8, 2017. 
[17] G. Björling, D. Johansson, L. Bergström, S. Jalal, I. 
Kohn, C. Frostell and S. Kalman, S, “Tolerability and 
performance of BIP endotracheal tubes with noble metal 
alloy coating – a randomized clinical evaluation study,” 
BMC Anesthesiology, vol. 15, no.174, 2015.  
[18] G. Björling, D. Johansson, L. Bergström, J. 
Sanchez, A. Strekalovsky, C. Frostell and S. Kalman, 
“Central Venous Catheters Coated with a Noble Metal 
Alloy – A Randomized Clinical Pilot Study,” Scand. 
Cardovascular Journal. In-press  
 
[19] S. Frennert and B. Östlund, “What happens when 
seniors participate in new eHealth schemes?” Disability 
and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology. July,  pp-1-9, 
2015.  
[20] S. Frennert, H. Eftring and B. Östlund, “Case 
Report: Implications of Doing Research on Socially 
Assistive Robots in Real Homes,” Int. JN of Social 
Robotics, Accepted January 11, 2017.  
[21] B. Östlund, B. “Digital ageing in the making and its 
ethical challenges,” In H. Campbell, G. Grieve and M. 
Lövheim (eds), Digital Existance, Routledge Studies in 
Digital Religion, In printing November 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

