Experiences of the Elderly, their Relatives, and Volunteers of a Social Media 
Application in Monitoring of Wellbeing 
 
Ismo Alakärppä  
Faculty of Art and Design  
University of Lapland  
Rovaniemi, Finland 
ismo.alakarppa@ulapland.fi 
 
Elisa Jaakkola  
Faculty of Art and Design  
University of Lapland  
Rovaniemi, Finland 
elisa.jaakkola@ulapland.fi 
 
Kirsi Päykkönen 
Faculty of Social Sciences  
University of Lapland  
Rovaniemi, Finland 
kirsi.paykkonen@ulapland.fi 
 
Jaana Väntänen 
Faculty of Social Sciences 
University of Lapland  
Rovaniemi, Finland 
jvantane@ulapland.fi 
Abstract— In the spring of 2013, we conducted a qualitative 
field study where elderly people, their relatives, and 
volunteering friends used a new social media application 
(Comcare) that runs in an Android tablet computer, for a 
period of two months. Comcare makes it possible to 
communicate with one's own social circle. In addition, it 
enables relatives to monitor the everyday routines of the 
elderly. The research material consists of five circles, each one 
of which includes an elderly person, his relative, and a 
volunteer friend. The material was gathered in eight group 
interviews before and after the field study, and 15 personal 
interviews during the testing period. This article concentrates 
on results of the evaluation period by reporting experiences of 
using the application, social support and feelings of safety.  
Keywords–elderly; social media; user experience  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Social media has made a breakthrough among the young, 
working age, and partly also among pensioners. Social 
interaction has transferred more and more to the Internet and 
concurrently the time used with a computer has grown 
significantly in the time span 1999–2009 among the age 
group 10–64 [1]. Social media continues to expand its 
popularity among all age groups. Even though young adults 
(18–29 years) remain to be social network mass users, it is 
notable that the rate of usage growth has been faster in older 
age groups in recent years. For example, in the past two 
years, social media use among Internet users age 65 and 
older has grown 150 % between April 2009 and May 2011. 
Also during this same period social media use by 50–64 
year-old Internet users doubled from 25 % to 51 % [2].  
Use of social media can improve the quality of life in 
many ways as the psychological well-being and perceived 
well-being do not necessarily require professional help, it 
also can be achieved through the support given by friends 
and other related parties. Social support is found to have an 
indirect link to the subjective health experience through 
psychological effects. [3]. Sense of community is based on a 
membership i.e. the feeling that one belongs to a group and a 
shared faith that commitment on togetherness is given by the 
group [4]. Social support and connections to the community 
are important as loneliness forms an important health and 
safety risk for the elderly. Thus, interaction with other people 
has an increasing role in preventing loneliness [5].  
Although high degree of acceptance concerning the 
ambient assisted living (AAL) has been found, and the 
system would likely make elderly people feel safer and more 
secure in their homes, the main concern still is how it will 
impact their daily lives [6]. It is suggested that relevant 
factors to the use of in-home monitoring technologies are 
where, when and in which situations user is monitored. Also 
seniors’ perceptions of privacy related to these technologies 
are highly contextual, and influenced by psychosocial 
motivations [7]. There is some evidence that physical spaces 
and environments affect the acceptance of monitoring 
technologies [8][9].  
Motivation for this study are findings of problems caused 
by the loneliness of the elderly, the breakthrough of social 
media, pressure to rise costs of social and health related 
services, and the need to add to collaboration between 
operators in the third sector and public sector, home care 
services. Third sector volunteer work e.g. friend services, 
play a significant role as a support to other home care 
services. In addition, new operational models are needed for 
volunteer work, in order to attract the younger generation, 
spending much of their time with the social media, to act as a 
supporting group for the elderly, and to direct some of the 
time they spend in the social media also towards taking care 
of the elderly.  
Inspired by the aforementioned challenges a social media 
application (Comcare) was developed and tested for a period 
of two months. In this article the attitudes and experiences of 
the elderly of the first test period and user experiences are 
assessed from the perspective of the elderly, their relatives, 
and volunteer support persons. Extra attention is paid to the 
experiencing of benefits, feeling of safety, communality, and 
social support. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
II. 
COMCARE SYSTEM 
The main idea of the Comcare system is to form a bi-
directional and equal care-giving community to take care of 
an elderly person. Comcare is a system and an application of 
social media working in an Android tablet computer [10], 
that is primarily meant for daily contacts and relaying of 
images and for monitoring of everyday routines (Figure 1). 
Figure 1.   Comcare system architecture. 
Comcare mediates updates written by the elderly 
themselves, through sensors by a door of restroom and door 
of bedroom, or members of the circle. Hence, the system 
enables the monitoring of everyday routines through the 
sensor-relayed data and by relatives belonging to the circle. 
The elderly can switch off the sensors at any time by 
pressing a button on user interface kit (Figure 2). The system 
shows all the output information to the elderly in the same 
way it is shown to the recipients. However, the updates are 
shown in different manners to the members of the circle 
depending on if the member belongs to the relative or the 
volunteer’s circle. Relatives are shown the messages the way 
they have been written, but volunteers only receive the 
activity information. The sending rate of activity information 
depends on the setting of the monitoring mode. The settings 
choices are: once a day, four times a day, or continuously in 
real time. All members of the circle are able to send 
messages with the elderly, and also send images through 
private messages. The application did not include talk or 
video connection. 
Figure 2.  Comcare application and user interfacekit for sensors 
III. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
Five elderly people (three females and two males), five 
relatives, and three volunteer friends took part in the study. 
One volunteer was involved in two circles as volunteer 
friend.  Table 1 shows the data of the partaking people. 
Emphasis in the qualitative analysis of the material was put 
on the experiences of the elderly, but also views of the 
relatives and the volunteers have been taken into account. 
The mean age of the elderly was 75.6 years. The elderly 
were volunteered customers of local voluntary friend service. 
The material consists of eight group conversations and 
fifteen 
individual 
interviews. 
The 
five 
first 
group 
conversations were held before the test period with the 
participation of an elderly person, a relative, and a volunteer. 
The three group conversations after the testing gathered 
together the elderly, the relatives and the volunteers, all in 
their own group conversations. The interview material was 
transcribed and the contents were analyzed by grouping the 
findings according to themes. In this article the attitudes 
towards, thoughts and experiences of the Comcare system 
before, during and after the test period are examined. 
TABLE I.  
THE DATA OF PARTICIPANTS 
Comcare 
Circle 
Participants 
Number of 
participants 
Gender 
Age range 
Mean age 
Elderly 
5 
3 women 
2 men 
73–78 
75.6 
Relatives 
5 
3 women 
2 men 
25–52 
35.4 
Volunteers 
3 
3 women 
58–66 
61.3 
All 
13 
9 women 
4 men 
25–78 
60.8 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Stance on technology and social media 
The elderly had little experience of computers and the 
Internet. Social media as a term was familiar to only one 
elderly person. The interview cast light on the term, telling 
them that it means communication through the Internet, 
where people share e.g. the newest everyday goings-on in 
their lives or images etc., and Facebook was mentioned as an 
example. After the description, social media was treated 
somewhat skeptically, and when talking about the pros and 
cons thereof, four elderly people introduced threats in the 
utilization of social media. Data security problems and 
straight scams were causes of concern.  
 
"Remember that there (in social media) can be nothing 
shown about me" (K3H1, 234) 
 
The attitude towards monitoring technologies, such as 
surveillance cameras and movement sensors, ranged from a 
defensive attitude to approval. Especially surveillance 
cameras raised a conversation for and against. The target 
group for safety technologies was estimated to be people 
living alone and who are in a bad condition. The attitude 
towards one's own video monitoring was negative, or 
positive but reserved. Movement sensors and live camera 
with blurred images containing little information were more 
readily approved of than monitoring cameras relaying sharp 
images. Accommodation to the existence of monitoring 
cameras was seen as being possible, but at the same time it 
was emphasized that the location of monitoring technology 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

has meaning in the action of being approved of. Monitoring 
cameras were not desired in e.g. in the bedroom. The overall 
costs of safety technology and services were also considered 
to be a factor in their approval. 
 
“In the beginning it might be a little bit like, that you are 
being stared at, but well you get used everything you 
know, it will go away by time then, from your mind, so 
then you won't mind at all, because it is like for example 
the tolling of the clock on the wall, so if you haven't 
heard it, it takes time to get used to it, and then it fades to 
the background there” (K5H1) 
B. First impressions and trial period experiences  
The participants got the first contact to the Comcare 
system in the initial group conversation where it was 
introduced to them. After the introduction they were asked 
for a first impression, and they ranged from interested and 
excited anticipation, to an attitude of questioning one's own 
abilities of learning. The relatives and the volunteers 
considered Comcare to be at first sight simple and easy to 
use. The elderly were not confident of their own memory, or 
their own learning capabilities. In the preconceived 
evaluations Comcare was seen as beneficial means for 
communicating and bringing change into one's life.  
 
“You have to say that in a way this was such a nice little 
thing and you play ((laughs)) play with these but when it 
comes down to a real situation then I think that you can 
get used to it little by little.” (K3RK1) 
 
At the beginning of the trial period two of the elderly 
people experienced the use of the system as an interesting 
adventure. The technical problems confronted diminished 
this excitement. Comcare also caused extra attention and 
trouble that one did not always want to commit to. On the 
other hand, through visits of friends and relatives the 
interaction was sufficient even without communicating 
through Comcare and for that reason, one of the elderly 
people experienced Comcare as being somewhat useless. 
 
"Well, I wouldn't know, it is, in the beginning it was 
learning and exciting, and then in the end you felt a bit 
annoyed when you could not" (K1H3, 66) 
 
An increase in communication, in addition to phone calls, 
was one of the things experienced as beneficial about 
Comcare. Some felt that communicating was more active 
through Comcare than earlier. Especially those of the elderly 
people, whose relatives did not live close by, and people that 
did not frequently communicate through phone calls, felt that 
Comcare was an easy-going way of communicating and 
share everyday matters. The elderly mentioned that Comcare 
had affected their wellbeing and made them feel good. In 
addition, Comcare was experienced as heightening the 
feelings of closeness and as cheering up everyday life.  
 
“We talked quite a lot after all, in the morning, in the 
daytime and also the in the evening, what it was that 
popped into mind. It was nice tapping them and there it 
went and I for one liked it. It was really this like close 
communication, that you can't be bothered to make a call 
about every little thing.” (K5KRK) 
 
At the end of the trial period the sensors, and user 
experiences thereof, connected with Comcare were discussed 
with the elderly. All the elderly and their relatives and the 
volunteers thought that they enhanced feeling of safety. 
Somewhat surprisingly, none of the elderly partaking in the 
testing period did not feel that sensors were disturbing or 
stressing. Some of the elderly even completely forgot that the 
sensors existed. The elderly thought it was good that they 
could themselves control if the sensors were switched on or 
off. Disregarding this none of the elderly switched the 
sensors off during the testing period. Part of the elderly 
thought that the sensor in the refrigerator was useless, but 
especially sensors the outdoor and the hallway were regarded 
as important locations for the sensors. In the final group 
interview it was discovered that three of the five elderly had 
no notion where the sensor data is going, who deciphers it 
and who reacts, if there is an emergency.  
 
“Well I didn't quite understand, that girl she said it many 
times that where this went when here there goes wires on 
the roof” (K3KRK) 
 
The most active circles experienced most benefit form 
the 
testing 
period. 
Two 
of 
the 
most 
frequently 
communicating elderly-relative pairs told that using the 
system had brought about a refreshed mood and nice 
meaning to everyday life.  
 
"So she might have been a bit more vital at that point ... 
that she wrote things like 'good morning' and 'I have 
eaten this and that' and 'now I'll go for the groceries’. 
But I think that in our family mother kind of liked it. 
(L1H1, 68) 
 
Communicating and sharing everyday matters became an 
integral part of the daily rhythm that the ones using the 
system 
most 
became 
somewhat 
dependent 
on 
the 
application. After the test period this frequent messaging was 
missed. 
 
C. Learning the use and some problems detected 
Only one of the elderly felt that learning was easy 
without problems. The relatives’ and volunteers’ learning 
was quick because of their earlier experience of information 
technology, but the elderly being not used to using 
computers and touch screens, learning was more arduous and 
an ongoing personal support was longed for. Four out of five 
elderly people encountered various problems in learning the 
system. Although the system was designed as easy to use as 
possible, lack of prior information technology experience, 
the unfamiliarity of the Internet world, understanding the 
functioning logic of the system, and using the touch screen, 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

caused a lot of problems. A part of the elderly, however, 
overcame the problems and learned it successfully.  
"As for myself, I can tell you that it was a bit hard at the 
beginning. But when I got to learning or knowing that 
compute, then I thought this is so nice." (K3KRK, 36) 
 
Using Comcare was not an especially positive experience 
to everyone because of sparsity of messages, usability 
problems, and a closed circle. Nevertheless the possibilities 
of social media were recognized and it was felt that a similar 
system could be of use to them. Difficulties in learning the 
use were regarded as being due to, among other things, one's 
own health. Hence, rare messages were sent and the system 
was experienced as useless. 
 
"I feel, that as I am sick, that I'm too tired for that.” 
(K4H3) 
 
The elderly doubted their own ability to learn and 
remember the use of the system, and felt insecure as users. 
Although clarity and big enough texts and icons were tried to 
achieve, some of the elderly people had trouble observing 
some elements in the interface. Inexperienced users were 
puzzled, frustrated, and insecure, when confronted with 
usability problems. Writing with the comparatively small 
keyboard or using the touch screen also caused a lot of 
problems. Finding letters was also difficult, because they had 
no prior experience where they keys are in a standard 
keyboard. 
 
"Now that it has laid there on the table I have felt that I 
should know how to use it too so it has made me nervous 
that no (K4H3, 37) 
  
The elderly had trouble distinguishing public updates and 
private messages. This could have been caused by a lack of 
prior models of this kind of sharing or graphic user interface 
related reasons. 
 
D. Experiencing sense of communality and a feeling of 
safety 
Deterioration of moving ability had restrained everyday 
activities. When getting out of one's home had been 
hindered, many hobbies and keeping up a social network 
were abandoned. For this reason it was seen that Comcare 
offered a new possibility for social interaction. 
 
"It is a form of socializing when you really can't get out 
of here. It is like you're under house arrest. I have to say 
it is like I'm under house arrest here." (K1H3, 19) 
 
The difficulty of learning how the system works and 
technical problems had their influence on the fact that it did 
not add to the sense of safety with everybody. One elderly 
person suffering from recurrent loneliness got relief to his 
loneliness by using the system; another one could not 
overcome the problems in learning the system, and thus was 
not able to benefit from the system. Nevertheless some felt, 
that a communication channel like Comcare adds to the 
feeling of safety. Most of the users were ready to use 
Comcare or a similar system also in the future. 
 
"So that you can contact already right away these ones 
close to you that this computer has connected with, yes 
that gives a certain sense of safety." (K5H3, 294) 
 
Those of the elderly that used the system actively told 
that communicating with it had made them closer to their 
relatives. The relatives had similar experiences. Frequent 
communicating and sharing one's own matters kept up the 
sense of community. According to active users of the system, 
sharing 
small 
matters 
of 
everyday 
life 
increased 
communality. The threshold to write a message seemed to be 
lower than e.g. making a phone call, so even small daily 
matters were shared more. 
 
"So well but it was so nice in the morning when you 
could tap good morning get up to your daughter and then 
again so like I am going for groceries now and now I am 
going out to look for some company though she then 
answered really what she wanted.  (K1KRK, 40) 
 
Only one of the elderly was satisfied with the number of 
people belonging to the circle, others would have more 
members to be involved. Communication possibilities were 
craved towards one's own family and friends, as well as 
being ready to make new acquaintances via the Internet. 
 
"Yes and maybe meet new people. Think about me for 
example, I have been here since 56 and well, most of my 
generation are already there underground, underground. 
(K1H3, 129:130) 
 
In addition to the sense of communality, the elderly who 
actively used the system, felt that they also get social support 
through the system. During the test period also the less active 
participants saw the system as a possible aid in giving and 
receiving social support. 
 
"It would be quite handy for you, too, this kind of a 
gadget and I know, it is me after all who takes these 
gadgets, because I am forced to be alone somewhat much 
(K3KRK, 467) 
 
More frequently contacting participants told of a rise in 
spirits and feeling more cheerful and vital. Although many 
elderly people would want and need to keep in contact 
frequently, many of them told that they do not want to be a 
nuisance. They did not want to bother family, neighbors’ or 
friends with their own troubles or their need for company. 
Although the testing period was short, a part of the relatives 
nevertheless told that they were better informed of the 
everyday situations of their elderly next of kin. A frequent 
contacting rate was assessed to lower the threshold for 
asking for support and help.  
 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

"I would believe that when that, the using, the threshold 
of using, lowers then well, the asking for help or things 
like that, is much more easier and quicker" (L5H1, 134). 
 
E. The amount and nature of communication  
The elderly testing the system actively experienced that 
keeping in contact with relatives and volunteers had been 
facilitated during the test period. The threshold of writing a 
message was lower than that of making a phone call, because 
the sender did not need to fear he was disturbing the 
recipient. You could send a message as quick as a thing to be 
shared sprang to mind. 
  
"I thought it was good in a way that I could be straight 
(in contact) like this with him so I didn't always have to 
take the phone in my hand" (K3KRK, 75) 
 
There was a wide variety in the rate of activity between 
the circles. The three most active circles read and sent 
messages several times a day. Between the other two circles 
the messaging was less frequent (Table 2).  
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF SENT MESSAGES 
Messages 
Circle 1 
Circle 2 
Circle 3 
Circle 4 
Circle 5 
Elderly 
197 
189 
16 
23 
96 
Relatives 
305 
270 
12 
10 
171 
Volunteers 
30 
- 
13 
11 
16 
Total 
532 
459 
41 
44 
283 
 
Reasons for rate of activity were slow learning of the 
system and less interaction and slow answering. Some case 
everyday life was otherwise full of social contacts, so that 
the usage of the gadget was scarce.  Most participants felt 
that the utilization of the system added to the overall amount 
of communicating, because it did not replace other means of 
interaction but supplemented them as an equal means of 
communication. An interesting observation is that problems 
in using the system also added to the amount of 
communication. Problems in use were discussed on the 
telephone of face-to-face with relatives. On the other hand 
Comcare had reduced the number of telephone calls with two 
of the elderly people. 
 
"We were more in contact. Up till then it was only once a 
day he called me". (K1H3, 102) 
 
Most of the participants felt that the usage of the system 
was mutual: messages were sent on both sides just about as 
frequently. Only one elderly person felt that others were 
more passive and slower than him, that it made the use of the 
system less sensible. One of the relatives felt the 
communication to be one-sided, because his elderly next-of-
kin had difficulties in learning to use the system. When 
contemplating about the one-sidedness or mutuality of the 
communication the elderly bore in mind the different day 
rhythms of both the relative and the volunteers: they did not 
even wait answer for a message to be written during the day, 
but only after the working hours. The communication via the 
system was informal in nature. Messages were chat, sharing 
everyday matters, and catching up on things, and taking care 
of small things to be done. 
 
"Well it is like hello, how are you" (K4H3, 73) 
"Couple of times a week no more, when you don't have 
actual business then it's no use just to babble" (K2H3, 
206) 
 
The elderly actively using the system experienced the 
exchange of messages as a nice pastime, which came an 
integral part of daily routines. Some of the elderly people, 
although, got bored waiting for answers to their messages. 
 
“It was a wish in our family, at least sort of on mother's 
side, that when she wrote something, so that I would 
instinctively be behind the computer right there and then 
and answer” (L3LRK) 
 
It was a desire to be able to communicate with more 
people that it was possible during the testing period and, to 
an extent, there was a readiness to make totally new 
acquaintances. Talking was a more known way of 
communicating with the elderly than writing messages on 
the Internet, and writing on the tablet computer was to a part 
of the elderly quite slow, thus voice calls or video calls 
would have been a more quick way of communicating. On 
the other hand many answerers mentioned the down sides of 
video calls. It was not desired to always share one's own 
image with others. Video or voice calls would also be more 
confining than exchanging messages.  
 
"Or on the other hand if you are tired yourself, so you 
really can't be bothered with a video call, because there 
is a good time for a video call, so it is not that it is 
suitable for every situation" (L5H1, 74). 
F. Acceptability  
Comcare was not experienced as being stigmatizing. The 
elderly were fine with introducing Comcare to other people. 
In the end of the testing period the participants were asked of 
their willingness to use the system in the future. Part of the 
elderly felt that the testing period was a positive experience 
and would have gladly continued using Comcare or a similar 
system. The costs of acquisition and maintaining of a similar 
system may, however, form an obstacle for the continuation 
of the utilization of social media. 
 
"I regarded it as a reason to be proud" (K5KRK, 454) 
"If I had the money, I'd surely get a computer straight 
away" (K1KRK, 142) 
 
According to relatives and volunteers, how the elderly 
accept the social media application are influenced by 
easiness of use, and how one is able to grasp how it works, 
as well as full functionality and reliability. Also the price of 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the equipment and the use of the service were believed to be 
factors in accepting the system. Relatives felt it was 
important that in order to be approved of by the elderly 
person, he would have to be totally in control if he wants to 
use the service or not. In addition, it was mentioned, that the 
ability to integrate Comcare as a part of the equipment 
already existing would facilitate its introduction.  
 
“So if it was in your own tablet, so if it was in something 
you already use, then it would be easy to start using” 
(L5H1) 
 
Volunteers were interested and ready to make Comcare a 
part of their everyday work routines. They did, however, 
mention that approval would demand a clear model of action 
in emergency situations, and how the service would be 
integrated to daily work routines. In addition, volunteers 
thought it was important that leisure time and time for 
volunteering work can be clearly defined. 
 
“This was easy because it was a test period, so you could 
count that it was over by a certain date so it was quite 
easy to commit yourself to this. But I don't know, if it 
would be quite, that it would be there all the time... that 
could cause problems.” (A1ARK).  
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The results must be interpreted with caution due to the 
minor research sample. The overall attitude of the elderly 
towards safety technologies and sensor technologies was 
positive and approving of with certain reservations. The 
elderly person himself is to decide as to who, where, when, 
and how he is being monitored and what kind of 
information is received about him. The attitude towards 
Comcare was of initial excited anticipation, which turned 
into annoyance and distrust towards the system, as part of 
the messages did not go through. The functionality of 
systems should be unconditionally secure before being 
introduced, in order not to lose the interest and excitement 
over the new technology. 
The sensors in Comcare were considered to be acceptable 
and giving extra safety, as long as their location is suitable 
and does not interfere with privacy. In general, there is 
readiness to use safety technology if one's own health so 
demands and if it is situated in spaces where privacy is not 
considered being under threat. Social media services 
designed for the elderly would seem to have potential to 
support elderly people experiencing loneliness, and also in 
supporting communality, and in supplying social support. 
The observation that the ones who used the system the most, 
benefited the most, is important. According to this study it is 
not reasonable to offer the application of social media to 
people that are not willing to share small everyday matters 
with others.  
Based on the study it seems that Comcare was more 
considered to be a method of conversation, rather than as a 
safety technology. For these reasons the system was seen as 
to be applicable also for wider use among the elderly, as 
soon as the technical shortcomings are cleared. The elderly, 
who actively used the system, felt that they also get social 
support through the system. However, also the less active 
participants saw the system as a possible aid in giving and 
receiving social support. Although the attitude towards 
technology was quite positive, a shared common view was 
that the safety of the elderly, or anyone else for that matter, 
couldn’t be left only to technology.  
A successful introduction requires of everybody in the 
circle the will, and the desire, to share matters with others, 
because an active communication always calls for at least 
two participants. According to this work there would seem to 
be an order among the elderly for social media applications. 
Extra attention has to be paid for them to be easy enough to 
use, having a reasonable price, secure in functionality, and 
easily learned also to first-comers. The future work must 
concentrate on figuring out challenges of separating public 
status updates and private messages and on exploring of 
those reservations the elderly have toward safety technology 
at home. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Official Statistics of Finland, "Time use survey: Changes 1979 - 
2009," 
Helsinki: 
Statistics 
Finland, 
http://www.stat.fi/til/akay/2009/02/akay_2009_02_2011-02-
17_tie_001_en.html [Assessed 11 November 2013]. 
[2] 
M. Madden and K. Zickuhr, "65% of online adults use social 
networking 
sites," 
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Social-
Networking-Sites.aspx [Accessed 21 December 2011]. 
[3] 
S. Guindon and P. Cappeliez, "Contributions of psychological well-
being and social support to an integrative model of subjective health 
in later adulthood," Ageing International, vol. 35, 2010, pp. 38–60. 
[4] 
D.W.  McMillan and D.M. Chavis, "Sense of community: A 
definition and theory," Journal of Community Psychology," vol. 14, 
1986, pp. 6–23. 
[5] 
T. Mankkinen, "Turvallinen elämä ikääntyneille: Toimintaohjelma 
ikääntyneiden 
turvallisuuden 
parantamiseksi," 
Sisäministeriön 
julkaisuja 19/2011, Helsinki, 2011.  
[6] 
R. Beringer, A. Sixsmith, M. Campo, J. Brown and R. M. 
McCloskey, "The acceptance of ambient assisted living: Developing 
an alternate methodology to this limited research lens," in Toward 
useful services for elderly and people with disabilities, B. 
Abdulrazak, S. Giroux, B. Bouchard, H.Pigot and M.Mokhtari, Eds.  , 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2011, pp. 161–167. 
[7] 
L. Lorenzen-Huber, M. Boutain, L.J. Camp, S. Kalpana and K.H. 
Connelly, "Privacy technology, and aging: a proposed framework," 
Ageing International, vol. 36, 2011, pp. 232–252. 
[8] 
M. Ziefle, S. Himmel and W. Wilkowska, "When your living space 
knows what you do: Acceptance of medical home monitoring by 
different technologies," In Human–Computer Interaction: Information 
Quality in eHealth H. Holzinger & K.-M. Simonic, Eds. Berlin, 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2011, pp. 607–624. 
[9] 
I. Alakärppä, J. Riekki and R. Koukkula, "Pervasive pain monitoring 
system: User experiences and adoption requirements in the hospital 
and home environments," Proceedings of the 3rd conference on 
pervasive computing technologies for healthcare, London, UK, 2009. 
[10] I. Alakärppä, S. Hosio and E. Jaakkola, "SNS as a platform of the 
activity monitoring system for the elderly," International workshop on 
advances in personalized healthcare service (APHS 2012), Paris, 
France, 2012.
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

