Performing Telecare: Recognizing New Nursing Care Practices
Annemarie van Hout, Ruud Janssen, Marike Hettinga
Research Group ICT-innovations in Health Care
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences
Zwolle, The Netherlands
Email: {a.van.hout, tjwm.janssen, m.hettinga}@windesheim.nl
Abstract—Telecare is increasingly becoming a part of nursing
care, and also in mental health care. In this paper, we study the
effects telecare has on nursing care, by showing the first results
of research on care by webcam for SMI (severely mentally ill)
patients who live at home. Based on ethnographic fieldwork,
we show how the nursing practice is altered by the use of
technology. New nursing care practices emerge when care is
given at a distance, using a webcam. The changes in care
practice are noticed by nurses, but not fully recognized. Even
more importantly, the new practices are not shared and
discussed. Discussing changing practices among nurses is
essential, in order to support nurses to name and purposely use
the opportunities technology brings.
Keywords:
nursing
telecare;
mental
health
care;
ethnography.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nursing
care
is
substantially
changing,
as
it
is
increasingly performed at a distance with the use of
technology. To care at a distance is already commonplace in
mental health care; especially Internet therapy is customary
for groups of patients [1,2]. The use of webcams is rising as
well; for example, for SMI (severely mentally ill) patients
who live at home. Where nurses normally visit patients at
home
[3],
the
use of
the
webcam
changes
routines
significantly. Some changes are obvious, as care at a distance
first means that patient and care professional are not in the
same room. Physical absence means that there is no room for
touching, smelling, walking around or observing anything
that technology does not cover [4,5]. Some changes might
not be so obvious though and alter care into new forms.
When indicating care as changed when technology is
used, we draw from Science and Technology Studies, by
analyzing
the
role of
the
technology.
Technology
is
comprehended
as
an
active
participant
in
the
care
relationship, besides nurses and patients. Being active means
that the technology is not neutral [6,7], but that its design [8]
and its (unforeseen) usability [9] influences its environment.
In healthcare, this means that the relationships between care
professionals and patients changes. Basic examples are
technology that takes over the actions of professionals, like a
hoist. Other examples show how practices are altered by
transferring tasks and responsibilities. Blood pressure can be
self-measured for example, by which a patient performs
tasks
which
originally belonged
to
care
professionals
[10,11]. Healthcare is redefined by the use of technology
[12] as roles, tasks, functions, relationships, places and
spaces change.
Last year, in preliminary research [13], focus groups
were held in order to find out what experienced telecare
users, nurses that is, thought about this new practice. One of
the nurses spoke about an experience she had with one of the
patients: One client is actually care-avoiding and with him I
am text messaging via an iPad. Like last Friday, I worked all
day and he was sending me messages all day and then I
responded. And at the end of the day he spilled the beans: he
texted that he was very stressed! And I thought: well done!
In this case, the use of text messaging was an incidental
feature, as the aim of the use of the project’s iPads was
telecare by webcam. It turned out to be of extra value as this
client was able, by having frequent, but brief contacts during
the day through a messaging app, to gain self-insight into his
anxiety, supported by the nurse. In this example the use of
technology would seem to have added to new forms of care.
The technology is intended for one thing, but actually fulfills
another function as well. The nurse and patient seem to have
uncovered a new, unforeseen care option, which enables new
forms of care. We therefore ask the question whether or not
healthcare is not only being redefined but even reinvented.
This paper is based on a research project that aims to
improve the use of telecare for care professionals in mental
health care. In order to do so this ‘Videoconferencing in
mental health care’ project will develop several online
instruments. With these online instruments, professionals can
get familiar with telecare and practice specific situations, in
order to bring their professional knowledge and experience
in line with the new care practice. Seven mental health care
organizations, two universities of applied science, a research
institution, a hospital and a university are working together
in this project. The project aims to add to knowledge on how
telecare changes nursing care by analyzing how frontrunners
are using nursing telecare. These insights can support nurses
in the use of telecare.
In this paper, we want to answer the following questions:
What new nursing care practices emerge when using a
webcam? Are professionals aware of these new practices and
are they purposefully performed?
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

II.
METHOD
A.
The project teams
The mental care organizations mainly participate with
FACT
teams.
FACT
stands
for
Flexible
Assertive
Community Treatment; its teams are multidisciplinary and
consist of
case managers (mostly nurses), psychiatrists,
psychologist and sometimes social workers [14]. All have
their own caseload of patients, but they share responsibility
for the total case load. Whenever patients need extra care, for
example because of an imminent crisis, they are listed on the
so-called FACT board. This board is a tool to follow the
patient more closely, a task that is the shared responsibility
of the team.
All the FACT teams that participate in the
project are involved in using telecare to care at a distance
with a webcam. The technical systems vary, just as the
implementation phases of the teams. Some teams have
embraced the new technology fully, in some teams just a few
nurses have and there are teams that are still discussing if
and how they want to use telecare.
For this article, we drew from material from two teams:
team E and team H. Nurses and patients of team E use a
dedicated computer with a screen and webcam and in team H
an iPad is used. In team H three case managers are
forerunners and use a webcam to care at a distance regularly.
The web contacts they have are part of planned care. Team E
consists of appointed members from several FACT teams.
They take turns manning a health care post where from 8 am
till 8 pm they are able to receive all unplanned webcam
contacts from clients throughout the region.
B.
Ethographic research
In order to understand the daily practice of telecare we, a
multi-disciplinary research group (ethics, nursing and user-
centered design) use ethnographic research techniques. We
assume that new care is in the making as telecare is
performed. We use techniques that allow us to become part
of the care practice, or at least approach the practice closely,
so we can recognize and understand these new practices. We
observed and talked with nurses engaged in telecare whilst
we were in the room. We took field notes while observing
webcam
contacts
with
patients.
In
between,
informal
interviews were held, subsequent to the webcam contacts,
which were taped and transcribed. We have joined the
different teams 32 times, during two to four hours each time.
We have observed and talked to 18 nurses, who were in
contact with 41 patients, some multiple times. The research
group
has
jointly
performed
the
data
analysis.
The
observations and analysis are led by sensitizing concepts,
guiding the notes and the coding process [15]. This is not a
neutral process, as neither is the observer. Our observations
and analyses were shaped by the theoretical notions used by
the researchers. The researchers discussed and articulated
these notions during the analytical process. In that way we
specified what we have
discussed they specify what they
have seen and discussed with the nurses, in order to describe
the new practices [16]. Patients were informed of our
presence beforehand and if they did not consent, the
researcher left the room. A letter with extra information for
patients was available. The independent ethics committee
judged this project to be exempt from review.
III.
RESULTS
This section presents our results. We identified three
different themes which we will discuss here. In each theme
we use examples from the data to clarify our points. These
examples may be described or quoted from the data; so
called thick descriptions, to support understanding of
the
results.
A.
Several roads to Rome?
We found a large variety of ways in which telecare is
used.
Even more interesting is the variety in how nurses
define this usage of telecare. To illustrate this use, we use
three quotes, all of which are about patient Bob, who has an
anxiety disorder. Bob ‘calls in’ regularly to the team E. As
he contacts them frequently, he sees a lot of different nurses.
In the next three quotes, nurses Mary, Daniel and Rudi
reflect on the contacts with Bob:
1) Interviewer: What do you think the purpose of telecare is
for people like Bob?
Mary: Well, when people get stuck for example. People who
are unable to start the day by themselves and then they start
calling their case manager every five minutes. With the
screen, I feel they can learn to give themselves a signal, like:
I get stuck, I have to do five things and I do not know how to
start. Structuring your day, that is a perfect way of using it.
(20150501OtE)
For nurse Mary, telecare is an excellent way to enable
Bob to structure his day. Instead of having to face his doubt
all day, he can call in and ask for support when he needs it.
Mary feels this helps Bob on a crucial moment and will give
room for a better day.
2) Bob calls in. He says: I want to talk a bit.
Daniel: Why?
Bob: I want to get rid of my tension.
Daniel: You always do, but you have to talk to your
psychiatrist, I cannot help you.
Bob: I want to know what I can do about it.
Daniel: What do you think?
Bob: I think I will go for a ride on my bike.
Daniel: Good idea!
Bob: I hang up now … and he immediately terminates the
call.
Daniel says that all conversations with Bob take this course.
He even thinks that whenever Bob calls in and sees that
Daniel is there, he quickly comes up with his own solution,
like riding his bike. I try to find out if Daniel intents to give
Bob little room to show this behavior, but Daniel doesn’t
know, it is just how it goes. (20150423OtE)
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Whenever Bob has contact with Daniel, conversations
take another course than in the first example. Daniel,
unconsciously or so it seems, steers Bob into the direction
of a self-found solution. The conversations do not have the
atmosphere of a quick relief, even though they still might
have that effect on Bob.
3) Bob already called in once this morning. He knows what
to do, but needs confirmation. Rudi thinks that Bob should
be taught how to handle his thoughts himself, without the
continuing intervention of others, for example with the help
of cognitive behavior therapy. He does not know if that
would be an option for Bob or if anything like that has been
tried yet. (20150430OtE)
Rudi, finally, reflects upon why Bob would need such
quick reliefs and whether he should be able to do this
himself, without the telecare. Mary, Daniel and Rudi differ
clearly in their opinion on how Bob should use telecare and
if and how he would benefit from it. Different lines of
thought on care would probably be the case before telecare
as well, but this dispute is on the use of telecare, which
makes these differences particular to telecare.
B.
Part of the plan?
In team E, where most of the care is unplanned, nurses
are aware of changes in their practice, even though they
found them difficult to name:
Nurse Taco talks about patient Tobias, who told very dark
stories after his last admittance. One example was on how
Tobias claimed that one of the nurses at the clinic had
instructed him to ‘go grab that borderline bitch’. Taco tells
how much he is affected by such contacts and how difficult
these conversations are by webcam.
We discuss this for a bit, but do not seem to get to the heart
of the matter. Taco says these contacts seem a kind of
stopover, like it is not part of the process. I ask him if it
would have been different had he been Tobias’ case
manager. Taco ponders on the treatment, on how telecare is
a part of the care offer and how this is part of the treatment,
but that does not seem right to him after all…. It seems
clear though that conversations like these with Tobias have
a larger effect on Taco because they are by webcam.
(20150422OtE)
Nurse Taco is aware of his reaction to intrusive contacts,
which he links to the fact that he is not part of the care
process of most patients he has contact with by webcam. He
finds it difficult to pinpoint the differences with regular
care, but he sees it in the context of the treatment plan.
What happens here is that the webcam creates a new form
of contact, contact without the context of a treatment plan.
And even though the nurses mostly report the contacts they
had in the patient’s file, especially the ones they (on a
professional basis) diagnose as difficult or important, the
fact remains the contacts are incidental instead of part of a
professional plan. In one way this fits the mental health care
paradigm of ‘recovery’ very well. Patients are the center of
care and are encouraged to take charge of their lives and
care. Unplanned care fits this seamlessly, but from a
professional point of view a new form of care is in the
making.
C.
Telecare: the intertwining of aid and aim
The cases of how nursing care changes in the above
paragraphs are just a few examples of the very rich data we
have gathered. Within the data there are many different
forms of telecare and many different opinions of nurses on
telecare. Apart from the new forms of care that were shown
before, another interesting phenomenon has come from the
data: the intertwining of aid and aim within care. Nurses talk
about telecare as a way of sparing time because they do not
have to travel to patients. They also mention how helpful it
can be in contact with patients, both care-avoiding and
excessively consuming patients, as patients do not have to
come to the office for regular appointments anymore:
C [team H]: Well, in that case, I would tell him: we have a
deal. I visit you once a week and I could contact you an
extra time by telecare at the beginning of the week. This way
I try to direct him so to speak and to restrict him in order to
make him realize that he has to wait for our planned
contacts so he will not keep calling in between.
So, telecare can be very supportive in alleviating logistic
obstacles. On the other hand, the nurses mention how
telecare enables more frequent, businesslike and concise
contacts, which leads to more substantial guidance or
supervision of some patients, again both care-avoiding and
excessively consuming patients. So sometimes telecare can
be used as an aid to solve logistic obstacles and sometimes
it is the aim: more frequent contact with patients.
IV.
DISCUSSION
We started this paper with the following questions: What
new nursing care practices emerge when using a webcam?
Are professionals aware of these new practices and are they
purposeful performed? We have seen how nursing practice
changes when telecare is introduced and we identified three
themes within these changes. In the first theme, we saw the
different functions of telecare, even for the same patient.
Different practices might be common in the everyday
practice of mental health care, but these different practices
are established with the webcam and not recognized or
discussed. The differences we saw between the three nurses
is on a new form of care: in what way can nurses offer
options for contact to patients with anxiety disorders? And
even more important: what do nurses, in their professional
opinion, think these options for patient contact should be?
The nurses of patient Bob have not discussed his case. They
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

belong to different teams and in Team E, only set up to man
the webcam, no care-meetings are held. So technology
changes practices without any necessary extra adjustments
are made.
In the second theme, the webcam created a new form of
contact, namely contact that was not part of the treatment
plan. Nurses find it difficult founding these contacts, as they
occur in a different manner and context than regular
contacts. It seems as if the new dynamic and opportunities
of these kind of contacts are not explored yet.
And thirdly, we saw how an intertwining of aids and aims
in care occurs when webcams come in. This might lead to
all kind of hindrances, especially when the logistic profits of
patients not coming to the office conflict with a care goal
that aims at supporting patients intensively, which may
require bodily presences of the nurse.
The technology has brought new opportunities and
different ways of working. What is remarkable is that the
changes the technology brings about in the care practice are
not discussed among nurses. This lack of discussion on the
content of telecare might also be the reason that telecare
does not seem to be a component of the treatment process.
Even when telecare is included in the treatment plan as a
tool for contact with the patient, the unplanned, incidental
contacts can leave nurses with a distinct idea of the purpose
of the contact. In the analyses, both these themes are linked
to the problem that aim and aid are intertwined within the
telecare practice, which makes it quite difficult for nurses to
purposefully use telecare.
So, we have seen so far that new nursing care practices
emerge when using a webcam. Nurses are aware of changes
in their care practice, but do not have the opportunity to
fully understand the changes in order to put them to use in
care. We therefore conclude that it is very important to
facilitate nurses to discuss these changes in order to name
the new practices and purposely use them in care.
As our project is still running, at this moment this
research has logically led
to first results. Over time, and
with possible extra field work, new insights can be gained
on other new practices. Other perspectives will be used as
well, especially from nursing and care theory. Finally, to
name the unsaid is a part of ethnographic research.
Observations and reflections on practices do not always
cover all that is happening or the unsaid [17]. We will
continue to pay attention to this issue.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We
would
like
to
thank
the
professionals
who
participated in our study and their respective organizations:
Dimence, GGZ Drenthe, Lentis and GGZ Noord-Holland-
Noord. The research described in this paper was made
possible by a research grant from Nationaal Regieorgaan
Praktijkgericht Onderzoek SIA (grant number 2014-01-52P).
REFERENCES
[1]
F. A. Moreno, J. Chong, J. Dumbauld, M. Humke and S.
Byreddy. “Use of StandardWebcam and Internet Equipment
for
Telepsychiatry
Treatment
of
Depression
Among
Underserved Hispanics“. Psychaitric Services. 2012 12: 1213-
1217.
[2]
L. van der Krieke, L. Wunderink, A.C. Emerencia , P. de
Jonge, S. Sytema. “E-mental health self-management for
psychotic disorders: state of the art and future perspectives“.
Psychiatric Services. 2014 1:33-49.
[3]
J.R. van Veldhuizen and M. Bähler. “Manual Flexible
Assertive Community Treatment”. Groningen, 2013.
[4]
L. Barnes and T. Rudge. “Virtual reality or real virtuality: the
space of flows and nursing practice“. Nursing Inquiry.2005
12: 306-315.
[5]
K. England and I. Dyck . “Managing the body work of home
care“. Sociology of Health and Illness. 2011 33: 206-219.
[6]
B. Latour. Science in Action. Cambridge (MS): Harvard
University Press, 1987.
[7]
J. Law. “Actor-network theory and material semiotics”. In:
The New Blackwell Companion to Social Theory. BS Turner
Ed. Oxford 2009: Blackwell, 141-158.
[8]
M. Akrich. “ The De-Scription of technical objects“,
in
Shaping
technology
/
building
society.
Studies
in
sociotechnical
change.
W.E.
Bijker
and
J.
Law,
Eds.
Cambridge (MS), London (GB) 1992: The MIT Press, 225-
258.
[9]
B. Latour. “Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a
few mundane artefacts”. In: Shaping technology / building
society. Studies in sociotechnical change. W.E. Bijker and J.
Law, Eds. Cambridge (MS), London (GB) 1992: The MIT
Press, 225-258.
[10] M. Mort, T. and C. May. “Making and unmaking telepatients:
identity and governance in new health technologies“. Science
Technology and Human Values. 2009 34 -9: 9-33.
[11] D.Willems. “Varities of goodness in high-tech home care”.
In: Care in practice. On tinkering in clinics, homes and
farmes. A.Mol, I. Moser and J. Pols Eds. Bielefeld 2010:
Transcript Verlag257-277.
[12] N. Oudshoorn. Telecare technologies and the transformation
of healthcare. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.
[13] R. Janssen, H. Prins, A. van Hout, J. Nauta, L. van der Krieke,
S. Sytema and M. Hettinga, “Videoconferencing in Mental
Health Care”, paper for eTelemed 2015.
[14] J.R. van Veldhuizen, “FACT: a Dutch version of ACT”,
Community Ment Health J, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 421-433,
August 2007.
[15] H. Boeije. Analysis in qualitative research. London: Sage,
2010.
[16] J. Pols, Care at a Distance: On the Closeness of Technology.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Amsterdam University Press,
2012.
[17] S. Hirschauer. “Putting Things into Words. Ethnographic
Description and the Silence of the Social“. Human Studies.
2006 29-4:413-441.
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

