Stress at Work: Developing a Stress Management 
Program in a Web-Based Setting
Hélène Sandmark 
School of Health, Care and Social Welfare 
Department of Public Health Sciences 
Mälardalen University 
Västerås, Sweden 
helene.sandmark@mdh.se 
Åsa Smedberg 
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences 
Stockholm University 
Kista, Sweden 
asasmed@dsv.su.se 
 
Abstract—Stress among employees is a public health issue in 
modern working life in developed countries. A lack of balance 
between job and demands in private life, and stressful situations 
in work life let people experience high levels of stress. Long-term 
sick leave and ill-health can be a consequence of high stress 
exposure during a long period of time. The objective of this 
interdisciplinary ongoing research program is to develop a 
platform providing multiple help online with evidence-based 
measures in a stress management program. The program is 
aimed to prevent stress-related dysfunctions and promote 
wellbeing and lower levels of stress among salaried employees in 
white collar jobs. The platform includes a web based system for 
asking experts, communities for peers and different health 
promotion measures which will be further described. 
Keywords-white collar workers; learning; relaxation exercise; 
coping; interdisciplinary research 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Stress is a public health issue in modern working life in 
developed countries. During the past years there have been 
substantial efforts on advancing information technology for 
effective health applications. These could be proactive, 
preventive and intervention measures to improve work life 
balance and occupational stress in the western economies. To 
address the challenge of health and wellbeing we need to 
include web-based empowering of patients and healthy 
individuals to enable them to play a substantial role in their 
own health and health promotion measures and increase 
knowledge for decision support. 
This paper describes the development of an evidence-based 
online stress intervention which is still work-in-progress. It 
introduces a web-based stress management system that applies 
a holistic and communicative approach to prevention and 
intervention of negative stress exposures and reactions among 
white collar workers in a Swedish setting. The system is based 
on group interaction, information sharing, and integration of 
actors’ knowledge. 
II. 
STRESS AND STRESS MANAGEMENT 
The concept of stress is complex, and can either be seen as 
an exposure, a stressor, acting on the human body and mind, 
or an effect, a stress response, of an event or thought in an 
individual. Stress reactions include physiological as well as 
psychological components. It is about how we perceive 
demands and what ability we have to cope with them. Stress 
among employees is a public health issue in modern work life. 
Intense lifestyles, with high demands in job and in private life, 
let people experience high levels of stress. Long-term sickness 
and absence from work can be a consequence of high stress 
exposure [1].  
 Stressors in occupational work, such as a frustrating work 
situation, locked-in positions, over commitment in work 
performance and work-family imbalance are often major 
causes 
of 
psychological 
and 
physiological 
strain. 
Overcommitted 
co-workers 
suffer 
from 
inappropriate 
perceptions of demands and not enough coping resources. It 
could be misconceptions preventing co-workers from properly 
estimate cost–gain relations and to set limits. Studies have 
shown that stress related dysfunctions are associated with a 
state of fatigue, sleep problems, lack of recovery, and also 
long term sickness absence [2] [3] [4] [5]. It is well-known 
that preventive measures and early interventions are beneficial 
in order to prevent people from stress-related dysfunctions, 
and risk of later illness and sickness absence. 
III. 
THE WEB-BASED STRESS INTERVENTION 
The Internet can serve as an interactive medium for 
information and communication, with accessibility and 
interactivity for almost everyone in the western world. It can 
include numerous of users, and gives users new knowledge 
and information as well as opportunities to communicate. It 
challenges 
traditional 
one-way 
information 
in 
health 
information, and can be used in developing interactive 
environments. Its main principles are in line with and suitable 
in health education and empowering processes. However, the 
function for many years was information search and retrieval, 
but the technology now makes it possible to use interactive 
applications. This makes it possible to integrate applications 
for shared experiences, recognition and support among users, 
which is characteristic of the web 2.0. To let users be not only 
consumers, but also producers and contribute to content is a 
valuable development [6]. Electronically accessed health 
services, such as web based communities for peer level 
support, and ask-the expert systems for more extensive 
medical information, offer answers and support. A benefit for 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the user could be reached if these two different health venues 
could be integrated [7]. 
The objective of this interdisciplinary research program is 
to develop a platform giving multiple help online with 
implemented evidence-based measures in a stress management 
program which is aimed to prevent stress-related dysfunctions 
and promote wellbeing and low levels of stress levels among 
salaried employees in white collar jobs. The platform includes 
a web based systems for asking experts, communities for peers 
and 
intervention 
programs 
offering 
health 
promotion 
measures. 
IV. 
DESIGN AND MODEL 
This new program is based on the bio-psychosocial model 
stating that biological, psychological and social factors are 
equally important in the development of disease or to promote 
and maintain good health and prevent ill health. The model is 
based in that health is a combination of biological, 
psychological, and social factors rather than solely biological 
or biomedical [8] [9]. In this project he model should be seen 
as a general framework to implementation and intervention of 
stress related exposures and reactions.  
The core element of the intervention is a learning process 
in which the participants learn to approach solvable problems 
and issues connected to promotion, prevention or reduction of 
stress. The project will be an ongoing process with the 
multiple help system on line that is set up and designed in the 
project. The system is a combination of self-help, groups, 
support and expert help online. Thus the program aims to 
enable people to gain better control over health determinants. 
Health promootion in work life is the combined efforts of 
employers, employees and society to improve the health and 
well-being of people at work. In this study the focus is on 
promoting active participation and encouraging personal 
development. 
The base of all intervention measures in this project is the 
empowering processes of the individuals. The educational 
approach to health promotion is concerned to enabling people 
to make informed choices, which is well in line with the 
design of this study. The promotive and preventive approach 
targets behavior changes in individuals, such as: internal locus 
of control as a key factor in efforts to create empowered 
environments and empowered individuals [10] [11]. 
V. 
THE INTERVENTION PROGRAM 
People who will be included in the project are more or less 
exposed to stress, which has to be considered when designing 
the web based system. Relaxation exercises, access to relevant 
information and interaction with other users and health 
professionals, helpful on-demand for upcoming stressful 
situations as well as long-term strategies for learning a new 
behavior and coping with stressful situations are parts of the 
system. The aim is to let the users become more empowered in 
their daily lives.  
The techniques used in the stress management system are 
utilized in cognitive therapy, stress management and in body-
oriented therapies. Relaxation exercises can ease stress 
reactions and prevent more chronic stress related dysfunctions. 
The exercises include techniques for improving breathing, 
relaxation, body awareness, sleep, cognitive reframing, 
emotional control, self-efficacy and self-esteem.  
The relaxation exercises, such as progressive muscle 
relaxation was originally designed by Jacobson to guide 
people through successive tensing and relaxation of the body 
muscle groups from toe to head to achieve body relaxation 
[12]. This is easy to learn and teach, safe, non-threatening and 
non-competitive. Since then it has been concluded that the 
effectiveness of the interventions varied according to the 
health-outcome measure used [13]. Cognitive-behavioural 
skills were found to be more effective for psychological 
outcomes, whereas muscle relaxation techniques were more 
effective for physiological outcomes. Using a combination of 
techniques; muscle relaxation and cognitive-behavioural skills 
seemed to be more effective across outcome measures than 
using a single technique [13] [14]. Deep diaphragmatic 
breathing is known to counteract the fight or flight response 
symptoms that are often associated with anxiety and negative 
reactions on stress exposure [15] [16]. Also meditation can be 
used to counteract stressful situations, as it is a technique to 
develop concentration and awareness to produce a calming 
effect. Here diaphragmatic breathing is central to any 
meditation practice [15] [16] [17]. It has been found that there 
could be a lowering of blood pressure during deep breathing 
[18], which is interesting to consider in stress management. 
 
 
Figure 1. Components of the Web-Based Stress Management System. 
Work coaching and counseling in stress management are a 
relatively new, but an increasingly sought after method for 
helping people to improve, develop, learn new skills, find 
personal resources, achieve aims and manage life change and 
personal challenges such as work-related stress and achieving 
work life balance. Occupational coaching might be effective 
for situations, whether in personal life, career, corporate or 
business life [19] [20]. It is well established among business 
and management executives, but has not been used much on a 
individual level among gainfully working men and women in 
the general population [21].  
These work oriented programs have not been scientifically 
evaluated regarding primary or secondary prevention for stress 
related disorders or as a health promotion measure for 
gainfully working people. We will include these measures in 
the web program to evaluate both the general design and also 
how they can be implemented on the Internet as a dynamic 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

tool in the communication process. There will also be an 
approach to focus the work-family balance.   
 
VI. 
MEASUREMENTS AND OUTCOMES 
There are different theoretical models including the stress 
concept. The demand-control-social support model is one of 
them. It a multidimensional model that examines the 
relationship between a person and the environment with 
particular focus of the interaction in employment settings. This 
model utilizes three dimensions which focus which can 
explain the development of stress reactions in working people. 
The individual, which is central in this model, has her or his 
perceptions of work experience. Factors connected to the 
psychosocial work environment, such as demand, control, and 
support are the core components of the model [22]. 
In this program electronically accessed health services, 
means stress management, which may offer the advantages of 
both expert knowledge as well as a social network where 
collaborative learning by means of social support is provided, 
and as understood to be a social network’s provision of 
psychological and material resources intended to increase the 
individual’s ability to cope with stress [23]. All the involved 
actors can benefit and the possibility of cross-fertilization to 
take place [7]. 
VII. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Stress among working people is a public health issue. In 
order to outline preventive and intervention measures for 
stress reduction, information technology for effective health 
applications should be developed and implemented. This paper 
describes how a web-based system for stress management has 
been developed entailing self-help through information access 
and exercises, and also support and guidance from peers and 
medical professionals. The platform is ready for use and to be 
implemented.  
The web-based stress management system presented in this 
paper  has resulted from previous research studies of web-
based solutions for learning new lifestyles, stress management 
and clinical trials. The next step is to make the system 
available to a group of employees who experience stressful 
lives. The focus will be on white-collar workers: office 
workers and in middle management positions. To evaluate the 
implementation stress levels will be measured using 
established questionnaires. levels will be measured using 
established questionnaires. In addition, there will be 
observations of systems usage and content and discourse 
analyses of the web-based communication [24] [25. 
We will complement the web-based system by a mobile 
application. To add new technical features will be useful to 
increase the system flexibility for the users. This would make 
it easier for the users to get help in their everyday lives, 
whenever and wherever they need support from peers, experts 
and information contents. 
REFERENCES 
[1] McEwen, B.S., 2000. The neurobiology of stress: from 
serendipity to clinical relevance, Brain Res. 886, 172-89. 
[2] Sandmark, H. 2007. Work and family: associations with long 
term sick-listing in Swedish women. BMC Public Health 2007, 
7:287. 
[3] Sandmark, H. 2009. Job mismatching, unequal opportunities and 
long-term sickness absence in female white collar workers in 
Sweden. Scand J Public Health. 37, 43-49. 
[4] Preckel, D., von Känel, R., Kudielka, B.M. and Fischer, J.E. 
2005. Over commitment to work is associated with vital 
exhaustion. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 78:117–22. 
[5] Siegrist, J. 2000. Psychosocial factors and stress. In 
Encyclopedia of stress, edited by Fink G. London, Academic 
Press.  
[6] Anderson, P. 2007. What is Web 2.0? Ideas, technologies and 
implications for education. JISC Technology and Standards 
Watch, Feb. 2007. 
[7] Smedberg, Å. 2007. To design holistic health service systems on 
the Internet. In Proceedings of World Academy of Science, 
Engineering and Technology, November 2007, 311-317.  
[8] Santrock, J. W. 2007. A Topical Approach to Human Life-span 
Development (3rd ed.). St. Louis, MO: McGraw-Hill. 
[9] Engel, G. 1977. The need for a new medical model: A challenge 
for biomedicine. Science; 196, 129–36. DOI: 
10.1126/science.847460. 
[10] Tones, K, Green J. 2003. Health Promotion:Planning and 
Strategies. Sage Publications. 
[11] I. Rootman, M. Goodstadt, L. Potvin, and J. Springett, 2001. A 
framework for health promotion evaluation. In Rootman, I. (ed.), 
Evaluation in Health Promotion: Principles and Perspectives. 
WHO, Regional Office for Europe, Copenhagen, 2001(92):7-38. 
[12] Jacobson, E. 1938. Progressive relaxation (2nd ed.), University 
of Chicago, Chicago. 
[13] Murphy, L. R. 1996. Stress management in work settings: a 
critical review of the health effect. American Journal of Health 
Promotion, 11, 112–135. 
[14] Jones, M. C. and  Johnston, D. W. 2000. Reducing distress in 
first level and student nurses: a review of the applied stress 
management literature. Journal of Adv Nursing, 32, 66–74. 
[15] B. Seaward, Managing stress, Boston: Jones and Bartlett, 2002. 
[16] Mayo Clinic Special Report. 2005. Anxiety disorders: Taking 
control of persistent worries, fears, and phobias. Mayo Clinic 
Women’s Healthsource, July: 1–8. 
[17] Benson, B. 2001. The relaxation response, New York: Harper 
Collins. 
[18] I. von Schéele, B. von Schéele, G. Hansson, A. Winman and T. 
Theorell. 2005. Psychosocial factors and respiratory and 
cardiovascular parameters during psychophysiological stress 
profiling in working men and women. Appl Psychophysiol 
Biofeedback. 30(2):125-36. 
[19] Beecham B., Dammers J., van Zwanenberg .2004. Leadership 
coaching for general practitioners. Education for Primary Care, 
15, 579–83. 
[20] Hannah, C., 2004. Improving intermediate skills through 
workplace coaching: A case study within the UK rail industry. 
International Journal of Evidence-Based Coaching and 
Mentoring, 2(1), 17–40. 
[21] Vaartjes, V. 2005. Integrating action learning practices into 
executive coaching to enhance business results, International 
Journal of Evidence Based Coaching and Mentoring, 3(1), 1-17. 
[22] Karasek, R. A.  and Theorell, T. 1990. Healthy work: stress, 
productivity, and the reconstruction of working life. New York: 
Basic Books. 
[23] Cohen, S. 2004. Social Relationships and Health. American 
Psychologist, Vol 59(8), Nov 2004, 676-684. 
 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
[24] [Preece, J. 2000. Online communities – designing usability, 
supporting sociability, Wiley & Sons.  
[25] Smedberg, Å. 2008. Online communities and learning for health 
- the use of online health communities and online expertise for 
people with established bad habits. Doctoral thesis, DSV, 
Stockholm University. ISBN 978-91-7155-689-9. 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

