Developing eHealth Technology for People With Dementia: Towards a Supportive Decision Tool Facilitating Shared 
Decision-Making in Dementia 
 
 
Marijke Span, Carolien Smits, Leontine Groen-van de 
Ven, Jan Jukema 
Research group Innovation of Care for Older Adults and 
Social Work, Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
m.span@windesheim.nl 
 
Marike Hettinga 
Research group ICT Innovation in Health Care 
Windesheim University of Applied Sciences 
Zwolle, The Netherlands 
 
  
 
Anita Cremers 
TNO Human Factors, Utrecht University of Applied 
Sciences, department: Multi Modal User Interface Design, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
 
Myrra Vernooij-Dassen  
Radboud University Nijmegen, IQHealth Care and 
Department of Primary Care, Stichting Kalorama, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands  
Jan Eefsting 
EMGO+ Free University Medical Centre of Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands 
 
 
Abstract— People with dementia are confronted with many 
decisions. However, they are often not involved in the 
process of the decision-making. Shared Decision-Making 
(SDM) enables involvement of persons with dementia in the 
decision-making process. In our study, we develop a 
supportive IT application aiming to facilitate the decision-
making process in care networks of people with dementia. A 
key feature in the development of this SDM tool is the 
participation of all network members during the design and 
development process, including the person with dementia. 
In this paper, we give insight into the first phases of this 
design and development process in which we conducted 
extensive user studies and translated wishes and needs of 
network members into user requirements. 
 
Keywords: shared decision-making; decision tool; co-
creation; dementia; eHealth 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Most 
western 
countries 
are 
currently 
facing 
demographic changes that will result in a dramatic 
increase of the number of people with dementia. 
Worldwide there are 35.6 million persons with dementia. 
It is to be expected that this number will be doubled by 
2013 and tripled by 2050 [1, 2]. 
People with dementia are confronted with many 
decisions in the dementia process regarding daily life and 
well-being issues. Involving people with dementia in 
decision-making is not self-evident. They are often 
ignored [3]. This lack of involvement of people with 
dementia in decision-making is also noticed in research 
and design and development processes. Researchers and 
designers often develop tools for people with dementia 
rather than with them. People with dementia belong to one 
of the most neglected groups in research and development 
[3, 4].  
Adequate care of people with dementia demands 
involvement of people with dementia in decision-making 
[5, 6]. In other fields of health care Shared Decision-
Making (SDM) has proven its positive results regarding 
quality of life [7-9]. Moreover, SDM increases 
satisfaction with decisions and results in better informed 
patients [10]. Furthermore, SDM increases the autonomy 
of patients and empowers them [10]. This could also be 
beneficial to persons with dementia. 
One of the supporting tools in SDM are decision aids, 
paper or IT-based.  Thus far, a supportive tool facilitating 
SDM in dementia is lacking. In our study, we aim at 
designing, developing, implementing and evaluating such 
a tool.  
Many IT applications have been developed to support 
people with dementia and their family and formal 
caregivers [11, 12]. Unfortunately, many IT applications 
are not used by them because they do not match their 
needs and capacities [13]. Therefore, in our study, 
involving network members and inclusion of people with 
dementia in the development and design process are key 
features.  
In comparison with existing SDM tools that primarily 
facilitate the patient-clinician relation this involvement of 
all network members in the SDM process is new. Another 
new element is the focus on the process of SDM instead 
of on the decision itself. 
In this paper, we describe the first phases of the 
development process of a supportive SDM IT application. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

We identified user requirements based on user studies to 
determine the content of this tool. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The present study is part of a major research program 
on SDM in care networks of persons with dementia. This 
program consists of three studies and aims to improve 
professional care. 
 SDM is a process of interaction and communication 
between a patient who wants to be involved and his or her 
care providers in making health care decisions, taking into 
account the preferences of the patient and the best 
available evidence [14]. In clinical practice patients and 
their clinicians are involved in this medical decision-
making process. In our research program, concerning care 
and well-being related decisions in care networks of 
people with dementia this means involvement, interaction 
and communication between people with dementia, 
informal caregivers and professionals.  
The first study of this research program on SDM aims 
to provide insight into decision-making processes within 
care networks of people with dementia in order to 
improve SDM. In this longitudinal study 25 care networks 
(each consisting of the person with dementia, two 
informal caregivers and two professional caregivers) are 
individually interviewed in three measurement cycles 
with six-month intervals.  
In the second study, specific SDM competencies of 
professional 
caregivers 
(e.g. 
case 
managers) 
are 
developed. Furthermore, best practices of shared decision-
making in care networks of dementia will be developed. 
The third and present study, developing a supportive 
IT application that facilitates SDM in care networks of 
dementia, uses data from the first two studies. Research 
questions of this third study focus on the requirements for 
a SDM tool concerning the most suitable content, user-
friendly design and effectiveness, and on the requirements 
for implementation in daily practice.   
In the following section we describe the approach for 
this third study. 
III. 
APPROACH 
 
Although involvement of end users in developing 
eHealth technologies still is not self-evident, we consider 
involvement of end users as one of the key factors for 
developing a user-friendly and usable IT application. Too 
many IT applications have been developed without ever 
being used. Another important factor is sustainability in 
practice. Researchers and developers become more aware 
of the importance of making their innovations sustainable. 
Tools and roadmaps are developed to support developers 
in increasing the structural embedding of IT applications 
in health care. One example is the eHealth Innovation 
Matrix (eHix) [15]. Another approach is the ceHRes 
roadmap. It connects a Human Centered Design with 
eHealth Business Modeling [16].  
Both eHix and the ceHRes roadmap emphasize 
involvement of stakeholders in all phases of the 
development. In our research program, a multi-
disciplinary consortium consisting of a variety of 
dementia 
experts 
and 
advocates 
achieves 
this. 
Furthermore, we use a stepwise approach in order to 
systematically translate user studies (needs and wants) in 
functional requirements of the tool (figure 1) [17]. 
We started this study by conducting a systematic 
review regarding the research question: how are people 
with dementia involved in the development of supportive 
IT applications [18]. We were interested in the state of the 
art regarding this question to discover which implications 
the results would have for our own development process, 
especially, in identifying user requirements.  
The results of this review show that involvement of 
people with dementia is not self-evident. Included studies 
dated from 2003-2010. Researchers and developers differ 
in how they involve people with dementia, depending on 
how they value the capacities of people with dementia. In 
most studies people with dementia were involved in the 
first phase of the development process. Recently, 
researchers and developers are more aware of the benefits 
of involving people with dementia in development 
processes; it results in more attuned and usable IT 
applications [18].  
 
A. User studies  
In the first developmental phase we explored the 
needs and wants of all stakeholders. Fifty semi-structured 
interviews were undertaken with persons with dementia, 
informal caregivers and professional caregivers to get 
insight into their experiences in decision-making in 
dementia. Framework analysis was used to analyze the 
interviews with AtlasTi software. In addition eight focus 
groups were conducted, two with persons with dementia, 
two with informal caregivers, two with professional 
caregivers and two with experts in the field of dementia. 
These focus group interviews had a twofold goal. One 
goal was to double-check the results from the interviews. 
The second goal was to retrieving additional information 
about the process of SDM and on the needs and wishes 
concerning (digital) support. AtlasTi software was used to 
analyze the focus group transcripts addressing the topics 
mentioned. Furthermore, an analysis of interactive 
dementia websites was conducted to identify needs of 
network members regarding decision-making.  
 
B. User requirements  
In a multi-disciplinary user requirement workshop 
(researchers specialized in older adults, dementia and IT, 
technicians 
and 
developers) 
we 
used 
Affinity 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Diagramming in order to determine user requirements 
based on the information retrieved in the above described 
user studies. In addition these user requirements were 
compared to national dementia standards in order to check 
whether they match with these standards [19, 20]. 
 
 
C. Functional requirements  
In 
a 
multi-disciplinary 
functional 
requirement 
workshop (researchers specialized in older adults, 
dementia and IT, technicians, developers and designers) 
the user requirements will be translated in functional 
requirements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Experiments 
The interface of the supportive SDM IT application will 
be determined in an iterative, participatory design 
process. Products of the design and development phases 
(mock-ups, prototypes) will be the subject of end user 
focus groups and experiments.  Feedback thus obtained 
informs the next design and development phase in order 
to improve the content and design of the tool. Special 
attention will be paid to the adaptability interface of the 
tool because of the declining cognitive abilities of persons 
with dementia over time. Experiments will also focus on 
comparing different ways of implementing the tool in 
daily practice: network members using the tool 
individually as a preparation of face-to-face meetings, 
compared with a shared way using it during such a 
meeting.  
 
E. Pilot study 
When the adapted tool becomes robust enough a pilot 
study will be conducted to evaluate the usability of the 
tool in daily practice. Five different care networks of 
persons with dementia (each care network consist of a 
person with dementia, two informal caregivers and two 
professionals) will use the tool for a period of five 
months. The evaluation focuses on design and content of 
the tool; interface of the tool; usability of the tool by 
professionals using SDM; and obstacles and benefits of 
the use of the tool. Furthermore, the impact of the tool on 
the care network members, including the person with 
dementia, and the decisions made will be evaluated. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
At this point in time we obtained the results of the user 
requirements. The interviews with persons with dementia, 
informal caregivers and professional caregivers gave 
insight into the issues and decisions network members of 
people with dementia experience regarding dementia. 
Important domains are: care, well-being, daily activities, 
living, mobility and financial and legal matters. Based on 
the results of these interviews we constructed a persona. 
This persona served the purpose of aligning the 
perspectives of the multi-disciplinary project members’ 
view.  
Subsequently the results of the interviews, focus 
groups and analysis of interactive dementia websites were 
screened for wishes and needs of end users of the tool. 
This resulted in a selection of more than two hundred 
relevant items. The principal researcher clustered these 
items stemming from the data. The selected items and 
first clustering were peer-reviewed by a second 
researcher. During the user requirement workshop multi-
disciplinary teams checked the clustering and determined 
the user requirements per cluster. User requirements were 
discussed until consensus was reached. The user 
requirements 
determined 
concerned 
the 
following 
clusters: participation of the person with dementia, 
information, role of informal caregivers, role of case 
manager, role of other professionals, decision history, 
communication, anticipation, support, self-management 
and autonomy, and administrative load.  
Our check with National dementia care standards 
learned that the user requirements are in line with these 
standards.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
The extensive exploration and translation of the user 
studies into user requirements created valuable input for 
the functional requirements process. This study is now 
midway. The next step is designing and developing the 
tool, testing it in experiments and improving the tool 
using the feedback of involved end users, followed by the 
pilot study and its evaluation.   
Developing a tool to facilitate the SDM process in care 
networks of people with dementia is a real challenge. 
Involvement of all stakeholders in the design and 
development process is needed in order to develop a 
robust IT application. In the current project we aim to 
involve people with dementia. In the first phases of the 
development process people with dementia participated 
successfully. 
The participation of people with dementia in this 
development processes is a conditio sine qua non in order 
User 
studies 
Design and 
Development of tool 
Functional 
requirements 
User 
requirements 
 
Figure 1 Process from user studies to design and 
development [17]  
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

to get an attuned and user-friendly tool. Researchers, 
developers and clinicians should be aware of that.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The Dutch Foundation Innovation Alliance (SIA 
RAAK [Regional Attention and Knowledge Circulation] 
PRO), 
Zorgpalet 
Hoogeveen 
(Residential 
care 
organization for older adults) and Windesheim University 
of Applied Sciences funded this study. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Prince, R. Bryce, C. Ferri, "The benefits of early 
diagnosis and intervention. World Alzheimer Report 
2011," Alzheimer's Disease International, 2011. 
Retrieved from http://www.alz.co.uk/research/world-
report-2011 (Last accessed 04-02-2013). 
[2] 
C. Ferri, R. Bryce, C. Ferri, "Global prevalence of 
dementia: a Delphi consensus study," Lancet, vol. 366, 
pp. 2112-2117, 2005. 
[3] 
N. Savitch, "How to make the world wide web 
dementia-friendly," Journal of Dementia Care, vol. 14, 
pp. 28-31, Sep 2006. 
[4] 
H. Wilkinson, Including people with dementia in 
research: 
methods 
and 
motivations. 
In: 
The 
perspectives of people with dementia, research 
methods and motivation. London: Jessica Kingsley, 
2002. 
[5] 
K. Cubit, "Informed consent for research involving 
people with dementia: A grey area," Contemporary 
Nurse, vol. 34, pp. 230-236, 2010. 
[6] 
                                                     
of 
people 
with 
dementia? 
Suggestions 
and 
reflections.," Scandinavian Journal of Occupational 
Therapy, vol. 13, pp. 101-112, 2006. 
[7] 
J. Hamann, et al., "Shared decision making for in-
patients with schizophrenia," Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica, vol. 114, pp. 265-273, 2006. 
[8] 
J. Hamann, S. Leucht, W. Kissling, "Shared decision 
making 
in 
psychiatry," 
Acta 
Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica, vol. 107, pp. 403-409, 2003. 
[9] 
S. L. Clever, et al., "Primary Care Patients' 
Involvement in Decision-Making Is Associated With 
Improvement in Depression," Medical Care, vol. 44 
(5), pp. 398-405, 2006. 
[10] 
E. Duncan, C. Best, S. Hagen, "Shared decision 
making interventions for people with mental health 
conditions," 
Cochrane 
Database 
of 
Systematic 
Reviews, 2010. 
[11] 
L. Magnusson, E. Hanson, M. Borg, "A literature 
review study of information and communication 
technology as a support for frail older people living at 
home and their family carers," Technology and 
Disability, vol. 16, pp. 223-235, 2004. 
[12] 
S. Lauriks, et al., "Review of ICT-based services for 
identified unmet needs in people with dementia," 
Aging Research  Reviews, vol. 6, pp. 223-246, 2007. 
[13] 
E. Hanson, L. Magnusson, H. Arvidsson, A. Claesson, 
J. Keady, M. Nolan, "Working together with persons 
with early stage dementia and their family members to 
design a user-friendly technology-based support 
service," Dementia: The International Journal of 
Social Research and Practice, vol. 6, pp. 411-434, Aug 
2007. 
[14] 
G. Elwyn, A. Edwards, P. Kinnersley, "Shared 
decision-making in primary care: the neglected second 
half of the consultation.," British Journal of General 
Practice, vol. 49, pp. 477-482, 1999. 
[15] 
S. Visser, T. Haaker, R. Menko, M. Hettinga, "From 
Buzz to Business: eHealth Innovation Matrix. Abstract 
submitted 
and 
accepted 
for 
Med-e-Tel 
2012, 
Luxembourg, April 18-20, 2012," 2012. 
[16] 
J. E. W. C. Van Gemert-Pijnen, et al., "Introducing a 
holistic framework for eHealth technologies," Journal 
of Medical Internet Research, vol. 13 (4):e111, 2011. 
[17] 
M. Hettinga, C. Nugent, R.J. Davies, F. Moelaert, H. 
Holthe, A.L. Andersson, "Managing the Transition 
from User Studies to Functional Requirements to 
Technical Specification," in Supporting People with 
Dementia Using Pervasive Health Technologies, 
Advanced Information and Knowledge Processing, 
Volume . ISBN 978-1-84882-550-5. Springer-Verlag 
London, 2010, p. 101, 2010. 
[18] 
M. Span, M. Hettinga, M.J.F.J. Vernooij-Dassen, J. 
Eefsting, C. Smits, "Involving People with Dementia 
in the Development of Supportive IT Applications: a 
Systematic Review," Ageing Research Reviews  vol. 
12, pp. 535-551, 2013. 
[19] 
E. Moll van Charante, et al., "NHG-Standaard 
Dementie (derde herziening)," Huisarts Wet, vol. 55, 
pp. 306-317, 2012. 
[20] 
AlzheimerNederland and Vilans, "Zorgstandaard 
Dementie," 
 
2012. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.alzheimer-
nederland.nl/media/11405/Zorgstandaard%20Dementi
e%20PDF.pdf  (Last accessed, 04-02-2013). 
 
 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

