Smartphone-Based Collaborative System for Wounds Tracking
Francis Faux
ISIS, Universit´e de Toulouse, INU Champollion, France
F81 100 Castres, France
Email: francis.faux@univ-jfc.fr
R´emi Bastide
and Nathalie Souf
and Rita Zgheib
IRIT, Universit´e de Toulouse, INU Champollion, France
F31 062 Toulouse, France
Email: firstname.lastname@irit.fr
Abstract—Tracking the evolution of wounds, ulcers or bedscars
is one of the important tasks of the care personnel in med-
ical institutions. We present an innovative, smartphone-based
software application aimed at supporting this task. By using
a standardized protocol complemented by image processing
techniques, the application allows for the reliable acquisition of
wound photographs, the assessment of wounds evolution, as well
as for the annotation of photographs with relevant metadata. We
detail the user-centered, scenario-based design process of this
application that has been undertaken in the Connected Health
Lab (CHL), our state-of-the-art usability lab dedicated to e-
Health applications.
Keywords–Wounds tracking; smartphone; collaborative system.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Tracking the evolution of wounds is an important medical
issue, and concerns health care professionals as well as patients
or their family. This paper presents a mobile application
attempting to go beyond the standard smartphone use, and
enabling medical experts to remotely view, analyze, and track
the wounds evolution. Chronic wounds are frequent. Among
them, foot or leg ulcers affect million of persons suffering
with type 2 diabetes. Bedsores (also called pressure sores or
pressure ulcers) [1], are one of the dangerous diseases that
an elder can face. They are a localized injury resulting from
prolonged pressure on the skin and plague persons who have
a reduced ability to move and change positions, and stay in
bed or a wheelchair most of the time. In oncology, chronic
wounds concern any wound even small, prone to chronicize
because of the cancerous disease and its treatment. Cancerous
wounds have the peculiarity to evolve according to treatments
efﬁciency instead of following a normal healing process.
Thanks to the popularity of mobile devices in clinics and
hospitals the need for a mobile collaborative wound tracking
application has arisen as the image remote analysis becomes an
attractive option. A smartphone application linked to a normal-
ized shooting protocol allows a chronological and iconographic
tracking of chronic wounds with a simple, practical, and
connected tool. For medical teams, the visual examination
of the healing process evolution has to be made easier and
more reliable, using successive pictures taken in a standardized
manner. For caregivers, this is to improve inter-professional
cooperation by securing the skills transfer. In the ﬁeld of tele-
care, remote wound tracking improves the patients’ quality of
life as patients only visit the wound clinic if necessary. Health
care costs are thus reduced thanks to a limited number of both
wound check appointments and travels to the clinic requiring
special transportation. Many general telehealth requirements
are concerned, such as quality of data transmission, privacy and
security, interoperability with legacy healtchcare systems, and
clear patient identiﬁcation. The process of wound assessment
is based on visual examination of picture by physicians, as well
as on wound descriptions which provide qualitative objectives
parameters (color phase peri-lesional state) and quantitative
ones (wound surface and depth). However, tracking a wounds
healing process across consecutive travel remains a difﬁcult
task for both clinicians and patients. Our project aims to
support the following information cycle (Figure 1):
•
data registering using the smartphone,
•
data analysis in order to share information,
•
decision, advice and feedback.
Figure 1.
Information cycle
In this paper, wounds tracking is considered in a global
and interdisciplinary approach, in relation with the patients
referring doctor, in order to reduce the impact of the wound
on the patients physical and psychological well-being. The
presented application also has an impact on the patients
environment. Thanks to an active communication with health
carers, the family is taking a more active part and consequently
feels reassured.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section
2 presents the related works, Section 3 outlines the key project
objective. Section 4 presents the wound tracking application
and Section 5 the standardized context of wound description.
Future works and conclusion are presented in Section 6.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Smartphones are ﬁnding their way into Healthcare systems
and one of the important ﬁelds of research today is wounds
assessment and tracking applications. In [2] [3], authors prove
smartphones ability to ensure accurate data. This implies a
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

more robust report of the safety of care and a better prevention
and monitoring of pressure ulcer. M-health can improve ef-
ciency and patient satisfaction. Based on high resolution cam-
eras integrated in smartphones, several research projects are
focusing on image acquisition and analysis of chronic wounds.
Topics raised in these projects are addressed in accordance
with two purposes: designing a wounds processing application
and deﬁning a collaborative system fostering patient-doctor
interaction. Processing wounds applications consists mainly
on the analysis of wound photos in order to detect and
recognize wounds size and color that are essential factors
for the evaluation of wounds. Several recent papers, such
as [4] aiming to automate chronic wound processing and
classiﬁcation, propose algorithms for size and color detection
of chronic wound images taken via smartphones. Their solution
is based on Mask Image components within capturing photos
and Camera calibration components within the segmentation
phase in order to determine the relative and absolute size of
the wound. These algorithms can be useful during the wound
stage recognition. Other approaches for image analysis have
been proposed like size determination from camera focus and
zoom [5] or detecting wound size via several different types
of sensors (sensor fusion approach) for increased accuracy. In
[6] the wound image analysis system for diabetic foot ulcers
covers size and color topics by performing image segmentation
and noise removal. The authors also present a region-detection
method for the prediction of wound boundaries, and they assess
the healing status based on a color evaluation method.
Several research works such as [7] [8] focus on the collab-
orative facilities which may improve treatment of wounds in
telemedicine. The proposed solutions aim at enhancing patient-
doctor interaction offering dynamic features that may reduce
the need for hospitalization and further facilitate a real-time
advice for patients. In [7], the authors present an integrated ap-
proach of publicly available chronic wounds databases through
a telemedicine platform. It offers the possibility to take high
resolution images of wounds via smartphones. They can then
be stored in a database with the associated metadata in order to
support their discovery, access and usability. With a unique id,
the patient can get prescribed medication from doctors, which
provides a smooth interaction between patient and doctors.
Patient history is easily accessible remotely by several doctors,
which enhances the diagnosis, treatment and routine check ups.
In [8] the main focus of the authors’ is the real-time interaction
via web technologies, enabling doctors to virtually collaborate
with their patients and colleagues via applications working
on mobile devices providing a collaborative annotation of
Digital imaging and communications in medicine (DICOM)
images. This research work addresses the issue of converting
DICOM images to a compact version that can run on mobile
devices before annotating and documenting images. Several
smartphone applications such as UrgoExpert [9], INFINYS
[10], Telap [11], Comedi-e [12] have been developed in order
to document chronic wounds and wound care and follow-up
the wound evolution. The main features of these applications
are the following:
•
Allowing nurses to deﬁne the wound’s class (ulcer,
bedsore) and its localization in the human body (Fig-
ure 2, right), as well as to visualize the wounds
evolution (exudat level, healing status (wet necrosis,
budding)) and the history of the treatment.
Figure 2.
Comedie-e smartphone application: heel bedsore
•
Photographs are captured via the smartphone camera,
classiﬁed (Figure 2, bottom) and recorded in the
smartphone storage card.
•
Contains measurement tools. The application gen-
erates wound histories in graphical and text-based
formats (Figure 2, top).
•
Enable accessing a medical prescription module or
consulting a protocol of treatment.
•
Transfer the photographs ans associated data via a
secure network to the patient health record.
III.
PROJECT OBJECTIVE
We propose a new software application for wound tracking.
The present paper focuses on the participatory design of the
application, with a practical goal of usability and efﬁciency.
We have taken a user-centered design process, taking advan-
tage of the facilities offered by the Connected Health Lab
(CHL), a state-of-the-art usability lab dedicated the e-Health
applications, located in the premises of the authors’ school
of Engineering. In the framework of this user-centered design
process, wounds pictures have been simulated using texture
modeling, in order to keep them replicable. The mobile appli-
cation is prototyped and assessed in the controlled environment
provided by our usability lab, that faithfully replicates the
working environments where the application will be deployed
and used (hospital patient’s rooms, or conventional home
rooms for patients under home care). Then we describe the
important points on which we have to focus to allow patients
and their caregivers to take a more active role in daily wound
care using a collaborative annotation functionality.
IV.
WOUND TRACKING
In real life conditions, wound pictures are captured each
time the nurse treats the wound and changes the dressing.
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 3.
Telap smartphone application, top: consecutive pictures , bottom:
wound contour measurement
To achieve pictures, basic recommendations have been
written and proposed to the health care professionals who
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

are taking wound pictures. The main ideas for these recom-
mendations are to improve the quality of the pictures and
consequently the quality of treatment:
•
Put a uniform background to better detect the wound
area.
•
No zoom to keep good resolution.
•
No move to avoid fuzzy picture.
•
Pacing a ruler reference in order to be able to recal-
culate the size of the wound.
•
Placing reference color table in order to recalculate
the colorimetry of the picture [13].
However, it is clear that difﬁculties remain to normalize
shooting to enable a simpler and more reliable assessment
of the wounds evolution. Pictures are often captured in an
empirical manner without maintaining a constant angle of
shooting (Figure 2, 3).
The difﬁculties mentioned by the healthcare professionals
we are working with are:
•
It is difﬁcult to take different pictures with the same
condition as the wound is changing and in on 3D
surfaces (for example a leg). As the patient moves it is
difﬁcult to retrieve a similar shoot through the different
patient’s visits (Figure 3). The wound evolves and the
lighting conditions are varying (Figure 3 a and b).
•
It is very difﬁcult to ﬁnd reference points on which
to align a picture as of course wound is evolving but
moreover the wound environment is not stable. For
example in case of ulcer wound, bad blood irrigation
induces leg swelling and even the contour lines of the
leg is not stable.
a)
b)
c)
d)
Figure 4.
Overlay: a) mask (picture 5), b) c) d) mask overlaid
In order to preserve an almost unchanging angle of shoot-
ing, we choose to overlaid a transparent mask image on the cur-
rent capture in our smartphone application. The same method
is used by T. K. Poon in [4]. The advantage of this approach
is that no peripheral devices to the smartphone camera are
necessary. We choose not to add temporary or permanent tattoo
of dots or lines around the wound or skin marker reference
points, which can serve as a pattern to ensure alignment of
successive mask. The transparent mask image which is only
the previous shot of the wound (Figure 4 a) is overlaid on
the current capture. When using the application, ﬁrst the nurse
positions the smartphone in order to approximatively recover
the previous shooting angle (Figure 4 b) then moves the
smartphone (Figure 4 c) to align as well as possible (Figure
4 d) the mask on the current wound. The mask area page is
visualized right after a new image acquisition. The outcome of
the application is a set of consecutive wound pictures captured
with same size and orientation.
A. Experimental simulation
Experiments have been realized in the environment of
simulation of the Connected Health Lab (CHL). The use case
of a heel bedsore evolution was chosen as simulation process
in the context of a this Living Lab which simulate the patient
route. The scenario of the study considers a seriously hurt
person because of a car accident (or an accident at work). The
person suffers of a polytrauma and is in a coma.
Weeks: 1, 2
3, 4
5, 6
7
Figure 5.
Use case: convalescence in the Living Lab
The ﬁgure 5 presents the patient’s convalescence of a
duration of 7 weeks and which includes four main phases:
1)
After managing the emergency (operation, stabiliza-
tion), the patient is hospitalized in intensive care
for two weeks, Heel pressure ulcer appears after a
week of hospitalization (week 1). Then the bedsore
deteriorates because of the patient’s immobility (week
2).
2)
As soon as the patient leaves the coma and wakes up,
he is transferred to an orthopedic service. However
the bedsore continues to deteriorate because of the
lack of mobility (weeks 3 and 4).
3)
The patient goes home with nursing home monitoring
(week 5). His bedsore begins to heal in week 6.
4)
The patient ﬁnding increasingly mobility, in particular
with the setting in the chair, the bedsore continues to
heal (week 7).
In order to realise a reproductive study, i.e., replicable model
of an ulcer pressure evolution, we decided to use a serie of
built picture of wounds, to serve as a benchmark for our
scenario and for the evaluation of the proposed prototype. We
synthesize the wound texture using Efros & Leung’s texture
synthetis algorithm [14]. This algorithm is chosen because
of its simplicity (Figure 6). Three reference images serve as
model for different stages of bedsore evolution. A rectangular
Stage 1
Stage 2
Top: Stage 3
Bottom: Stage 3+
Figure 6.
Wound texture synthesize and disk modelling the heel bedsore
window (in green on Figure 7) manually selected in each image
serves as texture source for the algorithm. After various tests,
a 3 × 3 window is used as algorithm parameter because of the
light granularity of the wound texture.
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Figure 7.
Stages of heel bedsore used for the texture synthesize
A simple disk of 16 mm of radius (area 8 mm2) models
the heel pressure ulcer. For stages 1 and 2 we select the zone
which looks like the real texture. The stage 3 is segmented in
TABLE I.
WOUND EVALUATION
CHL ZONE
INT. CARE
ORT. ROOM
HOME BED.
ARMCH.
WEEK
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
BEDSORE STADE
1
1
2
3
3+
3
2
two levels (called 3 and 3+) in function of level of necrosis in
the wound. The bedsore evolution is summarized in the table
I.
B. Analysis and results
A subjective analysis of the results (Figure 8) shows that
the application is relevant in medical context. Consecutive
pictures are captured with almost same scale and orientation
along the seven weeks of study and for the four rooms of
measurement.
The quantitative results indicate a variation of about 40% of
the area and 25% of the perimeter (Figure 9). The reason of
these variations comes from the difﬁculty to align the mask
over the current wound picture especially in the intensive
care room or the hospital room when the patient’s mobility
is reduced. At home bedroom the shooting is easier when the
patient can move its leg more easily.
Week:1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 8.
Result of tracking with the mask overlay
Figure 9.
Area and perimeter measurements
As conclusion from these experiments in the Living Lab,
the application usability is clearly insufﬁcient in such a context.
An evolution of the application is necessary. The shooting
must be easier and above all automatic. As future work, we
will study the possibility to introduce the correlation level
between the mask overlay and the current image in order to
facilitate the alignment between these two pictures. Moreover,
this study will be continue for various kinds of wounds
(cancerous wounds, ulcers, others bedsores) with varying areas
ans complex forms.
V.
STANDARDIZED CONTEXT OF WOUNDS DESCRIPTION
A. Introduction
In order to improve the informative status of the wound
pictures, it is important to add descriptions to the picture
itself. In this project, one of our objectives is to determine
recommendations to provide efﬁcient annotation tools able to
improve efﬁcient communication between the different actors
involved in the wound care (health care professionals as well
as patient or family), in the context of smartphone use. In
this paper we will present some of the lines of thinking we
have spotted. In order to communicate, health professionals
complete the information of the medical record but also use
other media as phone, mail, annotations and so on. Annotation
tasks are often used in the medical area as for example
post-it used for the asynchronous communication of health
care professionals. As mentioned in [15] ”practitioners use
annotations to act: either to enrich the annotated document
or as transitory support of knowledge used to create new
knowledge (recorded or not in a document). Annotations are
useful not only to keep pertinent knowledge in the health
record, but also to help practitioners to collaborate when the
documents show their limits”(p. 4).
Figure 10.
Wounds annotations of Pange et al.
Annotation systems are proposed in many telemedicine
systems using smartphones, as shown in Figure 10 for mam-
mography (annotation from [16]). As friendly annotation in-
terfaces are difﬁcult to provide through smartphone devices, in
order to get usable and efﬁcient tools, we are convinced that it
is extremely important to better understand how and why the
annotation process should be developed.
B. Analyse
Three main issues for annotation process were detected and
are presented in this paper:
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

Why are the annotations required.
In a wound an-
notation system, the objectives of the proposed annotations
could be very different. On the one hand, some annotations
are used to inform on general items such as Patient ID or
Patient Name. These data are not directly involved with wound
characteristics. Such annotations must be re-entered and dupli-
cated on the smartphone application when the interoperability
between smartphone and health care record are difﬁcult to
perform. On the other hand, some of the data bring speciﬁc
awareness on an aspect of the wound : a highlighted array
of interest gives the subjective point of view of a health care
professional. Some annotations could then be automatically
performed while improving the connection between system,
adding connected objects into the wound care process (such
as automatic detection of the ID of the patient) while some
annotations are speciﬁcally involved on the care expertise.
Being aware of these speciﬁcities will help to better understand
the annotation tasks and to focus on the needed interfaces.
When and how annotations are completed. Annotations
should be fed when the picture is taken or could be completed
during an asynchronous task of wound image description.
Items used for annotation can be from different natures:
standardized description, visual annotation such as colored
arrows, speciﬁc descriptions obtained after speciﬁc treatments
such as wound surface calculation or colorimetry indices. By
better understanding the annotation process, we hope to be
able to propose efﬁcient systems able to adapt to the different
contexts of use.
What is concerned with the annotation task. Annotation
tasks could bring information on three different levels of
knowledge.
•
The ﬁrst level concerns the picture itself and the
shooting environment. It could be important to remem-
ber the parameters linked to the shooting so that the
quality on the picture could be memorized. Quality
of context description could help to qualify a further
picture comparison. Metadata of picture description
used in DICOM standard are some of the information
to be kept, but the context of shooting referring to the
recommendation can also be used.
•
The second level is used in order to memorized the
context of the individual who is concerned by the
picture: for instance name of the patient, part of body
concerned.
•
Last level deals with speciﬁc wound characteristics.
The goal is to establish a standardized context of
wounds description in order to ensure interoperability
of information systems and to improve exchanges
between healthcare systems actors.
By better identifying the need of information on each level,
we will be able to better determine the needed information.
The project will then address the issues related to picture
description, annotation of wound pictures, and modelling of
factual wounds tracking (be able to reinterpret picture in order
to build meta-data useful for caregivers). We will provide a
model of annotation for wound. Using the different point of
view that we have mentioned on wound care annotation, we
want to propose an ontological framework.
Analysis of existing annotation systems and previous work
such as the one performed by the wound ontology [17], or
by the openEHR Clinical Knowledge Manager working group
[18], as mentionned by Gallaguer [19] will be considered and
extended by confronting them with the expertise of health
professionals involved in this project. Constraints due to smart-
phone use, inducing mobility, small screen, distribution of
information will be also detailed.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVE
We have presented a mobile, smartphone-based e-health
application that supports caregivers in their important activ-
ity of monitoring the evolution of wounds. The application
combines innovative mobile interaction techniques with image
processing and analysis in order to allow for a reliable and
usable clinical use. The design of this application has fol-
lowed a user-centered process, where both the standardized
photograph-taking procedure and the image processing steps
have been incrementally designed and validated in a controlled
environment, the CHL living lab dedicated to e-Helath ap-
plications. The application is currently a validated prototype.
Our future steps will be to perform a clinical validation and
assessment of the application, where it will be used by care
professionals in a real-life setting, with real patients. We also
plan to improve the image-processing components, and to take
into account the interoperability of the application with legacy
health information systems (e.g., electronic health records).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Bruno Roussel, research engineer, for his involvement in
the test procedure in the Connected Health Lab and Laurent
Grgoire, International coordinator, for his proofreading and
editing of the English language.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Zgheib, R. Bastide, and E. Conchon, “A semantic web-of-things
architecture for monitoring the risk of bedsores,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computational Science and Computational
Intelligence (CSCI), Las Vegas, USA.
IEEE, december 2015.
[2]
K. Wac, “Smartphone as a personal, pervasive health informatics
services platform: literature review,” Yearbook of Medical Informatics,
no. 2, 2012, pp. 83–93.
[3]
E. M. Quinn et al., “Clinical Unity and Community Empowerment: The
Use of Smartphone Technology to Empower Community Management
of Chronic Venous Ulcers through the Support of a Tertiary Unit,” PLoS
one, vol. 8, no. 11, 2013, p. e78786.
[4]
T. W. K. Poon and M. R. Friesen, “Algorithms for Size and Color
Detection of Smartphone Images of Chronic Wounds for Healthcare
Applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, 2015, pp. 1799–1808.
[5]
P. J. F. White, W. P. Blake, and M. R. Friesen, “Algorithms for
Smartphone and Tablet Image Analysis for Healthcare Applications,”
IEEE Access, vol. 2, 2014, pp. 831–840.
[6]
L. Wang et al., “Smartphone-Based Wound Assessment System for
Patients With Diabetes,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering,
vol. 62, no. 2, 2015, pp. 477–488.
[7]
C. Chakraborty, B. Gupta, and S. K. Ghosh, “Mobile metadata assisted
community database of chronic wound images,” Wound Medicine,
vol. 6, 2014, pp. 34–42.
[8]
M. F. Pasha et al., “An android-based mobile medical image viewer
and collaborative annotation: Development issues and challenges,”
JDCTA: International Journal of Digital Content Technology and its
Applications, vol. 6, no. 1, 2012, pp. 208–217.
[9]
“UrgoExpert,” URL: http://www.urgoexpert.fr[accessed: 2016-20-03].
[10]
“INFINYS,” URL: http:// www.sffpc.org[accessed: 2016-20-03].
[11]
“telap,” URL: http://www.telap.org [accessed: 2016-20-03].
[12]
“Comedi-e,” URL: http://www.esante-picardie.com [accessed: 2016-20-
03].
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

[13]
S. Van Poucke et al., “Automatic colorimetric calibration of human
wounds,” BMC medical imaging, vol. 10, no. 1, 2010, p. 7.
[14]
A. A. Efros et al., “Texture synthesis by non-parametric sampling,” in
Proceedings of the Seventh IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, vol. 2.
IEEE, 1999, pp. 1033–1038.
[15]
N. Bricon-Souf et al., “Informal notes to support the asynchronous
collaborative activities,” International Journal of Medical Informatics,
vol. 76, 2007, pp. S342–S348.
[16]
A. Prange and D. Sonntag, “Smartphone sketches for instant knowledge
acquisition in breast imaging,” Proceedings of the Sketch: Pen and
Touch Recognition Workshop in conjunction with IUI14, 2014.
[17]
“Introduction
to
the
wound
ontology
consortium,”
URL:
http://www.slideshare.net/SvenVanPoucke/woundontology1
[accessed:
2016-20-03].
[18]
“Open EHR, Clinical knowledge Manager, Inspection of open Wound,”
URL: http://openehr.org/ckm/ [accessed: 2016-20-03].
[19]
B. A. Gallagher, “Wound bed assessment using calibrated images
and representation in openehr,” Master’s thesis, University of Dublin,
Ireland, 2012.
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

