 
 
Communication between Mentor and Mentee Using Videoconferencing in Surgical 
Training
Line Lundvoll Warth 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
Tromsø, Norway 
University of Tromsø, The Arctic University of Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
email: line.lundvoll.warth@ehealthresearch.no 
 
 
Abstract—In 
surgical 
training, 
mentors 
and 
mentees 
communicate to expand mentees’ technical skills. However, 
access to mentors for education in surgical subspecialties is a 
challenge in many hospitals. Videoconferencing (VC), which 
enables real-time communication between mentors and 
mentees in different geographical locations, can overcome this 
challenge. This study examines a practice in Norway in which 
VC is used to provide education on a specific laparoscopic 
surgical procedure. Specifically, the study explores the 
characteristics of communication between a mentor and 
mentee using VC and how it affected communication. The 
empirical material consists of video recordings of an 
educational trajectory that included eight patient cases and 
focus group meetings. The communication reveals knowledge 
gaps and their closure through establishment of a shared 
understanding. In this way, VC supported the learning of 
technical skills while enabling feedback on non-technical 
elements. Both the mentor and mentee could reach their full 
potentials—expanding their own communicative skills and 
reflecting on their own abilities. VC also affected the 
relationship between the mentor and mentee, who were peers 
and colleagues rather than participants in the traditional 
mentee–mentor relationship. The results of this study will 
enable the development of an activity for non-technical skills to 
become relevant using VC. 
Keywords—non-technical 
skills; 
surgical 
training; 
communication; videoconferencing; qualitative study. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Although technical skills in surgery are obviously 
important, communication in the operating room (OR) plays 
an important role in patient safety, as operations are social 
situations in which tasks are accomplished through 
communication between team members. Communication 
errors within surgical teams have been studied in terms of 
communication failures [1], and studies have attempted to 
explain how surgical procedures are influenced by the 
quality and efficiency of teamwork. The results have shown 
that deficiencies in teamwork in the OR contribute 
significantly to adverse events and patient harm [2], as there 
is a strong relationship between teamwork failure and 
technical errors [3]. In other words, a good surgeon is more 
than just a good “pair of hands” [4]; he or she must be a good 
team player, must listen and communicate with colleagues, 
and must empower colleagues to reach their full potential 
[4]. These qualities are related to collective and cognitive 
competence, defined as non-technical skills. 
Non-technical skills are gaining importance in surgery 
and surgical training [4]. The Royal College of Surgeons of 
Edinburgh defines non-technical skills as skills and 
behaviors related to situational awareness, decision-making, 
communication, teamwork, and leadership [5]. Others have 
defined 
non-technical 
skills 
as 
interpersonal 
(e.g., 
communication, teamwork), cognitive (e.g., decision-
making, situational awareness), and personal resource skills 
(e.g., coping with stress and fatigue) [6]. Communication 
and teamwork related to decision-making are also important 
non-technical skills. All of these skills are essential for 
surgeons to operate safely in the OR, and, although they are 
developed in an informal and tacit manner [5], they need to 
be explicitly addressed in training. 
Surgical training involves individual work and guidance 
from an expert mentor. Mentees gain significant skills and 
experience by participating in simulated environments with 
virtual simulators and models prior to performing procedures 
on patients in the OR. Work in the OR involves 
collaboration; each team member has his or her own tasks to 
perform. Although each team member’s individual technical 
skills are important, good collaboration is necessary for a 
good surgical outcome [7][8]. Hence, both mentors and 
mentees need to develop non-technical skills in surgical 
training. A recent review of surgical telementoring reported 
limited understanding of VC in surgical practice; the review 
concluded that little attention has been paid to the 
educational and non-technical elements but has instead been 
focused on piloting the technology [9][10]. 
Surgical training is an educational process in which the 
mentor’s and mentee’s competence and work serve as parts 
of a collective activity and communicative process. Both 
communication and teamwork are important for modern 
surgical education and practice; indeed, a review of the role 
of non-technical skills in surgery stated that the key root 
cause of surgical errors worldwide is a lack of non-technical 
skills [3]. The review also provided evidence that non-
technical skills have an effect on technical performance and 
suggested that training that is focused on improving non-
technical skills can improve teamwork, performance, and 
safety in the OR and thereby positively contribute to patient 
outcomes [3]. This indicates that there is a need to focus on 
the development of non-technical skills in surgical training. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
In surgical training, access to local mentors for surgical 
subspecialties 
is 
a 
challenge 
in 
many 
hospitals. 
Videoconferencing (VC) is a technology that enables real-
time communication between mentors and mentees, even if 
they are in different geographical locations. It can thus help 
to overcome the issue of lack of access to local experts. This 
study focuses on a practice in Norway during which VC was 
used as a tool for surgical education concerning a specific 
hernia procedure. 
Research on VC has stressed its educational benefits [9] 
and described VC for mentoring as an effective way to 
develop surgical skills [11]. However, within this field, 
special focus on communication and team performance is 
needed to better understand the factors that influence surgical 
outcomes [12]. Specifically, a systematic literature review of 
communication in the OR concluded that further detailed 
observational research that provides detailed transcripts and 
analyses of communication patterns is needed to gain a better 
understanding of non-technical skills [13]. 
This study explores communication and teamwork 
between a mentor and mentee using VC as well as the 
knowledge needed to complete a surgery. Even though it is 
important to gather information about the outcomes of work 
in the OR, it is also necessary to gain a detailed 
understanding of the processes and communication patterns 
that lead to those outcomes, and these are often overlooked 
in favor of technical skills. This study therefore aims to 
provide insight into how mentors and mentees organize and 
accomplish collaborative work through VC in the OR. 
This study expands upon previous work by investigating 
knowledge-sharing between a mentor and mentee—
specifically, the manner in which individual knowledge is 
shared and constructed—to ensure that mentees apply best 
practices. The use of VC and communication between a 
mentor and mentee were followed in real-time surgical 
training regarding a laparoscopic hernia procedure. The 
characteristics of communication between the mentor and 
mentee through VC and how VC affects communication 
were explored. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 
describes the framework and scenario of the study, Section 
III describes the methods used, Section IV presents the 
results, and Section V presents the discussion. The article 
ends with Conclusions and Acknowledgments. 
II. 
SCENARIO AND FRAMEWORK 
Laparoscopy is a visual technique that uses several small 
ports in the abdomen with an instrument inserted through 
each. The procedure is visual, as a small camera is inserted 
into the patient`s abdomen. The images obtained from the 
camera are transmitted to a monitor in the OR and enable 
communication with participants outside the OR. In the case 
examined in this article, the mentee in the surgical team used 
VC to communicate with a geographically distant mentor. 
The mentee was experienced with laparoscopy; before 
practicing this procedure on patients, he underwent the 
traditional education pathway for a new procedure (i.e., 
simulations using models and videos of the procedure). 
Communication in the OR was framed with an activity 
theoretical perspective [14], focusing on the complex 
interactions between individual subjects and their wider 
context [15]. The mentor and mentee were part of a 
collaborative educational and communicative process 
mediated by a cultural tool (i.e., VC). This approach enabled 
expansion of the unit of analysis of education and learning 
beyond the individual [16]. The collaborative activity 
happened between the activity system of the mentor and 
mentee, enabling the use of VC in practice. 
III. 
METHODS 
This is an ethnographic study [17] that explores the use of 
VC for communication between a mentor and a mentee 
within an educational process. The study was carried out 
from 2014–2016 in Norway and involved observations, 
interviews, focus groups, and field notes. Five semi-
structured interviews, which lasted a total of six hours, took 
place from 2015–2016, and all were transcribed and 
analyzed. For three months in 2014 and 2015, surgical 
training of a mentee on the specific hernia procedure was 
observed and videotaped. The dataset covers the entire 
educational trajectory, which included eight cases and six 
hours of video observations. The whole dataset was 
transcribed. All participants participated in two focus group 
meetings to discuss the procedure. These meetings were also 
videotaped and transcribed. The data protection officer at 
the selected hospital approved the study, and the study 
participants provided informed consent. 
The analysis focused on the interactions between the 
mentor and the mentee, particularly when tensions appeared 
[17] and knowledge gaps needed to be closed, which 
directed the opportunities for expanding verbal decision-
making and non-technical skills [18]. The observations 
allowed communication and team performance (as opposed 
to individuals) to be studied. The eight sessions revealed 
communication patterns and non-technical skills (but not 
individual deficiencies) in a series of operations that utilized 
VC for educational purposes. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The surgical training examined in this study was 
organized into eight sessions. The first three sessions 
occurred onsite in the OR and involved preparation for the 
VC, and the next five sessions used VC. After the eighth 
session, the mentee was considered an expert in this 
procedure and the VC sessions ceased [19]. 
A. Communication using VC 
The characteristics of communication using VC are 
illustrated in Figure 1. This extract includes data starting 
from the four-minute mark of the seventh session, which 
was videotaped for about 25 minutes. 
The mentee referred to a history of communication by 
suggesting a course of action for the day based on previous 
sessions. Specifically, he suggested cauterization and 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
pulling the sack into the abdominal cavity. He then asked 
the mentor what he thought about the suggestion (utterance 
1). The mentor supported the proposal but had a hunch that 
simply pulling the sack was not adequate, based on his own 
practice with stitches (utterance 2). 
 
Figure 1.  Communication using VC. 
The mentee referred to the hernia as deep and 
acknowledged the suggestion to use stitches (utterance 3). 
The mentor then confirmed that it might be hard to just 
cauterize (utterance 4). The mentee considered going deep 
with the instrument (utterance 5), and the mentor elaborated 
on the depth (utterance 6). After this reflection, the mentee 
decided to use stiches (utterance 7), a decision that was 
supported by the mentor (utterance 8). The mentee 
reconsidered his decision to try to pull the sack into the 
abdominal cavity and asked the mentor to support this 
decision (utterance 9). The mentor did support the decision 
and elaborated on the opportunity to perform cauterization 
without injuring the patient (utterance 10). The mentee 
confirmed the shared understanding (utterance 11). 
The characteristics of the communication involved skills 
related to choosing an appropriate course of action and a 
shared understanding. First, the mentee presented a 
knowledge gap (i.e., whether to use stiches). This tension 
between the mentor’s and mentee’s knowledge provided an 
opportunity to close the knowledge gap, thereby expanding 
the collective activity of decision-making. The mentor 
supported the suggestion while mentioning the tension 
between the possible actions (i.e., pulling the sack or using 
stiches). Drawing upon the mentor’s experience and 
knowledge, the mentor and mentee communicated, closing 
the knowledge gap by establishing a shared understanding. 
This shared understanding was based on a collective activity 
in which the participants were able to bridge the gap and 
perform a successful procedure. 
B. Reviewing the procedure 
After two training sessions, focus group meetings were 
held to review the sessions and allow the mentor and mentee 
to discuss the content and how VC affected communication. 
Figure 2 illustrates how this meeting progressed. The 
mentor asked the mentee about his experience in one of the 
sessions and how he could improve as a mentor (utterance 
1). The mentee pointed out the tension between anticipated 
and “comfortable” knowledge, referring to the fact that the 
mentee had watched the training videos of the procedure 
(utterance 2). The mentor asked if the mentee felt that he 
provided too little instruction during the session (utterance 
3). As the session went well, he was not sure whether there 
was a gap in knowledge between the mentor and mentee, 
but guidance would have made the mentee feel “safer” 
during decision-making (utterance 4). The mentor then 
reflected on the communication between the mentor and 
mentee, illustrating the tension between the traditional way 
of locally training mentees (in which the expert mentor 
holds a more powerful position) and the use of VC as a pre-
planned tool for collaborative distributed work (in which the 
mentor and mentee act as colleagues; utterance 5). 
 
Figure 2.  Reviewing the procedure. 
Overall, the extract shows the mentor’s and mentee’s 
reflections on their own communicative skills, including 
how the mentor related to those around him. By exchanging 
reflections after the surgical procedure, the mentor could 
better understand his performance as a mentor. This learning 
activity led to a shared understanding between the activity 
systems of the mentee and mentor. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The purpose of this study was to explore the 
characteristics of communication between a mentor and 
mentee using VC and how VC affected communication. 
Observing communication using VC (Figure 1) enabled 
identification of successful communication and teamwork. 
This educational process was a collective activity mediated 
by VC as a cultural tool. Tensions in the work illustrated the 
limitations of the mentee’s individual knowledge, opening 
up opportunities to bridge the knowledge gap between the 
expert mentor and mentee. Collective decision-making led to 
learning opportunities, which allowed the mentee to become 
an expert in the procedure. Hence, communication using VC 
supported the learning of technical skills. 
VC also has the capacity to support collaborative (i.e., 
non-technical) skills. The communication examined here 
refers to prior sessions (a history) and the progress made in 
expanding the mentee’s knowledge. The mentor reflected on 
his prior actions and modified his teaching according to the 
mentee’s needs. 
The emphasis on decision-making skills in the training 
allowed the mentee to develop skills related to assessing 
situations and agreeing on an appropriate course of action 
within the team. Even though there was a gap in the 
mentee’s knowledge that the mentor had to bridge, the 
mentor and mentee discussed options in a balanced way, 
considering the consequences and benefits of each option, 
and maintained flexibility while making the shared decision. 
Afterwards, the mentor explained why he recommended a 
specific course of action. 
The communication built upon traditional problem-
solving in the OR. Laparoscopy is a visual procedure in 
which a small camera is inserted into the patient’s abdomen 
and the image is transmitted to a monitor in the OR. In this 
case, VC was used to show the mentee the same images seen 
by the mentor. Unlike in traditional training, where both the 
mentor and mentee are in the OR, this training occurred 
using VC. This created tension between the traditional 
method of local training, in which the mentor and mentee are 
both at the patient’s bedside and are aware of all activity in 
the OR, and remote guidance, in which the mentor has expert 
knowledge of the procedure but not complete knowledge of 
all the activity in the OR. 
The problem-solving process and the technical skills are 
both based on the same information, using the monitor. 
Nevertheless, there is teamwork in the OR that cannot be 
experienced by the mentor using VC. Both mentor and 
mentee develop awareness of the situation, which includes 
all activities in the OR and the pre- and post-operative 
situations of the patient. Hence, as both have responsibilities, 
the mentee is more of a colleague than a resident. 
When reviewing the procedure (Figure 2), the mentor and 
mentee discussed both the technical skills and dynamics of 
communication patterns (i.e., non-technical skills). This 
allowed the mentor to support the mentee while improving 
his own communicative skills through reflection. This 
activity also supported the mentee in reflecting on his own 
communicative skills. 
VC was used because the mentee had experience, but not 
in this specific procedure; the competences of the mentor and 
mentee were therefore unequal. However, the VC tool 
seemed to reformulate this inequality between the mentor 
and mentee and redefine the traditional mentee/resident–
mentor/expert relationship as one between peers and 
colleagues. Based on the division of labor, the mentee held 
the leadership in the OR, but the mentor was the expert on 
the procedure (defined as the picture on the monitor). This 
allowed non-technical skills, rather than just technical skills, 
to be developed, and enabled the participants to reflect on 
how teamwork could be improved. 
Communication is shaped by organizational culture and 
historical activities, which play an important role in how 
work is performed. Communication problems are attributed 
to a lack of clarity regarding roles and power relationships 
[14]. Implementing VC for collaboration in surgical 
education challenges traditional surgical training and 
communication patterns between mentors and mentees. 
Specifically, the results of this study illustrate that VC 
promotes effective reasoning and good communication 
between mentors and mentees. Communication and 
teamwork related to decision-making are characterized by 
reflection on performed work, which leads to the 
development of non-technical skills and the ability to 
emphasize non-technical skills as important in surgical 
training. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In the case studied, collaboration occurred between the 
activity systems of the mentor and mentee, and their 
communication and use of VC in practice were examined. It 
was found that VC allowed knowledge exchange during 
surgical training, resulting in the mentee becoming an expert 
on this procedure. The results provide insights into the way 
in which surgical training and practice are performed, the use 
of VC within surgical training in the OR, and how VC 
facilitates the development of communication skills. 
Incorporating VC into surgical training within the current 
training paradigm would allow both technical and non-
technical elements to be included in the feedback provided to 
mentees. The use of VC in surgical training could be a step 
toward raising awareness of non-technical skills, facilitating 
changes in the workplace, and emphasizing collaborative 
skills (i.e., communication and teamwork) among both 
mentors and mentees in the educational process (and, later, 
in daily work). In this way, VC could help produce a new 
generation of surgeons who are competent in all the skills 
required for knowledge expansion and safe, high-quality 
patient care. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to the Northern Regional Health Authority for 
funding this project (HST-1181-14) and to all the surgeons 
who participated in the study. 
 
 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Lingard et al., “Communication failures in the operating room: an 
observational classification of recurrent types and effects,” J. Qual. 
Saf. Health Care, vol. 13, pp. 330–334, 2004. 
[2] N. Sevdalis et al., “Quantitative analysis of intraoperative 
communication in open and laparoscopic surgery,” Surg. Endosc., 
vol. 26, pp. 2931–2938, Oct. 2012. 
[3] L. Hull et al., “The impact of nontechnical skills on technical 
performance in surgery: a systematic review,” J. Am. Coll. Surg., vol. 
214, pp. 214–230, 2012, doi:10.1016/j.jamcollsurg. 2011.10.016. 
[4] R. A. Agha, A. J. Fowler, and N. Sevdaliscet, “The role of non-
technical skills in surgery” Ann. Med. Surg., vol. 4, pp. 422–427. 
[5] The Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. NOTSS: Non-technical 
Skills 
for 
Surgeons. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.abdn.ac.uk/iprc/notss/. 2020.01.21. 
[6] R. Flin, P. O’Connor, and M. Crichton, Safety at the Sharp End: A 
Guide to Nontechnical Skills, Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008. 
[7] B. S. Nedrebo et al., “Survival effect of implementing national 
treatment strategies for curatively resected colonic and rectal cancer,” 
Br. J. Surg., vol. 98, pp. 716–723, 2011. 
[8] N. J. Birkmeyer et al., “Safety culture and complications after 
bariatric surgery,” Ann. Surg., vol. 257, pp. 260–265, 2013. 
[9] K. M. Augestad et al., Surgical telementoring in knowledge 
translation – clinical outcomes and educational benefits: A 
comprehensive review. Surg. Innov., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 273–281, 
2013. 
[10] K. M. Augestad et al., Educational implications for surgical 
telementoring: a current review with recommendations for future 
practice, policy, and research. Surg. Endosc., vol. 31, pp. 3836–3846, 
2017. 
[11] P. Lamba, “Teleconferencing in medical education: a useful tool,” 
Australas. Med. J., vol. 4, pp. 442–447, 2011. 
[12] L. Panait et al., “Telementoring versus on-site mentoring in virtual 
reality-based surgical training,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 20, pp. 113–118, 
2006. 
[13] C. Vincent, K. Moorthy, S. Sarker, A. Chang, and A. W. Darzi, 
“Systems approaches to surgical quality and safety. From concept to 
measurement,” Ann. Surg., vol. 239, 475–482, 2004. 
[14] Y. Engestrӧm, “Expansive learning at work: towards an activity 
theory reconceptualization,” J. Educ. Work, vol. 14, pp. 133–156, 
2001. 
[15] S. M. Weldon, T. Korkiakangas, J. Bezemer, and R. Kneebone, 
“Communication in the operating theatre,” Br. J. Surg., vol. 100, pp. 
1677–1688, Dec. 2013, doi:10.1002/bjs.9332. 
[16] Y. Engeström and H. Kerosuo, “From workplace learning to inter-
organizational learning and back: the contribution of activity theory. 
Guest editorial” J. Workplace Learn., vol. 19, pp. 336–342, 2007. 
[17] D. Silverman, Interpreting Qualitative Data: Methods for Analysing 
Talk, Text and Interaction, London: Sage Publications, 2001. 
[18] P. Linell, Approaching Dialogue: Talk, Interaction and Contexts in 
Dialogical Perspective, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1998. 
[19] L. 
L. 
Warth, 
“Creating 
learning 
opportunities 
by 
using 
videoconferencing in surgical education,” Stud. Health Technol. 
Inform., vol. 262, pp. 15–18, 2019, doi:10.3233/SHTI190005.
 
 
 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

