CyMED: a Plateform for Supporting Collaboration and Coordination of Home 
Care Teams using a Process Oriented Approach  
 
Awatef Hicheur Cairns, Nathalie Dos Reis, Andrew Cairns, Christophe Lefrère, Gilles Leloup, Antonio Caicao, 
Jean-Luc Strauss  
 ALTRAN Research 
Vélizy-Villacoublay, France 
e-mails: {awatef.hicheurcairns, natalie.dosreis, christohpe.lefrere, gilles.leloup, antonio.caico, jeanluc.strauss}@altran.com 
 
 
Abstract — Recently, more and more patients are treated in 
their homes by multiple health and social care    actors, from 
different organizations, public or private, characterized by 
their mobility and their schedule variability. In this paper, we 
investigate the difficulties inherent in home care collaboration 
related to communication, process orchestration and planning. 
To handle these kinds of difficulties, we present our 
coordination platform called Cyber Management of Elderly 
and the Disabled (CyMED), whose ambition is to use a mix of 
cooperation and process oriented tools, in order to facilitate the 
cooperative work of health and social care actors. With this 
approach, we aim to highlight the importance of organizational 
aspects in the context of homecare. 
Keywords-HomeCare; Coordination; Flexible Workflow; 
Declarative Workflows; Healthcare social network. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Recently, healthcare in industrialized countries is facing 
great challenges regarding the increase in the elderly 
population and people with chronic diseases which require 
monitoring and care management on a long-term basis [5] 
[6]. Consequently, industrial countries have to reconcile 
different goals: improving efficiency, personalization and 
equity of healthcare delivery while limiting financial 
resources [5]. Nowadays, to handle this issue, more and 
more patients are treated and taken care of in their own 
homes. Home healthcare (i.e., homecare) includes all health 
services (e.g., medical, para-medical and nursing), social 
services (e.g., domestic home-help) and financial services 
(e.g., insurance) provided for the needs of the patient at 
home [14]. Moreover, modern homecare propose new 
technological services (sensors, robots and applications) to 
monitor patients at home [1][5][6]. Homecare services 
(human, technique, technological) are often delivered 
completely independently by stakeholders belonging to 
various organizations from the public or private sectors. 
Family members and relatives are also involved in the care 
delivery [14]. Consequently, the collaboration and the 
coordination get more complicated between the homecare 
providers due to the fact that they belong to different 
organizational units often with different organizational 
structures, goals, knowledge, way of working and 
responsibility regarding health and life privacy [1] [6]. Over 
the last few years, many European or French projects have 
been developed for the homecare improvement [5]. Most of 
these projects focus on a dissemination of tele-monitoring 
solutions via an extensive use of sensors and robots at 
home, leaving issues related to process (coordination) 
aspects unanswered [5] [12]. From our viewpoint, the needs 
of homecare stakeholders are more focused on improving 
the organization and the coordination of their activities than 
on increasing the use of telemedicine at home [4]. In 
particular, managers from different homecare organizations 
need to set up common goals and routines for collaboration 
at the operational level and means to follow-up the quality 
of delivered services [14]. In this paper, we explore further 
the needs for collaboration between different health and 
social care providers, relying on interviews, surveys and 
scientific literature. To handle the coordination issues in 
homecare, we are developing a platform called Cyber 
Management of the Elderly and the Disabled (CyMED), for 
the orchestration of the different kind of homecare services. 
The suggested solutions are based on a patient and process 
oriented perspective to emphasize the importance of the 
organizational aspect. The remainder of this paper is 
organized as follows. Section II presents the different types 
of homecare processes. Section III presents our approach to 
define and orchestrate homecare processes. Next, the 
CyMED platform is presented in Section IV. Section V 
presents a survey of healthcare social networks and 
platforms existing in the market or from research projects. 
Finally, section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
HOMECARE PROCESSES 
Compared with hospital-based care, Homecare introduces 
new functions, new activities and new actors (such as the 
family, the coordinator, the equipment provider) in the 
process of care (see Figure 1) [1][6]. The only means of 
communication 
between 
the 
different 
homecare 
stakeholders is a simple physical notebook where each 
stakeholder notes the date of the visit, the actions performed 
or the patient health’s change [3][4][17]. A multitude of 
other information media may also be used: medical records, 
social service records, fax, telephone, etc. Indeed, the 
cooperation of these stakeholders is asynchronous since they 
communicate rarely directly or meet face to face [16]. 
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Moreover, homecare stakeholders differ widely regarding 
their way of working, need of information and technical 
skills. For instance, healthcare providers are often computer 
literate and possess their own information system support. 
On the contrary, social providers and elderly people have 
often little computer literacy and may be reluctant to use a 
computer-based system in their daily work.  
 
 
Figure 1. Homecare ecosystem 
From our study of the activities in the field of homecare, we 
deduced that homecare processes are by nature inter-
organizational, collaborative and ad-hoc. We distinguish, 
principally, two types of homecare processes [4]: 
• 
An organisational care process which encapsulates 
administrative and logistic sub-processes and can be 
broken down into several phases: patients’ requests 
and admissions, organisation of care processes (e.g., 
the elaboration of care plans and patients’ 
discharges) and support processes (related to the 
logistical, financial and quality aspects). 
• 
A care process made up of day-to-day care 
activities delivered at home by nurses, doctors, 
social services or the family’s patient members.  
Managing this kind of processes with traditional 
workflow systems is complex due their following features 
[1][3]: 
A. Personalized processes 
Although, homecare administrative and logistic processes 
are generally well-structured and often repetitive, care 
processes are, on the contrary, unstructured and very specific 
to each patient’s heath state and environment. 
B. Collaborative Processes  
 Homecare processes and responsibilities are distributed 
over multiple participants, with their own goals and 
procedures, working together to achieve a common objective 
(the wellbeing of the patient). They are also strongly 
influenced by the experience and the knowledge of the 
stakeholders (i.e., knowledge-intensive processes) [7]. 
C. Dynamic processes 
Homecare processes require continuous adaptation of 
their structures due to the change in laws and care protocols. 
They also need to adapt their behavior when exceptional 
situations occur (arising from human or material issues) [9].  
D. Time constrained processes  
There are different types of temporal constraints on 
homecare processes: scheduled tasks (with a fixed start and 
end date), unscheduled tasks (e.g., when a physician consults 
blood test results) and tasks with frequency over time (e.g., a 
patient need two nurse visits per week for three months). 
E. Regulated Processes  
The homecare domain is governed by general rules and 
constraints related to healthcare protocols, data privacy and 
actions’ traceability. 
 
III. 
A FLEXIBLE WORKFLOW APPROACH TO MANAGE 
HOMECARE PROCESSES 
There is a need for technological support in controlling and 
monitoring homecare processes to increase their efficiency 
and ensure the continuity of care. Workflow technology is 
potentially a means for achieving this end. Given the 
specificity and the inherent flexibility of homecare 
processes, we selected the Yet Another Workflow Language 
(YAWL) 
workflow 
management 
system 
for 
the 
coordination of work among homecare participants [10].  
We justify the choice of the YAWL system as follows: First 
of all, YAWL is an open source academic system and its 
modelling language is very expressive. In particular, YAWL 
allows modelling and implementing cancellation and 
multiple instantiation of tasks (e.g., shared tasks), which are 
often encountered in homecare processes (see Figure 2). 
Second, YAWL offers unique support for flexible processes 
through the use of “worklets”. In this way, specific 
activities, whose implementation is left open, are linked to a 
repository of possible actions (i.e. worklets). Based on 
contextual information, the desired action is chosen. Also, 
during enactment it is possible to add new actions to the 
repository. Finally, YAWL offers a link to the workflow 
engine DECLARE [13] which allows the enactment of 
loosely structured processes. DECLARE provide powerful 
ways of supporting "extreme" flexibility because it uses a 
declarative 
constraint-based 
approach. 
In 
this 
way, 
DECLARE allows specifying in a process model what 
should be done and not how to do it, using a set of tasks and 
constraints between these tasks. The users can execute 
activities in any order and as often as they want, but they are 
bound by the defined constraints. Furthermore, DECLARE 
also supports dynamic change, so that it is possible to 
deviate from the pre-modeled process template by adding or 
removing tasks or constraints. YAWL and DECLARE work 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

together in such a way that structured parts of the process 
are handled by YAWL while unstructured parts are handled 
by DECLARE. In addition, DECLARE supports decision 
making by providing the users with history based 
recommendations [15] during process execution using its 
link to the process mining tool ProM [8][11].       
 
 
 
Figure 2. Symbols used in YAWL. 
We illustrate the suitability of YAWL for homecare 
process enactment through a simplified medical prescription 
process, depicted in Figure 3. After the preparation of the 
required medicines, the delivery is organized in different 
modes depending on the patient’s context (e.g., pick up 
medicines from the pharmacy or home delivery). We used 
the worklet service for modeling the different delivery mode 
by linking a multiple atomic task “Medicines delivery” to 
the worklet service. After the diffusion of a medical 
prescription, at any stage of the care process, it is possible 
for a doctor to cancel the care plan and to reschedule 
another one via the cancellation task “Prescription 
cancellation”. During a treatment, a supervision of a patient 
is organized, illustrated by the composite task “Treatment 
Supervision”. This task is linked to the Declare service. In 
this way, it is possible for the homecare participants to 
execute their assigned tasks (“Check blood pressure”, “Ask 
for drug tolerance” and “Give breakfast”) in any order as 
long as they respect the constraints defined on these tasks. It 
is also possible to dynamically add or delate tasks, on the 
fly. Despite the expressive power of the YAWL system, 
which make it one of the best candidate to orchestrate 
homecare processes (structured or loosely structured), there 
are some limitations: YAWL is an academic workflow 
management system therefore we need to teste its 
limitations for implementing real-life workflows. The 
predefined rules’ templates embedded in the DECALRE 
system can’t express temporal frequency constraints (i.e., a 
task has to be redone every day, once time, during a week). 
The DECALRE designer may also seem not easy to use for 
homecare participants to add and remove tasks dynamically. 
                                                                                                      
                                              
 
 
Figure 3. A simplified prescription plan 
IV. 
THE CYMED PLATEFORM  
A. CyMED target architecture 
The architecture of the CyMED platform is based on the 
following main components (see Figure 4): 
- 
A multi-modal communication system, combining 
tablets, PCs, TVs, fax and telephone. Information 
sharing may be via email, chat, audio messages or video 
meetings. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. CyMED overall architecture  
- 
A flexible workflow management system (YAWL 
system) to orchestrate the different services.  
- 
An Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) which guarantees the 
interoperability and integration of the data sources and 
applications. 
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The CyMED platform will also be connected, when 
deployed, to diverse medical applications and to the 
National Electronic Health record in France, called DPM. 
The DMP was designed to enable coordination based on 
medical data sharing. However, we believe that an efficient 
coordination of homecare participants can be done only via 
an integrated approach using advanced technologies for data 
sharing, communication, and process orchestration.  
B. CyMED main services 
Let us note that the CyMED platform is under 
construction and a first version containing the healthcare 
social network is already available. The main functionalities 
of our platform are the following: 
The healthcare social network  
CyMED encapsulates a collaborative social network 
tailored to homecare services coordination and exchange of 
information. Each community is private and is built around 
one patient. It may involve the patient’s relatives, homecare 
professionals and different organizations (laboratories, 
hospitals, insurers or coordination centers). A member may 
have several profiles depending on the community where 
he/she belongs. For instance one person may be invited in 
the community of the patient A as a relative and also be 
invited in the community of another patient B as a 
healthcare professional. Each profile has access to specific 
functionalities of the platform and has different access rights 
on the information displayed on a community. There are 
also different means to communication between the same 
community members via text, audio or private messages 
(see Figure 5).  
 
 
Figure 5. An example of a patient’s community wall (user interface of 
healthcare professionals) 
The voice messenger is a functionality proposed in our 
platform to improve communication among homecare 
participants, allowing them to record voice messages from 
their mobiles devices. We also propose a system of private 
chat and video meeting accessible by all the member of a 
patient’s community. 
Personalized Human Machine Interface    
Our goal is to design a Human Machine Interface that is 
customizable (color, text size and font, etc.) and adjustable 
to the patients’ deficiencies and loss of autonomy, at one 
hand, and to the responsibilities of homecare participants, 
on the other hand. For instance, we have worked on the 
specification of a personalized and adaptable event reminder 
service used by the patients and the homecare participants in 
their daily work. This service allows customizing, per type 
of events and per profile: the reminder type (sound, visual, 
contacting a relative, etc.), the frequency, and the reminder 
message content (key information to be transmitted).  
The to-do-list functionnality 
The tasks assigned to each member of a patient’s 
community are managed via the to-do list functionality (see 
Figure 6).  
 
 
Figure 6. An example of a to-do-list (user interface of healthcare 
professionals) 
This to-do-list acts as the worklist of the YAWL engine 
and acts also as an interface between the DECLARE 
designer and the DECLARE engine. Using such a To-do-
list, a homecare participant or a patient, may define and 
assign tasks or care plans (if they are healthcare 
professionals) to other members of the same patient’s 
community. 
Social networks Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) 
The homecare system in France is funded by regional 
public units which need to be reliably informed of the 
involvement, interaction and service efficiency of homecare 
participants. To answer these kinds of questions, we 
identified the following list (table 1) of key performance 
indicators (KPIs) which allow measuring the engagement 
and service levels of a patient’s community on the CyMED 
platform (see Figure 7). 
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE 1. DETAILED LIST OF SOCIAL NETWORKS KPIS 
 
Social network 
Capital 
Number of contacts with a direct relationship with 
the patient. It is measured by yearly total volume of 
contacts, vol. and % of contacts / category. 
Number of 
social network 
gaps 
Number of contacts categories within a patient 
private community with no contact. It is measured 
by total volume of contacts categories with 0 
contacts per private community. 
Patient 
medical data 
exceptions 
Number of patient health abnormal data requiring 
actions to be taken, e.g., number of medications 
administrated but not taken. It is measured by daily 
total volume of exceptions notified. 
Level of 
community 
engagement 
Number of new events submitted by private 
community members. It is measured by monthly 
total volume of events generated by a category of 
the community or by a member of the private 
community. 
Quality of 
service 
provided by 
the community 
Share of alerts and/or tasks managed and 
completed by the private community. It is 
measured by monthly total volume of managed 
alerts and total volume of completed tasks by the 
community, or by a category of the community or 
by a member of the community. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Social networks KPIs- Patient network involvement level 
Health monitoring and detection of loss of autonomy 
CyMED will encapsulate a monitoring system in order 
to detect alarming situations (e.g., falls) or any degradation 
of the patient’s status (e.g., loss of autonomy). The detection 
of loss of autonomy is based on information reported by 
different types of sensors (weight, fall detection, power 
consumption, etc.) or questionnaires from the patients, 
caregivers, social providers and relatives. The CyMED 
platform will introduce flexibility in alert diffusion by 
allowing: (1) to customize alert thresholds per patient, (2) to 
adapt the alert diffusion process depending on the patients’ 
context and the availability of his/her member community, 
and (3) to cancel alert diffusion process any time by 
authorized homecare participants. 
Planning service  
The CyMED platform encapsulates a scheduling service 
to organize the appointments and events of the patients and 
all the homecare participants. A patient agenda is shared 
between all his/her community members with different 
views on its details. The planning service can also provide 
optimization functionalities if the users want to optimize 
their daily scheduling.  In this case, several criteria are taken 
into account expressed in terms of: unavailable or available 
time slots per type of service, availability per geographic 
areas, and distance between appointments’ locations, etc. If 
an appointment is cancelled, the planning service will 
propose to a homecare participant the nearest provider who 
can replace him/her, relying on a homecare participants’ 
locator. 
 
C. Implementation  
CyMED platform is based on a Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) architecture using an Enterprise 
Services Bus (ESB). We have chosen to use ESB 
architecture in order to have a flexible architecture allowing 
easily plugging of new applications, data sources and web 
portals. The standard parts of the social network will be 
generated from the framework LifeRay. The presentation 
layer will be provided by the Apache Web server. The 
processing layer and the business services are provided by 
the J2EE application server (Tomcat), communicating via 
asynchronous messaging. These autonomous services are 
integrated on an ESB (e.g., Mule) controlled and sequenced 
by the workflow engine YAWL. A secure connection layer 
protocol (Secure Sockets Layer - SSL) will be used to 
ensure the environmental safety of the platform. It will 
allow the encryption of the connection and also guarantee 
authentication through the use of cryptography. Finally, to 
ensure the interoperability of data exchange between the 
different services we are going to use international 
healthcare standards, such as DICOM (Digital Imaging and 
Communications in Medicine) and Health Level-7 (HL7).  
V. 
RELATED WORKS 
The issue of collaboration and coordination between 
homecare participants was treated by few European projects 
and studies [2][5][14][12][17]. For instance, in [16] the 
authors suggested a number of methodological measures and 
IT solutions, to support organizational development and 
coordination on both the managerial and operational levels. 
However, no solution was implemented. In [6], two design 
concepts were presented to improve homecare coordination, 
based on a voice messenger and on augmented paper binder. 
However, the proposed approach focus on enhancing 
communication rather than improving homecare processes 
enactment. A model of coordination for homecare processes 
was proposed in [4] based on recursive description of actions 
and shared reference. However, the proposed coordination 
model is not flexible and therefore is not adequate to manage 
homecare processes. More recently, an approach to 
automatically adapt the process of homecare for elderly 
people needs was proposed in [17]. This approach relies on 
ontology matching between homecare domain and concepts 
of Business Process Modeling Notations (BPMN). The 
drawback is that the produced process models are specified 
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

in BPMN notation which is not adequate to model flexible 
or loosely structured processes. Moreover, this approach 
doesn’t take into account the agenda of the different 
homecare participants when the tasks of homecare processes 
are scheduled. Social networks approach was also 
successfully used in order to ease the access to healthcare 
information, collective learning, manage health conditions, 
and crowd sourced eHealth research. PatientsLikeMe is an 
example of patient-driven healthcare social network that 
encourages information exchange and collaboration between 
patients and doctors. Hellohealth (hellohealth.com) is 
another kind of social network which enables healthcare 
providers’ identification and appointments’ management. In 
comparison, we can say that the advantage of the social 
network of CyMED is that it combines a communication 
approach (chat, video, text and voice messages) with a 
process oriented approach (process orchestration via the 
YAWL system). Its goal is also to integrate different 
healthcare applications and sensors to facilitate patient’s 
monitoring and the communication between different 
homecare participants and systems.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we present the overall architecture of our 
coordination platform, currently under construction, which 
offers a package of services, such as: the orchestration 
service (via the flexible workflow management systems 
YAWL and DECLARE), the communication service (via a 
dedicated homecare social network), and the monitoring 
service, etc. Future work will involve: (1) Implementing and 
deploying the system in real-life environments. (2) 
Implementing the optimization planning service and test its 
synchronization with the YAWL system [10] when tasks 
and appointments are rescheduled. (3) Defining constraint 
templates for the declarative workflow engine DECLARE 
[13] tailored to homecare. (4) Defining a mechanism based 
on ontologies and on the worklets service of YAWL to 
represent domain knowledge and patients’ context [2] in 
order to facilitate the personalized construction of homecare 
workflows. (5) Extending the proposed approach with 
process mining capabilities applied on real-life data to 
extract, analyze and improve running homecare processes 
(e.g., extract homecare best practices) [11]. Moreover, it 
will be interesting to adapt the recommendation mechanism 
(relying on process mining) implemented in DECLARE to 
recommend tasks to homecare participants following the 
patients’ health state contexts, preferences and constraints 
[15].  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Arbaoui, N. Cislo, and N. Smith-Guerin, “Home Healthcare 
Process: Challenges and Open Issues”. Proc. Conference on 
Operational Research Applied to Health Service, 2007, pp.423-
439, doi: arXiv:1206.5430v1. 
[2] L. Ardissono, A. Di Leva, G. Petrone, M. Segnan, and M. 
Sonnessa. “Adaptive Medical Workflow Management for a 
Context-Dependent Home Healthcare Assistance Service,” in 
Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, Vol. 146, 
Issue 1, pp. 59–58, Jan. 2006, doi: 10.1016/j.entcs.2005.11.007. 
[3] R. Bastide, S. Zefouni, and E. Lamine, “The homecare digital 
ecosystem: An information system support architecture,” Proc. 
IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems and 
Technologies, 
April 
2010, 
pp. 
475-480, 
doi:  10.1109/DEST.2010.5610602.  
[4] R. Beuscart and al.,“Homecare: the need for cooperative 
information systems,” Stud Health Technol Inform, 2004, doi: 
107(Pt 2):1343-7. 
[5] M. N. Boulos and al., “Connectivity for Healthcare and Well-
Being Management: Examples from Six European Projects,” 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 
vol. 
6, 
no. 
7, 
pp. 
1947-1971, 
Jul. 
2009, 
doi:  10.3390/ijerph6071947.  
[6] L.Christensen and E. Grönvall, “Challenges and Opportunities for 
Collaborative Technologies for Home Care Works,” Proc. 
European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 
Sep. 2011, pp. 61-80, doi: 10.1007/978-0-85729-913-0_4. 
[7] C. Di Ciccio, A. Marrella and A. Russo, “Knowledge-intensive 
Processes: An Overview of Contemporary Approaches,” Journal 
on Data Semantics, April 2014, doi: 10.1007/s13740-014-0038-4. 
[8] B. van Dongen, A. de Medeiros, H. Verbeek, A. Weijters, and W 
van der Aalst, “The Prom Framework: a New Era in Process 
Mining Tool Support,” Proc. ICATPN'05, June 2005, pp. 444-
454, doi: 10.1007/11494744_25. 
[9] M. Han, T. Thiery, and X. Song, “Managing exceptions in the 
medical workflow systems,” In Proc. International Conference on 
Software 
Engineering, 
May 
2006, 
pp.741-750, 
doi: 
10.1145/1134285.1134403. 
[10] A.ter Hofstede, W. van der Aalst, M. Adams, and N. Russell, 
“Modern Business Process Automation: YAWL and its Support 
Environment," Springer, Berlin, 2010, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
03121-2. 
[11] S. Mans, W. van der Aalst,  R. Vanwersch, A. Moleman, 
“Process Mining in Healthcare: Data Challenges When 
Answering Frequently Posed Questions, Process Support and 
Knowledge 
Representation 
in 
Health 
Care,” 
Workshop 
ProHealth, Sept. 2012, pp. 140-153, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
36438-9_10. 
[12] T. McBryan, M. McGee-Lennon, and P. Gray, “An integrated 
approach to supporting interaction evolution in home care 
systems,” Proc. ACM International Conference on Pervasive 
Technologies Related to Assistive Environments, July 2008, pp. 
1-8, doi: 10.1145/1389586.1389640. 
[13] M. Pesic, H. Schonenberg, and W. Aalst, “The Declare Service,” 
Proc. Modern Business Process Automation in YAWL and its 
Support Environment, pp. 327-343. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
03121-2_12.  
[14] D. Pinelle and C. Gutwin, “Collaboration Requirements for Home 
Care,” University of Saskatchewan HCI Lab Technical Report 
HCI-TR-2001-01 
[15] B. Schonenberg, B. Weber, van Dongen, and W. van der Aalst, 
“Supporting Flexible Processes through Recommendations Based 
on History,” Proc. International Conference on Business Process 
Management, Sep. 2008, pp. 51-66, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-
85758-7_7. 
[16] M. Winge, L. Johansson, M. Nyström, E. Lindh, B. Wangler, 
“CO-CARE - Collaborative Health and Social Care,” Proc. 
International Symposium for Health Information Management 
Research, pp. 113-124, ISBN: 978-0-473-14173-8.  
[17] S. Zefouni, E. Lamine, R.Bastide, H.Pingaud, “Design and 
Evolution of Home-Care Workflows Using Ontologies and 
Model Transformations,” Proc. International Conference on 
Health 
Informatics, 
pp. 
231-236, 
Feb.2012, 
doi:10.5220/0003779302310236.  
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

