eLabEL: Technology-supported Living Labs in Primary Care 
 
 
Joan Vermeulen, Martine Huygens, Luc P de Witte 
Department of Health Services Research 
Maastricht University 
Maastricht, The Netherlands 
j.vermeulen@maastrichtuniversity.nl, 
m.huygens@maastrichtuniversity.nl, 
l.dewitte@maastrichtuniversity.nl  
 
Ilse Swinkels 
NIVEL (Netherlands Institute for Health Services Research) 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
i.swinkels@nivel.nl  
 
 
Abstract— Telecare technologies and eHealth applications can 
support patients and care professionals. However, these 
technologies are currently not being implemented in primary 
care. The eLabEL project aims to contribute to a solution for 
this problem by establishing Living Labs in which patients, 
healthcare professionals, entrepreneurs and researchers 
collaborate during the selection, integration, implementation 
and evaluation of such technologies in primary care. So far, 
seven primary care centers across the Netherlands have been 
included. Needs and requirements of healthcare professionals 
and patients regarding telecare technologies and eHealth 
applications were studied using semi-structured interviews and 
focus group interviews respectively. Healthcare professionals 
and patients were positive towards the use of technologies that 
can improve accessibility of care for the entire patient 
population and also expressed a need for technologies that can 
support self-management in patients with chronic conditions. 
Requirements voiced by care professionals were the need for 
clear organization of the user-interface, availability of 
workflow directives for eHealth usage, minimal steps to 
perform a task, and integration with their current information 
system. Patients indicated that care technology should be easy 
to use and easy to learn, should provide real-time feedback 
based 
on 
self-measured 
data, 
and 
should 
improve 
communication between patients and healthcare professionals. 
Entrepreneurs from the eLabEL consortium will integrate 
their eHealth and telecare services to meet the requirements of 
the end-users. The large scale implementation of these 
technologies will be monitored and the impact on experiences 
of patients, professionals and organization of care will be 
studied during a two-year follow-up study. Stakeholders of the 
eLabEL consortium will join forces to advance the large scale 
implementation 
of 
telecare 
technologies 
and 
eHealth 
applications in primary care.      
Keywords- eHealth, Co-creation, Living Labs, Primary Care, 
Implementation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The number of older adults and persons with chronic 
conditions is increasing in Western societies [1]. At the 
same time, the labor force that provides care to this growing  
Wendy Oude Nijeweme – d’Hollosy, Lex van Velsen 
Biomedical system and signals group 
University of Twente 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
w.dhollosy@utwente.nl, l.vanvelsen@rrd.nl, 
Yvonne Jansen 
Behavioral and societal sciences 
TNO 
Leiden, The Netherlands 
Yvonne.jansen@tno.nl  
 
 
group of patients is decreasing [2]. Due to these societal 
changes, the focus has shifted from intramural and curative 
care towards extramural care and prevention. As a 
consequence, the role of primary care will become more 
important. A large variety of telecare technologies and 
eHealth applications exist that can be used in primary care 
practice to support patients in their independence and self-
management, to improve accessibility of care services, and 
to increase quality of care. Such technologies can also 
facilitate a shift from care provided in care practices to care 
provided at home [3][4][5]. 
Previous (small-scale) studies have shown that telecare 
technologies and eHealth applications can have positive 
effects [6][7]. However, many of these technologies are 
currently not being implemented in primary care practices in 
a structural way [8] because there is a suboptimal ‘fit’ 
between the needs in care practice and the technical 
solutions. In addition, the supply of care technologies is 
very fragmented; many applications are stand-alone 
solutions that are not connected with each other nor are they 
integrated with information and communication systems 
that are being used in primary care centers [9].  
The eLabEL project, that is conducted by the Centre for 
Care Technology Research (CCTR), aims to contribute to a 
solution for these issues that impede the implementation of 
telecare 
technologies 
and 
eHealth 
applications 
by 
establishing ten primary care ‘Living Labs’ in which such 
technologies will be implemented on a large scale. 
According to Bergvall-Kareborn et al. (2009)  a  Living  
Lab  is  “a  gathering  of  public–private  partnerships  in  
which  businesses, researchers, authorities, and citizens 
work together for  the  creation,  validation,  and  test  of  
new  services,  business  ideas,  markets,  and  technologies  
in  real-life  contexts” [10]. During the first phase of the 
eLabEL 
project, 
patients, 
healthcare 
professionals, 
entrepreneurs and researchers collaborate to select telecare 
technologies and eHealth applications that meet the needs of 
end-users and to integrate these devices and services so that 
they can be implemented seamlessly in a primary care 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

context. This could be technologies which can be used by 
the general patient population, such as online appointment 
planning and e-consultation as well as technologies that can 
support patients with a chronic condition, such as e-
coaching and self-monitoring applications. During the 
second phase, these integrated technologies will be 
implemented in the primary care Living Labs to facilitate 
the transition from ‘traditional care’ to ‘technology-
supported care’. The implementation of these technologies 
on a large scale will be monitored during a two-year follow-
up study to investigate the impact that this has on 
experiences of patients and professionals and organization 
of care. During the third phase of the eLabEL project, 
effective implementation strategies for telecare technologies 
and eHealth applications in primary care will be developed 
based on the findings from the longitudinal study and 
experiences of partners that are involved in the eLabEL 
consortium. In addition, the telecare technologies and 
eHealth applications and related services will be optimized 
throughout and at the end of the project based on the 
(interim) results of the follow-up study. This paper gives an 
overview of the current state of the eLabEL project.  Section 
II describes the establishment of the Living Labs. Section III 
describes the methods and results of needs assessment of 
healthcare professionals and patients. Section IV and V 
describe the integration and implementation of technologies 
and how this will be monitored during a two-year follow-up 
study. 
A 
short 
note 
about 
the 
development 
of 
implementation strategies is described in section VI. 
Finally, in the last section several barriers and challenges 
that have been identified so far are discussed. 
II. 
ESTABLISHING LIVING LABS 
Recruitment of primary care centers who wanted to be 
involved in the eLabEL project as Living Lab started in 
September 2013. Inclusion criteria were that at least 5,000 
patients should be registered in the center and the following 
healthcare professionals should work in the center: General 
Practitioner (GP), Practice Nurse (PN), and Physiotherapist 
(PT). Potential primary care centers were recruited via the 
professional and informal network of the researchers using 
snowball sampling. So far, seven primary care centers, with 
patient populations ranging from 3,500 to 13,000 patients, 
have been included in the project. These primary care 
centers are scattered across the Netherlands. Primary care 
practices that were included vary in: type of organization, 
experience and implementation of eHealth applications, 
average age of the patient population and social economic 
status of patient population.  
III. 
NEEDS ASSESSMENT HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS 
AND PATIENTS 
From March 2014 healthcare professionals’ and patients’ 
needs regarding care technology have been explored. This 
has been done for healthcare professionals using semi-
structured interviews and for patients using focus group 
interviews. The process of needs assessment is still ongoing 
and will be continued till January 2014.  
A.   Healthcare Professionals 
In total, 9 GPs, 8 PNs, and 9 PTs participated in a semi-
structured interview. Interview schemes were based upon 
six themes: demographics, computer skills, organizational 
management, organizational IT infrastructure, professionals’ 
understanding of eHealth and its possibilities, and finally, 
personal experiences with and future expectations of 
eHealth usage. 
During the interviews healthcare professionals mentioned 
several technologies that their primary care practice could 
benefit from and that they would like to implement, such as:  
online appointment planning, online prescription refill, e-
consult, video-consult, and online triage. Such services can 
potentially improve the accessibility of care and increase 
efficiency. Preferences for these services differed across 
centers 
and 
professionals. 
In 
addition, 
healthcare 
professionals also expressed a need for technologies that can 
facilitate remote monitoring of health conditions in patients 
with chronic conditions in order to support self-management. 
Requirements voiced by care professionals were the need for 
clear organization of the user-interface to encourage intuitive 
usage, availability of workflow directives for eHealth usage, 
minimal steps to perform a task, single sign on, and 
integration of eHealth applications with the information 
system that they currently use in their practice. 
B. Patients 
To explore patients’ needs regarding care technology, 
patients from eLabEL Living Labs will be sorted in different 
groups for the focus group interviews based on the 
following 
chronical 
conditions: 
COPD, 
Diabetes, 
Cardiovascular condition and patients with an enduring 
condition who are treated by a physiotherapist. The aim of 
these focus group interviews is to investigate if care 
technology can support self-management in patients with a 
chronical condition and which requirements should be met 
to stimulate the uptake and usage of care technology.  
Up to now, one focus group interview has been 
conducted with seven persons with Diabetes (mean age 70,0 
years; 71,4% male). Patients indicated that care technology 
should be easy to use and easy to learn, should provide real-
time feedback based on self-measured data and should 
improve communication between patients and healthcare 
professionals. At least seven more focus group interviews 
are scheduled in the upcoming months.   
IV. 
INTEGRATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF 
TECHNOLOGIES 
Entrepreneurs 
from 
the 
eLabEL 
consortium 
are 
integrating their telecare products/services and eHealth 
applications based on the outcomes of the semi-structured 
interviews with healthcare professionals and the focus group 
interviews with patients from the seven Living Labs. In this 
process, they also take into account the most recent 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

standards and guidelines that such an integrated and 
interoperable eHealth architecture should comply with. In 
addition to this, the entrepeneurs will develop a joint 
business model for the exploitation of the architecture and 
associated services. Researchers from the eLabEL project 
will monitor the proces of technology integration and 
business development to study the possibilities, barriers and 
facilitating factors that occur. 
V. 
MONITORING IMPLEMENTATION AND EXPERIENCES 
In 2015, the selected technologies will be implemented 
in the primary care centers. During a two-year follow-up 
study, the implementation process will be closely 
monitored. During two years the impact of using technology 
as part of the care process on a general level will be studied. 
This will be done by monitoring the experiences during and 
consequences of the transition from ‘traditional care’ to 
‘technology-supported care’, from a patient, professional 
and organizational perspective. The study can be divided in 
four sub-studies that were approved by the Medical Ethical 
Committee Atrium Orbis Zuyd (NL 14-N-107).  
A. Overall patient panel 
To study the experiences during and consequences of the 
implementation of care technology of the general patient 
population, a panel of 250 patients will be established in 
each primary care Living Lab.  Acceptance, usability and 
use of implemented technologies that are available for the 
entire patient population of the primary care practices will 
be monitored in this panel.  In addition, experienced quality 
of care will be measured in this patient panel. To measure 
these constructs questionnaires will be handed at baseline 
and one and two years after the technologies have been 
implemented. To investigate actual usages of technology, 
log data will be gathered and analyzed on the level of the 
general patient population.  
B. Patients with chronic conditions 
We will also study the experiences during and 
consequences of the implementation of care technology that 
can support self-management of persons with a chronic 
condition. Technology acceptance, use and usability of the 
implemented technologies will be measured in patients with 
COPD, Diabetes, and Cardiovascular condition who are 
offered eHealth by their healthcare professional. In addition, 
self-management, experienced quality of care, and care 
consumption will be monitored in these patients. These 
patients will fill out questionnaires at baseline and after they 
have used a telecare technology and/or eHealth application 
for six and twelve months. To investigate data regarding 
care consumption (contacts with care professionals, number 
of referrals to specialists and prescription rate), data will be 
extracted from the information system of the general 
practitioners on the level of individual patients. These data 
will be compared with Dutch general practices which are 
not participating in the eLabEL project [11].  
C. Healthcare professionals 
A panel of healthcare professionals will be established to 
study the experiences of general practitioners, practice 
nurses, and physiotherapists during the implementation and 
use of different care technologies in their primary care 
practice. Acceptance, usability, and use of the technologies 
as well as job satisfaction and fit between the technology 
and tasks that these healthcare professionals have to 
perform, will be monitored. Questionnaires will be sent to 
the healthcare professionals at baseline and one and two 
years after the implementation of the technology. Parallel to 
the questionnaires, interviews will be conducted with at 
least one general practitioner, practice nurse, assistant and 
physiotherapist of each primary care center to gain more in-
depth insight into their experiences with the technologies 
and the consequences of using these technologies on job 
satisfaction, care procedures and organizational changes that 
were needed or happened because of the increased offer of 
technology. 
D. Organisation of care 
This study will focus on the experiences during and 
consequences of the implementation of care technology on 
an organizational level. Interviews will be conducted with at 
least one director, manager or senior staff member of each 
primary care Living Lab to investigate changes in care 
logistics and procedures, organizational aspects, efficiency 
of care and financial aspects. These interviews will be 
conducted at baseline and one and two years after the 
implementation of care technology. Furthermore, to 
investigate changes in care consumption in the overall 
patient population, data regarding characteristics of the 
center (number of patients, number of patient visits, and 
number of staff) and care consumption (contacts with care 
professionals, number of referrals to specialists and 
prescription rate) will be extracted from the information 
system of the general practitioners.  
VI. 
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES  
Since most relevant stakeholders were involved in the 
eLabEL project from the start onwards, attention has been 
paid to issues that are related to implementation and 
valorization from the start onwards. Perspectives from 
patients, healthcare professionals, and entrepreneurs were 
taken into account during all phases. Based on the 
experiences of all stakeholders during the eLabEL project 
and the outcomes of the two-year follow-up study, effective 
implementation strategies will be developed that can be 
used to advance the use of telecare technologies and eHealth 
application in primary care.  
VII. DISCUSSION  
Thus far, many primary care centers across the 
Netherlands showed an interest to collaborate in the eLabEL 
project. Implementation and use of telecare technologies 
and eHealth applications appears to be a prominent topic. 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Using a Living Lab approach to ensure that input from 
relevant stakeholders is incorporated in the plans form the 
beginning onwards is appealing according to patients, 
professionals, and entrepreneurs that collaborate in the 
project.  
Despite the fact that many primary care practices were 
enthusiastic about the ambition and approach of the eLabEL 
project, several of them choose not to participate yet. The 
main reason for this was that general practices need to 
invest quite a lot of resources and time (e.g., for purchasing 
and installing new equipment, training staff, training 
patients, etc.) to facilitate a shift from ‘traditional care’ to 
‘technology-supported care’ and that it was unclear to most 
practices whether healthcare insurance companies would 
facilitate this. Many eHealth and telecare applications for 
primary care are currently not included in the regular 
healthcare financing system of healthcare insurance 
companies which makes it difficult for healthcare 
professionals and patients to find out or estimate whether 
the ‘technology-supported care’  that they provide/receive 
will be reimbursed or not. An issue that is related to this 
topic is that entrepreneurs who collaborate in the eLabEL 
project indicated that, partially due to the uncertainties 
surrounding reimbursement of eHealth applications, it is 
difficult for them to decide on a fair price for their products 
and services once they start providing these in an integrated 
way on a larger scale. A solution for this issue might be 
forthcoming since healthcare insurance companies in the 
Netherlands are currently in the process of developing 
financing structures for the use of telecare products and 
eHealth applications in primary care. The eLabEL project 
will most likely be influenced by introduction of these new 
financing structures in the beginning of 2015. 
Since several large primary care centers decided not to 
participate, the eLabEL consortium decided to include 
smaller general practices that were not officially a 
multidisciplinary primary care center but a GP practice 
combined with a PT practice. This facilitated the inclusion 
process and in addition it also increased the variability 
between the eLabEL Living Labs which can provide 
valuable 
input 
for 
the 
development 
of 
effective 
implementation strategies. 
Based on the experiences so far, several challenges have 
been identified that the eLabEL consortium will encounter 
in the near future. Firstly, integration of telecare 
technologies and eHealth applications with information 
systems that are currently being used in general practices is 
a 
very 
important 
requirement 
for 
the 
successful 
implementation and adoption of these technologies 
according to healthcare professionals. This requires 
cooperation of companies that deliver such healthcare 
information systems. Involving these companies and getting 
their commitment will be a challenge that deserves high 
priority in the next phases of the eLabEL project. Secondly, 
interoperability standards for telecare technology evolve 
quickly on both a national and an international level. For 
example, HL7v3 has been launched in 2005 and already its 
follow-up HL7FHIR has been introduced in April 2014. 
Such quick developments make it difficult to create the 
basis for interoperability in healthcare information systems. 
Stakeholders of the eLabEL consortium will join forces and 
combine their strengths, expertise, experiences, and contacts 
to face these challenges to advance the large scale 
implementation of telecare technologies and eHealth 
applications 
that 
support 
patients 
and 
healthcare 
professionals in primary care.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] United Nations. “World Population Ageing 2009,” New York: United 
Nations, 2010.  
[2] R. Fujisawa and F. Colombo, “The Long-Term Care Workforce: 
Overview and Strategies to Adapt Supply to a Growing Demand,” 
OECD Publishing, 2009, doi: 10.1787/225350638472. 
[3] G. Pare, M. Jaana, and C. Sicotte, “Systematic review of home 
telemonitoring for chronic diseases: the evidence base,” J Am Med 
Inform Assoc, vol. 14, 2007, pp. 269-77, doi:   10.1197/jamia.M2270. 
[4] N. van den Berg, K. K. Schumann, K. Kraft, and W. Hoffman, 
“Telemedicine and telecare for older patients--a systematic review,” 
Maturitas, 
vol. 
73, 
2012, 
pp. 
94-114, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.maturitas.2012.06.010. 
[5] K. H. Bowles and A.C. Baugh, “Applying research evidence to 
optimize telehomecare,” J Cardiovasc Nurs, vol. 22, 2007, pp. 5-15. 
[6] J. M. Peeters, T. A. Wiegers, and R. D. Friele, “How technology in 
care at home affects patient self-care and self-management: a scoping 
review,” Int J Environ Res Public Health,  vol. 10, 2013, pp. 5541-64, 
doi: 10.3390/ijerph10115541. 
[7] A.D. Black et al., “The impact of eHealth on the quality and safety of 
health 
care: 
a 
systematic 
overview,” 
Plos 
One, 
2011, 
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000387. 
[8] S. De Rouck, A. Jacobs, and M. Leys, “A methodology for shifting 
the focus of e-health support design onto user needs: a case in the 
homecare field,” Int J Med Inform, vol. 77, 2008, pp. 589–601, doi: 
10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2007.11.004.  
[9] M. Vitacca, M. M. Mazzù, and S. Scalvini. “Sociotechnical and 
organizational challenges to wider e-Health implmentation.” Chronic 
respiratory 
disease, 
vol 
6, 
2009, 
pp. 
91-97, 
doi: 
10.1177/1479972309102805. 
[10] Bergvall-Kareborn, B., M. Hoist, and A. Stahlbrost, “Concept design 
with a living lab approach. in System Sciences,” 2009. HICSS'09. 
42nd Hawaii International Conference on. 2009. IEEE, pp. 1-10, doi: 
10.1109/HICSS.2009.123. 
[11] Nivel Primary Care Database, http://www.nivel.nl/en/dossier/nivel-
primary-care-database 
Accessed 
on 
23 
October 
2014.
 
 
  
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

