Using Models and Simulation for Predicting Efficiency as a Measure of Success of 
Different Telemedicine Deployments  
 
Cristina Adriana Alexandru 
School of Informatics 
University of Edinburgh 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom 
C.A.Alexandru@sms.ed.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—The planning and development of large-scale 
telemedicine system implementations throughout Europe 
motivates the need for cost effective ways to predict the level of 
their success in each new context. The efficiency of the system 
and that of the work process involving it influence the success 
of any telemedicine implementation, determining whether the 
existing healthcare staff will be able to manage their workload 
in their available time. This paper demonstrates by means of 
examples how we could use observations from repeated 
simulations of a nurse working with a telemedicine system in 
different contexts, which may differ in several ways, to predict 
the efficiency of the work process. The examples presented in 
the paper are based on previous experience with the use of 
telemedicine systems in Lothian, Scotland. 
Keywords-telemedicine; telemonitoring; efficiency; scaling 
up;  cognitive modelling; simulation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Despite its potential advantages for patients suffering 
from long-term conditions, healthcare systems and the 
economy ([1]), the benefits of telemedicine in terms of 
patient care and costs have not been convincingly proven 
yet. Although many studies conclude that telemedicine is 
beneficial (e.g. [2, 3]), their evidence is often hard to 
generalise, as it is the result of small scale trials lead by 
enthusiasts [4, 5], and does not meet high evaluation 
standards [6, 7]. 
Several European countries are currently planning and 
developing large-scale telemedicine pilots, which will help 
assess whether telemedicine would work at scale. Two 
important examples are:  
 The Renewing Health European project ([8]), which 
involves nine European regions in the provision of 
telemedicine services for large segments of the population 
suffering from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD), diabetes and cardiovascular disease; 
 The ITTS (Implementing Transnational Telemedicine 
Solutions [9]) project partly funded by the EU Northern 
Periphery Programme, which involves partners from six 
Northern European countries and aims to facilitate 
transnational 
knowledge 
exchange 
for 
implementing 
telemedicine solutions at scale.  
The UK is also planning a large-scale deployment of 
systems such as these through the Delivering Assisted 
Living Lifestyles at Scale (DALLAS [10]) programme. The 
Scottish government placed such nationwide deployment at 
the centre of Scotland's eHealth strategy [11].  
Given the high level of risk associated with such 
projects, it becomes desirable to find cost-effective means to 
predict the success of telemedicine systems in different 
deployments, as this could influence the decision of 
investing into each deployment and help save resources. In a 
context characterised, on one hand, by a predicted shortage 
of human resources in healthcare and, on the other, by an 
increase in their workload due to an increase in the number 
of patients suffering from long term conditions ([1, 12]), the 
efficiency of a telemedicine system and that of the work 
process in which it is used are important factors for its 
success. We define efficiency here as how likely a 
healthcare professional is to care for her patients in her 
available time by using a work process involving the 
telemedicine system.   
We have previously described a methodology and 
associated modelling approach which can be used for 
predicting the usability of telemedicine systems in different 
deployments [13]. We will only briefly summarize them in 
this paper, focusing only on the efficiency component of 
usability. Elsewhere, we have shown by means of examples 
how our approach would work for predicting the efficiency 
of the system when deployed in contexts differing in 
workload, user and system characteristics [14]. The 
differences we observed were only in terms of minutes, as 
actions on the system in question would take little time and 
rarely escalate to dramatic changes in the user’s total time 
available. The very time intensive user work, which 
importantly influences the handling of her workload, lies 
outside of the system, within the work process. To cater for 
this conclusion, in this paper we exemplify how our 
approach can be used for predicting the efficiency of the 
work process involving the telemedicine system. While it 
may be hard for the naked eye to foresee how the user’s 
time would vary in contexts which differ in several 
characteristics of her workload which may influence each 
other, we show how our approach can help in this respect to 
provide a clear indication of the time that the user would 
need within each context for managing her work safely. The 
examples contain invented facts and numbers, derived from 
previous experience with telemedicine systems in Lothian, 
Scotland ([15]). We also describe the study we commenced 
for validating our approach. 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

II. 
THE PROPOSED METHODOLOGY AND MODELLING 
APPROACH 
Our methodology is a guide for reusing models, which 
are found to reliably determine the efficiency of a work 
process involving a telemedicine system into a reference 
deployment site, for predicting the efficiency of the same 
work process if the system is deployed into a potential site, 
using only information about the characteristics of the 
potential site. Its main advantage is that it reduces the need 
for evaluating the system and work process into each new 
context, thus saving resources. It also helps analyse whether 
the work process would be manageable in potential contexts 
and explore what-if scenarios involving changes to the 
workload, user, process or system characteristics if not. A 
step-by-step description of the methodology is provided in 
Fig 1.  
Although our methodology can be used with any type of 
modelling approach, depending on the level of perceived 
risk of the problem at hand, we have chosen to represent a 
work process by means of a user and system model which 
are run in parallel. The user model is a cognitive model 
inspired by the Icarus cognitive architecture ([16, 17, 18, 19, 
20]), which receives as inputs a description of a user’s 
profile in terms of goals, knowledge, skills as related to her 
work, and the time the user spends for performing actions 
on or outside of the system. We have chosen cognitive 
modelling due to the cognitive nature of nurses’ medical 
work ([21], [22]). The system model is a basic labelled 
transition system, which receives as inputs what the system 
presents to the user or stores internally at one time, how this 
changes as an effect to user actions on it, and the time it 
takes to make such changes (waiting time). The ‘run of the 
model’ means the parallel run of the user and system model, 
simulating a user using the system and doing any actions 
external to it. It takes as inputs a new workload and other 
characteristics of the work environment, which can be either 
constants (the same on every simulation run e.g. the number 
of patients to be monitored) or numbers drawn from 
probability distributions (e.g. for the values of readings). A 
high enough number of runs helps to obtain the expected 
distribution of the time spent by the user in achieving her 
goals (doing her work) in one deployment site. By changing 
the characteristics of the workload and/or the inputs to the 
models (e.g. to reflect changes in user skills, way of doing 
things or system design) we can model potential 
deployments, which can differ in several ways, sometimes 
interacting with each other, to the reference one. By running 
another high enough number of runs, we can obtain 
predictions of the efficiency of each potential context, 
unobvious to the naked eye, and useful for the analysis of 
whether work would be manageable there, as we will 
exemplify below. 
III. 
EXAMPLES 
Let us consider the case of a hypertension monitoring 
work process performed by nurses with the help of an online 
telemonitoring system, in which the nurses follow the steps 
from below (derived from previous experience [15]): 
 
Figure 1.  The methodology. 
From the table of patients from the system’s homepage, 
the nurse selects one who is flagged up (as having the last 
systolic-diastolic pairs as exacerbations) by choosing an 
appropriate action from a pop-up box, which takes her to 
the patient’s details page. Here, she can see the patient’s 
demographics, contact details, and last two days of systolic-
diastolic pairs of readings. If the readings are concerning, 
the nurse clicks on a button to go into the patient’s extended 
(seven day) details. Next, she needs to go into the electronic 
health record, on a separate system, to check the patient’s 
medical history. If the patient’s condition seems to be 
worsening, the nurse may decide to call her to check on her 
state, gain any additional information and give her advice. 
For doing this, she needs to go back to the patient’s details 
page and retrieve her phone number. Following this call, if 
the nurse concludes that the patient needs an appointment 
with her GP (General Practitioner), she will retrieve the 
GP’s phone number from the same page and call the GP, 
also passing on the medical information gained. Even if the 
patient did not require a call or an appointment, the nurse 
will next enter her conclusion as a note in a form provided 
on the patient’s details page. Following this step or if the 
patient’s condition noticed from the extended details page 
and history was not worsening, the nurse returns to the 
homepage. As there are no options in the system to 
acknowledge who has been checked, she writes the patient’s 
name down before selecting the next flagged up patient in 
the list, scrolling down to retrieve her first if necessary. The 
nurse finishes her work when all of the flagged up patients 
have been checked. 
Let us consider for a first scenario a medical practice 
which has recruited 20 patients for being monitored by 
using the telemonitoring system, and where a nurse’s time 
allocated for the monitoring work is 2 hours (many practices 
in the UK allocate a fixed amount of time from a nurse’s 
shift for telemonitoring work). Let us suppose that, 
according to our analysis of the context, we found that the 
patients’ reading criticality is characterized by a mean of 
30% and standard deviation of 10%. While for keystroke-
level actions we use the time from the Keystroke-Level 
Model (KLM [23, 24]), we define the following times for 
actions performed outside of the system: 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 Calling up patients: the nurse will dial the number in a 
time characterized by a mean of 8 seconds and standard 
deviation of 1 second. She will hold on the phone for 10 
seconds. Patients pick up the phone in a time characterized 
by a mean of 7 seconds and standard deviation of 1 second, 
so the nurse will not miss any patients in this context. 
 Speaking with the patients will take the nurse a time 
characterized by a mean of 8 minutes and standard deviation 
of 2 minutes. 
 Calling up and speaking with the GP will take the nurse 
a time characterized by a mean of 3 minutes and standard 
deviation of 30 seconds. Please note that here we have not 
broken down the steps of performing the call as for patient 
calls from above, as we consider that the GPs will always 
pick up and that there is efficient communication set up 
between the nurse and the GP. 
 Writing down names takes the nurse a time defined by a 
mean of 5 seconds and standard deviation of half a second. 
 Checking the electronic health record (which is a 
separate system, and so we are not considering it within the 
system model) takes a time defined by a mean of 3 minutes 
and standard deviation of 20 seconds.  
Also, let us consider that an analysis of the practice’s 
statistical data on who has been called and how often, we 
found that out of the patients whose medical history the 
nurse checks, those who need a call are characterized by a 
mean of 50% and standard deviation of 10%. Also, out of 
the patients whom the nurse has called, we find that those 
who need an appointment with their GP are characterized by 
a mean of 30% and standard deviation of 10%. This data is 
used to simulate a nurse’s decision of when to call the 
patient and GP. 
We implemented the above scenario by using our 
modelling approach, and performed 200 runs to obtain a 
prediction of the distribution of the time it takes for the 
nurse to monitor all of the patients who are flagged up. A 
representation of the results is provided in Fig. 2. 
The figure predicts that the nurse will always manage 
her work within the 2 hours (7200 seconds) allocated for it- 
in ideal conditions, where there are no interruptions, the 
latest time she will always finish is 7000 seconds- 3 minutes 
earlier than the deadline. Moreover, she would very rarely 
need the time between the last 20 and the last 3 minutes 
(only once in 100 work sessions would she need more than 
6000 seconds- 1h 40min) and she would rarely need the 
time between the last 37 and the last 20 minutes (only 2.5 
times in 100 work sessions would she need between 5000 
seconds- 1h 23min, and 6000 seconds- 1h 40min). This  
analysis, together with an analysis of cost and of the nurses’ 
workload for other duties, could aid in the reconsideration 
of the time allocated to them for the monitoring work. The 
two hour time allocation already offered to them is predicted 
to be the safest option, as the nurse would always manage  
all of the patients in this time. Nevertheless, if cost is more 
of a concern and/or the nurse’s time is critically needed for 
other duties, offering each nurse 1h 45min, or even 1h 
30min would be better options, and still safe enough, as in 
very rare cases would the nurse have to exceed them. 
Figure 2.  First scenario. 
We suppose that the efficiency results in the first 
scenario correspond with experience there. Let us next 
consider that there are plans to deploy the system into two 
potential sites, in both of which a nurse will deal with 
double the number of patients than in our reference site (40), 
and which, it turns out, differ in various other ways. We 
would be interested to estimate how much time nurses 
should have allocated for the monitoring work in each of the 
sites. 
The first potential deployment site (second scenario) 
has decided to recruit double the number of patients than the 
reference site, but these patients are less sick- the criticality 
of their readings has a mean of 20% and standard deviation 
of 5%, and the nurses are more likely to refer called up 
patients to their GPs- out of the patients who have been 
called up, those who are to be set up an appointment are 
characterised by a mean of 50% and standard deviation of 
10%.  
Although one would normally expect that double the 
patients would mean double the time spent monitoring 
them, our variations on the reading criticality and 
percentage of patients to require an appointment with the 
GP make our conclusion less clear. It is in such cases that 
our modelling approach can be of help. By reinstantiating 
our models with the new inputs and running another 200 
simulation runs, we obtain the graph presented in Fig. 3. 
Figure 3.  Second scenario. 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The graph predicts that the decrease in the criticality of 
the patients’ readings has mostly compensated the doubling 
of the number of patients and the increase in the percentage 
of called patients who need a referral, as the maximum time 
that the nurse would spend in this scenario is 9000 seconds 
(2.5 hours), only half an hour more than in the first scenario. 
Moreover, the nurse would need the last 17 minutes of this 
time extremely rarely (1.5 cases in every 100 work 
sessions), and the last 33 minutes very rarely (in 2 every 100 
work sessions). This predicts that the safest time the nurse 
should have allocated is 2 and a half hours, but that 2h 
15min and 2 hours would be more economical, and still safe 
enough, options. Our approach thus helps explore how the 
different inputs to the models interact to influence the total 
time. 
The second potential site (third scenario) has also 
decided to recruit double the number of patients than the 
reference site, and these patients are sicker- the criticality of 
their readings has a mean of 40% and standard deviation of 
10%. For fear that they would not be able to manage their 
work, the nurses here have decided on some simple 
questions to always ask patients whenever they call them, 
which would lead to less time spent during phone 
conversations with them- the new time is characterised by a 
mean of 6 minutes and standard deviation of 1 minute and 
20 seconds.  
Although double the patients and sicker patients would 
intuitively lead to more than double the time spent 
monitoring them as compared to the reference site, the fact 
that nurses speak less time on the phone with patients, 
where phone conversations are the most time consuming 
external action, will compensate some of the time, but it is 
difficult for the naked eye to decide how much. By 
reinstantiating our models and running another 200 
simulation runs for this new scenario, we obtain the graph 
from Fig. 4. 
 The graph predicts that the introduction of the nurses’ 
call protocol does not compensate greatly the time 
influenced by the more numerous and sicker patients, as 
nurses would still maximally spend more than double the 
time of the reference deployment site monitoring all of their 
patients. Nevertheless, the graph predicts that nurses would 
very rarely (in 3 every 100 work sessions) need more than 
3h 3min (11000 sec) to handle all of the patients. Therefore, 
although an ideal, safest time to offer them would be 4h 
(over 14000 sec), 3h 30, 3h 15min and 3 hours would be 
more economical, and still safe enough, options. 
IV. 
START ON VALIDATION 
To validate our work, we will use our methodology and 
modelling approach to help predict the efficiency of a 
monitoring work process for a new telemonitoring system 
introduced in Lothian, Scotland. We are currently working 
on iteratively improving our modelling approach until it can  
be used to reliably predict the efficiency of the work process 
for deployment sites where the system is already being used. 
To do this, we are conducting observations of users 
monitoring patients using the system, and using data from 
system logs, other system documentation and the practices’  
Figure 4.  Third scenario. 
statistical data, which helps us both obtain inputs for our 
model, and gain an understanding of the true efficiency of 
the work process to test the results of running our model 
against. Once our modelling approach is found to be reliable 
enough, we will gather data about potential deployment 
contexts and use our approach to predict efficiency there. A 
new evaluation of the efficiency of the work process in 
these contexts, once the system has been deployed and users 
have gained some experience with it, will reveal whether 
our approach is successful. The system is being used for 
monitoring two long-term conditions, by users with 
different roles and experience (non-clinical call centre staff 
vs. clinical users- nurses, physiotherapists, GPs, more or 
less computer literate or used with the system), which will 
help us also explore how efficiency is influenced by such 
aspects.  
V. 
RELATED WORK 
From a methodological standpoint, although we have not 
found any literature describing a methodology similar to 
ours, the areas of performance modelling and business 
process change management are the closest. In the area of 
performance modelling, the most relevant work is that by 
Bailey and Snavely ([25]), as it proposes using models for 
the ‘what-if’ exploration of how, in this case, the 
performance of large-scale scientific programs, is affected 
by systems of different sizes and different jobs. Like us, 
they stress that such an approach helps reduce the need for 
more costly evaluation, and inform the choice of a system. 
The authors of SAP (Systems, Applications and Products in 
Data Processing [26, 27]) combine the two areas to propose 
an approach allowing the exploration of ‘what-if’ scenarios 
for business process models. The purpose of these papers is 
to explore changes to one deployment site, while that of our 
work is to compare sites differing in several aspects which 
may influence each other. 
From a work process standpoint, time and motion is 
considered the most reliable method for analysing the 
impact that the introduction of health information systems in 
hospitals would have on the workflow of health 
professionals [28]. Recent years have seen a surge in the use 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

of time and motion studies in health informatics, due to 
some pioneering papers ([29], [30]), the development of a 
data acquisition tool ([31], [32], [33]) and steps towards 
methodological standardisation [28]. Through continuous 
observation of clinician work, time and motion can help 
deduce important aspects of the efficiency of work 
processes involving a health information system: the time it 
takes to perform each type of task, where inefficiencies may 
lie, the effect of interruptions, collaboration with colleagues 
and multitasking.  
There is of course a lot of literature on using models for 
predicting the efficiency of a system or process in terms of 
execution time, most notable being the work on the GOMS 
(Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection rules) family of 
models [34]).  
Our work is not intended to compete with model-based 
evaluation approaches, and it is not currently evaluating the 
efficiency of a single work process in the same depth as the 
time and motion method. Its strength does not lie in the 
prediction of efficiency within a single context, but in being 
used for analysing efficiency in contexts which may differ 
in several ways, including scale, without the need for costly 
evaluation with users, and in the area of telemedicine where 
there is a strong motivation for such an approach. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION, CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have briefly described a methodology which can be 
used for predicting the efficiency of a work process 
involving a telemedicine system in different deployment 
sites, and proposed a modelling approach to be used with it. 
We have exemplified them in action for providing an 
indication of the distribution of the time needed by a nurse 
performing monitoring work using a telemonitoring system, 
and showed how these results can be used for deciding what 
would be a good time limit to give to nurses such that their 
work is safe enough. Given considerations of cost and 
resources, its findings can lead to a decision of whether the 
work in the potential site is manageable, before any 
resources are wasted in deploying the system in that site. 
Should the work be found unmanageable, we could use it to 
answer ‘what-if’ questions about the effects of potential 
solutions: changing the characteristics of the workload, user, 
process or system. 
Although for contexts which differ slightly our approach 
might not be necessary, as the practicality of deploying the 
system there would be clear, there are many contexts where 
differences are complex and interact with each other where 
our approach could be useful. These contexts could be real 
ones where the system is planned to be deployed, or 
hypothetical ones- e.g. would monitoring work still be 
manageable if the system is to be used during an epidemic, 
with more and sicker patients? 
We have also described the validation work that we have 
started for our approach. The result of the current phase will 
be an improved modelling approach, including changes both 
to its logic and the specification of the models, and a good 
understanding of its pros and cons. The next step is to check 
whether our approach will provide good efficiency 
predictions in potential deployment sites.   
REFERENCES 
[1] “Telemedicine for the benefit of patients, healthcare systems 
and society”, European Commission Staff Working Paper 
[Internet] SEC (2009) 943 final, June 2009, Available from: 
 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/cf/docume
nt.cfm?action=display&doc_id=622 
[2] P. Trief, J.A. Teresi, J.P. Eimicke, S. Shea, and R.S. 
Weinstock, “Improvement in diabetes self-efficacy and 
glycaemic control using telemedicine in a sample of older 
ethnically diverse individuals who have diabetes”, the 
IDEATel project, Age Ageing, 2009,  pp. 219-25. 
[3] M. Clarke, A. Shah, and U. Sharma, “Systematic review of 
studies on telemonitoring of patients with congestive heart 
failure: a meta-analysis”, J Telemed Telecare, 2011, pp. 7-14. 
[4] B. McKinstry, H. Pinnock, and A. Sheikh, “Telemedicine for 
management of patients with COPD”, Lancet 2009, 
374(9691), pp. 672-673. 
[5] S.I. 
Chaudhry, 
J.A. 
Mattera, 
and 
H.M. 
Krumholz, 
“Telemonitoring in patients with heart failure. Authors’ 
response to letters”. N Engl J Med, 2011, pp. 78-80. 
[6] J. Barlow, D. Singh, S. Bayer, and R. Curry, “A systematic 
review of the benefits of home telecare for frail elderly people 
and those with long-term conditions”, J Telemed Telecare, 
2007, pp.172-179. 
[7] T.S. Bergmo, “Can economic evaluation in telemedicine be 
trusted? A systematic review of the literature”. Cost Eff 
Resour Alloc, 2009, pp 7-18. 
[8] “REgioNs of Europe WorkINg together for HEALTH”, 
Renewing 
Health 
[Internet], 
2013, 
Available 
from: 
http://www.renewinghealth.eu/en/ 
[9] “Implementing 
Transnational 
Telemedicine 
Solutions”, 
University of Aberdeen Centre for Rural Health [Internet], 
available from: http://www.transnational-telemedicine.eu/. 
[10] “DALLAS - delivering assisted living lifestyles at scale”. 
Technical report, Technology Strategy Board, June 2012, 
Available 
from 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130221185318/
www.innovateuk.org/_assets/0511/sbri_comp_dallas.pdf. 
[11] “The Scottish Government. ehealth strategy 2011-2017”, 
 
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2011/09/09103110/9
, September 2011. ISBN 978 1 78045 376 7. 
[12] Good health adds life to years - global brief for world health 
day 2012, Technical report, World Health Organization, 2012, 
Available from: 
 
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2012/WHO_DCO_WHD_2012.2
_eng.pdf. 
[13] C.A. Alexandru and P. Stevens, “Models to extend the scope 
of usability testing for telemedicine systems”. In Digital 
Futures 2012: The Third Annual Digital Economy All Hands 
Conference, Aberdeen, October 2012, Available from: 
http://www.dotrural.ac.uk/digitalfutures2012/sites/default/file
s/digitalfutures2012papers/Papers/Session4CUsability/Alexan
dru&Stevens_TelemedicineSystems.pdf 
[14] C.A. Alexandru and P. Stevens, “Predicting the Usability of 
Telemedicine Systems in Different Deployments through 
Modelling and Simulation”, Proceedings of the European 
Workshop on Practical Aspects of Health Informatics (PAHI 
2013), Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, March 2013, pp. 58-66. 
[15] C.A. Alexandru, “Usability testing and improvement of 
telemedicine websites”, Master's thesis, University of 
Edinburgh, School of Informatics, 2010.  
[16] P Langley, K. Cummings, and D. Shapiro, “Hierarchical skills 
and cognitive architectures”, in Proceedings of the Twenty-
Sixth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 
2004, pp. 779-784. 
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[17] D. Choi, M. Kaufman, P. Langley, N. Nejati, and D. Shapiro, 
“An 
architecture 
for 
persistent 
reactive 
behavior”; 
International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and 
Multiagent Systems, 2004, pp. 988-995. 
[18] P. Langley and D. Choi, “A unified cognitive architecture for 
physical agents”, in Proceedings of the 21st national 
conference on Artificial intelligence, Volume 2, AAAI'06, 
AAI Press, 2006, pp. 1469-1474. 
[19] P. Langley, D. Choi, and S. Rogers, “Acquisition of 
hierarchical reactive skills in a unified cognitive architecture”, 
Cognitive Systems Research, 10(4), 2009, pp. 316-332. 
[20] P. Langley, D. Choi, and N. Trivedi, “Icarus user's manual, 
July 2011”, Available from: http://www.dongkyu.com/icarus-
tutorial/ICARUS_manual_3.pdf 
[21] P. Potter, L. Wolf, S. Boxerman, D. Grayson, J.  Sledge, C. 
Dunagan, and B. Evanoff, “An Analysis of Nurses' Cognitive 
Work: A New Perspective for Understanding Medical 
Errors”, on: Advances in Patient Safety: From Research to 
Implementation (Volume 1: Research Findings), 2005. 
[22]  C.A. Tanner, “Thinking Like a Nurse: A Research-Based 
Model of Clinical Judgment in Nursing”, 2006, Available 
from 
http://jxzy.smu.edu.cn/jkpg/UploadFiles/file/TF_0692810354
_thinking%20like%20a%20nurse.pdf  
[23] S.K Card, T.P. Thomas, and A. Newall, “The Psychology of 
Human-Computer Interaction”, London: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, ISBN 0-89859-243-7, 1983. 
[24] D. Kieras, "Using the Keystroke-Level Model to Estimate 
ExecutionTimes", http://courses.wccnet.edu/~jwithrow/docs/k
lm.pdf  (On-line handout), 1993, 2001. 
[25] D. H. Bailey and A. Snavely, “Performance modeling: 
Understanding the past and predicting the future”, in Euro-Par 
2005 Parallel Processing Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
volume 3468, 2005, pp. 185-195. 
[26] M. Fritzsche, M. Picht, W. Gilani, I. Spence, J. Brown, and P. 
Kilpatrick, “Extending bpm environments of your choice with 
performance related decision support”, in Proceedings of the 
7th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Business 
Process 
Management, BPM '09, Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 
2009, pp. 97-112. 
[27] M. Fritzsche and W. Gilani, “Model transformation chains 
and model management for end-to-end performance decision 
support”, in Proceedings of the 3rd international summer 
school conference on Generative and transformational 
techniques in software engineering III, GTTSE’09, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 345–363. 
[28] K. Zheng, M. H. Guo, D. A. Hanauer, “Using the time and 
motion method to study clinical work processes and 
workflow: methodological inconsistencies and a call for 
standardized research”. J Am Med Inform Assoc, volume 18, 
2011, pp. 704–710. 
[29] J. M. Overhage, S. Perkins, W. M. Tierney, et al., “Controlled 
trial of direct physician order entry: effects on physicians’ 
time utilization in ambulatory primary care internal medicine 
practices” J Am Med Inform Assoc, volume 8, 2001, pp. 361-
371. 
[30] L. Pizziferri, A. F. Kittler, L. A. Volk, et al., “Primary care 
physician time utilization before and after implementation of 
an electronic health record: a time-motion study”, J Biomed 
Inform, vol. 38, 2005, pp. 176-188. 
[31] J. Westbrook, A. Ampt. “Design, application and testing of 
the 
Work 
Observation Method by 
Activity 
Timing 
(WOMBAT) to measure clinicians’ patterns of work and 
communication”, Int J Med Inform. vol. 78, 2009, pp. 25–33. 
[32] M. Ballerman, N. Shaw, D. Mayes, et al., “Validation of the 
Work 
Observational 
Method 
By 
Activity 
Timing 
(WOMBAT) method of conducting time-motion observations 
in critical care settings: an observational study”. BMC 
Medical 
Informatics 
and 
Decision 
Making, 
2011,  
doi:10.1186/1472-6947-11-32. 
[33] J. Westbrook, N. Creswick, C. Duffield, et al., “Changes in 
nurses’ work associated with computerised information 
systems: opportunities for international comparative studies 
using the revised Work Observation Method By Activity 
Timing (WOMBAT)”. Proceedings of 11th International 
Congress on Nursing Informatics. AMIA 2012, pp. 448–452. 
[34] B. E. John and D. E. Kieras, “The GOMS family of user 
interface analysis techniques: Comparison and contrast”, ACM 
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 3, 1996, pp. 
320-351. 
 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

