 
 
  
 
Abstract—Physical 
rehabilitation 
positively 
affects 
clinical outcomes in multiple sclerosis (MS) however it is 
limited 
by 
delivery 
modes, 
cost 
and 
distance. 
Telemedicine approaches can potentially facilitate home-
based 
rehabilitation 
however 
they 
were 
not 
systematically implemented for patients with MS. We 
developed a Home Automated Telemanagement (HAT) 
system for computer-guided management of patients 
with MS providing individualized instruction and 
monitoring of physical therapy exercise at patient homes.  
The HAT home unit runs on a netbook in the patient’s 
home connected to a remote server via internet.  The 
system questions the patient on their condition, gives 
detailed step by step exercise instructions, records their 
daily exercise log, and informs and quizzes the patient on 
their knowledge of multiple sclerosis.  The exercise log is 
transmitted to the remote HAT server where it is 
analyzed using decision support algorithms to facilitate 
MS management. The exercise logs are available on-line 
for review by patient providers. Patient exercise regimen 
is determined by their physical therapist and can be 
updated on-line, keeping a personalized approach to 
disease management while taking advantage of the 
convenience 
the 
technology 
supplies. 
This 
telemanagement system has been successfully designed 
and implemented to optimize the care of patients with 
multiple sclerosis. 
 
Keywords-telerehabilitation; eHealth; multiple sclerosis 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic debilitating disease 
of the central nervous system that may result in significant 
damage of the neuromuscular system, vision, and affective 
and cognitive functions [1]. Approximately 400,000 persons 
in the United States have MS [2].  Lifelong rehabilitation 
measures, along with medication treatment, are the major 
components of patient management [3–4]. Physical exercises 
positively affect patients’ quality of life and their functional 
capacities [5–6]. Poor adherence to rehabilitation, limited 
patient education, and access to specialized care can be 
barriers to treatment [7–8].  Removing those barriers is an 
important step  towards improving patient care for multiple 
sclerosis. 
 Current technology allows for remote information transfer 
in a variety of circumstances.  Information can be easily 
transferred to and from a person’s home through the existing 
 
 
telephone and internet infrastructures. Our goal was to 
design a telemanagement system for patient use in MS.  This 
paper reports the success of design and implementation of 
the Home Automated Telemanagement (HAT) software in 
patients with MS. We describe the software and hardware 
used, website design, and overall interactions of the HAT 
system design. 
II. SYSTEM DESIGN 
 The HAT system is based on Wagner’s model of chronic 
disease care [9]. The HAT system supports the major 
components of this model including patient self-care, 
tailored education and counseling, individualized treatment 
plan, guideline-concordant decision support, comprehensive 
patient provider communication, and multidisciplinary care 
coordination [10-12]. Using this model, the HAT system has 
been successfully implemented and tested in various health 
conditions [13-17]. 
The HAT system consists of home unit, HAT server and 
clinician unit [18]. The previous applications utilized 
laptops, PDA, IVR, and cell phones for patient home units 
[19-22]. The HAT system for MS takes advantage of the 
current technology to provide patients with a convenient 
treatment plan and exercise regimen as well as enforcing 
adherence 
to 
rehabilitation 
through 
more 
frequent 
monitoring. 
 The home unit was developed using Visual Basic and runs 
on netbooks with Windows operating systems.  Visual Basic 
is a programming language and development environment 
from Microsoft derived from the BASIC programming 
language.  The language allows for quick development and 
has extended Microsoft Windows functionality for more 
complex projects.  Visual Basic is also well supported by 
older operating systems, making it ideal for projects utilizing 
less expensive computers with limited system resources. 
 The 
patient 
home 
unit 
sends 
patient 
self-report 
information via internet to a HAT server running Windows 
2008.  A server running Internet Information Services (IIS) 
collects the patient’s data and integrates it into a website to 
be accessed by the patient’s physician and physical therapist.  
IIS is one of the most widely used web servers and provides 
a stable and widely compatible system for receiving and 
editing patient information. 
 The webpage was developed using Microsoft’s .NET 
framework.  This is a framework for developing dynamic 
websites which offers extensive built-in functionality and is 
supported by most browsers. 
     The patient home unit allows a patient to run a self-test 
and exercise program which asks the patient a series of 
symptom questions, instructs them on exercise routines, 
Designing Physical Telerehabilitation System for Patients with Multiple 
Sclerosis 
Joseph Finkelstein, Jeffrey Wood 
Chronic Disease Informatics Program, Johns Hopkins University 
Baltimore, USA 
 jfinkel9@jhmi.edu 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
records exercise completion and attempts, then ques
and educates the patient on multiple sclerosis.  The system 
then sends the symptom and exercise information to the 
server.  Once a report has been sent to the server it can be 
viewed by the patient’s physician through the 
website.   
 The system is designed so that each patient has an 
individual exercise plan decided by their physical therapist
The exercise plan specifies a set of exercises chosen by their 
physical therapist to optimize treatment and can be 
on the laptop system and the website.  Prior to beginning 
home unit use, a physical therapist creates
exercise plan.  The physical therapist chooses from a library 
of 47 predefined stretching and strengthening exer
with their own step by step instructions, illustration
tips, and instructional video.  During the self
records how many times they completed each exercise, 
along with the number of attempts made.  This allows the 
physician to determine which exercises are more challenging 
to the patient.  The exercise plan can be updated through the 
website by the physical therapist and will update on the 
home system the next time it connects to the server
the patient chooses the “Update Exercise Plan” from the 
main menu on the home unit.  There are 
exercise safety tips as well as specific tips for each exercise
designed to minimize the risk of injury during exercise
Information flow for the exercise plan can be seen in Fig. 1.
 
Fig. 1.  Exercise plan information flow 
III. RESULTS 
 The MS HAT system was successfully designed and 
implemented on low-cost touch-screen netbooks
Windows operating system.  Information was successfully 
sent and received from a remote location to the server using 
records exercise completion and attempts, then questions 
on multiple sclerosis.  The system 
symptom and exercise information to the 
.  Once a report has been sent to the server it can be 
nt’s physician through the MS HAT 
that each patient has an 
physical therapist.  
exercise plan specifies a set of exercises chosen by their 
and can be reviewed 
on the laptop system and the website.  Prior to beginning 
creates the patient’s 
chooses from a library 
predefined stretching and strengthening exercises, each 
illustration, safety 
and instructional video.  During the self-test the patient 
records how many times they completed each exercise, 
.  This allows the 
physician to determine which exercises are more challenging 
plan can be updated through the 
and will update on the 
home system the next time it connects to the server or when 
the patient chooses the “Update Exercise Plan” from the 
There are also general 
exercise safety tips as well as specific tips for each exercise 
designed to minimize the risk of injury during exercise.  
exercise plan can be seen in Fig. 1. 
 
HAT system was successfully designed and 
screen netbooks running 
.  Information was successfully 
received from a remote location to the server using 
wireless internet.  The website was successfully launched 
and provides full system functionality.
 The patient home unit runs the MS 
starts up and the user can navigate through the me
the enter, space, and backspace keys
keys.  These keys are marked clearly with their function to 
avoid any confusion. There is also the option of using a 
wireless keypad to navigate the program.  The wireless 
keypad is clearly marked like the keyboard and allows the 
patient to navigate the different exercises without having to 
go back the unit and make selections
exercise steps.  This functionality is especially 
MS where the patient’s mobility may be limited.  
 The text is large and easy to read while all the instructions 
are kept simple.  The program is designed to be simple 
enough for someone with no previous computer experience 
to use. 
 The home unit main menu options 
The first section is “Start Exercises”
program is broken into 3 parts, the symptom diary, the 
exercise plan, and the educational portion.  This section
begins with a self-testing portion where the
series of 16 questions pertaining to their 
One of these questions is shown in Fig. 
 
Fig. 2.  Patient symptom diary question 
 
The responses are used to gauge the overall health of the 
patient, as well as to raise flags when the patient may be 
experiencing multiple sclerosis symptoms that require 
attention and treatment.   
 After the self-test portion of the session
the exercise portion of the session.  First the patient is asked 
whether they would like to view general exercise safety tips, 
then the patient is presented with their specialized list of 
exercises.  The patient can then navigate to any exercise on 
the list and select it.  This brings the patient to a screen with 
a diagram of the exercise and step by step instructions.  
screen also lists the amount of times
to be completed as specified by a physician.  
be seen in Fig. 3.   
 
.  The website was successfully launched 
functionality. 
MS HAT program when it 
starts up and the user can navigate through the menu using 
the enter, space, and backspace keys along with the arrow 
These keys are marked clearly with their function to 
There is also the option of using a 
wireless keypad to navigate the program.  The wireless 
marked like the keyboard and allows the 
patient to navigate the different exercises without having to 
go back the unit and make selections between exercises or 
.  This functionality is especially important in 
MS where the patient’s mobility may be limited.   
The text is large and easy to read while all the instructions 
The program is designed to be simple 
enough for someone with no previous computer experience 
options five different options.  
he first section is “Start Exercises”.  This portion of the 
program is broken into 3 parts, the symptom diary, the 
exercise plan, and the educational portion.  This section 
testing portion where the patient answers a 
questions pertaining to their multiple sclerosis.  
in Fig. 2. 
 
used to gauge the overall health of the 
patient, as well as to raise flags when the patient may be 
symptoms that require 
session, the patient enters 
e portion of the session.  First the patient is asked 
whether they would like to view general exercise safety tips, 
s presented with their specialized list of 
exercises.  The patient can then navigate to any exercise on 
t it.  This brings the patient to a screen with 
a diagram of the exercise and step by step instructions.  The 
s the exercise is supposed 
to be completed as specified by a physician.  This screen can 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
Fig. 3.  Trunk rotation exercise instruction screen 
 
 If the patient still needs more instruction about the 
exercise, they can choose to view a video of an instructor 
giving detailed directions and performing the exercise. 
 Once the patient has completed the exercise to their 
satisfaction, they are questioned about the number of times 
they performed the exercise.  If this number is equal to or 
more than the amount specified by the physician then the 
exercise is highlighted red in the exercise menu, otherwise it 
remains green, indicating it is not completed as seen in Fig. 
4. 
 
 
Fig. 4.  Patient exercise list screen 
 
 The patient may leave the exercise screen at any time by 
hitting the key marked “Exit”.  If all exercises are not 
completed when the patient tries to exit they will be 
presented a dialog box telling them the exercises are not 
completed, asking for confirmation that they wish to exit to 
the main menu. 
 When the exercise portion is completed, the patient begins 
the education portion of the program.  The patient is asked a 
question about MS and then shown an educational tip about 
the disease.  Each question is based upon the tip given 
during the previous exercise session and if a question is 
answered wrong the tip for the question is repeated and the 
question is repeated the next time the session is completed. 
 Once the patient completes the educational portion, the 
program attempts to send the collected data to the server 
through the phone connection.  If there is no connection or 
the data can not be sent to the server, the data is stored on 
the home unit and sent to the server the next time a 
successful connection is made. 
 From the main menu the patient may also review general 
exercise safety tips and view their prescribed exercises 
without having to start a self testing session.  There are also 
options to check for an updated exercise plan and to shut 
down the system.  The main menu is shown in Fig. 5. 
 
 
Fig. 5.  MS HAT main menu 
 
 The MS HAT website is hosted on our servers and can be 
accessed by a patient’s physical therapist using any 
computer with a web browser and an internet connection.  
The physical therapist can view and edit the patient’s current 
exercise plan as seen in Fig. 6. 
 
 
Fig. 6.  Exercise editing on the website 
 
 The physical therapist can also change their exercise plan 
for the patient, send a message to the patient, record clinical 
notes, and view completed exercise data as shown in Fig. 7. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The MS HAT system was pilot tested in patient’s homes.  
The patient’s response was positive and the system design 
shows great potential for providing multiple sclerosis 
patients better care.  The system’s ease of use and 
convenience can provide reluctant patients with an 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
alternative to frequent doctor visits as well as provide them 
with a strict and easy to follow exercise regimen for disease 
intervention.  While face to face visits would still be 
important to the patient’s care, allowing the patient to 
monitor their health frequently, educating them on their 
condition, and walking them through a tailored exercise 
routine will hopefully increase their awareness, quality of 
life, and rehabilitation adherence. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Exercise home monitoring on the website 
 
 The proposed system can be adapted for other chronic 
diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [23] 
where the same principles have been applied to facilitate 
patient-centered care [24]. 
 We are also looking toward expanding the HAT system to 
other electronic platforms [25-26].  Mobile computing is 
becoming smaller, faster, and cheaper, creating more 
potential environments for the HAT disease management 
system.  Systems such as the Apple iPhone and mobile 
phones 
are 
rapidly 
becoming 
viable 
options 
for 
implementing HAT systems. 
V. CONCLUSION 
 The HAT system is a viable platform to facilitate 
management of multiple sclerosis.  This system can be 
expanded to support rehabilitation in other chronic 
cardiovascular, 
respiratory, 
and 
neurodegenerative 
conditions. Including means to monitor blood pressure, 
oxygen saturation and heart rate can improve safety of home 
exercise. Adding Kinect-like sensors may enhance user 
interface, exercise assessment, and data collection. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  
Vickrey B.G., Hays R.D., Harooni R., Myers L.W., Ellison G.W. 
 
 
A health-related quality of life measure for multiple sclerosis. 
 
 
Qual Life Res. 1995;4(3):187–206. [PMID: 7613530] 
[2]  
Anderson D.W., Ellenberg J.H., Leventhal C.M., Reingold S.C.,   
 
 
Rodriguez M., Silberberg D.H. Revised estimate of the prevalence 
 
 
of multiple sclerosis in the United States. Ann Neurol. 
 
 
1992;31(3):333–36. [PMID: 1637140] 
[3]  
Brown T.R., Kraft G.H. Exercise and rehabilitation for individuals 
 
 
with multiple sclerosis. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N 
 
 
Am. 2005;16(2):513–55. [PMID: 15893685] 
[4]  
Wiles C.M., Newcombe R.G., Fuller K.J., Shaw S., Furnival- 
 
 
Doran J., Pickersgill T.P., Morgan A. Controlled randomised 
 
 
crossover trial of the effects of physiotherapy on mobility 
 
 
in chronic multiple sclerosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
 
 
2001;70(2):174–79. [PMID: 11160464] 
[5] 
Solari A., Filippini G., Gasco P., Colla L., Salmaggi A., La Mantia 
L., Farinotti M., Eoli M., Mendozzi L. Physical rehabilitation has a 
positive effect on disability in multiple sclerosis patients. Neurology. 
1999;52(1):57–62.  
[PMID: 9921849] 
[6]  
Romberg A., Virtanen A., Ruutiainen J., Aunola S., Karppi S.L.,  
Vaara M., Surakka J., Pohjolainen T., Seppänen A.  Effects of a 6-
month exercise program on patients with  
multiple 
sclerosis: 
A 
randomized  study. 
Neurology 
2004;63(11):2034–38. 
[PMID: 
15596746] 
[7]  
Petajan J.H., White A.T. Recommendations for physical activity in  
patients with multiple sclerosis. Sports Med. 1999;27(3):179–91. 
[PMID: 10222541]  
[8] 
Río J., Porcel J., Téllez N., Sánchez-Betancourt A., Tintoré M.,   
 
Arévalo M.J., Nos C., Montalban X. Factors related with treatment 
adherence to interferon beta and  glatiramer 
acetate 
therapy 
in 
multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler.  2005;11(3):306–9. [PMID: 15957512] 
[9]  
Wagner E.H., Austin B.T., Von Korff M. Organizing care for 
 
 
patients with chronic illness. Milbank Q. 1996;74(4):511–44. 
10] Finkelstein J., Wood J., Cha E., Orlov A., Dennison C. Feasibility of 
congestive heart failure telemanagement using a Wii-based telecare 
platform. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2010;2010:2211-4. 
[11] Finkelstein J., Cha E., Dennison C.R. Exploring Feasibility of Home 
Telemanagement in African Americans with Congestive Heart 
Failure. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2010;160(Pt 1):535-9. [PMID: 
20841744] 
[12] Finkelstein J., Cha E. Hypertension telemanagement in blacks. Circ 
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2009;2(3):272-8. [PMID: 20031848] 
[13] Finkelstein J., Hripcsak G., Cabrera M. Telematic system for 
monitoring of asthma severity in patients' homes. Stud Health Technol 
Inform. 1998;52 Pt 1:272-6. [PMID: 10384460]  
[14] Finkelstein J., Khare R., Ansell J. Feasibility and patients' acceptance 
of Home Automated Telemanagement of oral anticoagulation therapy. 
AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2003:230-4. [PMID: 14728168]  
[15] Cross R., Cheevers N., Finkelstein J. Home Telemanagement for 
Patients with Ulcerative Colitis (UC HAT). Digestive Diseases and 
Sciences 2009;54(11):2463-72. [PMID: 19104937] 
[16] Cross R.K., Finkelstein J. Feasibility and acceptance of a home 
telemanagement system in patients with inflammatory bowel disease: 
a 6-month pilot study. Dig Dis Sci. 2007;52(2):357-64. [PMID: 
17211702] 
[17] Cross R.K., Arora M., Finkelstein J. Acceptance of telemanagement is 
high in patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disorder. Journal of 
Clinical Gastroenterology 2006;40:200-8. [PMID: 16633120] 
[18] Finkelstein J., Khare R., Vora D. Home Automated Telemanagement 
(HAT) system to facilitate self-care of patients with chronic diseases. 
Journal of Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics 2003;1(3):78-82. 
[19] Farzanfar R., Finkelstein J., Friedman R.H. Testing the usability of 
two automated home-based patient management systems. J Medical 
Systems 2004; 28(2): 143-153. [PMID: 15195845] 
[20] Samal L., Hutton H.E., Erbelding E.J., Brandon E.S., Finkelstein J., 
Chander G. Digital divide: variation in internet and cellular phone use 
among women attending an urban sexually transmitted infections 
clinic. J Urban Health. 2010;87(1):122-8. [PMID: 19941085] 
[21] Wood J., Yablochnikov I., Finkelstein J. Interactive asthma learning 
system utilizing a mobile phone platform. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 
2008 Nov 6:1181. [PMID: 18999060] 
[22] Skinner C., Finkelstein J. Using cell phones for chronic disease 
prevention and management. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2008 Nov 
6:1137. [PMID:18999018] 
[23] Finkelstein  J., Khare R., Vora D., Arora M. Design and 
implementation of home automated telemanagement in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. Proceedings of the 16th IEEE 
Symposium Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS 2003), 
2003:207 – 212. 
[24] Finkelstein J., Barr M.S., Kothari P.P., Nace D.K., Quinn M. Patient-
centered medical home cyberinfrastructure: current and future 
landscape. Am J Prev Med. 2011;40(5 Suppl 2):S225-33. [PMID: 
21521598] 
[25] Finkelstein J., Friedman R.H. Potential role of telecommunication 
technologies in the management of chronic health conditions. Dis 
Manage Health Outcomes 2000;8(2):57-63. 
[26] Cross R.K., Cheevers N., Rustgi A., Langenberg P., Finkelstein J. 
Randomized, controlled trial of home telemanagement in patients with 
ulcerative colitis (UC HAT). Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011 Jun 17. [Epub 
ahead of print] [PMID: 21688350] 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-179-3
eTELEMED 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

