Real-time Telemedicine in Pediatric Cardiology
Riccardo Triunfo, Francesca Frexia, Francesco Cabras,
Carlo Buttu, Valeria Lecca and Stefano Nicola Gessa
CRS4
Pula, Italy
e-mail: riccardo.triunfo@crs4.it, francesca.frexia@crs4.it,
francesco.cabras@crs4.it, carlo.buttu@crs4.it,
valeria.lecca@crs4.it and stefano.gessa@crs4.it
Sabrina Montis, Paola Neroni and Roberto Tumbarello
Azienda Ospedaliera Brotzu
Cagliari, Italy
e-mail: sabrinamontis@aob.it,
paolaneroni@aob.it and robertotumbarello@aob.it
Abstract—Point-of-care echocardiography is a very common technique
in neonatal intensive care units, but it is often hampered by the lack of
on-site specialists. The effectiveness of this procedure is directly related to
the quality of the collaboration between the specialists involved, which can
be inﬂuenced by the convenience of training new specialists in remote
districts. In this study we report the results of the REMOTE project,
which studied the feasibility of a real-time echocardiographic image
transmission system that allows direct interaction between the doctors
involved; the project adopts an innovative, low-cost, cross-platform
and open-source strategy that enables neonatal ultrasound consultative
services in remote districts and secondary care centers. We analyze the
results from two perspectives: clinical and technological. From the clinical
point of view, we report the preliminary results of our experimentation
involving 42 patients and two hospitals in Sardinia, Italy: a tertiary
hospital, with senior expertise in pediatric cardiology, and a secondary
hospital with a neonatal unit. From the technological perspective, we
describe the overall system model and the motivation of its design.
Index Terms—Real-time telemedicine; tele-ultrasound; COTS technolo-
gies; pediatric cardiology.
I. INTRODUCTION
Congenital heart diseases (CHDs) are the most common congenital
disorders [1][2][3] affecting 6 to 13‰ live-born infants [4][5][6][7].
Critical CHDs, deﬁned as those requiring surgery or catheter-based
intervention in the ﬁrst year of life, occur in approximately 25%
of those with CHDs [8]. Although many newborns with critical
CHDs are symptomatic and identiﬁed soon after birth, others are
not diagnosed until after discharge from the birth hospitalization
[7][9][10]. In infants with a critical cardiac lesion, the risk of
morbidity and mortality increases when there is a delay in diagnosis
and in timely referral to a tertiary center with expertise in treating
these patients. More than 50% of patients with a missed or delayed
CHD diagnosis die at home or in the hospital emergency department
with a median age of 13.5 days [11]. Point-of-care echocardiography
is the most common diagnostic method for the detection of CHDs
(nearly 100% of precision in detection) in fetuses or newborns
[12][13], but it is hampered by the lack of on-site specialists [14].
In addition, unlike in Anglo-Saxon countries where the sonographer
plays a key role in the management of echo-laboratories, in Italy and
many other European countries the echocardiographic studies have
to be performed by medical doctors (mostly cardiologists) [15][16].
This model can constitute a barrier to the access of speciﬁc exams,
particularly in sparsely populated areas and in extremely specialized
care, such as pediatric cardiology, because of a lack of physician with
a precise expertise in the pathology. Through the REMOTE project
[17], based on the results of the ﬁrst prototype [18], we propose a
new model to enable access to specialized care, such as pediatric
cardiology exams, in underserved areas through the use of real-time
telemedicine. The system devised in this project has been clinically
Figure 1.
Representation of the two video streams (ultrasound and ambient
camera)
tested in the region of Sardinia where there is a mean incidence of
CHDs of 20.25‰ (more than twice the incidence in literature) [19]
and where the 17.3% (284,000 people) of population is concentrated
in two big cities (>100,000 inhabitants) and the remaining 82.7%
(1.4 Million people) is dispersed across a great number of small
villages (375) in a relatively large territory (24,090 km2) [20]. The
main objectives of the project are to:
• enable real-time echocardiographic consultations with direct
interaction between clinicians involved;
• reuse any echocardiographic devices available in remote dis-
tricts;
• restrain the costs of additional material/software required;
• lower the learning curve for the secondary care doctors;
• facilitate teaching sessions via video conferences with many
participants.
II. MATERIALS & METHODS
The REMOTE system allows a specialist at a tertiary care center
to remotely guide the execution of an echocardiographic exam
performed by a medical doctor in a geographically remote sec-
ondary care center, seeing both the exam scene and the sonographic
video stream while directly interacting with the operator in real-
time, Figure 1. The system has been developed with a focus on
pediatric cardiology. This remote diagnosis tool, which is already
in its testing phase, currently connects four Sardinian hospitals to the
specialized pediatric cardiology tertiary center in the island. During
320
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

the course of an examination, a clinician (usually a cardiologist or a
pediatrician without specialized expertise in the pathology) visits the
patient and operates the echocardiograph. A specialist at the tertiary
center uses the combined view of the echocardiograph screen and
a robotized remotely controllable camera to determine the patient
clinical conditions, his posture on the bed and the appropriate position
of the probe. For some pathologies, like CHDs, the accuracy of the
examination is highly dependent on the operator: the results may not
be revealing when the exam is performed by an ultrasound technolo-
gist (sonographer) or by a generic medical doctor, and consequently
exams often have to be repeated by a specialized cardiologist. In
the study of Meyer-Wittkopf et al. a complete correlation between
sonographers and pediatric cardiologists prenatal cardiac ﬁndings was
achieved in only 62% of cases and the diagnosis accuracy could be
improved by allowing a pediatric cardiologist to work collaboratively
with sonographers [21]. The technique described in our work reduces
the repetition of exams and helps guarantee the correctness of its
execution and the subsequent diagnosis.
A. Approach
The main advantages of the system are:
• Real-time transmission. Carrying out the remote consultation
through the transmission of audio / video streams in real-time
enables the physician to start counseling at the same time of the
examination rather than after viewing the whole documentation
sent by the remote center (store-and-forward protocol).
• Reduction of both patient and physician transfers. Due to the
particular geographic conformation of the region, moving a
specialists to the remote center or the patient to the referral
center means a signiﬁcant increase of time before the diagnosis.
With this system, local physician can beneﬁt of great specialized
services without transferring the patient.
• Scheduling of consultation. Thanks to computerized booking and
scheduling procedures, the system can optimize the communi-
cation between the local centers scattered in the territory and
the referral center.
• Emergency management. An accurate, priority-aware manage-
ment procedure signiﬁcantly reduces the time to diagnosis for
urgent cases.
• Clinical record and remote reporting. Clinical records and re-
ports are accessible using a web browser, letting all the operative
units get immediate access to the patient data.
Each feature has been added to solve medical needs: the following
sections highlight the main issues faced during the development of
the teleconsultation system and how they were approached.
• Issue: operator dependent exam.
Approach: direct interaction between the operator and the
specialist (real-time voice and video chats) enables correct
exam execution. Due to the complex nature of the examination
and even more to the difﬁculties in diagnosing a CHD in
children, echocardiography in pediatric ﬁeld is considered a
highly operator-dependent practice [22]. This reason invalidates
the use of the traditional procedure of second opinion. Thus,
our system deals with this issue by providing the specialist with
video feed of the examination thanks to a robotized camera with
a variable magniﬁcation, in addition to the bidirectional real-time
voice channel between the operator and the specialist. Driven by
the specialist, it makes possible to assess patient conditions and
to focus on the precise positioning of the probe, the correctness
of the projections performed by the operator and also on the
proper use of the ultrasound device itself.
• Issue: high incidence of congenital heart diseases combined with
lack of specialists in secondary healthcare structures.
Approach: virtual presence of specialists through telemedicine
applications. The system can be activated at a relatively low cost
in any remote center [14][23][24][25] equipped with broadband
connection: specialists can be concentrated in tertiary hospitals
and the logistics and shifts can be optimized at a single point.
The physician who requires the teleconsultation and executes the
echography does not need to have speciﬁc expertise in the ﬁeld
of pediatric cardiology, but he must have proper skills on the use
of an echograph. As argued in Widmer et al. [26], it is crucial to
improve remote operator skills and reduce the learning curve; in
this scenario the system assumes a signiﬁcant educational value
for the echograph operator.
• Issue: ultrasound devices heterogeneity and age.
Approach: any kind of device with a video output can be
digitalized and used. Through the use of different types of
encoder and encoding technologies, the system is able to capture
and stream the output video of any ultrasound device equipped
with a nonproprietary video output, from the analog signal of
the most dated devices, to the most recent digital ones.
• Issue: low investments in remote districts.
Approach: Commercial Off-the-Shelf (COTS) low cost devices
and open source software. Although further research is needed
to assess such a telehealth system from an economic point
of view [27], some beneﬁts are expected. First of all, access
costs of telemedicine and its compatibility with consumer-type
hardware decrease to the minimum the initial investment for
linking a new remote unit to the pre-existent infrastructure of
the system. In addition, the choice of using COTS hardware
minimizes the economic and technological risks arising from the
use of proprietary hardware and systems. Last but not least is the
adoption of open-source licenses for the whole software, which
permits a ﬂexible reuse of the developed platform in scenarios
not considered in the initial project.
B. Components
The system is based on three main components, as summarized in
Figure 2:
• The control station (one per tertiary care center): it is a
software system that can be accessed using a common laptop;
through it a specialist can manage remote requests prioritization,
view patient data and start teleconsultation.
• The base station (one per secondary care center): based on a
mixture of hardware and software, it digitizes echograph video
outputs and shots of the exam scene. It also enables voice chats
with the remote medical doctor.
• The data hub (one for the whole system): this is a central
server that stores medical records and patient data, manages
voice chats, video streams, resource allocation and bookings.
1) Control Station:
1. Specialist Desktop Application:
allows the specialist to
view the list of patients waiting for teleconsultation, to select
the desired consultation, and to perform it through an audio
chat with the echocardiographer, using remote visualization
of echo and PTZ (Pan/Tilt/Zoom) camera. The specialist
may control pan, tilt and zoom of the camera through the
keyboard or the on-screen graphical interface.
2. Web Application: used to schedule the availability of
specialists, view the clinical records and create or edit
consultation reports.
321
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2.
System architecture
2) Base Station:
3. Echocardiographer Mobile Application:
it allows the
echocardiographer to create, manage and run teleconsulta-
tions. After answering the call of the specialist, no further
interaction with the mobile device is required, in order to
leave the operators hands free.
4. Web Application: it is used by the echocardiographer or
other supporting personal to create and manage personal
patient data, to schedule consultation, edit and view clinical
records.
5. Network A/V Encoder: this device enables remote trans-
mission of video and audio streams generated by the
Doppler ultrasound device. Through the use of network
and streaming protocols that enable low latency real-time
transmissions, it allows the specialist to receive in almost
real-time the output of the medical device. Due to the
number of sonographic device available, we adopted several
different types of encoder: for older medical devices that
emit analog video we chose a BNC/RCA to RTP/H264/AAC
encoder (using various kind of adapters we can link any
standard analog connector), while for modern devices that
provide a digital video output we used a network frame
grabber (VGA/DVI/HDMI compatible).
6. PTZ Network Camera: this device provides the streaming
video capture of the entire environment of teleconsultation
(room, patient, echocardiographer) and allows the specialist
to focus on the details of the examination. In addition, it
can be used as a backup for the encoder by targeting the
Doppler ultrasound monitor. For experimental purposes we
selected a PTZ camera with night/day switch (infrared when
0.005 lux or under) that features an optical zoom (18x) and
a reversible horizon (ceiling mount).
3) Data Hub:
7. Sip PBX: this component acts as IP PBX and VOIP gateway
and is responsible for connecting and managing audio calls
between clinicians.
8. Application Server: this is the core of the system and it
consists of four logical components responsible for user
authentication, scheduling and management of teleconsulta-
tions and writing clinical records. The authentication mod-
ule permits application, device and user authentication via a
custom version of standard OAUTH protocol. The planning
module allows the tertiary center to report the available time
slots of specialists and secondary centers as to schedule
patient visits during those time slots. The teleconsultation
management module is responsible for managing the entire
process for the remote visits, starting with the request of the
teleconsultation, through its acceptance by the specialist,
ending with the correct routing of audio streams video
and voice chat. The clinical records module allows the
specialist to analyze patient data and past clinical image
records during the teleconsultation, thus providing valuable
information to help compile the ﬁnal medical report. It also
allows the secondary care center involved in the visit to
manage, export and print the report. Finally, it contains an
administrative module for the management of care centers
(i.e., register devices, sip info, etc.).
4) Interconnections:
9. VPN Tunneling: it groups all devices in a single encrypted
virtual network, thus ensuring higher security for the trans-
mitted data.
10. Encoder Stream: it is an A/V stream carrying both the
video and audio channels from the ultrasound device. The
stream is transmitted directly from secondary to tertiary care
322
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 3.
Teleconsultation workﬂow
center without passing through an intermediate data center.
11. Camera Stream: the PTZ Camera video stream, transmit-
ted directly to the tertiary center like the encoder stream.
12. PTZ Camera Control: an HTTP channel through which
the specialist can control the camera pan/tilt/zoom features.
13. VOIP Stream: the audio stream that allows voice commu-
nication between sonographer and specialist. It is routed,
managed and distributed through the aforementioned Sip
PBX.
14. Data Stream: an HTTP stream through which all data are
exchanged between the data hub components and the other
systems.
C. Workﬂow
The main workﬂow consists of three phases:
• scheduling: the exam is requested and scheduled;
• teleconsultation: the examination is performed;
• reporting: the medical report is prepared and given to the patient
after the consultation.
Figure 3 shows each step in the process. To better understand the
diagram, it is helpful to clarify the meaning of Teleconsultation and
Teleconsultation Session. The former is the digital representation
of the visit provided to the patient. The latter is the single voice
chat session between the physicians. Each Teleconsultation may have
multiple session within it.
1) Scheduling:
1. Scheduling Availability: via a web browser, the tertiary
unit registers the hourly availability of the specialists for a
given time period.
2. Insert Personal Patient Data: the secondary unit enters
patient data.
3. Insert and Scheduling Consultation: the secondary unit
inserts and schedules a new teleconsultation according to
the availability of specialists speciﬁed at the tertiary unit.
2) Teleconsultation:
4. Start Scheduled Teleconsultation: at the scheduled time,
the echocardiographer logs in via the mobile app, selects
the scheduled teleconsultation and waits for the specialist.
5. Select and Accept Teleconsultation: at the scheduled
time the specialist logs in and accepts the teleconsultation
selected by the sonographer before.
6. Require Consultation Session: the specialist invites the
echocardiographer to start a teleconsultation session.
7. Accept Consultation Session: the echocardiographer ac-
cepts the session of the specialist.
8. Negotiation and start Streaming and Voice Chat: au-
tomatically, the system enables the routing of the audio
channel between the physicians involved in the consultation,
enables the video streams and provides the specialist with
the control of the remote camera.
9. Running consultation using stream/audio/PTZ: during
the teleconsultation session, the specialist can direct and
zoom the camera to improve the quality of the consultation.
The specialist is able to take snapshots of streams which
are automatically added to the patient medical records and
associated with the current visit. Both physicians can arbi-
323
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

trarily decide to pause the session for a certain time (during
the pause the audio and video channels are temporarily
suspended).
10. When ﬁnished, stop Consultation Session: the specialist
can arbitrarily terminate the session at any time, after which
the specialist can resume the teleconsultation by creating a
new session, or choose to permanently close it.
11. Conﬁrm and Close Teleconsultation: at this stage, the
echocardiographer can conﬁrm the end of the teleconsul-
tation to the system. The system enables the possibility to
write the visit report for the specialist.
3) Reporting:
12. Report Teleconsultation: the specialist can access the
patients medical records via web to edit the visit report.
13. Provide Report to The Patient: the secondary unit prints
the patients copy of the report.
D. Clinical Trial Protocol
Following an agile software development process, the system was
tested repeatedly during its development to quickly gather and incor-
porate suggestions from clinical use. After the ﬁrst release and a set
of preliminary tests, in order to evaluate its diagnostic effectiveness,
the system is under a clinical trial involving 42 cases, approved by the
ethics committee of Brotzu Hospital (the tertiary care center) on July
2012. The protocol involves two specialists in pediatric cardiology
that perform a series of medical examinations using the traditional
and teleconsultation approaches according to an established rotation:
each physician performs the same number of examinations directly
or by the teleconsultation system, in order to minimize the variance,
and each subject undergoes both diagnostic methods. Two categories
of patients are admitted: children under 6 years and adults over 18
years of age, to test the system with newborns, young children and
adults. In all cases, the patients can participate in the trial only after
giving their informed consent (personally or through their parents),
by which they declare to accept the aims and the conditions of the
study. As the procedure states, one of the two specialists performs
the assessment of the patient traditionally (direct consultation) by
running the echocardiography directly, while the other one guides a
third operator a physician trained in the use of the ultrasound machine
but without a specialized expertise in a teleconsultation. During the
examination the physician executes four projection planes (subcostal,
parasternal, suprasternal and apical), as indicated by the protocol, and
transfers his ﬁndings to a structured report by ﬁlling out the dedicated
form in the software. The result is a tree-structured document, which
is specially designed to make the two reports comparable and suitable
for the subsequent statistical analysis.
III. RESULTS
The system has been tested according to the protocol described
in Section II, which deﬁnes a precise examination sequence and
the use of a structured report to better compare the tests performed
by two different physicians, with and without the teleconsultation
application. The clinical results were very good: considering all
the 42 cases, an analysis from the main diagnosis point of view
showed a 97.6% agreement rate between the two techniques. Likening
the structured report single sections some differences appeared: the
detailed results for this point-to-point comparison will be presented
in a paper by the clinicians involved in the experimentation. Anyway,
these differences are not related to critical aspects of the examination
(in fact the global diagnosis is not affected by these punctual
disagreements) nor attributable to the use of the teleconsultation
system. According to the clinicians, the model created for the report
covers all the ﬁelds necessary to describe the patients’ clinical
conditions: the design of this model was fundamental to enable the
quantitative comparison of the reports and can be a good starting point
to perform statistical and epidemiological studies, since it can lead to
a computable formalism easily used for clinical research. Regarding
the ability of the participants to collaborate through the system, the
feedback was quite positive. The participants considered the system
to be a good tool, enhancing cooperation between clinicians with
different levels of experience. In preliminary tests the system has
been effective for both operators with no experience in pediatric
echocardiography and operators who were working for the ﬁrst time
with the model of ultrasound machine used during the examination.
Over the course of the study, we also determined that there is
a need to establish a very precise procedure for teleconsultation,
which must be set and followed accurately step by step to obtain a
correct diagnosis. The link created by the teleconsultation application
is good, but it can be really effective only if all the components
involved (human, technological and about the process) act together.
It would be insufﬁcient to use the system only to transmit images
and instructions; the specialist connected needs detailed feedback
from the operator performing the examination and directly seeing
the patient. The more details are coded within this feedback (e.g.,
checklists), the more effective the collaboration. The training potential
of the system has also been evaluated. The system was considered
very useful to train specialists through both in-class demonstrations
and while training on-the-job. In fact, because of the collaborative
design of the system young specialists can be easily supported in
their case evaluations. It has also been highlighted that the system
alone, as is, cannot be an effective training instrument unless the
student has already undergone in-depth clinical training to learn the
main projections used in echocardiography and the many important
aspects connected to the manual operations necessary to obtain
these projections (e.g., where pressure has to be applied, etc.). The
technological design of the system was conceived to achieve a real-
time transmission system with a latency lower than one second. The
adoption of an A/V trasmissions, with priority on constant frames
per second, has made possible to keep the streams in sync even in
condition of high network trafﬁc. Part of the clinical trials were been
performed between the more distant tertiary and secondary centers
involved in the project (approximately 120 km) through an xDSL
business connection, without any perceivable signal degradation or
increased latencies. The maximum bandwidth allocation during a
teleconsultation remains within 2.5 Mbit/s (TABLE I).
Furthermore, the system remains operational even in case of
a reduction of the available bandwidth by switching to the still-
image recording feature. This mode of operation provides static full-
resolution images instead of moving video that is usable during the
visit and during the reporting. Moreover, the adoption of a mobile
device with earphones and directional microphone has subjectively
improved the usability of the system for the ultrasound operator.
Concerning the quality of the VoIP transmission, the use of the
TCP protocol (instead of UDP) with subsequent adoption of a
TURN proxy improved the reliability of the audio channel between
the sonographer and the specialist and helped simplify network
conﬁguration for each operating unit. All the software can be reused
and extended with a relatively modest investment on a large number
of software platforms, thanks to the detailed analysis performed to
select the appropriate software libraries for developing the system
and the preliminary tests conducted during the development phase
(TABLE II).
324
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I
MAX BANDWIDTH USAGE FOR SINGLE CONSULTATION
DIRECTION
INBOUND
OUTBOUND
TERTIARY CENTER
500 kb/s
2.5 Mb/s
SECONDARY CENTER
2.5 Mb/s
500 kb/s
DATA CENTER
500 kb/s
500 kb/s
TABLE II
SOFTWARE LIBRARIES COMPATIBILITY
OSX
Windows
Linux
Android
IOS
Language
python
python
python
java
objc
Auth
oauth
oauth
oauth
oauth
oauth
API
qt
qt
qt
native
native
Gui
qt
qt
qt
native
native
Voip
pjsip
pjsip
pjsip
pjsip
pjsip
AV
gstreamer
gstreamer
gstreamer
native
native
IV. DISCUSSION
The adoption of telemedicine solutions is spreading out but in most
cases the projects, even if good from a technological and clinical
point of view, remain local and short-lived [27]. In order to learn
from the errors of the past, we made interoperability (technological,
semantic and process interoperability, as outlined in [28]) and long-
term usability of all components a priority for our project, even when
this approach was more difﬁcult than creating a customized solution.
The main challenges emerged with the following issues:
• Connecting different clinical institutions also meant connecting
different wards inside the institution itself, which often do not
really communicate. In this case, it is crucial to follow a general
approach that does not focus on any single aspect (clinical,
technical, organizational, administrative, etc.) of the integration.
• The importance of clinical training before the use of the system
is often underestimated. Interoperability must be also semantic
and the creation of a common model greatly facilitates this
communication.
• The system has to be designed to easily integrate with previous
existent systems, and its results have to be integrated in the
hospital system and in the patient electronic health records in
order to enable its use in real clinical activity.
• Roles and accountability must be deﬁned in detail so that it is
clear who is responsible for every single step of the process, who
has to pay and how much. A clear business model is essential
for the completion of the pilot project and also for the system
to have a chance to continue its existence in the future.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The system described in this paper addresses to diagnostic contexts
in which the lack of specialists is critical because the ability of the
operator performing the examination is essential to obtain a correct
diagnosis. To give a solution to the principal aspects related to
these situations, we realized a real-time telemedicine system with
open technologies and low-cost consumer components. The main
components are a real-time teleconsultation application, a precise
workﬂow and a EHR application to support the remote interaction
between clinicians, also thanks to a structured diagnostic report. The
system was clinically tested via a comparison to direct examination
and the results showed a 97.6% agreement rate between the two
techniques. The case study was pediatric tele-echocardiography, a
test that is strongly operator-dependent where it is crucial that the
person performing the examination has a speciﬁc expertise in the
pathology, but the same approach can be applied in diagnostic areas
with similar peculiarity.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially funded by the Regione Sardegna (grant
L.7 N.2039/270). We wish to thank the IT staff of all the hospitals
involved, in particular, Carlo Corona and Emiliano Deplano, for the
network infrastructure implementation; the medical staff involved,
Alessandra Atzei, Carlo Balloi, Laura Sau and Monica Urru, for
the clinical trial support;Cecilia Mascia and Alessandro Piroddi for
technical support.
REFERENCES
[1] P. W. G. Tennant, M. S. Pearce, M. Bythell, and J. Rankin, “20-year
survival of children born with congenital anomalies: a population-based
study,” Lancet, vol. 375, no. 9715, pp. 649–656, Feb. 2010, PMID:
20092884.
[2] M. A. Canﬁeld, M. A. Honein, N. Yuskiv, J. Xing, C. T. Mai, J. S.
Collins, O. Devine, J. Petrini, T. A. Ramadhani, C. A. Hobbs, and R. S.
Kirby, “National estimates and race/ethnic-speciﬁc variation of selected
birth defects in the United States, 1999-2001,” Birth defects research.
Part A, Clinical and molecular teratology, vol. 76, no. 11, pp. 747–756,
Nov. 2006, PMID: 17051527.
[3] T. M. Bird, C. A. Hobbs, M. A. Cleves, J. M. Tilford, and J. M. Robbins,
“National rates of birth defects among hospitalized newborns,” Birth
defects research. Part A, Clinical and molecular teratology, vol. 76,
no. 11, pp. 762–769, Nov. 2006, PMID: 17063529.
[4] M. D. Reller, M. J. Strickland, T. Riehle-Colarusso, W. T. Mahle,
and A. Correa, “Prevalence of congenital heart defects in metropolitan
Atlanta, 1998-2005,” The Journal of pediatrics, vol. 153, no. 6, pp. 807–
813, Dec. 2008, PMID: 18657826.
[5] M.-H. Wu, H.-C. Chen, C.-W. Lu, J.-K. Wang, S.-C. Huang, and S.-K.
Huang, “Prevalence of congenital heart disease at live birth in Taiwan,”
The Journal of pediatrics, vol. 156, no. 5, pp. 782–785, May 2010,
PMID: 20138303.
[6] N. yen, G. Poulsen, H. A. Boyd, J. Wohlfahrt, P. K. A. Jensen,
and M. Melbye, “Recurrence of congenital heart defects in families,”
Circulation, vol. 120, no. 4, pp. 295–301, Jul. 2009, PMID: 19597048.
[7] C. Wren, Z. Reinhardt, and K. Khawaja, “Twenty-year trends in diagno-
sis of life-threatening neonatal cardiovascular malformations,” Archives
of disease in childhood. Fetal and neonatal edition, vol. 93, no. 1, pp.
F33–35, Jan. 2008, PMID: 17556383.
[8] C. N. Talner, “Report of the New England regional infant cardiac
program, by Donald C. Fyler, MD, Pediatrics, 1980;65(suppl):375-461.”
Pediatrics, vol. 102, no. 1 Pt 2, pp. 258–259, Jul 1998.
[9] M. Samnek, Z. Slavk, B. Zborilov, V. Hrobonov, M. Vorskov, and
J. Skovrnek, “Prevalence, treatment, and outcome of heart disease in
live-born children: a prospective analysis of 91,823 live-born children.”
Pediatr Cardiol, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 205–211, 1989.
[10] J. Gregory, A. Emslie, J. Wyllie, and C. Wren, “Examination for cardiac
malformations at six weeks of age.” Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed,
vol. 80, no. 1, pp. F46–F48, Jan 1999.
[11] R.-K. R. Chang, “Missed diagnosis of critical congenital heart disease,”
Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, vol. 162, no. 10, p. 969,
Oct. 2008. [Online]. Available: http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/article.
aspx?doi=10.1001/archpedi.162.10.969
[12] M. D. Cheitlin, W. F. Armstrong, G. P. Aurigemma, G. A. Beller,
F. Z. Bierman, J. L. Davis, P. S. Douglas, D. P. Faxon, L. D. Gillam,
T. R. Kimball, W. G. Kussmaul, A. S. Pearlman, J. T. Philbrick,
H. Rakowski, D. M. Thys, E. M. Antman, S. C. Smith, J. S. Alpert,
G. Gregoratos, J. L. Anderson, L. F. Hiratzka, D. P. Faxon, S. A.
Hunt, V. Fuster, A. K. Jacobs, R. J. Gibbons, and R. O. Russell,
“ACC/AHA/ASE 2003 guideline update for the clinical application of
echocardiography: summary article,” Journal of the American College of
Cardiology, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 954–970, Sep. 2003. [Online]. Available:
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0735109703010659
325
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[13] M. D. Cheitlin, J. S. Alpert, W. F. Armstrong, G. P. Aurigemma, G. A.
Beller, F. Z. Bierman, T. W. Davidson, J. L. Davis, P. S. Douglas, L. D.
Gillam et al., “ACC/AHA guidelines for the clinical application of
echocardiography: executive summary,” Journal of the American College
of Cardiology, vol. 29, no. 4, p. 862879, 1997. [Online]. Available:
http://content.onlinejacc.org/data/Journals/JAC/22870/00005.pdf
[14] B.
McCrossan
and
F.
Casey,
Telemedicine
in
the
Diagnosis
and
Management
of
Congenital
Heart
Disease,
2011.
[Online].
Available: http://cdn.intechopen.com/pdfs/16887/InTech-Telemedicine
in the diagnosis and managemnt of congenital heart disease.pdf
[15] L. del Mestre, R. Compassi, L. P. Badano, M. L. Monti, R. Ciani,
S. Buiese, P. Gianfagna, and P. M. Fioretti, “I tecnici di ecocardiograﬁa:
una realt`a dei soli paesi anglosassoni? L’esperienza di un laboratorio
italiano in cui sono attivi dal 1984,” G Ital Cardiol, vol. 7, no. 12, p.
798808, 2006. [Online]. Available: http://www.giornaledicardiologia.it/
allegati/00704 2006 12/fulltext/12-06 03%20798-808.pdf
[16] M. Campana and C. Cuccia, “Organizzazione di un laboratorio di
ecocardiograﬁa: un ruolo centrale per le immagini e per il sonographer,”
Cardiologia negli ospedali, vol. 181, pp. 73–75, 2011.
[17] “Remote project.” [Online]. Available: http://www.telecap.it/?page id=
29
[18] R.
Triunfo,
R.
Tumbarello,
A.
Sulis,
G.
Zanetti,
L.
Lianas,
V. Meloni, and F. Frexia, “COTS technologies for telemedicine
applications,” International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology
and Surgery, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 11–18, Jun. 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://www.springerlink.com/index/10.1007/s11548-009-0377-z
[19] P. Bassareo, A. Antonelli, P. Neroni, M. Urru, M. Pisano, S. Montis,
G. Mercuro, and R. Tumbarello, “Incidenza delle cardiopatie congenite
in Sardegna.” Giornale Italiano di Cardiologia, vol. 6 (Suppl. 2), pp.
24–25, 2009.
[20] I. I. nazionale di statistica, “Censimento Istat,” 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://dati.istat.it/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=DICA COMPOP&Lang=it
[21] M. Meyer-Wittkopf, B. Schnfeld, S. G. Cooper, and G. F. Sholler,
“Correlation between fetal cardiac diagnosis by obstetric and pediatric
cardiologist sonographers and comparison with postnatal ﬁndings,”
Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology, vol. 18, pp. F02–F02,
2001. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1469-0705.2001.
abs15-3.x
[22] W. W. Lai, T. Geva, G. S. Shirali, P. C. Frommelt, R. a. Humes,
M. M. Brook, R. H. Pignatelli, and J. Rychik, “Guidelines and
standards for performance of a pediatric echocardiogram: a report
from the task force of the Pediatric Council of the American
Society of Echocardiography.” Journal of the American Society of
Echocardiography : ofﬁcial publication of the American Society of
Echocardiography, vol. 19, no. 12, p. 141330, Dec. 2006. [Online].
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17138024
[23] J. L. Cotton, K. J. Gallaher, and G. W. Henry, “Accuracy of
interpretation of full-length pediatric echocardiograms transmitted over
an integrated services digital network telemedicine link.” Southern
medical journal, vol. 95, no. 9, p. 10126, Sep. 2002. [Online].
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12356100
[24] P. T. Moore, N. O’Hare, K. P. Walsh, N. Ward, and N. Conlon, “Objective
video quality measure for application to tele-echocardiography.” Medical
& biological engineering & computing, vol. 46, no. 8, p. 80713,
Aug. 2008. [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
18618161
[25] J.
P.
Finley,
“Paediatric
telecardiology
in
canada.”
Paediatrics
&
child
health,
vol.
14,
no.
3,
p.
1568,
Mar.
2009.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.
fcgi?artid=2690543&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract
[26] S. Widmer, R. Ghisla, G. P. Ramelli, F. Taminelli, B. Widmer,
L. Caoduro, and A. Gallino, “Tele-echocardiography in paediatrics.”
European journal of pediatrics, vol. 162, no. 4, p. 2715, Apr. 2003.
[Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12647203
[27] L.
D.
Europeens,
Ed.,
The
Telemedicine
challenge
in
Europe,
ser.
The
European
Files,
vol.
20,
July
2010.
[Online].
Available: http://ec.europa.eu/information society/activities/health/docs/
publications/2010/2010europ-ﬁles-telemedicine en.pdf
[28] P. Gibbons, N. A. Phd, T. Flewelling, T. Jepsen, D. K. Md, J. Larson,
J. Ritter, M. R. Md, S. Selover, and J. Stanford, “Coming to terms: Scop-
ing interoperability for health care health level seven ehr interoperability
work group,” 2007.
326
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

