Emergency Web App for Accessing the Medical Emergency Services
Beatriz Gómez, Carlos Juiz
Cátedra Telefónica-UIB
Computer Science Department
Universitat de les Illes Balears – UIB
Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 07122
{b.gomez, cjuiz}@uib.es
Abstract-Nowadays,
accessing
emergency
services
and
customer healthcare, in Spain, is done only by traditional phone
calls to the number 061. In order to facilitate interaction between
the emergency users and the emergency service system, we are
improving
and
expanding
new
channels
of
personal
communication. Given that the use of smart mobile devices is
widespread in our society, we are developing a mobile application
for emergency management, providing the same assistance as
phone calls and adding some brand new features. We have
developed requirements design and a functional specification of
our new mobile application aimed at improving user interaction
with the traditional emergency systems. The functionalities of the
Web
application
are
focused
on
providing
a
direct
communication service, complete and effective, allowing quick
and accurate intervention of the emergency services. Our
purpose is to define a platform fully accessible to all users,
regardless of their language and/or technological knowledge.
Thus, the focus of this paper is mainly devoted to explain how to
extend traditional applications based on emergency phone calls,
to
modern
mobile
applications
considering
not
only
web
technologies, but also social networking behavior.
Keywords-Healthcare
Emergency
System;
User
Interaction;
Mobile Devices; Web Applications.
I. INTRODUCTION
Before the decision of the European Union (EU), in 1991,
to have a single phone number for European emergency calls,
accessing healthcare emergencies and medical urgencies is
Spain was performed by dialing 061. The EU decision,
legislated in Directive 91/396/EEC of the Council of the
International Association of Emergency Managers (IAEM)
Spain from July 29, 1991, defined the dialing number 112 for
these European emergency calls and added, in cases where it is
considered appropriate, this number will be introduced in
parallel with any other emergency number that existed before.
The Medical Emergency Services (SEMs for its acronym in
Spain) belong to any public health system integrally. Its main
function is to provide medical care in all emergency situations,
including disasters. Medical emergencies have two main
assistance scopes: hospitable, through emergency services of
the
hospitals;
and
extra-hospitable,
which
can
integrate
different resources and types of assistance depending on the
health model of the country in terms of integration or not
integration of specialized primary assistance into a single
health service and the type of the provision of services.
Therefore, extra-hospitable emergency health services are
defined like a functional organization that performs a set of
sequential human and material activities with fixed and mobile
devices, with appropriate resources, coordinated, initiated from
the moment in which the medical emergency is found. Thus,
after consideration of the needs, it is assigned a response
without mobilizing any resource or moves their devices to act
in situ, perform medical transport if necessary and transfer the
patient to the appropriate facility for definitive treatment.
The
protocol
of
Emergencies
Service
and
Medical
Emergencies indicates that the incident or accident and the
corresponding emergency assistance are done in a different
intervention chain, as it is shown in Figure 1. Thus, the first
people to intervene may be the patient, witness or designated
first responders (firemen, police). This is the weakest link, as a
few Spanish citizens are trained in first aid. Neither the
personal of some services and institutions which expected
higher occurrence of people or a greater probability of
emergency are trained in these first aids. However, this reality
increases the results in terms of survival, as witnesses and first
involved people apply basic life support and defibrillation,
while the first health equipment arrives, remain essential for
the survival in cardiac arrest cases. The second link is a call
initiation done by the first involved people through 112 or 061,
and received by the Coordination Center, which serves the
emergency phone, and according to its characteristics or
severity, it is decided to follow action: resolution of the phone
call, resource mobilization, or referral of the patient on their
own to a given health center. So, as third link, the Coordination
Center has the quest to obtain the appropriate resources for
appropriate patients in appropriate timeframes.
Fig. 1 Emergency Service Flowchart [1]
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Early care services, transportation services and
hospital
emergency are not the scope of this paper. Within this response
chain, the appropriate Emergency Services chain begins with
the receipt to the call at the Coordination Center for following
coordination of no health emergency devices.
In the specific area of the Autonomous Community of the
Balearic Islands, where our university is also located, SAMU
061 (Emergency Medical Service 061) is a public Emergency
Medical Service under the Health Service of the Balearic
Islands that has the responsibility for healthcare emergencies
and outpatient emergency in the territory of the islands [2].
Nowadays, the user who needs to access SAMU services
should make a phone call by dialing 061 (link 2), based on the
Protocol of Emergencies Service and Medical Emergencies
described before, which will be run by an operator (link 3) who
will manage the incidence and will organize the needed
resources based on the information described by the user, as
detailed above.
Such an approach would generate a list of services focused
on assessing and responding to any emergency; thus, our new
Emergency Web Application includes, among other features,
the
following
functions:
collecting
user's
personal
data,
emergency
registration
through
a
set
of
questions
and
emergency registration in state of panic, with the aim to
improve the first customer assistance. In terms of interactivity,
it will also be essential to make a detailed study of user in with
the platform. Our purpose is to define a platform fully
accessible to all users, regardless of their language and/or
technological knowledge.
The paper is structured as follows: in Section II, research
and implemented development related to this work is depicted.
In Section III, the current technological environment of SAMU
for the control and management of emergencies is overviewed.
Section IV will present the solution we designed to provide
new channels of communication between the user and SAMU.
We conclude with some final comments and open problems in
Section V and final observations in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Several functionalities have been studied and designed to
improve access
to
healthcare
emergency assistance and
medical emergencies, so that they generate social benefit of
these services and content, in particular to improve the
interaction between the healthcare emergency system and their
users. In fact, Alcalde [3] already anticipated the trend of
access not only by telephone, but also
through social
networking, IP telephony, messaging and mobile applications,
as well as video and image distribution. The authors propose
new VoIP
phone
technologies
and
flexible
architecture
between different emergency centers.
The Fire Department at San Ramon Valley (California,
U.S.A.) has developed an application that offers continued
connection with 911 emergencies service by mobile phone [4].
The application takes advantage of their phone location, so that
users that indicated they have been trained in Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation (CPR) and would be willing to help in an
emergency can be messaged to do it. Therefore, the 911
dispatch center receiving a call for an emergency that is
occurring near the trained user, will send a notification telling
his/her help is needed in the surrounding area.
Other researchers from University of Texas [5] reveal next-
generation emergency response technology related to mobile
phones. Specifically, the smartphones can be placed directly on
the chest to monitor breathing, heart rate, blood pressure and
transmit this information directly to the operator of the call.
Besides, previous
introduction
to
the
study of user
interaction is explained by Gómez and Juiz [6]; we explained
the importance of adding a new channel of communication
between emergency services and the user. Similar to the Fire
Department App, the application communicates with the user
via the mobile device (Fire App by notifications, our app by
chat). Our application also intends to use a system similar to
his personal data record. On the contrary, they have already
integrated the location by GPS; however we will incorporate it
in the future.
These are only a few examples from an increasing
application list [7] that could include “SOS First Aid”,
“PocketCPR”, “iRescue”, among others, all of them taking
advantage of social impact of mobile devices and trying to
improve healthcare.
III. TECHNOLOGICAL SCOPE: THE SENECA PLATFORM
SAMU061 uses the product for emergency management
services developed by Telefónica [8], known as SENECA
platform.
Telefónica is an integrated operator of telecommunications,
leader in Spain. Its activity is basically focused on fixed and
mobile telephony business. However, in terms of health,
Telefónica has been betting strongly for the development of
innovative services in eHealth and telecare areas, especially for
the elderly and patients with chronic diseases. It is important to
add that Telefónica is a European Emergency Number
Association (EENA) Advisory Board Member. EENA is a
Brussels-based NGO set up in 1999 dedicated to promoting
high-quality emergency services reached by the number 112
throughout the EU. So, Telefónica has registered its SENECA
platform in EENA, supporting, giving and sharing eHealth
solutions.
Specifically,
SENECA
is
suite
that
includes
four
operational products available in the SENECA Emergency Suite
(SES). SAMU 061 works through the second one, i.e.
SENECA Health. The technological infrastructure of the whole
SENECA platform is based on market standards and industry.
They integrate in the process of implementation of Emergency
Centers helping their customers in issues like operations
analysis based on service needs and the current situation,
definition and planning of change management activities,
cooperation with the agencies, in an effort to stipulate protocol
and methodology and management of the complete incident
cycle, taking into account citizens, management operatives or
intervention.
SENECA Platform includes a client-server architecture for
Local Area Network (LAN) used by the management database
server processes to communicate with incidences users. The
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

operating environment of the SENECA shown in Figure 2 is
based, in general terms, on the sharing of a common database
between
communications
processes,
management
(CAD),
geographic information systems (GIS) and its corresponding
exploitation.
Fig. 2 SENECA Platform Data Base [9]
In terms of system, SENECA provides an integration of
communications services and incident management based on a
design addressed to the user. It provides an operator interface
that clearly presents all necessary information and simplifying
the decision-making for trained operators at call centers.
A. General Description
The SENECA emergency platform is comprised of a series
of functional modules which can be divided into two groups:
Core Services [9]: Among its features are the following:
voice
integration,
mapping
information
system,
demand
management (attention, location, dispatch, monitoring), basic
alarm system, asynchronous event distribution bus, and storage
of configuration data. The Core is also comprised of the
following modules:
-
Data Base: SENECA Data Base is based in the Oracle
10G R2 Data Base Management System. The data base
stores information about SENECA Platform configuration,
Business Data, Mapping Information, and system register
messages.
-
PABX: Private Automatic Branch Exchange is the voice
commutation central used by the telephony system. It is
possible to integrate itself with different manufacturers,
included those based in VoIP technology.
-
ACD:
Automatic
Call
Distributor
is
a
device
that
automatically distributes calls that access the PABX
among agents.
-
CTI:
Computer
Telephony
Integration
intended
for
interaction between a telephone call and actions taken by a
computer system in an integrated and coordinated way.
Client modules: Contain functionalities of management and
dispatching, where one can find the platform modules residing
in the operating positions thereof. These are the graphic
interface modules, which provide the functionality to users, and
background modules serving the core.
-
COMS:
Communication
Window
that
provides
communication services of the operating station platform
while maintaining control of telephony, phonebook, radios
management, and recorders.
-
GIS–Maps: Cartographic Viewer and positioning.
-
CADM: Care and Dispatch Window, incidents control,
authority and resources.
-
COSE: Tracking Window of several information such as
call letters, files, resources, information search, operator-
definable filters, refreshment in real-time through the
distribution bus events, among others.
B. Additional Modules
SENECA Platform has several additional modules related
to Core Services and Client modules. Although they are not
strictly necessary for its use in relation to management
emergencies, it does offer a number of features and benefits to
support the management mentioned. Thus, one can find:
-
Mobile location: responsible for determining the position
of the mobile phone calling to the emergency center that is
managed and stored by the platform.
-
Dispatching and integration of emergency calls made by
deaf people is also provided.
-
Integration with radio communication solutions.
C. Operating Environment
SENECA Platform is mainly aimed at emergency and
medical
emergencies
centers,
among
which
are
112
Coordination Centers, Health Care and Emergency Medical
Services, Fire Corps and Rescue Services, Police Forces and
Security Services and Civil Protection.
Telefónica
leads
the
Spanish
Emergency
Centers,
specifically 112 Coordination Centers in nine communities, as
well as Health Care Services in six of them. In terms of safety,
National Policy Force belonging to Ministry of the Interior, and
Civil Guard are also lead.
IV. EMERGENCY WEB APP
To improve the interaction between the user and the
emergency center, we integrate a new communication channel
taking advantage of the increased use of mobile devices
accessing to the Internet. Our proposed solution consists on a
cross-platform web application, easily adaptable to any mobile,
and multi-language, making it accessible to all users, regardless
of their technical knowledge and/or language. This last feature
is really a requirement in several territories in Spain, e.g. the
Balearic Islands, due to the huge number of foreign visitors per
year. According to the Tourism Strategy Institute (INESTUR),
in the Balearic Islands on 2009, shown in Table 1, more than
11.5 million tourists visited the islands through aerial and
maritime ways, which means a special careful interest in the
diversity of the idiom.
TABLE I.
FOREIGN VISITORS PER YEAR
Foreign
Spanish
Total
Aerial way
8.917.460
2.311.535
11.228.995
Maritime way
62.526
317.641
380.167
Total Balearic Islands
8.979.986
2.629.176
11.609.162
Thus, we have prioritized the multi-language feature and
designed our application such that, once started, the application
requests the language in which you want to be attended to.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Following, there is a form to fill a small number of fields about
the user's personal data such as your name, address, telephone
number, and more. This is followed by triage questionnaire to
determine the type of emergency that the user suffers. Finally,
the user gets in touch with an operator through chat system, or
if the severity level requires it, it starts communicating via
traditional phone call.
In technological terms, the mobile web application is
developed in two main blocks: Graphical User Interface (GUI)
Module and SENECA Integration Module.
A. GUI Module
In the Web Application GUI, the user interaction has been
developed by Sencha Architect [10], the HTML5 visual app
builder. Sencha has a code editor that guides to build any
application using Model View Controller (MVC), thus both
components that represent information and components that
interact with user are easily identifiable, improving the
development and subsequent maintenance.
Sencha Architect is mainly based on JavaScript language,
and the visual part is edited with HTML5 and Cascading Style
Sheets (CSS) to make it more attractive. One might add that
configuration of visualization files, event files or data model
files are structured following the JSON (JavaScript Object
Notation) [11] syntax. However, developers may use their own
IDE because there are no file dependencies, and Architect
produces regular JavaScript files that can be edited with any
IDE.
The GUI Module is structured according to MVC. In the
Models information, the language model, the user data model
and the triage model with relevant variables are included. To
access these latest models, Sencha configuration Stores are
accessed through a Proxy Ajax that contains the structure of the
models described in Json files. In Views information, the
application Emergency Web App is divided in several panels.
The main TabPanel welcomes the user to the application and
the language requested by a Select field. With the Tab Bar, it is
possible to change to the form which asks for data to the user.
Once this information is sent via Submit button, the user
accesses the second form, where triage is performed based on
the emergency class. After that, the application gives access to
chat. The controller section is made from SENECA Integration
Module.
B. SENECA Integration Module
We have used Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) [12] to
establish the communication between our Web App and
SENECA Emergency system. SOA is a software design and
software architecture design pattern based on discrete pieces of
software providing application functionality as services to
other applications. To communicate, these services are based
on a formal definition with platform and programming
language independence. The definition of the interface [12]
encapsulates the characteristics of an implementation, making
it independent of the manufacturer, the programming language
or the technology development. With this architecture, it is
intended that developed software components are very reusable
because the interface is defined according to a standard, so a
C# service could be used by a Java application. In this sense,
Mascaró defines SOA as a Super-abstraction [13].
One of the greatest economic and technological problems
of the applications is scalability, either the ability to react and
adapt without losing quality, or to be prepared to get bigger
without losing quality in the offered services. SOA ensures the
scalability thanks to its easy assembly of several systems which
facilitates the interaction between different own systems or
third parties. SOA is like a producer-consumer system based in
services and messages, where there is almost a server provider,
a consumer and a service repository.
As one can see in Figure 3, the service is a single and
independent logical piece of a business process, integrated
inside of the service, and interacts with the external world
using an interface. Each service can have its own logic
business rules easily accessible and modifiable at any time. The
server provider starts when someone invokes the service. It
drives the business logic and sends a response if it is necessary.
Therefore, the service consumer sends a message to the
provider to access the service.
SOA lets us develope global systems that interact with each
individual business system. In fact, each system is a Web
Service integrated in the WWW. In this case, SENECA
Telefónica has created the Global System and the Emergency
Web App is an individual system that interacts with Global,
both being Web Services.
Web Services is a technology that uses a set of protocols
and standards used for exchanging data between applications.
Different
software
applications
developed
in
different
programming languages and executed on any platform, can use
web services to exchange data. Interoperability is achieved by
adopting
open
standards.
OASIS
(Organization
for
the
Advancement of Structured Information Standards) and W3C
(World
Wide
Web
Consortium)
organizations
are
the
responsible committees for the Web Services architecture and
regulation. Thus, Web services allow software and services
from different companies located in different geographic
locations can be easily combined to provide integrated
services. Thanks to the great independence between the
application that uses the Web Service and the service itself,
changes in one of them over time should not affect the other, as
long as the established agreements are maintained in the
protocol.
Fig. 3 SOA & Web Services [13]
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

The information exchanged between services is performed
using messages. In our case the standard protocol to send these
messages is SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) and the
description format is WSDL (Web Services Description
Language) format.
SOAP [14] is an XML based protocol for exchanging
structured information in the implementation of Web Services
in computer networks. SOAP offers a basic messaging
framework upon which web services can be built. This
protocol consists of three parts: an envelope, which defines
what the message contains and how to process it, a set of
encoding rules for expressing instances of data types, and a
convention for representing procedure calls and responses.
SOAP
protocol
has
three
main
features:
extensibility,
neutrality, as SOAP can be used over any transport protocol,
such as HTML, SMTP, TCP or JMS, and independency,
because SOAP supports any programming model.
WSDL is an XML [15] which is used for describing Web
services. WSDL describes how communication, i.e. the
requirements of the protocol and message formats required to
interact with the services listed in its catalog. Operations and
messages supported are described abstractly and linked to
concrete network protocol and message format.
The client program (our Emergency Web App) that
connects to the Global Web service, can read the WSDL to
determine what functions are available on the server. The
special data types are included in the WSDL file in the form of
XML Schema. The client uses SOAP to make the call to one of
the functions listed in the WSDL. The WSDL gives us a
description of a web service. Specifies the abstract interface
through which a customer can access the service and the details
of how to use.
The structure of any WSDL file always contains at least the
tags type that defines the data type used by the Web Service,
message for the type of messages, portType which includes the
type of messages that define a communication, binding to see
how the Web Service is implemented with SOAP, and service
that indicates the Web Service location.
In the Emergency App, WSDL is used in several key roles.
One of them indicates the logging mode to the Global Web
service. The request asks user name and password in the format
specified in the WSDL and the response returns the token
logged. This information is required to the application, not to
the user, to give it access to the Global Web service. By this
token, Emergency App can access all functions provided by the
Global Web services. The number and language format is also
set by a WSDL, as well as the fields required to obtain user
data and triage in emergency basis. The token must be included
in all of the mentioned functions. When user changes the
language, the whole application is reflected in the selected
language. Global Web service is responsible for providing
access and support to the chat service, once required fields are
correctly filled in and sent. Another WSDL-based application
closes the session thus releasing the token.
The
selected
technology
to
perform
this
SENECA
Integration Module was Java through NetBeans IDE [16]. The
integrated development environment has several complements
that easily automate the consumer client creation. NetBeans
interprets WSDL files; both in local and remote place, getting
necessary functions and data types for generate objects and
Java classes accessing the consumer server. Automatically
generation of code based on WSDL interpretation gives as a
result two objects and a service class, among others. Objects
represent the requested message and the response message. At
the beginning of the object one can see a WSDL fragment in
XML
according
to
the
expected
values.
Service
class
encapsulates the messages, receives and sends it and shares
information between those and Java objects. Thus, application
is structured in a simple and easy way.
C. GUI Module next to SENECA Integration Module
Module GUI has been easily integrated in SENECA
Integration Module on a single IDE, also NetBeans, which
generates Web Service client that communicates with the
Global Service. As we have mentioned before, Sencha has not
any file dependence, so we only had to import this JavaScript
files and JSON files that contain the data model. The response
of the server, in JSON format, has been processed by a data
treatment function, thus GUI Module can represent language
and required camps of the questionnaire.
It is not the intention of the authors of this paper to describe
the details of the Global Service, in parallel developed by
Telefónica
Sevilla
Development
Group.
Therefore,
the
interoperability of both blocks with the SENECA platform is
guaranteed regardless of language, platform and configuration.
V. RESULTS
Emergency Web App is a mobile application, even though
its name induces confusion. We decided to use HTML5 in the
development of this project to be independent of any platform
(Android, IOS, WPhone, and Blackberry). We evaluated the
use of Google GWT or some derivate (GXT, SmartGWT) that
allow traditional Java programming, but the result of the
compilation would have been an AJAX web application.
As a second option, we could write HTML5 code directly
using some sort of framework or JavaScript framework. At this
point, we evaluate two
possible ways: jQuery Mobile,
compatible with several devices and a powerful visual editor
that facilitates development in HTML5; and Sencha Touch 2,
developed by the same group as GXT Library, fully oriented to
mobile devices.
At this point, we can say that the final choice was to use
Sencha Touch 2 for the development of the client. As described
above,
Sencha
has
a
programming
environment,
very
comfortable and complete, known as Architect. Also, because
it is practically based on HTML5, Sencha not only ensures the
independence of the mobile device that the user could use, but,
in fact, the application is accessible from any web browser.
Hence, the final name has been chosen to be Emergency Web
App.
The final result of the application, in terms of the graphics,
has been extremely positive. Being based on JavaScript,
integration with Web Service has been direct and without
mishaps. In addition, the display emulates any mobile device,
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

using a similar complements, whether buttons, bars, selectors
and even sliding screen even visible from the web browser.
The left side of Figure 4 shows the running application
emulating a web browser on an iPhone. Therein welcomes the
application allowing modifying the language from the selector
below. It starts in Spanish by default (Telefónica is who
provides us the languages). By the bottom menu of the
application, one can access the form that the user must
complete before allowing access to chat. It lists the required
fields to be filled. Once completed, the user does not have to
re-fill again. Personal data will be registered for future access
to the platform. As one can see in the right side of Figure 4, the
sliding
screen
maintains
the
same
visual
effect
when
performing it with one’s finger on a touch screen of the latest
mobile. The graphical interface is not bounded to a specific
size, but, on the contrary, is adapted to the size of the device
that has been executed, so that it keeps its visual appeal
whether it is a small mobile device, as if is in a tablet, a laptop
or a personal computer.
Fig. 4 Welcome to the application [6]
Regarding integration modules with Seneca Platform,
creating a Web Server Client was the best option considering
parallel work in specific modules
would
perform with
Telefónica Technology Department in Sevilla. Apart from that,
this application is an integrated module in the Platform Seneca,
an existing service, functional, and for this project, unknown
and without needing to know in depth its functionalities.
Therefore, we can say that the two features that should meet
Emergency Web App about multiplatform and multi-language
have been successfully achieved.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
According to the conclusions of the round table "Apps
health, are we ready?" [17], it is expected that the number of
mobile medical Apps and users that use them, are going to
increase
exponentially
over
the
next
two
years.
This
conclusions stressed the importance of offering creative
solutions adapted to the needs of users as patients are willing to
pay for Apps "useful and effective" for the benefit of their
health. On this basis, it is estimated that, in two years, there
will be over 500 million people using medical Apps from
mobile.
These expectation figures show the positive reception of
the Apps related to medical emergencies by users. Even
Telefónica
company
wishes
to
initiate
and
integrate
communication through fax, SMS and internet/email and our
work is to include this new functionalities in the Emergency
Services chain.
The collection and storage of personal information of the
caller is a valuable feature because of the possibility of making
mistakes due to the poor quality of the call or the caller's state
of nervousness or panicking. Through Emergency App, the
time for obtaining user data is reduced because he completes
the questionnaire in addition to the exact location of the
emergency. If it is necessary to access the chat, according to
the severity of the emergency determined by the triage, it must
have the same priority as common call which ensures real-time
attention.
In this paper, we briefly explained our development project
in Cátedra Telefónica – UIB, which is not only for business
interest based on a new product to offer through SENECA
platform, but also for emergency systems, government entities
and especially users want ease of access and communication in
an area, where time reducing performance, reliability and
security are vital in healthcare emergencies and medical
emergencies.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
research
and
development
project
is
partially
supported by Cátedra Telefónica – UIB: Digital Health and
Sustainable Tourism and also is partially supported by the
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness under
Grant TIN2011-23889.
REFERENCES
[1]
Health Emergencies, “Setting emergency services and medical
emergency (Spanish),” Ministry of Health and Social Welfare,
Andalucía, 2011, pp. 58–70.
[2]
Health Service in Balearic Islands, “SAMU 061, Servicio de
Atención Médica Urgente 061,” Palma de Mallorca, 2011, pp.
2–6.
[3]
M.
A.
Alcalde,
“New
Challenges
in
the
Emergency
Coordination Centers (Spanish),” Dintel Foundation, 2011,
pp.14–25.
[4]
Fire Department San Ramon Valley, “San Ramon Valley Fire
Protection District to dispatch citizens to cardiac emergencies,”
California, April, 2011, pp. 3–10.
[5]
National
Science
Foundation,
“Researchers
Reveal
Next-
Generation Emergency Response Technology,” University of
Texas, 2013, pp. 3–5.
[6]
B. Gómez, C. Juiz, “Integration of Emergency Web App for
accessing
the
emergency
services
by
mobile
phones,”
Universitat de les Illes Balears, September, 2013, pp. 2–4.
[7]
L. Serrano, “11 essential apps for emergencies (Spanish),”
December, 2012, pp. 8–10.
[8]
European Emergency Number Association, “Global Service and
Communications Operator: SENECA Telefónica,” Brussels,
1995, pp. 12–15.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[9]
C. Badenes, “Detailed Description of SENECA Platform
(Spanish),” Ayuntamiento de Castellón, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–13.
[10] Sencha
Architect
website,
(2014)
M.
Mullany
“Sencha
Architect, The Ultimate HTML5 App Builder,” [Online].
Available: https://www.sencha.com/products/architect/.
[11] General
Assembly
Ecma
International,
“The
JSON
Data
Interchange Format,” ECMA International, Oct. 2013, pp. 2–5.
[12] C. Matthew, K. Laskey, F. McCabe, P. F. Brown, R. Metz,
“Reference Model for Service Oriented Architecture 1.0,”
OASIS Standard, 2006, pp. 4–24.
[13] M.
Mascaró,
“Web
tourist
applications
development,”
Universitat de les Illes Balears, October, 2012, pp. 6–41.
[14] W3C website, (2007) N. Mitra, Y. Lafon “SOAP Version 1.2
Part
0:
Primer
(Second
Edition),”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/soap12-part0/.
[15] W3C website, (March, 2001) E. Christensen, F. Curbera, G.
Meredith,
S.
Weerawarana,
“Web
Services
Description
Language
(WSDL)
1.1,”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl.
[16] NetBeans IDE website, (2013) Oracle Corporation “The Smarter
and
Faster
Way
to
Code,”
[Online].
Available:
https://netbeans.org/.
[17] CIO Spain website, (2013) “500 million people will use mobile
medical
apps
in
2015
(Spanish),”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ciospain.es/sanidad/500-millones-de-personas-
usaran-apps-medicas-moviles-en-2015#.UTiJM0GXwb0.gmail
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

