Organising Videoconferencing for Collaborative Medical Diagnosis 
Pre-Planned and Acute Practice 
 
Line Lundvoll Warth 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and Telemedicine 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
line.lundvoll.warth@telemed.no 
 
Abstract— How videoconferences (VCs) as a tool for real-time 
collaborative medical diagnosis are organised affects the 
content of collaborative work. The objective of this paper is to 
outline how the organisation of VCs for pre-planned and acute 
situations affects content in collaboration. Forty-seven VCs 
were observed and videotaped, and twenty semi-structured 
interviews were conducted in two studies, representing three 
contexts, reflecting pre-planned and acute medical problem 
solving. Regularly pre-planned meetings differ from others, 
creating a practice that includes consultations about general 
medical problems, the opportunity to discuss specialised 
problems, and information sharing between levels of care. 
Regularity and thus knowledge of each other and of the patient 
support the sharing of information about patients previously 
discussed. Acute use of VC is organised as a restricted service, 
offered during a specific timeslot during the day. The 
consultation is specialised (i.e., stroke), in which professional(s) 
with specific specialised knowledge meet. Non-planned, 24/7 
acute use of VC is still left to be explored in its context. What is 
known is that acute knowledge is knowledge in the moment, 
requiring unplanned access to VC as a tool for sharing 
knowledge resources twenty-four hours a day. These factors 
should 
be 
considered when 
VC 
is 
implemented 
for 
collaborative medical diagnosis. The paper is relevant as it is 
concerned with tools to enhance collaboration online, i.e., VC, 
and how VC improves the value of distributed knowledge 
among virtual teams. 
Keywords—videoconference; 
Collaborative 
medical 
diagnosis; context; pre-planned; acute 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Videoconferencing (VC) is a well-known technological 
tool for collaborative work. Through the use of VC, 
professionals can share information and knowledge jointly, 
producing real-time collaborative medical diagnosis. In 
previous work, the results illustrate that how the VC is 
organised in pre-planned meetings affects the content of 
collaborative work [1, 2]. Continuing work with VC in 
unplanned acute situations [3] led to an interest in how the 
organising of the VC as a tool affects content in the 
collaboration between the professionals. How the use is 
organised is important for the content of collaborative work. 
The objective in this article is therefore to explore how 
different ways of organising the use of VCs affect the 
content of the collaboration and to outline how successful 
VC for collaborative medical diagnosis can be organised. 
This paper expands previous work by connecting the two 
contexts, to illuminate the differences to be considered when 
implementing VC in practice.   
Studies on the organisation of VC have treated the tool as 
a technology disconnected from the context it is a part of, 
e.g., creating ten simple rules for organising VC anywhere 
[4] or a step-by-step guide to VC [5]. Several factors 
influence the VC practice, the context in one main factor. 
The effect of context is often related to a medical illness, i.e., 
VC between specialists and general practitioners (GPs) 
aimed at improving the quality of diabetes care [6], 
addressing administrative and clinical issues using VC in 
delivering psychiatric care [7], and using VC as an effective 
diagnostic tool for, e.g., skin lessons in dermatology [8]. In 
workplace settings, studies have, in many situations, been 
more focused on the technology used during the interaction 
than on the interplay with remote colleagues [9]. This work 
merges two different contexts, to illuminate how medical 
situations are unequal, demanding a different organisation. 
This is often overlooked when implementing new 
technology, as one solution is developed to cover, i.e., all 
acute medical situations, even all collaborative work. This 
expands novel knowledge to the field. 
The paper focuses on collaborative work between 
distributed resources. The theoretical approach constitutes 
the framework for the studies and the paper, as the 
perspectives create premises for understanding collaboration 
in VC practice. The tree contexts, two pre-planned and one 
acute, are accounted for. Video-recorded observations and 
interviews are described as the methods for revealing the 
organisation of VCs and how the context affects the content 
in collaboration. Based on the amount of and the content in 
the VC meetings, the results report how collaborative work 
is shaped by the context. The discussion illuminates pre-
planned and acute practice, and what kind of practice and 
problem solving to arrange for. The paper concludes with 
suggestions for future work. 
II. 
FRAMEWORK 
The interplay among remote colleagues and the emphasis 
on the context of knowledge sharing is used as a framework 
for understanding how the content of medical work and the 
organisation of the VC are mutually shaped. In workplace 
settings, the situated approach notes that problem solving 
often occurs in group settings [10]. This situated approach 
emphasizes a Cultural Historical Activity Perspective 
(CHAT), which focuses on the connection between the 
culture, the arteacts, objects, and tools as a social activity 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[11]. Knowledge is situated within the social activity, context 
and culture and it is an interplay between the institutional 
context and the organisational structure. The studies do not 
frame the use of VC nor the collaborative work itself as a 
transmission of knowledge from one individual to another. 
The collaborative work is shaped by the context it is used 
and developed in, e.g., the medical culture. That i the tools 
the professionals use in their work, the rules they follow, the 
division of labour, and the community they practice in. It is 
the social activity in the group that develops the practice. 
Collaborative medical diagnoses are culturally and 
historically situated [12], and the contradictions among 
different professionals might change the traditional treatment 
of patients. When knowledge from medical professionals is 
transferred between them by collaboration, it might change 
their treatment methods. Changing methods for the specific 
treatment or the tools they use is a change in the historical 
way of performing treatment. Performing medical treatment 
is connected to the context in which the VC is the tool that 
mediates the interactions and activities [13] [14] between the 
participants. It provides collaborative work and ensures that 
the meanings are socially shared. The knowledge is 
distributed as a result of sharing their competence and 
experience as individuals and as a part of their institutional 
practice. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Both studies were designed with the purpose of exploring 
the use of VC, the content for the collaborative work, and 
distributed knowledge sharing. The VC equipment was 
implemented independent of the studies explored in this 
paper. All the participants who used the VC in daily practice 
were recruited for these two studies. No payment was 
received for the professionals, since the collaborative work 
was voluntary as a part of their daily work practice. 
There are three contexts in this study: contexts a and b 
represent hospitals with pre-planned use, and c represents 
VC in unplanned/acute situations. Figure 1 illustrates how 
one hospital with one or several general practitioners (GPs) 
or specialists (coloured faces), with or without patient 
participation (transparent face), is connected to another 
hospital using VC as a tool for collaborative medical 
diagnosis. Traditionally, the professionals in these local 
hospitals seek a second opinion from the larger specialist 
hospital over the telephone. VC replaces or supplements the 
use of the telephone for these activities. 
 
A. Abbreviations and Acronyms 
Define abbreviations and acronyms the first time they a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Two hospitals connected using VC as a tool. 
 
Figure 2.  Organisation of the VC in all contexts. 
A. Hospitals with pre-planned use 
The pre-planned use of VC was organised differently in 
contexts a and b: In context a, the VC is scheduled for a 
specific time slot once a week and happens ‘when needed’. 
The GP identifies the cases to discuss and makes 
arrangements the day before with the hospital, which 
arranges for the appropriate specialist. In context b, the VC 
meetings are held routinely four times a week, organised as 
part of the ordinary daily meetings at the hospital. They take 
place regardless of whether there are predefined medical 
problems to discuss. This service is still running. 
In both contexts a and b, the VC equipment is located in 
the office of one of the GPs. At hospital A, the VC 
equipment is located in a smaller meeting and consulting 
room at the medical department. At hospital B, the VC 
equipment is located in the morning meeting room in the 
medical department. 
B. Hospitals connecting in acute situations 
In context c, the VC was connected during restricted 
times during the day, excluding nights and weekends. This 
context was associated with the condition of stroke, an acute 
medical problem. The professionals in the emergency ward 
assessed the patient and connected to VC from the local 
hospital’s emergency room. At the specialist hospital, the 
VC equipment is located in a dedicated room used only for 
this purpose. When they are called by telephone and asked 
for a VC meeting, the specialist on duty immediately moves 
to this room (Figure 2 illustrates the physical placement of 
the VC equipment in all contexts.) 
 
C. Qualitative methods 
The main data of interest in all three contexts were the 
social interaction and the content in the VCs, requiring 
qualitative research methods. For the pre-planned VCs, it 
was possible to observe the interaction [15]. Forty-seven 
VCs (five in context a and forty two in context b) were 
observed and videotaped during the first half of 2007. This 
constituted all meetings conducted during the five-month 
period. The purpose of the observations was to illustrate the 
social interaction, the content of the collaboration, and how 
the organising affected the content. All the video recordings 
were transcribed, analysed, and categorised to facilitate an 
understanding of the content in the VCs. 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Eight interviews with GPs and several of the specialists 
participating in the VCs, from both contexts, were conducted 
to evaluate the use of VCs in pre-planned collaborative work. 
The interviews were semi-structured, recorded, and then 
transcribed. The interviews lasted from twenty to seventy 
minutes and were conducted from August to December of 
2007. 
In the acute situation, context c, observations of the 
unplanned VCs were difficult. Therefore, all the activity 
using VC was automatically logged and used as a basis for 
conducting interviews. Thirteen professionals, nurses, 
physicians, and specialists from both hospitals were 
interviewed through twelve semi-structured interviews in the 
autumn of 2011. Each interview lasted from twenty minutes 
to two hours. All interviews were audio-recorded and then 
transcribed. All transcriptions were categorised according to 
utterances that seemed to be repeated by the practitioners. 
The purpose of the interviews was to reflect acute medical 
problem solving and the organising and use of VC.  
D. Ethical considerations 
The 
North 
Norwegian 
Regional 
Medical 
Ethics 
Committee (REK) approved the design of the study and how 
the data were collected, handled, analysed, used, and kept in 
contexts a and b. Context c has been registered and evaluated 
as a non-report obliged by the REK. The personal data are 
handled according to the personal information rules in 
Norway. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
In each context (a, b and c), two hospitals are connected 
(hospital A and B). Hospital A (A) and hospital B (B) use 
VCs as a tool for practicing collaborative work in diagnosis 
(Figure 1). Table 1 illustrates the use of VC in all three 
contexts. The content was categorised according to 
consultations and information exchange. A consultation 
consists of discussions about and exchanges related to 
medical problems, diagnoses and follow-ups. Information 
exchange consists of updating the conditions of patients 
treated previously and information about patients transferred 
between levels of care. 
In context a, VC was used five times in two months 
before they stopped using the service. Four times, the 
participants reported and discussed a medical problem and 
once they met to exchange information about a patient 
discussed earlier. 
TABLE I. 
THE TOTAL NUMBER OF VC IN THE CONTEXTS 
 
* The total also includes the category ‘practical organising’ used 17 times in the same period. 
In context b, the VC is routinely held four times a week. 
During a five-month period, there were forty-two VC 
meetings. The service is still running today. During this 
period, twelve meetings were consultations and thirteen 
involved an exchange of information. In context c, eighteen 
months passed between the first time and the last time the 
VC service was used for acute treatments. During this 
period, they consulted four times regarding four different 
stroke patients. The service is now locally disconnected. 
In Figure 3, the results illustrate how the organisation of 
VCs for pre-planned and acute situations affects the content 
of collaboration. Collaborative medical diagnosis is 
organised in both pre-planned and acute practice. The pre-
planned use of VCs is organised as regularly held meetings, 
in this context four times a week at a specific hour, or 
reserved for a specific day when a meeting is held when 
needed. Regularly held meetings offer all knowledge 
resources available at the time during the morning meeting. 
The GP can present patient problems more generally and 
specific medical problems. In pre-planned meetings held 
when needed, the GP must define a medical problem and 
report it to the hospital the day before. These meetings are 
only scheduled one day a week (Wednesdays), so the GP 
must wait for Tuesdays to report the medical problem to be 
discussed. Then, the specialist on duty in the hospital 
prepares and meets to offer a second opinion. 
The acute use of VC is organised as a restricted service, 
offered during a specific timeslot during the day. As the 
specialist hospital has less experienced staff on duty during 
the nights, the service is only offered weekdays from 07.30 
to 19.30 and Saturdays from 09.00 to 13.00. In between 
these hours, the local practitioners in the emergency unit 
determine whether they need to discuss an acute patient with 
the specialist hospital. 
As the purpose of collaborating is to discuss medical 
diagnoses, the content at all sites involves consultation. In 
acute situations, the consultation is specialised (i.e., stroke). 
Here, connecting using VCs is about collaboration 
concerning 
a 
specific 
acute 
situation, 
in 
which 
professional(s) with specific specialised knowledge meet. In 
a pre-planned VC, general (e.g., reviewing a medical 
record) and more specialised knowledge (e.g., diabetes) 
issues are examined. The problems might be of the same 
character, but consultations when needed, only once a week, 
involve insignificant problems. If it does not appear the day 
before the report time (i.e., Mondays) the problem must be 
of a more general character. 
However, pre-planned meetings (when needed), held if 
there are problems to discuss, and in restricted acute 
situations, 
involve 
professionals 
with 
this 
specific 
knowledge. It might be the same or different professionals 
participating each time (Figure 3, symbols  = ≠). Regularly 
held meetings may also include different professionals, but 
this is rare, as, e.g., during summer holiday among the 
practitioners, when stand-ins are practicing. Only regularly  
 
Context 
Period and purpose of use 
Period 
Consultation 
Information 
exchange 
Number 
a 
2 months 
4 
1 
5 
b 
5 months 
12 
13 
42* 
c 
18 months 
4 
0 
4 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
Figure 3.  The organisation of VCs for pre-planned and acute situations and the content. 
held meetings, where the same professionals (Figure 3, 
symbols  ≠ =) meet regularly, result in both consultation 
and information exchange. The regularity and therefore the 
professionals’ knowledge of each other and of the patient 
support the sharing of information about patients who have 
been previously discussed.  
Regularly pre-planned meetings differ from others, 
creating a practice that includes consultations about general 
medical problems and the opportunity to discuss specialised 
problems 
and 
exchange 
information 
about 
patients 
previously discussed. It also allows the sharing of resources 
among the same professionals over time, which provides 
opportunities to expand treatment activity together. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Based on three contexts, the results show how the 
organisation of VCs for pre-planned, as-needed, and regular 
and restricted acute situations affects the content of 
collaboration. This paper focuses on collaborative work 
between distributed resources and how the context affects 
the content and the medical work using VC as a tool for 
collaboration. 
As context b illustrates, VC is well-suited for 
consultations and medical problem solving. It is the medical 
condition that determines whether the situation can be pre-
planned or is acute. Regularly held meetings, as a part of 
established activities such as morning meetings, offer an 
adequate way to organise the use of VC if the aim is a two-
way commitment to collaborative work. Over time, the 
same professionals meet, discussing medical problems of 
diverse character and both general and more specialised 
problem solving. Through connecting with the same 
professionals over time, often discussing the progress of the 
same patients over days, they are able to follow up on the 
treatment. Discussing patient flow between levels of care 
and giving feedback on previously discussed patients also 
provides the specialists with feedback on their second 
opinions. Organising VCs as pre-planned meetings allows 
for situated knowledge, knowledge of the patient, and the 
opportunity to expand the treatment activity together. This 
might change the direction of the object so that the 
practitioners start to use treatment methods and previous 
knowledge connected to the culture of the specialists. 
Acute situations demand general biomedical knowledge 
according to a specific medical problem in time. The 
specialist does not have knowledge of the patient in advance 
or access to other information than what is shared. Here, the 
use of VC is only available during specific times. This gives 
an extra hampering factor (as in the context of conformity 
with pre-planned meetings reported the day before) for use. 
The medical problem must be evaluated against the ability 
to wait until the VC connecting time. If it is easier to 
connect by telephone, the traditional method of discussing 
medical problems is used. As acute situations cannot be 
foreseen and cannot wait, the activity is not restricted. Here, 
it is possible to suggest an alternative for organising VC to 
discuss acute medical diagnosis. Figure 4 includes a 
suggestion for organising VC in acute collaborative medical 
diagnosis as ‘unplanned’. 
Non-planned acute collaborative work benefits from 
being organised as a non-planned, 24/7 service. Acute, 
unplanned collaborative work often brings together different 
professionals periodically (Figure 4, symbols  ≠), because  
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 4.  The organisation of VCs for pre-planned and acute situations 
the consultations demand different knowledge. Over time, 
this activity might change the traditional practice, creating 
this new activity, where the same professionals are able to 
meet more often. However, it is still not likely that the 
activity will include, i.e., information exchange, as acute 
situations demand specialised knowledge and an immediate 
start of treatment. 
VC must be seen as a tool in connection with the context 
it is a part of. In spontaneous situations, which typically 
involve discussing the patient only once, the physicians do 
not have experience with the patient in advance. The 
organisation and the type of knowledge exchanged (the 
medical problem) are mutually attached. Connecting using 
VC regularly allows medical discussions of a more general 
character, i.e., regularly held meetings including both 
specialised and more general medical discussions. More 
general discussions can also be included in pre-planned, as-
needed meetings if the same professionals meet over time. 
As shown in the framework, knowledge is situated within 
the activity, context and culture, and it is an interplay 
between institutional context and organisational structure. 
How knowledge in daily work practice is structured is 
established over years, how the practitioners divide their 
work tasks, the rules for treatment, and the community they 
locally are a part of this interplay. Introducing VC for 
collaboration across levels of care calls for awareness of the 
fact that how the VC is organised and the resources shared 
must be seen as mutually connected. Neither the use of VC 
nor the collaborative work itself can be viewed as a 
transmission of de-contextualized knowledge from one 
individual to another. A medical diagnosis is the result of a 
social process through which professionals share a type of 
knowledge that often includes a treatment method practiced 
by other practitioners. Therefore, the use of VC also affects 
the traditional division of labour in health care. 
Sharing knowledge leading to changes in working 
methods and division of labour, creates the contradictions 
between traditional treatment methods (i.e., referring the 
patient) and the new work practice. If the purpose of VC is to 
retain knowledge sharing, the service needs to account for 
practice as situated knowing so the practitioners know how 
to continue the activity. Regular collaborative work, 
including both second opinions and follow-up feedback to 
those sharing knowledge for treatment advice, should be kept 
going. This also supports successful use of VC. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The objective of this paper was to outline how the 
organisation of VCs for pre-planned and acute situations 
affects the content in collaboration. Medical situations are 
unequal, because the participants who interact in them 
occupy specialised and situated knowing of the patient and 
the local contexts. This is often overlooked when 
implementing new technology, as one solution is developed 
to cover, i.e., all acute medical situations. Situated knowing 
of local context demand for adjustment of how VC is 
organised and how VC is used.  
Regularly pre-planned meetings create a practice that 
includes consultations about general medical problems, 
specialised problems, and information sharing. Regularity 
and knowledge of each other and the patient support the 
sharing of information about patients, as previously 
discussed. Acute use of VC is organised as a restricted 
service, offered during a specific timeslot during the day. 
The consultation is specialised, in which professional(s) 
with specific specialised knowledge meet. The acute service 
needs to be a twenty-four-hour service to support the 
context it appears in, as acute treatment is demanded 
regardless of time of the day. Restricted time collides with 
how acute care is organized, as a twenty-four-hour service. 
VC ‘when needed’, which need to be reported in advance, 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

also collides with traditional medical practice, i.e., medical 
problems need to be solved in the moment. Hence, regular 
knowledge sharing supports high-frequency use of VC. 
Based on this, the paper does not suggest using a 
universal guideline for how to organise the use of VC. VC is 
a situated practice, calling for awareness of the fact that how 
VC is organised affects the frequency of use and the 
knowledge shared. Even though experience from other 
similar cases might be used as a normative guideline, the 
context in which the VC is going to be implemented must 
be taken into account. As context b illustrates, VCs that fit 
into the local context (as a part of existing morning 
meetings) support successful collaborative work. 
Unplanned, 24/7 acute use of VC is still left to be 
explored in the future. The total number of acute medical 
situations will be affected if the same professionals meet 
over time and if they are going to follow up on previously 
treated patients. What is known about the context is that 
acute knowledge is knowledge in the moment, requiring 
unplanned access to VC as a tool for sharing knowledge 
resources twenty-four hours a day.  
As time passes, technology improves, while the contexts 
in which professionals practice continue to be important to 
its successful use. Also the most advanced technology with 
the greatest number of applications benefits fitting into daily 
medical practice to succeed. Today, the availability of 
electronic health records (EHR) for patients has opened up 
the sharing of information in consulting with professionals 
in other areas. Unfortunately, not all hospitals and general 
practitioners have access to the same systems, and so are not 
able to access the same EHR at the same time (as in context 
c in this paper). In contexts a and b, practitioners had access 
to the same EHR. In context a, pre-checking in the EHR 
seemed to create more hassle in preparing for the 
discussions than in context b, where the specialists only 
relied on the general practitioners to present patient records, 
without looking them up by themselves. The traditional 
approach of orally presenting medical cases when 
discussing them (for example in morning meetings) seems 
to be fundamental to discussions. Access to pictures and 
other non-text-based tools in the EHR might enrich 
discussions, and is an interesting approach to the use of VC 
that can be explored in future work. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to the Northern Regional Health Authority for 
funding the research projects (HST-1021-11-5126 and TFP-
506-06) and to all the informants participating in the studies. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Nilsen, L.L. and A. Moen, Teleconsultation: Collaborative work and 
opportunities for learning across organizational boundaries. Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare, 2008. 14(7): pp. 377-380. 
[2] Nilsen, L.L., Læring og utvikling av kunnskap i medisinske samtaler. 
Bruk av videokonferanse mellom allmennleger og spesialister 
[Learning and development of knowledge in medical talk. The use of 
videoconferencing between GPs and specialists], in Fakultet for 
humaniora, samfunnsvitenskap og lærerutdanning. Institutt for 
lærerutdanning og pedagogikk [Faculty of Humanities, Social Sciences 
and Education, Department of Education]. 2011, Universitetet i 
Tromsø [University of Tromsø]: Tromsø. pp. 107. 
[3] Nilsen, L.L. The work practice of videoconferencing in acute stroke 
treatment, in The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, eTELEMED. 2013. Nice, France: 
IARIA. 
[4] Gichora, N.N., et al., Ten simple rules for organizing a virtual 
conference—anywhere. PLoS Comput Biol, 2010. 6(2): pp. e1000650. 
[5] Telles, C., A step-by-step guide to videoconferencing. Nurse Educ, 
2008. 33(4): pp. 168-71. 
[6] Abrahamian, H., et al., Transfer of knowledge from specialist to the 
generalist by videoconferencing: effect on diabetes care. Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare, 2002. 8(6): pp. 350-355. 
[7] Shore, J.H., Telepsychiatry: videoconferencing in the delivery of 
psychiatric care. Am J Psychiatry, 2013. 170(3): pp. 256-62. 
[8] Senel, E., History of teledermatology: a technique of the future in 
dermatology. Skinmed, 2010. 8(3): pp. 167-70. 
[9] Nardi, B.A., ed. Context and Consciousness: Activity and Human-
Computer Interaction. 1996, MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. 
[10]Greeno, J.J., Learning in activity, in Handbook of the Learning 
Sciences K. Sawyer, Editor. 2006, Cambridge University Press: 
Cambridge, MA. pp. 79-96. 
[11]Engeström, 
Y., 
Activity 
theory 
and 
individual 
and 
social 
transformation, in Perspectives on Activity Theory, Y. Engeström, R. 
Miettinen, and R.-L. Punamäki, Editors. 1999, Cambridge University 
Press: New York, NY. pp. 19-38. 
[12]Engeström, Y., R. Engeström, and H. Kerosuo, The Discursive 
Construction of Collaborative Care. Applied Linguistics, 2003. 24(3): 
pp. 286-315. 
[13]Wertsch, J.V., Mind as Action. 1998, New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
[14]Vygotsky, L.S., Mind in Society: The Development of Higher 
Psychological Processes. 1978, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
[15]Jordan, B. and K. Henderson, Interaction analysis: Foundation and 
practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1995. 4(1) :pp. 39-103. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

