Design and Aims of Study to Measure Long-term Efficacy of Interactive Online 
Dietician Weight Loss Advice in General Practice  
 
 
Vibeke Brandt 
University of Southern Denmark 
Odense, Denmark 
vibra08@student.sdu.dk 
 
Dorte Glintborg 
Department of Endocrinology M,  
Odense University Hospital 
Odense, Denmark 
d.glintborg@gmail.com 
 
Søren Toubro 
Reduce 
Roskilde, Denmark 
st@reduce.dk 
             Mathilde Pedersen 
University of Southern Denmark 
Odense, Denmark 
maped08@student.sdu.dk 
 
    Carl J. Brandt 
Stenstrup Medical Center 
Svendborg, Denmark 
carl.j.brandt@gmail.com 
 
     Cecilia Arendal 
                          Stenstrup Medical Center 
Nyborg, Denmark 
c.arendal@mail.dk 
 
Kirsten Brandt 
Human Nutrition Research Centre, School of Agriculture, Food and Rural Development 
Newcastle University 
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom 
kirsten.brandt@newcastle.ac.uk
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Obesity is an increasing drain on the resources of 
general practitioners, who have few effective options for 
treatment other than surgery and (often prohibitively 
expensive) personal dietician advice. A study has been designed 
to investigate the effects of internet-based dietary advice 
compared with a placebo non-interactive web-support to 
conventional practice during 24 months. Using data from a 
previous pilot project for the power calculation, by recruiting 
300 patients we will obtain sufficient power to reliably detect a 
long-term weight loss of 2.5 kg, or, if this figure is higher, to 
obtain more detailed information about criteria distinguishing 
patients more or less likely to benefit from this type of Internet 
based weight loss program.  
 
Keywords-obesity; Internet community; treatment; preventive 
medicine 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Obesity is a growing problem and up to 30% of 
Europeans are obese, with body mass index (BMI) > or = 30 
kg/m2 [1]. Obesity increases the risk of type 2 diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, joint-, and musculoskeletal diseases 
and cancer. Furthermore the fertility decreases and the risk 
of spontaneous abortion increases. According to the 
Framingham study, obesity shortens life with 3 to 8 years 
for a 40-year-old person [2]. The general recommendations 
for a weight reduction consist of a change in life style. Form 
and content of communication are important for the 
modification of life style factors [3]. 
Treatment results are modest, except from surgery, but 
surgery is only recommended to people with BMI > 35 
kg/m2 with complications, or BMI> 40 kg/m2 without 
complications [1]. This treatment is expensive, which limits 
the number of operations that can be performed. In addition, 
many early and long-term complications with surgery that 
can reduce the quality of life are reported [4], and there is 
still uncertainty about the long-term results. 
Cochrane reviews show only a very modest effect of 
conventional advice in general practice compared to placebo 
[5], while several randomized trials have shown a greater 
weight loss by adding online dietician advice [6][7][8]. 
Recent studies suggest that an Internet community with 
experts is the most effective nonsurgical way to lose weight 
[6][9]. Online contacts can be an economically attractive 
contact form for optimizing guidance on diet and exercise 
and in keeping the patients motivated [10][11][12][13].  
There is evidence from some long-term studies that 
support the choice of such treatment form [5][14], however 
it is not sufficient to provide a definitive recommendation.   
Eighty-six % of the population in Denmark has Internet 
access at home [15]. This makes it possible to reach most of 
96
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

the patients via online intervention. The Internet also 
provides the benefit of self-monitoring, which has been used 
successfully in other approaches of Internet based weight 
loss interventions [7]. 
Conventional dietician advice is costly and access to 
professional dieticians is limited. Therefore, it is important to 
ensure that resources are being used in the best way possible. 
In Denmark it is possible to employ dieticians in general 
practice and health care centers. Many practices are however 
experiencing difficulty organizing the activities in a way that 
makes it economically feasible to offer diet treatment to 
patients within the rates provided by the Danish National 
Health Service. In a previous uncontrolled prospective pilot 
project [13], using an Internet based interactive weight loss 
program in a clinical practice setting, we found a sustained 
average weight loss of 7 kg (95% CI: 4.6-9.3 kg) during 20 
months among obese patients with average initial BMI of 
36.4. 
The present paper describes the rationale and elements of 
an evidence-based protocol for investigating the long-term 
efficacy of this Internet based weight loss program, in the 
context of the capabilities and resources available in typical 
publicly funded Danish GP practices.  
 
II. 
OBJECTIVE 
The objective is to examine how Internet consultations, with 
dieticians and personal trainers, as well as an Internet 
community, in combination with dietician consultations 
using an existing commercial weight loss program 
“Slankedoktor” [16] (designed for healthy overweight users) 
for obese patients in a general practice setting, affects body 
weight during 24 months compared to the usual treatment of 
obesity in general practice, supported by a placebo website 
without interactive online communications. 
III. STUDY DESIGN 
The study is designed as a randomized controlled single-
blind trial. 
 
A. Before randomization 
 
Patients from 10 medical centers are consecutively 
offered study inclusion. 
 
Inclusion criteria are BMI ≥ 27 kg/m2 or BMI ≥ 25 
kg/m2 plus at least one risk factor (infertility 
caused 
by 
obesity, 
hypertension, 
hyper-
cholesterolemia or diabetes). 
 
Patients are continuously invited until there is a 
total number of 150 patients randomized to the 
intervention group and control group respectively. 
 
Patients who receive oral information concerning 
the study and who agree to participate are 
scheduled for an appointment with a nurse. By 
receiving the first information at the doctor, full 
confidentiality is secured and the patient will be 
able to bring a companion. 
 
The appointment with the nurse must be scheduled 
within 14 days after the oral information, thus the 
patient has 14 days to reflect on the decision. 
 
The nurse obtains the approved informed consent 
and proceeds with weighing and measuring the 
patient (Figure 1) moreover the patient is instructed 
to use a web link to a standard questionnaire from 
the webpage “Praksisdiætisterne” and thereby 
supplying basic personal information such as age 
and gender as well as approval of study conditions 
(Figure 1). These are necessary requirements in 
order to participate in the trial. 
 
Patients are randomized immediately after the 
questionnaire is filled out. The computer will 
perform the randomization. 
 
Based on this scenario drop outs can be recorded, 
as well as certain characteristics for the patients 
who choose to drop out. 
 
B. Randomization 
 
Patients are invited to a consultation where the first 
physical examination by a nurse takes place (0 
months). Afterwards patients are randomized to the 
intervention and control group respectively (Figure 
1). 
Patients, 
who 
are 
randomized 
to 
the 
intervention group, are instructed on how to fill in 
information on the website before the initial 
consultation with the dietician. 
 
Each medical centre receives two randomization 
lists, one for females and one for males. Patients 
are assigned to treatment groups according to the 
next available item on the list, The relatively low 
number of patients per centre, the likely gender 
imbalance and the competitive recruitment may 
result in some centers recruiting very few patients 
within a gender. Due to this, the randomization list 
sequences will be sequential with a base number of 
two with 20% random offset (for each two 
consecutive patients, the first one is randomly 
assigned to one treatment group, the subsequent 
patient is then assigned to the other group, and an 
additional patient is inserted at random before 20% 
of these pairs), hereby minimizing the risk of 
unbalanced allocation of treatments within a 
gender at each of the medical centers. If all patients 
of one gender from one centre who complete the 
study are in the same treatment group (e.g. if there 
is only one patient), then the data from these 
patients will not be used in the overall analysis. 
97
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

 
 
Intention to treat method in data handling is used. 
 
D. Control group 
 
The control group participants receive placebo 
treatment by getting a login to a website that looks 
like “Praksisdiætisterne”. It will contain dietary 
advice (e.g. the National Food Administration‟s 
(Fødevarestyrelsen) "all about diet”) and exercise  
 
advice, but with neither dietician consultations nor 
community membership (Figure 2).  
 
They will receive usual care according to the 
medical centre they are assigned to and attend 
weight control sessions where the objective 
parameters are measured (Figure 2). 
 
 C. Intervention Group 
 
The intervention group receives a login to the 
website 
“Praksisdiætisterne” 
as 
well 
as 
a 
consultation with a dietician within 14 days (Figure 
1). 
 
 
 
 
At “Praksisdiætisterne” the patients will have to fill 
in a daily diet record as well as their doubts and 
questions to the dietician, who will have access to 
all patient profiles. Patients will be able to keep up 
with their weight loss progress by using the 
website. They will have access to a community 
where they are able to chat with other participants 
and share weight loss experiences as well as give 
advice and support to each other. 
 
Patients receive subsequent consultations with the 
dietician by appointment (Figure 3). 
 
The 
dieticians 
provide 
therapy 
individually 
according to their patients' needs and based on 
information 
supplied 
via 
the 
website 
“Praksisdiætisterne”, which will use the same 
technology and procedures for communicating with 
the patients as the publicly available slimming 
program „Slankedoktor‟ [16] and described in more 
detail by Brandt et al. [13]. The dietician will 
generate a personalised daily caloric reduction plan 
of approximately 1600-4800 KJ based on the 
patients‟ diet record. The dietary advice should be 
as standardized as possible, by following the same 
simple dietary guidelines that are given at 
“Slankedoktor” [16]. 
 
Patients are measured and weighed at the start, 
after 6, 12, 18 and 24 months and blood pressure is 
measured and blood samples taken at start, 12 and 
24 months (Figure 4). 
 
Patients are reminded by SMS in order to 
maximize attendance.  
 
E. Standardization of measurement methods 
 
The measurements must be standardized to avoid 
Figure 1.  Flow chart of inclusion and randomization. BP = blood pressure. 
Figure 2. Treatment of the control group. 
98
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

bias in internal validity (e.g., hip / waist 
circumference guidelines and standardization of 
blood pressure measurements), using detailed 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) agreed 
among all centers before the start of the study. 
 
 
 
F. Collecting data 
 
Data will be continuously added to a database, 
making it easy to extract relevant information.  
The dietician will be using a standardized 
questionnaire in order to collect data. 
 
This 
data 
includes: 
weight, 
waist/hip 
circumference, blood pressure, number of logins to 
“Praksisdiætisterne” and number of comments 
added to the online community. 
 
In the case of exclusion before the end of the trial, 
for example by moving or pregnancy, the patient 
will 
be 
encouraged 
to 
complete 
a 
final 
questionnaire and objective parameters (Figure 4) 
in order to provide surrogate endpoint data. The 
medical centers will be responsible for this. 
 
G. Inclusion Criteria 
 
BMI ≥ 27 kg/m2. 
 
BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2 plus a risk factor in the form of: 
o 
Hypercholesterolemia 
o 
Hypertension 
(systolic 
≥ 
140mmHg, 
diastolic ≥ 90mmHg) or patients receiving 
treatment for hypertension 
o 
Infertile women (where infertility is 
considered to be caused by obesity) 
o 
Type 2 diabetes 
 
Age at least 18 years. 
 
Obtained informed consent for use of data in an 
anonymous form. 
 
Communication with the patient via cell phone is 
required.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Measurement of objective parameters W= waist, H= hip, BP= 
blood pressure, BS= blood sample. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Consultation schedules in the intervention group. 
99
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

H. Exclusion Criteria 
 
Patients without daily access to the internet. 
 
Patients 
who 
fail 
to 
complete 
the 
initial 
questionnaire online. 
 
Patients who are incapable of using the Danish 
language, based on writing and reading skills. 
 
Patients who cannot be expected to use a computer 
or cell phone for any kind of physical or 
psychological reason. 
 
Patients who do not wish to participate. 
 
Pregnancy at the time of enrolment. 
 
Weight loss > 3 kg within the last 2 months 
 
I. Study Program 
Medical history is obtained by questionnaire at study 
inclusion, 12 and 24 months: 
 
Name, age, occupation, marital status. 
 
Cell phone number, email address. 
 
 Number 
of 
family 
members, 
number 
of 
pregnancies. 
 
History of obesity (always, since youth, max and 
min weight in adult life). 
 
Instances of weight loss events> 10 kg during adult 
life, for example pregnancies. 
 
Current illnesses. 
 
Education history. 
 
Current medication, smoking, use of dietary 
supplements, use of alternative medicine. 
 
Working hours (full time, part-time, overtime), 
hobbies, habits of exercise (type, times per week), 
transportation (bike, train / bus, car, walking). 
 
 Food intake (morning, afternoon, evening and 
snacks), cooking (own, purchase, fast food), use of 
canteen. 
 
The objective parameters continuously recorded by the user 
at “Praksisdiætisterne”: 
 
Height 
 
Weight 
 
Hip measurement 
 
Waist measurement 
 
Objective measurements obtained by a dietician, nurse or 
doctor (Figure 3): 
 
Weight 
 
Permanent lipid status 
 
HbA1C 
 
BP 
 
Hip and waist circumference 
 
IV STATISTICS 
The primary objective of this study is measurement of 
changes in body weight and waist circumference. Weight 
loss in the intervention group and control group will be 
compared and analyzed using an unpaired t-test. A weight 
loss of 5-7 kg in the study group and 2-3 kg in the control 
group is expected after 6 months of treatment. After 2 years 
we expect the control group to return to the starting weight, 
while the study group is expected to maintain a weight loss 
of 3-5 kg. Power calculation based on standard deviations 
observed in a previous pilot project [13], shows that to 
detect a difference in weight loss of 2.5kg with a power of 
90% requires 142 patients per group. 150 patients will be 
randomized to each group to allow for dropouts. If the 
difference is greater than 2.5 kg, the planned total of 300 
patients will make it possible to examine interactions 
between treatment and gender, age and obesity level. Due to 
this, the randomization will be stratified by gender, while 
age and obesity level will be analysed as continuous 
variables. 
V. ETHICS 
The intervention is not considered to cause any side effects 
or discomfort. Obesity can cause illness and death. 
Therefore it is essential to find a validated method for 
weight 
reduction 
with 
a 
long-term 
follow-up.  
Patient data is handled and stored on the servers of “E-
Doktor” and “Praksisdiætisterne”. This approach is 
approved by the Danish Data Inspectorate (Datatilsynet).  
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The study with the described protocol will provide 
definitive data on the efficacy of the use of a commercially 
available interactive Internet based weight loss program in 
the context of the GP practices in the Danish health care 
service, with a power to detect a long-term weight loss 
difference of 2.5kg. If the program turns out to be successful 
(more effective and/or cheaper than existing options), the 
collected data will further allow the generation of 
hypotheses on how the program can be further improved to 
increase efficacy and/or extend to other patient groups with 
high frequency of internet access such as younger teenagers. 
 
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors thank the Region Southern Denmark and the 
KEU fond for their input and financial support. 
VIII. REFERENCES 
[1] M. J. Bult, D. T. van, and A. F. Muller. Surgical treatment of obesity. 
Eur J Endocrinol 2008 Feb;158(2):135-45. 
[2] A. Peeters, J. J. Barendregt, F. Willekens, J. P. Mackenbach, M. A. 
Al, and L. Bonneux. Obesity in adulthood and its consequences for 
life expectancy: a life-table analysis. Ann Intern Med 2003 Jan 
7;138(1):24-32. 
[3] C. J. Brandt, H. Ellegaard, M. Joensen, F. V. Kallan, A. D. Sorknaes, 
and L. Tougaard. Effect of diagnosis of "smoker's lung". RYLUNG 
Group. Lancet 1997 Jan 25;349(9047):253. 
[4] J. F. Larsen, M. Støckel. Kirurgiske komplikationer efter 
fedmekirurgi. Ugeskrift for læger 2010 Sep 6; 172(36): 2439 
100
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

[5] R. L. Thompson, C. D. Summerbell, L. Hooper, J. P. Higgins, P. S. 
Little, D. Talbot et al. Dietary advice given by a dietitian versus other 
health professional or self-help resources to reduce blood cholesterol. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2003;(3):CD001366. 
[6] B. C. Gold, S. Burke, S. Pintauro, P. Buzzell, and J. Harvey-Berino. 
Weight loss on the web: A pilot study comparing a structured 
behavioral intervention to a commercial program. Obesity (Silver 
Spring) 2007 Jan;15(1):155-64. 
[7] G. G. Bennett, S. J. Herring, E. Puleo, E. K. Stein, K. M. Emmons, 
and M. W. Gillman. Web-based weight loss in primary care: a 
randomized 
controlled 
trial. 
Obesity 
(Silver 
Spring) 
2010 
Feb;18(2):308-13. 
[8] H. Arem, M. Irwin. A review of web-based weight loss intervention 
in adults. Obesity review in press 2010 June. 
[9] D. F. Tate, R. R. Wing, and R. A. Winett. Using Internet technology 
to deliver a behavioral weight loss program. JAMA 2001 Mar 
7;285(9):1172-7. 
[10] J. Harvey-Berino, S. Pintauro, P. Buzzell, and E. C. Gold. Effect of 
internet support on the long-term maintenance of weight loss. Obes 
Res 2004 Feb;12(2):320-9. 
[11] H. A. Haugen, Z. V. Tran, H. R. Wyatt, M. J. Barry, and J. O. Hill. 
Using telehealth to increase participation in weight maintenance 
programs. Obesity (Silver Spring) 2007 Dec;15(12):3067-77. 
[12] L. P. Svetkey, V. J. Stevens, P. J. Brantley, L. J. Appel, J. F. Hollis, 
C. M. Loria, et al. Comparison of strategies for sustaining weight 
loss: the weight loss maintenance randomized controlled trial. JAMA 
2008 Mar 12;299(10):1139-48. 
[13] C. J. Brandt, D. Glintborg, V. Brandt, C. Arendal, S. Toubro. 
Sustained weight loss during 20 months using a personalized 
interactive internet based dietician advice program in a general 
practice setting. International Journal on Advances in Life Science 
2011; vol 3 nr 12 (in press) 
[14] M. Neve, P. J. Morgan, P. R. Jones, and C. E. Collins. Effectiveness 
of web-based interventions in achieving weight loss and weight loss 
maintenance in overweight and obese adults: a systematic review 
with meta-analysis. Obes Rev 2010 Apr;11(4):306-21. 
[15] Statistics Denmark. Internet access in the home - devices with access 
to 
internet. 
http://www.statistikbanken.dk/BEBRIT01 
(accessed 
January 21st, 2011). 
[16] SlankeDoktor. www.slankedoktor.dk.  (accessed January 21st, 2011)  
 
 
101
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

