Validation of a Telemonitoring System for Sleep Apnea Treatment  
 
Valentina Isetta 
University of Barcelona-CIBERES, 
Faculty of Medicine 
Unit of Biophysics and Bioengineering 
Barcelona, Spain 
valentina.isetta@ub.edu 
Josep M. Montserrat 
Sleep Lab, Pneumology Department, 
Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS-CIBERES, 
Barcelona, Spain 
jmmontserrat@clinic.ub.es
Geraldine Thiebaut 
Air Liquide, 
Paris, France 
geraldine.thiebaut@airliquide.com 
Claude Weber 
Air Liquide, 
Paris, France 
claude.weber@airliquide.com 
Daniel Navajas 
University of Barcelona-IBEC-CIBERES, 
 Faculty of Medicine, 
Unit of Biophysics and Bioengineering 
Barcelona, Spain 
dnavajas@ub.edu 
 
Ramon Farré 
University of Barcelona-IDIBAPS-CIBERES, 
 Faculty of Medicine, 
Unit of Biophysics and Bioengineering 
Barcelona, Spain 
rfarre@ub.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—Patient’s compliance is crucial for the effectiveness 
of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) treatment of 
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), but many patients withdraw it 
due to its side effects. Air Liquide developed NOWAPI, a novel 
telemedicine system, which provides the CPAP treatment 
remote monitoring of the patient at home and is designed to be 
compatible with all CPAP devices under clinical use. The aim 
of this study was to validate NOWAPI in a bench test 
simulating OSA patients. First, the influence of NOWAPI 
sensor unit geometry to the CPAP treatment was assessed. 
Then, NOWAPI’s performance in correctly detecting the 
treatment duration and the residual events was tested. 
Recorded data were wirelessly sent to a secure server by 
NOWAPI, then downloaded and analyzed. NOWAPI sensor 
unit connection to the setting did not influence the CPAP 
treatment. The difference between the treatment duration 
estimated by the device and actual values was never higher 
than 3 min over the 4-hour test. The difference between the 
apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) estimated by NOWAPI and the 
actual values was not significantly different from the one 
between the AHI estimated by the CPAP machines and the 
actual values (p=0.171). NOWAPI showed an excellent 
performance in this bench test and could be a valuable tool for 
telemonitoring the treatment of OSA. 
Keywords: telemedicine; eHealth; home monitoring; sleep 
apnea; CPAP.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a very prevalent 
disease mainly associated with daytime sleepiness and 
deterioration of quality of life and is suffered by 2% to 4% of 
middle-aged adults [1]. OSA entails repetitive partial or total 
occlusion of the upper airway, which results in significant 
levels of sleep disturbance and snoring. However, the 
seriousness of untreated OSA is stressed by its significant 
consequences, including depression, ischemic heart disease, 
stroke, hypertension and significantly increased risk of motor 
vehicle crashes [2;3]. 
The treatment of choice for OSA is continuous positive 
airway pressure (CPAP) applied through a nasal mask during 
sleep. This constant pressure is transmitted to the pharyngeal 
area, thereby avoiding upper airway obstruction [4]. Despite 
the documented clinical efficacy of CPAP, up to 50% of 
patients suspend or underuse CPAP treatment, mainly due to 
its discomforting side effects, such as pressure intolerance, 
claustrophobic reaction to the mask, mask displacement, and 
machine noise [5;6]. Many of these problems could be easily 
solved by a closer follow-up, especially during the first 
weeks, but busy sleep centers have difficulties in giving such 
support. 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Figure 1. NOWAPI system data flow. 
If patients do not use CPAP for the recommended 
minimum of 4 hours per night, clinical outcomes are 
compromised [7], demonstrating that adherence optimization 
is a critical aspect of patient management. 
Several studies confirmed that treatment compliance 
could be significantly improved by comprehensive support 
programmes and timely interventions by health professionals 
[8]. In recent times, it has been recognized that telemedicine 
could have a valuable role in improving CPAP therapy 
adherence [9]. In fact, telemedicine has been used in various 
studies to promote and reinforce CPAP treatment. In most of 
them a cognitive behavioural intervention was applied to 
OSA patients at home, by telephone [6], the Internet [10] and 
videoconference [11]. Despite mixed results were achieved 
in terms of significant improvement of CPAP compliance, 
the potential of telemedicine to be integrated into the care of 
OSA patients was confirmed. 
Two recent randomized studies [12;13] combined 
elements of psychoeducational interventions together with 
technological innovation. Usual care was compared to a 
wireless telemonitoring of CPAP compliance and efficacy 
data, which physicians were able to daily monitor through a 
secure web browser and thus contact the patient if needed. 
Both studies resulted in higher CPAP adherence and 
improved OSA outcomes and demonstrated that continuous 
monitoring of patient’s compliance could be useful to early 
detect underuse and to properly address possible problems. 
Some existing CPAP and APAP (Automatic Positive 
Airway Pressure) devices monitor patient’s compliance by 
using different algorithms, but only few of them offer 
continuous remote monitoring. Air Liquide developed 
NOWAPI, a telemonitoring system designed to be 
compatible with all commercially available CPAP/APAP 
devices. The aim of this study was to validate this new 
monitoring system in a bench test. 
 
II. 
METHODS 
A. System Description 
NOWAPI system has been designed to remotely monitor 
the CPAP or APAP treatment of patients with sleep apnea at 
home. The system overview is depicted in Fig. 1. NOWAPI 
comprises a small sensor unit (15x4x7 cm) powered by a 
rechargeable battery, which contains a pressure and flow 
sensing module, a specifically developed detection software 
for the analysis of the measured signals and detection the 
breathing events, a GPRS communication module, which 
enables data transmission to a server, and a clinical interface, 
which enables the physician to visualize and properly 
evaluate the data downloaded from the server. The NOWAPI 
sensors unit is connected between the CPAP/APAP device 
outlet and the patient’s tubing. During the patient’s 
CPAP/APAP treatment, the system detects the pressure and 
flow signals which characterize the patient’s breathing and 
estimates the treatment use rate and some important 
parameters to assess the effectiveness of the therapy, such as 
the number of apneas, hypopneas, flow limitations, snoring 
periods, and average breathing flow and nasal pressure. The 
system stores all data in 2 different files, a detailed file with a 
sampling rate of 25 Hz and a synthetic file where data are 
recorded as mean values over 15–minute consecutive 
periods. The latter file is sent by the GPRS module 
integrated into the device to a secure server then available to 
be downloaded and analyzed. 
Furthermore, a led in the sensors unit turns red if the 
treatment duration is less than the minimum standard of 4 
hours/night, giving an immediate useful feedback to the 
patient about his/her treatment compliance. 
 
B. Patterns of disturbed breathing 
NOWAPI was tested with 2 different sets of simulated 
breathing patterns. In the first phase, a series of 20 
waveforms consisting of the successive repetition of apneic 
or hypopneic events or persistent flow limitation [14;15] was 
used. 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
 
Figure 2. Block diagram of the algorithm implemented to obtain the 
breathing patterns simulating patients with OSA. 
 
 
Figure 3. Fragment of a pattern of disturbed breathing which 
simulated an OSA patient’s sleep periods of treatment. 
 
Figure 4. Scheme of the test setting. 
In the second phase, the system performance was tested 
in 30 different test scenarios especially developed for this 
study, simulating 30 sleep periods of OSA patients under 
CPAP treatment, lasting 4 hours each. These simulated 
breathings consisted of realistic airflow patterns built from a 
library of actual events (e.g. normal breathing, apneas, 
hypopneas, flow limitations) selected from real OSA 
patients’ polysomnographic recordings. The selected events 
were exported by using the polygraph software with a 
sampling frequency of 64 Hz. Then, each event was properly 
elaborated by an algorithm implemented for this study. The 
block diagram describing the algorithm, developed by using 
Matlab computing tool, is shown in Fig. 2. First, the flow 
event was integrated to obtain the volume signal. Then, the 
signal was detrended and adjusted in order to have the 
minimum signal point at zero. Then, to reproduce the typical 
tidal volumes for normal breathing (0.5 l approx) and 
hypopnea (0.2 l approx), the signal gain was iteratively 
adjusted until the mean value of the signal peaks was 0.5 in 
the case of normal breathing and 0.2 in the case of hypopnea. 
Subsequently, the obstruction signal controlling the test 
bench valve was added to obstructive events. Moreover, a 
snore signal was added where requested. Then, the processed 
events were assembled to obtain the 30 4-hour simulated 
breathing patterns (Fig. 3). 
 
C. Measurement Setup and Protocol 
NOWAPI sensors unit was plugged between the 
CPAP/APAP device (or its humidifier) outlet and a model 
simulating an OSA patient [14;15], as shown in Fig. 4. This 
computer-driven model comprises a flow generator and an 
obstruction valve which allows the simulation of obstructive 
events. Other two valves (the leak and the exhalation valves) 
allow the simulation of leaks and mouth breathing and a 
loudspeaker simulates snoring. The test bench is equipped 
with two sensors, which record pressure and flow signals. A 
calibrated leak (EP on Fig. 4) simulates the mask leak. 
This validation study comprised two phases in which the 
same test setting (Fig. 4) was employed. 
 
1) First Test Phase 
The aim of the first test phase was to verify that the 
NOWAPI sensors unit connected between a CPAP/APAP 
machine and the conventional tubing connected to the patient 
did not modify the normal performance of the CPAP/APAP 
machine. Two commercially available CPAP/APAP devices 
(S9 AutoSet, Resmed and Remstar Auto, Respironics) were 
subjected to a set of 20 breathing patterns described 
elsewhere [14;15] with 2 alternative settings: with or without 
their Comfort Mode (CPR) activated and with or without 
NOWAPI sensors unit connected to the test setting. The 
responses obtained in the 4 different experimental conditions 
were compared and evaluated. 
 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

A
 
 
B
 
 
 
Figure 5. (A) Bland-Altman analysis of AHI values estimated by NOWAPI in each test versus the actual ones; (B) AHI values estimated by NOWAPI (red 
triangles) and the PAP machines (blue circles) versus the bench ones for each test. 
2) Second Test Phase 
In the second test phase, NOWAPI was subjected to the 
30 patterns especially implemented for this study, which 
simulated 30 sleep periods of OSA patients under CPAP 
treatment. The aim of this phase was the assessment of 
NOWAPI’s performance in correctly detecting the treatment 
duration and the residual disturbed-breathing events.  
In order to assess the effect of water condensation into 
the tubing on the measurements, usually caused by patient’s 
breathing, three of the tests were performed with the APAP 
device humidifier turned on. To guarantee realistic water 
condensation, humidifier was set to maximum level and the 
APAP device tubing was immersed in ice. 
The simulated patients were treated with 3 different 
currently available devices for APAP treatment: S9 Autoset 
(Resmed), Remstar Auto (Respironics) and Goodknight 
420E (Sefam). Each APAP device was connected to the 
monitoring device with its own tubing. A Whisper Swivel 
valve (Respironics) was used as exhalation port for all 
devices. 
Each 4-hour test was preceded and followed by a 30-
minute period during which the NOWAPI device was 
functioning but not subjected to either APAP device pressure 
or patient simulator’s breathing. This was to ensure test two 
epochs in which no treatment time and no events should 
have been detected.  
The synthetic files for each of the 30 tests, containing the 
data recorded as mean values over 15–minute consecutive 
periods, were sent via GPRS to the Air Liquide secure server 
and then downloaded for analysis. In this study, treatment 
duration and respiratory events, measured as apnea-
hypopnea index (AHI), detected by NOWAPI were 
considered for analysis and compared to the ones detected by 
the CPAP/APAP devices and to the actual simulated patterns 
generated by the bench. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
The results of first test phase are summarized in Table I. 
The absolute differences between the two test settings with 
and without the NOWAPI sensor unit in the circuit of the 
following parameters were calculated: the time taken by the 
CPAP/APAP machine to reach the pressure of 10 cmH2O 
(T10) and the maximum pressure applied by the machine 
(Pmax). The minor differences founded between the two test 
conditions are imputable to the intrinsic variability. 
TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF THE FIRST TEST PHASE 
CPAP/APAP machine 
Absolute difference 
with NOWAPI/without NOWAPI 
(meanSD) 
T10 (min) 
Pmax (cmH2O)  
S9 Autoset with CPRa 
0.400.43 
0.500.77 
S9 Autoset without CPR 
0.190.29 
0.110.14 
Remstar Auto with CPR 
1.230.98 
0.781.54 
Remstar Auto without CPR 
1.501.75 
1.261.41 
a. CPR = Comfort Mode. 
In the second test phase, all data sent to the server via 
GPRS were successfully received and analyzed. The 
percentage difference between the treatment duration 
estimated by NOWAPI and actual values was never higher 
than 1.25% (3 min) and never lower than -0.42% (-1 min). 
The difference in absolute values between the AHI 
estimated by NOWAPI and the actual values, 0.9±1.6 
events/hour (mean±SD), was not significantly different from 
the difference in absolute value between the AHI estimated 
by the CPAP/APAP machines and the actual values, 0.9±1.0 
events/hour 
(p=0.171, 
the 
normality 
condition 
was 
achieved). This good agreement was confirmed by Bland-
Altman analysis of AHI values estimated by NOWAPI in 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

each test versus the actual ones (Fig. 5A). Also, AHI values 
estimated by NOWAPI showed a very good correlation with 
the actual values (R2=0.97), slightly better than the ones 
estimated by PAP machines (R2=0.88) (Fig. 5B). 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
NOWAPI is a novel telemedicine system which provides 
remote monitoring of CPAP/APAP treatment of OSA 
patients at home. It detects critical parameters to evaluate the 
patient’s 
adherence 
(treatment 
duration), 
and 
the 
effectiveness of the treatment (residual respiratory events) 
and sends them via GPRS to a secure server. In this way the 
data can be easily downloaded and revised by the physician 
or the health professional providing CPAP, who can perform 
a closer patient’s monitoring and timely intervene to improve 
his/her treatment compliance. 
Few systems in the market provide this kind of remote 
treatment monitoring, which is usually integrated in the 
CPAP/APAP devices and implemented with a different 
algorithm for each manufacturer. Since NOWAPI is a stand-
alone system, it can be compatible with all the commercially 
available CPAP/APAP devices currently in clinical use. This 
fact would make it easy to remotely monitoring any patient, 
regardless of the specific CPAP device he/she uses. 
In this study, NOWAPI system was evaluated in a bench. 
In a first test phase, two different CPAP/APAP machines 
were subjected to a previously validated set of disturbed 
breathing patterns [14;15] with or without NOWAPI device 
connected between the CPAP/APAP and the bench. The 
results of this phase demonstrated that the geometry of 
NOWAPI does not influence the CPAP treatment. 
In the second test phase, NOWAPI was subjected to 30 
different breathing patterns especially built for this study by 
assembling real respiratory flow signals recorded during 
polysomnography in OSA patients. The telemedicine system 
successfully sent the recorded data to the central server and 
showed an excellent performance in estimating the CPAP 
treatment duration and in detecting residual respiratory 
events. 
A bench test is a useful tool to validate new systems such 
as NOWAPI, because it allows the comparison of different 
devices response when they are subjected to exactly the same 
patterns of disturbed breathing, which is not possible in 
patients, due to the biological variability in their disturbed 
breathing patterns [13]. Actually, bench tests and clinical 
studies are both useful and should be considered 
complementary when evaluating a specific system [14]. 
Subjecting NOWAPI to reference breathing patterns at the 
bench was a first step for evaluating the performance of the 
hardware/software implemented in the system.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
NOWAPI showed good compatibility with the CPAP 
machines and an excellent performance in estimating the 
duration of the CPAP treatment and in detecting residual 
respiratory events in simulated OSAS patients. The results of 
this study demonstrated that NOWAPI system could be a 
valuable tool for telemonitoring the treatment of obstructive 
sleep apnea. 
The results of the study will be verified in a clinical trial 
on patients in the clinical routine. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank Miguel Angel Rodriguez for 
his valuable technical support to the validation tests. The 
authors would like to thank Dr. Jordi Rigau for his 
contribution in the development of the bench test. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Young, P. E. Peppard and D. J. Gottlieb, “Epidemiology of 
obstructive sleep apnea: a population health perspective.” Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 165(9):1217-1239. 
[2] N. M. Al Lawati, S. R. Patel and N. T. Ayas, “Epidemiology, 
risk factors, and consequences of obstructive sleep apnea and 
short sleep duration.” Prog Cardiovasc Dis 2009; 51(4): 
pp.285-293. 
[3] J. Duran, S. Esnaola, R.  Rubi and A. Iztueta, “Obstructive 
sleep apnea-hypopnea and related clinical features in a 
population-based sample of subjects aged 30 to 70 yr.” Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 163(3 Pt 1): pp.685-689. 
[4] C. A. Kushida, M. R. Littner, M. Hirshkowitz, T. I. 
Morgenthaler, C. A. Alessi, D. Bailey, B. Boehlecke, T. M. 
Brown, J. Coleman Jr., L. Friedman, S. Kapen, V. K. Kapur, 
M. Kramer, T. Lee-Chiong, J. Owens, J. P. Pancer, T. J. 
Swick and M. S. Wise, “Practice parameters for the use of 
continuous and bilevel positive airway pressure devices to 
treat adult patients with sleep-related breathing disorders.” 
Sleep 2006; 29(3): pp.375-380. 
[5] I. Rolfe, L. G. Olson and N. A.  Saunders, “Long-term 
acceptance of continuous positive airway pressure in 
obstructive sleep apnea.” Am Rev Respir Dis 1991; 144(5): 
pp.1130-1133. 
[6] D. Sparrow, M. Aloia, D. A. Demolles and D. J. Gottlieb, “A 
telemedicine intervention to improve adherence to continuous 
positive airway pressure: a randomised controlled trial.” 
Thorax 2010; 65(12): pp.1061-1066. 
[7] L. S. Doherty, J. L. Kiely, V. Swan and W. T. McNicholas, 
“Long-term effects of nasal continuous positive airway 
pressure therapy on cardiovascular outcomes in sleep apnea 
syndrome.” Chest 2005; 127(6): pp.2076-2084. 
[8] R. Zozula and R. Rosen, “Compliance with continuous 
positive airway pressure therapy: assessing and improving 
treatment outcomes.” Curr Opin Pulm Med 2001; 7(6): 
pp.391-398. 
[9] M. Kwiatkowska and N. Ayas, “Can telemedicine improve 
CPAP adherence?” Thorax 2010; 65(12): pp.1035-1036. 
[10] Y. Taylor, A. Eliasson, T. Andrada, D. Kristo and R. Howard, 
“The role of telemedicine in CPAP compliance for patients 
with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.” Sleep Breath 2006; 
10(3): pp.132-138. 
[11] C. E. Smith, E. R. Dauz, F. Clements, F. N. Puno, D. Cook, 
G. Doolittle and W. Leeds, “Telehealth services to improve 
nonadherence: A placebo-controlled study.” Telemed J E 
Health 2006; 12(3): pp.289-296. 
[12] C. J. Stepnowsky, J. J.  Palau, M. R. Marler and A. L. Gifford, 
“Pilot randomized trial of the effect of wireless telemonitoring 
on compliance and treatment efficacy in obstructive sleep 
apnea.” J Med Internet Res 2007; 9(2):e14. 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[13] N. Fox, A.J. Hirsch-Allen, E. Goodfellow, J. Wenner, J. 
Fleetham, C.F. Ryan, M. Kwiatkowska, N.T. Ayas, “The 
impact of a telemedicine monitoring system on positive 
airway pressure adherence in patients with obstructive sleep 
apnea: a randomized controlled trial.” Sleep 2012; 35(4): 
pp.477-481. 
[14] R. Farre, J. M. Montserrat, J. Rigau, X. Trepat, P. Pinto and 
D. Navajas, “Response of automatic continuous positive 
airway pressure devices to different sleep breathing patterns: a 
bench study.” Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 166(4): 
pp.469-473. 
[15] J. Rigau, J. M. Montserrat, H. Wohrle, D. Plattner, M. 
Schwaibold, D. Navajas and R. Farre. “Bench model to 
simulate upper airway obstruction for analyzing automatic 
continuous positive airway pressure devices.” Chest 2006; 
130(2): pp.350-361. 
 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

