Detection and Classiﬁcation Method for a Temporary Change in Walking
Shin Morishima∗, Misato Haruta†, Akira Urashima‡, and Tomoji Toriyama§
Faculty of Engineering Toyama Prefectural University
5180 Kurokawa, Imizu-shi, Toyama, Japan 939-0398
Email: ∗morisima,‡a-urasim,§toriyama@pu-toyama.ac.jp , †t615034@st.pu-toyama.ac.jp
Abstract—The global elderly population has grown in recent
years and one of the difﬁculties the elderly face is an increased
vulnerability to falls. One of the ways to alleviate this problem is
to identify actions that cause falls and to prevent falls using the
detection result. Temporary change in walking (i.e., stumble and a
stagger) is a typical action. However, existing studies only classify
walking or other activities and recognize walking speed, and these
studies do not focus on a temporary change in walking. In this
paper, we propose a detection method for a change in walking
using a change point detection (i.e., anomaly detection for the
time series data) and a classiﬁcation method for the multiple
types of change. During the evaluation, four types of anomalous
walking videos (i.e. anomaly represents a temporary change.) are
used (the total number of videos is 240). As a result, our method
can detect anomalous walking in 91.7% of cases and classify four
types of detected anomalous walking into three clusters in 89.1%
of cases on the basis of each characteristic.
Keywords–Walking recognition; Classiﬁcation; Anomaly detec-
tion; Human activity recognition.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The global elderly population has grown in recent years
and one of the difﬁculties the elderly face is an increased
vulnerability to falls [1] [2]. Elder people are more likely to
be seriously injured by falls. In addition, this issue also leads
to an increase in the medical costs, speciﬁcally, the cost of
falls was approximately $50 billion in the USA in 2015 [1].
Human activity recognition is a research ﬁeld that is focused on
alleviating this problem [3]. Two types of activity recognition
can be used to address this problem. The ﬁrst type is fall
detection, which identiﬁes falls soon after they occur. There
are already several studies on the topic, which show that this
approach prevents injuries due to falls from becoming severe
[4] [5]. The second approach is to detect actions that cause falls
to prevent falls. Such actions include a stumble and a stagger.
These actions are caused by a temporary change in walking.
Thus, the recognition of the change is needed. In addition, the
classiﬁcation of change is needed because the change includes
actions that are not related to the falls such as a standstill.
However, existing studies on walking recognition can only
distinguish walking and other activities [6], recognize walking
speed [7], and do not focus on a temporary change in walking.
Most of the existing studies recognize activity from common
features between multiple persons if there is a clear difference
between target activities (e.g., walking and sitting). Various
methods can be used to identify these activities. However,
it is difﬁcult to recognize a change in walking because the
difference in each person is larger than the difference of each
action. A stumble detection system for powered artiﬁcial legs
has been proposed in [8]; however, it is difﬁcult to apply it to
cases without artiﬁcial legs.
In this paper, we propose a detection method for a change
in walking using change point detection and anomaly detection
for time series data. Furthermore, we propose the classiﬁcation
of multiple types of change using a method that uses clustering
of the results of the change point and anomaly detection.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II presents related works. Section III presents our pro-
posed recognition method. Section IV evaluates our proposed
method, and Section V concludes the paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
A. Walking Recognition
Walking recognition is the ﬁeld of human activity recog-
nition. Human activity recognition is deﬁned as the ability to
recognize human activities using sensor data [3] [9] [10]. Each
recognition method has two steps that are data collection by
sensors and the estimation of human activity on the basis of
data.
Currently, there are several studies on walking recognition,
which focus on the differences in sensors or estimation meth-
ods. Khan et al. have detected walking and other ﬁve activities
(i.e., sitting, standing, washing hands, driving, running) from
accelerometer data using change point detection [6]. The
abovementioned study uses a genetic algorithm to optimize the
parameters of change point detection to improve the accuracy
of detection. Thus, it has the high accuracy of 99.4%-99.8%
[6]. Trung et al. have classiﬁed ﬁve types of walking (i.e.,
walking on ﬂat ground, up/down stairs, and up/down a slope)
with a 90.4% accuracy on the basis of accelerometer data
using a support vector machine [11]. Davis and Taylor have
recognized walking speeds (i.e., normal speed, half of normal
speed, and double of normal speed) and classiﬁed walking
and other eleven activities (e.g., running and skipping) from
video-based four joint coordinates data [12]. Haescher et al.
have classiﬁed walking speed into four classes (i.e., 1, 2.5, 4,
and 5 km/h) from capacitive sensor data [7]. The application
of this walking recognition includes automated surveillance,
monitoring systems to identify people that may be injured or
require assistance, and the estimation of the amount of activity
[7] [12].
However, contrary to this study, these studies did not
focus on a temporary change in walking. The abovementioned
studies and our proposed study can be used together to detect
walking in several activities using existing methods and to
recognize a change in walking using our method.
B. Image-based Human Posture Estimation
In our proposed method, human joint coordinates are used
for the input of change point detection. The coordinates can be
extracted using the existing method. In this paper, OpenPose
[13], which has been proposed by Cao et al. is used to extract
the coordinates. OpenPose outputs two-dimensional 25-joint
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method using dataﬂow.
data per image by the deep learning-based posture estimation.
Our proposed method is not constrained by OpenPose. If the
coordinates can be acquired, the output of another method can
be applied. For example, there are some image-based posture
estimation methods such as ArtTrack [14] and DeepCut [15].
Our method can be applied for non-image-based methods such
as motion capture or a depth sensor.
III.
RECOGNITION METHOD OF A TEMPORARY WALKING
CHANGE
A. Overview of the Proposed Method
The input of the proposed method is the coordinate data
of human joints during walking. The method has three steps.
It distinguishes anomaly walk which exhibits behavior that
temporarily differs from daily walking and classiﬁes anomaly.
Annomaly walking detection can be used to analyze the causes
of falls because actions that can cause falls (e.g. stumble and
stagger) include the anomalous walking. The input is acquired
by videos using OpenPose, as mentioned in Section II. As
described in Section IV-A, in this paper, we use a video
(1, 920×1, 020 resolution and 30-fps frame rate) of a walking
person from the front. A picture of a person is acquired from
the front, while the person is walking from the back to the
front.
Fig. 1 shows the overview of the proposed method using the
dataﬂow from the video data to classify anomalous walking.
The preprocessing of the proposed method is the posture
estimation by OpenPose. OpenPose detects a human and esti-
mates posture from the video. OpenPose outputs coordinates
of joints, which are two-dimensional 25-point data from one
frame of the video.
These joints data are the inputs of the proposed method,
and the three steps of the method are shown below.
1)
Change point detection determines whether each joint
point or relationship between two joints is a change
point or not (the meaning of the relationship will
be explained in the next section.). The output is
the number of change points in each frame because
the detection is processed for each joint point and
relationship of each frame.
2)
Anomaly detection detects anomalus walking using
the number of change points. The result is output per
the overall walking data (data from one video).
3)
Clustering classiﬁes the anomalous walk detected by
the second step. It is processed only when input
walking data are detected as anomaly.
The processing of each step is performed by unsupervised
machine learning. It means that the data labeled by a human are
not needed. However, the ﬁrst and second steps require some
preprocessing to determine the parameter of each machine
learning algorithm. Preprocessing is the preparation of the
standard of the parameter determination. The standard is the
result of the change point detection using daily walking data.
One or two minutes of walking data are required for each
subject. In the evaluation, we use 20 videos of the daily
walking data for each subject, and the average length of videos
is approximately three seconds. Thus, the total time of the
walking data is approximately 1 min. To distinguish daily
walking (i.e., input data given by a human and the output data
detected by the proposed method), the terms “daily walk” and
“normal walk” are used. The details of each step are explained
in the next sections.
B. Change Point Detection for the Human Joint Data
Change point detection is processed in each frame data
using the target frame and the previous frames consecutive to
the target. The data format of the output data of OpenPose
is 2-dimensional 25 points data per frame. There are two
methods to deal with the data. The data are treated as one
50-dimensional data, or the data are treated as 2-dimensional
25-point data. If the data are processed as 50-dimensional data,
the relationships between joints can be considered. However,
there is a problem that when some joints considerably change,
they affect the entire result. However, if the data are processed
as 25-point data, the problem does not occur, however, the
relationships cannot be considered. To solve the problem, we
propose to use the difference data of all pairs of joints in
addition to the 25-point data so that we can deal with the
relationships using the sets of two-dimensional data. The total
number of data is 325 because the number of pairs is 300. The
result of change point detection from these data is output as
the number of change points. In this method, we divide the
result of joints and differences data to distinguish a change in
the movement of joints and the relationships of joints. Thus,
the output is one two-dimensional data per a frame.
Fig. 2 shows the change point detection ﬂow as the
dataﬂow. The input data are the joints data of 25 points and the
difference data consist of all pairs. We adopt the Multivariate
Exponentially Weighted Moving Average (MEWMA) algo-
rithm as the change point detection algorithm because it uses
only the target walking data and is not affected by individual
differences [16]. The MEWMA algorithm uses the data from
the target frame and from previous frames consecutive to the
target. If the number of frames is n (i.e., nth frame is the target
frame), the MEWMA vector is deﬁned by (1).
Zi = λXi + (1 − λ)Zi−1|i = 1, 2, 3, . . . n, Z0 = 0
(1)
Xi is the input vector, which is the coordinate of the joint or
the difference of each frame. The change point can be detected
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. Dataﬂow of the change point detection.
in equation (2) using the MEWMA vector.
T 1 < h1, T 2 > h2|T 2 = ZT
n Σ−1
n Zn
(2)
Zn is the MEWMA vector and ZT
n its transpose. Σ−1
n
is the
variance covariance matrix of Zn. h1 and h2 are thresholds
(0 < h1 < h2). h1 is the case in which a change in the
movement during walking becomes small and h2 is the case
when a change in the movement during walking becomes large.
The counter of change point is decremented when T 2 < h1,
and the counter is incremented when T 2 > h2 to distinguish
the cases in which the movement becomes small or large.
Using the MEWMA algorithm for all joints and differences,
the range of the counter value is −25 < counter < 25
(joints) and −300 < counter < 300 (differences). Finally,
the counting results are normalized by dividing by 25 or
300. The output of the change point detection is the two-
dimensional data, and the form is suitable for the anomaly
detection mentioned in the next section.
C. Anomaly Detection for the Number of Change Points of
Walks
The input data are two-dimensional data per frame obtained
from the change point detection. The anomaly is deﬁned as a
temporary change in the movement in the daily walk. Thus, the
data of daily walking are needed for each person. The data are
prepared as a set of the result of the change point detection for
the daily walk for a few minutes, and the set is called “normal
data”.
Anomaly detection is performed in each frame by com-
paring the normal data and the target frame. Thus, anomaly
detection is repeated in each frame by adding the target frame
data and removing it after detection. We use a Local Outlier
Factor (LOF) as anomaly detection because it can be calculated
in each data, and the feature is suitable for repeating [17]. LOF
is calculated by comparing local densities. The local density
is calculated by reachability distance deﬁned by (3).
reachability−distancek(p, q) = max(k−distance(q), d(p, q))
(3)
where p and q are the points of two-dimensional data, d(p,q) is
the Euclidean distance between p and q, k-distance(q) denotes
Figure 3. Example of the anomaly detection method.
the Euclidean distance between q and the kth nearest neighbor
of q. The local density, which is termed Local Reachability
Density (LRD) is deﬁned as (4).
LRD(p) = (Σq∈kNN(p)reachability − distancek(p, q)
k
)−1
(4)
where kNN(p) denotes the set of k nearest neighbor of p. LOF
is deﬁned using the LRD by (5).
LOF(p) =
Σq∈kNN(p)
LRD(q)
LRD(p)
k
.
(5)
The value of LOF is large when the target is an outlier. LOF
shows whether the target frame is an anomaly or not; however,
the result of the frame is not used for the direct detection of
anomalous walking, because an anomaly frame may appear in
the misestimation estimations of OpenPose. Therefore, in this
method, the condition of the anomaly walk is the walk that
includes two or more continuous anomaly frames. To classify
anomaly walks, the characteristics of the walk are deﬁned as
the average number of change points of the continuous two or
more anomaly frames.
Fig. 3 shows an example of the anomaly detection. In
the example, there are ten-frame data. LOF is calculated
for each frame and Fig. 3 shows the case of frames 1 and
2. In the ﬁeld of calculation of LOF, each frame data is
deleted after calculation. The frames identiﬁed as outliers
are collected if there are 2 or more continuous frames and
walking is identiﬁed as anomalous walking. The characteristics
of anomalous walking are the average values of continuous
frames excluding the ﬁrst frame of the continuous frame.
D. Anomaly Walk Classiﬁcation
The two-dimensional characteristic data of the anomaly
walk are acquired from one video. When there are multiple
anomalous walking videos, clustering algorithms can be per-
formed for the characteristics and the walk can be classiﬁed.
In this paper, we use the K-means algorithm, which is a typical
clustering algorithm. In the K-means algorithm, the parameter
given by a human is only the number of cluster k. In K-means
clustering, ﬁrst, each point, which means the characteristics of
walking, is randomly classiﬁed into k clusters. Next, the below
two steps are repeated until convergence.
1)
The center of gravity of each cluster is calculated.
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 4. Walking during the evaluation.
2)
Each point is reclassiﬁed into the cluster which has
the nearest center of gravity from the point.
Using processing, the detection of anomaly walks and the
classiﬁcation of the walks is completed from the walking
videos. In this method, the longer the video, the higher the
probability of the video to include multiple anomalous walking
instances, because anomaly detection handles the video as one
data unit. The classiﬁcation method assumes that there is only
one anomaly walk per video. Thus, a long video should be
divided every several seconds. However, Videos that are too
short are also not suitable for the method and the minimum
length of the video is two steps because walking has periodicity
every two steps.
IV.
EVALUATIONS
A.
Evaluation Method and Environment
We evaluate the accuracy of the detection and classiﬁcation
of anomaly walks in the proposed method. Thus, it is necessary
to prepare anomalous walking data for which the correct
answer is known. Therefore, we prepare the data of daily
walks and change of walking from daily walk to anomaly walk.
The subjects are three adults and Fig. 4 shows the details of
walking. The walks start 6.6 m away from the camera and
change to anomaly walks after 2.4 m of walking. There are
the following four anomaly walks.
•
Back: Go back one step and start walking again.
•
Side: Walk 40 cm from side to side.
•
Stop: Stop and start walking again.
•
Wide: Walk one large step (1 m).
The resolution of the videos is 1, 920×1, 020 and the framerate
is 30 fps. Each subject performs 20 times each type of walk
(daily and four anomaly walks). Thus, the number of data of
each type is 60. Table I shows the average number of frames
of each type of walk.
TABLE I. AVERAGE NUMBER OF FRAMES IN EACH WALKING TYPE.
Walking type
Daily walk
Anomaly walk
Daily
91
0
Back
49
83
Side
39
67
Stop
50
58
Wide
39
25
Figure 5. Transitions of the number of change points of the joint data.
B. Transition of the Number of Change Points in Change Point
Detection
In this section, the transition of the number of change
points is shown. It is an interim result of the proposed method;
however, it shows an overall trend of each type of anomalous
walk. There are ﬁve parameters of the MEWMA algorithm.
These parameters are detected by a greedy algorithm with
a high F value. The order of the parameters of the greedy
algorithm is the number of frames, h1 of joints, h2 of joints,
h1 of the difference, and h2 of the difference. The number of
frames is 15 (0.5 seconds). The thresholds of the change point
are 1/800 (h1) and 2 times (h2) the average MEWMA for
Figure 6. Transitions of the number of change points of the difference data.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE II. RESULT OF ANOMALY DETECTION FOR EACH ANOMALOUS
WALKING TYPE.
Walking type
Subject A
Subject B
Subject C
Total
TP
FP
TP
FP
TP
FP
TP
FP
Back
14
0
20
6
20
4
54
10
Side
18
0
20
2
20
2
58
4
Stop
20
2
20
1
20
2
60
5
Wide
17
4
18
6
13
2
48
12
Total
69
6
78
15
73
10
220
31
joints and 1/1200 and 11 times for differences data. The data
of daily walk is used only for the determination of parameters,
and change point detection is performed for the four types of
anomaly walks. Fig. 5 and 6 show the transitions of the number
of change points. These ﬁgures show the average number of
change points for 60 walks by the three subjects. The x-
axis shows normalized time; 0 to 1 indicates a daily walk,
and 1-2 indicates anomalous walks. The boundary between
daily and anomaly walks is determined by human conﬁrmation
in every frame. The y-axis shows the normalized number of
change points. The data are plotted every 0.1 point on the
x-axis as the average number of change points in the range.
The positive values in the result indicate a change in walking
movements to intense movements and the negative values
indicate a change in movements to slow movements. Even in
daily walk, the values of joints are positive because the foot
movement periodically changes. However, the relationships
between joints do not change, and the values of difference
are almost 0. The ﬁgure shows that the tendency of number of
the change points changes between daily and anomaly walks
and it is different in each type of anomaly walks. In Side
and Wide, both of the values are positive; however, a change
in the difference in Wide is smaller than that in Side. The
change in Wide is only a change in stride, and the change
in the positional relationship between the joints of the body
is smaller than that in Side. In Stop and Back, the values of
Stop are smaller than Back and Stop is characterized by the
temporally stopping of the movement of all joints. Thus, the
method can detect the difference between each anomaly walk.
This means that the method can be used to analyze the trend of
each walking type, and the result of change point detection can
be used for anomaly detection and classiﬁcation. However, in
actual operation, the types are not given. Thus, analysis should
be done after this classiﬁcation if the method is used for the
analysis
C. Anomalous Walking Detection
Table II shows the result of the anomaly detection for each
anomalous walking type. The threshold of LOF is 4.5, which
is detected by the greedy algorithm after the parameter of
MEAWA is detected. The table shows TP (TP is True Positive,
which means the detection of anomaly walks as an anomaly)
and FP (FP is False Positive, which means the detection of
daily walks as an anomaly) of each subject and of all subjects.
Each rate of TP and FP is 91.7% and 12.9% in total; TP
has high accuracy (> 90%), and FT has medium accuracy
(> 80% and < 90%) for standards in [3]. By focusing on
individual results of each type (e.g., TP is 100% in Stop case),
it is determined that there are differences in the accuracy. This
observation shows that there is a possibility of improving the
accuracy by optimizing the parameters that we focused on,
TABLE III. RESULT OF THE CLASSIFICATION INTO FOUR CLUSTERS FOR
EACH ANOMALOUS WALKING TYPE.
Walking type
Cluster 1
2
3
4
Back
46
0
7
1
Side
0
52
4
2
Stop
50
0
10
0
Wide
0
2
13
33
Figure 7. Characteristics of anomaly walks of each walking type.
such as the threshold or window size of each subject and
walking type. The optimization is considered effective for the
long-term observation of individuals. This will be evaluated in
detail in the future.
D. Anomalous Walking Classiﬁcation
In this section, clustering is performed in the case of TP
in anomaly detection. Table III shows the result of clustering
into four clusters. The number of clusters is the same as the
number of walking types. Each cluster is shown by a number
because clustering is unsupervised. In this result, clustering
is performed separately for each subject, and we group each
cluster of each subject with the highest match rate. Clustering
does not classify four types of walks into four clusters. Back
and Stop are grouped, and the clusters look divided such as
Back and Stop, Side, Wide, and Others. To explain this result,
the characteristics of each walking type are plotted in Fig. 7. As
shown in the ﬁgure, Back and Stop overlapped and created the
same cluster. This indicates that the tendencies of movement
of Back and Stop are the same, and the difference is only
the magnitude of the value. The trend is probably caused by
the stopping motion because Back includes the motion of Stop
because stopping is needed to switch the front step to the back
step. The differences indicate the length of stopping time.
We perform clustering into three clusters owing to the
grouping, and Table IV shows the result. In this result, anomaly
walks are classiﬁed into three clusters (Back and Stop, Side,
and Wide), and the accuracy rate is 89.1%. The rate is medium
in [3], and it classiﬁed walks better than the existing walking
recognition methods.
As with anomaly detection, clustering may show individual
differences. Fig. 8 shows the plots of the same data of Fig. 7
colored by each subject. For Side and Wide cases, the ﬁgure
shows that subjects have different tendencies. On the basis
of this result, when considering the classiﬁcation of anomaly
walks, it is determined that clustering should not target too
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE IV. RESULT OF THE CLASSIFICATION INTO THREE CLUSTERS FOR
EACH ANOMALOUS WALKING TYPE.
Walking type
Cluster 1
2
3
Back
46
0
8
Side
0
54
4
Stop
58
0
2
Wide
0
10
38
Figure 8. Characteristics of anomaly walks for each subject.
many people at the same time. The result shows the possibility
of other applications of the proposed method, if the method can
detect or classify the tendency of walking of each subject, it
can be used to diagnose diseases, such as paralysis, to measure
the effects of rehabilitation.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The detection of a temporary change in walking that causes
falls is a way to alleviate the problem. However, existing
methods recognize only walking speed or whether a person
is walking or not. In this paper, we proposed an anomalous
walking detection and classiﬁcation method by three process-
ing, which are the change point detection, anomaly detection,
and clustering. Thus, anomaly walks were detected in 91.7%
of cases using 240 videos including change from daily walk to
anomaly walk. Furthermore, the detected anomaly walks can
be classiﬁed into three clusters in 89.1% of cases. The average
length of video is 87 frames (30 fps) for the longest motion.
The result shows the proposed method can detect and classify
a temporary change in walking. This capability can be applied
to the analysis of the action that causes falling. In this paper,
we evaluated the method by video data, while the required
input of the method is the coordinate data of joints. Thus, the
method has a wide application range. For example, the method
is applicable to wearable technology such as motion sensors, if
it can acquire the coordinates of a sufﬁcient number of joints.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The
authors
thank
JSPS
KAKENHI
Grant
Number
JP19K24350.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. S. Florence, G. Bergen, A. Atherly, E. Burns, J. Stevens, and
C. Drake, “Medical Costs of Fatal and Nonfatal Falls in Older Adults,”
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, vol. 66, no. 4, Mar. 2017,
pp. 693–698.
[2]
Y. K. Haddad, G. Bergen, and C. Florence, “Estimating the Economic
Burden Related to Older Adult Falls by State,” Journal of public health
management and practice, vol. 25, no. 2, Mar. 2019, pp. E17–E24.
[3]
Z. Hussain, M. Sheng, and W. E. Zhang, “Different Approaches for
Human Activity Recognition: A Survey,” CoRR, vol. abs/1906.05074,
Jun. 2019, pp. 1–28.
[4]
P. Tsinganos and A. Skodras, “A Smartphone-based Fall Detection
System for the Elderly ,” in Proc. of the 10th International Symposium
on Image and Signal Processing and Analysis, Sep. 2017, pp. 53–58.
[5]
S.-H. Cheng, “An intelligent fall detection system using triaxial ac-
celerometer integrated by active RFID,” Jul. 2014, pp. 517–522.
[6]
N. Khan, S. McClean, S. Zhang, and C. Nugent, “Optimal Parameter
Exploration for Online Change-Point Detection in Activity Monitoring
Using Genetic Algorithms,” Sensors, vol. 16, no. 1784, Nov. 2016, pp.
1–16.
[7]
M. Haescher, D. J. C. Matthies, G. Bieber, and B. Urban, “CapWalk:
A Capacitive Recognition of Walking-based Activities As a Wearable
Assistive Technology,” in Proc. of the 8th ACM International Confer-
ence on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments, Jul.
2015, pp. 35:1–35:8.
[8]
F. Zhang, S. E. D ’ Andrea, M. J. Nunnery, S. M. Kay, and H. Huang,
“Towards Design of a Stumble Detection System for Artiﬁcial Legs,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering,
vol. 19, no. 5, Oct. 2011, pp. 567–577.
[9]
J. Aggarwal and M. Ryoo, “Human Activity Analysis: A Review,” ACM
Computing Surveys., vol. 43, no. 3, Apr. 2011, pp. 16:1–16:43.
[10]
J. Yang, J. Lee, and J. Choi, “Activity Recognition Based on RFID
Object Usage for Smart Mobile Devices,” Journal of Computer Science
and Technology, vol. 26, no. 2, Mar. 2011, pp. 239–246.
[11]
N. T. Trung, Y. Makihara, H. Nagahara, Y. Mukaigawa, and Y. Yagi,
“Inertial-sensor-based Walking Action Recognition usingRobust Step
Detection and Inter-class Relationships,” in Proc. of the 21st Interna-
tional Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR 2012), Nov. 2012, pp.
3811–3814.
[12]
J. W. Davis and S. R. Taylor, “Analysis and recognition of walking
movements,” in Proc. of International Conference on Pattern Recogni-
tion, Aug. 2002, pp. 315–318.
[13]
Z. Cao, T. Simon, S. Wei, and Y. Sheikh, “Realtime Multi-Person 2D
Pose Estimation using Part Afﬁnity Fields,” CoRR, vol. abs/1611.08050,
Nov. 2016.
[14]
E. Insafutdinov et al., “ArtTrack: Articulated Multi-Person Tracking in
the Wild,” in 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 1293–1301.
[15]
L. Pishchulin et al., “DeepCut: Joint Subset Partition and Labeling for
Multi Person Pose Estimation,” in Proc. of the 2016 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp.
4929–4937.
[16]
C. A. Lowry, W. H. Woodall, C. W. Champ, and S. E. Rigdon, “A
Multivariate Exponentially Weighted Moving Average Control Chart,”
Technometrics, vol. 34, Feb. 1992, pp. 46–53.
[17]
M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “Lof: Identifying
density-based local outliers,” in Porc. of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD
International Conference on Management of Data, May. 2000, pp. 93–
104.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-763-4
eTELEMED 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

