Implementing Transnational Telemedicine Solutions 
Leila Eadie, David Heaney, Lee Dowie 
University of Aberdeen , Centre for Rural Health 
Inverness, UK 
e-mail: {l.eadie; d.heaney; l.a.dowie}@abdn.ac.uk 
Liam Glynn, Monica Casey, Patrick Hayes 
NUI Galway, General Practice 
Galway, Ireland 
e-mail: {liam.glynn; monica.casey; 
patrick.hayes}@nuigalway.ie 
Matti Matero 
Oulu Arc Subregion 
Oulunkaaren, Kuntayhtymä, Finland 
e-mail: matti.matero@oulunkaari.com 
Undine Knarvik 
University Hospital of North Norway 
Norwegian Centre for 
Integrated Healthcare & Telemedicine 
Tromsø, Norway 
 e-mail: undine.knarvik@telemed.no 
Soo Hun 
Centre for Connected Health and Social Care 
Belfast, UK 
e-mail: soo.hun@hscni.net 
Käte Alrutz 
Västerbottens Läns Landsting 
Umeå, Sweden 
e-mail: kate.alrutz@vll.se 
 
Abstract—The 
Implementing 
Transnational 
Telemedicine 
Solutions (ITTS) project aimed to implement transnational 
telemedicine solutions at scale across Europe’s Northern 
Periphery Program area, introducing new telemedicine 
applications to remote and rural areas in order to improve 
healthcare delivery for rural communities. ITTS incorporated 
ten demonstrator projects, which shared knowledge and 
experience between six project partners and clinical teams in 
order to simplify the process of subsequent implementation. 
Across 9 of the 10 demonstrator projects, a total of 25 new 
services in more than 40 sites across the program area have 
now been implemented successfully, and are in use with 
patients. A mixed methods assessment will determine whether 
the projects become effective and sustainable. This paper 
documents 
the 
process 
of 
knowledge 
exchange 
and 
implementation and describes the services now in place. 
Evaluation results will subsequently be reported and published 
as a policy-informing guide. ITTS has shown, to date, that 
transnational 
knowledge 
sharing 
can 
facilitate 
the 
implementation of telemedicine solutions. 
Keywords- 
telemedicine; 
eHealth; 
transnational; 
implementation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Telemedicine and eHealth have been identified as 
important tools in the delivery of health care in the 21st 
century. EU eHealth strategy aims to improve citizens' health 
by making life-saving information available using eHealth 
tools, to increase healthcare quality and access by making 
eHealth part of health policy and coordinating EU countries' 
political, financial and technical strategies, and to make 
eHealth tools more effective, user-friendly and widely 
accepted [1]. Each of the countries involved has developed 
strategy accordingly. The Scottish Government released a 
National Delivery Plan that sets out the vital contributions of 
telehealth and telecare to health and care strategies in 
Scotland until 2015, including enabling services for 300,000 
more people and normalising use of the technology into 
relevant services [2]. In Northern Ireland, the Telemonitoring 
NI service a scalable, mainstream, end-to-end service which 
provides a clinical triage service, was launched in 2011, 
aiming to benefit around 20,000 people over the following 
six years [3]. The Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and 
Telemedicine [4] is the world's largest centre for research 
and development in telemedicine and e-health and is based in 
Tromsø. It has provided advisory services, plus research and 
development of telemedicine solutions since 1993. 
Delivering healthcare to remote and rural populations is a 
significant challenge, requiring innovative strategies to 
overcome infrastructure deficits, travel difficulties and 
staffing problems. There is an urgent need to reduce 
transport costs and carbon footprint, plus a growing 
acknowledgement that models of long-term care will have to 
evolve to cope with demographic changes and the economic 
downturn. Telemedicine may help to provide equity of health 
service regardless of distance from major centres of care. Yet 
telemedicine is not in common use; while there have been 
numerous pilot studies, on completion technology is often 
withdrawn and the services have not been sustained. The 
disconnected nature of developments has meant similar 
problems 
are 
often 
encountered 
during 
each 
new 
implementation and knowledge is not shared between sites. 
Implementing Transnational Telemedicine Solutions (ITTS) 
proposed transnational knowledge exchange about services 
already proven to work in one country [5], using this 
knowledge to implement services in new settings.  
ITTS was a project partly funded by the EU Northern 
Periphery Program (NPP), which aimed to implement 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

transnational telemedicine solutions in an effective and 
sustainable manner, normalising them into everyday 
practice. The plans for the project have been documented [6]. 
ITTS began in September 2011 and finished in March 2014, 
and built on previous work which mapped telemedicine 
services available in remote and rural areas of Northern 
Europe [7]. Six NPP area countries were actively involved 
and 
ten 
demonstrator 
telemedicine 
projects 
were 
implemented. The project teams were: Scotland (Lead 
Partner): Centre for Rural Health, University of Aberdeen; 
Finland: Oulu Arc Subregion; Ireland: National University of 
Ireland, Galway; Northern Ireland: Centre for Connected 
Health & Social Care; Norway: Norwegian Centre for 
Integrated Care and Telemedicine (NST); and Sweden: 
County Council of Västerbotten. 
The objectives of ITTS were to create sustainable, long-
term projects, enabling the uptake of transnational best 
practice and normalising the use of technology into everyday 
practice, at scale. ITTS aimed to improve accessibility by 
situating services in local communities, or in patients’ 
homes, and reducing unnecessary hospital visits and travel 
for patients and staff. It also aimed to demonstrate cost-
effective service delivery and evaluate the return on 
investment, encouraging the development of eHealth as a 
key business sector in the region. It was hoped this would 
encourage further development of telemedicine in remote 
and rural areas.  
The ten demonstrator projects were classified into three 
themes: videoconferencing consultations; smartphone and 
internet based mobile self-management; and home-based 
health services. While most of the technology used in the 
demonstrator projects is in existence, the implementation 
occurred in new sites, and in a co-ordinated fashion to 
promote sustainability. 
The major benefit of videoconferencing (VC) is to save 
travel time and costs, either for the patient who can contact 
their doctor at a site nearer their home, or for the healthcare 
staff, who need not travel large distances to visit patients. It 
also allows the introduction of services to areas that have 
been previously deemed too remote to allow cost-effective 
access. Because VC can use readily available, relatively 
inexpensive technology with which many people and 
institutions now have experience, it is a simple and economic 
introduction to telemedicine for clinics [8]. 
Smartphones are becoming increasingly popular and can 
provide reminders, symptom or activity tracking facilities, 
and of course, communication with health services, among 
many other features, allowing an inexpensive method of 
interaction with large numbers of patients. Similarly to 
websites, they can support self-management programs, 
providing an exchange of information for various health 
areas and the potential for patients to participate in their 
health care more pro-actively, thereby reducing the burden 
on existing services [9][10].   
Finally, home-based care is of particular interest to 
people living in remote and rural areas, especially those who 
suffer from multiple or complex health and social care needs, 
and those who are restricted in their ability to travel by 
illness or mobility issues. Telemedicine can reduce hospital 
visits and help keep patients in their own communities, 
bringing care into their homes that they would otherwise not 
be able to, or have the opportunity to access [11]. The ten 
demonstrator projects are listed in Figure 1. 
Previous work encouraged the idea that countries with 
experience of specific telemedicine implementations could 
‘export’ their currently existing project to ‘importing’ 
countries which had little or no experience of the application 
[7]. This knowledge allows technology to embed more 
rapidly, anticipating and overcoming obstacles before they 
arise. ITTS had access to a wide range of experts within the 
different partner countries, with a similarly wide range of 
experience. However, the different countries have varying 
health systems and infrastructure capabilities, plus different 
legal situations, and so some ‘translation’ between countries 
is needed. An International Telemedicine Advisory Service 
(ITAS) was created to advise on all elements of the project 
planning, implementation and analysis. ITAS comprised 
telemedicine experts from all of the participating countries. 
Figure 1: The ten demonstrator projects with the participating countries 
Previous work [6] described the plan and proposed methods 
of the ITTS project (summarised briefly in section II). 
Section III presents new results of two years work in the 
implementation of this plan. Conclusions are drawn in 
Section IV. Future assessment will demonstrate whether 
there are travel savings, and whether the services are 
effective, sustainable and improve access to healthcare in 
remote and rural communities.  
II. 
METHODS 
The ITTS project began in September 2011 with projects 
identified from previous work [7]. Each participating country 
identified whether there was any telemedicine activity for the 
subject areas in their region and scoped the potential for its 
introduction. 
Potential 
sites 
were 
assessed 
for 
appropriateness and readiness. Each country identified which 
demonstrator projects they felt able to proceed with. 
Business cases were created to provide details of the clinical 
teams, aims, risks and expected impact of the projects, and 
the financial investments required. The project funding 
allowed for some purchase of telemedicine equipment for the 
demonstrator projects in each country. The business cases 
were reviewed by ITAS, who provided comments on the 
design and implementation strategies. Their feedback was 
addressed before any implementation began. Project 
development workers liaised with the clinical teams, 
organising all aspects of the implementation from assessing 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

requirements to purchasing and installation. Once the 
technology was installed and staff trained in its use, the 
services were offered to patients, followed by the start of 
data collection for the evaluation. 
The evaluation aimed to ascertain whether the 
demonstrator projects worked in each country, the factors 
associated with successful and unsuccessful implementation 
and the cost implications. Assessment examined patients’ 
access to services, changes in hospital visits and travel for 
patients and staff, patient and staff views on their 
experiences of the services, social and cultural factors 
affecting implementation and sustainability and cost savings 
and return on investment from the projects. The 
methodology for this ‘mixed methods’ evaluation of the ten 
demonstrator projects was selected based upon the Model for 
Assessment of Telemedicine (MAST) [11]. It included the e-
Health Implementation Toolkit (e-HIT) [12], to assess 
readiness 
and 
potential 
barriers 
to 
implementation; 
questionnaires and interviews with clinical staff and patients 
using the new services; details of health service and travel 
activity before and after implementation; and a health 
economics analysis including socio-economic scenarios 
modelling the impact of expansion of the new services. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The majority of the demonstrator projects have now been 
successfully 
implemented: 
ITTS 
has 
supported 
the 
development of 25 new services at more than 40 sites in the 
six participating countries. Table 1 provides details of these 
services. 
 
Project 1: VC links for speech therapy services (Ire, NI, 
Scot, Swed) 
Scotland and Sweden had both previously delivered 
speech and language therapy (SLT) services using VC 
systems to link hospitals [5]. VC has the potential to reduce 
travel costs for patients or therapists; for example, in 
Scotland therapists can travel for up to a 6-hour return 
journey to see a patient for an hour-long appointment. 
Reducing travel time releases time for therapists to see other 
patients. VC also facilitates the provision of intensive 
therapy courses requiring shorter but more frequent sessions. 
Various patients benefit from SLT, and ITTS implemented 
services with stroke patients in Northern Ireland, head and 
neck cancer patients in Sweden, and children with speech 
difficulties in Ireland. VC systems were located in patients’ 
homes in Sweden, or within local community hospitals in 
remote or island regions such as the Aran Islands in Ireland 
and the Scottish Highlands. 
Project 2: VC links for renal services (NI, Nor, Scot, 
Swed) 
Existing renal VC services were expanded in Norway 
and Scotland and were exported to Northern Ireland and 
Sweden. Norway supported patients who are undergoing 
haemodialysis in their homes in addition to linking central 
and remote clinics. Scotland expanded their service to offer 
outpatient review appointments between the main hospital in 
Inverness and local renal units in Fort William and the 
Western Isles. Sweden set up links between Umeå hospital 
and local hospitals in Skellefteå and Lycksele to improve 
staff support and access to specialist care. Northern Ireland 
introduced home-based haemodialysis. 
Project 3: VC links for emergency psychiatry services 
(Nor, Scot) 
Emergency services cover out of hours assessments of 
patients in need of acute psychiatric help. VC connections 
with specialists can help prevent the automatic transfer and 
admission of patients by providing an assessment of the 
patient at the initial hospital, wherever that might be located. 
Norwegian studies have demonstrated that both patients and 
professionals reported no differences in quality and 
satisfaction between face to face consultations and VC 
assessments [14]. Reducing patient travel can help prevent 
additional distress and allows patients to remain near to the 
stability of home and carers. Norway had previously 
implemented 24-hour consultant VC cover from Tromsø and 
in ITTS expanded their service to include care for adolescent 
patients in Narvik, Lødingen and Tysfjord, as well as 
exporting it to Lorn and Islands Hospital, Oban, in Scotland. 
VC was also being used in multi-disciplinary team reviews 
to include community teams in ward rounds to help prepare 
for patient discharge and transfer. 
Project 4: VC links for remote diabetes services (NI, 
Scot) 
VC for diabetes services allows local access to specialists 
without the patients having to travel as far, or as often for 
several different appointments. Readings from blood glucose 
meters can be included in the VC link. VC was used in 
Scotland for patients with diabetes for annual or biannual 
review appointments, connecting the Inverness-based 
consultant with patients accompanied by diabetes specialist 
nurses based at community hospitals in Thurso.  ITTS 
expanded the service to include Fort William and Portree on 
the Isle of Skye. Existing services in Orkney were extended 
to include smaller islands, where the VC is also used to 
connect three sites across the islands with the main centre at 
Balfour Hospital, with the option of a 3-way link to 
specialists in Aberdeen. The service was exported to 
Northern Ireland, connecting Ulster Hospital with Bangor 
Hospital. 
Project 5: Smartphones for tracking physical activity 
(Ire, Nor, Scot) 
The combination of the growing problem of obesity and 
the increasing popularity of smartphones motivated this 
project in which the accelerometer sensors in phones were 
used to monitor physical activity. A survey of pedometer 
applications (apps) was made and a suitable program chosen: 
Accupedo by Corusen LLC (Texas, USA). This app runs in 
the background as users go about their daily tasks and 
provides graphs detailing daily step count and progress 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I.  
SERVICES IMPLEMENTED BY COUNTRY
Project 
Finland 
Ireland 
N. Ireland 
Norway 
Scotland 
Sweden 
VC links for speech 
therapy services 
- 
VC between the 
National University 
of Ireland Galway 
and the Aran Islands 
for paediatric 
patients.  
Start: August 2013 
VC connection to 
stroke patients’ 
homes in Newry 
and Mourne, plus 
a local health 
centre. Start: 
November/ 
December 2013 
- 
VC network in 
the northern 
Highlands is 
expanding and 
connecting to 
specialist services 
in Aberdeen and 
London.  
Expanding use to 
head and neck 
cancer patients, 
connecting to 
patients’ homes 
around 
Västerbotten.  
 
VC links for renal 
services 
- 
- 
Home 
haemodialysis 
support and care 
reviews.  
Start: November/ 
December 2013 
Home peritoneal 
dialysis support via 
VC.  
Start: May 2012 
VC consultations 
between 
Inverness, Fort 
William and the 
Western Isles. 
Start May 2013 
VC network 
between hospitals 
in Skellefteå, 
Lycksele and 
Umeå.  
Start: November 
2012 
VC links for 
emergency 
psychiatry services 
- 
- 
- 
Connects Tromsø to 
Narvik, Lødingen 
and Tysfjord for 
assessment of 
paediatric/adolescent 
patients.  
Start: October 2013 
Mobile VC 
connections 
between Lorn and 
Islands Hospital, 
Oban and on-call 
psychiatrists.  
Start: July 2013 
Withdrawn  
VC links for remote 
diabetes services 
- 
- 
VC consultation 
between Ulster 
Hospital and 
Bangor Hospital.  
Start: February 
2013 
- 
Expanding VC 
network between 
Inverness, 
Portree, Fort 
William and 
Thurso, plus links 
between Orkney 
island hospitals 
and Aberdeen.  
- 
Smartphones for 
tracking physical 
activity 
- 
Following a pilot 
trial, four GP clinics 
are ‘prescribing’ the 
app.  
Start: April 2013 
- 
 
App available at a 
Healthy Living 
Centre in Tromso, a 
public activity 
service for 
unemployed people 
and a Weight Loss 
Club.  
Start: May 2013 
One Highland GP 
clinic offering the 
app.  
Start: May 2013 
 
Smartphones for 
inflamatory bowel 
disease 
- 
Consultant at 
National University 
of Ireland, Galway 
offers the app to 
patients.  
Start: September 
2013 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Remote support in 
medical and social 
care emergencies 
Telehealth 
technology 
installed in Oulu 
Arc area nursing 
home.  
Start: May 2013 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Remote exercise 
classes for 
rehabilitation 
Classes delivered 
to elderly 
patients’ homes in 
Oulu Arc area.  
Start: January 
2013 
Classes delivered in 
person and to 
COPD patients’ 
homes in County 
Clare.  
Start: January 2013 
Withdrawn  
- 
Classes delivered 
in person to 
COPD patients at 
Wick and Fort 
William, plus link 
to remote centres 
at Golspie and 
Broadford. Start: 
August – October 
2013 
Classes delivered 
to long-term pain 
patients’ homes in 
Västerbotten.  
Start: May 2013 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

TABLE I.  
SERVICES IMPLEMENTED BY COUNTRY (CONTINUED) 
Home-based service 
delivery for patients 
with multimorbidity 
VC support for 
Oulu Arc area 
patients with 
multimorbidity 
living at home, 
plus a health 
website providing 
test results and a 
method of 
communicating 
with health staff.  
Start: Oct 2012 
Health room within 
a County Clare GP 
surgery offers 
monitoring 
equipment: BP, 
pulse oximeter, 
respiratory/ peak 
flow, BMI; plus 
exercise quipment:, 
health promotion 
DVD. Start: June 
2013  
- 
- 
- 
Self-measurement 
of blood pressure 
at centres in Malå, 
Sorsele and 
Storuman. ’Check-
up Bag equipment 
for nurses visiting 
patients to 
measure BP and 
calculate INR.  
Start: Nov2012 – 
May 2013 
 
toward daily goals. The partners in Ireland ran a 
randomised controlled trial with the app [15] to determine its 
effectiveness and a suitable protocol for export to the other 
countries. The app was ‘prescribed’ by GPs in Ireland and 
Scotland and used by weight loss groups in Norway. 
Project 6: Smartphones and internet support for 
diabetes 
Diabetes is a condition that has massively increased in 
the past decade and is expected to further grow in the next 
few years [16]. There are already a large number of websites 
and smartphone apps to help users with the disease and 
partly because of this profusion, little is known about which 
are worthwhile recommending to patients. No new services 
were implemented within ITTS in this project; instead an 
international knowledge exchange was organised to tackle 
this complex subject area. Various stakeholders, including 
primary and secondary care clinicians, patients, technology 
developers and other interested parties, contributed to a 
discussion about diabetes telemedicine. Topics of particular 
interest included supporting self-management, providing 
access to integrated information, encouraging lifestyle 
changes, maintaining patient engagement, remote monitoring 
and improving access to care. Information and evidence 
about 
useful 
technology, 
smartphone 
and 
internet 
applications and other resources relevant to diabetes care was 
collated, and a network of expertise and resources created. A 
position paper is being written and future projects planned. 
Project 7: Smartphones for inflammatory bowel disease 
(Ire) 
A smartphone app was developed and trialled in Scotland 
in a collaboration between a surgeon at Raigmore Hospital, 
Inverness, and a technology developer company (Open 
Brolly, Forres, Scotland) to help monitor inflammatory 
bowel disease, and through ITTS this was exported to 
Galway, Ireland. The app allows patients to record and 
transmit their symptoms to a specialist nurse, with details of 
their medication use. The nurse views data on a central 
‘dashboard’ which highlights any changes in patients’ 
conditions, allowing the nurse to contact the patient and 
advise on any management adjustments required. This 
prompt response should help reassure patients, prevent 
unnecessary outpatient appointments and  reduce admissions. 
. 
 
Project 8: Remote support in medical and social care 
emergencies (Fin) 
Northern 
Ireland 
in 
particular 
has 
considerable 
experience with telecare systems to support people with 
health or social care needs and help them to remain 
independent at home. Finland imported this service for frail 
elderly people in nursing homes who are given alarms which 
link to a centre from which help can be sent promptly. 
Project 9: Remote exercise classes for rehabilitation 
(Fin, Ire, Scot, Swed) 
VC rehabilitation classes for people with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or other conditions 
where guided exercise can be useful are particularly 
advantageous because such patients often experience 
difficulty travelling and the ability to take the classes at 
home or at a local hospital is beneficial. Remote patients 
perform the exercises and benefit from the same social, 
educational and clinical interactions as those physically 
present at the clinic. Scotland exported this project to 
Finland, where it is used with the elderly in their homes; in  
Ireland, where COPD patients participate in classes from 
home; and Sweden with patients suffering from long-term 
pain conditions. In Scotland, the service has been 
implemented in new sites using a ‘hub and spoke’ model, 
with physiotherapists in larger COPD clinics in Wick and 
Fort William leading classes for those present while also 
linking to remote community clinics in Golspie and 
Broadford. It is hoped that more clinics can join the links. 
Project 10: Home-based service delivery for patients 
with multimorbidity (Fin, Ire, Swed) 
Based on previous experience of home-based services for 
patients with complex care requirements, this project took 
different forms in different countries. In County Clare, 
Ireland, a self-monitoring station based within a GP clinic 
where patients can check their blood pressure and weight and 
use exercise equipment was implemented. In Sweden, clinic-
based blood pressure 
self-monitoring 
services 
were 
implemented in Malå, Sorsele and Storuman, in addition to a 
second service: a “check-up bag” that nurses used on home 
visits to evaluate blood pressure and calculate the INR blood 
clotting measure. In Finland’s Oulu Arc Subregion, patients 
used a web portal to access laboratory results, monitor their 
health and contact healthcare staff with any questions, plus 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

housebound patients with social and health care needs were 
offered a VC care option. 
At the time of writing, only three projects were not yet 
fully implemented and it was expected that continued effort 
would result in their implementation at a later date. The 
implementation of projects at two sites was cancelled due to 
service and department restructuring or closures. Many 
challenges were overcome, providing significant learning 
points, such as working with hospital IT departments to 
ensure that equipment is correctly installed and determined 
to be safe and secure, especially in projects where systems 
were located in patient homes. Other issues included 
information flow from management to front-line staff, and 
the effects of staff turnover.  
Initial feedback from patients suggested they appreciated 
the time and travel saving that VC allowed. Those using 
home-based services said they enjoyed the social interaction 
the video links offered, as well as the access to services they 
would otherwise not have been able to use. Complaints 
mainly referred to connection quality: intermittent problems 
with the sound or picture on VC, for example. 
ITTS collected and analysed data from the demonstrator 
projects. Results from the evaluation will be reported, and 
recommendations made aiming to help others interested in 
starting 
their 
own 
telemedicine 
services. 
Planned 
dissemination of the project results includes presenting the 
results from the demonstrator projects and cost analysis in 
peer-reviewed journal articles; attendance at various 
conference and policy-informing events; a report collecting 
together all the business cases (“A Case for Telemedicine”); 
and 
a 
guide 
containing 
an 
interactive 
checklist 
(“Telemedicine 
into 
Everyday 
Practice”) 
aimed 
at 
policymakers and service planners, all of which will be 
available on the project website [17]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Historically, telemedicine has rarely moved beyond pilot 
projects. 
The 
reasons 
include 
infrastructure 
issues, 
organisational barriers – both clinical and cultural – 
economic considerations and governance and security 
concerns. ITTS implemented telemedicine services across 
northern Europe, using transnational knowledge exchange to 
facilitate implementation, and encouraging success and 
sustainability. Patients are now using these services as a 
direct result of the project. ITTS has implemented 25 new 
telemedicine services across the six countries, offering 
benefits to patients and staff and showcasing what the 
available technology can achieve. Assessment will provide 
evidence about effectiveness and sustainability, but the 
achievement of implementing this number of telemedicine 
applications, from the initial planning stage [6], to the stage 
where they are operational should not be underestimated. 
This is the stage where many pilots fail, without attention to 
organisational issues.  
The challenges of implementing solutions that are 
sustainable, transnational, and that bring telemedicine into 
everyday practice are considerable, but this project has 
demonstrated the impact of strategic investment. The goal of 
the project was to implement transnational telemedicine 
solutions, 
in an 
effective 
and 
sustainable 
manner. 
Effectiveness and sustainability are as yet to be measured, 
but ITTS has created expert networks which will hopefully 
continue beyond the project timeline. This contribution will 
form a foundation for further work as those services which 
are successful mature and expand, and new applications are 
developed. ITTS has provided a demonstration of what can 
be achieved with transnational collaboration and efforts to 
ensure knowledge and experience is shared in practical ways. 
REFERENCES 
[1] European Commission. Public health eHealth policy. 
http://ec.europa.eu/health/ehealth/policy/index_en.htm  
[2] A national telehealth and telecare delivery plan for Scotland 
to 2015. Driving improvement, integration and innovation. 
Edinburgh: The Scottish Government, 2012. 
[3] www.telemonitoringni.info available 05/02/2014 
[4] www.telemed.no available 05/02/2014 
[5] D. F. Robinson, G. T. Savage, and K. S. Campbell. 
“Organizational learning, diffusion of innovation, and 
international collaboration in telemedicine,” Health Care 
Manage Rev. vol. 28(1), 2003, pp. 68–78.  
[6] M. Casey, P. Hayes, D. Heaney, L. Dowie, G. Ólaighin, M. 
Matero, et al. “Implementing transnational telemedicine 
solutions: a connected health project in rural and remote areas 
of six Northern Periphery countries. Series on European 
collaborative projects,” Eur J Gen Pract. 19(1),2013, 52–58. 
[7] Competitive health services in sparsely populated areas - 
eHealth applications across the urban-rural dimension. 
http://www.northernperiphery.eu/en/projects/show/&tid=11  
[8] W. R. Hersh, D. H. Hickam, S. M. Severance, T. L. Dana, K. 
Pyle Krages, and M. Helfand. “Diagnosis, access and 
outcomes: Update of a systematic review of telemedicine 
services,” J Telemed Telecare. 12(Suppl 2), 2006, pp. S3–31. 
[9] A. S. Mosa, I. Yoo, and L. Sheets. “A systematic review of 
healthcare applications for smartphones,” BMC Med Inform 
Decis Mak. vol. 12, 2012, pp. 67. 
[10] E.Ozdalga, A.Ozdalga, N. Ahuja.“The smartphone in 
medicine:a review of current and potential use among 
physicians and students,”J Med Internet Res14(5),2012, e128. 
[11] G. Paré, M. Jaana, and C. Sicotte. “Systematic review of 
home telemonitoring for chronic diseases: the evidence base,” 
J Am Med Inform Assoc. vol. 14(3), 2007, pp. 269–277. 
[12] K. Kidholm, A. G. Ekeland, L. K. Jensen, J. Rasmussen, C. 
D. Pedersen, A. Bowes, et al. “A model for assessment of 
telemedicine applications: MAST,” Int J Technol Assess 
Health Care. vol. 28, 2012, pp. 44–51. 
[13] E. Murray, C. May, F. Mair. “Development and formative 
evaluation of the e-Health Implementation Toolkit (e-HIT),” 
BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. vol. 10, 2010, pp.61. 
[14] D. Gammon, S. Bergvik, T. Bergmo, S. Pedersen. 
“Videoconferencing in psychiatry: a survey of use in northern 
Norway,” J Telemed Telecare. vol. 2(4), 1996, pp. 192–198. 
[15] L. G. Glynn, P. S. Hayes, M. Casey, F. Glynn, A. Alvarez-
Iglesias, J. Newell, et al. “SMART MOVE - a smartphone-
based intervention to promote physical activity in primary 
care: study protocol for a randomized controlled trial,” Trials. 
vol. 14, 2013, pp. 157. 
[16] World Health Organisation. Diabetes data and statistics. 
http://www.euro.who.int/en/health-topics/noncommunicable-
diseases/diabetes/data-and-statistics 26.11.2013 
[17]  www.transnational-telemedicine.eu 10.03.2013 
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-327-8
eTELEMED 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

