Study on the Effectiveness of Coloring on Physical and Mental
Health of the Elderly in Adult Daycare Centers
Chuan Feng∗, Ya Wen Deng†, Naomi Okubo‡, Tetsuya Sanpei§ and SeungHee Lee¶
∗Kansei, Behavioral and Brain Sciences – Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences
University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
Email: feng111@outlook.com
†National Tsing Hua University – Institute of Service Science, Hsinchu City, Taiwan
Email: dengyawenjp@gmail.com
‡coco de class Corp., Ibaraki, Japan
Email: n.okubo@cocodeclass-afs.com
§Japan Prime Computing Corp., Ibaraki, Japan
Email: sanpei.tetsuya@j-pc.jp
∗Faculty of Art and Design – Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences – University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
Email: seungheekansei@gmail.com
Abstract—It has been reported that coloring provides a wide-
range of health beneﬁts for all ages, especially the elderly. Many
nursing homes started to apply coloring as a routine activity for
their residents in Japan, and its usefulness is expected. As the
rapidly declining birthrate and aging of the population continue,
it is necessary to develop new activities to improve the lifestyle
of senior adults. The purpose of this study is to assess the
effectiveness of coloring therapy for the elderly on their mood
states, and to investigate whether there is a correlation between
color and the mood stage while coloring. A daily experimental
scheme is proposed for the elderly in a daycare center by
providing purposeful line drawings with concrete elements.
Keywords–coloring; art therapy; elderly; daycare center.
I.
INTRODUCTION
As Japan enters the super-aging stage, the number of
people certiﬁed for long-term care/support has been increasing.
Citizens over the age of 65 account for 26.7% of the country’s
population, and only around 1.7 million care workers are
available for almost 6.2 million individuals requiring special
attention [1]. This increase in elderly per caregiver ratio results
in a heavy burden for the worker and a reduction in quality
care. In response to this, many nursing homes arrange activities
beyond daily care to lessen stress on caregivers and provide a
better living environment.
Recently, a number of nursing centers started applying
’coloring’ as a routine activity, since it has been reported
that coloring books have a wide-range of therapeutic and
health beneﬁts [2]. Furthermore, related research proved that
the use of coloring in non-pharmacological treatment made
a positive impact on patients with various diseases of aging,
like cognitive disorders and disabilities. Hattori et al. [3] found
signiﬁcant improvements in the vitality and quality of life
on patients with mild Alzheimers disease. Moreover, it is
suggested to be an effective stress reducer for persons with
intellectual disability [4], while cardiac rehabilitation patients
also experienced a greater relaxation and positive mood re-
sponse after the coloring therapy [5]. However, although the
use of coloring books is encouraged as a pleasurable activity,
it is not considered as professional art therapy [6].
In this regard, the purpose of this study is to determine
the effectiveness of coloring on physical and mental health of
adult daycare center users, and provide evidence on whether
or not this activity affects the elderly. This paper is structured
as follows. In Section I, the current state of Japanese elderly
care and coloring as a therapy is introduced. In Section II,
general information of the cooperative facility is given, and in
Section III and IV, the methodology and preliminary study
are described, respectively. Finally, a brief discussion and
conclusion for the current study progress are given in Sections
V and VI.
II.
DAYCARE CENTER
For this research, a daycare center in Ibaraki, Japan, was
visited. This facility nurses 32 senior adults in need of Long-
Term Care(LTC) / Support, 11 males and 21 females, ranging
between the age of 60 and 105, with a mean age of 87. Accord-
ing to the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, the
level of care is classiﬁed from Support Level 1(Needs social
support and partial assistance with ADLs but may maintain or
improve functions), to Care Level 5 (maximum demand for
full service) [7]. Following this classiﬁcation, the users of the
Figure 1. Number of Elderly Users and Care Levels
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 2. Number, Ages and Gender of Care Workers
care center are distributed as presented in Figure 1, while 81%
of the elderly able to do coloring are below Care Level 3.
On the other hand, Figure 2 shows that from the 17 care
workers at the daycare center, only one is male. What is more,
the majority of carers are concentrated on the 50-60 age range
group, while no one is in their twenties.
III.
METHODOLOGY
This study included a total of N=30 elderly. Even though
most of the participants are under Care Level 3, they are
more or less suffering some common geriatric disease, such as:
hypertension, heart diseases, bone and joint pain or diabetes.
In addition, some of them are observed to have different
degrees of progressive memory loss and cognitive impairment,
namely suspected of having Alzheimer’s disease (AD). For
this reason, in order to avoid causing discomfort, the length of
each coloring time and the complexity of the drawings were
designed as stated below.
A. Drawing Design
Considering cultural inﬂuences, Japanese elderly prefer
contents which are familiar and related to their past. To elicit
emotion and empathy, three themes were chosen: ’Flowers’
and ’Traditional Objects’ (Figure 3). The contents of these
line drawings are colorless and were previously tested with
the elderly to not be difﬁcult for the subjects.
B. Procedure
Firstly, the participants, after signing an informed consent,
are presented with a set of 12 pre-determined colored pencils
Figure 3. A Sample Drawing From Each Theme
Figure 4. Answer Icons
and line drawings. Coloring time is divided into two sessions
of 30 minutes each. On the ﬁrst session, the subjects will color
an speciﬁc drawing, whereas, on the second session, the elderly
are free to choose which drawing to color.
Secondly, before starting coloring, the subjects are asked
to record the ’date’, ’weather’, and ’mood’ at the time of
the activity. To account for participants with mild cognitive
impairment, each answer uses easy to understand icons as
shown in Figure 4.
Finally, the ﬁnished coloring works are collected and
scanned to build a digital database. Then, the ’color’, ’draw-
ing’, ’blood pressure’, ’hearbeat rate’, ’body temperature’,
’date’, ’weather’, and ’mood’ elements are analyzed to ﬁnd
relationships between the activity and change on the elderly.
Furthermore, a color analysis program will assess color usage,
line pressure, and line consistency of each work.
IV.
PRELIMINARY STUDY
For the purpose of collecting design data, a preliminary
study was conducted at the daycare center. A pilot study
with prototype drawings (Figure 5) showed that most of the
elderly were willing to try coloring. During the activity time,
the atmosphere became lively and relaxed. In addition, two
opposite phenomena were perceived: some of the subjects
were extremely devoted and refused to communicate with the
outside world; while some actively communicated with people,
showing a signiﬁcant social desire.
Additionally, Figure 6 presents the coloring works of one
subject (age 92). This female participant is a farmer living with
her son and daughter in law, husband deceased. According
to the information provided by the daycare center, she has
been attending this institution for 3 years, 6 times per week,
and suffers from astigmatism and arrhythmia. On the other
hand, during the activity, she showed careful thinking while
ﬁlling the line drawings. Moreover, some of her personality
traits made detectable during the experiment were: will not say
anything when depressed, murmurs while drawing if feeling
angry, gets easily angry when remembering bad experiences,
and goes along with other people.
Figure 5. Pilot Study on Coloring
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Figure 6. Collected Data from a Subject
V.
DISCUSSION
This study found that the following points need more
strictly control for the upcoming experiment. On one side,
there are many factors of external interferences on the pro-
cesses of coloring and not all of the elderly can ﬁnish their
works everytime. On the other side, the pilot study did
not found any signiﬁcant relationship between the emotion
of subject and the color they have used. Therefore, in the
upcoming experiment, the study will introduce the experiment
more speciﬁcally to the elderly, and brieﬂy interview them
about their feeling while coloring to have more information to
analyze.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The purpose of this study was to determine the effec-
tiveness of coloring as a therapy for elderly nursing home
users, and provide evidence supporting the positive effects that
coloring can make on mental and physical health. A daily
experimental scheme was proposed by providing meaningful
line drawings with ﬁgurative elements to the elderly, to collect,
analyze and track their daily mood.
From the guidelines presented in this paper, a three months
research will be conducted at the daycare center to gather and
process the data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank all colleagues and students
who contributed to this study, and are grateful to the National
Federation of Agricultural Cooperative Associations, the day-
care center of JA-Hitachi Fureai, Tokai, and the daycare center
of JA-Hitachi Daisuki, Takahagi, for their collaboration during
preliminary investigations.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Considering a Social Model to Overcome Population Aging,” Japan
Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Tech. Rep., 2016.
[2]
“Why
grown-ups
love
coloring
books
too,”
2016,
URL:
http://ideas.ted.com/why-grown-ups-love-coloring-books-too/ [accessed:
2016-06-26].
[3]
H. Hattori, C. Hattori, C. Hokao, K. Mizushima, and T. Mase, “Con-
trolled study on the cognitive and psychological effect of coloring and
drawing in mild Alzheimer’s disease patients,” Geriatrics Gerontology
International, vol. 11, no. 4, 2011, pp. 431–437.
[4]
C. Schrade, L. Tronsky, and H. Kaiser, “Physiological effects of mandala
making in adults with intellectual disability,” The Arts in Psychotherapy,
vol. 38, no. 2, 2011, pp. 109–113.
[5]
D. Elkis-Abuhoff, M. Gaydos, R. Goldblatt, M. Chen, and S. Rose,
“Mandala drawings as an assessment tool for women with breast cancer,”
The Arts in Psychotherapy, vol. 36, no. 4, 2009, pp. 231–238.
[6]
R. Carolan and D. Betts, “The adult coloring book phenomenon,” 2015,
URL:
http://3blmedia.com/News/Adult-Coloring-Book-Phenomenon/
[accessed: 2016-06-26].
[7]
“About the Certiﬁcation of Needed Long-Term Care,” 2015, URL:
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/topics/kaigo/kentou/15kourei/sankou3.html
[accessed: 2016-09-05].
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-540-1
eTELEMED 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

