Transition to Adult Care for Youth with Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
Structured Support Aids for Adolescents and Young Patients in Morioka Area, Japan
Kazuma Takahashi
Department of Basic Nursing Science
School of Nursing, Graduate School
of Nursing, Health Support Centre,
Iwate Prefectural University
Takizawa, Japan
E-mail: t_kazuma@iwate-pu.ac.jp
Akio Takahashi
Department of Diabetes and
Endocrinology
Morioka Children’s Hospital
Morioka, Japan
E-mail: akiotakaha@m-codomo-
hp.or.jp
Yasushi Ishigaki
Department of Diabetes and
Metabolism
School of Medicine, Iwate Medical
University
Morioka, Japan
E-mail: ishigaki@iwate-med.ac.jp
Abstract—In clinical practice for adolescents and young adults
with childhood onset diseases, transitional medicine represents
an important element. Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM) is a
disease that requires patients, their families, and health care
professionals involved to face a wide range of problems,
including
early
development
of
complications,
decreased
quality of life, socioeconomic problems, and developmental
psychological problems. The transition to adult health care is
often not smoothly carried out for young patients with this
disease. In this paper, first, we discuss problems in this area,
including differences between paediatric and adult clinical
settings
for
diabetes
care,
insufficient
preparation
for
transition, and dissatisfaction of patients and families during
transition. Next, we propose a clinical trial, providing a
seamless transitional process to the young patients with T1DM
at a joint clinic operated by both pediatricians and physicians,
trying to ascertain the changes in psychological burden on the
patients, quality of life due to transition, self-care behaviors,
and blood glucose control during the transition.
Keywords-Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus; Transfer; Transition;
Joint Clinic; Bridge Clinc.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Progress in medicine over the last decades has given rise
to increased survival of children with complicated paediatric
diseases
who
reach
adulthood
[1].
The
transfer
of
adolescents and young adults from paediatric to adult health
care is a complex operation that may generate various
difficulties for all participants. The actual operation is called
“transition”. This process requires young patients to get
skills to increase their self-determination and become more
responsible and prepared to face self-care, and for their
families and health care professionals to be inclined to guide
them [2].
Importance of transitional medicine has been recognized
throughout
the
world,
but
discussion
and
consensus
formation between paediatricians and physicians seem still
inadequate. It is an urgent issue to prepare transition systems
so that the adolescent and young adult patients can receive
appropriate transitional process, considering changes of
patients’ status, progression of complications, and physical
and personality maturity along with age. There are, however,
the limited number of researches on the actual condition and
problems of the transition of young patients with chronic
diseases. Specialised medical facilities bridging transition are
globally rare, as well. It is crucial to promote researches on
this issue from the socioeconomic or psychological points of
view, as well as from a clinical one.
In this article, first, we review and discuss problems in
transition, focusing on Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM),
formerly referred to as juvenile diabetes mellitus, and then
present a project to establish a transition system to cohere
paediatric and adult health care for adolescent and young
adults with T1DM around Morioka area in Iwate, Japan.
II.
TYPE 1 DIABETES MELLITUS
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus arises because of β-cell 
destruction in the pancreas [3]. It is supposed that 415
million people across the world have diabetes and that
T1DM accounts for approximately 7–12% of the subjects
[4]. This disease develops most frequently during infancy
and adolescence, in people under 30 years. Both genetic and
environmental factors may play crucial roles, however, the
exact pathogenesis of T1DM remains still unclear.
Beta cells produce a hormone, insulin, which regulates
blood glucose levels. Since endogenous production of insulin
is generally absent or in very small quantities in the patients
with T1DM, lifelong treatment with insulin, either by
multiple injections or insulin pump, and with frequent self-
monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) is required. Self-care
is central to successful outcomes for individuals with T1DM
and good diabetes management has been shown to minimise
the risks of long-term and short-term complications [5].
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus is a complex and demanding
condition, which places a substantial behavioural and
psychological burden on young people and their families.
Diabetes management imposes considerable requirements,
including nutrition guidelines, insulin regimens, glucose
fluctuations, and SMBG, that are difficult for the patients to
negotiate, specifically for children [6]. The transition into
adolescence is often associated with poorer adherence to
treatment, deteriorating metabolic control, and increased risk
for psychological disorders [5]. In children with T1DM,
parents are ultimately responsible for daily management of
this disease, which can contribute to parental stress, distress,
and diminished quality of life (QOL). Therefore, ensuring
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

quality of life for the patients and their families, while
maintaining glycemic control within targets, is an important
challenge in diabetes treatment [7]. In addition, medical
expenses also represent a large burden to both the patients
and their families. Indeed, poor glycemic control in paeditric
T1DM is associated with lower socioeconomic status [8].
III.
EMERGING ADULTHOOD
The developmental period from ages 18–25 years has
been termed ‘‘emerging adulthood’’ [9]. During this stage,
many young adults leave their family homes, become
financially independent, start working, and seek intimate
relationships
with
partners
[10].
Competing
academic,
economic,
and
social
priorities
often
detract
from
engagement to chronic disease management. Even if young
adults face these competing demands, they have not achieved
all of the skills necessary to remain independent and accept
these responsibilities on their own [9]. In addition, during
this relatively healthy time in their lives young adults feel
markedly invulnerable, and have a tendency to reject adult
control.
The transition to emerging adulthood may give a tall
order to those with T1DM. During this stage, on-going
family involvement in diabetes management is necessary to
reduce the risk of deterioration in glycemic control that often
accompanies adolescence [11]. On the contrary, in addition
to the new responsibilities and freedoms, those managing
T1DM become more and more responsible for their self-
care, with daily requirements including SMBG and insulin
dose adjustments, and routine activities such as scheduling
physician appointments, ensuring availability of sufficient
stocks, and taking care of themselves when sick. It may be
unrealistic to expect the person with diabetes in the early
phase of emerging adulthood to make major changes in their
diabetes management strategies, or even to transition to a
new adult diabetes health care provider [12]. The demands of
managing the complicated illness like T1DM must be
integrated into the standardised changes in occupation,
education,
relationships,
and
living
situations
that
accompany emerging adulthood [13].
IV.
CULTURAL DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PAEDIATRIC AND
ADULT DIABETES CARE
The management of T1DM in paediatric care differs in
various ways from adult setting. In general, paediatricians
are not accustomed to the needs of young adults, and
physicians are trained with different viewpoints of diabetes
care.
Furthermore,
the
psychosocial
environment
and
expectations differ markedly between two settings, and
paediatric and adult providers have different ideas on
transition [14]. Indeed, the adolescents and young adults
experienced cultural difference during the transition. While
children’s
care
was
generally
characterized
by
close,
supportive relationships with staff, lower anticipation of
patient responsibility, and significant parental involvement,
adult care was considered less supportive and less personal,
with frequent changes in staff and decreasing involvement
by parents [15]. This shift in culture was sometimes
experienced as very precipitate [16]. Some felt out of place
in adult services, many were less satisfied with adult care
than children’s care [17].
V.
IMPACT OF TRANSITION ON GLYCEAMIC CONTROL,
ATTENDANCE AT HEALTHCARE APPOINTMENTS, AND
DIABETES-RELATED HOSPITALIZATIONS
A systematic review or meta-analysis by Sheehan et al.
[18] tried to examine the impact of transition from child to
adult health care on health outcomes and health behaviours
for young people with child-onset T1DM.
In nine observational studies that assessed the impact of
healthcare
transition
on
glycaemic
control
either
by
examining changes in HbA1c following transition, five
reported no change in HbA1c, one found an improvement in
HbA1c for females, and one reported an increase in HbA1c.
The remaining two studies, which compared young adults
who had transitioned to adult care with those who remained
in children’s services, found lower HbA1c levels in those
who had not transitioned to adult care. In the 10 studies
examining transition programmes or interventions, four
reported no change in HbA1c between pre- and post-
transition and six reported an improvement. Programmes
demonstrating
improvements
incorporated
a
range
of
elements,
including
joint
clinics,
letters
to
patients
summarizing medical history and support programmes.
Out of 8 observational studies, which assessed the
relationship
between
healthcare
transition
and
clinic
attendance, four studies reported less-frequent attendance
post-transfer compared with pre-transfer. Change in the
frequency of attendance post-transition, where transition
programmes or interventions were in place, was assessed in
five studies, and all studies found reduced attendance rates
post-transition.
In 4 observational studies that examined the relationship
between diabetes-related hospitalizations and healthcare
transition, no change in hospitalizations were found in 2
studies, one study found an increase in hospitalization
frequency, and the remaining study found fewer diabetes-
related hospitalisations in those who remained in paediatric
care.
VI.
RESISTANCE TO NEW PHYSICIANS
Young people with T1DM generally experienced greater
difficulties in accessing and keeping their own heath care
after transition [19]. They felt that adult clinics were less
reachable because of less-frequent appointments and less
multi-dimensional support, and had difficulties in building
consistent relationship with their new health caretakers.
Clinic cancellation rates were higher in adult services [20].
Engagement may have been disturbed by various reasons, for
example, the location and opening hours of adult clinics,
capacity to travel, other appointments such as work or
education, parking difficulties or transport costs and latency
time [21]. Patients in adult services were reportedly less
likely to be followed up if they did not attend their
appointments and were not automatically rebooked [22].
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Within adult diabetes clinics, young adults preferred
consu1tations with familiar health care staff [22]. Health care
staffs in adult health providers tend to make generalisations
and
judgements
in
re1ation
to
young
adu1ts,
which
undermined relationship development within the clinic [22].
Fear or perception of being told off or judged by health care
professionals for unsatisfactory glycaemic control was a
barrier to clinic attendance studies [22]. Young adults felt
health care staff did not take the time to understand the
struggle they experienced to achieve glycaemic control [23].
Some felt out of place in adult services and that the care was
inappropriate for the needs of their age group [21], many
were less satisfied with adult care than children’s care [22].
VII.
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND SOCIOECONOMIC ISSUES
Mental health is a more common concern among young
adults with T1DM than those without it, which is usually a
miscalculated problem [25]. A recent study found much
higher prevalence of psychosocial illness among adolescents
with T1DM than those without it [55.95% vs. 20%;
P<0.0001] [25]. Major depressive disorder was the most
common, while conduct disorder and generalized anxiety
disorder were less. Depression and anxiety have been
identified as a risk factor for impaired adherence to diabetes
care and higher HbA1c [26]. It is important to monitor and
refer older adolescents and young adults with T1DM to
appropriate mental health resources [12].
Substance use was common among adolescents and
young adults with T1DM, as well as those without diabetes.
High-risk alcohol use has been reported in 12.9% of 14–19-
year old patients with T1DM [27]. The effects of alcohol on
glucose and a risk for hypoglycaemia unawareness should be
made well known to the young people with T1DM [27].
Among patients with diabetes, tobacco use is an independent
modifiable risk factor for development of cardiovascular
diseases, diabetic neuropathy, and nephropathy [28]. Illicit
drug use has been found to be a risk factor for non-adherence
and diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) [29].
Eating disorders and eating disordered behaviour also are
of concern in adolescents with T1DM. Rates of eating
disorders among adolescents with T1DM are estimated at
10%; it is twice as high as in girls without diabetes and e the
incidence of eating disorders increases into young adulthood
[30]. Insulin restriction is the most concerned eating
disordered behaviour for adolescents with T1DM, which
results in hyperglycaemia creating glucosuria leading to
weight loss. This behaviour is very common and could occur
in patients who do not meet criteria for an eating disorder
[30].
Pregnancy planning is an important topic to be young
woman with T1DM. The American Diabetes Association
(ADA) recommends preconception planning should be
discussed with all women with T1DM starting at puberty
[12]
Lack of access to adequate health care coverage remains
to be one of the most significant issues to transition for the
emerging adult population with T1DM. They may have
increased
pressure
to
secure
full-time
employment
to
maintain health insurance for on-going medical care for their
chronic illness because of changes in legal status and living
situation that occur in early adulthood. Due to high co-pays,
some may be pushed to switch to less optimal insulin use or
become less adhered to diabetes care [31].
VIII.
STRUCTURED SUPPORT AIDS FOR THE ADOLESCENT
AND YOUNG PATIENTS IN MORIOKA AREA, JAPAN
A.
Transition Trial
1)
The aims of this study
The first aim of the present study is to provide a seamless
transitional process to the young patients with T1DM,
considering changes of patients’ status, progression of
complications, and physical and personality maturity along
with age, at a joint clinic operated by both paediatricians and
physicians. We also endeavour to ascertain the changes in
psychological burden on the patients, quality of life due to
transition, self-care behaviours, and blood glucose control
during the transition.
B.
Method/ Design
1)
Design
A prospective, uncontrolled trial is conducted in Morioka
Children’s Hospital [paediatric and joint clinics], and Iwate
Medical
University
(an
adult
clinic).
The
structured
transition
program
is
a
multidisciplinary
intervention
designed to provide additional support in the transition
period, which include age-specific education and counselling
on basic knowledge on diabetes, sick days, family planning,
pregnancy and
childbirth, drinking
and
smoking,
and
carbohydrate counting, by paediatricians, physicians, nurses,
registered dieticians, and clinical psychologists. A web site
provides information on the joint clinic by a newsletter, and
downloadable forms of useful knowledge for diabetes self-
management. Central to the program is use of the flash
glucose monitoring system FreeStyle Libre (Abbott Diabetes
Care Ltd., Witney, UK) to acquire flexible insulin therapy
corresponding
to
dietary
modification,
including
the
carbohydrate counting. Subjects are seen in the paediatric
care setting, the joint clinic at the Children’s Hospital, for 12
months and then transferred to the adult care setting where
they are seen for one year. There will then be a one-year
follow-up period for outcome assessment. This study is
going to be approved by the Institutional Review Board of
Iwate Prefectural University, Iwate Medical University, and
Morioka Children’s Hospital, respectively. All participants
must complete an informed consent at study enrolment. The
competitive research funding by Iwate Prefectural University
is financially supporting this project.
2)
Participants
a) Inclusion criteria

Established T1DM diagnosis for a minimum of one
year

Older than 15 years of age

At least 1 visit during the previous year with the
paediatric endocrinologist at Morioka Children’s
Hospital
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine


Ability to participate in all aspects of this clinical
trial

Written informed consent/assent must be obtained
and documented

Willingness to participate in the joint clinic and to be
transferred to the adult clinic

Resident of Iwate Prefecture
b) Exclusion criteria

Pregnant or lactating females or intent to become
pregnant during the next 3 years

Condition(s) which in the opinion of the investigator
may interfere with the subject’s ability to participate
in the study

Prior enrolment in the current study

Prior enrolment of a sibling in the current study

Current participation in another clinical trial or
participation in another clinical trial in the 6 months
prior to enrolment
3)
Study procedures
a) Recruitment
Eligible patients are identified in Morioka Children’s
Hospital. The investigators introduce the study and provide
a document on information to all eligible patients. If the
prospective
participant
agrees
to
be
approached,
the
investigators make contact during the clinic to answer any
questions or concerns regarding the study. If the subject
agrees to participate, informed consent is obtained at the
time or at the next routine paediatric clinic visit. The
researchers make contact during the clinic to answer any
questions or concerns regarding the study.
b) Baseline assessment
Once consent has been obtained, the baseline assessment
is
completed
as
part
of
the
initial
visit.
Baseline
characteristics collected are: age, gender, level of education,
family structure, distance from the treatment centre, smoking
and
alcohol
use,
comorbid
conditions,
concomitant
medications, and family history of diabetes. In addition,
baseline assessment includes detailed initial medical history,
measurement
of
weight
and
height,
blood
pressure,
centralized venous A1C, insulin use, clinic attendance, and
completion of baseline patient satisfaction questionnaires.
c) Hisotorical measures

Sociodemographic: age, sex, level of education,
persons living with participants/ family structure,
and distance from the treating centre

Medical history: detailed initial medical history;
family history of diabetes-related complications,
social habits (smoking, alcohol, illicit drug use),
follow-up interim history with focus on hospital
visits for hypoglycaemia and diabetic ketoacidosis

Insulin dosage and method of delivery

Frequency of medical care (retinal, monofilament,
lipid profile testing and microalbumin to creatinine
ratio)

Concomitant medications: all longstanding therapies,
with the emphasis placed on insulin therapy

Questionnaires (Diabetes therapy Related QOL;
Problem Areas in Diabetes; Summary of Diabetes
Self-Care Activities)
d) Physical examination measures

Anthropometric measurements: height, weight, and
BMI

Blood Pressure

Systems physical examination: general survey, skin,
head, neck, chest, heart, abdomen, musculoskeletal/
extremities,
and
neurologic
(including
lower
extremity monofilament testing)

Laboratory measures A1C, lipid profile, creatinine
e) Transition interventions
The structured transition program is a multidisciplinary
intervention aiming to provide additional support during the
transition period, which include age-specific education and
counselling on basic knowledge on diabetes, the differences
in the structure of adult and paediatric diabetes care, sick
days, family planning, pregnancy and childbirth, drinking
and smoking, and carbohydrate counting by paediatricians,
physicians,
nurses,
registered
dieticians,
and
clinical
psychologists.
Written
information
is
provided.
The
intervention lasts 24 months, 12 months at a joint clinic in
paediatric care and 12 months in adult care. Recommended
revisits interval ranges 4-8 weeks. At every visit, laboratory
tests
are
performed.
The
participants
complete
the
questionnaires at the beginning and the end of the joint
clinic, and the end of the adult clinic.
f) Primary outcomes
The primary objectives of the study are:

To compare the mean A1C levels before and after
the transition clinic, or before and after the adult
clinic

To compare the rates of diabetes related emergency
room visits and hospitalizations for DKA and
hypoglycaemia before and after the transition clinic,
or before and after the adult clinic

To compare the patient satisfaction and perception of
the care before and after the transition clinic, or
before
and
after
the
adult
clinic,
using
self-
administered questionnaires
g) Adverse events and safety
Due to the nature of the intervention, it is not expected
that serious adverse events related to the intervention will
occur. However, adverse events will be collected from the
time of signing the Informed Consent. The following
adverse events will be recorded in the subject’s medical
records and on the case report form:

Any
medical
occurrences
requiring
medical
intervention

Any
action
or
outcome
(e.g.,
hospitalization,
discontinuation
of
therapy,
etc.)
will
also
be
recorded for each adverse event
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

IX.
DISCUSSION
Mental health is a more common concern among young
our knowledge, this study is the first project to perform a
prospective evaluation of a structured transition program in
Japan. This study incorporates the recent recommendation
of the American Diabetes Association (ADA) [32], for
transition from paediatric to adult care, emphasizing that
“Both paediatric and adult diabetes care providers should
provide support and links to resources for transitioning
young adults.”
To date, there are no studies that have directly compared
various transition interventions, and there is a limited
number of clinical trials on transitional medicine in the
T1DM field. In our present project, we follow the transition
procedure of randomised controlled trial by Sequeira PA, et
al [33], the Let’s Empower and Prepare (LEAP) study,
which
included
51
young
patients
with
T1DM,
and
successfully facilitated their transition to adult care without
a decrease in clinical follow-up. The LEAP program
provided had four major components that we inherit in our
study, diabetes education tailored to patients’ developmental
stage, a joint clinic operated by both a paediatrician and a
physician, carbohydrate counting education, and a private
social networking website to facilitate social support.
Indeed, the LEAP study first proved the efficacy of tailored
diabetes education and joint clinic in the transition [33].
Carbohydrate counting is a popular method of calculating
grams of carbohydrate consumed at meals and snacks,
allowing patients with T1DM to adjust the mealtime insulin
dose considering the amount of carbohydrates to eat. There
is significant evidence that this method improves blood
glucose controls and quality of life of the patients [34]. We
introduce a modification to this meal planning method with
novel
a
novel
flash
glucose
monitoring
system
for
interstitial glucose measures, which significantly reduced
time in hypoglycaemia without deterioration of HbA1c, and
improved treatment satisfaction [35]. Internet-based self-
management among young patients has found some success
[36]. Recent trends indicate a major shift to incorporate
mobile
telecommunication
technologies
into
health
behaviour interventions. These technologies offer several
advantages for health behavioural interventions, including
information and messages tailored to the participant, quick
access, increased cultural sensitivity, and anonymity, which
may be attractive regarding sensitive health issues [37].
X.
CONCLUSION
Psychological and socioeconomic issues characteristic of
young adults with T1DM similar to those reported in the
Caucasian population were found in our study, as well.
Continuous and developmentally tailored diabetes medical
care by health care providers trying to integrate the patient’s
life circumstances is central to resolution of these issues.
The findings of the current project are expected to support
the routine implementation of standardized intervention
during the transition period not only in T1DM, but also all
other areas of care for emerging adults with chronic medical
conditions.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. McPherson, P. Arango, H. Fox, C. Lauver, M. McManus,
P. W. Newacheck, J. M. Perrin, J. P. Shonkoff, and B.
Strickland, “A new definition of children with special health
care needs,” Pediatrics, vol.102, pp. 137-40, Jul. 1998.
[2]
L. F. Zhang, J. S. Ho, and S. E. Kennedy, “A systematic
review of the psychometric properties of transition readiness
assessment tools in adolescents with chronic disease,” BMC
Pediatr, vol. 14, P. 4, Jan. 2014, doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-14-
4.
[3]
J. Silverstein, G. Klingensmith, K. Copeland , L. Plotnick, F.
Kaufman, L. Laffel, L. Deeb, M. Grey, B. Anderson, L. A.
Holzmeister, and N. Clark, “Care of children and adolescents
with type 1 diabetes: a statement of the American Diabetes
Association”, Diabetes Care, Vol. 28, pp 186-212, Jan. 2005.
[4]
International Diabetes Federation, IDF Diabetes Atlas, 7th
ed., Brussels, Belgium: International Diabetes Federation,
2015.
[5]
S. S. Jaser, “Psychological problems in adolescents with
diabetes,”
Adolesc Med State Art Rev, vol. 21, pp. 138-51,
Apr. 2010.
[6]
R. Whittemore, S. Jaser, A. Chao, M. Jang, and M. Grey,
“Psychological experience of parents of children with type 1
diabetes:
a
systematic
mixed-studies
review,”
Diabetes
Educ,vol. 38, pp. 562-79, Jul.-Aug. 2012.
[7]
M. Hirose, E. A. Beverly, and K. Weinger, “Quality of life
and technology: impact on children and families with
diabetes,” Curr Diab Rep, vol. 12, pp. 711-20, Dec. 2012.
[8]
K. Hassan, R. Loar, B. J. Anderson, and R. A. Heptulla, “The
role of socioeconomic status, depression, quality of life, and
glycemic control in type 1 diabetes mellitus,” J Pediatr, vol.
149, pp. 526-31, Oct. 2006.
[9]
J. Arnett, “Emerging adulthood: a theory of development
from late teens through the twenties,” Am Psychol, vol. 55,
pp. 469–480, May. 2000.
[10] J. Arnett, “Conceptions of the transition to adulthood:
perspectives from adolescence through midlife,” J Adult Dev,
vol. 8, pp. 133–143, Apr. 2001.
[11] L. M. Laffel, L. Vangsness, A. Connell, A. Goebel-Fabbri, D.
Butler, and B. J. Anderson, “Impact of ambulatory, family-
focused teamwork
intervention on glycemic control in youth
with type 1 diabetes,” J Pediatr, vol. 142, pp. 409–416, Apr.
2003.
[12] A. Peters, L. Laffel, and American Diabetes Association
Transitions Working Group, “Diabetes care for emerging
adults: recommendations for transition from pediatric to adult
diabetes care systems,” Diabetes Care, vol. 34, pp. 2477-85,
Nov. 2011.
[13] J. Weissberg-Benchell, H. Wolpert, and B. J. Anderson,
“Transitioning from pediatric to adult care: a new approach to
the post-adolescent young person with type 1 diabetes,”
Diabetes Care, vol. 30, pp. 2441–2446, Oct. 2007.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

[14] M. Nakhla, L. E. Bell, S.Wafa, and K. Dasgupta, “Improving
the transition from pediatric to adult diabetes care: the
pediatric care provider's perspective in Quebec, Canada,”
BMJ Open Diabetes Res Care, vol. 5, e0003902017, Jun.
2017, doi: 10.1136/ bmjdrc-2017-000390.
[15] L. Scott, T. M Vallis., M. Charette, A. Murray, and R. Latta,
“Transition of care: researching the needs of young adults
with type 1 diabetes,” Can J Diabetes, vol. 29, pp. 203–210,
Jan. 2005.
[16] C. S. Price, S. Corbett, N. Lewis-Barned, J. Morgan, L. E.
Oliver, G. Dovey-Pearce, “Implementing a transition pathway
in diabetes: a qualitative study of the experiences and
suggestions of young people with diabetes,” Child Care
Health Dev, vol. 37, pp. 852–860, Nov. 2011.
[17] L. Perry, J. M.Lowe, K. S. Steinbeck, and J. S. Dunbabin,
“Services doing the best they can: service experiences of
young adults with type 1 diabetes mellitus in rural Australia,”
J Clin Nurs, vol. 21, pp. 1955–1963, Jul. 2012.
[18] A. M. Sheehan, A. E. While, and I. Coyne, “The experiences
and impact of transition from child to adult healthcare
services for young people with Type 1 diabetes: a systematic
review,” Diabet Med, vol. 32, pp. 440-58, Apr. 2015.
[19] N. Van Walleghem, C. A. Macdonald, and H. J. Dean,
“Evaluation of a systems navigator model for transition from
pediatric to adult care for young adults with type 1 diabetes,”
Diabetes Care, vol. 31, pp. 1529–1530, Aug. 2008.
[20] N.
Kime, “Young people with type 1 diabetes and their
transition to adult services,” Br J Community Nurs, vol. 18,
pp. pp. 6–8, Jan. 2013.
[21] P. Rapley P., L. Hart, G. Babel, and J. Kaye, “Young adults
transferring to a young adult diabetes clinic: Hba1c and
missed appointments,” Australian Diabetes Educator, vol. 10,
pp. 10–12, 2007.
[22] K. Visentin, T. Koch, and D. Kralik, “Adolescents with Type
1 diabetes: transition between diabetes services,” J Clin Nurs,
vol. 15,pp. 761–769, Jun. 2006.
[23] S. Brierley, C. Eiser, B. Johnson, V. Young, and S. Heller,
“Working with young adults with type 1 diabetes: views of a
multidisciplinary care team and implications for service
delivery,” Diabet Med, vol. 29, pp. 677-681, May. 2012.
[24] R. Snow, and N. Fulop, “Understanding issues associated
with attending a young adult diabetes clinic: a case study,”
Diabet Med,: vol. 29. pp. 257-259, Feb. 2012.
[25] S. Khandelwal, G. S. Sengar, M. Sharma, S. Choudhary, and
N. Nagaraj, “Psychosocial Illness in Children with Type 1
Diabetes Mellitus: Prevalence, Pattern and Risk Factors,” J
Clin Diagn Res, vol. 10, pp. SC05-SC08. Sep. 2016.
[26] M.
Herzer,
and
K.
K.
Hood,
“Anxiety symptoms
in
adolescents with type 1 diabetes: association with blood
glucose monitoring and glycemic control,” J Pediatr Psychol,
vol. 35, pp. 415-25, May. 2010.
[27] M. A. Knychala, M. L. Jorge, C. K. Muniz, P. N. Faria, and P.
T. Jorge, “High-risk alcohol use and anxiety and depression
symptoms in adolescents and adults with type 1 diabetes
mellitus: a cross-sectional study,” Diabetol Metab Syndr, vol.
7, p. 24. Mar. 2015.
[28] D. Haire-Joshu, R. E. Glasgow, and T. L. Tibbs, “Smoking
and diabetes,” Diabetes Care, vol. 22, pp. 1887-98, Jan. 1999.
[29] E. A. Warner, G. S. Greene, M. S. Buchsbaum, D. S. Cooper,
B. E. and Robinson, Diabetic ketoacidosis associated with
cocaine use. Arch Intern Med 1998, vol. 158, pp. 1799-802.
[30] R. C. Peveler, K. S. Bryden, H. A. W. Neil, C. G. Fairburn, R.
A. Mayou, D. B. Dunger, and H. M. Turner, “The relationship
of disordered eating habits and attitudes to clinical outcomes
in young adult females with type 1 diabetes,” Diabetes Care,
vol. 28, pp. 84–88, Jan. 2005.
[31] K. A. McBrien, C.Naugler, N. Ivers, R. G. Weaver, D.
Campbell, L. Desveaux, B. R. Hemmelgarn, A. L. Edwards,
N. Saad, D. Nicholas, and B.J. Manns, “Barriers to care in
patients
with
diabetes
and
poor
glycemic
control—A
crosssectional survey,” PLoS One, vol. 12, e0176135, May.
2017, doi: 10.1371/ journal.pone. 0176135.
[32] American Diabetes Association, “Children and Adolescents:
Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes-2018,” Diabetes Care,
vol. 41(Suppl 1), pp. S126-S136, doi: 10.2337/dc18-S012.
[33] P. A. Sequeira, E. A. Pyatak, M. J. Weigensberg, C. P. Vigen
, J. R. Wood, V . Ruelas, L . Montoya, M . Cohen, H . Speer,
S. Clark, and A. L. Peters, “Let's Empower and Prepare
(LEAP): Evaluation of a Structured Transition Program for
Young Adults With Type 1 Diabetes,” Diabetes Care, vol. 38,
pp. 1412-9, Aug. 2015, doi: 10.2337/dc14-2577.
[34] DAFNE Study Group, “Training in flexible, intensive insulin
management to enable dietary freedom in people with type 1
diabetes:
dose adjustment
for
normal
eating (DAFNE)
randomised controlled trial,” BMJ, vol. 325, pp. 746-7151,
Oct. 2002.
[35] P. Oskarsson, R. Antuna, P. Geelhoed-Duijvestijn, J. Krӧger, 
R. Weitgasser, and J. Bolinder, “Impact of flash glucose
monitoring on hypoglycaemia in adults with type 1 diabetes
managed with multiple daily injection therapy: a pre-specified
subgroup analysis of the IMPACT randomised controlled
trial,”
Diabetologia, doi: 10.1007/s00125-017-4527-5, Dec.
2017.
[36] V. van der Meer , M. J. Bakker, W. B. van den Hout , K. F.
Rabe, P. J. Sterk, J. Kievit J, W. J. Assendelft, J. K. Sont and
SMASHING (Self-Management in Asthma Supported by
Hospitals, ICT, Nurses and General Practitioners) Study
Group,
“Internet-based self-management plus education
compared with usual care in asthma: a randomized trial,” Ann
Intern Med, vo. 151, pp. 110-20, Jul. 2009.
[37] J. S. Huang, L. Terrones, T. Tompane, L. Dillon, M. Pian, M.
Gottschalk,
G.
J.
Norman,
and
L.
K.
Bartholomew,
“Preparing adolescents with chronic disease for transition to
adult care: a technology program,” Pediatrics, vol. 133, pp.
:e1639-46,Jun. 2014, doi:10.1542/peds.2013-2830.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-618-7
eTELEMED 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

