 
 
CallMeSmart Becoming Ubiquitous and Self-learning 
 
a Terje Solvoll, b Monika Johansen, c Gunnar Hartvigsen, d Alain Giordanengo  
 
a,b,c,d Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care and 
Telemedicine, University hospital of North Norway, 
Tromsø, Norway 
 
c Department of Computer Science, 
University of Tromsø, 
Tromsø, Norway
emails: {a terje.solvoll@telemed.no, b monika.johansen@telemed.no, 
c gunnar.hartvigsen@uit.no, d alain.giordanengo@telemed.no} 
 
 
Abstract – A novel system for communication between hospital 
doctors, CallMeSmart-doctor (CMS-Dr), earlier referred to as 
CallMeSmart, has been developed and tested at a university 
hospital. The first version of CMS was dedicated to doctor-
doctor communication. In this paper we discuss how we based 
on CMS-Dr can establish a generic CMS solution: A 
fundamental new ICT infrastructure for all health care actors 
(not only doctors), and other actors and sectors with complex, 
temporarily and time critical communication patterns. The 
CMS-generic shall become Ubiquitous and Self-Learning 
(CMS USL). The technological CMS-USL solution will 
represent the internationally forefront of ICT-research and 
development through new combination of advanced data-
based 
wireless 
communication 
that 
maintains 
context 
awareness, in addition to ubiquitous and self-learning machine 
mechanisms. 
Keywords – Context-awareness; wireless devices; mobile 
communication; Interruption management; VoIP; Machine 
learning  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Physicians’ working conditions rely on mobility. They 
move frequently between in-patient ward, outpatient ward, 
emergency ward, operating theatres, etc., and they often do 
not stay more than a few minutes in the same location. High 
mobility requires mobile communication systems, which 
enables physicians to communicate with colleges at any time 
and place, to avoid any delay between the decision made and 
action taken. Such delays could result in medical errors [1], 
and mobile communication systems have been suggested as 
a solution to improve communication in hospitals [2]. The 
challenge when deploying mobile communication systems is 
to handle the balance between the increased availability and 
possible interruptions [3]-[5]. Most hospitals still rely on a 
mobile communication infrastructure with dedicated devices 
for each role, where pagers are the most dominant mobile 
communication devices. 
Pagers provide a cheap and reliable way for contacting 
staff members.  They are ubiquitous and several physicians 
carry numerous pagers simultaneously to cover the various 
work roles they have been assigned. Pagers suffer from a 
number of problems due to their simplicity. The most 
obvious limitation is that it requires the staff to locate a 
telephone (landline or wireless) in order to respond to a page. 
This might cause unnecessary delays and communication 
overhead, since the person placing the page is not always 
near the phone when the page is returned [6]. Pagers also 
create a large amount of unnecessary interruptions [7][8], 
which is unpleasant and can cause medical errors [1].  
The 
most 
intuitive 
solution 
to 
improve 
the 
communication situation in hospitals is to provide physicians 
with wireless phones. However, phones can be even more 
interruptive than pagers [3]-[5]. In [3], a physician states 
that; “with a pager you just have to glance down at your coat 
pocket to see who is paging, while with a phone, you have to 
pick it up from your pocket to see who is calling. Having 
done that, it is easier just answering and explaining that you 
are busy” [4]. 
Preliminary studies points at a diversity of potential 
benefits from wireless phones in hospital settings, using both 
mobile text and voice services [6][9]-[11]. These studies also 
reveal potential technological limitations that can explain 
some of the challenges of gaining acceptance. Text-chat is a 
less obtrusive medium than other forms of workplace 
communication [12]. It is therefore unlikely that mobile text 
messaging creates the same amount of interruptions as 
mobile 
voice 
services. 
Improved 
asynchronous 
communication systems have in fact been recommended for 
improving hospital communication practices [2]. In addition 
to mobile synchronous communication systems, mobile text-
messaging systems are therefore an interesting medium to 
explore in hospitals settings. 
However, 
the 
current 
generation 
of 
mobile-text 
messaging systems is no suited for hospital environments. 
Studies of mobile text-messaging usage in hospitals have, 
revealed difficulties related to small screen size [10], and 
problems related to forcing doctors to carry an additional 
device [9]. It has to be taken into account that these studies 
are some years old. Today displays and keyboards are 
significantly improved, which might have changed the 
situation. A continual problem with mobile text messaging is 
that senders often need an acknowledgement that an 
asynchronous message has been read by the receiver [2]. The 
acknowledgement challenge could be solved by a forced 
feedback when the message has been opened. Automatic 
suggestions for replies may ease the difficulties with text-
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
messages. It has been reported that predefined messages can 
meet up to 90% of the mobile text-messaging needs for some 
hospital workers [13]. 
Mobile communication systems for hospitals represent an 
important research area since hospitals are noted to suffer 
from poor communication practices. The combination of 
wireless phones and fact that hospital workers seam to exert 
interruptive communication patterns before non-interruptive 
methods [2][7][8] and often exhibit a “selfish” and 
interruptive 
communication 
practice, 
may 
result 
in 
unnecessary interruptions for conversations that otherwise 
would’ not occur [14]. This amplifies the risk of overloading 
limited resources with special knowledge, experience, and 
the power of taking medical decisions. The balance between 
getting immediate access to resources and causing 
interruptions in moments where it is not appropriate, has 
similarities 
with 
the 
classical 
problems 
regarding 
collaboration and sharing of resources, such as of disparity in 
work and benefit, “prisoner’s dilemma” and “the tragedy of 
the commons” [15]. A critical issue for voice services is the 
potential of make people “fatally available” [6], which 
cannot be overlooked since health care is a knowledge 
intensive activity where consulting colleagues or senior staff 
members is a necessity in many situations [16]. 
One way of attacking this problem is to provide the caller 
with context information from the receiver’s situation. 
Context information could be any kind of information which 
helps to decide if the receiver is available or not, such as; 
location, activity, surrounding noise, role, etc. In a study by 
Avrahami et al. [17], they revealed that if the caller is 
provided with context information about the receiver’s 
situation, it reduces the mismatch between the caller’s 
decision and the receiver’s desires. 
A number of studies have focused on context-sensitive 
systems for hospitals. The work done on context-sensitive 
mobile communication within hospital settings has identified 
some important elements of context, including location, role, 
delivery timing and artifact location, and user state [18]. This 
model has been applied to an instant messaging system based 
on PDAs enabling contact based on these contextual 
elements. This approach, however, requires workers to carry 
additional mobile devices in order to support voice and 
paging services, since it is not compatible with existing 
hospital communication infrastructure.  
A variety of models for detecting interruptibility have 
been created for stationary [19][21] and mobile settings [22]-
[24]. In general, these models focused on office workers and 
social settings, and used information such as a user’s 
calendar, interactions with computing devices, switches to 
determine if doors are open, accelerometers, microphones 
and motion sensors. Accuracy rates of approximately 80% to 
90% 
have 
been 
reported 
for 
directly 
predicting 
interruptibility and user state, such as “standing” or 
“walking”, 
and 
social 
context, 
such 
as 
“lecture”, 
“conversation”, etc. None of these models, by our 
knowledge, has been explored in health care settings, and 
there are several factors which suggest that new health care 
models need to be developed. First, studies on context-aware 
communication for hospitals suggest information not 
included in these interruptibility models, such as work role, 
are critical for detecting proper context in health care settings 
[18]. Second, another issue is elements, such as location and 
social relationships, that are inherently different within 
health care, and need to be accounted for in health care 
appropriate models. For example, scenarios such as “visiting 
patients”, “in surgery”, etc. need to be considered in 
combination with the work roles of the person initializing the 
contact and the contacted person. 
In addition, appropriate forms for user-interaction on 
interruptibility models also need to be investigated. It has 
been reported that users tend to use the information provided 
about a person’s availability for communication, as a 
presence indicator instead of using it to control interruptions. 
This suggests that automatic configuration of devices may be 
the most appropriate approach [25]. The “SenSay” context-
aware mobile phone [23] uses a hybrid approach that 
automatically blocks calls, and also generates text messages 
notifying the caller that their call have been blocked. Then 
they are allowed to override the blocking by calling back 
within a predetermined number of minutes from the same 
phone number. This problem needs to be reinvestigated in 
health care settings, since there are some situations where 
certain calls should not be blocked (such as those for a 
specific role) whereas other calls may need to be restricted. 
Thus, the context of both the caller and person being called 
will need to be considered. 
The use of semi-structured messages has shown to be 
particularly useful for work coordination [26]. Preliminary 
studies have estimated that up to 90% of mobile text-
messages used by hospital workers could be met by the use 
of such messages [13]. However, we have not been able to 
find any published work on the style and function of such 
messages, nor any studies that demonstrate if they would 
actually be adopted, or if they would have any effect during 
real work practice. The possibility to create automatic 
replies, and suggestions for replies, is also an advantage 
when using predefined messages, but the appropriate replies 
have not been studied in the context of mobile-text 
messaging. This could be particularly useful within health 
care 
settings, 
since 
such 
replies 
actually 
offers 
acknowledgement when a message has been read [2]. 
The paper is organized as follows: Status of Knowledge, 
which will include state of the art and a section about 
Ubiquitous self-learning computing, methods, which will 
explain the different method approaches we plan to use, 
approaches and hypotheses, and then a section to conclude 
the project. 
II. 
STATUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
We know from earlier studies within health care, but also 
from our own studies [3]-[5], that physicians in hospitals are 
interrupted unnecessary by mobile devices in situations 
where such interruptions should be avoided. One of the 
problems applicable for most of the earlier systems 
developed was that they required both new devices and 
infrastructures, and/or were based on public networks, like 
GSM/3G, which in both cases require considerable 
investments. A system based on existing infrastructure and 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
devices used in hospitals would be much cheaper, and will 
probably require less training and maybe less resistance from 
health care workers when introduced. This is important, 
since early studies show that over half of medical informatics 
systems fail because of user and staff resistance [27]. We 
believe that by knowing and understanding the health care 
workers’ work situation, the nature of unnecessary 
interruptions, and also by involving the participants in the 
design process, it is possible to build a system suited for their 
communication patterns and work situations on top of an 
existing communication infrastructure using devices already 
in use at hospitals. Our studies [3]-[5] contributed to such 
knowledge, and were used as input when designing and 
developing the context sensitive system for doctor’s mobile 
communication, CMS-Dr [28][29]. 
The CMS-Dr prototype focuses on context sensitive 
interfaces, middleware, and new interaction forms for mobile 
devices that support multi-modal communication in 
hospitals. These devices support media such as voice 
services, text-messaging and paging services, in an efficient 
and non-interruptive manner, as well as enable support for 
individual and role-based contact on a single device. That is, 
the user only needs to carry one device for both personal and 
role based communication, which enables other users to, for 
example, contact someone assigned as “on-call” duties at a 
specific department, even if they do not know who that 
person is. At the same time, it aims at balancing between 
availability and interruptions, while it enables acute calls and 
alarms be forced through. Currently, by our knowledge, 
similar devices are not generally available for internal 
communication systems in hospitals.  
The prototype senses the context automatically from 
different sensors, calendar information, work schedule, etc., 
to change the physicians’ availability and the phones profile, 
according to the collected context information. At the same 
time, the caller is given feedback about the physicians’ 
availability, and thereby it is possible for the caller to force 
through an emergency call, or forward the call to another 
physician at the same level, that is available. The system is 
based on ideas from existing research on interruptions, in 
combination with our ideas presented in [4][30]-[34]. A first 
version of the prototype is ready and has been tested in lab-
settings with physicians as test users. The tests were 
performed as scenarios observed from real situations. The 
feedback was positive and has been used as input for 
improvement and further development of the prototype. 
CMS-Dr prototype is ready for testing in clinical settings, 
and a pilot was launched in May 2014, at the Oncology 
Department at the University Hospital of North Norway 
(UNN). The solution has so far retrieved overwhelming 
enthusiasm and positive response from the test users. 
A. Ubiquitous self-learning computing 
Ubiquitous computing, also denoted as pervasive 
computing, calm technology, or ubicomp, was first described 
by Mark Weiner et al. [35] as a technology “which informs 
but doesn't demand our focus, or attention”. The principles 
of this technology are [36]: The purpose of a computer is to 
help you do something else; The best computer is a quiet and 
invisible servant; The more you can do by intuition, the 
smarter you are; The computer should extend your 
unconscious; Technology should create calm. In 2009, 
Stefan Poslad proposed a Smart DEI model to describe the 
ubiquitous computing built around three layers [37]: Smart 
Devices, smart Environments and smart Interactions. Smart 
devices provide sensitive information in order to enable 
automated dynamic service delivery like sensors or 
smartphones [37][38]. A smart environment is “able to 
acquire and apply knowledge about an environment and to 
adapt to its inhabitants in order to improve their experience 
in that environment” [39] by using smart devices [37]. Smart 
interactions enhance the device communication, the human 
machine interaction by acquiring, and disseminating the 
information provided by the smart devices and environments 
[37]. By using these three layers, a ubiquitous computing 
system could be predictive, self-learning and provide 
decision-making services, as Weiner has proposed [40].  
To realize ubiquitous self-learning computing for pattern 
recognition and analysis we will make use of machine 
learning mechanisms. Machine learning has had tremendous 
success in intelligent systems design and modern technology 
[41]. One example is the Kinect® full-body tracking system 
used on the Xbox® games console, providing real-time 
tracking of the human body using machine learning 
techniques. The key principle is for the machines to learn 
from data related to the task to be solved [42]. This enables 
flexible systems with the ability to adapt and update 
themselves based on input and corrections from their 
environments. At University of Tromsø – The Arctic 
University of Norway (UiT), there is a strong activity on 
machine learning, focusing in particular on information 
theoretic learning criteria [43]. This versatile approach has 
lead to several award-winning publications [44]. 
III. 
METHODS 
Each step of the project is conducted in three phases, 
which are constructed in order to ensure that users are 
involved as much as possible in designing and evaluating 
the systems targeted by the project. The three phases are 
observations & interviews, scenarios, and prototyping & 
effect studies. The approaches will be used in a 
complementary and iterative fashion. 
A. Observation and interviews 
Creating technology that will work in practice requires a 
thorough understanding of how technology is used in the 
workplace. The project will use techniques from Computer 
Supported 
Cooperative 
Work 
(CSCW) 
including 
observations of actual activities, conducting interviews with 
users [45]-[49] and performing workplace studies. This 
methodology has recently been advocated for improving 
medical informatics research [50] and will be used in the 
project in order to construct preliminary scenarios to present 
to users during design sessions, and also to investigate 
qualitative aspects of prototype systems during use in real 
work environments. 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
B. Scenarios 
A scenario driven approach to research revolves around 
analyzing specific scenarios and use-cases [51] and 
subsequently, building technologies in order to serve those 
use cases. Scenarios in design [52][53] emphasizes both 
technical and non-technical aspects of systems design. This 
is especially important when dealing with technologies 
requiring changes in large and complex organizations. 
Observations and interviews with workers while using 
prototypes may reveal information that can be used to define 
new scenarios worth investigating. 
C. Prototyping 
Prototype systems will be developed and tested, further 
developed and evaluated both in laboratory and in real 
settings. Prototypes will be used in order to demonstrate the 
feasibility of proposed technical systems, in order to 
conduct effect studies, and will be deployed during real 
work practice. 
D. Effect studies 
Studies analysing the effects of technology on users that 
are consistent with practices in human computer interaction 
and information systems will also be conducted. Alternative 
user-interface designs for example will be evaluated using 
metrics such as completion time and error-rates for specific 
tasks. 
IV. 
APPROACHES AND HYPOTHESES 
The first research challenge in this project is to 
generalise CMS-Dr for other professions within hospitals. 
The second research challenge is to make the system 
intelligent through pattern recognition, pattern analysis and 
machine learning (CMS-USL). The intelligence is necessary 
to identify and analyse the bottlenecks in interaction 
patterns, unclear interaction patterns, and for the CMS-
system to adapt to changing interaction patterns. The 
interaction pattern in hospitals is under constant change; 
role changes, tasks changes and responsibility changes. For 
example, when new IT solutions are introduced, e.g., the 
new structured EPR system that will be introduced to 
around 80 % hospital-employees in Norway in 2015 and 
2016, roles, tasks and responsibilities will changes as the 
structured EPR is introduced. Hospitals are complex 
organisations, but we believe that if we can get CMS to 
fulfil and adapt to hospitals complex and continually 
changing communication demands, it will be easier to 
generalize CMS to the usage in less complex organisations. 
Therefore, the third research challenge is to generalize the 
solution to fulfil the usage of CMS outside hospitals. The 
fourth research challenge is that health care workers need to 
manually search for needed patient information from EPR 
systems. The future systems should use context awareness 
to automatically find the needed information when 
appropriate, e.g., when the doctor approaches a new patient 
during his visit, this patient’s EPR would automatically pop-
up on the doctor’s smartphone/tab. 
The overall aim is to deliver all the resources required 
(human, materials, information etc.) for a specific process 
(e.g. heart surgery) at the right time, to the right person, in a 
just-in-time configuration. The overall research goals are (1) 
to establish new knowledge about automatic machine 
learning and user modelling for complex, temporarily and 
time critical communication patterns in hospitals and similar 
organization in which roles and responsibilities, and 
therefore also the communication patterns, change from 
time-to-time, and (2) improving intramural communication 
in a university hospital, which will be the test bed for this 
project. 
For the latter, we will establish a generic CMS solution, 
a new ICT-research and communication infrastructure for 
all health care actors and for other actors and sectors with 
complex, temporarily and time critical communication 
patterns. This will require various theoretical and 
methodological 
approaches, 
including 
requirements 
engineering methods for ubiquitous systems [54].  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The overall aim of this project is to develop a complete 
system for a specific process at the right time, to the right 
person, in a just-in-time configuration. To do this, we need 
to understand the complexity of the hospitals organization, 
their communication patterns, analyse the bottlenecks, and 
thereby adjusting CMS to fulfil and adapt to hospitals 
complex 
and 
continually 
changing 
communication 
demands. The interaction pattern in hospitals are under 
constant change, and it is therefore important for future 
systems to make use of context awareness to automatically 
find and include the needed information when appropriate.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
W. Hersh, M. Helfand, J. Wallace, D. Kraemer, P. 
Patterson, S. Shapiro, and M. Greenlick, “A systematic 
review of the efficacy of telemedicine for making 
diagnostic and management decisions,” J Telemed 
Telecare, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 197-209, August 1, 2002, 
2002. 
[2] 
E. Coiera and V. Tombs, “Communication behaviours in 
a hospital setting: an observational study,” BMJ, vol. 
316, no. 7132, pp. 673-676, February 28, 1998, 1998. 
[3] 
J. Scholl, P. Hasvold, E. Henriksen, and G. Ellingsen, 
"Managing 
Communication 
Availability 
and 
Interruptions: A Study of Mobile Communication in an 
Oncology Department," Pervasive Computing, pp. 234-
250, 2007. 
[4] 
T. Solvoll and J. Scholl, “Strategies to reduce 
interruptions from mobile communication systems in 
surgical wards,” Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 
vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 389-392, 2008. 
[5] 
T. Solvoll, J. Scholl, and G. Hartvigsen, “Physicians 
Interrupted 
by 
Mobile 
Devices 
in 
Hospitals: 
Understanding the Interaction Between Devices, Roles, 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
and Duties,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 
15, no. 3, pp. e56, 2013. 
[6] 
P. A. Spurck, M. L. Mohr, A. M. Seroka, and M. Stoner, 
“The impact of a wireless telecommunication system on 
time efficiency,” J Nurs Adm, vol. 25(6), pp. 21-26, Jun, 
1995. 
[7] 
N. J. Blum and T. A. Lieu, “Interrupted care. The effects 
of paging on pediatric resident activities,” Am J Dis 
Child, vol. 146, no. 7, pp. 806-808, July 1, 1992, 1992. 
[8] 
M. H. Katz and S. A. Schroeder, “The sounds of the 
hospital. Paging patterns in three teaching hospitals,” N 
Engl J Med, vol. 319, no. 24, pp. 1585-1589, December 
15, 1988, 1988. 
[9] 
R. D. Acuff, L. M. Fagan, T. C. Rindfleisch, B. J. Levitt, 
and P. M. Ford, "Lightweight, Mobile E-Mail for Intra-
Clinic Communication." 
[10] 
S. A. Eisenstadt, M. M. Wagner, W. R. Hogan, M. C. 
Pankaskie, F. C. Tsui, and W. Wilbright, "Mobile 
workers in healthcare and their information needs: are 2-
way pagers the answer?." pp. 135-139. 
[11] 
A. Minnick, K. Pischke-Winn, and M. B. Sterk, 
“Introducing 
a 
two-way 
wireless 
communication 
system,” Nurs Manage vol. 25(7), pp. 42-47, 1994  
[12] 
E. Bradner, W. A. Kellogg, and T. Erickson, “The 
adoption and use of \&ldquo;BABBLE\&rdquo;: a field 
study of chat in the workplace,” in Proceedings of the 
Sixth European conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work, Copenghagen, Denmark, 1999, pp. 
139-158. 
[13] 
J. E. Bardram and T. R. Hansen, “The AWARE 
architecture: 
supporting 
context-mediated 
social 
awareness in mobile cooperation,” in Proceedings of the 
2004 
ACM 
conference 
on 
Computer 
supported 
cooperative work, Chicago, Illinois, USA, 2004. 
[14] 
J. 
Parker 
and 
E. 
Coiera, 
“Improving 
Clinical 
Communication: A View from Psychology,” J Am Med 
Inform Assoc, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 453-461, September 1, 
2000, 2000. 
[15] 
J. Grudin, “Groupware and social dynamics: eight 
challenges for developers,” Commun. ACM, vol. 37, no. 
1, pp. 92-105, 1994. 
[16] 
E. Coiera, “When Conversation Is Better Than 
Computation,” J Am Med Inform Assoc, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 
277-286, May 1, 2000, 2000. 
[17] 
D. Avrahami, D. Gergle, S. E. Hudson, and S. Kiesler, 
“Improving the match between callers and receivers: A 
study on the effect of contextual information on cell 
phone 
interruptions,” 
Behaviour 
& 
Information 
Technology, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 247 - 259, 2007. 
[18] 
M. A. Munoz, M. Rodriguez, J. Favela, A. I. Martinez-
Garcia, and V. M. Gonzalez, “Context-aware mobile 
communication in hospitals,” Computer, vol. 36, no. 9, 
pp. 38-45, 2003. 
[19] 
J. Fogarty, S. E. Hudson, C. G. Atkeson, D. Avrahami, J. 
Forlizzi, S. Kiesler, J. C. Lee, and J. Yang, “Predicting 
human interruptibility with sensors,” ACM Trans. 
Comput.-Hum. Interact., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119-146, 
2005. 
[20] 
E. Horvitz, P. Koch, C. M. Kadie, and A. Jacobs, 
“Coordinate: Probabilistic forecasting of presence and 
availability,” in Proceedings of the 18th Conference in 
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence  (UAI'02), 
2002, 
pp. 224-233. 
[21] 
E. Horvitz and J. Apacible, “Learning and reasoning 
about 
interruption,” 
in 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
5th 
international conference on Multimodal interfaces, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, 2003, pp. 20-27. 
[22] 
A. Bernstein, P. Vorburger, and P. Egger, "Direct 
Interruptablity Prediction and Scenario-based Evaluation 
of Wearable Devices: Towards Reliable Interruptability 
Predictions." 
[23] 
D. Siewiorek, A. Smailagic, J. Furukawa, A. Krause, N. 
Moraveji, K. Reiger, J. Shaffer, and F. Wong, "SenSay: a 
context-aware mobile phone." pp. 248-249. 
[24] 
N. Sawhney and C. Schmandt, “Nomadic radio: speech 
and audio interaction for contextual messaging in 
nomadic environments,” ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. 
Interact., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 353-383, 2000. 
[25] 
J. Fogarty, J. Lai, and J. Christensen, “Presence versus 
availability: the design and evaluation of a context-aware 
communication client,” Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., vol. 
61, no. 3, pp. 299-317, 2004. 
[26] 
T. W. Malone, K. R. Grant, K.-Y. Lai, R. Rao, and D. 
Rosenblitt, “Semistructured messages are surprisingly 
useful for computer-supported coordination,” ACM 
Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 115-131, 1987. 
[27] 
J. G. Anderson, Evaluating Health Care Information 
Systems: Methods and Applications: Sage Publications, 
Inc., 1993. 
[28] 
T. Solvoll, L. Gironi, A. Giordanengo, and G. 
Hartvigsen, "CallMeSmart: A VoIP Softphone on 
Android Based Mobile Devices Using SIP," eTELEMED 
2013, The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 3, pp. 198-203: 
International 
Academy, 
Research 
and 
Industry 
Association (IARIA), 2013. 
[29] 
T. Solvoll, L. Gironi, and G. Hartvigsen, "CallMeSmart: 
An Ascom/Trixbox Based Prototype for Context 
Controlled Mobile Communication in Hospitals." pp. 1-
4. 
[30] 
T. Solvoll, S. Fasani, A. B. Ravuri, A. Tiemersma, and 
G. Hartvigsen, "Evaluation of an Ascom/trixbox system 
for context sensitive communication in hospitals." pp. 
49-53, 2010. 
[31] 
T. Botsis, T. Solvoll, J. Scholl, P. Hasvold, and G. 
Hartvigsen, 
“Context-aware 
systems 
for 
mobile 
communication in healthcare - A user oriented 
approach,” Proceedings of the 7th Wseas International 
Conference 
on 
Applied 
Informatics 
and 
Communications, pp. 69-74, 2007. 
[32] 
A. 
Talaei-Khoei, 
T. 
Solvoll, 
P. 
Ray, 
and 
N. 
Parameshwaran, “Policy-based Awareness Management 
(PAM): Case study of a wireless communication system 
at a hospital,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 84, no. 10, pp. 1791-
1805, 2011. 
[33] 
A. 
Talaei-Khoei, 
T. 
Solvoll, 
P. 
Ray, 
and 
N. 
Parameshwaran, “Maintaining awareness using policies; 
Enabling agents to identify relevance of information,” J. 
Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 370-391, 2012. 
[34] 
T. Solvoll, A. Tiemersma, E. Kerbage, S. Fasani, A. B. 
Ravuri, 
and 
G. 
Hartvigsen, 
“Context-sensitive 
Communication 
in 
Hospitals: 
A 
User 
Interface 
Evaluation and Redesign of Ascom Wireless IP-DECT 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

 
 
Phones,” in eTELEMED 2011, The Third International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social 
Medicine, Gosier, Guadeloupe, France, 2011, pp. 37-46. 
[35] 
M. W. a. J. S. Brown. "Designing Calm Technology," 
January 
8th, 
2015; 
http://www.ubiq.com/hypertext/weiser/calmtech/calmtec
h.htm. 
[36] 
"Pervasive 
Computing," 
January 
8th, 
2015; 
http://mbcbs.weebly.com/uploads/1/0/9/0/1090057/per_u
nit_1.pdf. 
[37] 
S. Poslad, Ubiquitous Computing: Smart Devices, 
Environments and Interactions: Wiley, 2011. 
[38] 
C. Noda and T. Walter, "Smart Devices for Next 
Generation Mobile Services," Construction and Analysis 
of Safe, Secure, and Interoperable Smart Devices, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science G. Barthe, L. Burdy, 
M. Huisman, J.-L. Lanet and T. Muntean, eds., pp. 192-
209: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005. 
[39] 
D. Cook and S. Das, Smart Environments: Technology, 
Protocols and Applications (Wiley Series on Parallel 
and Distributed Computing): Wiley-Interscience, 2004. 
[40] 
M. Weiser, “The computer for the 21st century,” 
SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 3, no. 3, 
pp. 3-11, 1999. 
[41] 
C. M. Bishop, “Artificial Life,” Life, vol. in press, 2014. 
[42] 
C. M. Bishop, Pattern recognition and machine 
learning: springer New York, 2006. 
[43] 
R. Jenssen, “Entropy-Relevant Dimensions in the Kernel 
Feature 
Space: 
Cluster-Capturing 
Dimensionality 
Reduction,” Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE, vol. 30, 
no. 4, pp. 30-39, 2013. 
[44] 
R. Jenssen, “Kernel Entropy Component Analysis,” 
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE 
Transactions on, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 847-860, 2010. 
[45] 
E. Coiera, “Four rules for the reinvention of health care,” 
BMJ, vol. 328, no. 7449, pp. 1197-1199, May 15, 2004, 
2004. 
[46] 
G. Button and P. Dourish, “Technomethodology: 
paradoxes and possibilities,” in Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing 
systems: common ground, Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada, 1996, pp. 19-26. 
[47] 
G. M. Murtagh, "Seeing the "rules": preliminary 
observations of action, interaction and mobile phone 
use," Wireless world, pp. 81-91: Springer-Verlag New 
York, Inc., 2002. 
[48] 
K. Nygaard, "Program Development as a Social 
Activity." pp. 189-198. 
[49] 
B. Shneiderman, “Leonardo's laptop: human needs and 
the new computing technologies,” in Proceedings of the 
14th ACM international conference on Information and 
knowledge management, Bremen, Germany, 2005, pp. 1-
1. 
[50] 
W. Pratt, M. C. Reddy, D. W. McDonald, P. Tarczy-
Hornoch, and J. H. Gennari, “Incorporating ideas from 
computer-supported cooperative work,” Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 128-137, 
2004. 
[51] 
A. Cockburn, Writing Effective Use Cases: Addison-
Wesley Professional, 2000. 
[52] 
J. Carroll, M. B. Rosson, and P. McInerney, “Scenarios 
in practice,” in CHI '03 extended abstracts on Human 
factors in computing systems, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, 
USA, 2003, pp. 1046-1047. 
[53] 
J. M. Carroll, “Making use: scenarios and scenario-based 
design,” in Proceedings of the 3rd conference on 
Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, 
methods, and techniques, New York City, New York, 
United States, 2000, pp. 4. 
[54] 
Tom, et al., REUBI: A Requirements Engineering 
method for ubiquitous systems. Sci. Comput. Program., 
2013. 78(10): pp. 1895-1911. 
 
 
 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-384-1
eTELEMED 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

