Structured Documentation of Physiological Models and Behavioural Patterns
containing Uncertainty
Myriam Lipprandt
OFFIS - Institute for Information Technology
Escherweg 2, D-26121
Oldenburg, Germany
Email: myriam.lipprandt@ofﬁs.de
Andreas Hein
OFFIS - Institute for Information Technology
Escherweg 2, D-26121
Oldenburg, Germany
Email: andreas.hein@ofﬁs.de
Abstract—In this article, two main requirements on medical
documentation in the ﬁeld of assisted technologies at home
(so called AAL) and a process model are introduced. For an
integrated health care, the medical documents make interoper-
ability possible. These document formats should be able to be at
least structured for further information processing. In the ﬁeld
of AAL it is important to store functional aspects of human ac-
tivities and data containing uncertainty because patient’s health
state is measured in a different way than in hospitals. Unknown
states of circumstances and context, bad quality sensors and
24/7 measurements can be made. This leads to data containing
uncertainty and trends (e.g ﬁtness trend). This data can be
stored in structured medical documents though data types and
code systems. CDA documents are a medical standard format
with a machine-processable and human-readable part. CDA
has to be extended in order to be able to represent functional
data through equation and data with uncertainty. A process
model supports the creation of structured medical documents
with AAL-speciﬁc data. It supports the mapping of AAL data
into a structured document by an application ﬂow. This process
is supported by a model-driven technique which makes data
description and transformation possible.
Keywords-AAL; CDA; eHealth; Tele-Rehabilitation; Human
Models; Uncertainty, Interoperability; PHMR
I. INTRODUCTION
The many funding programs and research projects have
over the last couple of years developed a lot of new
approaches in the ﬁeld of Ambient Assisted Living (AAL),
which has close links to Ambient Intelligence and and Ubiq-
uitous Computing. These approaches mostly aim at health
related use cases such as tele-rehabilitation, gait analysis [1]
or activity detection. Many applications incorporate medical
and non-medical sensors from different vendors and different
domains. Important questions are: What is a health relevant
information, that need to be stored and be communicated to
the an external service provider such as a doctor or hospital?
How to deal with unclear sensor data? Are standardized
medical documents suitable to represent data gathered in
home applications?
The need for a standardized representation of medical
information in a semantically annotated and further machine
processable format is crucial for the interoperability of
health supporting systems at home. Therefore, the Personal
Healthcare Monitoring Report (PHMR) [2] speciﬁes a model
to represent both measurements captured by devices, and
narrative information. Deﬁning templates for the HL7 Clin-
ical Document Architecture (CDA) [3] and proﬁles [4] for
monitoring applications is a good step forward, but not
sufﬁcient to integrate the quintessence of human behaviour
in such documents. The technical world of health supporting
applications at home refers to a distributed architecture
with loosely coupled components, sensors and actuators.
The aim is to enable people to live an independent life
in their home environment. Therefore, the collected data
are of prime importance for medical care. The state of
health is reﬂected by the application through continuous
measuring, plus knowledge that is rather vague and con-
text dependent. This health related information gathered
in home environments differs fundamentally from medical
information collected in laboratories or hospitals. The main
difference is the lack of knowledge to accurately interpret
the data under consideration of the situational meaning
[5], that leads to a degree of uncertainty and behavioural
aspects of physical functions. Vital parameters like blood
pressure and pulse react to external factors like weather,
sport or stress. A medical decision can only be made when
the vital parameters are plausible and when the context
is known. For example, a high blood pressure is normal
during a training session but requires a treatment when it is
long-lasting. New approaches of medical applications with
devices from home automation can derive the activity of
daily living (ADL) and gait analysis at home to predict falls
or upcoming dementia by building behavioural proﬁles of
person. This applications have to deal with many sensor
data which are not primary medical. The interpretation of
the data from raw data to a clinical decision can contain
degree of uncertainty. This uncertainty has to be stored
in a structured medical document for further processing.
Document standards must represent on one hand the raw
sensor data, and on the other hand the semantic information
of the context, which must be mapped into a machine
processable format. In addition, the process of handling
331
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

AAL data and their mapping into a standardized medical
documents is not fully described yet. The aim of this article
is to show that medical document standards need an adaption
to store functional aspects and uncertainty’s in activities to
represent medical data in AAL applications ”realistic” and
to show that a standardize process of mapping the data into a
document needs to be invented. In the next chapter the basics
of clinical documents (e.g. templates and data types) are
described. To understand the differences of data, collected
in AAL applications, a new data model is introduced in
section III. The requirements of AAL applications leads to
an extension of standardized medical document, which are
presented in section IV.
II. CLINICAL DOCUMENTS
Structured clinical documents must fulﬁl the demands of
the healthcare system. That is, to exchange documents with
clinical content easily and to provide a structured mark-up
for representing various kinds of information from patient
demographics to sensor data to make further processing pos-
sible. Also, the human readability is a core requirement. The
legal aspect of storing the health relevant information over
10 or more years requires maximum backward compatibility.
A. Clinical Document Architecture
The Clinical Document Architecture (CDA) is a document
standard that deﬁnes a syntax and semantics for clinical
documents like a discharge summary or laboratory results.
The structure of CDA is not bound to any exact use case,
which makes it applicable for many use cases. Every CDA
is a complete information object containing narrative text,
images and other content. CDA has a header and a body en-
coded in Extensible Mark-up Language (XML). The header
speciﬁes meta-information about the intended use case, the
patient, the author of the document and the custodian. The
body is composed of structured mark-up with one or more
sections. These sections contains attributes like id, title, text
and a coded value. The body can represent information in
three levels of granularity, ranging from simple narrative
text (not machine processable) to a completely structured
coding in level 3, where even the narrative text is completely
machine processable.
B. Templates
Templates are sets of constrains on a CDA document
structure and content, intended to specialize CDA to speciﬁc
use cases [6]. The Continuity of Care Document [7] (CCD)
is a CDA template that reﬂects the most relevant administra-
tive, demographic, and clinical information about a patient’s
healthcare. It provides, for doctors and medical applications,
an aggregation of all data about a patient that needs to
be stored pertinent to an episode of care or a disease.
The primary use case is to provide a snapshot in time to
communicate a clinical summary of a patient. The header
deﬁnes the document meta-data. The body deﬁnes sections
with semantic coding from ”Systematized Nomenclature of
Medicine - Clinical Terms” (SNOMED CT) such as past
medications, problems, and procedures.
1) Personal Healthcare Monitoring Report (PHMR): The
PHMR is a CDA template that carries personal healthcare
monitoring information. That encompasses the represen-
tation of measurements captured by devices, graphs that
show trends of the users’ health status, notes, summaries,
and other kinds of narrative information that can be added
by caregivers. The header is based on the speciﬁcation
of History and Physical Note [8] and the body contains
constrained CCD templates. CCD is constrained by adding
some section requirements, and a speciﬁcation of which
sections are recommended for use with Personal Healthcare
Monitoring Reports, such as ”Results” and ”Vital Signs”.
PHMR is a good step forward for a standardized repre-
sentation of data gathered from monitoring devices at home.
The characteristics of observed device data can be separated
into continuous (SpO2) and discrete (Blood pressure, Tem-
perature) vital signs and data.
For continuous measurements, a sub-template named
”Waveform Observation” handles the series of measure-
ments connected with a sample period (see code exam-
ple). The sample period is represented through a generic
collection that allows for multiple repetitions of other data
types. LIST contains discrete values in a deﬁned sequence.
A GLIST is a periodic sequence of values generated from
parameters and used to specify regular sampling points for
biosignals. A GLIST TS is a generated sequence of ”Point
in Time” (TS) and has a beginning (head) and an increment
tag for indicating the step size, that is, the sample period
in milliseconds. The SLIST PQ represents the waveform
measurements of physical quantities (PQ). It is a sequence
of sampled values scaled and translated from a list of integer
values.
Representation of Waveforms in PHMR
<observation classCode="OBS" moodCode="EVN">
<code code="250864000"
codeSystem="2.16.840.1.113883.6.96"
codeSystemName="SNOMED CT"
displayName="Pulse oximetry waveform"/>
<statusCode code="completed"/>
<value xsi:type="SLIST_PQ">
<origin value="0" unit="1"/>
<scale value="1" unit="1"/>
<digits>94 92 92 91 90 90 ... </digits>
</value>
</observation>
C. Data Types
The data carried in a CDA document are the HL7 Version
3 data types which are described in an abstract notation
332
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

for a comprehensive discussion and are also represented in
an XML-speciﬁc way. The data types can be divided in
three categories: (1) boolean, binary, text and multimedia,
(2) codes and identiﬁers, and (3) quantitative data types.
The generic data types are collections (sets, lists, interval,
etc.) and can be extended to deal with uncertainty, time-
dependency and other qualiﬁcations of data values. Un-
certainty is represented in through two data types which
belongs to the category of the generic types extension
which are generic types with one parameter. (1) Uncertain
Value - Probabilistic (UVP) and (2) Parametric Probability
Distribution (PPD). UVP is a generic data type extension
used to specify a probability expressing the information
producer’s belief that the given value holds. PPD is generic
data type extension specifying uncertainty of quantitative
data using a distribution function. Aside from the speciﬁc
parameters of the distribution, a mean (expected value)
and standard deviation is always given to help maintain a
minimum layer of interoperability if receiving applications
cannot deal with a certain probability distribution. These
two data types are not permit to use in CDA. Beside the
semantics all observations are structured by the situation
in which they are acquired. Context information about the
setting and situational meaning are also data, called context
or meta data [9], which are currently not represented in
CDA data types. Context information are never 100 percent
true or false. And in AAL many sensor data or behavioural
patterns contains an amount of uncertainty which has to be
expressible in an medical document.
D. Codes
The semantics for carrying the concepts of a a circum-
stance like a diagnosis or a vital sign is bond by the data type
Concept Descriptor (CD) or Coded Value (CV). The Codes
systems ICD-10, LOINC or SNOMED CT can be stored in
this this data types that contains the ﬁeld code, codeSystem,
codeSystemName, displayName. This data type stores the
semantics of the section via a code system (like LOINC or
SNOMED CT). This terminologies refers to aspects of the
medical domain. The purpose of medical terminology is to
support the interoperability between different IT systems. In
the ﬁeld of AAL medical terminology like SNOMED CT
or LOINC doesn’t ﬁt. The AAL domain consists of new
applications measuring human behaviour in a different way
than in hospital through assessment tests. The terminologies
imply a deﬁned contextual setting that addresses so far not
the area of AAL.
E. Procedure Model and tools for CDA Documents
The creation of CDA documents is not a common shared
process like in the area of software engineering. The im-
plementation approaches were based on XML processing
techniques or a RIM-based approach by HL7. The disadvan-
tage is a generic API requiring CDA speciﬁc knowledge. On
Rwa Data 
Pre-processed 
Data 
Medical 
Knowledge 
Complete Context-
Knowledge 
Incomplete 
Context-Knowledge 
Little Context-
Knowledge 
Clinical 
Application 
Supervised 
Application 
Ambient 
Application 
Frequency 
Context 
Dependance 
Medical Decision 
Diagnosis 
Annotation & 
Interpretation 
EEG, MRT, 
ECG, PET… 
Door-
Contacts 
Laser-
scanner  
Long-Term ECG 
Rehabilitation 
Gait 
Analysis 
Blood 
Pressure 
Activity & Behaviour 
Trend 
Trend 
Power-
Sensor  
Figure 1.
Three Dimensional Layer Context Model (3DLC) [5]
a more supported level ﬁrst tools came out with a domain
speciﬁc CDA API for supporting developers in creating CDA
documents. The main advantage was to hide the complexity
of the CDA standard by providing a domain speciﬁc API.
The MDHT (Model-Driven Health Tools) interoperability
framework goes much further. They provide a model-driven
framework for generating implementations of CDA tem-
plates that support domain-speciﬁc Java API, a construction
and consumption of Java objects for XML serialisation and
de-serialisation and a validation mechanism based on OCL
(Object Constraint Language). MDHT also provides a work
ﬂow targeting the role of a ”model developer” who uses the
tool kit IDE based on the eclipse modelling framework and
an ”implementer” who uses the generated domain-speciﬁc
Java API for producing, consuming and validating the CDA
instances (XML).
III. STRUCTURE OF MEDICAL AND NON-MEDICAL DATA
IN AAL APPLICATIONS
A. Three Dimensional Layer Model (3DLC)
The 3DLC Models [5] (see ﬁgure 1) classiﬁes the medical
data from a perspective of context-dependence that is impor-
tant to differentiate the data gathered in clinical environment
or at home. Medical data can produced under laboratory
circumstances (hospital), with less context-knowledge in a
tele-rehabilitation or with no context-knowledge in Ambient
Assisted Living (AAL) application like the gait analysis.
Tele-rehabilitation applications such as the OSAmI [10] or
SAPHIRE [11] systems developed for patients with cardio-
vascular disease take place in the home environment. The
data are collected in a semi-controlled environment. The data
are interpreted in the context of a training session proceeded
on an ergometer with medical sensors like pulse. No context
information are available in applications for unsupervised
applications.
333
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Beside the context information, sensor quality is lower
in home environments than in medical environments. The
vital parameters like ECG are of high quality when mea-
sured in hospital under laboratory circumstances. Medical
applications incorporate vital parameters for usage at home
constraint the users themselves to carry out the medical pro-
cedure with low-costs sensors. The repeated measurements
at home compensate in some degree the lack of quality since
trends can be derived.
This leads to a different interpretation of home-based
information. Not a single measurement should be interpreted
medically, rather than that a trend analysis is needed. Medi-
cal information is provided by this kind of applications more
or less through the establishment of behavioural proﬁles
combined with trend information. The fact of measuring data
over a longer period of time gives a different view on the
representation of medical data in a standardized format. A
single point documents is not sufﬁcient and should leads to
a representation of trends. Nowadays clinical documents do
not take this progression of activities in AAL application
into account.
IV. EXTENSION OF CLINICAL DOCUMENTS
A. Functional Model
The description of a functional model reﬂects an arbitrary
human activity that has to be structured represented in a
medical document. The mapping of a behavioural pattern,
that is reﬂected through a trend is from a medical point
of view a crucial information. This information should be
machine processable to derive further information. Mathe-
matical models can represent dynamic processes of a human.
A trend is a example for a mathematical view on a human
behaviour (see ﬁgure 1). Figure 2 depicts the requirements of
representing equations in a structured documents by means
of a tele-rehabilitation example. Many physiological systems
can be seen as a functional model consists of input and
output parameters. Also external conditions like weather or
other context data can have inﬂuence on a patients health.
Different scenario and medical problems can lead to diverse
mathematical models that needs to be stored in medical
documents. At this point a linear model, that is a statistic
regression model will explain the process of expanding the
document.
In order for a functional model to be represented in
a structured document, data types must be deﬁned in an
abstract way. With ISO 21090 data types are deﬁned for
the purpose of exchange in the health system. These deﬁni-
tions are based on HL7 and ISO/IEC 11404 Information
Technology - General Purpose Datatypes (GPD). Linear
equations contains place holder with variable-length, for that
the equation is expressed as a collection of data types. With
this standard ISO 21090 the new data type denoting the
equation is derived.
Table I
SEMI-FORMAL DESCRIPTION OF THE DATA TYPE LINEARMODEL
Name
Type
Description
Variable
LIST < INT >
Denotes the variable in an equation
Coefﬁcient
LIST < INT >
Gives the quantiﬁer of the variable
Index
INT
Number of variables
Result
INT
result of the equation
Code
CD
Gives the code and semantics
type LinearModel class=(
variable : Sequence(Int),
coefficient : Sequence(Int),
index : int,
result : int,
code : CD,
)
1) Attribute:
var.:
Sequence(Int). the variable represents the param-
eters which has inﬂuence on the physical model.
Dependent on the model the variable denotes the
demographic data, the weather or earlier performed
training sessions.
coeff.: Sequence(Int). In the model, the coefﬁcient gives
the importance (weight) of the variables.
index: int. The index i denotes the number coefﬁcient-
variable pairs (bi ∗ xi)
result: int. The result of the equation gives the represented
physiological aspects like heart rate.
code: CD. The data type CD gives the meaning (seman-
tic) of the data type. This data type is generic, many
use cases of physiological aspects can be described
through that equation. Therefore a data type CD is
needed.
2) Example:
<example xsi:type="LinearModel">
<variable value "34, 57, 1" />
<coefficient value "1, 3, 0" />
<index value "3" />
<code="1234..." codeSystem="2.16..."
codeSystemName="name"
displayName="HF Prediction" />
</example>
In this example, a linear model shows a prediction of the
heart frequency with three variables and no suitable code
system. In this scenario, a functional model is established
to predict the heart rate from patient with cardiopulmonary
diseases in a tele-rehabilitation [12]. It shows that AAL give
the opportunity for new kinds of health related applications.
To meet the need of these applications new code systems and
tags for CDA has to be invented. The representation of an
334
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

BP(t)
Pulse(t)
SpO2(t)
Age
Weight
Diagnose
Medication
Ergometer
Controller
Sensor measure y(t)
Load
Figure 2.
Simpliﬁed Block Diagram of an Ergometer Training Session
equation through XML-tags is close to the CDA standard
syntax. The abstract notation of the equation gives the
possibility to convert it in other medical document standards
like DICOM SR [13].
B. Human Model with uncertainty
Sensor data from home applications reﬂecting the health
state of a person. E.g it can reﬂects problems in mobility
or activity (ADL). These data are medical meaningful in a
higher abstraction level (see ﬁgure 1). Not the raw sensor
data shall be stored in a clinical document if there are not
from medical or technical importance. In some cases, it is
not clear which data have to be stored in a document for
further processing. That is where the aspect of uncertainty
comes into play.
Damaged sensors, new activity patterns, more than one
person in the ﬂat, unclear activities or different kind of
problems can occur and leads to misinterpreted data. In
worse case, the data are detected as ﬂaws and are deleted. It
would be better to categorise the data with a degree of belief
and storing them to make a further processing possible. In
unsupervised AAL applications the situational-context of a
persons behaviour is not fully known, from this it follows
that data can be ambiguous. A degree of belief [14] might
reﬂect this lack of knowledge better than deleting it because
of uncertainty. The uncertainty could contain information
that has to be represented in a medical document. The
beneﬁts for representing uncertainty for technicians and
doctors are:
• Detection of damaged sensors
• Detection of new activity patterns
• Detection of more than one person at home
Up to now, AAL applications has to deal with uncertain data
from an unclear cause. Therefore it is better to document
this kind of data as ”unknown data” or with a degree of
belief than to delete it. Due to the aspect of interoperability
a structured way of storing uncertain data is important.
The reasons for uncertainty in data of home applications
are:
• Erroneous or not interpretable data: The raw data
can not be mapped on events or activities because of
measuring errors
• Vagueness: Activities are not sharp bounded, they can
overlap to each other or be parallel
• Imperfect data: In case of a damaged sensor, events
or activities can not be detected
Localisation
Technical 
Concept
Event
Medical 
Diagnosis
Degree 
of belief
Degree 
of belief
Degree 
of belief
Light 
Barrier 
Door 
Contact
Laser 
Scanner
Power 
Sensor
Force 
Sensor
Motion 
Detector
Figure 3.
Origins of uncertainty
Raw 
Data
Event
Technical 
Concept
Medical
Diagnosis
Event
Event
Raw 
Data
Raw 
Data
Raw 
Data
Figure 4.
Composite of data
• Context uncertainty: Depending on the circumstances
(date, place) data can be interpreted as normal or
abnormal.
Static sensors like light barriers or door contacts gives
pre-existing knowledge about an position unless a spatial
model of the ﬂat exists (see ﬁgure 3). The trigger of a light
barrier is associated with the presence of a person at home.
The knowledge of context is limited to one trigger event
containing maybe a time stamp and a spatial aspect.
Through the aggregation of more trigger events a higher
information like ”primitive events” can be identiﬁed. For the
chain of raw sensor data to a medical diagnosis a description
language is needed. This language describes the origin of the
data (the device), the data (data type, unit, etc.), the context
(time, space, etc.) and last but not least the uncertainty
or degree of belief to transform this information into a
structured medical document. Sensors measuring directly an
event (like laser scanners or power sensor) should be stored
in an medical document if they can not be mapped to a
technical concept (automate, pattern matching, proﬁle)(see
335
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

Table II
COMPARED STRUCTURE OF CDA, XML FOR THE CONCEPTS OF
INFORMATION, RELATION AND NESTING
CDA-XML Semantics
XML
Information
chunks
section, clinical statement,
codes, data types
elements and attributes
Relations
components,
entry,
entryRelationship
elements and attributes
Nesting
count of elements
count of elements
Data
Hierarchical 
Structure
Knowledge (1)
Structured 
Document
Knowledge (2)
Figure 5.
Process Model
DSL
3DLC Data 
Model
XML
(Tree)
Data D
Tree T
Figure 6.
Transformation from AAL data to a tree structure in XML
ﬁgure 4 and 3) because not full interpretable data can contain
important information, that the AAL application does not
observed.
For the structured documentation of uncertain data, the
data characteristics, relation, aggregations and the degree
of belief shall be described in a formal language. This
language can not describe the complete domain of AAL
but is applicable in cases where the data are ambiguous or
unclear.
C. Process Model
I will develop a process to map AAL speciﬁc data with
functional aspects and uncertainty into structured medical
documents like CDA. To map the data into a structured
document a transformation has to be made. By virtue of
the standardized approach, mappings into different kind of
documents are possible (see ﬁgure 5).
The input are the data from the AAL scenario. This can be
raw data from a sensor, events or technical concepts which
needs to be stored structurally. The knowledge (1) in ﬁgure
5 contains three aspects:
1) The input data (data description is taken from the
project RAALI [15]) are the data from the AAL
scenario. These data are described through a domain-
speciﬁc language containing the possibility to mark a
them with a degree of belief
2) The hierarchical structure (annotated tree graph the-
ory) is the output
3) Function h = DData → TT ree. The description how
the data are mapped to the tree
The transformation steps from the Data DData to the
TT ree
can be seen in ﬁgure 6. At ﬁrst a domain-
speciﬁc language (DSL) [16] is created with the Xtext
(http://www.eclipse.org/Xtext/) framework. It based on the
Eclipse Modelling Framework which is extended by Xtext
to to build DSL with the extended Backus Naur form
(EBNF). The DSL describes the AAL application data with
the help of the 3DLC model. An ”integrator” can use this
DSL to describe his AAL data (containing uncertainty) with
this tool. In the next step a domain-speciﬁc Java API is
generated. This API gives the opportunity for consuming and
processing the AAL data. After this, these data are mapped
into a tree (graph without cycles) (function h = DData →
TT ree). This tree is an abstract structure representing a
structured document without a commitment to a deﬁnite
medical document standard (every structured document can
be seen as a tree [17]). This step is semi-automated because
the ”integrator” has the ability to enhance the data through
additional knowledge. This knowledge can be
• Codes from a code system
• Re-organisation of data
• Sources of uncertainty (if the ”integrator” has knowl-
edge or an idea where the uncertainty could come from)
• Other external sources of information (e.g hospital stay)
This data are represented as a table containing e.g. data
and relations to give the ”integrator” the possibility to make
changes. After the annotated tree is created the notes and
arcs are mapped to a speciﬁc standard. This procedure is
seen in ﬁgure 5 in knowledge (2). In this step, a function
f = TT ree → DDocument maps nodes and arcs to the
structure of e.g CDA (see table II).
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In AAL application the patient’s health state is measured
in a different way than in hospitals. Unknown states of
circumstances and context, bad quality sensors on the one
hand and 24/7 measurements and trend analysis on the other
can be made. The health related states are received through
vital sensor data and sensors from power sensors or from
home automation. An higher aggregation of these data need
to be made to derive medical information for care givers or
doctors. For an integrated health care, the use of medical
document formats makes interoperability possible. CDA
documents are a medical standard format with a machine-
processable and human-readable part. For the purpose of
AAL the CDA documents need to store more than just the
snap shot view of a laboratory result or one monitoring
session. To deal with an amount of uncertainty rather than
to discard the not perfect data makes further process of the
data possible. Damaged sensors, new patterns of activity
or different research questions for medical, technicians and
scientiﬁc staff should be persistent stored. We need to
store human models that reﬂects the physiological aspects
through equation enhanced with semantics by a coding
336
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

scheme and and activity pattern consisting a certain degree
of uncertainty. The HL7 Version 3 data types representing
uncertainty are not supported in CDA, that makes it im-
possible to store ambiguous data. Equations and their code
systems reﬂecting functional models does not exist. There-
fore CDA needs to be extended. Also a process of creating
a structured medical document is described to support the
upcoming AAL domain properly. The next step is to provide
different users (domain experts, like doctors, developers and
other technical staff) with an integrated software tool, that
supports the creation of extended medical documents. At
least three domain knowledges has to be incorporated in
this software tool. First, the domain knowledge of AAL
(devices, abstractions, measurements), second, the clinical
document knowledge (structure, data types, templates and
codes) and third, medical knowledge (e .g diagnosis). This
tool is still under construction. It will represents the different
knowledges by domain speciﬁc languages and a lot of data
transformation to help the domain expert in creating AAL
speciﬁc medical documents.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The research leading to the results described in this
paper has been funded Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF) in the RAALI project with the support
code 16SV5562K
REFERENCES
[1] T. Frenken, E.-E. Steen, M. Brell, W. Nebel, and A. Hein,
“Motion Pattern Generation and Recognition for Mobility
Assessments in Domestic Environments,” in Proceedings of
the 1st International Living Usability Lab Workshop on AAL
Latest Solutions, Trends and Applications. In conjunction with
BIOSTEC 2011.
SciTePress, 28-29 January 2011, pp. 3–12,
ISBN 978-989-8425-39-3.
[2] L. Alschuler, C. Beebe, K. W. Boone, and R. H. Dolin.
(2008) Implementation guide for CDA release 2.0 Personal
Healthcare Monitoring Report (PHMR).
[3] R. H. Dolin, L. Alschuler, S. Boyer, C. Beebe, F. M.
Behlen, P. V. Biron, and A. Shabo (Shvo), “HL7 Clinical
Document Architecture, Release 2,” J Am Med Inform
Assoc, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 30–39, 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://www.jamia.org/cgi/content/abstract/13/1/30
[4] IHE, Technical Framework Volume I Revision 5.0. Technical
report Final Text., IHE Std.
[5] A. Helmer, M. Lipprandt, T. Frenken, M. Eichelberg, and
A. Hein, “3DLC: A Comprehensive Model for Personal
Health Records Supporting New Types of Medical Appli-
cations,” Journal of Healthcare Engineering, 2011.
[6] T. Benson, Principles of Health Interoperability HL7 and
SNOMED (Health Informatics), 1st ed.
Springer, December
2009.
[7] HL7, Implementation Guide: CDA Release 2 Continuity of
Care Document (CCD), HL7 Std., 2007.
[8] L. Alschuler, C. Beebe, K. W. Boone, and R. H. Dolin. Im-
plementation Guide for CDA Release 2: History and Physical
(H&P) Notes. HL7.
[9] L. Wilkinson, The Grammar of Graphics (Statistics and
Computing). Secaucus, NJ, USA: Springer-Verlag New York,
Inc., 2005.
[10] M. Lipprandt, M. Eichelberg, W. Thronicke, J. Kruger,
I. Druke, D. Willemsen, C. Busch, C. Fiehe, E. Zeeb, and
A. Hein, “OSAMI-D: An open service platform for healthcare
monitoring applications,” in Proc. 2nd Conference on Human
System Interaction HSI ’09, 2009, pp. 139–145.
[11] O. Nee, A. Hein, L. Ludwig, D. Willlemsen, C. Busch, and
T. Scheffold, “Cardiac tele-rehabilitation with the SAPHIRE
system,” in Med-e-Tel, Luxembourg, April 2008.
[12] A. Helmer, R. Deparade, F. Kretschmer, O. Lohmann,
A. Hein, M. Marschollek, and U. Tegtbur, “A heart rate
prediction model for the telerehabilitation training of car-
diopulmonary patients,” in 5th International Joint Confer-
ence on Biomedical Engineering Systems and Technologies.
SciTePress - Science and Technology Publications, 2012, best
Paper Award.
[13] Supplement 23: Structured Reporting Storage SOP Classes,
DICOM Standards Committee Std., April 2000.
[14] S. Russell and P. Norvig, Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern
Approach, 2nd ed.
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
2003.
[15] R. Welge, B.-H. Busch, K. Kabitzsch, J. Laurila-Duersch,
S. Heusinger, M. Lipprandt, M. Eichelberg, E. Eichenberg,
H. Engelien, M. Gk, G. Moritz, and A. Hein, “Ontology
based approaches for the representation of aal-integration
proﬁles,” in 6. Deutscher AAL-Kongress 22.01-23.01.2013
Berlin, Springer, Ed., 2013 (to appear).
[16] T. Stahl and M. V¨olter, Modellgetriebene Softwareentwick-
lung - Techniken, Engineering, Management.
dpunkt.verlag,
2005.
[17] J. Riesmeier, Ein generisches Verfahren zur adaptiven Visu-
alisierung von strukturierten medizinischen Befundberichten.
Aschenbeck und Isensee, 2005, vol. ISBN: 3-89995-295-2.
337
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-252-3
eTELEMED 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine

