A System for Real Time Monitoring of Users’ Postural Attitudes
Alberto Cavallo, Alessio Robaldo, Flavio Ansovini and Alessandro De Gloria
University of Genoa – EliosLab
Genova – Italy
Email: Cavallo.Alberto.ca@gmail.com Robaldo.Alessio@gmail.com Flavio.Ansovini@unige.it
Alessandro.DeGloria@unige.it
Abstract— This paper presents a system for real time
monitoring of users’ postural attitudes with particular focus on
children. Maintaining for too long a wrong posture could cause
serious problems to children and, in worst cases, they could
receive permanent spinal deviations. The system is composed
of two different elements: 1) a device equipped with inertial
sensors (accelerometer, magnetometer and gyroscope), which
are applied to the patient’s spine and are able to measure his
spinal curvature; 2) a mobile application for smartphone that
provides a graphical user interface. Considering the age of the
target of this project, we have decided to make use of the
system similar to a game, giving the user a score based on his
posture and creating a ranking. Our system can also give an
alarm when the patient is maintaining a bad posture in order
to educate him.
Keywords- Posture; Inertial Measurement Unit; Serious Game
for Health.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Bad posture attitude is one of the main causes of
backache and it can easily degenerate into real pathologies,
especially when the patient is in his childhood and his
growth is not concluded yet [1]. Thanks to some studies [1],
we know that postural interventions, such as reminders about
the good posture during a school lesson, significantly reduce
the level of pain reported by children at the end of the class.
We also know that users are more willing to use
whatever kind of product (in our case a medical device), also
improving its effectiveness at maximum, if it is presented in
form of a game, especially if it is aimed at children [2]. So
that, this system would fall under the category of serious
games and, in particular, games for health (games that are
designed
for
a
primary
purpose
other
than
pure
entertainment) which are becoming largely adopted in
various health problems for improving the people wellness
[3].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in
Section 2 we briefly present a study on the state of the art
related to posture problems, talking about what is needed to
put our project into practice and considering some of the
systems already existing focused on the same problem. In
Section 3 we present the project itself, analyzing the very
elements of which the system is composed and
the
algorithms we have developed. In Section 4 we examine the
benefits deriving from the inclusion in our project of some
typical aspects of gamification and we explain the idea we
are developing. We conclude our paper in Section 5 by
analyzing the results obtained with tests and proposing
further experiments in order to verify the real impact of our
device.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
What is needed to put into practice our project is a
system able to monitor postural attitudes suitable for an
environment different from a laboratory (e.g., it could be
used in a classroom); this should be non-invasive, and finally
it should not either restrict or alter in any way user’s motion.
Nowadays, many systems have already been proposed but
without achieving all our three goals at the same time. The
main analysis methods of movement are based on videos and
optoelectronics; they offer a good precision but they cannot
be employed outside of an environment specifically studied
for them [5]. Other interesting techniques perform the
analysis by means of electromagnetic tracking systems and
potentiometric goniometers, but the first one can be affected
by the presence of metallic objects in the work environment
and the second one restricts the patient’s movements.
Figure 2. Graphic User Interface: a) Correct curve; b) Medium curve; c)
Wrong curve
Figure 1. System components relation
269
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

III.
THE PROJECT
Once we evaluated the above considerations, we decided
to implement a system based on inertial sensors and in
particular a three-axis gyroscope, a three-axis magnetometer
and a three-axis accelerometer. These sensors are used to
obtain the Eulero angles, three data that describe the
orientation of a rigid body in the space. The use of
accelerometers and gyroscopes to analyze the spine position
of a human being has already been studied [4]-[7], but we
have introduced in our system a magnetometer in order to
avoid a typical problem of gyroscopes, called drift.
Our system is basically composed of two components:
the first one is dedicated to the measuring of the patient
posture, and the second one analyses the data and allows the
user to interact with the system through a graphic interface.
The two elements can communicate each other via Bluetooth
connection (Figure 1).
We have designed and developed a device (Figure 2)
equipped with an ST iNemo module [8]. With this module it
is possible to receive data from a three-axis accelerometer, a
three-axis gyroscope and a three-axis magnetometer, and
filter them to compute Euler angles.
The measurement of the posture kept by the user occurs
by placing one or more devices on different spots of his back
in order to monitor the main curves of the spinal column. In
particular, our sensors are used to measure back curves of the
patient on the sagittal plane (to monitor kyphosis and
lordosis) but they can also be used to monitor angles on the
coronal plane (to monitor scoliosis).
The device we have developed is composed of two
Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs): the first one, called
master has to handle the data transmission to the Android
application via Bluetooth, in addition to measurement task
using the sensors; the second IMU, called slave, is only able
to measure and elaborate data, working as master satellite.
This
structure
allows
us
to
perform
simultaneously
measurement in different areas of patient’s back, giving a
more accurate set of data.
The graphic user interface is implemented to be executed
on a mobile device (smartphone or tablet) equipped with an
Android operative system; in turn, the device is connected
with the sensor component using a Bluetooth connection.
When it receives data from the sensors, it gives back to the
user a real time view of his position, emitting three different
kinds of warning in case of a prolonged bad posture: a
graphic one (Figure 3), an acoustic one, and a vibrating one.
In order to avoid excessive noise from our system, we have
set the alarm so that it will sound only after a certain span of
time during which the patient is maintaining a wrong
position; in this way the system will not measure patient's
temporary movements/changes of position.
Another function performed by our app is the possibility
to save various information concerning monitoring shifts
within a database so that the user can examine them later.
Finally, the software has been designed to be used by
more than one user on the same device; when the system is
launched, a user authentication is required so each patient
can access their own personal data and profile.
IV.
POSTURE MONITORING AS A SOCIAL GAME
An important aspect we have considered in developing
our system is the great success that social games have been
recently achieved. Several studies show that the fact of
sharing the results obtained between user and the possibility
for them to leave a usually positive feedback, make the
system more attractive. This is a feature common to every
kind of activities, be they virtual or real, experienced by the
user who is nowadays used to share many aspects of his life
through social networks.
For all these reasons, while developing our system, we
have thought about giving a score to the user based on the
time he spends in maintaining the correct position. This score
is then inserted within a rank to create a certain sense of
competition among users/players and, most importantly, to
push them to maintain the correct position. This idea would
be of particular effectiveness in case of children or teenagers
belonging to the same class.
The score is given accordingly to the framework shown
below:
•
+1 point every minute spent in the correct
position;
•
0 points every minute spent in a position
partially incorrect;
•
-1 point every minute spent in the wrong
position.
The system updates the results of all participants every
thirty minutes to highlight children who have kept the
position particularly wrong. Besides, we have thought of the
possibility to form teams to increase interaction among
children. Finally, as mentioned before, users’ scores can be
shared on social networks and inserted within a global rank
to develop a challenge.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In order to evaluate our system, we have carried out
experiments in lab. They showed the validity of the approach
both for the precision in measuring the posture and for the
feedback given to the user.
Figure 3. The system hardware prototype
270
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

The experiments conducted so far left us quite optimistic
about the results our system could give but, the real impact
of social games have not been completely verified.
In order to verify the real impact of the device we have
developed, shaping it as a social game, we suggest working
in partnership with a school. In this way, we could test the
system on a significant number of subjects. The general idea
we propose is to split up the students in two group called
Group A and Group B. The first group should use our system
in “social game modality”; in the meanwhile Group B should
be using the system only with “real time feedback modality”.
During the experiment we expect the members of Group A
to maintain a correct position for a longer period of time than
the one kept by members of Group B.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Robbins, I.P. Johnson, and C. Cunliffe, “Encouraging
good posture in school children in using computers,” Clinical
Chiropratic, March 2009, pp. 35-44.
[2]
“10 stats on the growth of gamification,”
http://www.gameifications.com/learning/10-numeri-sulla-
gamification-nelleducazione/, [retrieved: March, 2016].
[3]
“Health a fitness news,”
http://seriousgamessociety.org/index.php/2014-07-11-14-15-
51/explore/137-health-a-fitness-news,
[retrieved: March, 2016].
[4]
W. Y. Wong, M. S. Wong, “Trunk posture monitoring with
inertial sensors,” Eur Spine J, January 2008, pp. 743-53.
[5]
R. Y. W. Lee, J. Laprade, and E. H. K. Fung, “A real-time
gyroscopic system for three-dimensional measurement of
lumbar spine motion,” Medical Engineering & Physics,
December 2003, pp. 817-24.
[6]
E. Lou, J. Raso, D. Hill, N. Durdle, and M. Moreau, “Spine-
straight device for the treatment of kyphosis,” Studies in
Health Technology and Informatics, 2002, pp. 401-4.
[7]
R. J. Nevins, N. G. Durdle, and V. J. Raso, “A posture
monitoring system using accelerometers,” Electrical and
Computer Engineering, 2002, pp. 1087-92.
[8]
“INEMO_M1 official documentation,”
www.st.com/web/en/catalog/sense_power/FM89/SC1448/PF2
53162. [retrieved: March, 2016]
[9]
University
of
Pennsylvania
Annenberg
School
for
Communication, “Social networks can motivate people to
exercise more: Compared to motivational messaging, the
social influence of online peers proved more effective in
improving exercise habits,”
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2015/10/151007110738.htm,
October 2007 [retrieved: March, 2016]
[10] J. Simoes, R. D. Redondo, and A. F. Vilas, “A social
gamification
framework
for
a
K-6
learning
platform,”
Computers in Human Behavior, March 2013, 345-53.
[11] J. Hamari, J. Koivisto, “Social motivation to use gamification:
an empirical study of gamifying exercise,” ECIS 2013
Completed Research, January 2013. Paper 105.
271
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-470-1
eTELEMED 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (with DIGITAL HEALTHY LIVING 2016 / MATH 2016)

