Health Solutions Using Low Cost Mobile Phones
and Smart Spaces for the Continuous Monitoring
and Remote Diagnostics of Chronic Diseases
Carlos Oberdan Rolim∗, Fernando Luiz Koch†, Jim Black ‡ and Claudio F. R. Geyer §
∗Department of Engineering and Computing Science – Regional Integrated University (URI)
Campus Santo Angelo, Brazil – Email: ober@san.uri.br
† Nossal Institute for Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Australia – Email: fkoch@unimelb.edu.au
‡Nossal Institute for Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Australia – Email: jim.black@unimelb.edu.au
§Informatics Institute – Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Brazil - Email: geyer@inf.ufrgs.br
Abstract—Our research group is developing solutions for
public health mixing mobile devices extended by low-cost sensing
technologies, and ubiquitous computing. We seek solutions for
mass distribution that (i) enhance the average investment per
patient, (ii) reduce the cost of public health implementation,
and (iii) improve end-user experience. Our solutions are tailored
to monitoring and diagnosis of conditions associated to chronic
diseases such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes and obstructive
lung disease. We focus on innovative mobile health (mHealth)
that provide one-on-one, in-ﬁeld diagnostic and monitoring proce-
dures allowing ’good enough’ diagnosis. This project is motivated
by the need to enhance public and individual health care
provisioning for in-development communities and the extensive
availability of mobile computing technology in this environment.
Keywords
-
Mobile
phones;
Smart
spaces;
Chronic
diseases.
I. INTRODUCTION
We aim at creating applications that integrate techniques
from the ﬁelds of mobile, ubiquitous, and pervasive computing
in order to create low cost, comprehensive solutions for public
health. With that purpose, we are exploiting the advances
in mobile computing technology, which is promoting the
massive use of phone-based applications by the diverse societal
segments. This technology is becoming sophisticated enough
to perform tasks comparable to their hospital equivalents, at
price points accessible for members of emerging economies
[1]. Moreover, solutions based on ubiquitous and pervasive
computing enable the creation of dynamic and heterogeneous
environments (the so called pervasive spaces or smart spaces.
We envision exploiting this technology to automate and/or
optimize the patients’ daily tasks.
In speciﬁc, we are focusing on chronic diseases and risk
factors such as obesity and hypertension. These conditions
affect over 10% of the Brazilian population [2] and represent
a major item in public health expenditures. The side-effects
of the obesity (such as hypertension) are points of concern
in public health. These condition leads to complications such
as clogged arteries, stroke, and heart attacks that represent
immediate risk to patients and potential high treatment costs.
In this context, we are developing low-cost solutions that
mix mobile applications and ubiquitous computing. This
technology will be used for continuous monitoring of risk
factors and premature diagnosis of associated conditions. It
will support both reactive actions in response to changes of
patient’ conditions and pro-active measures, such as proposing
exercising and right eating habits.
We are exploiting the increasing the capabilities of com-
modity mobile devices, which are computational powerful and
omnipresent. We are extending these devices with software
applications and external sensors that provide non-invasive
technologies for environmental and vital data monitoring.
The proposed technology provides the following beneﬁts:
• Enhance average investment per end-user (patient), sup-
porting the delivery of public health via mass distribution,
• Reduce costs of public health implementation, through
mass distribution and the utilization of commodity de-
vices. The delivery will be composed of free (open
sources) software solutions, and low-cost (license free)
sensor devices.
• Improve end-user experience by providing easy-to-use
mobile computing interfaces and by exploiting the prin-
ciple of “processing transparency” in ubiquitous compu-
ting.
This development is part of a larger research program at
the Nossal Institute for Global Health, The University of
Melbourne[3]. This work is structured as follows. Section II
describes our motivation and related work. Section III presents
the solution. The paper concludes in Section IV.
II. MOTIVATION
Several academic, governmental, and commercial institu-
tions are already exploring the mobile and ubiquitous com-
puting technologies for the creation of public health solu-
tions. For instance, the ”Compendium of ICT Applications on
Electronic Government” [4] by United Nations Department of
Economic and Social Affairs has more than 50 solutions being
developed in several countries that scope and presentation,
”Future of Health” prepared by the group PSFK for UNIFEC
72
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

[1]. This fact emphasizes the role of diagnostic and monitoring
technologies to improve health systems.
Three facts motivate our research. First, mobile technology
is widely available in developing countries, which provides
the basis for extensive mobile health solutions. For instance,
in Brazil there are over 187 million handsets (statistics from
early-2010), present in 90% of municipalities and over 96%
of population density [5].
In addition, several academic, governmental, and commer-
cial institutions are already exploring the mobile and ubiqui-
tous computing technologies for the creation of public health
solutions. For instance, the ”Compendium of ICT Applications
on Electronic Government” [4] by United Nations Department
of Economic and Social Affairs which has more than 50
solutions being developed in several countries that scope and
presentation, ”Future of Health” prepared by the group PSFK
for UNIFEC [1]. This fact emphasizes the role of diagnostic
and monitoring technologies portable and easy to spread to
improve health systems.
Finally, there is a demand for home-base health monito-
ring solutions for chronic diseases. The Brazilian Institute
of Geography and Statistics (IBGE acronym in Portuguese)
shows that there are 17 million obese people in Brazil,
representing 9.6% of the population. The Ministry of Health
reported that the proportion of Brazilian adults diagnosed with
hypertension increased from 21.5% in 2006 to 24.4% in 2009.
Of these, the percentage of hypertensive patients is only 14%
of the population until age 34. From 35 to 44 years, the
proportion rises to 20.9%. And the rate jumps to 34.5% from
45 to 54, and 50.4%, from 55 to 64 years. This increase in
the occurrence of the disease, according to age, is the result
of eating patterns and lack of physical activity throughout life,
in addition to genetic factors, there also stress and obesity.
Motivated by this scenario, we focus on the research and
development of diagnostic solutions based on low-cost tech-
nology. It extends the mobile phone’s capabilities towards
mobile health and ubiquitous computing applications. We
aim at solutions to monitor health conditions associated to
chronic diseases (i.e., obesity, hypertension and diabetes). We
also promote academic research on smart environments and
environmental sensors for telemedicine and developed by the
authors presented in [6], [7].
This development draws on existing experience from other
projects in developing low-cost sensors and associated soft-
ware and user interfaces on mobile platforms. For example,
[8], [9] show that governments, companies, and non-proﬁt
groups are already developing mobile health applications to
improve healthcare. These reports present several programs,
either currently operating or slated for implementation in the
near future.
Moreover, [10], [11], [12], [13] propose alternative solutions
that address relevant issues of (i) education and awareness; (ii)
remote data collection; (iii) remote monitoring; (iv) commu-
nication and training for healthcare workers; (v) disease and
epidemic outbreak tracking, and (vi) diagnostic and treatment
support. We leveraged from these experiences and design
Fig. 1.
System Architecture - Adapted from [14]
principles in composing our solution.
Next, we introduce the proposed system architecture and
present the current prototypes.
III. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
We propose a model of for an easy development of mobile
health applications through a framework of software and
hardware components. The new solutions will be composed
of software applications that read data being collected by data
sensors connected to commodity mobile phones. The solution
complies with the existing standards such as programming
languages, libraries, and hardware interfaces. These features
facilitate dissemination to heterogeneous devices and also help
reduce development and distribution costs.
Figure 1 illustrates the system architecture. There are three
distinct modules:
• (A) the Nossal Compatibility SDK that provides the
framework for software application development.
• (B) the Sensor Module that provides the (software and
hardware) support for external sensor integration.
• (C) the Integration and Management Module that pro-
vides support for the management of smart space and the
integration of software applications and sensor hardware.
These modules are described below.
A. The Nossal SDK Module
This module (Figure 1(I)) provides the execution environ-
ment for the application. It allows for applications to utilize
abstract, reusable modules. It provides re-usable functionality
in the domains of data gathering, data processing, and human
interfacing. This component accomplishes our goals of com-
patibility, integration and standardization. Some of the design
principles for this module are:
• Portable to different operation platforms (e.g., Symbian
OS, Windows) while preserving the same functionalities
and programming interfaces.
• Provides a scripting language that supports basic data pro-
cessing functionality, fully integrated to the data gathering
73
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

and human interfacing functionalities. This provides a
“compilation free” enthronement for application writing.
That is, applications are developed as scripts (plain text),
which are loaded, parsed and executed by the operation
environment.
• Provides the basic functionality to support the varying
human components available in different devices, as for
example keyboard, screen, audio, microphone, and others.
The design is ﬂexible to adapt to the available hardware
support.
• Extensible through the development of external packages
that can be added to the operating environment both
during the development phase and at run-time.
B. Sensor Module
The Sensor Module (Figure 1(II)) provides the interface
to attach external sensors to the mobile phone. This module
is composed of a microprocessor that controls a number of
external Analogue/Digital (A/D) ports where the sensors are
attached. On the other side, there are the de facto standard
USB interface and wireless BlueTooth interface (in research)
to connect to the mobile phone. Once plugged into the phone,
it is recognized as a standard USB device.
The A/D ports allow the connection of “sensor modules”
such as the pulse oximeter, ECG, and phonocardiogram. Other
sensors can be developed and attached to this interface, as long
as they respect the electronic parameters established by the
module’s conﬁguration. The design allows the integration of
up to 12 sensors. Virtually any type of sensor can be plugged
in as long as it provides a signal output between 0V and 5V.
The electronics are composed of inexpensive elements that
cost less than USD10.00 (ten American dollars) in the retail
market.
We apply the 32-bit MCF51JM128 microcontroller (which
costs around AUD 4.00) from Freescale Semiconductor Inc.
This component can be programmed using the C language.
It also provides integrated ﬂash and RAM memory for the
application and data storage. In addition, it supports interface
to external devices via USB interface. Figure 2 has a picture
of our current development prototype. We intend to produce
this module in a reduced form factor to facilitate distribution
and portability.
Figure 2 has a picture of our current Oximeter sensor
prototype. It displays the following elements:
• (i) External Sensor Module, in its prototype version: we
intend to produce this module in a reduced form factor
to facilitate distribution and portability; the prototype ver-
sion contains the microcontroller (square in the bottom-
left corner), the module’s electronics (square circuit board
on the right), and a “debug board” (underneath the
microcontroller) that will not be part of the ﬁnal product.
• (ii) USB Interface: provided as output by the External
Sensor Module; it requires a common mini-USB cable to
connect this module to the mobile phone.
• (iii) Mobile Phone: we use a HTC SmartPhone running
Microsoft Windows Mobile 6.1 for the prototype; we
Fig. 2.
Oximeter Sensor Prototype
opted for this development platform due to hardware
availability as Microsoft Research sponsored this project,
• (iv) Oximeter Probe: attached to one of the A/D ports
of the External Sensor Module, which controls its func-
tionality such as activating the LEDs and collecting the
results from the light sensors.
C. Integration and Management Module
The Integration and management module (Figure 1(III)) is
mainly responsible for management of smart space. It has
internal sub-modules used by context-awareness, discovery,
adaptation, localization services and other common services in
ubicomp area. This module also is used to provide applications
to environment and to integrate sensors and other devices
immersed there but that was not connected via sensor module.
This module currently is under construction and is the main
focus of Brazilian chapter of Nossal Institute project.
D. Current applications and future extensions
Based on this architecture, we are developing applications
for data collection, monitoring, and diagnosis of symptoms
related to chronic diseases. We are researching and developing
the following applications.
The Intelligent Activities Manager provides a solution to
monitor patient’s daily activities. It includes an environment
monitor composed of sensors and accelerometers. Once cer-
tain conditions are detected, it reminds the patients on the
importance of performing certain activities, such as scheduled
medical appointments, exams, drug dosage reminding, and
even conditions like laziness and lack of physical exercises.
The design aims at ﬂexibility, user-friendliness, and context
awareness. The goal is to provide a personalized solution to
motivate patients to perform physical activities and take care of
their health and well-being to prevent the condition escalation.
The Integrated Solution for Collecting and Monitoring of
Vital Signs provides a solution for integrating vital data from
multiple sensor units - e.g., from our low-cost phonocardio-
gram, our clinical thermometer, our respiratory rate calcu-
lator and others. The solutions supports remote monitoring
by transmitting the collected information to health centres.
The integration of external sensors happens through an open
74
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

Fig. 3.
“Ready Set” Application Prototypes
interface, as well as the development of the data collecting
and transmission applications. Thus, we foresee the integration
of multiple sensor coming from different research initiatives,
transforming this application into a platform for combined
remote monitoring.
The Low Cost Piezo-Electric Scale is a hardware-software
development initiative that complements the sensing capability
required for the monitoring of chronic diseases’ conditions.
It provides the tool for continuous weight monitoring and
control, communication the measurements to the health central
(using the “ Integrated Solution for Collecting and Monitoring
of Vital Signs” described above). For example, the application
can provide notiﬁcation of encouragement when the patient
looses weight and the other way around. We emphasize that
this application is also useful for the diagnosis and monito-
ring of malnutrition conditions, allowing for further project
extensions.
In addition, we will be integrating these solutions to some
of the existing applications of the Nossal Institute for Global
Health that add-value to our project, viz.:
• The Nossal Oximeter Sensor: it works by measuring the
difference in absorption in two wavelengths of light. With
each pulse of arterial blood into the ﬁngertip or ear lobe
it is possible to calculate the percentage saturation of
haemoglobin with oxygen. The primary use of this sensor
is to be in the diagnosis and assessment of the severity
of respiratory disease and hypoxaemia in an outpatient
setting.
• The Respiratory and Pulse Rate Calculator: this appli-
cation uses the system clock inside the mobile phone to
capture the time that the health worker begins and ends
counting just 10 respiratory cycles; it provides tools to aid
health ﬁeld-workers counting respiratory or pulse rates.
• The Formulary/Drug Dose Calculator: this application
records a subset of the information in the local formulary
- the names, indications for use, dosing regimens and
presentations of drugs available for health workers to
prescribe to their patients. When the health worker selects
a drug, an indication and a presentation (i.e., capsules,
tablets, ampoules, and others) the application calculates
the appropriate dose for that patient, along with other
supporting information relevant to the prescribed drug.
• The Drip Rate Calculator: this application prompts the
user for the volume to be infused and the infusion period.
It then calculates the corresponding number of drops per
minute. No need for calculations or a wristwatch.
• The Drug Reminder Alarm: this application makes use
of the built-in digital camera that is present in mid-
range/sophisticated phones, and in some basic phones as
well. It is meant to be used by pharmacists when they
dispense complex drug regimens. The pharmacist lays out
the correct number of tablets or capsules to be taken at
a given time of day, takes a digital photograph, and then
adds the photo and the time details to the application’s
task list. The alarm will then ring at the set interval, and
show the photo on the screen to remind the patient to
take the prescribed medication.
As part of the development cycle, each application must be
ﬁeld tested after appropriate testing and debugging. We will
perform qualitative research studies using experts to assess the
internal validity of the diagnostic and management algorithms,
and the correctness of ﬁnal recommendations. Moreover, the
results from each solution will be compared to the current
best methods for measuring the same parameters in order to
validate the approach.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
This project is motivated by the need to enhance public
and individual health care provisioning for in-development
communities. We focused on creating the software and hard-
ware infrastructure required to facilitate the development of
low-cost health-care solutions. We are exploiting the use of
commodity mobile phones and ubiquitous computing to create
a solutions for mass distribution that (i) enhance the average
investment per patient, (ii) reduce the cost of public health
implementation, and (iii) improve end-user experience.
The solution contributes to improved health and well-being
by providing a comprehensive, ﬂexible, and low-cost mobile
health diagnosis, monitoring and management solution. We are
bound by the necessities and requirements of the Brazilian
government health programs, thus creating a solution that
is suitable for immediate implementation by that institution.
The solution complies with the existing standards such as
programming languages, libraries, and hardware interfaces and
operates using minimum computing resources. We anticipate
the following beneﬁts from this technology’ implementation:
75
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

• To provide the assistance tools to support for home-based
health programs, improving end-user experience.
• To improve the performance and scope of the health
system, by reducing the costs of health delivery programs,
thus enabling the implementation of prevention, monito-
ring and diagnosis tools by a ubiquitous, pervasive and
inexpensive technology.
• To deliver extended support for health programs to pre-
vent chronic diseases, contributing to the larger goal
of overall health is to promote the diagnosis, preven-
tion and treatment of health for the largest portion of
society possible.The results contribute to promoting an
innovation culture and economy with the development of
frontier technologies for public health improving health
care conditions.
The current implementation is limited by the needs of
the immediate problem – i.e., a solution to monitor health
conditions associated to obesity. Hence, the prototypes are
being developed for a speciﬁc purpose and have limited scope.
Nonetheless, the framework components – i.e., the Nossal
SDK and the sensor interface – are device agnostic and can
be used for general purpose. They can be re-used in future
projects that we will run in other problem domains.
Future developments include reﬁning the technology and
developing new applications for the diagnosis of other diseases
and health conditions. We intend to create the distribution
device in compact format based on the technology already
developed. Moreover, we must extend the Nossal SDK, es-
pecially concerning the capabilities of the scripting language
and support to hardware technologies. Finally, we intend
to conduct extensive tests from the technical and clinical
perspectives to ensure the portability, robustness, and accuracy.
REFERENCES
[1] PSFK,
“The
future
of
health
report
for
unicef,”
2010,
http://www.psfk.com/future-of-health; Last accessed: 20/12/2010.
[2] IBGE, “Instituto brasileiro de geograﬁa e estatistica (ibge),” 2010,
http://www.ibge.gov.br/home/; Last accessed: 20/12/2010.
[3] N. I. for Global Health, “Cell phone applications for clinical diagnostic
therapeutic and public health use by front-line health workers in devel-
oping countries,” 2010, http://www.ni.unimelb.edu.au/; Last accessed:
20/12/2010.
[4] United Nations, “Compendium of ICT Applications on Electronic Gov-
ernment – Mobile Applications on Health and Learning,” Department
of Economic and Social Affairs, Tech. Rep., 2008.
[5] ANATEL, “Agencia nacional de telecomunicacoes (anatel),” 2010,
http://www.anatel.gov.br/Portal/exibirPortalInternet.do; Last accessed:
20/12/2010.
[6] C. Rolim, C. Westphall, F. Koch, and M. Assuncao, “Towards a grid of
sensors for telemedicine,” in Proceeding of the 19th IEEE International
Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS06), ISBN 0-
7695-2517-1, 2006, pp. 485–490.
[7] C. Rolim, F. Koch, C. Westphall, J. Werner, A. Fracalossi, and G. S.
(2010), “A cloud computing solution for patient’s data collection in
health care institutions,” in Proceeding of the 2nd International Confer-
ence on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine (ETELEMED10).
ISBN 978-1-4244-5803-5, 2010, pp. 95–99.
[8] Department of Economic and Social Affairs, “Compendium of ICT
Applications on Electronic Government – Mobile Applications on Health
and Learning,” United Nations, Tech. Rep., 2007.
[9] UN Foundation, “mHealth for Development,” United Nations, Tech.
Rep., 2008.
[10] M. Laguna, J. F. J, and J. Gonzalez, “Mobile health monitoring and
smart sensors: a product line approach,” in Proceedings of the 2009
Euro American Conference on Telematics and information Systems: New
Opportunities To increase Digital Citizenship (EATIS09).
New York,
NY: ACM, 2009.
[11] F. Balagtas-Fernandez and H. Hussmann, “Applying Domain-Speciﬁc
Modeling to Mobile Health Monitoring Applications,” in Proceedings
of the 2009 Sixth international Conference on information Technology:
New Generations (ITNG09). Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society,
2009, pp. 1682–1683.
[12] A. M. A and H. Kim, “A Health-Care Service for Mobile Computing,”
in Proceedings of the 2008 Advanced Software Engineering and Its
Applications (ASEA08), no. 190–193. Washington, DC: IEEE Computer
Society, 2008.
[13] A. Jurik, J. Bolus, A. Weaver, B. Calhoun, and T. Blalock, “Mobile
health monitoring through biotelemetry,” in Proceedings of the Fourth
international Conference on Body Area Networks (ICST09), Brussesl,
Belgium, 2009, pp. 1–8.
[14] eHit,
“ehit
ehealth
business
solutions,”
2010,
http://www.ehit.ﬁ/index.jsp?pid=138; Last accessed: 20/12/2010.
76
eTELEMED 2011 : The Third International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-119-9

