Methodology of Analysis of Users’ Information Demand
through Search Keyword Analysis
Eunji Yu / KISTI
NTIS Center
Daejeon, Korea
eunjiyu08@kisti.re.kr
Wonkyun Joo / KISTI
NTIS Center
Daejeon, Korea
joo@kisti.re.kr
Abstract—The search records in a portal service which
provides diverse information services reflect users’ demand for
information and services. Therefore, the analysis of search
records in the portal service makes it possible to figure out and
measure the demand for user-wanted information or services.
This
study
suggests
a
model
which
investigates
users’
information demand for national Research and Development
(R&D) data after analyzing the National Science & Technology
Information Service (NTIS) users’ search records. The NTIS
has collected national R&D data such as government R&D
programs, projects, research outcomes and equipment. It
appears
that
that
users’
information
demand
measured
through the methodology in this study would be helpful in
developing service strategies and establishing services.
Keywords-Government
R&D;
Text
Analysis;
Topic
Modeling; Information Demand.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A portal is a service designed to provide diverse
information services to allow users to search wanted
information on a certain site without visiting every website.
Recently, the portal service has attempted to provide user-
customized
services
after
improving
the
conventional
information
search-oriented
service.
For
the
effective
promotion of this mission, it is critical to figure out what
information and services users want. For this, one of the
most commonly used methods is to analyze the keywords of
the users who use the portal. It appears that users’ keywords
are the data reflecting their demand for information and
services in a realistic manner. Therefore, keywords have
been deemed reasonable data needed to figure out users’
demand. In fact, there have been a lot of efforts to improve
information services based on the analyzed results in diverse
fields. This study aimed to analyze the keywords of the NTIS
(National Science & Technology Information Service) [1],
which has collected and provided national R&D information,
such as national R&D programs, projects, research outcomes
and equipment. In addition, the study investigates users’
demand and its trend with a goal of proposing a model which
can analyze how users’ information demand is changing.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, conventional studies on the research and keyword analysis
methods designed to measure users’ information demand are
briefly mentioned. In Section III, keywords are analyzed and
a scheme to construct a model designed to figure out users’
information demand is explained. Lastly, the contribution,
limitations of this study and future research directions are
stated.
II.
RELATED RESEARCH
2.1.
NTIS Service
NTIS provides various services for researchers, decision
makers, and governmental officers by converting national
R&D
information such
as programs, projects,
human
resources, research facilities and equipment into information
in a database by the interconnection with 17 governmental
departments
conducting
national
R&D
projects
for
improving the effectiveness of research and development
through the research life cycle from the R&D planning and
the utilization of the outcomes [2].
2.2.
Demand Measurement
With the development of information technology, it has
become
more
important
to
predict
users’ information
demand to properly respond to the fast changing trends. To
figure out the exact demand, a lot of resources are needed,
such as optimum data, which contains users’ demands and
domain experts’ knowledge. Based on these resources, in
fact, a variety of demand prediction techniques have been
used. They are divided into quantitative and qualitative
techniques. One of the most popular qualitative techniques is
a questionnaire survey using experts’ opinions. With high
accuracy, this method is widely used among businesses.
However, with this technique, it is difficult to define a scope
of experts or consumers. In terms of quantitative techniques,
there are regression analysis, time series analysis and
diffusion model-based demand prediction method [3]. When
the demand is predicted using a quantitative technique, it is
very important to decide what data would be analyzed. The
technique is used when optimum data can be secured. During
time series analysis, in particular, it is usually adopted in the
fields where data can be easily collected. Furthermore, this
method is able to model complicated causality, such as
diverse variables and time difference, and predict the future
by discovering the flow of past data and new trends.
2.3.
Keyword Analysis Service
Lately, portal services have provided a service which
measures users’ interest with the accumulated keywords and
analyzes trends. For example, Google has introduced Google
Trend [4], which shows keyword query count in an index
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-587-6
FASSI 2017 : The Third International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

format based on the keywords of the users from around the
world. Naver [5], the largest portal site in the Republic of
Korea, has also provided a keyword statistics service called
‘Naver Trend’. Since the nation’s search engine market share
is dominated by Naver (over 70%), it is appropriate to
measure
the domestic interest on keywords [6]. The
predictions by Google or Naver trend analysis have little
difference, even compared to reliable statistical data. To
examine users’ demand through analysis of keywords,
therefore, there should be studies on the subjects which meet
the conditions further specified. The information to be
analyzed should be representative or comprehensive or
should have many users, like Google and Naver. Therefore,
in this study, the search data of NTIS which has the Korean
government R&D information was selected as the analysis
target.
III.
ANALYSIS MODEL FOR USERS’ INFORMATION
DEMAND
A model proposed in this study is shown in Figure 1. The
topic analysis methodology used in the model in this study
derives a set of the keywords extracted by calculating the
importance of the terms using probability based on the TF-
IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency) [7]
values. The topic analysis differs from conventional models
in that it can prevent similar or the same keywords from
being classified into a different category when keywords are
analyzed based on the TF only. Lastly, the importance of the
keywords derived through the topic analysis is visualized,
using probability values, as shown in Figure 3.
Figure 1. Analysis model for users’ information demand
In Figure 1, the process can be explained as follows: In
Step 1, pre-treatment on the keywords about national R&D
information in the NTIS for the past year is performed.
Nouns are only extracted by reflecting users’ search query
properties, and homonyms are processed using a synonym
dictionary. Furthermore, unused terms are filtered with a
stopword dictionary. Since the unstructured data ‘texts’ are
analyzed, a pre-treatment process which handles homonyms
and disuse is very important in this methodology, even
having influence on final analysis results. In Step 3, topics
are analyzed. The result of topic analysis is shown in Figure
2.
Figure 2. Result of topic analysis
Figure 3. Visualization example of analysis result
As a result, we are able to find out users’ demand for
national R&D information and demand trends at a glance, as
shown in Figure 3.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
This study has proposed a model which can measure
users’ demand by analyzing the keywords in the NTIS and
even figure out the demand trends on national R&D
information. This research is significant in that it suggested
methodology through which users’ demand for national
R&D information, which is relatively difficult in terms of
demand prediction and its changes, can be analyzed as a field
in which a huge amount of information is stored, diverse
topics are mixed, and new research topics are continuously
produced. In future studies, however, it is necessary to verify
this methodology by analyzing actual NTIS keywords. In
addition, keywords are simpler than conventional studies in
which texts are analyzed in terms of pre-treatment. To derive
filtered results, however, a high-quality glossary and a
stopword dictionary in national R&D information must be
developed in advance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by Construction of NTIS
funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-587-6
FASSI 2017 : The Third International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

REFERENCES
[1]
National
Science
&
Technology
Information
Service,
http://www.ntis.go.kr [ accessed July 2017]
[2]
MyeongSeok Yang et al., “A study on the NTIS service,” Journal of
Korea Technology Innovation Society, 13 2013, pp.294-304.
[3]
“Methodology on Short-Term Demand Forecasting: ARIMA model,”
34, (2004), pp.68-80.
[4]
Goodle Trends, https://trends.google.com/trends/
[ accessed July
2017]
[5]
Naver
Trends,
http://datalab.naver.com/keyword/trendSearch.naver
[ accessed July 2017]
[6]
B. Cogille, J. Wolfers and E. Zitzewitz, “Using Prediction Markets to
Trak
Information
Floes:
Evidence
from Google,”
American
Economic Association, 2009, pp.1-44.
[7]
J. Han, M. Kamber, Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques, 3rd
Edition, Morgan Kaufmann Pulishers, San Francisco, 2011.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-587-6
FASSI 2017 : The Third International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

