Hashtag Trend Analysis based Travel Destination Recommendation Technique 
 
Hyunsoo Hong, Sungwook Yoon, Hyenki Kim 
Dept. of Multimedia Engineering 
Andong National University, 
Andong-City, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: bazooka92@nate.com, uvgotmail@nate.com, hkkim@anu.ac.kr (Corresponding Author)  
 
 
Abstract—The study explores a plan for the evaluation of 
travel destination preferences classified by emotional language 
by analyzing hashtags existing in image sets through the 
collection of Social Network Service, and by comparing with 
the vocabulary showing general travel satisfaction. The 
vocabulary to be evaluated was divided into regional, tourism 
target 
vocabulary, 
common 
expression 
language, 
and 
emotional expression language. This study demonstrates 
tourists’ preference for travel destinations according to 
whether collected hashtags match previously retrieved 
emotional hashtags when tourists search for specific tourist 
sites. Through this, it will be possible to analyze the changing 
travel trends of a specific travel destination and accordingly, it 
will be possible to establish a travel promotion policy. 
Keywords-hash-tag; trend; emotional; corpus anaysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Through tags, most of the social network service (SNS) 
platforms tend to emphasize key words that express their 
writing and central key words. The role of keywords, 
categories, and metadata is expanded to express self-directed 
information discovery on digital documents, which is 
expressed as an additional expression with a hashtag. This 
resulted in the users of the existing metadata transferring 
from experts to general users. Through the hashtag 
processing, the folksonomy-based voluntary classification of 
ontologies allows various processes for corpus discovery of 
big data to be arbitrarily organized and used as search and 
analysis data [1]. The frequent use of hashtags in social 
network services is common to many platforms, and it is 
possible to intuitively perform statistical analysis, such as 
association analysis or frequency analysis between hashtags. 
Using this information, the promoter can use the hashtag to 
actively promote tourism information [2].  
 In 
general, 
hashtags 
are 
usually 
expressed by 
summarizing articles written by SNS users into noun-type 
keywords, and are responsible for categorizing keywords 
searched for information sharing. 
The association analysis and the real-time pattern 
analysis of the promotion keywords are considered to be the 
means to make or strengthen tourism trends. This method of 
promoting tourist attractions is also used as a means of 
promoting tourism information to tourists. Municipal tourism 
information from municipalities with tourist attractions 
generally promote events, festivals, promotion of specific 
areas, Fam tour, and local companies, and it is intended to 
spread through the use of not only official channels but also 
platforms, such as Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, Kacao 
Story, Band, and Blogs. Typically, these platforms are made 
through social connections with users and organizations, so 
they spread even faster through related tags. 
The acquisition of information on tourist sites tends to be 
affected by the names of the sites and the keywords of the 
empirical contents posted on social platforms. The emotional 
and abstract experience language in the travel review, along 
with the name of the locality posted on social media will 
possibly affect the next trip destination of followers and 
friends exposed to the media [3]. 
However, since social media generally involves a rapid 
change in trends, it reflects the trend of recent time changes 
in real time. In general, the analysis of these trends reflects 
the tendency to change through folksonomically categorized 
tags. This reflected travel trend influences search preferences 
and strengthens or damages the emotional image along with 
the place’s name. This research aims to provide effective 
promotional strategies for tourist information on targeted 
social network service tourist sites. Some methods are 
proposed, which would help to collect retrieved hashtags and 
select destinations in accordance with travel trends changing 
in real time. The study conducted research on the effective 
use of multiple hashtags as keywords for travel through 
classification and analysis.  
The structure of this paper is as follows. Session 2 
describes related studies, Session 3 describes tourism travel 
destination preference analysis plan and Session 4 describes 
the conclusion of the paper. 
II. 
RELATED STUDIES 
Articles posted on social networks with the subject of 
travel are always being uploaded from the point of view of 
tourism consumers, and the followers of digital connections  
recognize this information to be trends. Users who are 
interested in traveling can learn information about the 
desired travel destination through hashtag searches and can  
enhance the travel trend. A technique [4] was also proposed 
where, the more the travel destination name is gathered on 
Twitter, the more it is considered to be the travel destinations 
that people are likely to visit. In addition, there was a study 
[5] that analyzed the real-time SNS trends to recommend 
travel destinations and a study [6] on techniques of analysis 
of hashtags that appear simultaneously in the SNS 
environment. 
This 
study 
suggests 
the 
level 
of 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-587-6
FASSI 2017 : The Third International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

recommendation according to the survey done on emotional 
vocabulary and the frequency analysis of existing hashtags. 
Unlike previous research, it is to grasp the preference 
through 
the 
emotional 
analysis 
through 
collective 
intelligence. 
A.  Folksonomy based Hashtag 
Folksonomy is a new classification system based on 
‘tags’ instead of ‘directory’ which is the traditional 
classification standard, and it means ‘classification by 
people’  (Folk + order + nomos). According to Wikipedia, "it 
is a newly coined word that represents the way members 
organize information together using freely chosen keywords" 
[7]. In addition to dividing into politics, economy and culture, 
for example, it is possible to gather information at a glance 
based on keywords, such as general elections and flower 
festivals. The difference between folksonomy and taxonomy, 
which is a classification system like existing book 
management, is that the members voluntarily organize unit 
information by giving meaning to individual information, 
and since the information is listed while interacting with the 
main members, it has the advantage of transmitting more 
meaningful information more accurately, and therefore it is 
in the same context as the hashtags on SNS [8]. Therefore, 
folksonomy is not as systematic compared to taxonomy. This 
is because users of the Internet are not making and learning a 
folksonomy system, but making it more convenient and 
useful. Thus, the cost of categorizing content can be reduced 
because there is no need to learn a complete classification 
scheme. Folksonomy is expandable and can change quickly 
depending on how users are categorizing through the Internet. 
Since folksonomy is the result of a collection of people's 
interaction, it is suitable for searches. The folksonomy-based 
hashtag also needs to be evaluated for changes in its trends 
and categories. 
B. Status of Use of Promotion tags to Promote Municipal 
Government 
In April 2017, the study conducted a questionnaire 
survey on the selection of promotional phrases related to 
Yeong-ju city to about 1,000 public officials who were all 
the subjects of public promotion training for Yeong-ju city. 
Figure 1 shows it processed by word cloud according to 
frequency. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Word cloud based on frequency of promotional keywords 
In the top 40 keywords for promotion, 90% of language 
bundles, 5% of common language, and 5% of emotional 
corpus showed uneven usage combinations. The name of the 
place or specific sightseeing spots were mainly surveyed. 
Figure 2 below shows the results of the frequency analysis. 
The results show that according to the classified 
keywords used by tourism promoters, there is a tendency to 
promote geographical names. (see Figure 2).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Promotion keywords based on survey 
The hashtags used on SNS are typically used as multiple 
lists, and it is common to be listed mainly through the 
placement of the area name - the general corpus - the 
common corpus. This study aims to gauge the level of travel 
satisfaction by combining names of certain areas, common 
expression language containing the contents of tourist 
experiences, and corpora of folksonomical emotional 
expressions. 
III. 
TOURISM TRAVEL DESTINATION PREFERENCE 
ANALYSIS PLAN 
A. Hashtag Classification Technique 
This study proposes an analysis method that calculates a 
tourist travel destination preference index by using SNS data 
created by tourists on travel destinations and analyzing the 
frequency of specific tourism travel destination references 
and emotional analysis. The contents of the hashtag used as a 
keyword for promotion were classified into three categories 
in this study. 
A list of words in the order of geographic, common, and 
conceptual words is shown in Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Travel purpose and travel destination classification  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-587-6
FASSI 2017 : The Third International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

They were divided into {specific region corpus, common 
expression corpus, emotional expression corpus}. In this 
classification, the study created a database with a real-time 
hashtag trend list of emotion expression corpus  (Table 1).  
TABLE I.  
CORPUS-SPECIFIC PERSONALITY REGULATION 
 
Explanation 
Example 
Specific Region 
Corpus 
Name of tourist destination, 
geographical name, tourist 
destination 
BusekTemple 
 Jeju 
Commom 
Expression 
Corpus 
Non-border language, such 
as natural environment 
Mountain,  
Sea, 
Apples 
Emotional 
Expression 
Corpus 
Abstract word representing 
travel purpose 
Healing 
Happiness 
Memories 
 
B. Analysis Plan 
The flow chart of the proposed method is shown in 
Figure 4.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Flowchart of Research 
First, collect hashtags from posted writings on SNS. 
Then, analyze morphemes through corpus analysis. Finally, 
collect related hashtags used in the same sentence. Analyze 
articles containing representative keywords related to various 
travel location names through hashtag collection of posts on 
social network services. The study uses Korean morpheme 
analyzer [9] to classify articles of social platforms, such as 
Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter into noun units and extract 
candidate keywords. Then, the term frequencies in which the 
keywords appear are listed in order. In this case, words not 
relevant to the research purpose are filtered by Stop Word. In 
addition, to identify the real-time trend area, words related to 
the region and emotional words are extracted. Finally, 
compile only the keyword related to the area and list the 
ranking. The items with highest frequency have priority. 
A name dictionary for tourism travel destination is 
constructed in advance, and based on this, SNS including a 
tourist travel destination name is extracted, and through the 
term frequency algorithm, the frequency of related keyword 
references within the SNS text of each travel destination is 
obtained. In addition, emotional words for sightseeing travel 
destinations are extracted as keywords, and a trend 
dictionary database of emotional vocabulary collected from 
posts about travel is created. 

 










 0
n
n
n
t
V
HT
F
P t

Equation (1) is the preference index (P(t)). t is a tourist 
destination, Ft is the total number of t references, Ft is the 
reference frequency of t, n is the number of posts including t, 
HT is the matching ratio of the hashtag abstract language 
words including travel-related emotional expressions, and Vn 
represents the emotional probability of t. 
C. Emotional word Evaluation 
The emotional direction can be encoded by evaluating 
positive, neutral, and negative emotional words evaluated in 
the hashtag of the image set appearing when searching for a 
specific tourist destination [10]. In the emotion analysis, 
positivity indicates the positive direction and negative 
indicates the decrease in the preference in the negative 
direction. Emotional probability is calculated by extracting 
the SNS including the tourist destination and then using the 
term frequency algorithm to find the frequency of reference 
within the SNS text for each tourism destination. Emotional 
hash tags refer to tags or keywords that can define emotional 
probability through collective intelligence. In addition, the 
emotions expressed in the text are analyzed to reflect 
positive or negative opinions about the tourist destination. In 
this process, we use open Hangul API, which is an open 
platform that can be used in research to identify positive, 
neutral, and negative emotion words in sufficient number 
through collective intelligence [11]. The final tourist 
destination preference index is calculated by using the 
frequency of comments and emotional analysis results for 
each tourist destination. By evaluating the combination of 
hashtags created, it is possible to create a preference index 
for a specific region and adjust the direction of the related 
promotion policy. 
D. Evaluation of Emotion Expressions Corpus according 
to Trend 
The study collected emotional language according to 
trend through big data analysis and created a database with 
travel related emotion expression corpus (HT). If a match is 
found in the vocabulary used, such as hashtag searched in the 
travel destination, it can be evaluated for the purpose of 
following the trend and rated as preference. Also, it can be 
used to promote local events, festivals, and specific 
information in addition to the corpus of the local name 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-587-6
FASSI 2017 : The Third International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

Alone Friendship Date Everyday Healing Friends Sea 
Vacation 
Backpacking 
Guesthouse 
Daily 
Family 
Romance Food porn Communication Weekend Camping 
Youth Walking Top-restaurant Happiness Man Memories 
Drive Parenting Itchy-feet Railroad Honeymoon I-love-
you Alone Train-travel Nature 
through collection of frequent hashtag changed in real time. 
Figure 5 is part of an example of keyword extraction for 
travel purposes in the proposed study with purpose specific 
travel destination classification technique [12].  
 
Figure 5.  Emotional language examples 
It is possible to search common corpus including 
emotional language that is investigated in real time and 
maintain it as database (HT) and use it as promotion 
keyword to improve search efficiency.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
This study analyzed the preference of travel destinations 
by analyzing the hashtag existing in the image set through 
the collection of SNS, classifying it as emotional language, 
and comparing it with the vocabulary showing general travel 
satisfaction. The vocabulary to be evaluated was divided into 
regional, tourism target vocabulary, common expression 
language, and emotional expression language. This study 
demonstrates tourists’ preference for travel destinations 
according to whether collected hashtags match previously 
retrieved emotional hashtags. Through this, it is possible to 
analyze the changing travel trend of a specific travel 
destination and accordingly, it will be possible to establish a 
travel promotion policy. The limitation of the study is that it 
is necessary to be able to react to trends quickly because it is 
necessary establish promotion policies in accordance with 
real–time trends of recommended emotion language of many 
existing travel destinations. Through practical data collection 
and analysis in the future, a study will be done on the 
conditions and phenomenon of the combination of the 
hashtag of SNS data and whether they express a 
strengthening or weakening of promotion effect. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by a grant from Seoul Accord 
Fund (IITP-2017-2011-0-00559) of Ministry of Science, ICT 
and Future Planning  (MSIP), IITP 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. H. Kim, “A Tag-based Music Recommendation Using 
UniTag Ontology,” The Korean Society Of Computer And 
Information, Journal of the Korea Society of Computer and 
Information, vol. 17(11), pp. 133-140, November 2012. 
[2] S. H. Lee, S. J. Park, M. H. Lee, and D. H. Hwang, 
“Efficiency Analysis of Multi Tag-based Web Image Search,” 
Korea Multimedia Society, pp. 260-263, 2009. 
[3] H. J. Park, “A Qualitative Exploration of Folksonomy Users' 
Tagging Behaviors,” Korean Society for Library and 
Information Science, Journal of The Korean Society for 
Library and Information Science , vol. 45(1), pp. 189-210, 
February 2011. 
[4] I. Y. Chae, M. K. Moon, M. S. Kim, and K. Y. Yu, “A 
proposal on tourist destination preference analysis based on 
emotion using SNS,” The Korean Society for Geospatial 
Information Science, pp. 131-132, 2016. 
[5] Y. S. Kim, S. H. Jun, M. Jeon, and E. Hwan, “Tourist 
destination recommendation scheme based on real-time SNS 
trend analysis”, Korea Information Science Society, pp. 291-
293, 2014. 
[6] S. J. Kim and S. D. Lee, “A Co-Occuring HashTag Analysis 
Technique In SNS EnvironMents SNS,” The Korea Contents 
Society, pp. 223-224, 2014. 
[7] Wikipidia, 
Folksonomy, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Folksonomy/, 2017.07.09. 
[8] J. M. Lee, “A Conceptual Access to the Folksonomy and Its 
Application on the Web Information Services,” The Korean 
Biblia Society For Library And Information Science, Journal 
of the Korean Biblia Society for Library and Information 
Science, vol. 18(2), pp. 141-159, December 2007. 
[9] KoNLPy, KoNLPy: Python Korean Langueage NLP, [Online]. 
Available from: http://konlpy-ko.readthedocs.io/ko/v0.4.3/ 
2017.07.09. 
[10] J. K. An and H. W. Kim, 2015, “Building a Korean Sentiment 
L exicon Using Collective Intelligence,” Journal of 
Intelligence and Information Systems, vol. 21(2), pp. 49-6, 
2015. 
[11] Open Hangul, Open Hangul API, [Online]. Available from: 
http://api.openhangul.com/, 2017.05.02 
[12] J. H. Moon, J. Rew, Y. Kim, and E. Hwang, “Purpose-based 
Travel Destination Classification Scheme Using SNS 
Hashtags,” Korea Information Science Society, pp. 121-123, 
2015. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-587-6
FASSI 2017 : The Third International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

