Development of the MedITNet Assessment Method 
Enabling Healthcare Delivery Organisation Self Assessment against IEC 80001-1 
 
Silvana Togneri MacMahon, Fergal McCaffery, Frank Keenan 
Department of Computing & Mathematics 
Dundalk Institute of Technology 
Co. Louth, Ireland 
{e-mail: silvana.macmahon, fergal.mccaffery, frank.keenan}@dkit.ie
 
 
Abstract— The provision of care to patients has moved away 
from episodic acute care due to the increase in chronic 
diseases such as diabetes. This has changed the relationship 
between the patient and the care team. The management of 
chronic disease requires the use of information technology 
including networked medical devices to facilitate the 
establishment of an ongoing relationship between the patient 
and care team. The use of networked medical devices can 
provide benefits to patients such as reduced cost of care, 
reductions in adverse events and improved care through the 
provision of accurate and up-to-date information. However, 
the placement of a medical device onto an IT network can 
lead to risks to the device. These risks may lead to incorrect 
or degraded performance of the device impacting patient 
care and negating the potential benefits of using the device. 
While, IEC 80001-1 was developed to assist Healthcare 
Delivery Organisations (HDOs) in addressing these risks, 
HDOs may struggle in implementing the requirements of the 
standard. This paper discusses the development of an 
Assessment Method which forms part of MedITNet, an 
assessment framework which can be used by HDOs to assist 
them in implementing the requirements of the standard by 
providing a flexible, consistent and repeatable approach to 
assessing the capability of their risk management processes 
relating to networked medical devices. The assessment 
highlights weaknesses in the process and can be used as a 
foundation to improve these processes.  
Keywords- Risk Management; Medical IT Networks; IEC 
80001-1; MedITNet; Assessment Framework; Assessment 
Method. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The recent downturn in the global economy has led to 
an increased focus on ensuring that a high standard of 
care is provided to the patient while reducing the cost of 
care. Interoperability of medical devices has been 
recognised for its potential to achieve this goal [1]-[3]. 
Such is the potential that governments have provided 
incentives to promote the meaningful use of interoperable 
medical devices and Health Information Technology 
(HIT), such as Electronic Health Records (EHRs) [4]-[6]. 
The use of interoperable medical devices has resulted 
from the increased prevalence of chronic conditions such 
as diabetes which has resulted in a move away from acute 
episodic care. The management of chronic disease 
requires the establishment of an ongoing relationship 
between the patient and their care team facilitated by 
carefully designed care processes and requiring the 
support of information technology [7]-[10] As a result of 
this change, the number of networked medical devices in 
use continues to increase [11]-[13]. 
A number of benefits of the use of networked medical 
are recognised. These include reducing the instances of 
adverse events improving patient safety, reducing the time 
spent by clinicians manually entering information, 
reducing 
redundant 
testing 
due 
to 
inaccessible 
information, improving patient care, reducing healthcare 
costs 
and 
ensuring 
comprehensive 
and 
secure 
management of health information [14]-[15]. These 
benefits have resulted in medical IT networks becoming a 
critical, integral component of the medical system [16]. 
However, as medical devices increasingly interface with 
other equipment and hospital information systems the 
integration complexity of the systems is increased and this 
presents additional operational risks [13][17]–[19]. 
Proprietary networks were traditionally used when a 
device was placed onto a network. However, these are 
being used less with medical devices being designed to be 
placed onto the hospitals general IT network. This means 
that medical device manufacturers no longer exercise 
control over the configuration of the network [20]. This 
lack of control can lead to risks which result in 
unintended consequences outside the control of the 
medical device manufacturer. The placement of the 
device onto the hospital network creates a new system in 
which the device has not been validated [21]. These risks 
can result in the incorrect and degraded performance of 
the medical device [22][23] compromising patient safety, 
effectiveness and the security of the IT network [24]-[26]. 
IEC 80001-1: Application of risk management for IT-
networks incorporating medical devices [27] was 
published in 2010 to address the risks associated with the 
incorporation of a medical device into an IT network. 
However, HDOs face challenges when implementing the 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-448-0
FASSI 2015 : The First International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

requirements of this standard [28]. HDOs vary in size and 
in terms of the capability of their risk management 
processes [16] [29] and the regulatory requirements of the 
region in which they provide care differ meaning that the 
implementation of the requirements of the standard will 
vary depending on the relevant regulatory requirements. 
The effective performance of risk management activities 
requires interaction between different stakeholder groups. 
An understanding of the context of the HDO is also 
required in order to manage the identified risks [17][30]. 
In addition, organisational changes are required to 
facilitate the necessary level of interaction among 
stakeholders and HDOs may be unprepared for this [13] 
due to the fact that departments within the HDO typically 
operate in silos [7]. These challenges make the 
requirements of the standard confusing and difficult to 
implement.  
These difficulties in implementing the requirements of 
the standard highlighted the need to provide HDOs with 
assistance. This research has focused on the development 
of an assessment framework which provides HDOs with a 
flexible approach to assessing the capability of their 
current risk management processes relating to medical IT 
networks. The use of the assessment framework enables 
communication among stakeholders groups allowing 
HDOs to implement the requirements of the standard.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 
II describes the development of the Assessment Method 
component of the MedITNet assessment framework while 
Section III described the stages of the Assessment while 
the validation of the resultant Assessment Method is 
discussed in Section IV. The conclusions are presented in 
Section V. 
II. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE ASSESSMENT METHOD 
The Assessment Method described in this paper is one of 
three components which make up the MedITNet 
assessment framework [31][32]. In addition to the 
Assessment Method, MedITNet contains a Process 
Reference Model (PRM) and Process Assessment Model 
(PAM). The PRM provides a description of 14 processes 
which address the requirements of IEC 80001-1. The 
processes within the PRM are described in terms of the 
purpose of the process and the outcomes achieved as a 
result of performing the process. The PAM extends the 
description of the processes by including a description of 
the base practices or activities performed during the 
process and the work products used or produced as a 
result of performing the process. The PAM also 
introduces the concept of a measurement framework or 
scale on which the capability of the process can be 
measured. The Assessment Method provides a consistent 
approach to assessing the capability of the processes in 
the PAM using questions related to each of the base 
practices. The Assessment Method can be tailored for use 
based on the context in which the HDO provides care. 
A. Development Approach 
The approach to the development of the Assessment 
Method combines the learnings from a literature review 
with knowledge of risk management practices in a HDO. 
In order to understand the risk management practices 
within the HDO, focus groups sessions were conducted 
with risk management stakeholders within a HDO. These 
sessions were performed during the Practice-Inspired 
Research phase of the Action Design Research (ADR) 
process [33] which was used in the development of the 
Assessment Method and also in the development of the 
MedITNet Assessment framework.  
B. Literature Review 
In order to inform the development of the Assessment 
Method, a review of Assessment Methods for similar 
standards was completed. This review focused on 
ISO/IEC 15504-3 [34] and Appraisal Requirements for 
CMMI [35] Domain specific including Rapid Assessment 
for Process Improvement in Software Development 
(RAPID) [36], Express process appraisal (EPA) [37], 
Adept [38], Med-Adept [39] and Tudor IT Service 
Management Process Assessment (TIPA) [40] were also 
reviewed. While this review informed the development of 
the Assessment Method, the results of the review were not 
sufficient in themselves to develop the Assessment 
Method. In order to develop the Assessment Method, the 
results of the literature review were combined with the 
knowledge gained during the Practice-Inspired Research 
conducted as part of this study. This approach allowed the 
researcher to take into account the concerns which HDOs 
express in relation to the implementation of the IEC 
80001-1 standard.  
The literature review provided an understanding of 
the challenges that HDOs encounter when incorporating a 
medical device into an IT network. Each of the identified 
challenges 
was 
considered 
when 
developing 
the 
requirements for the Assessment Method, using a similar 
approach to that used by Mc Caffery and Coleman [41] 
using criteria for Assessment Methods as outlined by 
Anacleto et al. [42]. The criteria were adapted to take into 
account the domain in which the Assessment Method will 
be used, that is, within the HDO rather than in the context 
of software development. The development of the 
requirements for the Assessment Method also took into 
account the challenges related to the management of risk 
associated with the incorporation of a medical device into 
an IT network which were highlighted as part of the 
Literature Review and Practice-Inspired Research. The 
requirements for the Assessment Method were defined as 
follows: 
 
Due to the constraints on resources within 
HDOs, the Assessment Method should be 
lightweight in its approach and facilitate self-
assessment; 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-448-0
FASSI 2015 : The First International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

 
The Assessment Method should be based on the 
processes described in the MedITNet PAM; 
 
Guidance should be provided for tailoring the 
Assessment Method for use in various scales of 
HDOs and in different geographical contexts. 
The Assessment Method should also facilitate 
assessments based on conformance with the 
standard as well as those which seek to assess 
the capability level with which risk management 
processes are being performed; 
 
The Assessment Method should support the 
identification 
of 
risks 
and 
improvement 
opportunities; 
 
The Assessment Method should not assume any 
previous knowledge of process assessment on 
the part of those conducting the assessment; 
 
The Assessment Method should facilitate the 
development of tool support in the future; 
 
The Assessment Method should be publicly 
available; 
 
The Assessment Method should encourage a 
culture 
of 
communication 
among 
various 
multidisciplinary risk management stakeholders 
including those within and external to the HDO; 
 
The Assessment Method should be validated for 
use within the HDO context. 
In addition to the literature review and, to augment the 
Practice-Inspired Research, members of the Clinical 
Engineering team (CE) and the Clinical Informatics team 
in a HDO were consulted throughout the development of 
the questions for the Assessment Method. This was an 
iterative process which is in the following section. 
C. 
Question Development 
The involvement of HDO risk management stakeholders 
in the development of the Assessment Method was 
considered to be vital as HDOs may use the Assessment 
Method in its form within the technical report and without 
reference to the PRM and PAM. The Assessment Method 
assesses against ISO/IEC 15504-2 compliant models i.e. 
the MedITNet PRM and PAM. These models describe 
processes at the level of the process purpose, outcomes, 
practices and work products. This approach to the 
development of the Assessment Method ensures its 
applicability beyond the HDO assisting with its 
development, across varying geographical and regulatory 
contexts. The development of the assessment questions, 
which form part of the Assessment Method, was 
completed in two phases.  
a) 
Question Development – Phase 1 
During phase 1 of the question development process, a 
meeting was held in the HDO with the Principal Physicist 
and a Physicist/Clinical Engineer. Both had taken part in 
the initial phase of the Practice-Inspired Research and 
were already familiar with the provisions of the standard 
and the proposed MedITNet framework. 
During the previous discussions on the current risk 
management practices within the HDO, it was agreed that 
the Risk Analysis and Evaluation Process was the main 
process relating to the identification and classification of 
risks. It was noted during the previous focus groups 
session that discussion of the Risk Analysis and 
Evaluation process lead to discussion of other aspects of 
risk management which are outside the scope of that 
process. Therefore, it was decided that questions should 
be developed for this process first.  
The development of these questions would inform the 
development of the assessment questions for the 
remaining processes. In order to develop the questions for 
the Risk Analysis and Evaluation process, each of the 
base practices was reviewed and the participants were 
asked to formulate a question that could be used to assess 
the base practice being described. To facilitate gaining an 
understanding of each of the base practices, each base 
practice was discussed in the context of the standard with 
the relevant section of the standard being consulted and 
reviewed if required. Once all participants were clear on 
the meaning of the base practice, the participants from the 
clinical engineering team were encouraged to think of a 
“real” scenario where the relevant base practice had been 
implemented in the past. The discussion of the scenario 
would focus on how the base practice was implemented in 
the context and any constraints that may have affected the 
implementation of the base practice.  
Once the practice had been discussed in context, the 
participants were encouraged to formulate questions that 
could be used to assess the degree to which the base 
practice had been implemented during the proposed 
scenario. All questions which were formulated by the 
participants were recorded and the participants were 
encouraged to rephrase the questions in order to decrease 
the number of questions used to assess each base practice. 
The Risk Analysis and Evaluation Process contains five 
base practices against which 14 questions were eventually 
formulated. This draft of questions was used in the 
validation focus group within HDO A which was 
conducted as part of the ADR process. However, the set 
of questions (presented in Table I) does not represent the 
final set of questions which were developed to be used in 
the assessment of this process.  
b) 
Question Development – Phase 2 
During the second phase of the development of the 
questions, the questions for the remaining 13 processes 
were developed. These questions were developed with the 
assistance of the Clinical Informatics Manager (CIM) of 
the HDO. The CIM is a former nurse who oversees the 
systems administration tasks of the Clinical Information 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-448-0
FASSI 2015 : The First International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

System within the Intensive Care Unit. The CIM was 
briefed on the research being carried out on the 
development of the Assessment Method and was given 
the PRM and PAM to review and was briefed on the 
requirements of the IEC 80001-1 standard. Following the 
development of the assessment questions for the 
remaining 13 processes, the CIM was also shown the 
questions developed during phase 1 for the Risk Analysis 
and Evaluation Process. The CIM was asked to review 
and reformulate the questions, as required, for this process 
based on their experience of development of the questions 
for the remaining processes. 
In general, one question was related to each of the base 
practices. However, the assessment of some base 
practices required more than one question. The CIM was 
asked to participate in the development of the questions in 
order to ensure that the questions were phrased in a way 
that could be understood by various risk management 
stakeholders within the HDO. The questions were also 
developed based closely on the base practices defined 
within the PAM to ensure that the questions could be 
applied across multiple HDO contexts and were not 
specific to the HDO in which the research was being 
carried out. 
TABLE I – SAMPLE ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS 
Base Practice 
Summary: 
Question 
Number: 
Question: 
BP.1 - Identify 
likely hazards. 
BP.1 Q.1  
How do you identify likely safety 
hazards for individual devices? 
BP.1 Q.2 
How do you analyse the system as a 
whole to identify likely safety hazards? 
BP.1 Q.3 
How do you consider the impact of the 
device on the environment? 
BP.1 Q.4 
How do you consider the impact of the 
device in terms of effectiveness? 
BP.1 Q.5 
How do you consider the impact of the 
device in terms of data and system 
security? 
BP.2 - Estimate 
associated risks. 
BP.2 Q.1 
Do you have a procedure for estimating 
risk?  
BP.2 Q.2 
What approach do you use to estimate 
the risk associated with each source of 
harm? 
BP.2 Q.3 
What information sources do you use 
to estimate the risks associated with 
each source of harm? 
BP.2 Q.4 
Are risks reviewed throughout the life 
cycle? 
BP.3 - List 
possible 
consequences of 
harm. 
BP.3 Q.1 
How do you identify possible 
consequences of harm? 
BP.4 - Record 
results of Risk 
Analysis and 
Evaluation 
activities. 
BP.4 Q.1 
How are risk management activities 
recorded? 
BP.4 Q.2 
Are instances where risk estimate is so 
low that risk reduction is not required 
recorded? 
BP.5 - 
Implement Risk 
Control 
Measures. 
BP.5 Q.1 
How are risk control measures 
implemented? 
BP.5 Q.2 
Are risk control measures implemented 
in line with risk management policy? 
III. 
STAGES OF THE ASSESSMENT METHOD 
The stages of the assessment process are illustrated in 
Figure 1 and discussed in the remainder of this section. 
 
Stage 1 – Definition of Assessment 
Scope
Stage 2 – Conduct Initial Briefing
Stage 3 – Conduct Assessment 
Interviews
Stage 4 - Generation of Findings 
Report
Stage 5 - Presentation of Findings 
Report
Stage 6 - Implementation of 
Recommendations
Stage 7 - Reassessment (Optional)
 
Figure 1.  Stages of the Assessment Process 
Participants in the assessment process include the lead 
assessor, a risk management stakeholder from within the 
HDO, who will manage the assessment on behalf of the 
Top Management (TM) of the HDO. Focus group 
interviews are used during the assessment to ensure 
communication among risk management stakeholders. An 
additional Assessor (A) may be required to assist the LA. 
In addition to sponsoring the assessment, TM will ensure 
that Risk Management Stakeholders (RMS) are available 
to participate in the assessment. The RMS will be drawn 
from a multi-disciplinary team from within the HDO and 
will include members of the IT, CE and Clinical Teams 
and any other relevant RMS as required. The RMS may 
also include participants who are external to the HDO such 
as MDMs. It should be noted that Stages 1 to 5 above 
complete the assessment activities. Stage 6 involves the 
implementation of recommendations made during the 
assessment. Where a follow-up assessment is required, 
stage 7 is performed. A reassessment can be used to 
confirm that the recommendations for improvements to the 
risk management process have improved risk management 
processes as envisaged. 
a) 
Stage 1 
The lead assessor meets with Top Management and the 
scope of the assessment is discussed. The system which is 
to be the focus of the assessment is defined and the 
context of the system is understood. At this time, the 
availability of relevant risk management stakeholders to 
participate in the assessment is confirmed. 
b) 
Stage 2 
The lead assessor meets with relevant risk management 
stakeholders who will be taking part in the assessment to 
explain the Assessment Method and give details of what 
their participation will involve. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-448-0
FASSI 2015 : The First International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

c) 
Stage 3 
The lead assessor conducts interviews based on the 
scripted questions with the relevant risk management 
participants and evaluates the responses. The assessor 
makes notes on the interviews and additional questions 
are asked if clarification is required. Relevant work 
products are reviewed at this stage. 
d) 
Stage 4 
A findings report is prepared based on the data gathered at 
stage 3. Each process is reviewed in turn and where 
relevant particular strengths and weaknesses are identified 
based on the evaluation and interview notes. Suggested 
actions to address these issues and to facilitate process 
improvement are outlined and discussed. 
e) 
Stage 5 
The findings report is presented. 
f) 
Stage 6 
Having allowed time for the contents of the report to be 
considered, the findings are discussed and a plan for 
improvement of the processes with specific improvement 
objectives is agreed. 
g) 
Stage 7 
The HDO having implemented the agreed improvements 
have the option of performing a reassessment to ensure 
that improvements have been implemented and that risk 
management processes have improved accordingly. 
IV. 
VALIDATION OF THE ASSESSMENT METHOD 
The Assessment Method was validated from the 
perspective of its utility in a specific HDO context. The 
first stage of validation consisted of performing an 
assessment of current risk management practices within a 
HDO context using the Assessment Method. This phase 
consisted of a pilot implementation of the Assessment 
Method by performing an assessment of the Risk Analysis 
and Evaluation process using the questions from the 
Assessment Method. A focus group session took place in 
the HDO with participants from various risk management 
stakeholder groups taking part. The assessment allowed 
for areas of weakness in the current risk management 
processes related to medical IT networks to be highlighted 
and addressed. A findings report was provided to the 
HDO and a follow-up focus groups session took place 
nine months later to review which recommendations had 
been implemented. A summary of the recommendations is 
provided in Table 2. This phase of the validation ensured 
that the developed questions could be understood by risk 
management stakeholders and were suited for use for the 
performance of an assessment in the specific HDO 
context. The performance of the assessment resulted in 
improvement to not only the risk analysis and evaluation 
process within the HDO, but participants also reported 
improvements in the overall risk management of medical 
IT networks within the HDO. The performance of this 
stage of the validation confirmed the utility of the 
Assessment Method in a specific HDO context. 
TABLE II - SAMPLE ASSESSMENT RESULTS SUMMARY 
BP.1 - Identify likely hazards 
Develop a standardised process for the identification of hazards, 
including the identification of hazards during the tendering process 
Maintain the same level of documentation in the recording of identified 
hazards, regardless of when in the lifecycle the hazard is identified 
Store information related to risk management in a manner which can be 
accessed as an information source for the estimation of future risks 
BP.2 - Estimate associated risks 
Establish a policy detailing risk acceptability criteria 
Formalize and document a procedure for the estimation of risk which 
stipulates which risk management stakeholders should be involved 
BP.3 - List possible consequences of harm 
Consider consequences of harm based on the risk acceptability criteria 
Consider consequences of harm based on the risk management policy 
BP.4 - Record the results of Risk Analysis and Evaluation activities 
Record Risk Analysis and evaluation activities in the risk management 
file 
Ensure accessibility of emails containing information on Risk Analysis 
and Evaluation activities 
BP.5 - Implement Risk Control Measures 
Establish a process for risk control 
Ensure that risk control measures are implemented in line with the risk 
control process 
Document risk which have been considered so low as not to require 
additional risk control measures 
In order to confirm the generalisability of the 
Assessment Method across a range of HDO contexts, the 
Assessment Method was also validated through expert 
review by members of the standards community from the  
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Sub-
Committee 62A and the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) Technical Committee 215 Joint 
Working Group 7 (JWG7). Members of this group are 
drawn from risk management stakeholders within HDOs, 
medical device manufacturers and providers of other IT 
technology. They are recognised as experts in their field 
and represent their country in this capacity. The focus of 
this stage of the validation is to ensure that the 
Assessment Method can be used across multiple HDO 
contexts, regardless of the regulatory environment in 
which the HDO operates. During this phase of the 
validation the Assessment Method was circulated to 
members of JWG7 for review. The Assessment Method 
was circulated with the MedITNet PRM and PAM and 
members were invited to make comments on any aspect 
of these components of MedITNet. The review by 
members of this group resulted in a number of changes to 
the Assessment Method including the provision of sample 
templates which could be used by HDOs during the 
performance of an assessment and in the preparation of 
the findings report for circulation to Top Management of 
the HDO. In addition to the review by members of JWG7, 
a focus group session was conducted with a selection of 
experts from the group. These experts were asked to 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-448-0
FASSI 2015 : The First International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

comment on various aspects of the overall MedITNet 
framework. During this session experts reported that the 
use of the Assessment Method and specifically the 
assessment questions resulted in risk management 
stakeholders having a greater understanding of the 
requirements of the IEC 80001-1 standard. The experts 
also noted that the definition of the requirements of the 
standard at the level of processes in the PAM enabled the 
assessment questions to be tailored to take into account of 
the context in which the HDOs provide care. This was  
Each of these phases was performed iteratively as part 
of the ADR process and changes suggested by each phase 
of the validation were incorporated into the next version of 
the Assessment Method and the overall MedITNet 
framework.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
While IEC 80001-1 takes steps to address the risks 
associated with the placement of a medical device onto an 
IT network, HDOs may face challenges in understanding 
and implementing the requirements of the standard. The 
MedITNet framework has been developed in order to 
assist HDOs in addressing these challenges. The 
Assessment Method provides a consistent, repeatable and 
tailorable approach to the assessment of the capability of 
risk management processes related to the management of 
medical IT networks. An assessment of these processes 
can highlight weaknesses therein and can be used as a 
foundation for an improvement of risk management 
processes. Effective risk management of medical IT 
networks ensures that the potential benefits of networked 
medical devices are realised while ensuring the safety of 
the patient is protected, the effectiveness of the device is 
assured and the security of the data and system are 
preserved. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Science Foundation 
Ireland Principal Investigator Programme, grant number 
08/IN.1/I2030 (the funding of this project was awarded by 
Science Foundation Ireland under a co-funding initiative 
by the Irish Government and European Regional 
Development Fund),and by Lero - the Irish Software 
Research Centre (http://www.lero.ie) grant 10/CE/I1855 & 
13/RC/20194. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
West Health Institute, "The Value of Medical Device 
Interoperability - Improving patient care with more than $30 
billion in annual health care savings," 2013. 
[2] 
A. Hamilton, et al., "Summary of the August 2011 Symposium on 
the Role and Future of Health Information Technology in an Era 
of Health Care Transformation," The George Washington 
University, 2011. 
[3] 
I. Lee, et al., "High-confidence medical device software and 
systems," Computer, vol. 39, 2006, pp. 33-38,. 
[4] 
N. Milenkovich, March 15, 2013, [Accessed 14/07/2015]. OCR 
issues 
new 
HITECH 
regulations 
Available: 
http://drugtopics.modernmedicine.com/drug-topics/news/drug-
topics/health-system-news/ocr-issues-new-hitech-regulations 
[5] 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, "42 CFR Parts 412, 
413, 422. Medicare and Medicaid Programs; Electronic Health 
Record Incentive Program; Final Rule ", Health and Human 
Services Ed., ed, 2010. 
[6] 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 10/04/2013, 
[Accessed 14/07/2015]. EHR Incentive Programs. Available: 
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-
Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/index.html?redirect
=/ehrincentiveprograms 
[7] 
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the Quality Chasm: A 
New 
Health 
System 
for 
the 
21st 
Century. 
Available: 
https://download.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=10027 
[8] 
E. H. Wagner, "The role of patient care teams in chronic disease 
management," BMJ: British medical journal, vol. 320, 2000, p. 
569. 
[9] 
E. H. Wagner, B. T. Austin, C. Davis, M. Hindmarsh, J. Schaefer, 
and A. Bonomi, "Improving chronic illness care: translating 
evidence into action," Health affairs, vol. 20, 2001, pp. 64-78.  
[10] C. Hoffman and D. Rice, "Chronic care in America: A 21st 
century challenge," Princeton, NJ: The Robert Wood Johnson 
Foundation, 1996. 
[11] J. Comstock. 2013,. [Accessed 14/07/2015] 14M networked 
medical devices to ship by 2018.  
Available: 
http://mobihealthnews.com/28295/14m-networked-
medical-devices-to-ship-by-2018/ 
[12] Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), "Health IT 
for Improved Chronic Disease Management," Department of 
Health and Human Services, Ed., ed, 2013. 
[13] M. Castañeda, "Connecting devices and data on the healthcare 
network," Biomedical Instrumentation & Technology, vol. 44, 
2010, pp. 18-25. 
[14] J. Goldman and S. Whitehead, "Advancing the Adoption of 
Medical Device "Plug-and-Play" Interoperability to Improve 
Patient Safety and Healthcare Efficiency," 2010. 
[15] K. K. Venkatasubramanian, S. K. S. Gupta, R. P. Jetley, and P. L. 
Jones, "Interoperable Medical Devices - Communication Security 
Issues," IEEE Pulse, vol. Sept/Oct 2010, 2010. 
[16] R. Hampton and R. Schrenker, "What Does IEC 80001-1 Mean to 
You?," 24x7 - Technology and Service Solutions for Biomeds, 
2011. 
[17] S. 
R. 
Rakitin, 
"Networked 
Medical 
Devices: 
Essential 
Collaboration for Improved Safety," AAMI.org, 2009. 
[18] S. Loughlin and J. S. Williams, "The top 10 medical device 
challenges," Biomedical Instrumentation & Technology, vol. 45 
2011, pp. 98-104. 
[19] T. Mehta and C. Mah, "Auto-Provisioning of Biomedical Devices 
on a Converged IP Network," Biomedical Instrumentation & 
Technology, vol. 43, 2009, pp. 463-467. 
[20] T. Gee. 2008. [Accessed 14/07/2015] Medical Device Networks 
Trouble 
Industry. 
Available: 
http://medicalconnectivity.com/2008/12/18/medical-device-
networks-trouble-industry/ 
[21] S. Eagles, "An Introduction to IEC 80001: Aiming for Patient 
Safety in the Networked Healthcare Environment," IT Horizons, 
vol. 2008, 2008. 
[22] National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center, 
"Attack Surface: Healthcare and Public Health Sector," ed, 2012. 
[23] D. Talbot. 2012, [Accessed 14/07/2015] Computer Viruses Are 
"Rampant" on Medical Devices in Hospitals. MIT Technology 
Review. 
Available: 
http://www.technologyreview.com/news/429616/computer-
viruses-are-rampant-on-medical-devices-in-hospitals/ 
[24] J. Graham and C. Dizikes, "Baby's death spotlights safety risks 
linked to computerized systems," in Chicago Tribune, ed, 2011. 
[25] J. Shuren, "Health Information Technology (HIT) Policy 
Committee Adoption/Certification Workgroup - Testimony of 
Jeffrey Shuren, Director of FDA's Centre for Devices and 
Radiological Health," ONC, Ed., ed, 2010. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-448-0
FASSI 2015 : The First International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

[26] S. Eagles, "IEC 80001: An Introduction," 80001-1 Experts,, 
Presentation from 19th Annual NCBA ConferenceSeptember 13, 
2012. 
[27] IEC, "IEC 80001-1 - Application of Risk Management for IT-
Networks incorporating Medical  Devices - Part 1: Roles, 
responsibilities and activities," 
ed. 
Geneva, 
Switzerland: 
International Electrotechnical Commission, 2010. 
[28] F. J. Hegarty, S. T. MacMahon, P. Byrne, and F. McCaffery, 
"Assessing a Hospital's Medical IT Network Risk Management 
Practice 
with 
80001-1," 
Biomedical 
Instrumentation 
& 
Technology, vol. 48, 2014, pp. 64-71. 
[29] T. Cooper and K. Fuchs, "The Wireless Challenge - Technology 
Risk 
Assessment 
In 
Healthcare 
Facilities," 
Biomedical 
Instruments and Technology, vol. May/June 2013, 2013. 
[30] M. Janssen and R. Schrenker, "Guidelines From 80001: 
Maintaining a Medical IT Network," Biomedical Instrumentation 
& Technology, vol. 45, 2011, pp. 295-299, 2011/07/01. 
[31] S. T. MacMahon, F. McCaffery, S. Eagles, F. Keenan, M. 
Lepmets, and A. Renault, "Development of a Process Assessment 
Model for assessing Medical IT Networks against IEC 80001-1," 
presented at the Software Process Improvement and Capability 
Determination (SPICE) 2012, Mallorca, Spain, 2012. 
[32] S. T. MacMahon, F. McCaffery, and F. Keenan, "Transforming 
Requirements of IEC 80001-1 into an ISO/IEC 15504-2 
Compliant Process Reference Model and Process Assessment 
Model," presented at the European Systems and Software Process 
Improvement and Innovation Conference, Dundalk, Co Louth, 
Ireland, 2013. 
[33] M. Sein, O. Henfridsson, S. Purao, M. Rossi, and R. Lindgren, 
"Action design research," 2011. 
[34] ISO/IEC, "ISO/IEC 15504-3:2004 Information technology -- 
Process assessment -- Part 3: Guidance on performing an 
assessment," ed. Geneva, Switzerland, 2004. 
[35] M. Busby, et al., "Appraisal Requirements for CMMI (Registered 
Trademark) Version 1.3 (ARC, V1. 3)," DTIC Document2011. 
[36] T. P. Rout, A. Tuffley, B. Cahill, and B. Hodgen, "The rapid 
assessment of software process capability," in First International 
Conference on Software Process Improvement and Capability 
Determination, 2000, pp. 47-56. 
[37] F. Wilkie, D. McFall, and F. Mc Caffery, "The Express Process 
Appraisal Method," 2005. 
[38] F. Mc Caffery, P. S. Taylor, and G. Coleman, "Adept: A unified 
Assessment Method for small software companies," Software, 
IEEE, vol. 24, 2007, pp. 24-31. 
[39] F. McCaffery and V. Casey, "Med-Adept: A Lightweight 
Assessment Method for the Irish Medical Device Software 
Industry," presented at the EuroSPI, Grenoble France, 2010. 
[40] B. Barafort, et al., ITSM Process Assessment Supporting ITIL : 
Using TIPA to Assess and Improve your Processes with ISO 
15504 and Prepare for ISO 20000 Certification vol. 217. 
Zaltbommel, Netherlands: Van Haren, 2009. 
[41] F. Mc Caffery and G. Coleman, "The development of a low-
overhead Assessment Method for Irish software SMEs," Journal 
of Information Technology Management (JITM), 2007. 
[42] A. Anacleto, C. G. von Wangenheim, C. F. Salviano, and R. Savi, 
"Experiences gained from applying ISO/IEC 15504 to small 
software companies in Brazil," in 4th International SPICE 
Conference on Process Assessment and Improvement, Lisbon, 
Portugal, 2004, pp. 33-37. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-448-0
FASSI 2015 : The First International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

