Integration of Data Providing and Analyzing System
and its Application to Higher Education Institutional Data
Masaaki Ida
National Institution for Academic Degrees and
Quality Enhancement of Higher Education
Tokyo, Japan 187–8587
Email: ida@niad.ac.jp
Abstract—There exist various kinds of data providing and an-
alyzing service on Web sites. Japanese College and University
Portraits is an information system consisting of databases with
Web services for providing information concerning various ac-
tivities undertaken by universities and junior colleges, covering
national, prefectural, municipal, and private institutions. This
paper describes the outline of this integrated system and related
analysis systems. Especially, we focus on data providing service in
several ways including research results conducted by the research
department of National Institution for Academic Degrees and
Quality Enhancement of Higher Education. A further advanced
and integrated data analysis and data visualization system can be
developed by using Web APIs with various multivariate analysis
methods. Canonical correlation analysis is one of the basic and
requisite data analysis and visualization skills for data analysts
in this Big Data era. Therefore, because data is received through
Web APIs, the development of an integrated data analysis system
equipped with canonical correlation analysis is desirable. This
article also presents a work-in-progress result of the canonical
correlation analysis for higher education institutional data.
Keywords–Higher education institutional data; data providing;
Web API; visualization.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Education-related databases are important for college selec-
tions or various quality assurance activities, such as reporting
and data analysis in higher education institution. Therefore,
data service of higher education institutional data is desired to
be developed. However, Institutional data of universities, e.g.,
the number of various kinds of academic staffs, are difﬁcult
to analyze because they were not necessarily standardized and
integrated in each university itself or even in national level
education-related agencies. Some advanced higher education
integrated data systems are progressively developing. The most
famous and useful system is the Integrated Postsecondary Edu-
cation Data System [1], which has been developed by National
Center for Education Statistics (NCES) in the United States.
The system collects and analyzes basic institution information
about universities and colleges in the U.S. The system stan-
dardizes and accumulates this information nationwide. This
system comprehensively holds general and basic institution
data. Moreover, this system is equipped with data analysis
tools to conduct university comparative analysis. There exist
other web-based university database systems in the U.S. and
other countries. These databases are well-organized and com-
prehensive systems with easy Web-based operation on their
Web sites. However, in order to cooperate or integrate with
other information systems, e.g., in-house database developed
in individual institutions, or external database services, more
improved systems are expected to be equipped with various
Web service functions and standardized data sets. In this paper,
in Section II, the integration of data providing and analyzing
system in Japan is described. In Section III, Web API and
data analysis is described. As an example of data analysis,
canonical correlation analysis is introduced with a numerical
example.
II.
INTEGRATION OF DATA PROVIDING AND ANALYZING
SYSTEM
A. Japanese college and university portraits
In Japan, Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
and Technology collects basic information about higher educa-
tion institutions in Japan. This law-based basic statistical data
includes yearly information of higher education institutions,
such as the number of faculties or staffs, the number of enrolled
students by grade (undergraduate, graduate, foreign student),
the number of graduates by subsequent course, the number
of those who are employed after graduation by each industry
and by occupation, faculties, facilities, and ﬁnancial data.
However, these are published as statistical data, so that detailed
information of individual universities are not published.
Japanese College and University Portraits is an information
system consisting of database with Web services for provid-
ing information concerning various activities undertaken by
universities and junior colleges, covering national, prefectural,
municipal, and private institutions [2]. System operation started
in March 2015. The system is managed by National Institution
for Academic Degrees and Quality Enhancement of Higher
Education, Japan (NIAD-QE) associated with Promotion and
Mutual Aid Corporation for Private Schools of Japan.
The purposes of the system are as follows
•
Information Dissemination: The Portrait Website will
be used not only by those who intend to participate in
higher education as students, but also by stakeholders
in various areas of society, such as government and
industry. The database is also expected to be an in-
formation source contributing to improve international
society’s understanding of higher education institu-
tions in Japan.
•
Monitor and Analysis of Institution Activities: The
system is expected to be used by higher education
institutions to monitor and analyze the status of their
own educational activities for internal quality assur-
ance and enhancement.
•
Workload Reduction: Collection and publication of
fundamental and standardized data in the database sys-
tem will assist higher education institutions when they
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-666-8
FASSI 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

respond to various surveys and external evaluation.
Workload reduction of institutions based on accurate
data are expected to be accomplished by the system.
Data items stored in the system are in multiple levels,
Institution level and faculty level, for example, general infor-
mation of higher education institution, objectives of education
and research, characteristics, education system organization,
campus, university evaluation, student support, policies of
education, academic program, admission, faculty, enrollment,
scholarship, completion, post graduate pathways, employment,
research activities, international activity, student life, ﬁnancial
information and so on.
The database system consists of three databases, three
circles in Figure 1, with basic organization data located in
the common part of circles, which is regarded as university
data warehouse. These database are classiﬁed in the following
three categories:
•
University common publication data: published com-
mon education data over national, prefectural, private
institution,
•
University basic data: corresponding to school basic
survey,
•
National university evaluation data: used for national
university evaluation.
Figure 1. Japanese College and University Portraits.
Each data is registered by data-sheet submission from higher
education institutions. The stored data are used for publication
and provided for data utilization for the sake of society and
universities.
B. Data providing service
Data providing and utilization services are explained in the
following ways. These functions are partially equipped in the
working system. Data analysis tools for data utilization are
now being developed by research department of NIAD-QE.
1) Data providing via Website: The system has search
(retrieval) functions, (1) simple search by university name,
faculty name and location, (2) detailed search, e.g., by entrance
examination, student ﬁnancial aid and so on, and (3) keyword
search. Adding to searching and utilizing the data which are
ordinary in table format in Web pages, we can download
data tables, and utilize them in spreadsheet software in user
side. Then it is possible to extract necessary data for analysis,
and to conduct data analysis by using personal analysis tools
or personal Business Intelligence (BI) tools on user’s local
environment, which are popular tools in these days.
2) Data providing via BI tool: Highly-detailed and ﬂexible
data analysis can be attained by Structured Query Language
(SQL). However, expert ability is required for such advanced
treatment of database. In case that we intend to try advanced
data analysis without expert ability, full-scale BI tools are
candidates of effective analysis with great potential, which is
equipped in the Portrait system. BI tool makes it possible for
system registered users to utilize the database more conve-
niently with some useful BI functions, such as ﬁlter, formula,
chart and drill-down functions. We can generate various kinds
of easily understandable data tables and charts, and also
generate data analysis report ﬁle in PDF format or spread sheet
format. This BI tool of the system was used to generate data
analysis reports in National University Corporation Evaluation
in Japan.
3) Data providing via Web-based analysis system: Data
analysis and data visualization tool are being developed by
research department of NIAD-QE. Figure 2 shows an example
of comparative analysis of universities. We refer European
university comparison and visualization systems, U-Map [3]
and U-Multirank [4]. They are new higher education trans-
parency tools for multi-dimensional mapping and ranking [5].
In this ﬁgure, data table includes selected eight indicators in
columns for selected 13 universities in rows for corresponding
ﬁscal year. Values of indicators are transformed into relative
classes or groups (e.g., four level: quantile point), which are
expressed by the number of star marks. Chart in lower side
shows feature of three universities selected from universities
in this data table. Fan-shaped parts of the charts, surrounding
center circle, correspond to the amount of indicators. Relative
analysis by class or group is helpful for understanding whole
aspect of higher education institutions with multiple features.
4) Data system integration: Data providing via Web API:
Web API is a Web Application Programming Interface for
performing computer processing via Internet. This mecha-
nism makes it possible for registered users to access external
database through the internet. The advantages to use Web API
are to obtain data when necessary, to obtain only necessary
part of data by query (search), to obtain standardized and latest
data that might be updated recently, and to have possibility to
provide more useful and valuable information combining with
other multiple external data sources provided by other Web
APIs such as ofﬁcial government statistics or location informa-
tion Web service. Moreover, this type of Web services has an
effect for developing application modules with independency,
which leads to improvement of maintenance and redesign of
database application system.
Research department of NIAD-QE is developing various
kinds of Web APIs and their applications which are suitable for
data analysis and data dissemination. Web APIs for university
basic survey (for national and prefectural) and university ﬁnan-
cial data have being developed. Output form can be selected
in JSON or XML formats. University basic survey sheets
consist of detailed university information cards in university
level or department level, e.g., institutional structure, faculty
member and staff (sheet 7: number of students, number of
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-666-8
FASSI 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

Figure 2. Data Analysis and ata Visualization Tool.
academic staffs), student (sheet 8: number of students of each
department), graduate student (sheet 9), foreign student (sheet
11), facility (sheet 20), graduation and employment (sheet
30) and so on. This type of detailed university Web API
development is early attempt in higher education ﬁeld.
The followings are examples retrieved by survey year and
institution code of Japanese universities. Figure 3 (left) shows
an example of Web API output concerning applicant and
enrollment ﬁgures by undergraduate school in faculty level.
The elements in Japanese language mean university name,
faculty name, and the number of undergraduate students in
every ﬁscal year. Figure 3 (right) shows an example of output
of the Web API concerning faculty members from survey in
university level.
API key is issued for registered user to access and use
API functions for security. Retrieved data is provided through
cryptographic protocol that provides communication security
over computer network.
III.
WEB API AND DATA ANALYSIS
A. Analysis and visualization process
Generally, there exist various kinds of data analysis ser-
vices on Web sites. Further complex and advanced data anal-
ysis tool and data visualization applications can be developed
by data integration mechanism using Web API functions.
By utilizing Web APIs, we can develop ﬂexible integrated
Web applications with data tables and charts generation, and
data analysis system. With ﬂexibilities of API mechanism
more useful and user-friendly data visualization system can
be developed.
The analysis and visualization process is as follows:
Figure 3. Web API of university basic information (JSON format).
1)
Database query by university name or department
name with various indicators is submitted to uni-
versity information Web API site with API key for
registered user, which is also developed by research
department of NIAD-QE.
2)
Data in JSON or XML format are received by Web
programming on server side or client side.
3)
Analysis and visualization of various indicators with
effective graphic libraries are conducted, and com-
parison of multiple indicators with sorting functions
on data tables or charts is made.
4)
Moreover, analysis system can be programmed to
combine with other databases using API functions,
e.g., various ofﬁcial statistical data API or map API
on outer Web service sites. These Web service combi-
nation, or mash up programing, can be easily applied
using Web API functions.
B. Canonical correlation analysis
Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) is a core analysis
method in multivariate analysis ﬁeld. CCA is a generalized
method of corresponding analysis that is useful for question-
naire analysis [6]–[8]. Two multiple variable data matrices, X
and Y are expressed with n × p and n × q real data matrices,
XR and YR. We deﬁne the following matrices for data average
and deviation:
Qn = In − (1/n)1n1T
n
X = QnXR,
Y = QnYR
where 1n means (1, 1, · · · , 1)T, and Qn means averaging.
Calculating correlation matrices, RXX, RY Y , RXY , for
X, Y , then, the result of canonical correlation analysis is the
singular value and corresponding singular vectors, µ with a
and b satisfy the following matrix equation:
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-666-8
FASSI 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

(
RXX
RXY
RY X
RY Y
) (
a
b
)
= (1 + µ)
(
RXX
O
O
RY Y
) (
a
b
)
We call the singular value µ as the ﬁrst canonical correlation
coefﬁcient µ1 for maximum value, and µ2 for second one, and
µ3 for third one and so on. And its corresponding vectors, ai
and bi for µi, are called score vectors. Similarly, we calculate
the vectors f i and gi as follows;
f i = Xai
(1)
gi = Y bi
(2)
In this paper, we consider µi, ai, bi, f i, gi for understanding
the arrangement of each element and tendency of whole data
set.
C. Numerical example
As an example of canonical correlation analysis with Web
API, we show the result of analysis for university ﬁnancial
data (work in progress); In this case, the number of items for
X expressing incomes is four (management expenses grant,
tuition, research grant, donation), and the number of items for
Y expressing expenses is three (general management expenses,
research expenses, education expenses). Figure 4 shows the
result of canonical correlation analysis in two dimensions;
(a1, a2) and (b1, b2) for µ1, µ2. For f i, gi, Figure 5 show
the arrangement of each university incomes and expenses in
two dimensions.
Figure 4. Example of canonical correlation analysis (1).
Figure 4 shows visually summarized information in two
dimensions, which are high accumulation contribution of
eigenvalues. We can grasp the global feature of ﬁnancial
situations of universities by this arrangement. Figure 5 shows
the proximity between universities (university ID) and the
tendency of whole data set.
Figure 5. Example of canonical correlation analysis (2).
In this way, we can take a global view of the clustering.
various comprehensive considerations on overall of accumu-
lated data can be taken by executing the analysis. Various
comprehensive considerations on overall accumulated data can
be taken by executing the analysis. Those abilities will deepen
the global understanding on the relations of accumulated
multiple information, and which have promising possibility
leads to new knowledge discovery.
IV.
CONCLUSION
This paper describes the outline of the integrated system,
Japanese College and University Portraits and related data
analysis systems. Especially, we focus on several data provid-
ing services and utilization of Web API function. This type of
university Web API development is early attempt in higher
education ﬁeld. In order to handle more general university
data, coordination of differences between the data deﬁnition is
needed for useful comparison. We hope that our development
and attempt will play an important role as an infrastructure for
data utilization and data analysis in higher education quality
assurance.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System, IPEDS”, URL;
nces.ed.gov/ipeds [accessed: 2018-07-20].
[2]
“Japanese
College
and
University
Portraits”,
URL;
top.univ-
info.niad.ac.jp [accessed: 2018-07-20]
[3]
“U-Map”, URL; http://www.u-map.eu [accessed: 2018-07-20].
[4]
“U-Multirank”, URL; http://www.umultirank.org [accessed: 2018-07-20].
[5]
D.
F.
Westerheijden,
“Multi-dimensional
Mapping
and
Ranking
New
Higher
Education
Transparency
Tools”,
NIAD-UE
University Quality Assurance Forum 2014 Keynote speech, URL;
www.niad.ac.jp/n kenkyukai/no13 2014forum keynote.pdf
[accessed:
2018-07-20].
[6]
B. Thompson, Canonical Correlation Analysis: Uses and Interpretation,
Sage Publications, 1985.
[7]
J. P. Benzecri, Correspondence Analysis Handbook, Marcel Dekker,
1992.
[8]
M. Greenacre, Correspondence Analysis in Practice, Second Edition,
Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2007.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-666-8
FASSI 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

