Case Study: Becoming a Medical Device Software Supplier  
 
Kitija Trektere, Fergal McCaffery 
Regulated Software Research Centre & Lero, 
Dundalk Institute of Technology 
Dundalk, Co.Louth, Ireland 
e-mail: {kitija.trektere, fergal.mccaffery}@dkit.ie 
Garret Coady, Matteo Gubellini 
BlueBridge Technologies 
3015 Lake Drive, Citywest, Dublin 24, Ireland 
e-mail: {garretcoady, 
matteogubellini}@bluebridgetech.com 
 
Abstract—Today many software development companies are 
restructuring their business model to enter the medical device 
domain. The reason for this change is that significant 
opportunities exist within the healthcare industry and 
particularly in relation to the usage of software within this 
domain. However, in order to become either a medical device 
software supplier or manufacturer there are challenges to 
overcome. This paper describes a case study of an Irish 
software development company that in 2014 decided to change 
their business model to enable them to become a medical 
device software supplier. The paper provides an account of 
their journey from being an plan-driven automotive software 
supplier to securing software development contracts from 
leading medical device manufacturers. This involved them 
having 
to 
re-design 
and 
re-structure 
their 
software 
development approach to meet both the demands of medical 
device standards and medical device multinational third party 
software selection criteria. 
Keywords-MDevSPICE® framework; software development 
process; medical device software; medical device software 
development; agile practices; agile software development 
practices. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 2015, the medical device (MD) global market was 
“valued at $228 billion, up from $164 in 2010 and projected 
to reach $440 billion by 2018” “at approximately 4.4% 
compound annual growth rate per year” [1]. The leaders in 
the MD market are the US having 38% of the global value of 
this market followed by China with a market valued at $48 
billion with western Europe having almost 25% of the global 
market [1]. However, to become a MD supplier for the 
industry takes significant time and resources as there are 
many obstacles that need to be overcome. 
This paper presents a case study of an Irish software 
development company BlueBridge Technologies (BBT). 
Their journey started in 2014 when BBT decided to embark 
upon becoming a MD software supplier and at that moment 
they had no regulatory requirements in place, in fact a key 
question they asked at that stage was “what are the 
standards we need to implement and in what order?”. This 
paper presents how with the help of academic MD 
researchers’ regulations were put in place through 
undergoing an MDevSPICE® assessment and outlining the 
challenges that might arise in the near future. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II, 
describes the background of BBT and the current situation in 
the MD industry. Section III, outlines the challenges BBT 
faced in order to become a MD software supplier. Section 
IV, describes the approaches followed to become a MD 
software supplier. Section V, outlines given that BBT have 
satisfied the regulations they wish to further refine and 
improve their software development processes to make them 
more efficient. Section VI, describes first steps taken in order 
to improve their current lifecycle process. Finally, Section 
VII provides a conclusion and future work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND OF THE COMPANY  
BTT was founded in 2006 – initially formed upon the 
closure of the Irish based development operations of Magna 
Automotive, and today employs 19 people with 8 of them 
working as software developers. BBT are currently working 
on 7 different projects with 5 of them involving developing 
the software component for another organization’s product. 
Their current customers include pharmaceutical and 
multinational MD companies. 
The main reason why software development companies 
wish to enter the MD domain is because of the expansion of 
the MD industry in the past few years therefore providing 
many opportunities for others to enter into this industry. The 
MD industry is largely research and development driven.  
Software increasingly performs an essential role in the 
provision of healthcare services [2]. This is particularly 
reflected in the importance that software now plays in 
medical diagnoses and treatment [3]. The level of software 
functionality in MDs and the complexity of that software 
has substantially increased [4]. The MD regulatory 
environment has been extended to include more focus on 
software. For example, the latest amendment to the Medical 
Device Directive [5] recognizes that standalone software 
can be classified as a MD in its own right. Consequently, a 
significantly increased proportion of software applications 
will now be classified as MDs and must be developed in a 
regulatory compliant manner [6]. Medical records are 
increasingly being stored in electronic form. The use of 
Electronic Medical Record (EMR) systems in the USA by 
physicians increased from 18.2% in 2001 to 48.3% in 2010 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-497-8
FASSI 2016 : The Second International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

[7]. The adoption of EMR systems could produce efficiency 
and safety savings of $81 billion annually and improve 
prevention of medical diseases [8]. Use of Mobile devices in 
health care is increasing. “By 2017, mobile technology will 
be a key enabler of healthcare delivery reaching every 
corner of the globe” [9]. 
III. 
CHALLENGES BBT NEEDED TO OVERCOME TO 
BECOME A MD SOFTWARE SUPPLIER 
To become a MD software supplier there were 
regulations and standards that needed to be adhered to. This 
required processes to be defined in accordance with these 
standards and regulations and then for objective evidence to 
be obtained demonstrating the implementation of the 
defined processes. For BBT, the starting point was to gain 
an understanding of three main standards. The paragraph 
below briefly outlines the standards that BBT familiarized 
themselves with before starting to define their MD software 
development processes. 
A. ISO 13485:2006 
 “This International Standard specifies requirements for 
a quality management system that can be used by an 
organization for the design and development, production, 
installation and servicing of medical devices, and the 
design, development, and provision of related services” 
[11].  
ISO 13485 is in practice necessary for any MD 
company. It details the requirements for the Quality 
Management System (QMS) for MDs.  
B. IEC 62304 
“This standard defines the life cycle requirements for 
Medical Device Software. The set of processes, activities, 
and tasks described in this standard establishes a common 
framework for medical device software life cycle processes” 
[10]. 
IEC 62304 covers the development process for medical 
device software. This standard is harmonised with the 
requirements of ISO 13485 and therefore complements it by 
adding the specifics required for MD software. 
However, IEC 62304 interfaces with ISO 13485 in two 
areas: software inputs and system integration. The software 
inputs are generated from the system (or subsystem) level 
requirements, while IEC 62304 explicitly does not cover 
system level activities, in particular design validation. 
C. ISO 14971:2009 
“This International Standard was developed specifically 
for medical device/system manufacturers using established 
principles of risk management. For other manufacturers, 
e.g., in other healthcare industries, this International 
Standard could be used as informative guidance in 
developing and maintaining a risk management system and 
process”[12]. “This International Standard deals with 
processes for managing risks, primarily to the patient, but 
also to the operator, other persons, other equipment and the 
environment” [12]. 
The area of regulatory standards and the recording of 
documentation associated with their implementation was 
new to BBT. Therefore, BBT engaged with both standards 
consultants and an academic research group (the RSRC, our 
research centre) specializing in MD software development 
research. This assisted BBT to fast-track the initial steps to 
becoming a MD software supplier. 
IV. 
APPROACH TO BECOME A MD SOFTWARE COMPANY 
When BBT reached out to the RSRC, we knew that this 
was an ideal company to become involved with in regards to 
performing research into how software companies could 
make the transition to becoming MD software suppliers. 
A. Embark on MDevSpice® assessment 
First of all, it was essential to understand BBT’s current 
position in regards to their software development processes. 
We decided to perform an MDevSPICE® [13] assessment. 
MDevSPICE® is a framework assessment model where all 
MD software standards and processes are brought together 
into one place with software engineering best practices. 
MDevSPICE® was developed in the RSRC. Then, this 
framework assessment model was utilized in BBT to assess 
the current situation. 
Below we describe what happened next in regards to both 
the assessment and BBT’s subsequent journey to becoming a 
MD software supplier. As BBT were used to developing in a 
plan-driven manner and this would enable them to develop 
medical device software in compliance with the V-model we 
did not investigate agile practices at this stage. 
 
A) Assessment conducted: Given that MDevSPICE® 
consists of 23 processes we selected the most appropriate 10 
processes from the MDevSPICE® model to assess BBT 
against (see Table I). 
 
It was agreed upon discussion with BBT that only the 
most foundational processes would be assessed. Therefore, 
the following 10 out of the 23 MDevSPICE® processes 
were chosen to be assessed over two onsite days at BBT.  
The 10 processes chosen for the assessment were selected 
because they provided coverage of IEC 62304 and also 
provided an important system level input into the software 
development process. The system level process was 
important as BBT’s software formed part of an overall 
medical device system comprising hardware and software 
and electronics. The processes were agreed upon during a 
meeting with senior management at BBT and the 
assessment team prior to the assessment. The order of the 
processes assessed was important as it is important to follow 
the medical device software development lifecycle. 
Therefore, systems requirements were a very natural place 
to start. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-497-8
FASSI 2016 : The Second International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

 
TABLE I.  
PROCESSES OF MDEVSPICE® 
MD System Lifecycle 
Processes 
MD Software 
Lifecycle Processes 
MD Support 
Processes 
 Project Planning 
Project Assessment 
 and Control 
Risk Management 
 
Stakeholder 
Requirements 
 Definition 
System Requirement 
 Analysis 
System Architectural 
 Design 
 System Integration 
System Qualification 
 Testing 
 Software Installation 
Software Acceptance 
Support 
Software Development 
 Planning 
Software 
Requirements  
 Analysis 
Software Architectural 
 Design 
Software Detailed 
 Design 
Software Unit 
Implementation. and 
 Verification 
Software Integration 
and Integration 
 Testing 
Software System 
 Testing 
Software Risk 
Management 
Configuration 
 Management 
Software 
 Release 
Software 
Problem 
 Resolution 
Software 
Change 
Request  
 Management 
Software 
Maintenance 
 
Below is outlined the process assessment schedule: we 
assessed 5 processes on each day (See Table II). 
TABLE II.  
DAY 1 AND DAY 2 OF ASSESSMENT PROCESS 
Onsite Assessment Day 1 
System Requirements Analysis 
Software Development Planning 
Software Requirements Analysis 
Software Architectural Design 
Software Detailed Design 
Onsite Assessment Day 2 
Software Unit Implementation & Verification 
Software Integration & Integration Testing 
Software System Testing 
Software Risk Management 
Software Configuration Management 
 
Each process was assessed by two MDevSPICE® 
assessors in an interview with at least two members of BBT 
being present in each interview. Prior to the interviews both 
the schedule and the names of the BBT staff members that 
would be involved in each process interview was agreed. It 
was very important to ensure that access was provided to the 
most relevant staff for each interview session as otherwise 
the assessment would not have been as accurate as possible.  
Each of the 10 interviews lasted approximately one hour 
and involved one assessor asking BBT staff a set of scripted 
questions related to that process area. The second assessor 
used a tool to record detailed responses from the 
interviewees with both assessors using the tool to enable 
each question to be scored as “Fully Achieved”, “Partially 
Achieved” or “Not Achieved”. In addition to the usage of 
predefined scripted questions, additional questions were also 
asked that were specific to BBT. 
B) Findings produced: The MDevSPICE® assessors at 
the end of Day two returned back to the RSRC and  went 
through each process together, discusssing the observations 
and notes from the assessment. As a result of performing the 
assessment we provided BBT with a set of strengths, issues 
and recommendations to address those issues across each of 
the assessed processes.  
The MDevSPICE® assessment provided coverage over a 
number of different MD software related standards. Figure 1 
shows a breakdown of the coverage provided for each of the 
different 
standards 
from 
assessing 
10 
of 
the 
23 
MDevSPICE® processes. One of the key objectives of BBT 
Management was to gain an understanding in relation to the 
state of their current development processes against IEC  
62304, as this is the main MD software process standard, 
processes were selected from MDevSPICE® that featured 
heavily in IEC 62304. The exception to this was System 
Requirements Analysis but this was deemed to be a critical 
process to examine as BBT would be performing software 
development for an overall MD system. Therefore, it is 
essential that they have an efficient process in place for 
System Requirements Analysis as otherwise everything that 
occurs afterwards within the development lifecycle will be 
impacted. 
From looking at Figure 1 it can be seen that the 10 
processes assessed provided: 59% coverage of IEC 62304; 
2% of ISO 80002-1 [14] (this technical report relates to how 
ISO 14971 may be applied within software); 16% of the 
FDA’s Guidance for off the shelf software [15]; 1% of the 
FDA’s Guidance for premarket submissions [16]; 20% of 
the FDA’s Guidance for validation of software [17]; 1% of 
ISO 13485 and 1% of software engineering best practice 
standards. 
Figure 1.  Scope of the BBT Assessment. 
C) Implementing the recommendations: In order to assist  
BBT to implement the recommendations in a timely manner 
BBT took the following steps: 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-497-8
FASSI 2016 : The Second International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

a) Brought 
in 
consultants 
to 
assist 
with 
the 
implementation of QMS 13485. 
b) Recruited an engineer from a leading MD 
manufacturer who possessed considerable experience in 
developing MD software development and in particular MD 
risk management expertise to put in place a risk 
management strategy in line with ISO 14971.  
c) Engaged with a notified body organisation to 
prepare them for an official audit in IEC 62304 and 
subsequently perform the audit. This enabled a successful 
IEC 62304 audit to be achieved in a timely manner. 
D) Actions taken by BBT: 
a) Gained Certification in IEC 62304. 
b) The IEC 62304 audit was  performed against one 
project using a plan driven approach. 
c) BBT implemented the required MD standards for 
medical device software suppliers. 
The main criteria MD manufacturers use for selecting a 
MD software supplier is that organizations should have IEC 
62304 in place. At this stage BBT now have not only 
satisfied this criteria but surpassed it in that they not only 
adopted IEC 62304 but were certified against it and also 
have adopted IEC 13485, ISO 14971 and the FDA Guidance 
documentation for: Off the shelf software, Premarket 
Submissions and Validation of MD software. Therefore, at 
this stage BBT were ready to obtain contracts as a MD 
software supplier company. 
V. 
WHAT HAPPENED NEXT? 
Once BBT became a MD software supplier they noticed 
the significant attention within the MD field. MD software 
manufacturers started to get in contact and invite tenders for 
various projects. In fact, to date they have worked on a 
number of MD software development projects for different 
types and sizes of manufacturers. Therefore, the overhead 
required to implement the necessary standards was starting 
to pay dividends. However, now that the opportunities 
clearly are out there it is noticeable that BBT now want to 
move to the next phase of their MD software development 
journey and not only develop software in line with the MD 
standards but their ambition is now to increase the 
efficiency of their MD software development. Therefore, 
they wish to improve their software development processes 
even further and implement more regulatory standards in 
relation to security etc. The key driver to take a step further 
is that BBT now are undertaking challenging projects and 
are developing MD software for multinational MD 
companies they have much more to achieve in their journey. 
BBT have agreed to work with researchers from the RSRC 
to introduce MD software development best practices that 
will increase the efficiency of their MD software 
development. 
A. Challenges for such large projects 
However, as with every new project there are associated 
challenges and this is increased when embarking upon a 
fixed price project, therefore if the project is delayed or runs 
into some other difficulties, BTT is liable in relation to the 
budget. Another challenge is the tight timeframe where 
strict milestones have to be achieved in addition to the 
achievement of appropriate documentation to satisfy 
regulatory deliverables. Additionally, BBT would also like 
to excel in being able to facilitate change during the 
lifecycle of the project as this is something that is 
challenging in traditional MD software development. A very 
positive aspect of BBT’s current approach is that they 
engage in regular interaction with their customers. 
Therefore, receiving feedback and making sure that the right 
MD software is developed from the very start of the 
development. 
B. What is the current status of BBT development process 
lifecycle? 
Currently BBT is developing software in a plan driven 
way through using the V-model [18]. When following a V-
model the testing is planned in parallel with the 
corresponding development phase and the planning for 
verification and validation of the product is emphasized 
from the very beginning. To date, V-model has been proven 
to be the best fit when developing MD software in 
compliance with the regulations [19]. However, in order to 
improve the efficiency of their software development new 
software practices should be explored that have proven 
successful in the development of safety-critical software in 
association with researchers from the RSRC. 
Before introducing a new lifecycle it is crucial to 
perform an assessment in order to establish how the current 
software development process should be improved/changed. 
VI. 
ASSESSMENT PROCESS AND RESULTS 
The following subsections will describe the high-level 
assessment process completed in BBT in 2016. 
A) Assessment Process 
The Software development process assessment was 
performed at BBT before deciding what new practices 
would be most suitable for BBT. We met up with the CEO 
of the company, project manager/developer (who had has 
experience of agile software development), and a developer 
who specialized in Android software development. The 
meeting was also attended by the R&D manager/Systems 
Risk engineer and the QMS manager. The assessment was 
based on previously scripted open-ended questions that 
related to many different areas of the company as well as the 
software development process. 
B) Results 
a) Currently BBT have several standards in place, such 
as IEC 62304, ISO 13485, ISO 9001 and ISO 14971. In 
their software development process they make use of 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-497-8
FASSI 2016 : The Second International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

various tools in areas such as  project management, testing 
and integration. One of their main drivers for adopting new 
best practice software development methods is to streamline 
even further their already succcessful practices for 
interacting with customers. BBT view this as being key to 
delivering safe regulatory compliant software that fully 
meets the customer requirements and works within the 
intended environment, thereby decreasing the chances of 
expensive rework, particularly on fixed price projects.  
b) Additionally, they wish to develop metrics such as 
problem tracking, code coverage, defects found, defects 
closed etc. 
c) In the past, BBT was open to changes and customers 
were able to introduce them whenever they wanted without 
consequences to the overall budget, time. However, today 
the process has become more structured. BBT now ensures 
that a formal change request document is in place specifying 
what happens if a change occurs within a previously signed 
project. 
d) BBT at the moment is not making use of any 
principle software design techniques however, they plan to 
introduce architecture diagrams and design patterns. 
e) BBT previously have developed software in a plan 
driven manner and lately they have decided to integrate 
some agile practices into their development process..  
f) Currently almost 80% of testing is automated and 
20% is done manually. If the percentage of manual testing 
could be decreased further – the overall development 
process could become faster. 
g) One of the team members mentioned that due to the 
new lifecycle approach where agile practices are introduced, 
there could be a challenges regarding integrating the QMS 
with the development process and achieving the necessary 
regulatory documentations. 
h) At present their current process incorporates only 
two agile practices, they are: short iterations (every two 
weeks) and continuous integration. 
i) BBT is also planning to provide their team with the 
training needed in order to work in an environment where 
MD software is developed in an agile way. The team will be 
provided with training in regards to MD software, agile 
practices and mobile app development. 
j) Some team members will be provided with support 
to change towards adopting a more agile software 
development process. 
C) Recommendations 
Our advice to BBT is to integrate more agile practices 
into their current MD software development so that the 
software is developed efficiently in regular iterations and 
can be presented to the customer on a regular basis and 
facilitate change. Based upon a mini-literature review 
performed, the following agile practices have been cited as 
being used to develop software successfully for safety 
critical/medical domains: 
a) Acceptance test-driven development (ATDD) [20]. 
b) Automated Tests/Automated unit testing [21]. 
c) Code Reviews / Peer Reviews [22]. 
d) Coding Standards [20][23]. 
e) Continuous integration (CI) [20][23][24]. 
f) 
Open Workspace [20][25]. 
g) Scrum [26]. 
h) Test-driven development (TDD) [20][27]. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper described a case study of a journey taken by 
an Irish software development company, moving from 
developing automotive software to developing MD 
software. We described how through adopting and 
implementing MD standards they now have become a MD 
software supplier. The key contribution of this research 
work was to enable an organization such as BBT to 
overcome the challenging and resource intensive learning 
process of understanding what standards should be put in 
place in order to become a medical device software supplier.  
Secondly, it was important to be able to provide guidance as 
to the order in which practices should be put in place so that 
previously implemented practices will not need to be 
overwritten later. Since becoming a MD software supplier 
many new opportunities have become available. However, 
BBT now wish to further improve their software 
development processes in order to become more efficient 
and to be able to satisfy new challenges that could rise from 
undertaking new multinational MD manufacturer’s projects. 
The authors of the paper have provided a list of agile 
practices that have been cited to be well suitable for safety 
critical/medical domain. 
In the future, we plan to investigate agile practices that 
are applicable for the MD software industry in greater detail 
by performing an extensive literature review and industry 
survey. Further, we will work with BBT to integrate the 
most applicable agile practices into their current software 
development lifecycle.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Science Foundation 
Ireland Research Centres Programme, through Lero - the 
Irish Software Research Centre (http://www.lero.ie) grant 
10/CE/I1855 & 13/RC/20194. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Cunningham, B. Dolan, D. Kelly, and C. Young, “Medical 
Device Sectoral Overview,” Galway City and County 
Economic and Industrial Baseline Study, 2015. 
[2] C. Abraham, E. Nishihara, and M. Akiyama, “Transforming 
healthcare with information technology in Japan: A review of 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-497-8
FASSI 2016 : The Second International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

policy, people, and progress,” Int. J. Med. Inform., vol. 80, 
no. 3, pp. 157–170, 2011. 
[3] S. Hanna, R. Rolf, A. Molina-Markham, P. Poosankam, K. 
Fu, and D. Song, “Take two software updates and see me in 
the morning: The Case for Software Security Evaluations of 
Medical Devices,” in The 2nd USENIX conference on Health 
security and privacy, pp.6, 2011. 
[4] S. R. Rakitin, “Coping with Defective Software in Medical 
Devices,” pp. 40–45, 2006. 
[5] EC, “Directive 2007/47/EC of the European Parliament and 
of the Council concerning medical devices,” Official Journal 
of the European Union. Official Journal of the European 
Union, Brussels, Belgium, p. 35, 2007. 
[6] F. McCaffery, J. Burton, A. Dorling, and V. Casey, “Software 
Process Improvement in the Medical Device Industry,” in 
Software Engineering Encyclopaedia, P. Laplante, Ed. New 
York: Francis Taylor Group, 2010, pp. 528 – 540. 
[7] C.-J. Hsiao, E. Hing, T. C. Socey, and B. Cai, “NCHS Health 
E-Stat Electronic Medical Record/Electronic Health Record 
Systems of Office-based Physicians: United States, 2009 and 
Preliminary 2010 State Estimates,” Natl. Cent. Heal. Stat., 
vol. 2009, no. December, p. 6, 2010. 
[8] G. Hillestad, R., Bigelow, J., Bower, A. and F. Girosi, “Can 
Electronic Medical Record Systems Transform Health Care? 
Potential Health Benefits, Savings, And Costs,” Health Aff., 
vol. 24, no. January, pp. 1103–17, 2016. 
[9] “Mobile to Play a Significant Role in Healthcare as GSMA 
Research Predicts mHealth Market to be Worth US$23 billion 
by 
2017,” 
2012. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.gsma.com/newsroom/press-release/mobile-to-
play-a-significant-role-in-healthcare-as-gsma-research-
predicts-mhealth-market-to-be-worth-us23-billion-by-2017/. 
[Accessed: 26-Mar-2016]. 
[10] BSI, “Medical device software- Software life-cycle processes, 
62304:2006,” Bs En 62304:2006, vol. 3. 2006. 
[11] ISO, “ISO 13485: Medical Devices - Quality Management 
Systems - Requirements for Regulatory Purposes.” Geneva, 
Switzerland, pp. 57, 2003. 
[12] ISO, “ISO 14971 - Medical Devices - Application of Risk 
Management to Medical Devices.” Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 
82, 2009. 
[13] F. McCaffery, M. Lepmets, and P. Clarke, “Medical Device 
Software as a Subsystem of an Overall Medical Device,” in 
Proceedings of The First International Conference on 
Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration 
Medical, 2015, pp. 17–22. 
[14] IEC, “IEC TR 80002-1 - Medical Device Software - Part 1: 
Guidance on the Application of ISO 14971 to Medical Device 
Software.” Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 58, 2009. 
[15] FDA, “Guidance for Industry - FDA Reviewers and 
Compliance on Off-The-Shelf Software Use in Medical 
Devices.” USA, p. 26, 1999. 
[16] FDA, “Guidance for the Content of Premarket Submissions 
for Software Contained in Medical Devices.” USA, pp. 23, 
2005. 
[17] FDA, “General Principles of Software Validation ; Final 
Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff.” USA, pp. 47, 2002. 
[18] K. Forsberg and H. Mooz, “The Relationship of System 
Engineering to the Project Cycle,” 12th INTERNET World 
Congr. Proj. Manag., pp. 12, June 1994. 
[19] F. McCaffery, D. McFall, P. Donnelly, F. G. Wilkie, and R. 
Sterritt, “A Software Process Improvement Lifecycle 
Framework for the Medical Device Industry,” in IEEE 
International Conference and Workshops on the Engineering 
of Computer-Based Systems (ECBS’05) Proceedings, pp. 8, 
2005,  
[20] S. Datta, P. Sarkar, S. Das, S. Sreshtha, P. Lade, and S. 
Majumder, “How many eyeballs does a bug need? An 
empirical validation of linus’ law,” in Lecture Notes in 
Business Information Processing, vol. 179 LNBIP, pp. 242–
250, 2014,  
[21] J. Grenning, “Launching extreme programming at a process-
intensive company,” IEEE Softw., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 27–33, 
2001. 
[22] M. Bernhart, A. Mauczka, and T. Grechenig, “Adopting code 
reviews for agile software development,” in Proceedings - 
2010 Agile Conference, vol. 179 LNBIP, pp. 242–250, 
AGILE 2010. 
[23] K. Beck, Extreme programming explained: embrace change. 
addison-wesley professional, 2000. 
[24] P. Dahlem, Marc and Diebold, “Agile Practices in Practice - 
A Mapping Study Agile Practices in Practice - A Mapping 
Study -,” in 18th International Conference on Evaluation and 
Assessment in Software Engineering, pp.30, MAY 2014. 
[25] K. Beck, “Embracing change with extreme programming,” 
Computer (Long. Beach. Calif)., vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 70–77, 
1999. 
[26] P. Abrahamsson, O. Salo, J. Ronkainen, and J. Warsta, Agile 
software development methods Review and analysis. ESPOO: 
VTT Publications 478, 2002. 
[27] J. Rasmusson, The Agile Samurai, How Agile Masers Deliver 
Great Software. Texas, 2010. 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-497-8
FASSI 2016 : The Second International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

