Limitations of Using Digital BIM Models to Carry out Thermal Analysis 
Anabelle Rahhal, Coralie Matthys, Samia Ben Rajeb, Pierre Leclercq 
LUCID - Lab for User Cognition & Innovative Design   
Quartier Polytech 1, Allée de la Découverte 9, Bât. B52  
4000 Liège - Belgium  
emails: a.rahhal@uliege.be, cmt@assar.com, 
samia.ben.rajeb@ulb.ac.be, pierre.leclercq@uliege.be
 
 
Abstract— To meet ever more demanding thermal regulations, 
Building Information Modeling (BIM) and its geometrically 
semantically enriched building models are presented as a 
powerful means. In this article, we focus more specifically on 
the thermal performance of the envelope of existing buildings. 
Based on the modelling of an existing case, we discuss the 
potential of extraction and use of the information contained in 
the digital models to carry out two types of studies: a 
regulatory certification in the Energy Performance of 
Buildings (EPB) software and a simulation of energy needs in 
the Green Building Studio (GBS) software. Through them, we 
present a panel of the possibilities and the limits of using 
digital models for this type of study by considering, on the one 
hand, the quality of the models and on the other hand, the 
hypotheses governing the methods of the analysis tools.  
Keywords-digital Building Information Modeling (BIM); 
energy analysis; building data modeling and understanding; 
reverse engineering. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This article is part of a context where digital technology 
takes a prominent place in the architect’s profession. Project 
design is evolving towards a computerized design thanks to 
technological advances including BIM tools.  
The sector is today subject to ever more numerous 
requirements in terms of costs, performance and construction 
techniques. The sophistication of equipment (security, air 
treatment, home automation, etc.) and the addition of 
legislative and regulatory constraints increasingly complicate 
projects and involve dealing with an increasing amount of 
data [1][2].  
Furthermore, another major transformation is underway: 
the energy transition that results from an international 
awareness of environmental problems [3]. The building 
sector has a major role to play in the latter since it is 
responsible at a European level for 50 % of primary energy 
consumption and 30 % of greenhouse gas emissions [4]. 
However, the focus on the energy performance of new 
buildings is not sufficient and the objectives will not be 
achieved without an energy improvement of the existing 
building stock. Thus, energy renovation is one of the main 
levers for energy saving [5].  In this context, it is essential to 
have tools that enable to evaluate the environmental impact 
of a building and to analyze the improvement measures of its 
energy efficiency in an accelerated manner. It is on the basis 
of these considerations that states are increasingly 
encouraging the use of BIM to support the energy transition 
of buildings.  
Regarding the scientific literature, this acronym can refer 
to several distinct notions. In this article, we focus on BIM as 
« Building Information Model », i.e., « … a digital 
representation of physical and functional characteristics of a 
facility, which serves as a shared knowledge resource for 
information about a facility forming a reliable basis for 
decisions during its life-cycle. »  [6]. 
The purpose of this article is to identify the possibilities 
and limits of using digital models to evaluate the thermal 
performance of an existing building shell. In that respect, we 
will first study the exploitation potential of the data 
contained in the BIM models for a regulatory encoding in the 
EPB software, and we will then analyze these models to 
perform dynamic thermal simulations in GBS software. 
These tools are chosen among those available on the market 
and we have a certain maturity in their use. 
This article is structured in four parts. Section II presents 
a state of the art of the current use of digital models in the 
building sector. Section III details the methodology 
established to answer the exploitation issue of these models. 
Section IV is dedicated to the presentation of results of the 
implementations that will serve as a support for the 
discussions developed in Section V.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A. BIM applications 
A global survey conducted by the American company 
McGraw Hill Construction in 2014 revealed that among the 
25 applications of BIM, the 3D coordination between 
construction disciplines and the visualization of design 
models are the most common cases of uses in the pre-
construction phase [7].  
The use of BIM is relatively limited for analysis and 
simulations. 
In the energy sector, which is the case of this article, the 
frequency of use of BIM and digital model barely reaches 
25% [8]. However, this study highlights a paradox between 
the frequency of implementation and the perceived benefit of 
certain BIM uses, like shown in Figure 1. Indeed, the 
majority of these are perceived as positive by the 
respondents, whereas they are not frequently implemented. 
The main reasons given for their low application rate are the 
interoperability problems that result from using different file 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-750-4
FASSI 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

formats, as well as the resistance of the construction industry 
towards innovation [9].  
  
 
Figure 1.  Relation between the frequency and the perceived benefit for 
implementing each BIM use, adapted from [8]. 
B. Interviews  
In parallel with reviewing scientific literature concerning 
BIM practice in the construction industry, we realized semi-
structured interviews at ASSAR Workshop Architects, a 
BIM precursor architecture office in Belgium. The purposes 
of these interviews are, on the one hand, to understand how 
this office implements BIM for renovation projects and, on 
the other hand, to have an overview of the workflows 
characterizing projects requiring thermal or energy studies.  
These interviews revealed that the digital model is very 
little exploited for thermal and energy studies while ASSAR 
is between the most advanced Belgian offices in the 
implementation of BIM. The interview’s answers also 
indicate that workflows are still very fragmented between 
architects and energy consultants. In order to evaluate the 
building's performance, a considerable time is spent on 
recapturing the project data or adapting the digital model 
transmitted by the architects.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The issues, arising from the review of scientific literature 
and interviews, guide the work towards studying and 
modelling a concrete case, in order to evaluate potentialities 
and limits of using a numerical model to realize thermal 
analyzes. Figure 2 illustrates the research methodology 
adopted in this work. First, starting from a modelling 
protocol and using Revit and Sketchup software tools to 
produce different models of the case study: “Monolayer 
Model”, “EPB Model” and “Multilayer Model”.  
Then, quantitative tables were exported from each of 
these models. The EPB software needed manual encoding to 
generate its report. Sorting the data collected from the 
quantitative tables was also necessary to be able to compare 
the data in Excel software.  
Exports in Green Building XML (gbXML) were also 
accomplished and compared to verify the integrity of the 
data transfer. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Overall methodological scheme. 
A. Case study 
Our case study is an existing residential building with 
two parts built respectively in 1900 and 2007 and 
characterized by: 
• 
a poor thermal performance ; 
• 
a degree of complexity related to the form and 
constructive hypotheses that involve establishing 
certain assumptions and simplifications to carry out 
the modelling; 
• 
a subdivision into five apartments corresponding to 
six separate thermal zones, identified in Figure 3. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-750-4
FASSI 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

 
Figure 3.  3D representation of the energetical sectors composing the 
building. 
B. Method 
Modeling : The first step of our process is dedicated to 
building modelling. Autodesk Revit is the chosen modelling 
tool because it is an object-oriented software, widely used in 
BIM processes. In addition, it integrates energy analysis and 
simulation tools useful for our study. Two building models 
are created based on the available documentation of the 
existing building by using two different modelling 
techniques. Figure 4a shows the first technique is the 
"monolayer" model, which consists of isolating the load-
bearing, inner and outer layers of the walls, as distinct 
elements. Figure 4b illustrates the second technique is the 
"multilayer" modelling technique, using composite walls, 
containing several layers of materials. 
 
 
Figure 4.  (a) Monolayer modelling.       (b) Multilayer modelling. 
1) Exploitation of digital models : The created models 
are then analyzed and exploited according to two distinct 
approaches.  
a) First approach : certificative approach. 
The first approach seeks to evaluate the potential of a 
digital model in a regulatory thermal study in the EPB 
software. To evaluate this potential, we extract useful data 
from Revit models. Figure 5 shows that raw data is then 
sorted and compared with the values calculated and entered 
previously and manually in the EPB software. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Generation of a comparative table based on the extraction of 
Revit quantitative tables from “Monolayer” and “Multilayer” models and 
EPB report. 
The studied parameters are : 
• 
heat loss wall surfaces separating the different 
energy sectors ; 
• 
heat transfer coefficients U and thermal resistances 
R of the walls, roofs, floors and openings ; 
• 
the heated or conditioned floor surfaces of each 
energy sector ; 
• 
the volumes of each energy sector. 
 
Most of parameters are extracted from physical models, but 
analytical energy models are also used to obtain the heat loss 
surfaces and the volumes of energy sectors (see Table I).  
TABLE I.  
DATA EXTRACTED FROM PHYSICAL AND ANALYTICAL 
MODELS. 
 
Heat loss 
surfaces  
U and R 
coefficients 
Heated floor 
surfaces 
Volumes 
of energy 
sectors 
Physical 
models 
V 
V 
V 
- 
Analytical 
models 
V 
- 
- 
V 
 
Figure 6 illustrates the analytical model obtained directly 
from the physical model and composed of simple surfaces 
with no thickness. It is interpreted by the and relying on the 
detailed composition of the construction elements. 
The processed data from Revit models are then compared 
with the data previously encoded in the EPB software, by 
calculating a variation percentage for each element.  
To evaluate how much this variation is detrimental to the 
EPB study, it is indeed necessary to set thresholds of 
variation. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-750-4
FASSI 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

 
Figure 6.  Analytical model. 
These are defined in relation to the values of two EPB 
indicators: Figure 7 shows the specific primary energy 
consumption and Figure 8 illustrates the net heating energy 
requirements, which are represented using two scales of 
values. These values will be used for the analysis of the 
results. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Specific consumption of primary energy. 
 
Figure 8.  Net heating energy requirements. 
To determine the thresholds of variation, we make it 
possible to fluctuate iteratively and independently the values 
of the parameters encoded in the initial EPB file. The 
threshold is then set to the percentage change for which the 
results indicate that the limit of energy class or performance 
category of the EPB unit is reached. 
b) Second approach : evaluative approach. 
The second approach aims to estimate the exploitation 
potential of the models for an energy simulation. It is 
performed by GBS software, an Autodesk product, which 
minimizes the risk of interoperability problems. Figure 9 
illustrates the approach that consists of evaluating the 
integrity of the data transfer upstream and downstream of the 
simulation, by comparing the exported gbXML Revit files 
and issued from GBS simulation to the original Revit 
models. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Comparison of the gbXML files and Revit models.  
The analyzed data are : 
• 
the surfaces of the walls and their environment 
(exterior, floor, interior) ; 
• 
the thermal properties of the materials; 
• 
geolocation and meteorological data from the 
project used to determine heating and cooling 
design temperatures ; 
• 
internal inputs, which are determined by the energy 
provided by occupants, equipment and lighting ; 
• 
occupancy and operating scenarios, which include 
building occupancy times and defining the set point 
for heating or cooling ; they also include lighting 
and equipment usage schedules during which heat 
gains occur. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Regulatory study in the EPB software 
The results obtained for the first implementation are 
synthetized in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
SUMMARY OF THE RESULTS FOR THE FIRST APPROACH. 
Parameter 
Physical 
models  
Analytical 
models 
Heat loss 
surfaces 
Walls 
X and - 
X 
Floors 
V 
X 
Roofs 
V and - 
X 
Openings 
V 
V 
Protected volumes 
/ 
X 
Heat floor surfaces 
V 
/ 
U and R coefficients 
X 
/ 
- = Some values are not defined 
/ = Values that cannot be extracted from physical or analytical models 
V = Most values are in the variation boundaries 
X = Most values are beyond the variation boundaries 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-750-4
FASSI 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

The results obtained for the geometric parameters 
(surfaces and volumes) indicate that the wall loss surfaces 
extracted from Revit physical models are far from the values 
calculated for the EPB encoding. Some of them could not 
even be determined. This difference is explained by the fact 
that the physical models correspond to the constructive 
reality of the project. This means that Revit calculates the 
wall surfaces as they are or will be constructed based on a 
physical model of the building. However, the regulatory EPB 
defines the wall surfaces in relation to a conceptual model 
which simplifies this reality. On the contrary, the floor 
surfaces coincide because there have not been determined 
from the floor instances but from surfaces cropped manually 
in specific plans.  
Table II also indicates that most of the geometric data 
extracted from the analytical models are beyond the 
thresholds of variation. This difference is explained by the 
fact that these surfaces are based on an approximative 
interpretation of the building elements by the calculation 
algorithm and are not defined the way the EPB method 
advocates.  
In addition, Revit calculates the thermal properties of the 
walls in a simplified way:  it does not take into account the 
surface exchange heat resistances to determine the U 
coefficient and it does not distinguish the walls according to 
their environment whereas these parameters are essential in a 
regulatory energy calculation.  
B. Thermal simulation in Green Building Studio 
The results obtained for the second implementation are 
synthetized in Table III. The results indicate that 
inconsistencies occurred during data transfer. These have not 
all been preserved or interpreted during the simulation. 
Additional surfaces were superimposed on the openings 
(doors and windows) and were assigned the same 
constructive type as the host wall. This results in erroneous 
geometric data for both gbXML files.  
TABLE III.  
SUMMARY OF THE RESULTS FOR THE SECOND APPROACH. 
Parameter 
 gbXML 
file 
exported 
from 
Revit 
 gbXML 
file 
exported 
from 
GBS 
Geometric data 
X 
X 
Walls environment 
X 
X 
Materials and walls thermal properties 
V 
X 
Location 
V 
V 
Weather data 
- 
X 
Internal gains 
V 
X 
Operating scenarios 
V 
X 
- = Non-exported data 
V = Successfully exported data 
X = Non successfully exported data 
Furthermore, the belowground surfaces are defined in 
Revit based on a horizontal reference plan.  The elements 
under this plane are thus considered buried. However, the 
land on which the building is located is inclined. 
On the contrary, all the thermal properties were exported 
correctly from Revit to gbXML format. Moreover, the 
gbXML file analysis of the monolayer model shows that the 
different layers have been assembled logically. The U values 
calculated for each layer of material are consistent between 
the files. However, the thermal transmittance coefficients U 
of the gbXML file exported from Revit do not take into 
account the surface exchange heat resistances since this 
property is not available initially in Revit. After the 
simulation, the gbXML code analysis of the single layer and 
multilayer models indicates that all types of doors have been 
substituted. Green Building Studio has also assigned default 
thermal properties to additional surfaces that have been 
created at openings and stairwells when exporting in 
gbXML. 
Location data were successfully retrieved during the 
gbXML export. 
The gbXML file exported from Revit does not contain 
meteorological 
data. 
These 
ones 
are 
normally 
set 
automatically by GBS after defining the project location.  
After the simulation, the analysis of the meteorological data 
indicates that the heating and cooling design temperatures of 
the file resulting from the simulation are slightly different 
from those calculated by Revit. One of the explanations that 
can justify this difference is the choice of the weather station 
used to calculate the temperatures for each of the two 
softwares. 
The analysis of the gbXML code exported from Revit 
indicates that the data on the internal loads are consistent 
with those encoded in Revit. However, a surface contribution 
generated by the interior equipment was automatically added 
during the simulation in Green Building Studio. 
The analysis of the gbXML code exported from Revit 
indicates that operating and occupancy schedules defined in 
Revit have been exported correctly.  
Green Building Studio has, for its part, taken into account 
four additional scenarios for the simulation: a cooling 
scenario, a heating scenario, a scenario of domestic hot water 
use and a ventilation scenario. The equipment operating 
schedule was replaced by two scenarios: one for the 
equipment that had previously been defined in Revit, the 
other one for additional equipment considered by Green 
Building Studio. 
V. 
LIMITS AND OUTLOOKS OF DIGITAL MODELS FOR 
THERMAL STUDIES 
Our first implementation shows that most quantities 
extracted from the Revit models cannot be used as they are, 
but must be sorted in order to compare their values with 
those of the EPB encoding. The determination of the heat 
loss surfaces especially requires the use of time-consuming 
processing methods and involves juggling constantly 
between the digital models and the extracted tables of 
quantities to select only the useful elements for EPB 
calculation.  
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-750-4
FASSI 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

In the walls quantitative tables for example, it is 
necessary to keep only those that separate distinct energy 
sectors. This implies having to remove a large part of the 
elements contained in the extracted quantities (see Table IV).  
TABLE IV.  
COMPARISON OF THE NUMBERS OF EXCEL LINES FOR THE 
HEAT LOSS WALLS SURFACES IN THE MONOLAYER AND MULTILAYER 
MODELS. 
Models 
Gross  
statement 
Intermediate 
statement 
Final statement 
Monolayer 
306 lines 
84 lines (27%) 
42 lines (14%) 
Multilayer 
284 lines 
84 lines (29%) 
42 lines (15%) 
 
The data sorting of the single-layer model especially 
requires the most investment because of the large number of 
object instances generated. Furthermore, some areas could 
not be determined on the basis of the constructive model, 
such as roof areas. Therefore, the wall surfaces of the Revit 
models obtained on the basis of a material survey are 
difficult to use for an EPB encoding since they cannot be 
calculated on the basis of a detailed physical model. 
Although analytical energy models have some potential 
and provide much simpler geometry, their walls areas cannot 
be encoded in the EPB software. Indeed, the latter are based 
on an approximative interpretation of the construction 
elements by the calculation algorithm and are not defined the 
way the EPB method advocates. 
In addition, the first approach highlights the constraints 
faced by energy consulting firms when working with 
architects that use digital models. Their work relies on the 
use of regulatory calculation engines based on historical 
methods that require manual data inputs. On the one hand, 
they do not make it possible to directly import the 
information of a digital model, which prevents the consulting 
firms from working on the basis of integrated flows. On the 
other hand, these calculation engines are based on 
simplifying assumptions whose objective is to facilitate 
manual encoding. This results in models that are generally 
far removed from the physical reality of the building. 
The 
second 
approach 
highlights 
a 
series 
of 
inconsistencies upstream and downstream of the simulation 
in Green Building Studio.  Therefore, while it appears to be 
an interesting tool to perform and analyze various 
alternatives at the beginning of design, this software is 
however not very suitable for obtaining an accurate diagnosis 
of the energy performance of an existing building. There is 
no doubt that the use of such tools requires analysis, 
technical know-how and the ability to interpret the results. 
However, architects and engineering offices need consistent 
information to guide the design and facilitate the 
optimization process. Any simulation tool should therefore 
inform the architect more precisely of the assumptions 
underlying the results.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
A. Contributions to research 
Our study explores two distinct building modelling 
methods in order to perform two types of energy studies: a 
regulatory study and an energy simulation. It allows to define 
a non exhaustive list of possibilities and limits of using such 
models, related on the one hand, to the modelling tools 
(Revit) and to the characteristics of the models themselves 
(mono and multilayer) and of the other hand to energy 
analysis tools (EPB and GBS). Finally, exploitation of Green 
Building Studio allows us to point out the limits of a 
simulation software and the erroneous conclusions that a user 
could draw from it. 
B. Limits of the research 
This work is based on a deep analysis of the digital 
model and its possibilities and limits for conducting energy 
studies. The case study was modeled to meet specific energy 
needs and does not integrate all needed information for all 
other disciplines in a project. The collaborative aspect of 
BIM has not been investigated. Nevertheless, this aspect 
remains one of the intrinsic characteristics of BIM. 
Exploring BIM as a method of collaboration is not relevant 
in this work. 
A similar finding can be made for the first 
implementation. Indeed, the exploitation potential of the 
digital model is not evaluated on the basis of its direct import 
but on the possibility of using the data that it contains and to 
be able to encode them manually in the EPB regulatory 
software, which does not allow currently importing a digital 
model. However, the objective of BIM is to avoid re-
entrying information between the different pieces of software 
used. 
Finally, the method for setting the variation thresholds 
developed in the first validation process could still be 
improved. In addition, the setting of these thresholds remains 
subjective because it is specific to the studied project type 
and to the initial values of the indicators. 
C. Future work 
One of the avenues for reflection concerns the computer 
development of regulatory tools. Indeed, these tools are 
currently designed to be used at the end of the design as a 
guarantee of final certification and rely on manual data entry. 
However, any new or renovation project must comply with 
the regulations and must therefore be analyzed at its earliest 
stage, in order to evaluate various possible solutions. It 
would therefore be interesting to develop interoperability 
between the BIM digital model and certification softwares 
such as EPB from exchange formats such as Industry 
Foundation Classes (IFC) or the gbXML. In addition, the 
work focused on using Revit software as a modelling tool 
and Green Building Studio as an energy analysis software. 
Future work could focus on using other modelling softwares. 
 
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-750-4
FASSI 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to give our special thanks to ASSAR 
l’Atelier Architects, for the time they gave us during the 
interviews and for enlightening us on the practice of BIM in 
business. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] N. Bradley and E. Krygiel, Green Building Information 
Modeling (BIM): Successful Sustainable Design with 
Building Information Modeling, Hoboken, New Jersey: John 
Wiley & Sons, 2008. 
[2] O. Celnik and E. Lebègue, Building Information Modeling 
(BIM) & digital model for architecture, building and 
construction, 2nd ed., Paris: Eyrolles, 2014. 
[3] Commission Européenne, 2020 climate & energy package. 
[Online] 
Available 
from 
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/strategies/2020_en 
[4] S. Trachte and F. Salvesen, “Sustainable renovation of non 
residential 
buildings, 
a 
response 
to 
lowering 
the 
environmental impact of the building sector in Europe,” in 
Energy Procedia, vol. 48, pp. 1512–1518, December 2014. 
[5] E. Mlecnik et al. Low energy housing retrofit (LEHR), final 
report. Belgian Science Policy, 2010. 
[6] National Building Information Modeling Standard (NBS), 
Electronic 
publication: 
National 
Building 
Information 
Modeling 
Standard 
Part-1: 
Overview, 
Principles 
and 
Methodologies. US National Institute of Building Sciences 
Facilities 
Information 
Council, 
Building 
Information 
Modeling (BIM) Committee, 2007. 
[7] McGraw Hill Construction, Smart Market Report : Added 
Value of Building Information Modeling (BIM) for 
Construction in Major Global Markets : How architects 
around the world innovate with building data modelling 
(Building Information Modeling (BIM)), 2014.  
[8] R. Kreider, J. Messner, and C. Dubler, “Determining the 
frequency and impact of applying Building Information 
Modeling (BIM) for different purposes on projects,” The 
Sixth International Conference on Innovation in Architecture, 
Engineering & Construction (AEC), pp. 1-10, University 
Park, 2010. 
[9] S. Beazley, E. Heffernan, and T.J. McCarthy, “Enhancing 
energy efficiency in residential buildings through the use of 
Building Information Modeling (BIM): The case for 
embedding parameters during design,” in Energy Procedia, 
vol. 121, pp. 57-64, 2017. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-750-4
FASSI 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Fundamentals and Advances in Software Systems Integration

