Merchant Facial Expressions and Customer Trust in Virtual Shopping 
Environment 
Nasser Nassiri 
Department of Information Technology 
Higher Colleges of Technology (HCT) 
Dubai, UAE 
nasser.nassiri@hct.ac.ae 
David Moore 
Department of Computer Science 
Leeds Metropolitan University (ex professor) 
Leeds, UK 
moore-exleedsmet@hotmail.co.uk
 
 
Abstract - Trust is an essential contributor to the traditional 
customer experience. Online, it is harder for individuals to 
assess a partner’s trustworthiness, as many of the cues present 
in face-to-face interaction are difficult to transmit via 
technology. The recent advance of computer graphics and 
internet technology, however, potentially enables individuals to 
transmit these cues through their avatars in 3D e-commerce 
environments. The paper investigates the impact of the vendor 
avatar’s dynamic facial expression on consumer trust in 3D e-
commerce environments. An experiment was conducted to 
empirically test the effects of the basic seven universal 
emotions of facial expression displayed by online vendor 
avatars on consumer trust in a 3D e-commerce environment. 
Respondents were able to recognize the intended emotions on 
the salesman avatars. They preferred to purchase from the 
salesman with a neutral expression.  
Keywords-Virtual Shopping Environments; Trust; Avatars; 
Online Retailing; Virtual Salespersons 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Internet has brought customers and retailers together 
by enabling consumers to shop with anyone, at any time and 
from anywhere. However, it is also keeping them apart, and 
consumers are no longer in face-to-face contact with 
salespeople. Trust is an essential contributor to the traditional 
customer experience [11]. It makes collaboration between 
vendors and consumers more pleasant and allows for 
cooperation that would otherwise not take place. In online 
transactions, 
trust 
becomes 
even 
more 
important. 
Commercial interactions that are carried out over the internet 
carry more risk than face-to-face interactions [18]. One 
reason for this is that it is harder for individuals to assess a 
partner’s trustworthiness, as many of the cues present in 
face-to-face interaction (e.g., emotions, posture, eye gaze, 
and gesture) were not transmitted via the early technologies 
used [11]. Yet, up to 93% of the meaning of all 
conversations comes from non-verbal communication [28]. 
However, the recent advance of computer graphics and 
internet technology enables individuals to transmit these cues 
through their avatars in Collaborative Virtual Environments 
(CVE) and therefore in 3D e-commerce environments such 
as that featured in Fig. 1 [5][9]. Avatars are virtual objects 
representing a human being in a virtual environment. These 
virtual objects are three-dimensional animated models. They 
are used by, for example, SecondLife [37], which offers 
retailers and shoppers a virtual 3D environment where both 
shoppers and retailers interact via their avatars.  
 
Fabri et al. [16] conducted an experiment to establish 
how facial expressions of emotions might be effectively and 
efficiently captured and represented in CVE. Their findings 
provide 
strong 
evidence 
that 
creating 
virtual 
face 
representations with a limited number of facial features 
allows emotions to be effectively portrayed visually and 
gives rise to recognition rates that are comparable with those 
of corresponding raises a research question about whether 
the effectiveness of these avatars in conveying emotions will 
enable such avatars to transmit signals of trustworthiness in 
CVE e-commerce interactions” [23].  
 
This paper, therefore, focuses on the role which the 
dynamic facial expressions of virtual vendors might play in 
3D e-commerce environments. Specifically, it investigates 
the impact of the vendor avatar’s dynamic facial expression 
on consumer trust in 3D e-commerce environments. The 
study reports an experiment in which participants were 
presented with seven avatars, each animated with one of the 
seven universal emotions, and saying the same message but 
with a varied tone of voice, to reflect the emotion shown by 
each avatar.  
 
 
Figure 1. A simulation of a 3D e-commerce environment 
II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
Trust plays an important role in many social and 
commercial interactions. It is seen as a concept with many 
dimensions [1][8] and has been studied in many diverse 
disciplines. For instance, economists have focused on 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

merchants’ reputations and their effect on transactions [4]; 
researchers of marketing have focused on strategies for 
building consumers’ trust [11][25][30]; human computer 
interaction scholars have focused on the relation between 
design and usability of a system and users’ reactions [8]; and 
psychologists have studied trust as an interpersonal and 
group phenomenon [36]. 
 
Although trust is an essential component of all successful 
face-to-face commercial transactions, there is a renewed 
focus on trust when commercial transactions are conducted 
through electronic media and customer trust in internet-
mediated marketing environments has been identified as a 
major research area [35]. Buyers look for signs from sellers 
that increase their trust, and sellers look at ways they can 
help build buyers’ trust. Since uncertainties exist in 
transactions over the Internet, many researchers have stated 
that trust is a critical factor influencing the successful 
proliferation of e-commerce [19][20][21]. This has brought 
about new challenges for building trust in e-commerce 
business environments. Recent research on trust includes 
development of a trust typology [26], the measurement of 
trust [3], and critical factors influencing initial trust 
formation [26], including the impact of familiarity and seller 
size and reputation [20]. Mukherjee and Nath [31] have 
extended 
and 
validated 
Morgan 
and 
Hunt’s 
[30] 
commitment-trust theory to online retailing contexts. 
Empirically, trust building has been identified as one of the 
main web experience components having a positive and 
significant effect on the selection of an e-vendor [24].  
 
The initial impressions of an e-commerce website are 
particularly important. Although attitudes about a company 
or website evolve over time and even during the course of 
one shopping visit, initial impressions persist and can affect 
whether or not a visitor returns. Judgments about 
trustworthiness occur as soon as a visitor begins interacting 
with a site [6]. A number of researchers have investigated the 
importance of the website interface in promoting trust in the 
website from initial usage. Nielsen et al. [32] recommended 
that company information about pricing, including taxes and 
shipping costs, and balanced information about products 
would increase customers’ perceptions of trustworthiness. 
However, besides cognitive elements, trust also includes an 
affective dimension, based on underlying feelings [25] and in 
service contexts, emotional bonds with customers have been 
found to provide a more enduring source of loyalty than 
economic incentives and switching costs [14]. Further, as 
Arnott [2] argues, decisions to trust an organization are based 
on assessments of several elements such as, in the case of 
online shopping experiences, trusting the brand, trusting the 
internet merchant and trusting the information system. 
Relationship marketing is more effective when the 
relationships are developed with individual people rather 
than with the firm itself [33]. In spite of this evidence that 
the human element is an important contributor to trust, many 
websites neglect this element and focus instead  on securing 
trust though the use Socket Software Layer (SSL) and only a 
small number of these websites focus on the visual 
representation of the vendor’s face to secure trust – a key 
reason for conducting this research. 
 
The face is a very important source of socio-emotional 
cues. Centuries ago, Hippocrates advised doctors to use their 
facial expressions to establish a good rapport with their 
patients. Surakka and Hietanen [39] see facial expressions of 
emotion clearly dominating over vocal expressions of 
emotion, and Knapp [22] generally considers facial 
expressions as the primary site for communication of 
emotional states. Ekman et al. [12] found that, in addition to 
the neutral expression, there are six universal facial 
expressions, corresponding to the following emotions: 
Surprise, Anger, Fear, Happiness, Disgust, and Sadness (see 
Figure 2a). Fig. 2b shows the 7 universal emotions and 
neutral expression as represented in a virtual face 
corresponding to the real photos in Fig. 2a [16].  
    
 
Figure 2a. Facial expressions of the b7 universal emotions [16] 
 
Figure 2b. The 7 universal emotions as represented in  a virtual face [16] 
 
Researchers have studied the impact of facial expression 
emotions on trust in face-to-face interactions. For example, 
in commercial transactions, trust building mechanisms 
include several factors such as physical presence, facial 
expression of emotions, and past action [18]. While this 
illustrates clearly the influence of facial expressions on trust 
in face-to-face interactions, little is known about its influence 
on trust in 3D e-commerce environments.  
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Forty two Lebanese participants of different gender and 
ages were involved in the experiment. Lebanon is a 
particularly apt country in which to conduct the experiment 
since salesman-to-consumer interactions, bargaining, trust 
based on personally relationship have been extremely 
important in the traditional shopping environments of the 
Arab world [34]. Each participant was presented with a local 
website constructed for the purpose of this study (Fig. 3) 
with some pictures of CDs signifying that this site sells audio 
CDs online. The website includes seven buttons for each 
virtual vendor representing the seven facial expressions of 
emotions. Once the virtual face was created, a sound track 
was digitized, reflecting the tone of voice corresponding to 
the emotion represented by each facial expression. The 
sound was then attached to each facial expression. The facial 
expressions were then added to the animated talking virtual 
head manually using the same application (Fig. 4). Each 
participant was required to go through each animation by 
pressing its corresponding button. Upon pressing any button, 
the chosen virtual avatar face is animated for 10 seconds, 
showing the emotion chosen and saying, in a tone matching 
the emotion, a sentence encouraging the participant to place 
the order through him.  
 
 
Figure 3. The virtual website used for the experiment. 
 
Each participant listened to the seven avatars and at the 
end of the session was asked to answer two questions. The 
first question required them to match each sales 
representative with the emotion he was perceived as 
conveying. The second question asked about the extent to 
which (using a Likert 6-point scale) the participant would be 
prepared to place an order with each of the sales 
representatives. The participants were free to visit the avatars 
in any order and were allowed to revisit them in the process 
of answering the questions. The gender and age-group of 
each participant were recorded, as well as their responses to 
the questions. 
 
Figure 4.1. 
Happy 
Figure 4.2. 
Sad 
Figure 4.3. 
Afraid 
Figure 4.7. 
Neutral 
Figure 4.4 
Surprised 
Figure 4.5. 
Disgusted 
Figure 4.6. 
Angry 
 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The gender and age group of the participants are shown 
in Table 1, which shows a reasonable representation across 
gender and age. 
 
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF GENDER AND AGE GROUP OF PARTICIPANTS 
Gender 
Age Group (years) 
Total 
20 to 25 
26 to 30 
31 to 40 
Over 40 
Male 
11 
9 
5 
4 
29 
Female 
9 
2 
0 
2 
13 
Total 
34 
11 
5 
6 
42 
 
The first question was intended to investigate whether 
these particular instances of the universal emotion were 
correctly identified by the participants. The results of the 
participants’ identifications are presented in Table 2.  
 
All the participants successfully identified the happy, sad, 
angry and neutral expressions of the Sales Rep. There are a 
few misidentifications of the surprised, afraid and disgusted 
– 4, 7 and 9 misidentifications, respectively, with surprised 
being confused with afraid and disgusted, afraid being 
confused with disgusted and sad, and disgusted being 
confused with afraid, surprised and sad. 
 
TABLE II : RECOGNITION OF THE SALES REPRESENTATIVE EMOTIONS 
 
Intended 
Emotion 
Perceived Emotion 
 
Neutral 
Happy 
Sad 
Afraid 
Surprised 
Disgusted 
Angry 
Neutral 
42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Happy 
 
42 
 
 
 
 
 
Sad 
 
 
42 
 
 
 
 
Afraid 
 
 
2 
35 
 
5 
 
Surprised 
 
 
 
2 
38 
2 
 
Disgusted 
 
 
2 
4 
3 
33 
 
Angry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
 
To provide a measure of the strength of agreement 
between the intended emotion and the one perceived by the 
participants, Cohen’s Kappa coefficient [7] of  = 0.921, has 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

been calculated. The coefficient represents the proportion of 
agreement after chance agreement is excluded and it takes 
negative values for agreement less than that expected by 
chance, a value of 0 for agreement levels expected by 
chance, and a value of 1 for perfect agreement. The value of 
the coefficient confirms the high rate of agreement between 
the emotion that the avatar is intended to convey and the 
emotion perceived by the participants. 
 
It is interesting to note that only one of the female 
participants made any error in classification of the emotions, 
whereas 8 male participants made 19 errors between 
themselves. This may suggest that women are better at 
identifying the avatar’s emotion, however, this was not 
found to be statistically significant (2 (df =1) = 2.110, p 
(exact) = 0.232, based on a two-by-two contingency table of 
the number of male and female participants identifying all 
the emotions correctly or making one or more mistakes).  
 
The second question asked respondents whether they 
would place an order with each of the sales representatives. 
The results are described in Table 3.     
 
The results in Table 3 show strong preference for the 
Neutral sales representative, followed by a slight inclination 
towards ordering with the happy sales representative. There 
is a slight disinclination to use the Surprised and Sad sales 
representatives, a disinclination to use the Afraid sales 
representative and strong disinclination to use the Disgusted 
and Angry sales representatives. In order to analyze these 
results a Repeat Measures General Linear Model [38] was 
constructed, with the emotion expressed by the sales 
representative as the within-subject variable and the gender 
and age of the participants as between-subject variables. 
Post-hoc comparisons were conducted on variables that 
proved to be significant within the model to identify 
differences. Mauchy’s test for sphericity was not passed (p < 
0.001), so the Greenhouse-Geisler correction [38] to the 
degrees of freedom of the univariate tests was applied, using 
 = 0.661. The within-subject tests show that the emotion of 
the sales representatives with regard to placing an order is 
significant (p < 0.001), however the interactions of emotion 
with gender, age, or gender and age are not significant (p = 
0.564, 0.600, and 0.151, respectively). Therefore, there are 
significant differences between the participants’ responses to 
the emotions, but these responses are not significantly 
affected by the gender or age of the participants. Table 4 
shows the estimated means and their 95% confidence 
intervals, ordered in decreasing preference. The responses 
were coded ‘strongly disagree’ = 1 to ‘strongly agree’ = 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE III: LIKELIHOOD OF PARTICIPANTS PLACING AN ORDER WITH EACH 
SALES REPRESENTATIVE 
 
 
 
1  
Strongly 
Disagree 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Strongly 
Agree 
Sales Rep2 
Neutral 
 
 
 
5 
13 
 
Sales Rep5 
Happy 
2 
7 
5 
21 
4 
3 
Sales Rep7 
Surprised 
5 
13 
18 
6 
 
 
Sales Rep6 
Sad 
8 
12 
18 
4 
 
 
Sales Rep4 
Disgusted 
24 
10 
8 
 
 
 
Sales Rep1 
Afraid 
13 
14 
10 
 
5 
 
Sales Rep3 
Angry 
38 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE IV: MEAN, STANDARD ERROR AND 95% CONFIDENCE INTERVAL 
FOR REACTIONS TO SALES REPRESENTATIVE EMOTION, IN DESCENDING 
ORDER 
 
Emotion 
Mean 
Standard 
Error 
95% Confidence Interval 
Lower 
Bound 
Upper 
Bound 
Sales Rep2 
Neutral 
5.39 
.14 
5.11 
5.67 
Sales Rep5 
Happy 
3.66 
.22 
3.20 
4.11 
Sales Rep7 
Surprised 
2.37 
.17 
2.31 
3.00 
Sales Rep6 
Sad 
2.12 
.17 
2.02 
2.73 
Sales Rep4 
Disgusted 
2.11 
.30 
1.50 
2.73 
Sales Rep1 
Afraid 
1.14 
.23 
1.65 
2.57 
Sales Rep3 
Angry 
11 
.06 
1.02 
1.25 
 
Table 5 shows the results of the post-hoc comparisons 
between 
the 
participants’ 
responses 
to 
the 
sales 
representatives’ emotions. The Bonferroni correction [15] for 
multiple comparisons has been applied. Taking the results 
from Tables 4 and 5 together, the Neutral sales representative 
is very highly significantly preferred above the other 
emotions. Participants were neutral about the Happy sales 
representative, who is nevertheless significantly preferred to 
the Surprised sales representative. The participants were 
disinclined to place orders with the Surprised, Sad, Disgusted 
and Afraid sales representative and there were no significant 
differences 
between 
their 
reactions 
to 
these 
sales 
representatives. Participants were least likely to place an 
order with the Angry sales representative, whom they reacted 
to significantly less favorably than all the other sales 
representatives, with the exception of the Disgusted sales 
represented that was not significantly different.  
TABLE V.POST-HOC COMPARISONS BETWEEN EMOTIONS (SIGNIFICANCE, P) 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION  
This study considered whether the emotions conveyed 
through the animated facial expressions of avatars and their 
tone of voice could induce trust in 3D e-commerce 
environments. The results show that people successfully 
recognized the intended emotions conveyed by the animated 
salespeople, or avatars. In this respect, this study is in line 
with Fabri et al. [16] results, suggesting that human emotions 
are legible in 3D virtual environments. Further, it was 
interesting to find that while the results did not reach 
statistical significance, women made fewer mistakes in 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

recognizing intended emotions than men. While further 
research is needed to validate this result, it might suggest that 
online as offline, women are better readers of emotions [29].  
 
There appears to be a very high success rate for the 
recognition of the sales representative’s emotion, albeit not 
100% recognition. Where misidentification has occurred, it 
has been between related emotions (sad, afraid, surprised and 
disgusted) and not between more contrasting emotions: 
happy, neutral and sad. 
 
Reaction to Sales Reps
1
2
3
4
5
6
Neutral
Happy
Surprised
Sad
Disgusted
Afraid
Angry
Emotion of Sales Reps
Likelihood of Placing an Order 
(1 - Strongly Disagree to 6 - Strongly Agree)
 
Figure 5. Mean and 95% Confidence Interval of the Participants’ 
Inclination to use Sales Representative (1-Strongly Disagree to 6 - Strongly 
Agree)  
 
The other set of results shows that respondents preferred 
to purchase from the salesman with a neutral expression, 
rather than from any other salesmen, including the happy 
salesman. This suggests that the perceived positive emotions 
of sales avatars do not induce trust as much as neutral 
expressions. This is perhaps surprising, since offline, the 
positive emotions of salespeople influence trust [18], and 
lead people to return to a store and spread word of mouth 
[40]. A possible explanation is that while consumers are able 
to read the emotions of sales avatars, they remain conscious 
of the fact they are not real people with real feelings.  
 
It may be that rather than convincing them, positive 
emotions conveyed by an avatar make customers more 
‘suspicious’ than a neutral expression. An alternative 
explanation of these results would be that the neutral 
expression in fact conveys seriousness, professionalism and 
competence. This would be consistent with Fogg et al. [17] 
study which mentions expertise as one of the elements 
inducing trust online.  
 
Thus, consumers may develop trust as a result of 
perceptions of professionalism and competence, rather than 
emotionally-pleasant, virtual interactions. A similar finding 
emerged from a study of responsiveness during service 
interactions taking place over the telephone. Doucet [10] 
established that informational responsiveness were more 
beneficial for both the organization and the customer than 
emotional responsiveness. In a context precluding real face-
to-face 
interactions, 
therefore, 
information 
and 
demonstration of competence may be the main drivers of 
trust.   
 
There are several possible managerial implications of this 
study. First, it suggests that consumers are able to recognize 
intended emotions as conveyed by sales representative 
avatars. Therefore, the current technology makes it possible 
for online retailers to infuse their virtual sales people with 
certain emotions. Second, the participants’ inclination to 
purchase from a neutral rather than a happy sales 
representative suggests that it may not be possible to increase 
purchase intentions purely by animating the virtual 
salesperson with a happy mood. It has been suggested that 
consumers may equate the neutral expression with 
competence, in which case retailers may be able to use 
further cues to convey competence, such as for example the 
sales representative’s dress and language and of course 
domain knowledge.  Further, it might be useful to include the 
effect of presenting “no avatar” in order to compare the 
overall feedback of the participants,  
 
A limitation of the study is the relatively small sample 
size (n=42), in spite of the respectable number of 
observations (294). Future research should aim to investigate 
statistically whether women are better readers of emotions 
online than men.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND AVENUES FOR FURTHER 
RESEARCH 
This study suggests that contrary to traditional shopping 
environments where trust can be conveyed through the sales 
representative’s facial expression, or the vocal expression of 
emotions, virtual environments do not seem able to increase 
customer trust through the positive emotions of sales 
representatives’ avatars. Further research is needed to 
validate these initial results. It would be useful in particular 
to design an experiment which simulates two different 
interactions with a sales avatar, one based on social 
exchange, while the other is based on informational 
exchange. A qualitative approach, using think aloud [13] 
while people interact with different sales avatars, would also 
allow for a deeper understanding of consumers’ reactions to 
virtual sales people, and of how virtual sales people can 
convey expertise.  
  
Another limitation is that the same virtual salesman 
avatar is used to show all the facial expressions, and this 
might confuse the participants when scoring the expressions. 
Further research should also aim to have a different avatar 
for each expression. Future research should aim to verify 
statistically the possibility that women are better readers of 
emotions online than men. Further, the experiment was 
presented to the participants with avatars having different 
emotion and appropriate ton of voice. It was suspicious 
whether the voice contributed to the high success rate of the 
recognition of the sales representative's emotion or not. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

Therefore, a future research in this direction might lead to 
more robust results. 
 
We must reiterate that this study’s results do not 
necessarily imply that the positive emotions of sales avatars 
are detrimental to 3D e-commerce environments. In 
particular, further research should establish whether the 
emotions of sales avatars make the shopping experience 
more ‘fun’, keep people in the virtual environment longer, 
and make them explore more. This in turn may commit 
consumers to return to the store, and become life-long 
customers.   
 
By suggesting a preference of consumers for neutral 
rather than positive emotions on sales avatars’ facial 
expressions, this study has contributed towards a better 
understanding of how consumers react to virtual interactions, 
and possible explanations as to why they prefer neutral 
expressions on sales representatives’ avatars. As such, the 
study supports the argument that retailers face a number of 
new challenges in managing online customer experiences. 
The virtually of human interaction and its consequences is an 
important area for future research.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Araujo, A. (2003), “Developing trust in internet commerce”, in 
Proceedings of the Conference of bthe Centre for Advanced Studies 
on Collaborative Research.  
[2] Arnott, D.C. (2007), "Trust - Current Thinking and Future Research", 
European Journal of Marketing, vol. 2007 no. 41, pp. 981-87. 
[3] Bhattacherjee, A. (2002), “Individual Trust in Online Firms: Scale 
Development and Initial Test”, Journal of Management Information 
Systems, vol. 19, no. 1 (Summer), pp. 211-241.  
[4] Cabral, B. (2006), “The Economics of Trust and Reputation: A 
Primer”, Technical Report, New York University and CEPR. 
[5] Capin, T., Pandzic, I., Thalmann, N., Thalmann, D. (1999), “Realistic 
Avatars and Autonomous Virtual Humans in VLNET Networked 
Virtual Environments”, in Earnshaw, R.A. and Vince, J. (Ed.), Virtual 
Worlds on the Internet, IEEE Computer Science Press, pp. 157-174. 
[6] Cherny, L. (1999), Conversation and Community: Chat in a Virtual 
World, CSLI, Stanford. 
[7] Cohen, J. (1960), "A Coefficient of Agreement for Nominal Scales," 
Educational and Psychological Measurement, vol. 20 no. 1, pp. 37-
46. 
[8] Corritore, L. Kracher, B., and Wiedenbeck S. (2003), “On-line trust: 
concepts, evolving themes, a model”, International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, vol. 58 no. 6, pp. 737–758. 
[9] Coulson, M., (2002), “Expressing emotion through body movement: 
A component process approach”, in Proceedings of AISB Symposium 
on Animated Expressive Characters for Social Interaction, London, 
UK, pp. 11-16. 
[10] Doucet, L. (2007), Responsiveness: Emotion and Information 
Dynamics in Dyadic Service Interactions, PhD dissertation, 
University of Pennsylvania. 
[11] Dwyer, F.R., Schurr, P.H., and Oh, S. (1987), “Developing Buyer-
Seller Relationships”, Journal of Marketing, Vvl. 51 no. 2, pp. 11-27. 
[12] Ekman, P., Friesen, W., and Ellsworth, P. (1972), Emotion in the 
Human Face: Guidelines for Research and an Integration of Findings, 
Pergamon Press Inc, New York, NY. 
[13] Ericsson, A and Herbert, S. (1993), Protocol Analysis - Verbal 
Reports as Data, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
[14] Evanschitzky, H., Iyer, G.R., Passman, H., Niessing, J., and Meffert, 
H. (2006), "The Relative Strength of Affective Commitment in 
Securing Loyalty in Service Relationships," Journal of Business 
Research, vol. 59 no. 12, pp. 1207-13. 
[15] Everitt, B. (1995), The Cambridge Dictionary of Statistics in the 
Medical Sciences, Cambridge University Press, Melbourne. 
[16] Fabri, M., Moore, D., and Hobbs, D. (2002), “Expressive Agents: 
Non-verbal Communication in Collaborative Virtual Environments”, 
in Proceedings of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 
2002 (Embodied Conversational Agents Workshop), July 2002, 
Bologna, Italy. 
[17] Fogg, B.J., Marshall, J., Laraki, O., Osipovich, A., Varma, C., Fang, 
N., Paul, J., Rangnekar, A., Shon, J., Swani, P., and Treinen, M. 
(2001), “What makes Web sites credible? A report on a large 
quantitative study”, CHI 2001 Conference Proceedings, vol. 3 no. 1, 
pp. 61-6. 
[18] Giddens, A., (1990), The Consequences of Modernity, Stanford 
University Press, Stanford. 
[19] Hoffman, L., Novak, P., and Peralta, M. (1999), “Building Consumer 
Trust Online”, Communications of the ACM, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 80-
85. 
[20] Jarvenpaa, L., Tractinsky, J., and Vitale, M. (2000), “Consumer trust 
in an internet store”,  Information Technology and Management, Vol. 
1 No. 1 and 2, pp. 45-71. 
[21] Keen, W. (2000), “Ensuring e-trust”, Computer World, vol. 34 no. 11, 
pp. 46. 
[22] Knapp, M. (1978), Nonverbal Communication in Human Interaction 
(2nd Edition), Holt, Rinehart and Winston Inc., New York, NY. 
[23] Lisetti, C., Nasoz, F, Lerouge, C., Ozyer, O., and Alvarez, K. (2003), 
“Developing Multimodal Intelligent Affective Interfaces for Tele-
Home Health Care”, International Journal of Human Computer 
Studies Special Issue on Applications of Affective Computing in 
Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 59 no. 1-2, pp. 245-255. 
[24] Lorenzo, C., Constantinides, E., Geurts, P., and Gomez, M.A. (2007), 
“Impact of Web Experience on E-Consumer Responses”, in 8th 
International Conference on E-Commerce and Web Technologies, ed. 
G. Psaila and R. Wagner, Regensburg, Germany. 
[25] McAllister, D.J. (1995), “Affect- and Cognition-Based Trust as 
Foundations for Interpersonal Cooperation in Organizations”, 
Academy of Management Journal, vol. 38 no. 1, pp. 24-59. 
[26] McKnight, D. and Chervany, N. (2001), “What Trust Means in E-
Commerce Customer Relationships:  An Interdisciplinary Conceptual 
Typology”, International Journal of Electronic Commerce, vol. 6 no. 
2, pp. 35-59.  
[27] McKnight, D., Cummings, L., and Chervany, N. (1998), “Initial Trust 
Formation in New Organizational Relationships”, Academy of 
Management Review, vol. 23 no. 3, pp. 473-490. 
[28] Mehrabian, A. (1971), Silent Messages, Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.  
[29] Merten, J. (2005), “Culture, Gender and the Recognition of the Basic 
Emotions”, Psychologia, vol. 48 no. 4, pp. 306-316. 
[30] Morgan, R. M. and Hunt, S. D. (1994), “The Commitment-Trust 
Theory of Relationship Marketing”, Journal of Marketing, vol. 58, pp. 
20-38. 
[31] Mukherjee, A. and Nath, P. (2007), “Role of Electronic Trust in 
Online Retailing - a Re-Examination of the Commitment-Trust 
Theory”, European Journal of Marketing, vol. 41, pp. 1173-202. 
[32] Nielsen, J., Molich, R., Snyder, C., and Farrell, S. (2000), “E-
commerce User Experience”, Technical Report, Nielsen Norman 
Group, Cheskin Research & Studio Archetype/Sapient: 1999, 
eCommerce Trust Study,  Sapient, http://www.sapient.com/cheskin/. 
[33] Palmatier, R.W., Dant, R.R., Grewal, D., and Evans, K.R. (2006), 
“Factors Influencing the Effectiveness of Relationship Marketing: A 
Meta-Analysis”, Journal of Marketing, vol. 70 No. 4, pp. 136-53. 
[34] Raven, P. and Welsh, D. H.B. (2004), “An Exploratory Study of 
Influences on Retail Service Quality: A Focus on Kuwait and 
Lebanon”, Journal of Services Marketing, vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 198-214. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

[35] Schibrowsky, J.A., Peltier, J.W., and Nill, A. (2007), “The State of 
Internet Marketing Research - a Review of the Literature and Future 
Research Directions”, European Journal of Marketing, vol. 41 no. 7-
8, pp. 722-33. 
[36] Scott, L. (1980), “Interpersonal trust: A comparison of attitudinal and 
situational factors”, Human Relations, vol. 33 No. 11, pp. 805-812.  
[37] www.secondlife.com  
[38] SPSS (1999), SPSS Advanced Models 9.0, SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL. 
[39] Surakka, V. and Hietanen, J. (1998), “Facial and emotional reactions 
to Duchénne and non-Duchénne smiles”, International Journal of 
Psychophysiology, vol. 29, pp. 23-33. 
[40] Tsai, W. (2001), “Determinants and consequences of employee 
displayed positive emotions”,  Journal of Management, vol. 27 no. 4, 
pp. 497-510. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

