Performance Evaluation of DSDV and AODV Protocols for Green Corridor
Management in a Metropolitan City
Sandeep Sagar Kariyappa Shivappa, Asha Hanumantharaya, Narendra Kumar Gurumurthy
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, University Visvesvaraya College of Engineering,
Bangalore University, Bangalore, India
email:sandeepsagarks@gmail.com, ashahveda@gmail.com, gnarenk@yahoo.com
Abstract—Air pollution is a serious health concern in
densely
populated
metropolitan
cities.
Vehicle
traffic
congestion
is
a
major
challenge,
especially
in
medical
emergency cases, such as transportation of life saving drugs,
accident victims, or transplant organs. In this paper, we
propose a signal free corridor based air pollution management
for
ambulances
by
maintaining
proper
speed
in
which
ambulances do not encounter any signals, decreasing the
vehicle density and air pollution at junctions. Performance
evaluation of Destination Sequenced Distance Vector Protocol
(DSDV) and Ad-Hoc On Demand Distance Vector Protocol
(AODV) for the vehicular environment in multiple scenarios
has been simulated and the results are encouraging.
Keywords- AODV; DSDV; Signal free route; NS-2.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Air pollution is mainly caused by fuel-wood and biomass
burning, fuel adulteration, vehicle emission and traffic
congestion.
It
is
concentrated
in
densely
populated
metropolitan cities.
Some of the reasons why pollution is
concentrated in metropolitan areas include (1) High density
of vehicles, (2) Increased number of traffic signals, (3)
Increase in the number of diesel vehicles, (4) Increased
number of two wheelers, (5) Decreased carpooling, (6)
Reduced public transportation usage.
Bengaluru is a metropolitan city having a population of
150,000,000 [3]. As per recent statistics, the vehicle
population in Bengaluru is 5,800,000, and 90% of registered
vehicles are motor bikes and cars, with 1300 new vehicles
getting added every day. Only 40,000,000 people use public
transport services like BMTC (Bangalore Metropolitan
Transport Corporation). The rest of the population uses their
own vehicles. Hence, travel speed has dropped to 15 Km/h.
A. Vehicle Statistics in Bengaluru [3]
We include below some vehicle statistics in Bengaluru.
1)
Two wheelers – 3,841,140
2)
Light motor vehicles-1,141,460
3)
Heavy truck vehicles-108,850
4)
Auto rickshaws-149,950
5)
Heavy goods vehicles-73,470
6)
Floating vehicles-200,000
7)
other vehicles-244,890
Total number of vehicles is 5,759,760.
The average speed of vehicles on many metropolitan city
roads is less than 15 kilometers per hour during peak hours
[3]. At such speeds, vehicles in India emit air pollutants 4 to
8 times higher than pollutants emitted when there is less
traffic congestion. Indian vehicles also consume increased
carbon footprint fuel per trip than in the case where traffic
congestion is less. The more severe the traffic congestion,
the longer vehicles stay at junctions, causing greater air
pollution [1].
Figure 1. Air pollution levels in different metropolitan cities of India [3].
Bangalore has reported that, one in every two children of
the city are suffering from bronchial related diseases, ranking
second in the list of cities with highest air pollution levels in
India (see Fig. 1). The annual average values of air pollutants
in Bengaluru show a linear increase year after year (see Fig.
2). Ideas of road widening, one way streets, strict traffic
rules, efficient navigation system can reduce congestion.
Vehicles must not wait for a long time at traffic signals and,
hence, signal free routes are recommended.
Figure 2. Annual average values of air pollutants in Bengaluru [3].
II.
SIGNAL FREE ROUTE
Signal free route is a congestion free route between the
source and the destination. In vehicles transport, this means
no encountering of any signals of traffic by maintaining
optimum speed and coordinating between vehicles on the
road. There is an exponential increase in the number of
vehicles on the road every day. Traffic congestion reduces
average traffic speed during peak hours. At low speeds,
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-530-2
FUTURE COMPUTING 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

scientific studies reveal, vehicles burn fuel inefficiently and
pollute more per trip [2]. Similar to the signal free route for
ambulances while transporting transplant organs, signal free
routes can be designed for the Bangalore long distance routes
using the DSDV and AODV protocols. These protocols
show the shortest possible path between the source and the
destination.
To overcome the hurdles of traffic signals,
proper speed has to be maintained by the vehicles. Signal
free route for ambulances at the time of emergencies can also
be designed using Vehicle Ad-Hoc Networks (VANET).
Sensing traffic congestion on the route of an ambulance, the
dispatch center communicates to vehicles on the route and
thereby
vehicles
communicate
with
each
other
for
maintaining proper speed on signal free route and giving way
for the ambulances in case of emergencies.
III.
VANETS
VANETs are a form of Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks
(MANETs) with the mobile nodes being vehicles and it is
mainly
aimed
at
providing
safety
and
hassle-free
transportation for passengers. In these networks, vehicles
are equipped with communication equipment that allows
them to communicate with each other i.e., Vehicle to
Vehicle (V2V)
communication and
also
to
exchange
messages
with
a roadside network
infrastructure i.e.,
Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I) communication [2]. It
provides an efficient way to use vehicular networking.
VANETs are applied to control the high density of vehicles
during congestion in metropolitan cities. They find their
applications widely in electronic toll collection, monitoring,
collision warning, road signal alarms, parking lot payment,
and so on. Specific areas of research in VANETs include
routing, broadcasting, quality of service and security [1].
VANETs
are
important
components
of
Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS) to set up communication
systems in the form of location tracking using Global
Positioning System (GPS), wireless networks. The need for
ITS arises from the real time problems of traffic congestion,
to provide a comfortable, hassle-free transportation system to
the vehicles. Congestion is a major challenge for the
efficiency of the transportation system, travel time, speed
and fuel consumption. It has its application to retrieve
information about instant accidents and traffic messages and
helps in designing and developing a better traffic signaling
system. It also offers multimedia applications such as
Internet connectivity and multimedia access [2]. The better
the management of traffic congestion on roads, the better the
air pollution management.
Some of the characteristics of VANETs include [10]:
1)
Highly dynamic topology,
2)
Frequently disconnected network,
3)
Mobility modeling and prediction,
4)
Communication environment,
5)
Hard delay constraints.
A. IEEE 802.11p and IEEE 1609 Standards
IEEE 802.11p standard [4] describes the extensions
added to 802.11 that had significant overheads used in
different multiple vehicular scenarios for Media Access
Control (MAC) operations. 802.11p protocol operates in
5.8/5.9 GHz with a guard band from 5.850-5.855 GHz, to
support ITS applications of On Board Unit (OBU) to Road
Side
Unit
(RSU)
communication.
RSU
to
RSU
communications are developed that describe the security,
management and physical access in Wireless Access in
Vehicular Environments (WAVE) communication. At the
Transmission
Control
Protocol-Wi-Fi
Wireless
Short
Message Protocol (TCP-WI WSMP) layer, Unicasting (for
non-safety
applications)
and
Broadcasting
(for
safety
applications) are specified providing limitations in the case
of low bandwidth occupancy and low power usage [1].
The IEEE 1609 family of standards for WAVE [4]
describes
the
architecture,
communication
model,
management structure, security mechanisms and physical
access for high speed (about 27 Mb/s) and short range (about
1000m)
low
latency
wireless
communications
in
the
vehicular
environment.
The
primary
architectural
components defined by the 1609 standards are the OBU,
RSU and WAVE interface. IEEE 1609.0 defines the usage of
WAVE
environment
by
applications,
the
respective
management activities are defined by IEEEp1609.1, the
security protocols are defined by IEEEp 1609.2, and the
network-layer protocols are defined by IEEEp 1609.3.
Additionally, the standard also provides extensions to the
physical channel access defined in IEEE 802.11 to support
the WAVE standards in IEEE p1609.4.
The
IEEE
1609
family
standards
find
various
applications in design, specification, implementation and
testing of WAVE devices used in transportation, automotive
and traffic management. Network, hardware and application
designers of ITS use these standards as they define the
communications architecture for Dedicated Short Range
Communication (DSRC) based V2V and V2I interactions,
and they pose as the basis for the low-latency interface
design of on-board and roadside devices. ITS application
designers use the standards to deploy the basis for interface
definitions between system components and as a framework
for application architecture. The architecture, interfaces and
messages defined in the IEEE 1609 family of standards for
WAVE
support
the
operation
of
secure
wireless
communications between vehicles and infrastructure, as well
as between vehicles [9].
B. Dijkstra's Algorithm
The Dijkstra's Algorithm is a graph based search
algorithm that gives the shortest path solution for the single
source graph with positive edge costs by producing the
shortest path tree. This routing algorithm finds the path of
lowest cost between the source node and every other node,
thereby resulting in the shortest path between source and
destination. It has wide applications in network routing
protocols such as Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) and is
also helpful in finding the shortest distance to the destined
city from a source city [2].
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-530-2
FUTURE COMPUTING 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

C. Ad-Hoc On Demand Distance Vector Protocol
The AODV algorithm is a reactive protocol whose
route finding is carried out by Route Discovery Cycle (RDC)
maintaining active routing. It is a descendant of DSDV
protocol providing unicast and multi-cast communication
and adding an extra feature of sequence number to prevent
loop formation. AODV is noted for its quick adaptation
under dynamic link conditions, consuming less network
bandwidth, which can be scalable for large network [5].
D.
Destination Sequenced Distance Vector Protocol
DSDV is a Bellman-Ford algorithm based protocol that
provides solutions to routing loop problems by adding
sequence numbers. DSDV provides the best performance in
networks with moderate mobility and few nodes. Requiring
regular update of its routing tables becomes the major
setback for its performance in dynamic environments and
large network [6].
E.
NS-2
Network Simulator-2 (NS-2) is a well-accepted tool for
network simulation, as its architecture is suitable for
extensions and interfacing with other simulation modules. It
can be implemented using IEEE 802.11 protocol. It is used
in the simulation of routing protocols and it is highly used in
ad-hoc networking research. NS-2 supports popular network
protocols, offering simulation results for wired and wireless
networks alike. AODV and DSDV routing protocols are
used for simulation [1].
IV.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF GREEN
CORRIDOR MANAGEMENT
Vehicles equipped with communication devices can
interact effectively by exchanging information on congestion
with the dispatch center and other surrounding vehicles,
making it feasible for the vehicles to travel in coordination
and giving way to ambulances in a signal free route.
Congestion
Detection
Algorithms
(CDA)
are used to find the high traffic density areas with low
vehicular speeds allowing the drivers of ambulances to
reroute to any other shortest path available. RSU are
deployed to transmit data during obstacles in order to restrict
the exchange of data during its need from the centralized
location. The information updates on congestion can be
given to drivers in the form of text messages to the OBU.
Ever since the Bangalore International Airport came into
existence, a number of road development projects in all parts
of the city have been deployed to make the travel to the
airport convenient and faster. In parallel, there is an
exponential increase in the number of vehicles every day,
which
in
turn
increases
congestion
and
air-pollution,
reducing average traffic speed and causing inefficient usage
of fuel by vehicles.
Bangalore has evidenced the instances of green corridor
with the help of Bangalore traffic police during major life
saving emergency cases. Green corridor for live heart
transport from Bangalore to Chennai reduced the travel time
to 2 hours from 7 hours in September 2014 [5]. Deriving the
idea from this, signal free routes can be designed for the
Bangalore long distance routes using the DSDV and AODV
protocols depicting the less possible congestion and less air
polluted path between the source and destination. Vehicles
that maintain proper speed stay in the signal free route,
experiencing less traffic congestion by increasing the
average travel speed by at least 2 times. The air pollutants
density in the vicinity of traffic signals and travel time are
decreased considerably.
A. Implementation
The required aspects for the performance evaluation are:
I.
Availability of sufficient VANET modules on the
routes to detect congestion.
II.
Existence of dispatch centre that holds the updated
data, based on traffic congestion.
III.
Presence of RSU helps in signal propagation
during obstacles restricting propagation.
IV.
Vehicles in signal free route maintain speed in the
given range, as shown in Table II.
B. Case Study
1) For Public Transport:
The vehicle of interest starts from the source at Dr.
Ambedkar Institute of Technology College (Dr. AIT) to
reach the destination University Visvesvaraya College of
Engineering (UVCE) and can go by 4 routes and achieve the
shortest path with fewer signals in route. For the least air
pollution, the vehicle has to travel through the route which
has the least number of traffic signals that contribute to the
shortest path.
1.
Route 1 has 10 traffic signals.
2.
Route 2 has 11 traffic signals.
3.
Route 3 has 11 traffic signals.
4.
Route 4 has 9 traffic signals.
Figure 3. Flowchart for Case 1.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-530-2
FUTURE COMPUTING 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

Since route 4 has the least number of traffic signals, the
vehicle of interest travels along this route. The idea of signal
free route can be implemented by taking speed, congestion,
direction of traffic, duration, number of traffic signals on the
route and emergency into considerations. The shortest path
is found by DSDV or AODV protocol considering traffic
signals as nodes traversing through the minimum number of
traffic signals, and, consequently, minimal air pollution. In
turn, it also increases the average speed and decreasing the
time taken to reach the destination by 50% compared to the
existing traffic system. The air pollutants spread over the
route instead of getting concentrated in traffic junctions, as
depicted in Fig. 3.
TABLE I: TABLE TO SHOW THE DISTANCE BETWEEN EACH SIGNALS, SPEED
AND TIME IT TAKES TO REACH WITH THE USUAL TRAFFIC SYSTEM
From
To
Distance
Speed
Time
Dr.AIT
Nagarabhavi
Circle
2
20
6
Nagarabhavi Circle
Chandralayout
1.2
14
5
Chandralayout
Attiguppe
0.9
18
3
Attiguppe
Underpass
3
20
9
Underpass
Rajajinagar 5th
Block
1.6
16
6
Rajajinagar 5th
Block
More
1.4
14
6
More
Okalipuram
0.75
15
3
Okalipuram
Majestic
1.4
8.4
10
Majestic
UVCE
3.2
17
11
TABLE II: TABLE TO SHOW THE DISTANCE BETWEEN EACH SIGNALS, SPEED
AND TIME IT TAKES TO REACH WITH SIGNAL FREE ROUTE
From
To
Distanc
e
Min
Spee
d
Max
Spee
d
Time
Dr.AIT
Nagarabhavi
Circle
2
60
80
2
Nagarabhavi
Circle
Chandralayout
1.2
36
72
2
Chandralayout
Attiguppe
0.9
27
36
2
Attiguppe
Underpass
3
45
72
4
Underpass
Rajajinagar 5th
Block
1.6
48
64
2
Rajajinagar 5th
Block
More
1.4
42
56
2
More
Okalipuram
0.75
22.5
30
2
Okalipuram
Majestic
1.4
28
33.6
3
Majestic
UVCE
3.2
32
38.4
6
2) For Ambulance:
The signal free route for ambulances at the time of
emergency and live organ transportation is designed using
VANETs, control unit and routing protocols. Considering
speed, congestion, direction of traffic, duration, number of
traffic signals in the route, number of ambulances in the
same traffic junction, as major aspects, a green corridor is
designed for ambulances. The VANETs in the path ahead of
the ambulance periodically predict the possible congestion
by considering the speed of surrounding vehicles and
transmits the information to the surrounding nodes. In the
case of vehicles traveling at a greater speed, no congestion
message is transmitted but, real time congestion message is
transmitted to the surrounding nodes in the case of vehicles
traveling at a lower speed than that of other vehicles (nodes),
enabling the ambulance to find alternate shorter paths to the
nearest hospital. The unavailability of alternate route justifies
the need for a signal free corridor, during which all traffic
signals in the route are controlled by the ambulance,
unblocking the way by signaling green. As the ambulance
approaches the traffic signal within a distance of 500 m, the
control of the nearest traffic signal in the route is taken over
by the ambulance automatically until it is given safe passage;
the ambulance is equipped with GPS and Radio Frequency
(RF) module. The longitude and latitude of the traffic
congested location is tracked using the GPS and the same
information is updated in the database of the dispatch center.
The technique of controlling traffic signal lights in signal
free route consists of two units which synchronize with each
other and help achieve a hassle-free travel for ambulances,
Fig. 6.
The GPS installed in the ambulance unit senses the
positional coordinates of an ambulance and the controller is
equipped with embedded system and encoder. It predicts the
direction of the ambulance using the information from the
GPS receiver and transmits the same information to the
decoded signal which causes the embedded system to work
in emergency mode and signal green in the lane of the
ambulance and red in other lanes until the ambulance crosses
the junction. As soon as the ambulance crosses the junction,
the embedded system starts to work in normal mode,
resuming the previous conditions.
Priority will be assigned in the case of two or more
ambulances in the same traffic junction, based on the
distance between each ambulance and the traffic junction and
the received signal strength from other ambulances. The
closer the ambulance, the better the received signal strength
and the higher its priority. Thereby, an efficient signal free
corridor for life saving emergency cases is created.
Figure 4. Proposed traffic signal monitoring system.
V.
SIMULATION AND RESULTS
Experimental Analysis:
To simulate the multiple
scenarios of the wireless network, a TCL program is written
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-530-2
FUTURE COMPUTING 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

in NS-2. The simulation related parameters are given in
Table III.
TABLE III: SIMULATION RELATED PARAMETERS
Channel Type
Wireless
Radio-Propagation Model
Two-Ray Ground
Network Interface Type
Wireless Phy
MAC Type
Mac/802.11
Interface Queue Type
Queue/Drop Tail/Pri Queue
Antenna Model
Antenna/Omni
Link Layer Type
LL
Max packet in ifq
50
Case 1) The nodes serve as traffic signals at respective
places alternating red, yellow and green color. Mobile nodes
with black, brown, cyan, serve as vehicles. The node
numbered 41 is the vehicle of interest and moves from
source to destination, traversing a minimum number of
traffic signals in the signal free route and maintaining the
speed in proper range. The routing protocol used is DSDV
resulting in a minimum number of packet loss, Fig. 5.
Figure 5. Signal free route using DSDV protocol.
The nodes representing traffic signals at respective places
alternate red, yellow and green color. Mobile nodes with
black, brown, cyan, act as vehicles. The node numbered 41
is the vehicle of interest, moves from source to destination
traversing a minimum number of traffic signals in signal
free route maintaining the speed in proper range. The
routing protocol used is AODV resulting in an increased
number of packet loss compared to DSDV, Fig. 6.
Figure 6. Signal free route using AODV protocol
Figure 7. Signal free route in case of single ambulance.
Case 2) In case of an ambulance, considering a traffic
junction with 4 lanes, blue nodes represent display board, 4
traffic signals, each for respective lanes alternating red,
yellow, green color, red color. The node numbered 153 is an
ambulance and the node numbered 55 represents a hospital.
Knowing the positional co-ordinates of the ambulance, the
display board displays the distance at road sides, vehicles
ahead of the ambulance give way for it, and the RF
transmitter in ambulance controls the traffic signal, Fig. 7.
In case of two or more ambulances, the nearest
ambulance to the traffic junction and the highest signal
strength received by the RF receiver is given highest priority.
The nodes numbered 111 and 153 are ambulances destined
to reach node 155, the hospital. Ambulance 111, being closer
to the traffic junction than 153, impacts to signal green for
111 lane first and finally to 153, Fig. 8.
Figure 8. Signal free route in case of two or more ambulances.
The idea of signal free route for air pollution management
has been simulated using both DSDV and AODV protocols
for various scenarios. The average speed of vehicles on the
road has doubled compared to the existing traffic system
(Fig. 9) and the average travel time has decreased to half the
usual travel time; the usual travel time and speed is as
mentioned in Table I. Fig. 10 depicts decreasing the air
pollution at traffic junction areas at least by 2 times.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-530-2
FUTURE COMPUTING 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

Figure 9. Comparison of existing traffic system and signal free route
with respect to average traffic speed.
Figure 10. Comparison of existing traffic system and signal free route with
respect to average time taken to reach next signal.
VI. ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES
Some of the advantages of the system include: a
decrease in air pollution and a decrease in the average time
taken to reach the destination by increasing the average
traffic speed. It is an efficient method for ambulances and
other emergency vehicles.
Among the shortcomings of the system, we can list: the
probability of increase in road accidents due to increase in
average traffic speed and uncoordinated vehicles on road.
VII. CONCLUSION
This
paper
aims
at
managing
air
pollution
in
metropolitan cities by creating signal free route reducing
congestion at traffic junctions. Vehicles move in co-
ordination with each other on a signal free route and
maintain a proper speed, increasing the average speed of
vehicles on the road. The vehicles with average speed more
than 30kmph burn fuel efficiently which results in reduction
of air pollution by at least 2 times. The DSDV and AODV
protocols predict the least congested traffic route. The signal
free route for ambulances at the time of emergencies is
designed using VANETs and automatic control of traffic
signal lights, resulting in a hassle-free transportation for
ambulances. The idea of signal free route can be extended to
other emergency vehicles like Vehicles with Z cross security,
cash van, fire engines, etc., decreasing the average travel
time. In the future, the idea of signal free route can be
extended to other emergency vehicles like VIP, cash van, fire
engines, etc., decreasing the average travel time. In order to
decrease injuries from road accidents, a rule of compulsory
wearing of seat belts for all passengers in the vehicles
becomes necessary.
REFERENCES
[1]
Aparajitha Murali, K. Bhanupriya, B. Smitha Shekar, and G.
Narendra Kumar, “Performance Evaluation of IEEE 802.11p
for Vehicular Traffic Congestion Control”, 11th International
Conference on ITS Telecommunications, pp. 732-737, 2011.
[2]
B. Smitha Shekar, G. Narendra Kumar, H. V. Usha Rani, C.
K. Divyashree, Gayatri George and Aparajitha Murali, “GPS
Based Shortest Path for Ambulances using VANETs”,
International Conference on Wireless Networks (ICWN 2012)
IPCSIT volume 49, pp. 190-196, 2012.
[3]
Website:
Bangalore
Traffic
Police,
www.bangaloretrafficpolice.gov.in.
[4]
Christoph Schroth, Florian Dtzer, Timo Kosch, Benedikt
Ostermaier, and Markus Strassberger, “Simulating the Traffic
Effects
of
vehicle-to-vehicle
messaging
Systems,”
5th
International Conference on ITS Telecommunications, 2005.
[5]
Ian D. Chakeres, and Elizabeth M. Belding-Royer, “AODV
Routing Protocol Implementation Design”, 24th International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops
(ICDCSW’04), March 2004.
[6]
Prof B. N. Jagdale, Prof. Pragati Patil, Prof P. Lahane, and
Prof D. Javale, “Analysis and Comparison of Distance
Vector,
DSDV
and
AODV
Protocol
of
MANET,”
International Journal and Distributed and Parallel Systems
(IJDPS) volume 3, No. 2, pp. 121-131, March 2012.
[7]
K. Sangeetha, P. Archana, M. Ramya, and P. Ramya,
“Automatic Ambulance Rescue with Intelligent Traffic Light
System,” Coiambatore, India. IOSR Journal of Engineering,
volume 04, Issue 02, pp. 53-57, February 2014.
[8]
E. Geetha, V. Viswanadha, and G. Kavitha, “Design of an
Intelligent Auto Traffic Signal Controller with Emergency
Override,” International Journal of Engineering Science and
Innovative Technology (IJESIT), volume 3, Issue 4, pp. 670-
675, July 2014.
[9]
Sebastian Griang, Petri Mahonen, and Janne Riihijarvi,
“Design of Performance Evaluation of IEEE 1609 WAVE and
IEEE
802.11p
for
Vehicular
Communications,” Second
International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks
(ICUFN), pp. 344-348, 2010.
[10] Aamir
Hassan,
“VANET
Simulation,”
http://www.diva-
portal.org/smash/get/diva2:239905/FULLTEXT01.pdf,
Master’s
Thesis
in
Electrical
Engineering,
School
of
Information Science, Computer and Electrical Engineering,
HalmstadUniversity,2009.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-530-2
FUTURE COMPUTING 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

