Building a Portable Talking Medicine Reminder for Visually Impaired Persons
Hsiao Ping Lee∗† and Tzu-Fang Sheu∗‡
∗Department of Medical Informatics, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, 40201 ROC
Email: ping@csmu.edu.tw
†Department of Medical Research, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, 40201 ROC
‡Department of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Providence University, Taichung, Taiwan, 43301 ROC
Email: fang@pu.edu.tw
Abstract—Assistive systems can help improving the ability of
disabled persons in taking care of themselves. There are more
than 39 million visually impaired persons in the world, and
moreover, the amount is increasing year by year. Therefore,
Developing assistive systems for the visually impaired persons
is an important issue. Since the medication guides are often too
complex for visually impaired persons, it makes The visually
impaired persons frequently forgetting to take drugs or being
wrong in medication. In this work, we are going to develop
a portable talking medicine reminding system to assist visually
impaired persons in medication and reduce the number of med-
ication errors. The assistive system will mainly provide auditory
feedback in operation, and braille output for special needs.
The assistive system will also provide a user-friendly interface
that is speciﬁcally designed for visually impaired persons and
is compatible with common-used screenreaders. The assistive
system identiﬁes drugs based on the now relatively common
barcodes on drug begs. In addition, to overcome the problem
that it is difﬁcult for visually impaired persons to scan the
barcode horizontally or vertically, an omni-directional barcode
recognition technology will be used in the assistive system. It will
make the assistive system easier for visually impaired persons to
use. The assistive system will be built on a handheld device for
better portability so that it can assist visually impaired persons
anytime and anywhere, and reduce the number of medication
errors. The system will be suitable to be used in the applications
of ubiquitous health-care.
Keywords—assistive systems for visually impaired persons;
portable and talking assistive systems; medicine-taking remind-
ing; barcode recognition; ubiquitous health-care.
I. MOTIVATION
Assistive technology can help improve the ability of dis-
abled persons in taking care of themselves. Building barrier-
free smart living space and providing sufﬁcient assistive
systems and devices for disabled persons are one of the
civilization indicators of a country [1]. The amount of visually
impaired persons in the world is over 39 million [2]. The
amount is increasing year by year. Due to their impairment,
the visually impaired persons face more difﬁculty in their daily
life. Most of them rely on assistive systems and devices to
overcome the daily difﬁculties. There have been many assistive
systems and devices developed for visually impaired persons
in the past [3]–[10]. However, the amount and categories of
assistive systems and devices for visually impaired persons
are insufﬁcient. The consequences are severe. It is important
to develop appropriate assistive systems and devices, based on
the needs of the visually impaired persons, to help solve some
of the problems that they face in daily life, thereby improving
their ability to take care of themselves.
Compared with sighted persons, visually impaired persons
frequently forget to take drugs or make errors in medication
because medication guides are often too complex for visually
impaired persons, which include the category, dosage and
taking time. Many visually impaired persons may make errors
in the daily medication. The medication errors will reduce
the quality of life of the visually impaired persons, and
furthermore, may seriously damage their health. Currently,
some medication reminding softwares have been developed
and available in markets, for example, RxMindMe, Med
Minder and OnTimeRx [11]–[13]. However, these softwares
are designed for sighted persons rather than visually impaired
persons. The special need of visually impaired persons are
not considered in the design of the softwares. Thereby, it is
worthwhile and important to develop an assistive system spe-
ciﬁc for visually impaired persons to assist them in medication
and reduce the number of medication errors.
II. THE PORTABLE TALKING MEDICINE REMINDER FOR
VISUALLY IMPAIRED PERSONS
In order to assist visually impaired persons in medication
to reduce the number of medication errors, in this work, we
are going to develop a portable assistive system for visually
impaired persons, that is named Portable Talking Medicine
Reminder (PTMR).
The developing PTMR system is built on handheld devices,
for example Android smart phones, for better portability. Since
barcodes are now relatively widely attached to drug begs, we
will use barcode-based drug identiﬁcation in the PTMR system
so that the system knows the category of drugs in the beg. Due
to their impairment, it is difﬁcult for visually impaired persons
to put barcodes under the camera len horizontally or vertically
during recognizing barcodes. It will signiﬁcantly impact the
result of barcode recognition. Therefore, an omni-directional
barcode recognition technology will be used in the system,
that can correctly and efﬁciently recognize the barcode in any
direction, for example a rotated barcode. The text-to-speech
technology will be used in the PTMR system for auditory feed-
back. Also, the braille feedback will be available in the PTMR
system as an optional output format. That is, the PTMR system
is able to simultaneously provide messages in both auditory
and braille formats. For convenient use, we are going to design
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

a user-friendly interface speciﬁc designed for visually impaired
persons. The user interface will be compatible with commonly
used screenreading softwares. When users scan the barcode
on a drug beg, the PTMR system recognizes the barcode,
and then provides the medication information, such as drug
name, taking time, dosage. The PTMR system also describes
the color and the shape of the drug to avoid misery. The full
guides in auditory and braille formats will be provided while
the PTMR system is operated. In addition, we will build a
service platform to achieve automatic collection of medication
information in the work. A medication data exchange standard
will be also designed for the use of transferring medication
information between the user’s client and service platform.
The PTMR system can be conﬁgured automatically based on
the medication information received from the service platform.
The automatic conﬁguration is one of the featured functions
that facilitate the use of the PTMR system. It is difﬁcult for
visually impaired persons to input data on a handheld device
with a touch screen. By using the featured function of auto-
matic conﬁguration, the problem of being unable to input data
can be completely solved. Furthermore, the potential problem
of typing error will be also avoided. The PTMR system will
provide reminding and guiding functions to prevent visually
impaired persons from medication errors, such as wrong type,
time and dosage. The PTMR system will regularly send the
medication and error logs to the visually impaired persons’
nursing staffs or relatives automatically. Based on the logs, the
nursing staffs or relatives can give necessary suggestions and
care to the visually impaired persons in the medication. The
portable talking medicine reminder developing in the work
will serve visually impaired persons anytime and anywhere,
and help to reduce the number of errors in medication.
III. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, the assistive system that is called portable
talking medicine reminder (PTMR) will be developed for
visually impaired persons. The assistive system is designed to
remind visually impaired persons in medication. The system
helps avoid the medication errors, for example forgetting
to take drugs or taking wrong drugs, and provide a better
health-care. The PTMR system will provide several featured
functions, such as user-friendly interfaces, auditory and braille
feedback, automatic conﬁguration, that facilitate the use of
visually impaired persons. The PTMR system is portable and
can be used anytime and anywhere. Furthermore, the PTMR
system can be used in the applications of ubiquitous health-
care. The work is still in progress.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the National Science
Council of the Republic of China, Taiwan, for ﬁnancially
supporting this research under Grants [NSC102-2218-E-040-
001 to H.P. Lee, NSC102-2221-E-040-004 to H.P. Lee].
REFERENCES
[1] C. Phillips and M. Giasolli, “Assistive technology enhancement using
human factors engineering,” in Proceedings of the 1997 Sixteenth
Southern Biomedical Engineering Conference, 1997, pp. 26–29.
[2] “Prevalence of vision impairment,” http://www.lighthouse.org/research/
statistics-on-vision-impairment/prevalence-of-vision-impairment/,
accessed May, 2014.
[3] D. J. Calder, “Assistive technology interfaces for the blind,” in Proceed-
ings of the 3rd IEEE International Conference on Digital Ecosystems
and Technologies, 2009, pp. 318–323.
[4] H. Takizawa, S. Yamaguchi, M. Aoyagi, N. Ezaki, and S. Mizuno,
“Kinect cane: An assistive system for the visually impaired based on
three-dimensional object recognition,” in Proceedings of IEEE/SICE
International Symposium on System Integration (SII), 2012, pp. 740–
745.
[5] J. Xiao, K. Ramdath, M. Iosilevish, D. Sigh, and A. Tsakas, “A low cost
outdoor assistive navigation system for blind people,” in Proceedings of
the 8th IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications
(ICIEA), 2013, pp. 828–833.
[6] T. H. Nguyen, T. H. Nguyen, T. L. Le, T. T. H. Tran, N. Vuillerme, and
T. P. Vuong, “A wireless assistive device for visually-impaired persons
using tongue electrotactile system,” in Proceedings of 2013 International
Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications (ATC),
2013, pp. 586–591.
[7] R. Velzquez, Wearable and Autonomous Biomedical Devices and Sys-
tems for Smart Environment.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010.
[8] D. J. Calder, “Assistive technologies and the visually impaired: a digital
ecosystem perspective,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International Con-
ference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments,
2010.
[9] D. Dakopoulos and N. G. Bourbakis, “Wearable obstacle avoidance
electronic travel aids for blind: a survey,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics, Part C: Applications and Reviews, vol. 40, no. 1,
pp. 25–35, 2010.
[10] S. Shoval, J. Borenstein, and Y. Koren, “The navbelt-a computerized
travel aid for the blind based on mobile robotics technology,” IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 1376–
1386, 1998.
[11] “Rxmindme,”
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/
rxmindme-prescription-medicine/id379864173?mt=8,
accessed
May,
2014.
[12] “Medreminder,”
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.
rsys&hl=zh TW, accessed May, 2014.
[13] “Ontimerx,” http://www.ontimerx.com/, accessed May, 2014.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

