Improved AODV Protocol to Detect and Avoid Black Hole Nodes in MANETs 
Muneer Bani Yassein, Yaser Khamayseh, Bahaa Nawafleh 
Department of Computer Science 
Jordan University of Science and Technology 
22110, Irbid, Jordan 
Email: {masadeh, yaser}@just.edu.jo, nawafleh_bahaa@yahoo.com 
 
 
Abstract— Security in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs) is 
difficult to achieve because of the different attacks that might 
occur in the network, such as black hole attacks. In black hole 
attacks, the malicious node tries to attract most of the network 
traffic by advertising it has the best routing paths to the 
destination nodes, once the traffic is received by the black hole 
node, it simply drops the packets. This paper proposes an 
enhancement to Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector (AODV) 
routing protocol by employing effective policies to detect and 
avoid black hole nodes. The performance of the proposed 
scheme 
is 
evaluated 
using 
simulation. 
The 
obtained 
performance results indicate that the proposed AODV protocol 
achieves a significant improvement over both MI-AODV and 
the original AODV protocols, in terms of packet delivery ratio, 
dropped packets ratio, and overhead. 
Keywords- Black Hole; Routing Protocol; Mobile Ad hoc 
Networks; Wireless Network; AODV. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
A wireless ad hoc network is a network using different 
airwaves (such as radio waves) to connect a collection of 
infrastructureless nodes; it differs from wired network which 
uses physical connection. Due to the open nature of wireless 
links, wireless links face many challenges, such as security, 
routing, and scheduling [3][6][12][14]. A Mobile Ad Hoc 
Network (MANET) is a group of mobile devices that are 
connected through wireless links. These nodes collaborate 
together in order to achieve different network functionalities. 
Moreover, it uses a point to point transmission and each node 
works as a host and as a router [1][3]. Each node in the 
network may be sender, receiver, or intermediate node that 
provides contact of the other nodes, and these networks do 
not have any infrastructure such as Base Stations. MANETs 
are vulnerable to attacks and threats [4][9]. The process of 
transmitting data between the source and the destination 
nodes through the path is called routing. The determination 
of the best path depends on many measurements such as 
paths cost, and number of hops. 
Routing involves two sub processes, namely, (i), 
determining the best routing paths from the source to the 
destination, and (ii), transferring the data packets using the 
discovered path. Security in MANETs is difficult to achieve 
because of different attacks that might occur in the network 
(e.g., black hole attacks). In black hole attacks, the malicious 
node tries to attract as much as possible of the network 
traffic by advertising the best routing paths to the destination 
nodes, once the traffic is received by the black hole node, it 
drops the data. For example, in the widely used Ad hoc On-
Demand Distance Vector (AODV) [4] routing protocol in a 
network infected with black hole nodes, when a source node 
sends data packets into a destination, the black hole 
advertises that it has the best path to the destination node 
whenever it receives any Route Request (RREQ) control 
packet. Then, it sends the response, Route Reply (RREP) to 
the source node. RREP messages could arrive from a normal 
node or a black hole node. If the reply arrives from a normal 
node, the protocol works as intended. If the first replay 
arrives from a black hole node, the source will transmit the 
data through the path that contains the black hole node. Once 
the data is received by a black hole node, it drops the data. 
The probability of black hole node replies first to the 
RREQ message increases if the black hole is physically 
closer to the destination. Moreover, the probability of a false 
RREP message from a black hole arriving first to the source 
is higher than a normal safe reply as a black hole nodes 
response immediately to RREQ messages without the need 
for waiting a responding from the destination or checking the 
Routing Table (RT) as in the case of normal nodes.   
According to the AODV specification, once a source 
receives a RREP message, this makes the routing discovery 
process completed, and thus, it ignores all other reply 
messages from other nodes, and it begins sending the data 
packets using the received path. This work aims at 
improving the AODV protocol in order to detect and avoid 
black hole nodes to improve data packet delivery ratio, to 
provide secure routing, and to increase the network 
performance. 
The rest of this paper is organized as the following: 
Section II presents some of the related work in the area. 
Section III presents the proposed scheme. Section IV 
presents the simulation environment and the obtained results. 
The paper is concluded in Section V. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Different mechanisms were proposed to solve the black 
hole node problem. Most of researches conducted in this area 
can be divided into three categories: securing existing 
protocols, developing new secure protocols, and intrusion 
detection techniques. The following is a sneak review of 
some of the works that attempt to solve the black hole 
problem [8][16][17][18][20][21][22][23][25][24]. 
Sangi et al. [20] analyzed the performance degradation for 
AODV protocol, especially if the byzantine attacks are 
generated in a combination. In their analysis, they used 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

GloMoSim simulator. The authors concluded that the effects 
of byzantine and black hole are devastating when they are 
compared to a single black hole attack. In the routing 
protocol, route rushing or wormhole attacker maximizes the 
probability of malicious nodes. Also, a limited number of 
malicious nodes may generate wormhole attack with a 
combination between black/gray hole attack in which it may 
affect the activities of the network more than the rushing 
with black/gray hole attack.  
Medadian et al. [21] proposed a new scheme to prevent 
the black hole attacks based on the discussion between 
neighbor nodes in the network that will participate in the 
communication between the source and the destination 
nodes. The proposed scheme provides a higher security and 
better performance in delivering packets than the traditional 
AODV. The proposed scheme restricts each node with a 
number of rules to identify if they are not attacker; the node 
activities within the network determine if it is honest or not, 
in order to be a participant in the transmission process, the 
node must proves its honesty. Firstly, every node in the 
network is allowed to be a participant of the transmission 
process between the source and destination nodes, so each 
node has enough time to prove its truth. Min and Jiliu [22] 
addressed the security issues included in the routing process 
in MANET networks, in addition to detecting multiple black 
holes that act in groups in the networks, it proposed two 
authentication approaches using hash functions: firstly, the 
Message Authentication Code (MAC), and secondly, the 
Pseudo Random Function (PRF). Based on these two 
approaches, it can be fast to verify the message and to 
identify the group, making it possible to determine multiple 
black holes that work and cooperate together, also to find the 
safe routing path while avoiding attack from black hole 
groups. 
 
Zhang et al. [23] proposed a new approach for detecting 
black holes based on the process of checking a sequence 
number assigned to the Route Reply message based on the 
use of a new message generated by the destination of the 
route.  
The proposed scheme is used to deal with malicious 
attacks and with the problems resulted from traditional 
methods, rather than using a public key as in the traditional 
methods in which this may result in extra problems, such as 
key distribution, instead, in this scheme, an intermediate 
node in the network unicast a message along with a defined 
control message to the destination to ask for up to date serial 
number. Khamayseh et al. [8] proposed the protocol MI-
AODV to detect black hole nodes in a network. This 
mechanism modifies the original AODV protocol to enable 
the nodes of detecting black hole nodes in the network. 
III. PROPOSED PROTOCOL 
The security issue in MANETs is essential and even more 
challenging because of multiple senders, multiple receivers, 
and the usage of wireless links for transmitting the data. 
Thus, MANETs are more likely to be affected by attacks, 
such as the black hole attack. In general, MANET attacks 
can be classified into two types; external (outside) and 
internal (inside) attacks. The external attacks are caused by 
nodes that do not belong to the domain of the network, while 
the internal attacks are caused by the nodes which are part of 
the network itself. 
Furthermore, a black hole attack is a type of denial of 
service attack where a malicious node can attract data 
packets by falsely advertise a fresh route to the destination 
and retain them without forwarding them to the destination. 
This work proposes a mechanism for preventing the black 
hole attack by modifying the operations of the AODV 
routing protocol. The proposed mechanism aims at detecting 
and avoiding black hole nodes in MANET to reduce its 
impact. The proposed mechanism utilizes the following 
observations:  
 
The necessity to monitor the RREP messages and to 
observe its history. In this work, we propose to 
insert a new field in the RREP message to store the 
address of the last node that has a path to the 
destination.  
 
The necessity to observe the behavior of other 
nodes. Create new two tables in each node: suspect 
and black list tables. 
 
Suspect table contains the addresses of intermediate 
nodes which have sent RREP message; it also 
includes the number of times a node failed to send 
data through this node. For each node i, the suspect 
table contains a list of all nodes in the network that 
node i have received a RREP message and for node 
i the number of failures. A RREP message is 
considered failed if it was not able to deliver the 
data to the destination using the specified path. If 
the node doses not receive an acknowledgment 
message it considered the data is lost and restart the 
routing process again to retransmit the data.  
 
Black list table contains a list of nodes with failed 
RREP message that exceeded a certain threshold.  
If node i receives a RREP message from node j, with 
invalid path, it adds node j to the suspect table. Once 
the number of failures for a particular node exceeds a 
certain threshold, this node is moved to the black list 
table and any coming RREP messages from this node 
will be ignored.  
 
 
Add acknowledgment message of length one bit. 
The message is set to 1 if the packets are delivered 
to the destination node; otherwise, it is set to 0. The 
acknowledgment message will be forwarded to the 
source node to acknowledge the recipient of the 
send data.  
Moreover, the source sends a RREQ message in a 
standard manner as in the original ADOV protocol. In this 
scenario, the source node S sends RREQ to the destination D 
through intermediate nodes. When a RREP message is 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

received from intermediate nodes, the following steps are 
performed: 
 
Transmit the data packets through the path received 
in the first route replay message. In Figure 1, the 
first RREP message arrives to the source node 
through intermediate nodes I3, I5. Figure 1 shows 
the first RREP arrived to the source node. 
 
 
Figure 1.  First RREP arrived to the source node. 
 
The source node waits for an acknowledgement to 
arrive. If the acknowledgement arrives, then the path 
is safe. 
 
If the acknowledgement does not arrive, the address 
of the last node that has a path to the destination node 
is stored in the suspect table, and retransmit the data 
using the second received path; go to steps (a, b).  
 
The nodes will exchange their suspect tables, in case 
of a common node is found in the exchanged lists, 
and the node is already in the suspect table, then it is 
moved to the black list table. 
 
Once a node is added to the black list table, RREP 
messages from this node are ignored.  
 
Figure 2 depicts the procedures of the proposed algorithm 
that to solve a black hole problem in a consistent and 
sequential manner. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Proposed A 
Figure 3.   
Figure 4.   
Figure 2. Proposed AODV Protocol Algorithm. 
IV. SIMULATION AND ANALYSIS OF RESULTS 
In this study, we use GloMoSim simulator [26] to 
evaluate the performance of three deferent protocols: 
proposed protocol, original AODV protocol, and MI-AODV 
protocol.  
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed 
scheme, different experiments with different number of 
nodes, namely, 15, 20, 25, 30, and 35 nodes, were 
conducted. The nodes placed randomly and move according 
to the random waypoint model with a speed of (0 – 20 m/s) 
over a square terrain area of 1000*1000 meters. Each run 
lasts for 800 seconds. The radio propagation range is 250 
meters, and the bandwidth is 2 Mb/s. In the application 
layer, the Constant Bit Rate (CBR) traffic generator is used 
as a model of data resources in the simulations and the size 
of each data packet is 512 byte. In the MAC layer (i.e., Data 
Link Layer), we used the IEEE 802.11 communication 
protocol. Table 1 shows the simulation parameters for the 
different scenarios. 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
Simulator 
GloMoSim 2.03 
Simulation time 
800 second 
Simulation area 
1000m × 1000m 
Number of nodes 
15, 20, 25, 30, and 35, 
Mobility model 
Random waypoint 
Minimum speed 
0 meter/second 
Maximum speed 
20 meter/second 
Pause time 
0 , 
MAC protocol 
IEEE 802.11 
Data packet size 
512 byte 
Radio range 
250m 
Bandwidth 
2 Mb/s 
 
The simulation evaluates the performance of the original 
AODV, MI-AODV and the proposed versions of AODV 
with the presence of 1, 2, 6 black hole nodes for each 
protocol. Each experiment was repeated 10 times with 
different random seeds to change the random simulator 
parameters; the average of the obtained 10 values is 
computed. The margin of error for each average at 95% 
confidence is computed. Four performance metrics were 
used in this study to evaluate and compare the proposed 
AODV to the MI-AODV and the original one. These metrics 
are: packet delivery ratio, dropped packets ratio, overhead, 
and end-to-end delay. 
A. Results and Analysis   
In this section, we provide analysis of the results obtained 
from the simulation experiment that we performed to 
compare the performance of the three protocols in the 
presence of the black hole nodes. Throughout the paper, the 
green line with the triangular markers represents the original 
ST: Suspect Table (ST) 
BLT:  Black List Table (BLT) 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Step 1: A RREQ packet is broadcasted by node i, wait a RREP then  
send data packet, and wait an Ack packet from destination   
While (no Acknowledgement is received) 
Increment the suspect probability for node i  
If (Pi,j >= Psuspect)  
Insert replying address in suspect table  
Resend data to other RREP 
             
Step 2: Broadcast ST 
Step 3: While (received ST is not empty) 
if( Pi, j >= Pblack hole) 
Move node j from ST to BLT 
otherwise 
Rebroadcast Received ST 
Step 4: Broadcast BLT 
Step 5: While (received BLT is not empty) 
Insert in this BLT 
Broadcast this BLT 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

AODV protocol, the red line with the square markers 
represents the MI-AODV protocol, and the blue line with 
the trapezoidal markers represents the proposed protocol.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Delivery ratio, 1 Black hole, Pause 0. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Delivery ratio, 2 Black holes, Pause 0. 
Figure 3 shows the improvement of packets delivery ratio 
in the proposed AODV protocol compared to MI-AODV 
and original AODV protocols when the network is attacked 
by one black hole. Figure 4 shows the improvement of 
packets delivery ratio as the network is being attacked by 
two black hole nodes. As shown in Figures 3 and 4, the 
proposed AODV protocol improves the delivery ratio by 
50.9% in case of 1 black hole and by 57.8% in case of 2 
black holes; the MI-AODV protocol improves the delivery 
ratio by 38.4% in case of 1 black hole and by 48.5 in case of 
2 black holes, compared to the original AODV protocol for 
a network attacked by one and two black hole. 
Figures 3 and 4 show the results of a network attacked by 
one and two black holes, the packets delivery ratio for the 
cases of 15 to 35 nodes increases as the number of nodes 
increases. Within this interval, as the number of nodes 
decreases the effect of black hole increases, because a black 
hole has the chance to obtain more RREQ messages from all 
RREQ messages sent in the network; therefore, it drops 
more packets. This is the reason behind the decreasing 
packets delivery ratio for all protocols when the number of 
nodes decreases.  
The packets delivery ratio increases as the number of 
nodes increases from 15 to 35 nodes for the original AODV, 
the MI-AODV, and the proposed AODV protocols. As the 
number of nodes increases within this interval a black hole 
has the chance to subscribe in more communications; 
however, the source node surrounded by more neighbor 
nodes therefore it has a greater chance to receive routes 
from other normal and reliable nodes.  
Figures 5 and 6 show the ratio of dropped packets results 
for the three protocols for a network attacked by one and 
two black hole. The proposed AODV protocol improves the 
dropped packets ratio by 61.5% and 57.8% for the cases of 1 
and 2 black holes respectively compared to the original 
AODV protocol. The MI-AODV protocol improves the 
dropped packets ratio by 39.7% and 48.5% for the cases of 1 
and 2 black holes respectively compared to the original 
AODV protocol. 
The proposed AODV protocol reduces the ratio of 
dropped packets compared to the MI-AODV and the 
original AODV protocols for a network attacked by one 
black hole. As shown in Figure 5, the ratio of dropped 
packets increases as the number of nodes decreases for the 
cases of 15 to 35 nodes. As number of nodes decreases 
within this interval, the black hole has the chance to drop 
high ratio of sent packets. This is the reason behind the 
increasing ratio of dropped packets.  
 
 
Figure 5. Dropped packets ratio, 1 Black holes, Pause 0. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Dropped packets ratio, 2 Black holes. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

When the number of nodes increases the source node 
becomes surrounded by more neighbors and has a high 
chance to receive more alternative routes to the desired 
destination and the effect of black hole nodes decreases. 
There is an observable agreement between the results of 
dropped packets ratio and delivery packets ratio for a 
network attacked by one and two black hole nodes. The 
obtained results for end-to-end delay show that the delay 
time is very close for the cases of 15 to 20 nodes because of 
the decreased number of nodes. This leads to increasing the 
chance of destination node to be neighbor to the source 
node. The original AODV protocol shows the best delay 
result compare to the proposed protocol by 24.3% and MI-
AODV protocol by 11.6% for the case of one black hole.  
Figure 7 depicts the results for delay times. The results 
indicate that by increasing the number of nodes, the delay 
increases for all protocols. Moreover, the original AODV 
achieves the lowest delay, while the proposed scheme 
achieves the highest delay; the increase in delay for the 
proposed scheme is due to the extra processing and resend 
of packets over the second discovered path to the 
destination. Therefore, the packet deliver ratio achieved by 
the proposed scheme is higher than the other 2 schemes.  
 
 
 
Figure 7. Delay, 1 Black hole. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Delay, 2 Black hole. 
 
In Figure 8, the network is attacked by two black holes 
and the delay time results are depicted. Similar behavior is 
depicted as in the case of 1 black hole except for the case of 
15 to 20 nodes, in which the proposed scheme achieved the 
best results. For the case of 35 nodes, the original AODV 
protocol outperforms the proposed protocol by 18.3% and 
the MI-AODV protocol by 13.2%. Figures 9 and 10 depict 
the overhead results for the 3 protocols for the cases of 1 
and 2 black holes, respectively. As shown in Figures 9 and 
10, the proposed AODV protocol improves the additional 
overhead by 15.7% for the case of 1 black hole, and 15.1% 
for the case of 2 black holes, and the MI-AODV protocol 
improves the overhead by 6.9% for the case of 1 black hole, 
and 10.7% for the case of 2 black holes. The overhead 
reported by the original protocol is higher than the overhead 
reported by the other 2 protocols, while the proposed 
protocol achieved the lowest overhead. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Overhead, 1 Black holes, Pause 0. 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Overhead, 2 Black hole, Pause 0. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The main focus of this research is security issue in 
MANETs because it is essential and even more challenging 
as it has multiple senders, multiple receivers, and the usage 
of wireless links for transmitting data. Black hole problem is 
type of denial of service attack where a malicious node can 
attract data packets by falsely advertise a fresh route to the 
destination and retain them without forwarding them to the 
destination. The proposed AODV protocol modify the 
behavior of the original AODV to send the data packets 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

safely, and it aims at detecting and avoiding black hole 
nodes in MANET to reduce the impacts of black hole nodes.  
This is due to the fast response of the black hole in the 
original scheme to the RREQs. This leads to increase the 
number RREQ and RREP control messages in the network. 
The transmission data processes by both MI-AODV and 
proposed protocols needs more time than the original 
AODV protocol, thus, the number of the control packets in 
MI-AODV and proposed AODV protocols is less than the 
number of control packets in the original AODV protocol.  
Each node has suspect and black list tables to hold the 
addresses of the suspicions nodes, Suspect table contains the 
addresses of intermediate nodes which have sent RREP 
message, it also includes the number of times a node failed 
to send data through this node, and black list table contains 
a list of nodes with failed RREP message that exceeded a 
certain threshold. RREP is overloaded with an extra field to 
store address of the last node reply has a path to the 
destination. We added a new acknowledgment message to 
acknowledge the recipient of the send data from the source 
to the destination nodes. The obtained simulation results 
shown that the proposed AODV protocol comprehend the ill 
effects of the black hole attack and outperforms both the 
MI-AODV, and original AODV protocols in terms of 
packet delivery ratio, dropped packets ratio, and overhead. 
The protocol does not consider the behavior of two black 
hole nodes that cooperate together and work as a team. The 
next step is to support the protocol with a certain technique 
to solve the problem for more than one black hole cooperate 
together, and support it with a certain mechanism to deal 
with spoofing and reply acknowledgment from black hole.   
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Rangara, R. Jaipuria, G. Yenugwar, and P. Jawandhiya, 
“Intelligent Secure Routing Model for MANET”. Proceedings of 
Computer Science and Information Technology (ICCSIT), IEEE, vol. 
3, pp. 452 - 456, 2010. 
[2] J. Sen, S. Koilakonda, and A. Ukil, “A Mechanism for Detection of 
Cooperative Black Hole Attack in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks”, 
Proceedings of Intelligent Systems, Modelling and Simulation 
(ISMS), IEEE, pp. 338 - 343, 2011. 
[3] P. Tsou, J. Chang, Y. Lin, H. Chao, and J. Chen, “Developing a 
BDSR Scheme to Avoid Black Hole Attack Based on Proactive and 
Reactive Architecture in MANETs”, Proceedings of Advanced 
Communication Technology (ICACT), IEEE,  pp. 755 – 760, 2011. 
[4] M. Medadian, A. Mebadi, and E. Shahri, “Combat with Black Hole 
Attack in AODV Routing Protocol”, Proceedings of First Asian 
Himalayas, IEEE, pp. 530 - 535, 2009. 
[5] S. Lu, L. Li, K. Lam, and L. Jia, “SAODV: A MANET Routing 
Protocol that can Withstand Black Hole Attack”, Proceedings of 
Computational Intelligence and Security, vol. 2, pp. 421 - 425, 2009. 
[6] S. Umang, B. Reddy, and M Hoda, “Enhanced intrusion detection 
system for malicious node detection in ad hoc routing protocols using 
minimal energy consumption”, In ITE journal, vol. 4, 2010, pp. 2084 
- 2094. 
[7] S. Kannan, T. Maragatham, S. Karthik, and V. Arunachalam, “A 
Study of attacks, Attack Detection and Prevention Methods in 
Proactive and Reactive Routing Protocols”, In Medwell journal, vol. 
5,  2011, pp. 178-183. 
[8] Y. Khamayseh, A. Bader, W. Mardini, and Muneer BaniYasein, “A 
New Protocol for Detecting Black Hole Nodes in Ad Hoc Networks”, 
In International Journal of Communication Networks and Information 
Security (IJCNIS), vol. 3, 2011, pp. 36-47. 
[9]  N. Bhalaji and A. Shanmugam, “A Trust Based Model to Mitigate 
Black Hole Attacks in DSR Based Manet”, In European Journal of 
Scientific Research, vol. 50 no. 1, 2011, pp. 6-15.  
[10] A. Sangi, J. Liu, L. Zou, “A Performance Analysis of AODV Routing 
Protocol under Combined Byzantine Attacks in MANETs”, 
Proceedings of Computational Intelligence and Software Engineering 
CiSE , IEEE, pp. 1 - 5, 2009. 
[11] D. Mishra, Y. Jain, S. Agrawal, “Behavior Analysis of Malicious 
Node in the Different Routing Algorithms in Mobile Ad Hoc 
Network (MANET)”, Proceedings of Advances in Computing, 
Control, & Telecommunication Technologies, pp. 621-623, 2009. 
[12] T. Manikandan and K. Sathyasheela, “Detection Of Malicious Nodes 
in MANETs”, Proceedings of Communication Control and 
Computing Technologies (ICCCCT), IEEE, pp. 788 - 793, 2010.  
[13] W. Gong, Z. You, D. Chen, X. Zhao, M. Gu, and K. Lam, “Trust 
Based Malicious Nodes Detection in MANET“, Proceedings of E-
Business and Information System Security, IEEE,  pp. 1 - 4, 2009. 
[14] N. Bhalaji and A. Shanmugam, “Association Between Nodes to 
Combat Blackhole Attack in DSR Based MANET”, Proceeding of 
Wireless and Optical Communications Networks, pp. 1-5, 2009. 
[15] L. Tamilselvan and V. Sankaranarayanan, “Prevention of Blackhole 
Attack in MANET”, Proceeding of Wireless Broadband and Ultra 
Wideband Communications, IEEE, pp. 21, 2007. 
[16] A. Saini and H. Kumar, “Effect Of Black Hole Attack On AODV 
Routing Protocol In MANET”, In International Journal of Computer 
Science and Technology, vol. 1, 2010, pp. 1 – 4,. 
[17] E. Gerhards-Padilla, N. Aschenbruck, P. Martini, M. Jahnke, and J. 
T¨olle, “A Detecting Black Hole Attacks in Tactical MANETs using 
Topology Graphs”, Proceeding of Local Computer Networks, IEEE, 
pp. 1043 - 1052, 2007. 
[18] G. Mamatha and S. Sharma, “A New Combination Approach To 
Secure MANETS Against Attacks”, In International Journal of 
Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), vol. 2, 2010, pp.1-10. 
[19] R. Das, B. Purkayastha, and P. Das, “Security Measures for Black 
Hole Attack in MANET: An Approach”, In International Journal of 
Engineering Science and Technology, vol. 3, 2011, pp. 2832- 2838. 
[20] A. Sangi, J. Liu, and L. Zou, "A Performance Analysis of AODV 
Routing protocol under Combined Byzantine Attacks in MANETs" , 
International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Software 
Engineering,CiSE 2009, pp. 1-5, 2009. 
[21] M. Medadian, M. Yektaie, and A. Rahmani "Combat with Black Hole 
Attack in AODV routing protocol in MANET", AH-ICI 2009. First 
Asian Himalayas International Conference on, pp. 3-5 Nov. 2009. 
[22] Z. Min and Z. Jiliu, "Cooperative Black Hole Attack Prevention for 
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks",  In Proceedings of the 2009 International 
Symposium on Information Engineering and Electronic Commerce. 
IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 26-30, 2009. 
[23] X. Zhang,Y. Sekiya, and Y, Wakahara, "Proposal of a Method to 
Detect BlackHole Attackin MANET", Autonomous Decentralized 
Systems, International Symposium on, pp. 23-25 March 2009 
[24] S. Marti, T. Giuli, K. Lai, and M. Bake, “Mitigating Routing 
Misbehavior”. In Proceedings of Mobile Ad hoc networks 6th 
MobiCom, BA Massachuestts; pp. 10-18, 2000.  
[25] N. Mistry, D. Jinwala, and M. Zaveri, "Improving AODV Protocol 
against Blackhole Attacks", proceedings of the International Multi 
Conference of Engineers and Computer Scientists, vol. 2, 2010. 
[26] X. Zeng, R. Bagrodia, M. Gerla, "GloMoSim: a library for parallel 
simulation of large-scale wireless networks," Parallel and Distributed 
Simulation, 1998. PADS 98. Proceedings. Twelfth Workshop on , pp. 
154-161, 
May 
199
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-339-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

