Enhancing Hebbian Learning in Biological Neural Cultures Through Electrical 
Stimulation 
 
 
Víctor Lorente, Jose Manuel 
Ferrández 
Dpto. Electrónica, Tecnología de 
Computadores y Proyectos,  
UPCT, Cartagena, Spain 
{victor.lorente, jm.ferrandez}@upct.es 
Eduardo Fernández 
Instituto de Bioingeniería 
Universidad Miguel Hernández 
Elche, Spain 
e.fernandez@umh.es 
Felix de la Paz 
Dpto. de Intelegencia Artificial 
UNED 
Madrid, Spain 
delapaz@dia.uned.es
 
Abstract— Electric stimulation has been widely used to induce 
changes in neuronal cultures coupled to microelectrode arrays 
(MEAs). In this paper, we used low-frequency current 
stimulation on dissociated cultures of hippocampal cells to 
study how neuronal cultures could be trained with this kind of 
stimulation. We show that persistent and synchronous 
stimulation of adjacent electrodes may be used for creating 
adjacent physical or logical connections in the connectivity 
graph following Hebb’s Law. 
Keywords- Cultured neural networks; Hebbian Law; Induced 
plasticity; Learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Using biological nervous systems as conventional 
computer elements is a fascinating problem that permits the 
hybridization between Neuroscience and Computer Science. 
This synergic approach can provide a deeper understanding 
of natural perception and may be used for the design of new 
computing 
devices 
based 
on 
natural 
computational 
paradigms. Classical computational paradigms consist in 
serial and supervised processing computations with high-
frequency clocks silicon processors, with moderate power 
consumption, and fixed circuits structure. However the brain 
uses millions of biological processors, with dynamic 
structure, slow commutations compared with silicon circuits, 
low power consumption and unsupervised learning. This 
kind of computation is more related to perceptual recognition 
[1,2], due to the natural variance of the perceptive patterns 
and the a priori lack of knowledge about the perceptual 
domain. 
A real biological processor with millions of biological 
neurons and a huge number of interconnections would 
provide much more computational power instead of their low 
transition rates due to high number of computing elements 
and the extraordinary network capability of adaptation and 
reconfiguration 
to 
unknown 
environments. 
This 
extraordinary capability is related with natural unsupervised 
learning. 
Microelectrode Arrays (MEAs) have been designed for 
direct culturing neural cells over silicon or glass substrates, 
providing 
the 
capability 
to 
stimulate 
and 
record 
simultaneously populations of neural cells. The use of 
dissociated cortical neurons cultured onto MEAs represents a 
useful experimental model to characterize both the 
spontaneous behaviour of neuronal populations and their 
activity in response to electrical and pharmacological 
changes. 
Learning is a natural process that needs the creation and 
modulation of sets of associations between stimuli and 
responses. Many different stimulation protocols have been 
used to induced changes in the electrophysiological activity 
of neural cultures looking for achieve learning [3-13] and 
low-frequency stimulation has brought good results to 
researchers enhancing bursting activity in cortical cultures 
[10,11]. 
Hebbian learning describes a basic mechanism for 
synaptic plasticity wherein an increase in synaptic efficacy 
arises from the presynaptic cell's repeated and persistent 
stimulation of the postsynaptic cell. The theory is commonly 
evoked to explain some types of associative learning in 
which simultaneous activation of cells leads to pronounced 
increases in synaptic strength.  Basically the efficiency of a 
synaptic connection is increased when presynaptic activity is 
synchronous with post-synaptic activity. In this work, we use 
this kind of stimulation to create adjacent physical or logical 
connections in the connectivity graphs using Hebb’s Law. 
In previous papers, we used a specific low-frequency 
current stimulation on dissociated cultures of hippocampal 
cells to study how neuronal cultures could be trained with 
this kind of stimulation [14, 15]. We showed that persistent 
and synchronous stimulation of adjacent electrodes may be 
used for creating adjacent physical or logical connections in 
the connectivity graph following Hebb’s Law. In later 
experiments, we have used different parameters for this 
stimulation to check if those connections can be created 
stimulating with different configurations. The results 
provided in this paper show that low-frequency stimulation 
can create adjacent connections with different amplitude 
values. In addition, we present new results explaining when 
such connections have been established in a dissociated 
culture of hippocampal neurons grown onto a MEA. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

The outline of the paper is as follows. We first introduce 
the evolution of the related work on this topic. Next, we 
present the methods for addressing Hebbian Learning throw 
electrical stimulation. The following section shows the 
results obtained using a specific stimulation with our 
experimental setup on hippocampal cultures to train them. 
We conclude by discussing some crucial aspects of the 
research and the remaining challenges. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The first studies demonstrating functional plasticity in 
cultured networks began 1990s. The research group of Akio 
Kawana at NTT in Japan reported that tetanic stimulation 
through one or several electrodes resulted in plasticity [3]. 
They observed a change in the probability of evoking bursts 
by test pulses, as well as a change in the rate of spontaneous 
bursting, as a result of repeatedly evoking bursts using strong 
tetanic stimulation. Jimbo et al. reported similar results with 
a different tetanic stimulation and used voltage clamp to 
observe inward currents associated with evoked bursts [4]. 
The following year, Jimbo et al. reported that tetanizing a 
single electrode resulted in changes in the responses to test 
pulses to other electrodes [5]. In another paper, Jimbo et al. 
used simultaneous tetanization through a pair of electrodes to 
induce more precise forms of plasticity, expressed in detailed 
spike patterns evoked by electrical (probe) pulses [6]. Since 
then, a few other groups have reported on other forms of 
plasticity in MEA neural cultures. 
Typically, these later papers have focused on more 
abstract plasticity results, more related to the network level 
than to the synaptic level. For instance, Shahaf and Marom 
reported that networks could be learn to respond in specific 
ways to test pulses, by repeatedly stimulating until the 
desired response was obtained [7], while Ruaro et al. 
reported that cultured networks could learn to extract a 
specific pattern from a complex image that had been 
presented repeatedly as spatial patterns of multielectrode 
stimulation [8].  
In the following years, researchers have tried using more 
complex stimulation patterns in order to induce plasticity in 
neural cultures. Wagenaar et al. [9] looked for plasticity 
expressed in changes in spontaneous burst patterns, and in 
array-wide response patterns to electrical stimuli, following 
several induction protocols related to the previous ones, as 
well as some novel ones. Madhavan et al. [10] investigated 
patterns of spontaneous multi-single-unit activity to study the 
potential role of bursts of action potentials in memory 
mechanisms. Their analysis revealed spatiotemporally 
diverse bursts occurring in well-defined patterns, which 
remained stable for several hours. Chao et al. [11] compared 
five established statistical methods to one of their own 
design, called center of activity trajectory (CAT), to quantify 
functional plasticity at the network level. Stegenga studied 
the possibility of changing the spatio-temporal structure of 
spontaneous bursts using different configurations of tetanic 
stimulation. They obtained a profile of the array-wide 
spiking rate, a burst profile (BP) and also calculated the per-
electrode spiking rate profile, the phase profiles (PPs). None 
of their stimulation methods had a measurable effect on of 
the specific burst statistics (peak firing rate, rise and fall 
times). However, they found many PP changes in their 
experiments, which can be seen as a confirmation that the 
analysis is sensitive to changes in the network. 
Other researchers have focused in changing some 
stimulation parameters (voltage vs. current, frequency, 
amplitude…) to achieve learning. Brewer et al. [12] used 
chronic stimulation for getting an increase in evoked spike 
counts per stimulus and in spiking rate. The results obtained 
suggested that plastic network changes induced by chronic 
stimulation 
enhance 
the 
reliability 
of 
information 
transmission and the efficiency of multi-synaptic network 
communication. In turn, Martinoia et al. [13] applied low-
frequency stimulation constantly applied over weeks. They 
found that the stimulation had a delayed effect modulating 
responsiveness capability of the network without directly 
affecting its intrinsic in vitro development.  
 
III. 
METHODS 
A. Cell Culture Preparation 
Dissociated cultures of hippocampal CA1-CA3 neurons 
were prepared from E17.5 sibling embryos (Figure 1). 
During the extraction of the hippocampus a small amount of 
cortical tissue will have inevitably also been included. Tissue 
was kept in 2ml of HBSS. 10mg/ml of trypsin was added to 
the medium and placed in a 37° C water bath for 13 min for 
subsequent dissociation. The tissue was then transferred to a 
15 ml falcon containing 4ml of NB/FBS and triturated using 
combination of fine pore fire polished Pasteur pipettes 
(Volac). Cells were then transferred onto 12 well plates 
(Corning Incorporated) containing glass coverslips (Thermo 
Scientific). 
 
Figure 1. Hippocampal CA1-CA3 culture (21 DIV) on a microelectrodes 
array.  
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

The coverslips were pre-treated overnight with PDL 
(50mg/ml), a synthetic molecule used as a coating to 
enhance cell attachment. The PDL was then aspirated away 
and the coverslips washed twice with PBS. This was then 
followed by a final coating of laminin (50µg/ml), a protein 
found in the extracellular matrix, to further help anchor the 
dissociated hippocampal cells. The cells were maintained in 
a mixture of 500ml NB/B27 (promotes neural growth) and 
500ml NB/FBS (promotes glial growth), each supplemented 
with Glutamax and Pen/Strep (dilution 1/100). Glutamax 
improves cells viability and growth while preventing build 
up of ammonia and Pen/Strep helps to prevent any 
infections. Cell density for each coverslip was roughly 
200000 cells. Cells were kept in an incubator at 37˚ C in 6% 
CO2.  
 
B. Expeerimental Setup 
Microelectrode arrays (Multichannel systems, MCS) 
consisted of 60 TiN/SiN planar round electrodes (200 µm 
electrode spacing, 30 µm electrode diameter) arrange in a 
8x8 grid were used. Two pairs of electrodes were selected 
for creating functional connections between them. The 
activity of all cultures was recorded using a MEA60 System 
(MCS). After 1200X amplification, signals were sampled at 
10kHz and acquired through the data acquisition card and 
MCRack software (MCS). Electrical stimuli were delivered 
through a two-channel stimulator (MCS STG1002) to each 
pair of electrodes.  
 
C. Expeerimental Protocol 
Three experiments were carried out using a total of 15 
cultures during 2-3 weeks. Five cultures were stimulated in 
each experiment with a low-frequency electrical stimulation, 
which differs only on a few parameters. Each experiment 
started 
when 
cultures 
had 
14DIV. 
The 
following 
summarizes the experiments and stimulation applied to the 
cultures: 
1) Experiment1 (E1): Cultures ID48-52 
a) Days of experiment: 16. 
b) Stimulation1: train of 5 biphasic pulses cathodic-
first (50 µA peak, 100 µs phase, 50ms ISI) was delivered 
every 3s for 10 min. 
2) Experiment2 (E2): Cultures ID68-72 
a) Days of experiment: 10. 
b) Stimulation2: train of 5 biphasic pulses cathodic-
first (60 µA peak, 100 µs phase, 50ms ISI) was delivered 
every 3s for 8 min. 
3) Experiment3 (E3): Cultures ID73-77 
a) Days of experiment: 11. 
b) Stimulation3: train of 5 biphasic pulses cathodic-
first (40 µA peak, 100 µs phase, 50ms ISI) was delivered 
every 3s for 8 min. 
In every experiment, two pairs of electrodes with no 
logical connections between them were selected using 
connectivity diagrams based on cross-correlation. In every 
stimulation session these steps were followed:  
1) Spontaneous activity was recorded for 2 min after a 
recovery period. 
2) Cultures were then stimulated through the two pairs 
of electrodes using the corresponding stimulation protocol. 
3) Spontaneous activity was recorded for 2 min after 
the stimulation. 
 
D. Analysis Performed 
We observed the spontaneous activity of the cultures 
before and after the stimulation experiments, as well as their 
evoked response to the applied stimulus. Extensive burst 
analysis, post-stimulus time histograms and functional 
connectivity were the main analysis performed to the 
registered data.  
Correlation and information theory-based methods are 
used to estimate the functional connectivity [16, 17] of in-
vitro 
neural 
networks: 
Cross-correlation, 
Mutual 
Information, Transfer Entropy and Joint Entropy. Such 
methods need to be applied to each possible pair of 
electrodes, which shows spontaneous electrophysiological 
activity. For each pair of neurons, the connectivity method 
provides an estimation of the connection strength (one for 
each direction). The connection strength is supposed to be 
proportional to the value yielded by the method. Thus, each 
method is associated to a matrix, the Connectivity Matrix 
(CM), whose elements (X, Y) correspond to the estimated 
connection strength between neuron X and Y. 
High and low values in the CM are expected to 
correspond to strong and weak connections. By using such 
approach, inhibitory connections could not be detected 
because they would be mixed with small connection values. 
However, non-zero CM values were also obtained when no 
apparent causal effects were evident, or no direct 
connections were present among the considered neurons.  
In our experiments, Connectivity maps offered a 
visualization of the connectivity changes that occur in the 
culture. Connectivity maps were generated using the 
connectivity matrix (CM) obtained after applying the 
analysis and Cross-Correlation or Mutual Information. By 
setting thresholds in the CM, it is possible to filter out some 
small values that may correspond to noise or very weak 
connections. In consequence, these maps show the strongest 
synaptic pathways, and can be used for visualizing the 
neural weights dynamics, and validate the achieved 
learning. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The low-frequency current stimulation used in this study 
had an impact on the electrophysiological responses of the 
cultures, as previous studies had reported [13]. Raster plots 
showed that all of the stimulations provided induce changes 
in the firing frequency of the cultures.  
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
 
Figure 2. Raster plots extracted from cultures of experiments E2 and E3. 
(a) (21DIV) and (b) (32DIV) belong to ID68 from E2, (c) (30DIV) and (d) 
(37DIV) belong to ID73 from E3. Each figure is divided in two graphs, 
which show the spiking activity of the culture before and after stimulation. 
Raster plots show a change in the spiking activity, changing from a uniform 
activity before stimulation to a more concentrated activity after stimulation. 
This result is emphasized after the third week in vitro due to the maturing 
occurred in the cultures. 
Furthermore, 
we 
can 
observe 
some 
kind 
of 
reorganization in the firing activity, from a uniform spiking 
activity to a discrete spiking activity. After the third week in 
vitro, the bursting activity becomes more frequent and robust 
and this effect is much more evident than during the first 
weeks (Figure 2). 
The change on the spiking activity of the cultures can 
also be seen clearly observing the instantaneous firing 
frequencies (Figure 3) and the interspike intervals (Figure 4) 
over the time. Instantaneous firing frequency graphs shows 
that stimulated electrodes start firing in more separated 
period of times after stimulation but each firing period last 
longer. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 3. Instantaneous firing frequencies of stimulated electrodes in the 
culture ID68 (22DIV) from E2 before (a) and after (b) stimulation. A 
change in the spiking periods can clearly be seen, which are less in quantity 
and longer in duration. This culture only created a connection between the 
second pair of electrodes (38, 47), which had an impact on the 
instantaneous firing frequencies. Connected electrodes fire in the same 
firing periods, whereas not connected electrodes had no firing relation. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

In addition, interspike intervals graphs show the previous 
results in the spiking periods but also it can be seen that the 
ISI decrease both in value and dispersion. Both effects are 
related to the stimulation, which modulates the firing 
capabilities of the cultures. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 4. Interspike intervals on recordings from stimulated electrodes in 
the culture ID68 (22 DIV) from E2 before (a) and after (b) stimulation. 
Spiking periods have change after stimulation (b). ISI has decreased both in 
value and dispersion after stimulation. 
 
Connectivity diagrams based on cross-correlation 
between electrodes showed some kind of connections 
reorganization after stimulations, concentrating them in a 
few electrodes. Furthermore, adjacent physical or logical 
connections in the connectivity graph following Hebb’s law 
appeared in some pairs of stimulated electrodes (Figure 5).  
 
Electrodes with created connections between them can 
distinctly be detected with the instantaneous firing 
frequencies graphs. Figure 3 showed two pair of stimulated 
electrodes (12, 21 and 38, 47) before and after the 
stimulation session. The firing periods of the electrodes 
from the second pair follow exactly each other, whereas the 
firing periods of the first pair of electrodes do not match. 
Furthermore, the electrodes of the second pair change both 
the firing periods after stimulation. This features indicates 
that there exits a strong connection between them. 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 5. Connectivity graphs based on cross-correlation between 
electrodes. The graph belong to the culture ID48 (E1) at 25 DIV. Pair of 
electrodes 31, 42 and 52, 53 were stimulated with low-frequency current 
stimulation with 50 µA biphasic pulses. (a) No logical connections were 
observed before stimulation. (b) A connection (red arrow) between 
electrodes 31 and 42 has appeared. 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

All of the cultures of E1 created a connection between 
the paired stimulated electrodes, whereas 60% of the 
cultures of E3 and only 20% of the cultures of E2 showed 
that connection. In some cases, the connection was 
intermittent, lasting one to several days. In others, a 
persistent connection was created. Finally, some cultures did 
not create any kind of connections. In this way, Hebbian 
tetanization created ad-hoc permanent or transient logical 
connections by modifying the efficiency of the paths 
between the selected electrodes. We speculate that the failed 
cultures may be caused by a not-homogeneous culture 
growth between the electrodes or by the neurobiological 
properties of the connections as will be confirmed using 
histological techniques in future works. In this case, using 
low-frequency current stimulation with 50 µA biphasic 
pulses provided the best results for creating connections 
following Hebb’s law. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Learning in biological neural cultures is a challenging 
task. Different authors have proposed different methods for 
inducing a desired and controlled plasticity over the 
biological neural structure. Low-frequency stimulation has 
brought good results to researchers enhancing bursting 
activity in cortical cultures. 
In this paper, we have shown that using this kind of 
stimulation it is possible to create adjacent physical or 
logical connections in the connectivity graph following 
Hebb’s Law and such connections induce changes in the 
electrophysiological response of the cells in the culture, 
which can be observed in the different analysis performed. 
Furthermore, low-frequency stimulation induces changes 
using different values of current amplitude and stimulation 
time. Persistent and synchronous stimulation of relevant 
adjacent electrodes may be used for strengthen the 
efficiency of their connectivity graph. These processes may 
be used for imposing a desired behaviour over the network 
dynamics. In this work, a stimulation procedure is described 
in order to achieve the desired plasticity over the neural 
cultures, and shaping in this way the functional connectivity 
of the neural culture. 
In future works, we will use different kind of electrical 
stimulations, such as tetanic stimulation, and try to find 
what are the optimal parameters of every stimulation that 
induce persistent changes in the cultured network. These 
induced connections will be used for driving a robot using 
Braitenberg’s principles. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is being funded by grant 12361/FPI/09 from 
Séneca Foundation, from the region of Murcia and by the 
project 2010V/PUNED/0011 from UNED. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J.A. 
Anderson 
and 
E. 
Rosenfeld, 
“Neurocomputing: 
Foundations of research”. MIT Press, Cambridge, 1988. 
[2] The 
Facets 
Project. 
Accessed 
March 
2013 
from 
http://facets.kip.uni-heidelberg.de/ 
[3] E. Maeda, Y. Kuroda, H.P. Robinson and A. Kawana, 
“Modification of parallel activity elicited by propagating 
bursts in developing networks of rat cortical neurons”. 
European Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 10, num. 2, 1998, p. 
488-96. 
[4] Y. Jimbo, H.P. Robinson and A. Kawana, “Strengthening of 
synchronized activity by tetanic stimulation in cortical 
cultures: application of planar electrode arrays”. IEEE 
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 45, num. 11, 
1998, p. 1297-304. 
[5] Y. Jimbo, T. Tateno and H.P.C. Robinson, “Simultaneous 
induction of pathway specific potetiation and depression in 
networks of cortical neurons”. Biophysical Journal, vol. 76, 
num. 2, 1999, p. 670-678. 
[6] T. Tateno and Y. Jimbo, “Activity-dependent enhancement in 
the reliability of correlated spike timings in cultured cortical 
neurons”. Biological Cybernetics, vol. 80, num. 1, 1999, p. 
45-55. 
[7] G. Shahaf and S. Marom, “Learning in networks of cortical 
neurons”. Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 21, num. 22, 2001, p. 
8782- 8. 
[8] M.E. Ruaro, P. Bonifazi, and V. Torre, “Toward the 
neurocomputer: image processing and pattern recognition 
with neuronal cultures”. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical 
Engineering, vol. 52, num. 3, 2005, p. 371-83. 
[9] D.A. Wagenaar, J. Pine, and S.M. Potter, “Searching for 
plasticity in dissociated cortical cultures on multi-electrode 
arrays”. Journal of negative results in biomedicine, vol. 5, 
num. 16, 2006.  
[10] R. Madhavan, Z.C. Chao, and S.M. Potter, “Plasticity of 
recurring 
spatiotemporal 
activity 
patterns 
in 
cortical 
networks”. Physical Biology, vol. 4, num. 3, 2007, p. 181-93. 
[11] Z.C. Chao, D.J. Bakkum, and S.M. Potter, “Region-specific 
network plasticity in simulated and living cortical networks: 
comparison of the center of activity trajectory (CAT) with 
other statistics”. Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 4, num. 
3, 2007, p. 294-308. 
[12] A.N. Ide, A. Andruska, M. Boehler, B.C. Wheeler, and G.J. 
Brewer, “Chronic network stimulation enhances evoked 
action potentials”. Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 7, num. 
3, February 2010, 16008. 
[13] L.L. Bologna, T. Nieus, M. Tedesco, M. Chiappalone, F. 
Benfenati, and S. Martinoia, “Low-frequency stimulation 
enhances 
burst 
activity 
in 
cortical 
cultures 
during 
development”. Neuroscience, vol. 165, 2010. 
[14] V. Lorente, J.M. Ferrández, F. de la Paz, and E. Fernández, 
“Training 
hippocampal 
cultures 
using 
low-frequency 
stimulation: Towards Hebbian Learning”. 8th International 
Meeting on Substrate-Integrated Microelectrodes Arrays, 
2012, pp. 90-91. 
[15] J.M. Ferrández, V. Lorente, F. de la Paz, and E. Fernández,  
“Training Biological Neural Cultures: Towards Hebbian 
Learning”. Neurocomputing, 2012.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2012.09.031 
[16] O. Sporns and G. Tononi G, “Classes of network connetivity 
and dynamics”. Complexity, vol. 7, 2002, pp. 28–38. 
[17] K.J. Friston, C. Frith, R. Frackowiak, “Time-dependent 
changes in effective connectivity measured with PET”. 
Human 
Brain 
Mapping, 
vol. 
1, 
1993, 
pp. 
69–79.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

