Optimal Beacon and Superframe Orders in WSNs 
 
Marwa Salayma, Wail Mardini, Yaser Khamayseh, Muneer Bani Yasin 
Department of Computer Science 
Jordan University of Science and Technology (JUST) 
Irbid 22110, Jordan 
{mksalayma, mardini, yaser, masadeh}@just.edu.jo 
 
 
Abstract— Most of 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) 
applications aim to utilize low data rates, consume very low 
energy, and operate in short range areas at low costs.  IEEE 
802.15.4 standard is proposed in order to achieve such needs 
by putting standards for physical and Medium Access Control 
(MAC) layers. MAC operates in either beacon enabled or 
beaconless modes. Performance of the standard beacon 
enabled mode is basically affected by beacon frame 
parameters, which are Beacon Order (BO) and Superframe 
Order (SO). These two parameters determine node’s active 
and inactive periods, they also determine node’s duty cycle. BO 
and SO values must be chosen carefully when the standard 
MAC is parameterized since some combinations may degrade 
standard performance dramatically. Finding the optimal (BO, 
SO) combination is an application-based issue since diverse 
WSN applications work through different arrival rates at 
different duty cycles. This paper investigates the standard 
beacon enabled mode behavior through intensive simulation 
and revels the optimal range of (BO, SO) combinations for 
specific star topology with different number of nodes. The 
investigated application is evaluated in terms of energy 
consumption, average end to end delay and throughput. 
Moreover, this paper proposes an adaptive algorithm that 
converges to the network current performance and improves 
network performance accordingly, irrespective of the duty 
cycle. The performance of the new adaptive algorithm is 
compared to that of the original MAC algorithm using 
QualNet 
5.2 
simulator. 
The 
new 
adaptive 
algorithm 
outperforms the original MAC algorithm as it reduces energy 
consumption up to 7%, decreases average delay by 26%, and 
increases throughput by 16%.   
Keywords-Wireless sensor networks; IEEE802.15.4; Beacon 
enabled; Superframe structure; Energy consumption. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Recently, most wired sensors are replaced with wireless 
ones forming the emerging era of Wireless Sensor Networks 
(WSNs). WSNs consist of sensing devices that can 
communicate with each other and with the surrounding 
environment via wireless communication medium [1] [2]. 
Huge number of sensor nodes are often scattered in 
unreachable areas, and WSNs are often battery powered and 
cannot be easily recharged. Moreover, it is reasonable to 
force sensor nodes to track and monitor phenomena for 
months or even years [2].  
Energy conservation is the main concern for researches 
in the area of WSN, these studies focus on designing WSN 
energy efficient algorithms and standards, one of which is 
the IEEE 802.15.4 [3]. IEEE 802.15.4 refers to Wireless 
Personal Area Network (WPAN) standard proposed by the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers Task Group 
4 (IEEE TG4) to support Low Rate (LR) applications; it is 
often referred to as LR-WPAN IEEE 802.15.4 standard. LR-
WPAN is designed for home, building and industrial 
automated applications [4].  
IEEE802.15.4 standard supports both the physical and 
the Media Access Control (MAC) layers.  IEEE802.15.4 
MAC supports two types of devices; Full Functional 
Devices (FFDs) and Reduced Functional Devices (RFDs). 
FFD acts as a regular coordinator and/or as a sink node. If 
both features are taken, the node typically referred to as 
PAN coordinator (PANc). However, RFD acts as an 
ordinary end device [4-6]. Both FFDs and RFDs 
communicate with each other forming two types of 
topologies: star and peer to peer topologies.  Peer to peer 
topology can be classified to either a mesh or a cluster tree 
topology [6-8].  
 IEEE802.15.4 standard  operates  in  three different 
Radio Frequency (RF) bands  and it supports different data 
rates [4]. The 2.4 GHz RF band is widely used in 
IEEE802.14.4 based applications due to the following: 
Firstly, there is no license required to operate in this RF, and 
secondly, it offers the highest data rate amongst the 16 
operating channels [4].  
 IEEE802.15.4 MAC operates either in beacon enabled 
or beaconless modes. In the beacon enabled mode,  FFD 
broadcasts regular beacon frames in order to advertise itself  
to the other nodes  The beacon frame includes information 
that enables the nodes to synchronise with each other when 
they need to access the channel [9][10]. Furthermore, 
beacon frame includes information that indicates whether 
there is some pending data for some nodes. The time 
between two successive beacons is referred to as the Beacon 
Interval (BI), which divided virtually into 16 equal sized 
slots. BI duration is specified by the Beacon Order 
parameter (BO) according to the following formula [9]: 
BI = aBaseSuperframeDuration * 2BO 
                    (1) 
 Nodes can use the channel during the whole BI period 
or can sleep for some time portions; the parameter which 
decides that is the Superframe Order (SO), the SO decides 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

the Superframe Duration (SD) active session according to 
the following formula [9]: 
SD = aBaseSuperframeDuration* 2SO 
 
      (2) 
where 0 ≤ SO ≤ BO ≤ 14 
aBaseSuperframeSuration value depends on the slot 
duration according to the following formula: 
aBaseSuperframeDuration= aBaseslotDuration * total 
number of slots  
 
 
                    (3) 
 Typically, time durations are expressed in term of a 
general time unit, that is, the symbol. The value of one 
symbol in seconds depends on the chosen RF band. 
However, the 2.4 Ghz RF band works in 62500 symbol/s at 
which one symbol brings out 16 µs, and as each slot 
duration (aBaseslotDuration) equals about 60 symbols, then 
the 
total 
16 
slots 
contribute 
in 
960 
aBaseSuperframeDuration symbols are equal to 15.36 ms. 
From those equations, node can infer the duration of  its 
sleep period. All those concepts can be indicated through 
one concept which is the duty cycle (D). It is the percentage 
of time the node is awake from the whole time between the 
two successive beacons. D is mathematically expressed in 
(4) [9][10]:  
          D=SD/BI * 100%            
 
 
      (4)                                  
When a node need to access the medium, it has to locate 
the beginning of the next time slot in order to compete for 
the channel, thus, it follows the contention based algorithm 
followed by the standard, that is, the slotted Carrier Sense 
Multiple 
Access/Collision 
Avoidance 
algorithm 
(CSMA/CA); this is why this time portion is referred to as 
Contention Access Period (CAP) [9][10]. Furthermore, the 
standard empowers PANc with the authority to assign some 
slots excessively for some nodes during which they can 
utilize the channel alone. This is why such time slots are 
referred to as Guaranteed Time Slots (GTS).  
The optional period which includes those slots is 
referred to as the Contention Free period (CFP) and it 
include maximum of seven GTS which are preserved 
optionally after the CAP period. CAP and the optional CFP 
together are referred to as the Active Period. Active period 
is the time during which nodes can be active and are able to 
use the medium. The duration of this period is often referred 
to as the SuperFrame Duration [9][10]. More precisely, 
every time the node needs to access the channel, it needs to 
locate the boundary of what is called the slotted/un-slotted 
CSMA backoff period. The Backoff period unit is indicated 
through the aUnitBackoffPeriod which equals to 20 symbols 
or 0.32 ms [10]. The lengths of the discussed periods are 
assigned through the beacon frame which is transmitted in 
the first time slot (slot 0) [4].  
Obviously, improving the beacon enabled standard 
performance is directly related to the chosen BO and SO 
values. How to decide the optimal BO and SO values that 
achieve the best performance is an application related issue.  
For example, an application may have packets ready for 
transmission every second but needs to be active for 30 
minutes and sleep for 30 minutes. Some applications spend 
most of the time inactive, thus, i.e., low duty cycles; others 
need to work through full duty cycles, while many of 
applications need to sleep for some time portions. Hence, 
each application has its own special case that has much to 
do in the decision of BO and SO values, keeping in mind 
that the basic building block of any network topology 
consists of seven nodes (piconet). Therefore, we need to 
find a mechanism that is general enough for beacon enabled 
MAC coordinator to regularly examine PAN status and 
performance to adapt the superframe parameters and 
durations.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section II 
summarizes some of literature work which is closely related 
to the paper topic, while section III investigates the problem 
and illustrates the followed methodology. Section IV 
clarifies the proposed algorithm. The algorithm performance 
is then evaluated in Section V. Finally the whole paper 
topic, analysis and work are concluded in the last section 
along with some ideas and work proposed to be adopted in 
the future. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Since the launch of IEEE 802.15.4 standard, many 
researches took place that analyse the standard performance 
either mathematically through analysis models or virtually 
through simulation or both. Those researches are primarily 
aimed at finding ways for enhancing the standard 
performance 
especially 
when 
it 
comes 
to 
energy 
consumption. Such interests aimed at choosing the best 
standard parameters values that suits the applications to 
work for the longest time possible. f those studies is listed 
below. 
In [11], the IEEE 802.15.4 standard performance is 
evaluated in terms of throughput and packet delivery ratio. 
The study focused in the quality of service (QoS) for real 
time sensor applications and provides an enhancement to the 
current IEEE 802.15.4 beacon enabled standard by 
dynamically allocating the already existed GTS. The 
standard performance metrics were evaluated through 
varying both BO and SO values while preserving the one 
dynamically allocated GTS. The study considered both 
100% and 50% duty cycles. And, the maximum SO and BO 
values tested were 6 due to the association latency that may 
result from choosing higher values that are not suitable for 
WSN applications. Other QoS property examined was the 
collision probability which was evaluated through varying 
number of nodes. Simulation run through NS2 simulator and 
applied on a star topology. Results showed that high values 
of BO increase throughput due to the decreased possibility 
of packets drops. Moreover, results revealed that collision 
probability increases as the number of nodes increases 
which will degrade the successful use of the channel and 
hence achieve poor throughput.  
 In [12], the performance of beacon enabled IEEE 
802.15.4 is evaluated in term of energy consumption in a 
large scale clustered tree network. Analysis of the IEEE 
802.15.4  MAC  were performed on a real ZigBee  nodes 
applied on home network areas by varying BO values 
between 6 and 10 while fixing SO value to 0.  High fraction 
of packets transmitted is sacrificed for the aim of 
minimizing the power consumption by allowing nodes to 
stay active for only 15.36 ms and turn the transceiver off 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

else after.  Results revealed that power consumption keeps 
on 
decreasing 
by 
increasing 
BO 
to 
some 
value 
(approximately 10) after which it is started to increase 
again. However, the study considered only very low duty 
cycles due to the small fraction of CAP and did not consider 
the effect of SO on the standard performance at all.  
In [13], performance of the slotted CSMA/CA is 
investigated through studying the effects of SO, BO and 
Backoff Exponent (BE). However, the same study took 
place in [3], which considered other criteria such as the 
number of nodes and the data frame size. Simulation 
experiments were done for 13 different values of BO and 
SO which contributes in a 100% duty cycles. Those 
experiments intended to reach up the best range of traffic 
load offered that achieves the optimal performance metrics 
values. Metrics which were evaluated are the throughput, 
average delay and network reliability. The best range of 
offered load that achieved the optimal trade-off between 
throughput and average delay utility was found to be 
between 35% and 60%. This study did not concern 
parameters behaviour with sleep period enabled.  
However, Shu et al. [6] proposes an optimization problem 
in order to achieve the minimum energy consumed under 
the packet delivery reliability constrain. The objective 
function was achieved after finding optimal values for the 
two decision variables which are BO and SO. Experiments 
run through a C implemented simulator and applied on a 
star topology. Simulation results revealed that for a network 
where packets generated under Poisson processes and where 
the number of nodes varies from 5 to 35, the optimal value 
of BO was found to be 7 while that for SO was found to be 
1, that’s just in case that number of nodes is less than 15 and 
2. However, choosing optimal values for BO and SO 
depends on the quality of service constraints chosen.  
The authors in [14] propose an algorithm that 
reconfigures only the BO parameter of the IEEE 802.15.4 
superframe structure.  The Beacon Order Adaptive 
Algorithm (BOAA) was investigated and applied on a star 
topology. Changing BO depends on the inter-arrival rate 
which reflects the frequency of communication. Adjusting 
the value of BO changes the length of the duty cycle due to 
the dynamic changing of the beacon interval. Experimental 
results showed that increasing the value of BO contributes 
in saving power due to the increased inactive period. 
However, this power saving improvement would be at the 
expense of the delay because increasing BI would cause 
nodes wait more time for the next beacon which determines 
their new configuration. Throughput was not taken under 
consideration because only small numbers of nodes were 
allowed to send a light traffic. This makes BOAA suitable 
only for simple applications which need no real-time or 
complex configuration.  
In [15], IEEE 802.15.4 standard performance is 
investigated in terms of throughput, energy consumption 
and reliability by applying the standard on ideal and non-
ideal star topologies. The focus was on changing nodes 
number while varying some of IEEE 802.15.4 standard 
configurations such as the availability of synchronization, 
BO and SO. According to the results achieved, some 
recommendations were suggested that aid in configuring the 
standard, configuring applications that follow the standard 
and how to improve the standard. However, such 
recommendations can only be taken under consideration 
when applying the standard on the same topologies tested 
where only the behaviour of BO=SO (100% duty cycle) 
considered . Moreover, most of the suggestions provided 
were based on theoretical ideas and not on practical 
achieved results. However, all such researches are very 
application specific and none gives a general enhancement 
that can be applied on all WSN applications. 
III. 
METHODOLGY AND PROBLEM ANALYSIS 
In order for the current transaction to complete during 
the current superframe active session, the remaining CAP 
backoff periods must be sufficient enough to accommodate 
the whole CSMA/CA operations; otherwise, nodes shall 
wait for the next superframe. If this situation continues to 
happen, network performance will be adversely affected. 
Actually, PAN performance is adversely affected by high 
and low values of both BO and SO parameters. This section 
investigates the effect of all possible (BO, SO) combination 
values on IEEE 802.14.4 standard performance through 
simulation. The Simulation study is conducted using 
QualNet 
5.2 
simulator. 
Simulation 
parameters 
are 
summarized in Table 1.  
PANs consist of one FFD that is the PANc while the 
other devices are RFDs. RFDs transmit a 50 byte Constant 
Bit Rate (CBR) packet every one second through the 
simulation period.  Standard performance is investigated in 
terms of energy consumption, average end to end delay and 
throughput.  Results are categorized according to the duty 
cycle. In other words, those (BO, SO) combinations that 
achieve the same duty cycle are depicted in one figure for 
each performance metric. Duty cycle concept is expressed 
according to the following formula: 
                  D= 2SO-BO * 100%                                       (5)           
As SO value is always lower than the BO value, D can be 
expressed as: 
                    D= 1/2BO-SO *100%  
                    (6) 
Hence, D
 {100%, 50%, 25%, 12.5%, 6.24%, 3.13%, 
1.56%, 0.78%, 0.39%}.  
For each duty cycle in the set, the standard performance 
is investigated for the seven PANs in order to study the 
effect of the number of nodes in one piconet, so that we can 
generalize the results achieved for larger network sizes as 
the basic building block for any network is seven nodes. 
However, due to space consideration, we just depict results 
for 100% and 50% duty cycles and which reflect energy 
consumption and average end to end delay behaviour.  
 
TABLE 1. QUALNET SIMULATION PARAMETERS FOR SEVEN 
PAN SCENARIOS 
Parameter 
Value 
Simulator 
QualNet 5.2 
Physical 
and 
MAC 
model 
IEEE 802.15.4 
Area 
80 m * 80 m 
Number of nodes 
2-8 
Transmission range 
10 m 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

Simulation time 
1000 s 
Channel Frequency 
2.4 GHz 
Energy model 
MICAZ 
Antenna Height 
0.08 
Traffic 
CBR 
Payload size 
50 byte 
Arrival Rate 
1 second 
BO and SO values 
1-14  
 
A. 
Total Energy Consumption Results (mWh) 
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 depict total energy consumed in 
different PAN sizes. PANs work in the 100% and 50% duty 
cycles which are determined by all possible (BO, SO) 
beacon frames combinations sent by the PANc. We note 
that despite the value of SO, combinations with BO values 
greater than 3 increase BI value. This result in longer time 
between two successive beacons and thus decreases beacon 
overhead 
which 
contributes 
in 
conserving 
energy. 
Unfortunately, this is not always the case, since very high 
SO values starting from 9 increase the possibility for idle 
listening due to the longer time nodes spend doing nothing 
which will dissipate energy.  
However, increasing the duty cycle by either fixing BO 
while increasing SO values or fixing SO while decreasing 
BO values, decreases sleep time portion as SO becomes 
closer to BO. Unfortunately, this may increase energy 
consumption at combinations with high SO values (starting 
from 9) due to the idle listening . However, increasing BO 
while fixing SO values or decreasing SO while fixing BO 
values leads to an increased BItherefore, it leads to lower 
duty cycles. This, on one hand, offers to  nodes more time to 
sleep between active periods, thus helping in conserving 
energy while on the other hand decreases the need for 
frequent beacon frames transmission which consequently 
saves energy. Furthermore, very short CAP compared to the 
total overall BI will cause frequent CCA deference; hence, 
nodes shall try to transmit altogether at the beginning of the 
next superframe. This leads to bothsevere collision and 
packets re-transmission which consequently increases 
energy consumption.   
 It can be noticed that for the 1 s arrival rate,  as the duty 
cycle decreases, there is not much big difference in energy 
consumption trend. We can say that the dominating energy 
consumption factor is the idle listening. Or in other words, 
to conserve energy in a piconet, it is necessary to let PAN to 
work through a reasonable CAP in a reasonable BI by 
setting reasonable BO and SO values keeping in mind that 
we need to avoid all combinations with BO greater than 8. 
Sleep mode somehow contributes in energy saving but not 
to that extent.  The positive effect of sleep mode in energy 
consumption is much noticeable in inactive networks which 
work in very low arrival rates where there is infrequent 
packets transmission (every hour for example). Actually, for 
the 1 s arrival rate, inactive period length has much to do 
with the delay and the throughput behavior but it is not a big 
energy conserving factor. This will be more clarified in the 
following sections.     
 
 
Figure 1. Total energy consumption in PAN works at 100% duty cycle 
 
Figure 2. Total energy consumption in PAN works at 50% duty cycle 
 
B. 
Average End to End Delay Results(s) 
The second performance metric considered is the delay 
each received packet suffers during its journey from the 
source node to the PANc which is why it is called end to 
end delay.  Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 depict average end-to-end delay 
in different PAN densities which work in  100% and 50% 
duty cycles determined by the whole possible (BO,SO) 
beacon frames combinations sent  by the  PANc. Results 
revealed that as (BO, SO) values increase, the time during 
which nodes may access the medium increases, and  if there 
are more than one node want to use the medium, the average 
delays significantly increase because nodes will go into 
additional and higher backoff delays, since the backoff 
exponent should be higher which increases as number of 
nodes increases.  
However, despite the value of SO,  as BO increases, 
nodes that haven’t finish their work in the current 
superframe shall wait until the next beacon frame initiates 
the active period in order to  accomplish the work in the 
next superrframe. This case is obvious in Fig. 4 where the 
average delay increases dramatically if it compared to that 
of Fig. 3.  Despite the duty cycle, all combinations with BO 
and SO values lower than (6, 6) contributes in very low 
delay (close to 0) because of the short BI which if it 
increases, delay increases accordingly. Unfortunately, all 
those combinations with BO=SO values starting from 11 
results in a very long BI which on one hand delays the 
association process, while on the other hand may cause 
nodes to loose synchronization with the coordinator.  Those 
cases result in a bad throughput as they lessen the number of 
the successfully transmitted packets. This explains why 
average delay at such combinations has values close to 0. 
However, at (14, 14), the first successful association 
occurred after 3000 s whereas the simulation period 
occupies 1000s; thus, no PAN activities shall take place 
during this time which explains the 0 delay at this 
combination.   
In short, whatever is the duty cycle, the average delay 
behavior is consistent. Increasing the duty cycle on one 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

hand decreases sleep time portion as SO becomes closer to 
BO. This shall decrease delay, since node shall have enough 
time to achieve its work during the current CAP and hence 
will wait less time for the next superframe in order to 
continue or renew transmitting its packets.   
However, increasing BO while fixing SO or decreasing 
SO while fixing BO values leads to an increased BI and 
therefore leads to lower duty cycles. This offers nodes more 
time to sleep between active periods at the expense of 
completing their work in the current superframe, thus, node 
shall need to wait for the next CAP which definitely will 
increase delay as the duty cycle decreases.   
In short, for 1 s arrival rate, high (BO, SO) values 
increase backoff delay which is proportional to the number 
of nodes, whereas small SO values increase the waiting 
delay as node shall need to wait for the next CAP to 
accomplish its work. Despite that the inactive period has not 
much effect on energy consumption, long sleep time 
portions will increase delay. However, this may not be the 
case in inactive applications which work through very low 
arrival rates, because in the time that low SO values 
decrease energy consumption dramatically, delay may 
increase which would obviously occur if node receives 
packets at the end of its active session. It can be said that for 
applications that work through low duty cycles, energy can 
be saved if delay is sacrificed.  
 
C. 
Summary 
For the examined CBR application that works through 
1s arrival rate, it can be noticed that the closer the values of 
SO to BO (high duty cycles); the higher the throughput and 
the lower the delay and nodes percentage of collision. 
However, this has not much to do with energy consumption.  
Keeping in mind that very high values of BO on one hand 
will delay the association time which will adversely affect 
the throughput, while on the other hand will increase the 
delay significantly besides increasing energy due to the idle 
listening.  Meanwhile, as number of nodes increases, 
collision increases, which can be noticed in short CAP, 
thereby, in order to decrease collision rate, CAP should be 
increased.   
Regarding to the results achieved for the whole 9 
possible duty cycles, it is revealed that for 1s arrival rate 
application, the Rang of combinations that is possible to 
achieve the optimal performance is aligned between {(6, 6) 
and (8, 8)}.   If the standard is allowed to work in 100% 
duty cycle for example, its optimal performance achieved at 
(6, 6). However, for those applications that work in 50% 
duty cycle, it needs to work at (7, 6), whereas for 
applications that work in 25% duty cycle, it is preferred for 
them to work through (8, 6). Thus, if our aim is to allow the 
1s arrival rate applications to work in its near optimal 
performance, it is preferred to allow them to work in 25%, 
50% or 100% duty cycles.  Unfortunately, lower duty cycles 
achieve bad performance in terms of the three metrics 
irrespective of the (BO, SO) combination, this means that 
unless it is necessary to follow, it is preferred to avoid such 
duty cycles.  More generally, irrespective of the duty cycle, 
all those combinations with BO greater than 8 must be 
unconsidered when we need to implement any application 
that works in 1s arrival rate. Hence, (8,8) can be expressed 
as the cut-off value after which PAN performance drops 
dramatically and which may varies according the arrival rate 
the application may work with. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Average end to end delay for PAN works at 100% duty cycle. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Average end to end delay for PAN works at 50% duty cycle 
 
IV. 
PROPOSED ALGORITHM 
Previous analysis indicates that in all PAN scenarios, 
despite that decreasing the duty cycle affects applications 
total energy differently, both delay and throughput 
behaviors are consistence, that is, as the  duty cycle 
decreases by either fixing BO while decreasing SO or fixing 
SO while decreasing SO, both metrics are adversely 
affected. This result is two-folded; first, if we want to 
improve performance, we need to avoid low duty cycles by 
having both BO and SO values close to each other’s as 
much as possible.  In other words, we have to increase the 
duty cycle; this can be achieved by fixing BO while 
increasing SO. Moreover, enhancing delay behavior through 
increasing duty cycle shall improve throughput behavior 
accordingly. This note presents the base from where we start 
our new algorithm.  
Following the new algorithm, PANc regularly estimates 
total end to end delay each node suffered so far along with 
the number of packets received from that node at that 
moment. PANc can then estimate nodes average end to end 
delay which will be its performance criteria according to 
which SO value shall dynamically change. Experiments 
revealed that the most reasonable number of packets after 
which the checking process is done by PANc is 5; hence, 
checking process is done every 5 packets. According to the 
results achieved, PANc decides if it should increase SO. In 
other words, if the new estimated average delay is checked 
to be worse than that of the previous calculated one, then 
PANc shall increase SO value, otherwise, do nothing.  If SO 
increased, its value should not exceed that of BO value, and 
if so, it shall reset to the original SO value and restart the 
overall process again. This adaptive algorithm is illustrated 
in Fig. 5. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

V. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
The new proposed adaptive algorithm performance is 
evaluated along with that of the MAC original algorithm. 
Simulation took place on a PAN that consists of five nodes 
where four CBR applications are sent by the four nodes to 
the PANc every 1s. Recall that for 1s arrival rate 
application, simulation analysis investigated revealed that 
the (BO, SO) combination that achieves the near optimal 
performance in terms of the three metrics and after which 
the performance is adversely affected is (8, 8). Hence, our 
scope is limited to all possible (BO, SO) combinations 
which are less than and including (8, 8). Selected 
combinations then dynamically change according to the 
network performance. Other simulation parameters are 
identical to those presented in Table 1.  Fig. 6, Fig. 7 and 
Fig. 8 depict performance evaluation results for the 
proposed algorithm compared with the original MAC 
algorithm in terms of the three metrics starting from average 
end to end delay behavior. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The new adaptive algorithm 
 
 
Figure 6. Average delay for the proposed and the original algorithm 
 
 
Figure 7. Throughput for the proposed and the original algorithm 
 
Figure 8.  Total energy following the proposed algorithm along  with 
origional algorithm 
A. Average End to End Delay (s) 
Fig. 6 depicts that the adaptive algorithm achieves less 
delay than the original MAC algorithm. This is simply 
because CAP increased gradually offering more time for 
nodes to accomplish their work in the current superframe, 
thereby, there will be less possibility for nodes to wait for 
the next beacon frame in order to accomplish the 
uncompleted work, thus, delay decreased, keeping in mind 
that BI remains constant as BO remains fixed. 
B. Throughput (bits/s) 
As it is expected, Fig. 7 depicts that the throughput for 
new adaptive algorithm outperforms that of the original one. 
In the adaptive algorithm, nodes have more time to perform 
activities and send packets in the current active session as 
SO increases gradually; thus, CAP increases accordingly. 
This gives nodes more opportunities to finish their work in 
the current active session which will also decrease collision 
rate and hence increases the throughput. 
C. Total Energy Consumption (mWh) 
It is noticed from Fig. 8 that the adaptive algorithm 
outperforms the original MAC algorithm at most (BO, SO) 
tested combinations, especially at some combinations which 
contribute in 50% duty cycle. At such combinations, delay 
is somehow moderate which will partially cause increment 
in SO value; thus, it allows PAN to work most of the time in 
50% duty cycle; this offers to nodes more opportunities to 
sleep half of the period, while limiting idle listening.  
However, for combinations which contribute in very low 
duty cycles, such as (5, 2), delay is initially estimated to be  
very bad, hence, SO shall enhance  delay accordingly, this 
will decrease sleep time opportunities while increasing idle 
listening which in turn increases energy consumption; this 
explains why 
energy consumption at such 
values 
unfortunately increases. Thereby, the proposed adaptive 
algorithm performance proved to outperform the original 
MAC algorithm in terms of average delay and throughput at 
all the tested (BO, SO) combinations while decreasing 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

energy consumption at most of them. The new adaptive 
algorithm reduces energy consumption up to 7%, decreases 
average delay by 26% while increasing throughput by 16%.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The chosen (BO, SO) combination has a direct impact 
on the performance of WSN applications that follows the 
IEEE802.15.4. Low SO values, compared to that of BO, 
serves low duty cycle applications whereas the closer SO to 
BO the higher the duty cycle. Thus, IEEE802.15.4 standard 
can support up to 9 duty cycles through just manipulating 
BO and SO parameters. In order to achieve optimal 
performance, different types of applications have to be 
aware of which (BO, SO) combination to use to achieve the 
best performance. For 1 s arrival rate application, the rang 
of combinations that is possible to achieve the best 
performance is aligned between {(6,6) and (8,8)}. The 
stranded can achieve its optimality if it is allowed to support 
25%, 50% and 100% duty cycles applications. Lower duty 
cycles achieve bad performance irrespective of the (BO, 
SO) combination, which means that unless it is necessary to 
follow, it is preferred to avoid such duty cycles.  (8, 8) can 
be expressed as the cut-off combination because other 
combinations with higher BOs drop the PAN performance 
dramatically.  
The experimental work conducted for the 1 s arrival rate 
application 
revealed 
that 
improving 
some 
metrics 
performance may be scarified in order to allow others 
achieved. However, our goal is to achieve high PAN 
performance in term of all metrics and most importantly the 
power consumption irrespective of the duty cycle or the 
arrival rate. The proposed adaptive algorithm proved to 
improve the standard in terms of the average delay and the 
throughput at all tested (BO, SO) combinations while 
decreasing energy consumption at most of them. The new 
adaptive algorithm reduces energy consumption up to 7%, 
decreases average delay by 26% while increasing 
throughput by 16%.  
 As a future work, increasing the duty cycle will be 
achieved through following different techniques which 
manipulates BO values. The same work that is conducted 
for 1s arrival rate applications, will be investigated for other 
higher and lower arrival rate applicants in order to decide 
both the optimal and the cut-off (BO, SO) values.  Then the 
new adaptive algorithm behavior is going to be evaluated 
for such arrival rates applications. Other than average end to 
end delay criteria, PANc shall check PAN performance 
according to energy consumption metric and according to 
which the new adaptive algorithm shall be controlled. 
REFERENCES 
[1] IF. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and A. Cayirci; 
A survey on sensor networks,  Communications Magazine 
2002. Atlanta, GA, USA, vol. 40(8), pp. 102-114, 2002. 
[2] L. Selavo, A. Wood, Q. Cao, T. Sookoor, H. Liu,  A. 
Srinivasan, and J. Porter,” wireless sensor network for 
environmental 
research”, 
Proc. 
the 
5th 
international 
conference on Embedded networked sensor systems. Sydney, 
Australia Nov.  2007, pp. 103-116. 
[3] A. Koubaa,” Promoting Quality of Service in Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, 
(Submitted 
for 
receiving 
Habilitation 
Qualification in Computer Science) National School of 
Engineering, Sfax, Tunisia, 2011. 
[4] SC. Ergen, “ ZigBee/IEEE 
802.15. 
4 
(Summary)”, 
[Online][accessed April  2013], Available from URL 
http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~suman/courses/838/papers/zigbee.p
df. 
[5] P. Park,  C. Fischione, and  KH. Johansson, “Adaptive IEEE 
802.15. 4 protocol for energy efficient, reliable and timely 
communications”, Proc.  the 9th ACM/IEEE international 
conference on information processing in sensor networks. 
Stockholm , April  2010, pp. 327-338.  
[6] F. Shu, T. Sakurai, HL. Vu,  and M. Zukerman, “Optimizing 
the IEEE 802.15. 4 MAC”, Proc.  IEEE Region 10 
Conference (TENCON). Hong Kong,Nov.  2006, pp. 1-4. 
[7] P. Patro, M. Raina, V. Ganapathy, M. Shamaiah, and C. 
Thejaswi , “Analysis and improvement of contention access 
protocol in IEEE 802.15. 4 star network”, Proc. Mobile 
Adhoc and Sensor Systems (MASS 07),  IEEE Internatonal 
Conference.  Piza, Italy, Oct. 2007, pp. 1-8. 
[8] H. Deng, J. Shen, B. Zhang, J. Zheng, J. Ma, and H. Liu, 
“Performance Analysis for Optimal Hybrid Medium Access 
Control in Wireless Sensor Networks”. Proc. Global 
Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM 08). LA, 
USA, Nov. 2008, pp 1-5.  
[9] E. 
Casilari 
and 
J.M. 
Cano-Garcí, 
“Impact 
of 
the 
Parameterization of IEEE 802.15. 4 Medium Access Layer on 
the Consumption of ZigBee Sensor Motes”, Proc.   The 
Fourth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous 
Computing Systems, Services and Technologies (UBICOMM 
2010). Florence, Italy, Oct. 2010, pp. 117-123. 
[10] X. Li, CJ. Bleakley, and W. Bober, “Enhanced Beacon-
Enabled Mode for improved IEEE 802.15. 4 low data rate 
performance”, Wireless Networks 2012, vol. 18, pp. 59-74. 
[11] F. Charfi, and M. Bouyahi, “Performance evaluation of 
beacon enabled IEEE 802.15.4 under  NS2”, arXiv preprint 
arXiv 2012, pp. 1204.1495. 
[12] SA. Khan and FA. Khan, “Performance analysis of a zigbee 
beacon 
enabled 
cluster 
tree 
network”, 
Proc. 
Third 
International Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE'09). 
LahoreApril 2009, pp. 1-6. 
[13] A. Koubaa and M. Alves, E. Tovar, “A comprehensive 
simulation study of slotted CSMA/CA for IEEE 802.15. 4 
wireless sensor networks”,  IEEE WFCS,  2006, pp.63-70. 
[14] M. Neugebauer, J. Plonnigs, and K.  Kabitzsch, “A new 
beacon order adaptation algorithm for IEEE 802.15. 4 
networks”, 
Proc. 
The 
Second 
European 
Workshop 
on Wireless Sensor Networks. Ghent, Belgium2005, pp.  302-
311. 
[15] J. Hoffert, K. Klues, and O. Orjih “Configuring the IEEE 
802.15. 
4 
MAC 
Layer 
for 
Single-sink 
Wireless 
Sensor”,   Washington University in St. Louis, 2005. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-272-1
FUTURE COMPUTING 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

