Is There Chaos in Blobs of Carbon Nanotubes  
Used to Perform Computation? 
 
Stefano Nichele, Dragana Laketić, Odd Rune Lykkebø, and Gunnar Tufte 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
Trondheim, Norway 
email: {nichele, draganal, lykkebo, gunnart}@idi.ntnu.no 
 
 
Abstract—We report on observations of the behavior in single-
wall 
carbon 
nanotubes 
(SWCNTs) 
and 
polymer 
nanocomposites, which may indicate that the conductivity of 
this nanomaterial undergoes chaotic changes under certain 
circumstances. We present interesting material properties that 
can be used for (a) investigating non-linearity / chaotic 
behavioral properties of the material, (b) understanding the 
underlying physics that may be explored by evolution, and (c) 
identifying appropriate signal types (voltages, frequencies) 
suitable to stimulate the material and demonstrate a 
computationally rich behavior. The presented results show that 
the investigated material is particularly sensitive to specific 
frequencies, e.g., square waves, and suggest that different 
behavioral regimes may be achieved, e.g., uniform, stable, 
chaotic. This work is done within the NASCENCE project, 
whose goal is to find new materials suitable to perform 
computation. 
Keywords- Computation-in-Materio; Evolution-in-Materio; 
Evolvable Hardware; Chaos. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Traditional silicon-based computers are meticulously 
designed with a conventional top-down process. The 
miniaturization and engineering of such processors poses 
technological and economical challenges. In contrast, 
Evolution-in-Materio [1] [2] is a bottom-up approach where 
the intrinsic underlying physics of materials is exploited as 
computational medium. Different computational substrates 
have been previously explored [3] [4] [5]. The EU-funded 
NASCENCE project [6] investigates how nano-scale 
materials, e.g., carbon nanotubes / polymer composites, 
liquid crystals, and graphene, may be used and configured to 
produce computation. As such, the material blob is treated as 
a black-box and is interfaced to a traditional computer 
through a series of signals / wires which send inputs / 
configurations and read / interpret outputs. Evolutionary 
algorithms are the means of finding suitable configurations 
in order to “program” the material to solve a wanted 
function. Such a black-box hybrid approach has been shown 
successful for different problems, such as Traveling 
Salesman [7], logic gates [8], bin packing [9], machine 
learning classification [10], frequency classification [11], and 
function optimization [12]. At the current state of research, it 
is not clearly understood what the exploited underlying 
physical properties are and what is the best way of exploring 
them, e.g., number of input / outputs, types of signals (static 
voltages, sinusoidal waves, square waves). The solved 
problems serve as proof of concept that such an approach 
may be competitive in terms of computational time, size, and 
energy consumption, but scaling-up to solve bigger instances 
requires a better understanding. In other words the black-box 
needs to be opened. The number of used input electrodes, 
configuration signals, etc., is related to what part of the 
search and solution space is available for evolution to be 
exploited on the material, which may be critical for the 
success of any kind of computational task.  
There are several parameters that may have impact on 
evolvability and computational power. Those can be grouped 
in three macro-categories:  
 Intrinsic: this is related to internal properties of the 
molecules that compose the material, for example the 
type of used particles and their composition. This decides 
the physical properties that may be available to be 
exploited, e.g., conductivity, charge, etc. 
 External/Environmental: external stimuli that influence 
the material properties, such as current, temperature, 
light. Those can be of two types: controllable, e.g., 
evolved, or non-controllable. External inputs may have 
an impact and change the physical state of the material 
temporarily or permanently.  
 Construction: those are properties that are decided when 
the system is built and cannot be changed afterwards. As 
such, they may be said to be both external, i.e., 
construction choices, and internal, as they influence the 
intrinsic physical properties of the material, e.g., 
concentration of molecules, type of nanotubes (metallic, 
semi-conducting), electrodes material, size and pitch. 
As there are several variables to be explored, it is 
reasonable to acquire a better understanding of how the most 
relevant parameters impact the computational power of 
materials. The more we know about materials, the better they 
can be used for computations (or any other purpose we may 
want to use them for). 
This paper, which serves as a work-in-progress report, is 
organized as follows: Section 2 describes the investigated 
material and hardware platform. Section 3 relates the work to 
dynamic complex systems and chaos. In Section 4, the 
experimental setup is described and Section 5 presents the 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

results and discussion. Section 7 concludes the paper 
together with planned future work. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND HW PLATFORM 
The current experiments are performed on a blob of 
single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) mixed with 
polybutyl methacrylate (PBMA) dissolved in anisole 
(methoxy-benzene). The material samples, supplied by 
Durham University, are prepared on 4x4 grids of gold micro-
electrode arrays with pads of 50μm and pitch of 100μm. The 
preparation is done by dispensing 20μL of material onto the 
electrode area (CNT concentration 0.53% of weight). This is 
baked for 30min at 90C; the solvent dries out and leaves a 
“thick film”. The substrate is cooled slowly over a period of 
1h. This process leaves a variable distribution of nanotubes 
across the electrodes. Carbon nanotubes are 30% conducting 
and 70% semi-conducting, while PBMA creates insulation 
areas within nanotube networks, which may allow non-linear 
current versus voltage characteristics.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Sketch of nanotubes dispersed over electrodes. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Electrode array slide plugged into connector. 
 
A sketch of randomly dispersed nanotubes over gold 
electrodes on a glass slide is shown in Figure 1. The glass 
slide on which the material and electrodes are placed is 
plugged into a connector as represented in Figure 2. Such 
connector is attached to a custom built hardware board called 
Mecobo [13] (designed and built at the Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology), which is connected 
to a host PC via USB. Such platform can be accessed 
remotely over the internet by a Thrift server. Figure 3 shows 
a Mecobo board with a connected material slide. An overall 
block diagram of the system is presented in Figure 4. 
Mecobo serves as interface for computer-controlled 
evolution of configuration signals (analog or digital) to 
stimulate the nanomaterial to solve computational problems. 
For more details on the Mecobo platform see [13]. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Mecobo interface between nanomaterial and PC. 
 
In a typical experiment, the overall goal is to solve a 
computational task. Output signals are sampled from the 
material by the board and returned to the host computer 
which executes an evolutionary algorithm and calculates the 
fitness. The maximum sampling frequency is 50KHz. The 
input signals may be static voltages or square waves ranging 
between 400Hz and 25MHz. As the material is treated as a 
black-box, the input stimuli are used to exploit the 
underlying physics of the material blob. On the other hand, if 
we want to unveil the computational power of materials, how 
to better exploit them, and how to use them to solve 
problems of scaled-up complexity, a different approach is 
needed. As such, in the experiments herein we connect 
material slides to a Hewlett Packard 33120A 15MHz 
function / arbitrary waveform generator (used as input) and 
an Agilent 54622D 100MHz mixed signal oscilloscope (used 
as output). 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Experimental system block diagram. 
III. 
COMPLEX DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CHAOS 
Carbon nanotubes randomly dispersed in polymer 
solutions may be considered as a complex dynamic system 
where a huge number of tiny elements (nano-molecules) 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

interact at a local level and exhibit different emergent 
dynamics [14]. Such an emergent process cannot be 
understood by describing one of its parts alone but must be 
considered together with the massively parallel interactions 
among its parts. The idea of complex dynamic systems is 
connected with the notion of “edge of chaos” [15] [16], 
which may indicate maximum complexity and computational 
power. Computation may be said to occur in the vicinity of a 
phase transition between order, i.e., little dynamics / 
information processing and high memory / structure 
preservation, and chaos, i.e., no memory and plenty of 
dynamics. It may be argued that in order to have any 
complex computation, a balance between order and chaos 
needs to exist, i.e., edge of chaos.  Computation at the 
molecular level, i.e., computation-in-materio, may be able to 
produce considerably rich dynamics as the very essence of 
the material physics is exploited. This may allow to abstract 
computational properties and analyze the dynamics of the 
investigated substrates as trajectories and attractor basins 
[17]. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
Evolving solutions to computational problems in the 
material requires interfacing to a computer (EA). Such 
interface is typically provided by the Mecobo board. 
However, when it comes to understanding the underlying 
properties of the material and relative responses, it may be 
necessary to use specific electronic test instruments, i.e., 
oscilloscopes and signal generators.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Mecobo (left) vs. oscilloscope (right) at 1KHz (top) and 10KHz 
(bottom). Input ±3.3V, duty cycle 50%. 
 
Figure 5 presents the same square wave (±3.3V, duty 
cycle 50%) at a frequency of 1KHz (top) and 10KHz 
(bottom), sampled with Mecobo (left) at a frequency of 
25KHz and probed with the oscilloscope (right). It is visible 
that the material may show a charge / discharge transition, 
but the level of details is partially lost with Mecobo. As the 
operating input frequency may range between 400Hz and 
25MHz, while the maximum sampling rate is 50KHz, it is 
clear that physical properties of the material need to be 
investigated with an oscilloscope. On the other hand, when 
solutions ought to be discovered by an evolutionary 
algorithm, Mecobo acts as an interface, being able to 
produce different inputs, i.e. analog and digital, on different 
pins and read outputs at the same time.    
 
 
 
Figure 6. Schematics without Mecobo. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. SEM image of gold electrode arrays with different coverage of 
nanotubes. Adopted from [8]. 
 
The chosen experimental setup is shown in Figure 6, 
where the input probe (from the signal generator) is placed 
on pin #2 (IN) and the two output probes (to the 
oscilloscope) are connected to pins #9 (OUT1) and #7 (OUT 
2). The input / output pins have been chosen as there is the 
same electrode distance between gold pads within the 
material blob. Coverage of gold electrodes with randomly 
dispersed nanotubes varies and some of the electrodes may 
even be left with little or no coverage, as visible in the 
Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) image in Figure 7.  
One of the expected results is to achieve different 
responses on different output pins, as the material from a 
macroscopic point of view has the following properties: 
 
Varying capacitance between pin pairs; 
 
Varying inductance between pin pairs; 
 
Varying induced magnetic field, inducing current in 
other parts of the material; 
 
Varying resistance between pin pairs; 
 
Varying metal/semiconductor junctions, e.g. different 
coverage of carbon nanotubes on gold probes. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Even if a single square wave input signal is used, the 
resulting output shows a rich variety of behaviors, more than 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

what may be achieved by a single static voltage or by a 
sinusoidal wave. As such, square waves may be better suited 
to penetrate the material and exploit the nanotube sub-
networks, which may be particularly sensitive to different 
frequencies. 
Figure 8 presents the experimental results. In particular, 
Figures 8(a) show several snapshots of the material response 
on two different pins at different frequencies, ranging from 
1KHz (Figure 8a1) to 14MHz (Figure 8a12). At 1KHz the 
signals may seem similar (a1), where the material charges-up 
and subsequently discharges, but at a zoomed-in resolution 
(a2) a voltage spike is visible on the second probe which is 
not present on the first probe. This is better visible at 5KHz 
(a3), 30KHz (a4) and 100KHz (a5), where it is possible to 
notice that on the rising front there is a sudden voltage 
increase/drop, as the material behavior is “supercapacitor-
like”. Starting from 500KHz (a6), which is also zoomed-in 
(a7), the second probe signal is similar to a square wave 
(most of the harmonic frequencies are passed) while the first 
probe acts more like a filter. In both cases, there is a 
resonance phase which results in a deterministic yet semi-
chaotic waveform. This may be the effect of some 
conducting sub-networks in the material that are enabled at 
specific frequencies and disabled at others. At 2, 5 and 8.5 
MHz the measured voltage decreases while frequency 
increases. At 10MHz (a11) a strange phenomenon is 
observed where both signals (it is more noticeable on the 
first) have a voltage increase, probably due to a feedback-
effect (some frequencies are fed again into the material by 
some nanotube sub-networks). At 14MHz (a12) the signal on 
the second probe is sinusoidal, i.e., only one harmonic 
frequency is present. As such, it may be concluded that with 
a single square wave input it is possible to observe a rich 
variety of behaviors while the frequency spectrum is 
traversed.  
As the system produces uniform, stable and semi-chaotic 
behaviors, it is of particular interest to visualize input-output 
responses and output-output relations, as to better understand 
traversed trajectories and attractors. For this purpose, XY 
plots are shown in Figure 8b, where OUT1 is plotted against 
OUT2 and Figure 8c, where IN is plotted against OUT1. In 
Figure 8b1, some orbits are present at 30KHz. Similar orbits 
are visible at 60KHz (b2) and 100KHz (b3), moving towards 
opposite corners to those where the impulse is. After each 
impulse, there is a semi-chaotic orbit which relaxes before 
the next impulse arises, as the semi-chaotic behavior is 
annihilated by the lack of energy in the material, until the 
next impulse. This may suggest that chaotic behavior may be 
present, yet particularly difficult to observe.  
Finally, we present XY plots between input and output, 
which represent the phase space of the system (input-output 
pin pair). Figure 8c1 is registered at 350Khz. Several 
oscillating orbits are present, which are zoomed-in at 2MHz 
(c2). Same effect is observed for frequencies up to 5MHz 
(c3) while for frequencies around 10MHz and higher we 
observe a hysteresis loop which may indicate that some 
saturation may have been reached in the material. Some sort 
of non-linearity seems present, which is always a good 
indicator that the system may achieve chaotic behavior.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented interesting properties of 
nanocomposites of single-wall carbon nanotubes and 
polymers. Such material blobs are investigated within the 
NASCENCE projects as one of possible novel computational 
substrates. Previous work has presented proof of concept for 
the solution of several problems, where the material blob was 
used as a black-box and interfaced to a computer running 
EAs through a custom developed board. Our approach was 
intended for investigating different behavioral responses 
when the material is stimulated with square wave voltages at 
different frequencies, with the goal of detecting non-linear 
and chaos-like behaviors. As such, signal generator and 
oscilloscope’s probes were connected to the material gold 
electrodes. This was done to understand underlying physical 
responses and suitable signal frequencies able to show 
computationally rich behaviors. The work in progress results 
are promising as a single square wave signal has been shown 
to produce a variety of responses dependent on pins and 
frequencies. Phase space plots have been presented with 
orbiting trajectories alternated to relaxed transients. 
Responses that may be exploited for evolution have been 
identified at rather low frequencies, in ranges below MHz.  
As future work we will continue our investigation to 
search for interesting responses and new methods for their 
analysis, in particular with the goal of determining whether 
chaotic behavior is present. The presence of chaos may be 
considered a benefit of the used computational materials, as 
the described theory on the computation at the “edge of 
chaos” may be plausible for computation at the molecular 
level, where the low physics of material are exploited. 
Another future direction is the modeling of different 
materials at different abstraction levels. Currently, cellular 
automata (CA) models of materials are considered. Such an 
approach has the advantage of representing different 
computational behaviors as trajectories and attractor basins, 
allowing measurements on computational complexity and 
computational power of materials.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the European Community’s Seventh Framework 
Programme (FP/2007-2013) under grant agreement number 
317662. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Miller, S. Harding, and G. Tufte, “Evolution-in-materio: 
evolving 
computation 
in 
materials,” 
Evolutionary 
Intelligence, vol. 7, no. 1, 2014, pp. 49–67. 
[2] J. Miller and K. Downing, “Evolution in materio: Looking 
beyond the silicon box,” in The 2002 NASA/DoD Conference 
on 
Evolvable 
Hardware, 
A. Stoica, J. Lohn, 
R. Katz, 
D. Keymeulen, and R. S. Zebulum, eds., Alexandria, Virginia, 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, 
IEEE Computer Society, 15-18 July 2002, pp. 167–176. 
[3] A. Thompson, “Hardware evolution - automatic design of 
electronic circuits in reconfigurable hardware by artificial 
evolution,” CPHC/BCS distinguished dissertations, 1998. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

  
  
  
   
(a1) – 1KHz 
 
(a2) – 1KHz (zoom)  
 
(a3) – 5KHz 
 
      (a4) – 30KHz 
 
  
  
  
 
(a5) – 100KHz 
 
      (a6) – 500KHz 
 
           (a7) – 500KHz (zoom) 
 
      (a8) – 2MHz 
 
  
  
  
   
(a9) – 5MHz 
 
      (a10) – 8.5MHz 
 
                (a11) – 10MHz 
 
    (al2) – 14MHz 
 
  
  
  
 
(b1) – 30KHz 
 
        (b2) – 60KHz 
 
                (b3) – 100KHz 
 
   (b4) – 500KHz 
 
  
  
  
 
(c1) – 350KHz 
 
(c2) – 2MHz (zoom)              
 
(c3) – 5MHz 
 
      (c4) – 10MHz 
 
Figure 8. Oscilloscope screenshots. 
(a) Voltage responses on 2 different pins with input square wave at different frequencies. 
(b) XY plots, X (OUT1) is plotted against Y (OUT2) at different frequencies. 
(c)  XY plots, X (IN) is plotted against Y (OUT1) at different frequencies.  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

 [4] S. Harding and J. Miller, “Evolution in materio : A real-time 
robot controller in liquid crystal,” in Proceedings of the 2005 
NASA/DoD Conference on Evolvable Hardware, J. Lohn, 
D. Gwaltney, G. Hornby, R. Zebulum, D. Keymeulen, and 
A. Stoica, eds., Washington, DC, USA, IEEE Press, 29 June-1 
July 2005, pp. 229–238. 
[5] P. Cariani, “To evolve an ear: epistemological implications of 
Gordon Pask’s electrochemical devices,” Systems Research, 
vol. 10, no. 3, 1993, pp. 19–33. 
[6] H. Broersma, F. Gomez, J. Miller, M. Petty, and G. Tufte, 
“Nascence 
project: 
nanoscale 
engineering 
for 
novel 
computation using evolution,” International journal of 
unconventional computing, vol. 8, no. 4, 2012, pp. 313–317. 
[7] K. Clegg, J. Miller, K. Massey, and M. Petty, “Travelling 
salesman problem solved "in materio" by evolved carbon 
nanotube device,” in Parallel Problem Solving from Nature - 
PPSN XIII, T. Bartz-Beielstein, J. Branke, B. Filipic, and 
J. Smith, eds., vol. 8672 of Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, Springer International Publishing, 2014, pp. 692–
701. 
[8] A. Kotsialos, K. Massey, F. Qaiser, D. Zeze, C. Pearson, and 
M. Petty, “Logic gate and circuit training on randomly 
dispersed carbon nanotubes.,” International journal of 
unconventional 
computing., 
vol. 10, 
September 
2014, 
pp. 473–497. 
[9] M. Mohid et al., “Evolution-in-materio: Solving bin packing 
problems using materials,” in The 2014 IEEE Conference on 
Evolvable Systems - ICES, IN PRESS, IEEE Computer 
Society, 2014. 
[10] M. Mohid et al., “Evolution-in-materio: Solving machine 
learning classification problems using materials,” in Parallel 
Problem Solving from Nature - PPSN XIII, T. Bartz-
Beielstein, J. Branke, B. Filipic, and J. Smith, eds., vol. 8672 
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer International 
Publishing, 2014, pp. 721–730. 
[11] M. Mohid et al., “Evolution-in-materio: A frequency classifier 
using materials,” in The 2014 IEEE Conference on Evolvable 
Systems - ICES, IN PRESS, IEEE Computer Society, 2014. 
[12] M. Mohid et al., “Evolution-in-materio : solving function 
optimization problems using materials.,” in Computational 
Intelligence (UKCI) : 2014 14th UK Workshop on, 8-10 
September 2014, Bradford, UK ; proceedings. (D. Neagu, 
M. Kiran, and P. Trundle, eds.), IEEE, September 2014, 
pp. 1–8. 
[13] O. R. Lykkebø, S. Harding, G. Tufte, and J. Miller, “Mecobo: 
A hardware and software platform for in materio evolution,” 
in Unconventional Computation and Natural Computation - 
13th International Conference, UCNC 2014, London, ON, 
Canada, July 14-18, 2014, Proceedings, pp. 267–279. 
[14] S. Stepney, “The Neglected Pillar of Material Computation,” 
Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, vol. 237, July 2008, 
pp. 1157–1164. 
[15] C. Langton, “Computation at the Edge of Chaos: Phase 
Transitions and Emergent Computation,” Phys. D, vol. 42, 
June 1990, pp. 12–37. 
[16] M. Mitchell, 
J. Crutchfield, 
P. Hraber, 
“Dynamics, 
computation, and the "edge of chaos": A re-examination,” in 
Complexity: Metaphors, Models, and Reality, Addison-
Wesley, 1994, pp. 497–513. 
[17] S. Nichele and G. Tufte, “Trajectories and attractors as 
specification for the evolution of behaviour in cellular 
automata,” in Evolutionary Computation (CEC), 2010 IEEE 
Congress on, IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–8. 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

