Bringing Colours to the Black Box —
A Novel Approach to Explaining Materials for Evolution-in-Materio
Dragana Laketi´c, Gunnar Tufte, Stefano Nichele, Odd Rune Lykkebø
Department of Computer and Information Science
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Trondheim, Norway
Emails: (dragana.laketic, gunnar.tufte, nichele, lykkebo)@idi.ntnu.no
Abstract—The work presented in this paper is done within the
NASCENCE (NAnoCSale Engineering for Novel Computation
using Evolution) project which investigates computational prop-
erties of nanomaterials and unconventional computing paradigms
which can be applied to such materials in order to achieve
material computing. The paper presents a novel approach to mod-
elling computations in one of the nanomaterials considered in the
project - Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes (SWCNTs)-polymer
nanocomposites. Our belief is that the presented approach is
more suitable for the experiments within NASCENCE. It takes
inspiration from the principles of dynamical hierarchies and can
be related to some known cellular computing architectures. Our
motivation is given as well as some initial simulation results
based on a simpliﬁed model built according to the proposed
approach. The results show that the proposed approach captures
well the conductivity dependence on the concentration of carbon
nanotubes and varying electric potential in the material.
Keywords–Unconventional
computing;
Evolution-in-Materio;
carbon nanotubes; SWCNT-polymer nanocomposites.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Computing devices based on silicon (Si) technology are
not likely to meet the needs for the extent of computations
needed by humankind in the future. Novel technologies need
to be found which will provide for the growing scales of
computations but also for the demands such as energy efﬁ-
ciency and similar. In that it is not only sufﬁcient to ﬁnd a
promising replacement for Si, i.e., some novel material which
can perform computations; it is also necessary to discover new
computing paradigms better suited to novel technologies.
The NASCENCE project [1] investigates both. Materials
considered so far are coated gold nanoparticles and nanocom-
posites made of SWCNTs and polymer molecules but also,
recently, SWCNTs / Liquid Crystal (LC) dispersions. Meth-
ods of material manipulation for achieving computation are
explained within Evolution-in-Materio (EIM) [2][3] whereby
Evolutionary Algorithms (EA) are employed to search for the
solution of a computational task in materio.
Exploitation of computational properties of a material
requires a good understanding of its properties and behaviours
when exposed to certain type of excitation. A good under-
standing of the material properties is best tested in a model
of the material. If a model produces responses similar to the
experiments in the lab, then model is sufﬁciently good to
make good predictions of the material behaviour in simulation
thereby saving experimental time and resources.
However, to make a model good enough for the CNT-based
materials used in NASCENCE is not an easy task. This is due
to the setup of the experiments but also the bulk of material
itself: there is no tidy alignment of CNTs, rather there is a blob
of nanocomposite where Van der Vaals’ forces keep SWCNTs
in bundles which, sustained by polymer molecules, stretch in
all directions. Further, there is no ’neat’ electric ﬁeld as is the
case, for example, in the CNT-gate stretching from source to
drain electrode in thin ﬁlm transistors [4][5]. In NASCENCE
experiments, electric ﬁeld is the result of the voltages on a
number of electrodes which are immersed into a blob, thick
ﬁlm of SWCNT-polymer nanocomposite. As existing models
and simulation methods fail to serve the purpose, a novel
approach is needed.
This paper presents one of the approaches considered
within the project. In NASCENCE, a material under exper-
iments is treated as a black box - some signals are brought
to it and some signals are read as a response. If the aim
is to model what takes place in the material, we need to
unbox it and look inside searching for the physical processes
which lead to material computing. Different levels of details
can be accounted for when addressing the physics at the
bottom of the computations produced by the material. The
approach presented in this paper is based on two paradigms
borrowed from complex systems: dynamical hierarchies [6][7]
and cellular computing [8][9].
The paper is organised as follows. Section II gives a brief
overview of the computing materials and EIM. Section III
presents the approach to modeling SWCNT-based nanocom-
posites. Section IV shows simulation results based on a simple
model and, ﬁnally, Section V provides a discussion of a
proposed approach and some directions for future work.
II.
MATERIALS THAT COMPUTE
The notion is not novel. Ferrous sulphate which discrimi-
nates between the frequencies [10], frequency discriminator in
FPGA tissue [11], pattern recognition in a bucket of water [12],
robot controllers in liquid crystal [13] - are just a few examples,
some of which have been known for as long as half a century.
Beside ﬁnding suitable materials, another challenge is which
method of material manipulation to use in order to achieve
useful computation. One possible way is to use a bottom-up
approach and let an EA search the space of possible solutions.
EIM [2] uses computations performed by the material when
stimulated by some signals from outside material which change
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Overview of the Evolution-in-Materio, taken and adapted from
[14]. See Section II for explanation.
according to an EA. These signals conﬁgure the material so
that it performs a certain computation. Therefore they are
called conﬁguration signals. EA is run on a computer where
conﬁguration (signals) of the material is represented as a
genotype which undergoes evolutionary changes until material
response corresponds to a desired computation. Figure 1 shows
an overview of this process.
Conﬁguration and input signals as well as ﬁtness value
are processed by the computer, i.e., they are digital while
actual computations which happen in the material are ana-
logue due to the physics exploited for computation. Figure 1
shows this cross-domain between digital and analogue worlds.
Instructions which conﬁgure the material are generated by the
computer (digital) and are subject to an EA which runs on a
computer. Material response (analogue) is read and converted
by interface so that it can be tested for ﬁtness by the computer.
EIM is used in NASCENCE [1]. In a typical experiment,
material is treated as a black box. We assume nothing about
what is inside the sample of material when searching for solu-
tions for some computational task. A more detailed description
of the process used in the experiments can be found, for
example, in [15][16].
In NASCENCE, it has already been shown that materials
can solve computational problems [14][16]. However, having
a problem solved is not enough. We would like to learn more
about the possibilities that lie in the material. If the travelling
salesman problem is successfully solved for 9 and 10 cities
[14], can we expect the same blob of material to be equally
successful at solving the problem for larger numbers of cities?
Can we say more about problem scalability in some other way
than purely by running exhaustive runs of experiments?
To get more knowledge about the computing properties of
the material, a way to go is to construct a model of the material.
A good model means a good understanding of the underlying
laws of physics which govern behaviour of the system under
investigation. A model also shows how well we understand the
material - if a model is good enough, when used in simulations
it will produce behaviours similar to those observed in the
lab when we run experiments. The more we know about the
material, the better can we make use of its properties for
computations while saving experimental resources.
Figure 2. Optical micrographs of SWCNT-polymer nanocomposites
dispersed over gold electrodes with 25µm electrode gap. Different
concentrations exhibit various coverage of gold electrodes.
III.
DICING MATERIAL INTO CELLS
Many models of CNTs exist [17]–[21]. However, usually
they are suited for a certain purpose, for example to model
conductivity of CNT gates in thin ﬁlm transistors [18]. Our
goal is to model conductivity of CNTs used in NASCENCE ex-
periments. The conductivity of CNTs is due to the percolation
paths they form and can be observed when CNTs are placed in
an electric ﬁeld. It changes either with the change of electric
ﬁeld or with the change of percolation paths if nanotubes are
movable. In case of the samples currently under investigations,
SWCNTs are not movable, they are held at certain positions by
polymer molecules. So, the only way that conductivity of the
sample can change is by changing the electric ﬁeld to which
the sample is exposed.
Therefore, it can be said that the challenge faced when
modelling blobs of SWCNT-polymer nanocomposites used
in NASCENCE experiments is multifaceted. The main two
questions which need to be answered are:
•
how
to
represent
physics
of
SWCNT-polymer
nanocomposites?
•
how to represent electric ﬁeld which changes accord-
ing to the change of voltages on the electrode array?
Figure 2 shows micrographs of some of the sam-
ples used in NASCENCE experiments. Typically, it is
a 20µL blob of SWCNT-polymer nanocomposite. Poly-
mer is Poly(Methyl MethAcrylate) (PMMA) or Poly(Butyl
MethAcrylate) (PBMA). The nanocomposite is dissolved in
some solution to be dispersed over array of electrodes as a
droplet and subsequently dried at high temperature leaving
a thick ﬁlm of nanocomposite spread over electrodes upon
dissolvent’s evaporation. Electrodes are made of gold and can
be placed in different arrangements - circular, square matrix
- so that the distance between individual electrodes varies.
Typically, it is several 10s of µm and so is the radius of
individual electrodes.
Another feature which can be noticed from micrographs in
Figure 2, is that the coverage of electrodes by nanotubes is not
uniform. Some electrodes are more in contact with nanotubes
than the others and some may even remain with no contact
at all. Also, this is very much dependent on the SWCNT
concentration. A somewhat simplistic sketch of the material
sample at hand can look as given in Figure 3, which simpliﬁes
the content of the sample together with the electrodes.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

Figure 3. A sketch of the system used in experiments: SWCNT bundles are
represented as grey sticks lying in all directions, polymer molecules are in a
shape of balls and electrodes are golden yellow patches seen behind material.
A. Abstracting away the details
Behaviour of complex systems is the result of the dynamics
of their constituent parts [22]. In [23], Herbert Simon named
hierarchies as “one of the central structural schemes” that
the architect of complexity uses. And, indeed, hierarchies,
dynamical hierarchies [6][7] in particular, describe systems
which are made of a number of components undergoing
some dynamics and, in doing that, mutually interacting. Such
behaviour leads to the emergence of novel units at higher hier-
archical levels [24]. Hierarchical systems within which higher
levels emerge as a result of the dynamics of lower level units
have been studied from various approaches - philosophical,
computational, information theoretical - that more as they carry
the principles on which life itself emerges.
Interesting to notice is that dynamics at different levels
happens at different rates [25]. The lower the level, the higher
the rate of the dynamics [24] which further leads to averaging
or “some selective loss of detail” as Pattee names it [26] or
some ﬁltering of the information from a lower to a higher level
[27]. All the details of the dynamics at lower levels need not be
fully known, rather some averaged, ﬁltered information which
describes it in sufﬁcient detail.
B. Cellular approach
Another trait of complex systems is that their constituent
parts operate in parallel. The behaviour or functionality of the
system as a whole is the result of the operation of its parts but,
as a rule, it cannot be simply represented as a sum of its parts,
i.e., nonlinearity is inherent to the system. The related notion
is emergence [28] which captures the property that “the whole
is greater than the sum of its parts” and that nonlinearity is
present.
Models of such systems are usually based on the represen-
tation of the parts of the system as cells. It is needed to ﬁnd
appropriate cell arrangement and some governing mechanism
for the cell dynamics. This mechanism can be given in different
forms - rules which describe how a cell transitions from one
state to another - Cellular Automata (CA) [8] or some physics
of the cell - Cellullar Neural Networks (CNN) [9].
C. Our sample - what is in the cell?
Now, let us take a second look at the sketch of a system
shown in Figure 3. Let us try to imagine some 3-dimensional
Figure 4. Example of the system viewed as a collection of cells.
Figure 5. Four examples of what the cell sides may look like.
cells, in the simplest case let them be a one layer of cubes,
as in Figure 4. Each cell contains a portion of the system
which may contain SWCNTs and/or polymer molecules and/or
golden electrodes. The cell dynamics within the system will
be governed by the physics of its content. The cell interaction
with its neighbouring cells will be governed by the sides
where the cells touch. Figure 5 shows some examples of what
the sides of the cell, in this case a cube, may look like.
The top left ﬁgure shows an example with mainly polymer
molecules and CNT bundles only in a right top corner; the
top right an electrode with CNT bundles and a few polymer
molecules; the bottom left an electrode; the bottom right only
CNT bundles. If only polymer molecules are present, there will
be no current ﬂow between the cells as they are electrically
isolators. If there are SWCNTs there, the current ﬂow will
be determined by the electrical properties of the SWCNTs
- the percentage of metallic and semiconducting nanotubes,
characteristic resistance per unit length, etc. If there is an
electrode there, then the voltage it provides is known. Further,
the sides of the cells may contain each of the elements to a
certain percentage.
The behaviour of the cell is determined by the physics of
the material the cell contains. When describing the physics
that governs the cell dynamics, no detailed mechanisms of
SWCNT-polymer nanocomposites behaviour are needed. Some
level of abstraction may sufﬁce so that interesting and useful
behaviour is still captured although not all the segment and
junction resistances and the currents in individual segments of
percolation paths formed by SWCNTs are considered.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

Figure 6. Plot of the concentration of SWCNTs in our model, see Section
IV for explanation.
Figure 7. Plot of the electric potential resulting from the voltages on
electrodes, stand-alone crosses correspond to the electrode voltages, see
Section IV for further explanation.
IV.
MODEL AND SIMULATION
Let us consider a very simple model which captures the
properties described in Section III. A sample of material is
given as a blob of SWCNT-polymer nanocomposites dropped
over 16 electrodes placed in 4×4 array. Further, let us assume
that such system has been diced into a number of cells, as in
Figure 4. The cells are uniform and in a shape of a cube. Ap-
proximately 1.96·104 cells of 100×100×100µm3 dimensions
would account for a blob of 20µL of nanocomposites typically
used in our experiments. Let them be placed in a 140 × 140
grid of cells and position the array of electrodes in the centre
of the grid.
Lab samples are characterised by the concentration of
SWCNT. To make the model more realistic, let us assume
that the concentration is not uniform for all the cells: the cells
closer to the centre of the 140 × 140 grid have slightly higher
concentration than the cells closer to the edges. Therefore, in
our model, for a given concentration, we multiply this value
with some weight which depends on the position of the cell
within the grid, as shown in Figure 6, for a simple case where
the concentration of 0.25 is multiplied by coefﬁcients 1.5,
1 and 0.5 dependent on the cell position within the three
’rings’ around the central cells which contain electrodes, 1.5
corresponding to the closest to the centre.
Electric ﬁeld is the result of the voltages on electrodes.
During EA runs, voltages on electrodes change thereby chang-
ing electric ﬁeld as well. The electric ﬁeld at certain location
determines electric potential of the location. Without going
into exact equations, let us assume that the value of the electric
ﬁeld at some position within the 140 × 140 grid is given as
supersposition of the contributions from individual electrodes.
Further, for each contribution, the value of the electric ﬁeld
Figure 8. Plot of the simulated current for the SWCNT concentration 0.25%
- only the cells which contain electrodes can conduct current but since no
percolation paths are formed with other cells, there are no current ﬂows.
Figure 9. Plot of the simulated current for the SWCNT concentration 5% -
all cells in the system conduct current.
is dependent on the distance of the cell from that particular
electrode. Figure 7 shows a plot of the electric potential caused
by the electric ﬁeld which is determined in the described way
for voltages on electrodes being some random numbers in the
range [0, 3]V . For each location (i, j) in the grid, the potential
is calculated as vij = 0.01·∑16
k=1 vk ·
√
(i − ki)2 + (j − kj)2,
for an array of 16 electrodes in a 4 × 4 matrix.
The change of the states of the cells is governed by the
physics of the material found in the cell. In our model, the
cell state is described as the collection of the states of the cell
sides (vi, ii), i = 1, 2, ..., 6, the state of the cell side given as a
pair of values (vi, ii) representing electric potential and current
at its location within the grid. The choice to describe the state
of the cell based on the states of its sides comes from the
fact that conductivity of the sample is calculated based on the
interactions between the neighbouring cells which can allow
for the current conduction if sufﬁcient concentration of CNTs
is found at the cell boundaries so that conducting percolation
paths can be formed.
Let us consider a simple case where the physics is deter-
mined purely by the concentration of the SWCNTs in the cell
and some probability that the side of the cell will conduct.
In particular, a random number from a uniform distribution is
multiplied by the concentration of SWCNTs in the cell and if
such product is greater than the midrange of the distribution
interval, the current may ﬂow and is set to 1, otherwise it is
set to 0. Figures 8 and 9 show the conductance of the material
for two corner cases when there is no current as no percolation
paths are formed due to a low concentration of SWCNTs and
when concentration of SWCNTs is so high that current ﬂows
across the whole of material.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

V.
DISCUSSION/CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, initial work on modelling conductivity of
SWCNT-polymer nanocomposites has been presented. The
novelty of the approach lies in it being based on two
paradigms: dynamical hierarchies and a cellular computation
model. Principles of hierarchies are used to ﬁnd a suitable
approach to abstracting away details of the physics at a very
low level. A cellular computation model accounts for the
interactions between units of material - cells.
Initial sketch of the model shows that when it is used in
simulations, it yields the results which are intuitively expected:
higher concentrations of SWCNTs in nanocomposites lead
to more percolation paths formed and consequently more
current ﬂows; different voltages on electrodes produce different
electric ﬁelds in the material; the material behaviour is based
on some underlying physics which can be abstracted to a
certain level, etc.
However, this initial sketch is still far away from the
model of the behaviour of the materials used in NASCENCE
experiments - it needs to be extended! We identify main
directions for future extensions:
•
representation of the physics which drives the be-
haviour of the cell
•
type of the cell which is best suitable
Could some of the existing models for CNT thin ﬁlm tran-
sistors be used like in [19]? Or some of the models currently
investigated within the project (not published yet)? Or some
even higher level description? Simple cubes as presented at this
place are far from the real blob of material sample. Some other
shapes, e.g., dodecahedron are being considered. Also, the non-
uniformity of the cells is likely to be suitable for successful
models regarding size and content of the cell.
We are looking forward to addressing these challenges.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research presented in this paper has been funded within
EC 7FP under grant agreement no. 317662
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Broersma, F. Gomez, J. Miller, M. Petty, and G. Tufte, “Nascence
project: Nanoscale engineering for novel computation using evolution,”
International Journal of Unconventional Computing, vol. 8, no. 4, 2012,
pp. 313–317.
[2]
J. Miller and K. Downing, “Evolution in materio: looking beyond
the silicon box,” in Proceedings of the NASA/DoD Conference on
Evolvable Hardware.
NASA/DoD, July 2002, pp. 167–176.
[3]
S. Harding, J. F. Miller, and E. A. Rietman, “Evolution in materio:
Exploiting the physics of materials for computation,” Int J of Uncon-
ventional Computing, 2008, pp. 155–194.
[4]
B. K. Sarker, N. Kang, and S. I. Khondaker, “High performance
semiconducting enriched carbon nanotube thin ﬁlm transistors using
metallic carbon nanotubes as electrodes,” Nanoscale, vol. 6, 2014, pp.
4896–4902.
[5]
D.-M. Sun, C. Liu, W.-C. Ren, and H.-M. Cheng, “A review of carbon
nanotube- and graphene-based ﬂexible thin-ﬁlm transistors,” Small,
vol. 9, no. 8, 2013, pp. 1188–1205.
[6]
T. Lenaerts, D. Gross, and R. Watson, “Introduction to the workshop
wdh2002,” in Proceedings of the Alife VIII workshop On the modeling
of dynamical hierarchies, D. Gross and T. Lenaerts, Eds.
Sydney:
University of New South Wales, 2002, pp. 37–44.
[7]
S. Rasmussen, N. Baas, B. Mayer, M. Nilsson, and M. Olesen, “Ansatz
for dynamical hierarchies,” in Artiﬁcial Life.
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, 2001, pp. 329–353.
[8]
E. F. Codd, Cellular Automata, ser. Association for computing machin-
ery, Inc. Monograph series.
Academic Press, New York, 1968.
[9]
V. Cimagalli and M. Balsi, “Cellular neural networks, a review,” in Proc.
6th Italian Workshop on Parallel Architectures and Neural Networks,
Vietri sul Mare, Italy, E. Caianiello, Ed.
World Scientiﬁc, 1993, pp.
12–14.
[10]
G. Pask, “Physical analogues to the growth of a concept,” in Mechani-
sation of Thought Process, symposium proceedings, 1958, pp. 877–923.
[11]
A. Thompson, Hardware Evolution: Automatic design of electronic
circuits in reconﬁgurable hardware by artiﬁcial evolution.
Springer,
1996.
[12]
C. Fernando and S. Sojakka, “Pattern recognition in a bucket,” in
Advances in Artiﬁcial Life, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
W. Banzhaf, J. Ziegler, T. Christaller, P. Dittrich, and J. Kim, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003, vol. 2801, pp. 588–597.
[13]
S. Harding and J. F. Miller, “Evolution in materio : A real-time robot
controller in liquid crystal,” in Proceedings of the 2005 NASA/DoD
Conference on Evolvable Hardware, J. Lohn, D. Gwaltney, G. Hornby,
R. Zebulum, D. Keymeulen, and A. Stoica, Eds.
Washington, DC,
USA: IEEE Press, 29 June-1 July 2005, pp. 229–238.
[14]
K. Clegg, J. Miller, K. Massey, and M. Petty, “Travelling salesman
problem solved in materio by evolved carbon nanotube device,” in
Parallel Problem Solving from Nature PPSN XIII, ser. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, T. Bartz-Beielstein, J. Branke, B. Filipic, and
J. Smith, Eds.
Springer International Publishing, 2014, vol. 8672, pp.
692–701.
[15]
O. Lykkebø, S. Harding, G. Tufte, and J. Miller, “Mecobo: A hardware
and software platform for in materio evolution,” in Unconventional
Computation and Natural Computation, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, O. H. Ibarra, L. Kari, and S. Kopecki, Eds.
Springer
International Publishing, 2014, pp. 267–279.
[16]
A. Kotsialos, M. Massey, F. Qaiser, D. Zeze, C. Pearson, and M. Petty,
“Logic gate and circuit training on randomly dispersed carbon nan-
otubes,” International Journal of Unconventional Computing, vol. 5,
no. 6, 2014, pp. 473–497.
[17]
M. S. Fuhrer, J. Nygrd, L. Shih, M. Forero, Y.-G. Yoon, M. S. C.
Mazzoni, H. J. Choi, J. Ihm, S. G. Louie, A. Zettl, and P. L. McEuen,
“Crossed nanotube junctions,” Science, vol. 288, no. 5465, 2000, pp.
494–497.
[18]
A. Behnam and A. Ural, “Computational study of geometry-dependent
resistivity scaling in single-walled carbon nanotube ﬁlms,” Phys. Rev.
B, vol. 75, Mar 2007, p. 125432.
[19]
A. Behnam, J. Guo, and A. Ural, “Effects of nanotube alignment and
measurement direction on percolation resistivity in single-walled carbon
nanotube ﬁlms,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 102, no. 4, 2007, p.
044313.
[20]
D. A. Jack, C.-S. Yeh, Z. Liang, S. Li, J. G. Park, and J. C. Fielding,
“Electrical conductivity modeling and experimental study of densely
packed swcnt networks,” Nanotechnology, vol. 21, no. 19, 2010, p.
195703.
[21]
W. S. Bao, S. A. Meguid, Z. H. Zhu, and M. J. Meguid, “Modeling elec-
trical conductivities of nanocomposites with aligned carbon nanotubes,”
Nanotechnology, vol. 22, no. 48, 2011, p. 485704.
[22]
Y. Bar-Yam, Dynamics of Complex Systems.
Westview Press, 1997.
[23]
H. Simon, “The architecture of complexity,” in Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society, vol. 106, 1962, pp. 467–482.
[24]
S. N. Salthe, Evolving Hierarchical Systems.
Columbia University
Press, 1985.
[25]
H. A. Simon, “The architecture of complexity: Hierarchic systems,” in
The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial (Third edition), 1996, pp. 183–216.
[26]
H. H. Pattee, “The physical basis and origin of hierarchical control,” in
Hierarchy Theory, H. H. Pattee, Ed.
George Braziller Inc., 1973, pp.
71–108.
[27]
J. L. Lemke, “Opening up closure: Semiotics across scales,” in Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences.
Wiley Online Library, 2006,
p. 100.
[28]
M. A. Bedau and P. Humphreys, Emergence, Contemporary Readings
in Philosophy and Science.
MIT Press, 2008.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

