An Integrated VLE to Enhance Social Interaction  
for User-centred Active Learning 
 
 
Li Jin 
School of Electronics and Computer Science 
University of Westminster, UK 
L.Jin02@westminster.ac.uk 
Zhigang Wen 
Imagination Technologies Ltd. 
Kings Langley, Watford 
Hertfordshire, UK
 
 
Abstract—With the advent of social networking on the Internet, 
the great impacts of social interaction have rapidly migrated 
into the online world in order to enable multiple users to share 
opinions, insights, expertise, experiences, and interests with 
each other and further reduce the barriers to collaboration, 
skill-development, and discovery. Social networking facilitates 
social interaction and share of user-generated content in a 
collaborative environment. It has transferred the Internet into 
a dynamic platform for the development of innovative e-
commerce and e-learning applications. Social networking has 
already begun to foster an intuitive and immersive virtual 
environment by converging Web 3D technology for enhancing 
user motivation and engagement. This paper presents an 
integrated Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) which is 
designed to incorporate social networking services into 
conventional VLEs in order to support both informal and 
formal learning practices required in Higher Education. A 
Social Virtual World (SVW) is adopted as a visual interface to 
access the integrated VLE since it enhance social interaction 
for user-centred active learning by supporting visual 
communication, mutual awareness and accountability. This 
paper further discusses and experiments some actual 
educational practices prototyped in the proposed integrated 
VLE to evaluate the valued learning experience achievement. 
Keywords- Social interaction; e-Learning; Virtual Learning 
Environments  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
Humans are fundamentally social beings bounded to 
interact with each other by establishing empathy relations, to 
create groups, and to collaborative with others. Social 
Interaction usually follows a set of predefined behavioural 
patterns or models shaped by our natural abilities and 
rational skills to improve productivity, especially when a 
group of people works in a given homogeneous cultural 
environment [1]. Therefore, the social information obtained 
through interaction plays an important role in decision 
making and collaborative working. For instance, people 
would more likely purchase the best selling products (e.g. 
books, games, and toys) in real life because the best selling 
product implies that many people who have used it were 
satisfied with it and even were inspired by it. With the advent 
of social networking on the Internet, the great impacts of 
social interaction have rapidly migrated into the online world 
in order to enable multiple users to share opinions, insights, 
expertise, experiences, and interests with each other and 
further 
reduce 
the 
barriers 
to 
collaboration, 
skill-
development, and discovery.  
Social networking facilitates social interaction and share 
of user-generated content in a collaborative environment. It 
has evolved and transferred the Internet into a platform for 
the development of innovative e-commerce and e-learning 
applications [2, 3, 4, 5]. Social networking has already begun 
to foster an intuitive and immersive virtual environment by 
converging Web 3D technology. As one of emerging 
technologies, Social Virtual worlds (SVWs) has expanded 
and challenged ideas of the next generation of virtual 
learning environments. It is important for educators to 
analyze and understand what the characteristics of the 21st 
century learners are and how learning is changing as a result 
of these learners’ participating in these environments in 
comparison to the conventional static and text-oriented 
Virtual Learning Environments (VLEs). 
In this paper, Section II firstly analyzes multimodal 
interaction 
and 
requirements 
of 
social 
interaction 
enhancement through social networking. It then discusses the 
impact of SVWs on the Internet and its applications for e-
learning. Section III outlines the limitations of SVWs when 
being used in formal educational learning and then presents 
an integrated VLE which is designed to incorporate social 
networking services into conventional VLEs in order to 
support both informal and formal learning practices. A SVW 
is adopted as a 3D visual interface to access the integrated 
VLE since it facilitates social interaction for user-centred 
active learning by supporting visual communication, mutual 
awareness and accountability.  Section IV discusses and 
experiments some actual educational practices prototyped in 
SVWs to evaluate the learning experience achieved in the 
proposed integrated VLE. Finally, a brief conclusion is 
drawn in section V. 
II. 
ANALYSIS AND REQUIREMENTS 
Social networking on the Internet provides a dual-way 
mechanism for users, which allows them not only to read and 
download content in a top-down approach as before but also 
to write and upload online content in a bottom-up approach. 
35
FUTURE COMPUTING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-107-6

By using user friendly interfaces along with rich media, it 
encourages users as producers to enrich information, 
including video, audio and even 3D data. This stands in 
contrast to traditional Internet use, which limits users to 
browsing content that only the site owner can modify in a 
top-down approach. The advent of social networking is 
transferring the Internet into a dynamic platform for user 
active participation rather than a primary conventional 
information repository. The impact of the emerging 
technology has resulted in facilitating social interaction and 
share of user-generated content in a collaborative online 
environment. This section analyzes multimodal interaction 
on social networking and identifies the requirement of social 
interaction enhancement. It then discusses the impact of 
SVWs on the Internet and its applications for e-learning. 
A. Social Interaction on Social Networking 
As a novel medium, social networking facilitates 
multimodal interaction among users to improve information 
exploration and enrichment in collaborative way. Different 
social networking services focus on different aspects of 
human 
interaction. 
For 
example, 
MySpace 
(www.myspace.com) as a media-based social network 
allows self-publishing within users’ network of friends and 
colleagues. Facebook (www.facebook.com) allows users to 
create personal profiles and build up social relationship with 
other users by uploading various media such as photos and 
videos. Wikis provide multiple users a web-based 
collaborative interface to edit content and add links. Blogs 
support regular and frequent content editing via quickly 
thoughts and images posting and interaction with the public. 
It provides a quick, responsive, and user-centred mechanism 
for effective collaboration. YouTube (www.youtube.com) as 
an online video-sharing network allows users to upload and 
share videos clips and give out comments on shared content. 
One of the clear evolutionary trends of social networking 
is that these sites keep changing because there is a constant 
drive for extension and development as social grouping 
change and reformation as a result of social interaction 
among large numbers of users through these services. For 
example, while browsing a discussion forum, users may 
select a particular review or comment with a high rating from 
other users. Such decision is actually made based on 
observation of the activity of other users in the information 
space. 
To 
support 
coherent 
interaction 
in 
online 
environments, Erickson and Kellogg in IBM research centre 
developed a social translucence approach [6] which aimed at 
revealing and visualizing the presence and activity of users 
in digital environments in order to promote shared awareness 
and to support social processes. It emphasized the 
importance of perceptually-based social cues visible to their 
users and pointed out three key features of such systems for 
social interaction enhancement [7]: 
 
• 
Visibility/Co-presence: A system should allow users 
to observe each others’ presence and actions and 
further offer a sense of co-presence - “being there 
together” which is bound to be closely related. In 
face-to-face settings, social information is used to 
guide interaction among users in the system.   
• 
Awareness: A system enhances mutual awareness 
among the users through their co-presence. However, 
this awareness does not mean that user activities 
becomes total transparent. A system must protect 
user privacy and only reveal information that is 
necessary to support social awareness. 
• 
Accountability: Shared awareness leads to user 
accountability. Since users know that they can see 
each others’ actions, they must be responsible for 
their actions. This facilities user to follow social 
rules and conventions. 
However, it is observed that most social networking 
services on the Internet are still heavily based on text, image 
and video such as blogs, wikis, Facebook, and YouTube. 
There is a lack of efficient ways to support rich interaction 
that mainly enhanced by perceptually-based social cues 
visible among users such as gesture, posture, and emotional 
expression in real time. Recently, in conjunction with Web 
3D technology, social networking has already begun to foster 
an intuitive and immersive 3D Social Virtual World (SVW) 
to address these deficiencies. 
B. Social Virtual World for E-learning 
Social Virtual Worlds (SVWs) are intended to build up 
lively-based interactive virtual communities which represent 
part of reality and also leave some space for fantasy to be 
filled in. Users interact with each other through their 
emotional avatars in a 3D virtual world. One of the most 
successful SVWs is Second Life (www.secondlife.com), an 
online social space in which users can explore, meet others, 
socialize, and participate in individual and group activities 
for educational or business purposes. Since its introduction 
to public in 2003, the 3D virtual community has grown 
explosively and today is inhabited by millions of users from 
all around the world. Some well-known companies start to 
embed SVWs into e-commence and e-performance services 
[8, 9]. For example, the British Broadcasting Corporation 
(BBC) staged its annual ‘One Big Weekend’ rock concert in 
Second Life. Online audiences were able to see avatars of 
their favorite musicians, as well as watch and listen to live 
streams of the bands on stage in Scotland. It is agreed 
SVWs added a social level of interactivity for those who 
were unable to attend physically. Meanwhile, thanks to the 
popularity and success of massively multiplayer online role-
playing game (MMORPG), SVWs are rapidly growing in 
popularity due to game-play features. These massive 3D 
virtual environments have been widely accepted by wide 
range of people and become more attractive for young 
generation. Millions of users spend hours in SVWs at a time 
socializing, competing, and most of all, learning, learning 
how to builds digital creative content (e.g. architecture and 
crafts), learning how to work as a team, learning how to 
make decisions, and learning how to solve problems. They 
enjoy engaging within learning activities and are highly 
motivated and stimulated in the environments.  
36
FUTURE COMPUTING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-107-6

While offering a source of entertainment for users, 
SVWs make huge contribution to user-centred active 
learning. They have begun to be used in e-learning by many 
institutions, such as colleges, universities, libraries, and 
government entities. Institutions explore SVWs for a wide 
range of educational activities including learning, teaching 
and research in order to enhance personal development 
skills within a collaborative and sharing virtual environment 
[10, 11, 12]. Researchers and educators favour the 
innovative learning environment because it is more personal 
and social than traditional e-learning. In recent, Second Life 
has become one of novel virtual learning platforms for 
major colleges and universities, including the University of 
Florida, Harvard, Open University, and Ohio University.  
 
III. 
DESIGN OF AN INTEGRATED VLE  
Wegerif [13] emphasizes that many evaluations of 
asynchronous learning networks understandably focus upon 
the educational dimension, either learning outcomes or the 
educational quality of interaction, overlooking the social 
dimension. After identifying the requirement of social 
interaction enhancement and investigating SVWs for e-
learning, we believe that SVWs should be adopted as a 
means to extend and enhance the existing VLE for user-
centred active learning. Users are encouraged to become 
dependent on each other’s knowledge and experience to the 
point of leading and teaching others. However, SVWs along 
with other social networking services have primarily made 
contribution to informal learning which is mainly relies on 
self-motivation and self-management. There are still some 
challenges of adopting social networking for formal learning 
in High Education (HE) systems which requires explicit 
curriculum design, indicative content development, learning 
material management, and learning outcome achievement [4]. 
This section presents the design of an integrated social 
learning approach for user-centered active learning in order 
to support both informal and formal learning practices. The 
approach is to propose an integrated VLE system on which 
enables incorporating SVWs as a new component into 
traditional distance learning. Figure 1 illustrates this 
integrated VLE which is designed to use a SVW as a 
visualization integration interface to present educational 
activities while coupling with conventional Learning 
Management System (LMS) such as Blackboard and student 
supporting system. 
The integrated system is intended to carry out learning in 
SVWs through both formal and informal practices including 
seminars, workshops, group discussions, and social events 
which are organized and led by guided members or through 
peer-to-peer 
synchronous 
voice 
chatting, 
or 
instant 
messaging (IM). A SVW (e.g. Second Life) is adopted as a 
visual interface to access the integrated VLE for user-centred 
active learning since it facilitates social interaction to 
improve learners’ motivation and engagement in learning 
activities by supporting visibility, mutual awareness and 
accountability. Such a system will make it easier for users to 
carry on coherent discussions; to observe and imitate others' 
actions; to engage in peer pressure; to create, observe, and 
conform to social conventions; and to engage in other forms 
of collective interaction as suggested in the social 
translucence approach by Erickson and Kellogg [6].  
The conventional LMS such as Blackboard is responsible 
for hosting courses on the Internet as a supplement to 
traditional classroom courses. It is used for course 
management in this VLE and allows lecturers and tutors to 
upload and organize course material including course content, 
reading lists, assessment, and announcement similar to those 
used in classroom. Students can browse and download these 
course materials via the LMS. The integrated system relies 
on a customizable open architecture, authentication protocols, 
and a scalable design that allows the integration of other 
social networking services such as YouTube, blogs, and 
wikis in student supporting systems. These social networking 
services are interlinked within a SVW (e.g. Second Life) to 
enhance the efficiency of communication between tutors and 
students and further achieve real-time social interaction 
among students and tutors. Learning in the integrated VLE is 
supported by exchange of knowledge, expertise, and 
information through coupling with these social networking 
services such as writing blogs, co-editing wikis, uploading 
videos on YouTube, or joining MySpace and Facebook. 
The integrated system allows students and tutors to 
download or upload learning content, and conduct course-
related discussion through a 3D space that students would 
Figure 1. The integrated VLE enhanced by 
social interaction 
Learning Content 
Management 
Systems  
(e.g. Blackboard) 
Student Supporting 
Systems on SN 
Wiki|Blogs|YouTube 
MySpace|Others 
An Augmented Social Learning Platform 
3D Social Virtual Worlds 
Social Interaction  
 
Visibility|Awareness|Accountability 
Tutors 
Students 
Central Systems (Authentication and Registration) 
37
FUTURE COMPUTING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-107-6

like to take part in, where they not only work on course-
related tasks, but also relax, socialize, and talk with others. It 
enables connecting students and tutors on both an academic 
level and a social level for supporting both formal and 
informal learning.  
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATION 
In order to evaluate the proposed system, this section 
discusses and experiments some actual learning practices 
prototyped in the integrated VLE. In our research, a virtual 
campus build up in Second Life as a visual interface of the 
integrated VLE allows users to access a social interactive 
learning environment where learning practices occur 
including workshops, seminars, invited speeches, group 
discussions, and tutorial demonstrations. The virtual campus 
represents learning scenarios in 3D intuitive way and uses 
hypermedia to improve delivery of learning materials beyond 
text. It has capability of interlinking with LMS such as 
Blackboard 
in 
conventional 
e-learning 
systems 
and 
integrating with other social networking tools such as 
YouTube, blogs, and wikis. The methods followed to deliver 
lectures in a SVW are very similar to those followed in the 
real world like PowerPoint presentations, video tutorials, and 
guest lectures. But at the same time there are facilities that 
would be possible only in a SVW. Since educational 
activities are diverse, the following learning practices are 
chose to be prototyped in SVWs for experimental study. 
1) Role Playing Simulations: Role-playing simulations 
have been popular teaching and learning methods which 
encourage students to enact different roles through acting 
rehearsals. Role-playing activities help students familiarize 
the situations they might encounter in their work sectors and 
therefore have been used extensively for training. SVWs 
introduce a significant shift in student-centre active learning 
because students are able to take on new roles in such a 
game-like virtual environment or expand their identities as a 
supplement to a real world identity. Also they have great 
impacts on the change of the roles of students and 
instructors. Students in SVWs present social information 
about their enacted roles and further develop their identity 
and knowledge both outside and inside the world by role 
playing. One such example would be the production of a 
court simulation in the virtual campus where the avatars 
participate in the role play involving lawyers, interest 
groups, and justices. This type of role-playing activity 
requires that students apply their substantive knowledge of 
constitutional law and the jurisprudence of their justice in 
deciding important constitutional issues. Although the 
simulation places extra demands on both instructors and 
students, the effort is worthwhile because this kind of 
training becomes a challenging social interactive learning 
practice. 
2) Social Events: Many academic social events are 
organised regularly in universities in order to enhance the 
students’ active learning experience. By taking advantage of 
SVWs, we launched a virtual exhbition in our virtual 
campus as shown in Figure 2. The feature of ‘the learner as 
content producer’ in a SVW allows students to put their 
visual works (e.g. poster, animation, video) as user-
generated content in the virtual exhbition centre. Students 
can change and replace their exhibits whenever they want. 
Compared to the on-site gallery show, the virtual exhibition 
in a SVW has great competitive advantages including low 
cost, removing the barriers such as limited time and space of 
exhibition, and being able to reach a much wider audience 
through the Internet. Furthermore, the learner as content 
producer in this SVW has greatly spurred students’ 
motivation, enhancing their creativity and productivity. As a 
result, students are increasingly stimulated into active 
participation in social events in the intergrated VLE while 
achieving a student-centred active learning experience.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3) E-mentoring/e-tutoring: Previous research pointed 
out that successful mentoring demands frequent and regular 
interaction but all sorts of barriers such as time, work 
responsibilities, geographical distance and lack of trust  - 
often reduce if not halt interaction [14].  In the case of 
distance learning when students are geographically 
dispersed, it is usually impossible for mentors and mentees 
to meet face-to-face regularly. A SVW as an visual interface 
in the integrated VLE  is used to teleport students to the 
virtual campus. An e-mentoring system was developed in 
order to allow students to discuss their work with their 
online tutors or mentors through their 3D avatars by real 
time communication in the form of voice chatting, IM, and 
even non-verbal expressive gesture and posture. For 
example, as shown in Figure 3, one of our MSc students 
joined in an online tutorial in Second Lift while he was 
actually in Spain and met up his tutor based in the UK. With 
the utilisation of a SVW, an e-tutoring/e-mentoring system 
offers cost-effective solutions which impinge less upon the 
participants’ time and effort, so that more frequent social 
interaction is easier to achieve and manage. It has several 
Figure 2. The virtual exhibition event 
38
FUTURE COMPUTING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-107-6

advantages, including open correspondence, access to more 
geographically 
isolated 
regions, 
and 
efficiency 
of 
communication. As a result, students feel that the e-
tutoring/e-mentoring systems in the SVW are more 
attractive and engaging, enabling more thoughtful and 
deliberate discussions with trust. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
According to Gilroy [17], the formula of Valued 
Learning Experience = F (Pedagogy, Trust, Content, 
Community). This emphasized the key factors for achieving 
valued learning experience include a functional pedagogy for 
instruction, the level of trust, indicative content to be learned, 
and a networked community for collaborative learning. 
Based on the above experimental study, it is observed that 
the integrated VLE coupled with a SVW as visual interface 
has great potential to support user-centred active learning in 
terms of the creation, distribution, and access of learning 
resources, collaboration and interaction, time and location 
independency, roles changing (e.g. student and tutor), and 
learning outcomes achievement. There are many other 
learning practices such as workshops, seminars, and 
conferences, and even alumni reunions that can be 
prototyped and take place in the virtual campus. Based on 
the overall positive student feedback for these educational 
applications, the social advantages and student-centred 
learning experience offered by the integrated learning 
environment are seen to be strongly valued to students. With 
the utilization of SVW as a social portal, the integrated VLE 
not only allow users with specific learning requirements to 
be able to access and share of learning materials from 
dispersed locations through a visual online interface but also 
offer the following innovative characteristics for being a 
social learning environment: 
• 
Massively multi-user participation: to enable a large 
number of learners joining together in shared 3D 
virtual environments and be able to attract new 
learners. 
• 
Focus of socialisation and collaboration: to focus on 
interpersonal relations rather than moving around in 
the environment and further encourage the formation 
of in-world social groups in order to coordinate and 
work together for a common learning objectives. 
• 
Multimodal social interaction: to offer rich modes of 
real-time interaction based on perceptually-based 
social cues such as gesture, posture, and emotional 
expression to support visual communication, mutual 
awareness and accountability. 
• 
Focus of self-motivation and active engagement: to 
facilitate self-motivated participation and attract a 
number of learners to actively take part in a focus 
group because of common learning interest. 
• 
Share of learner-generated content: to support 
learners to contribute customized content and 
encourage sharing of learning materials generated by 
learners themselves as creative effort. 
• 
Low cost participation: no fee for registration and 
low cost participation in SVWs. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
By introducing social interaction into e-learning that 
conventional VLE cannot offer, it is seen that SVWs can be 
used to enhance various types of learning practices for user-
centred active learning. This paper has presented an 
integrated VLE which was designed to incorporate social 
networking services into conventional VLEs in order to 
support both informal and formal learning practices required 
in Higher Education. A SVW is adopted as a visual interface 
to access the integrated VLE since it facilitates social 
interaction to improve learners’ motivation and engagement 
in learning activities by supporting co-presence, mutual 
awareness, and accountability. The integrated VLE has 
considerable advantages and strength to benefit users, 
including improving student engagement and motivation, 
offering student-centred active learning experience, and 
introducing 
socio-technical 
innovations. 
Preliminary 
experiments prototyped in the integrated VLE, including 
social events, e-tutoring/mentoring, and role-playing have 
produced favourable responses from academics and students. 
In summary, SVWs are transforming the nature of learning 
as social practice in a collaborative environment. Through 
enhancing social interaction, the integrated VLE will be able 
to facilitate self-motivation, active engagement, and creative 
thinking in user-centred active learning. More experimental 
educational activities will be validated in future work and 
these will be further evaluated through student feedback and 
progression analysis. It is intended to expand the social 
interactive VLE by integrating more academic resources and 
services departments in HE such as career service, library 
service and training centres. However, social networking 
also raises challenging research issues about privacy, identity 
and Intellectual Property (IP) [11] and even after-effects 
issues including how online behaviours affect users’ 
behaviour offline in real life. Furthermore, higher level 
interaction (e.g. cognitive, motivational) has not yet been 
fully achieved in SVWs and researchers and practitioners are 
Figure 3. E-mentoring/E-tutoring  
39
FUTURE COMPUTING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-107-6

now attempting to address these complex natural multimodal 
interaction issues [16].  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project is supported by Education Initiative Centre 
at the University of Westminster. Thanks to the contribution 
of our MSc Computer Animation Students to the 
development of virtual campus in Second Life. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Quemada, J., “Collaboration, Social Interaction and Social Protocols”, 
Proccedings of WTICE’08, Italy, 23-25 June. 
[2] 
Churchill, E.F, and Halverson, C.A., “Social Networks and Social 
Networking”, IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 9, issue 5, Sep/Oct 2005, 
pp.14-19. 
[3] 
Wever, B.D., Mechant, P., Veevaete, P., and Hauttekeete, L., “E-
Learning 2.0: social software for educational use”, Proceedings of 9th 
IEEE International Symposium on Multimedia, Taiwan, 10-12 Dec, 
2007, pp.511-516. 
[4] 
Marsick, V.J. and Watkins, K.E., “Informal and Incidental Learning”, 
New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, issue 89, Wiley 
Periodicals, 2001, pp.25-34. 
[5] 
Lockyer, L. and Patterson, J., “Integrating Social Networking 
Technologies in Education: A Case Study of a formal learning 
environment”, Proceedings of 8th IEEE International Conference on 
Advanced Learning Technologie, Santander, Spain, 1-5 July 2008, 
pp.529-533. 
[6] 
Erickson, T., and Kellogg, W.A., “Social Translucence: Using 
Minimalist  Visuallisations of Social Activity to Support Collective 
Interaction”, Designing Information Spaces: The Social Navigation 
Approach, 2003, pp. 75-105. 
[7] 
Vassileva, J., and Vassileva, I., “Social Interaction History, A 
Framework for Supporting Exploration of Social Information 
Spacess”, Proceedings of 2009 International Conference on Computer 
Science and Engineering, Vancouver, Canada, 29-31 Augues, pp.538-
545. 
[8] 
Dell 
2009, 
“Dell 
Island 
in 
SecondLife”, 
http://www.dell.com/html/global/topics/sl/index.html, last accessed 
Feb 2009. 
[9] 
Hetherington, R., Bonar-Law, J., Fleet, T., and Parkinson, L., 
“Learning in a Multi-User Virtual Environment”, Proceedings of 
IEEE 2008 International Conference Visualization, Columbus Ohio, 
USA, 19-24 Oct. 2008, pp.99-105. 
[10] Cunha, M., Raposo, A., and Fuks, H., “Educational Technology for 
Collaborative 
Virtual 
Environments”, 
Proceedings 
of 
12th 
International Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
in Design, Xian, China, 16-18 April, 2008, pp. 716-720. 
[11] Hendaoui, A., Limayem, M., and Tompson, C.W., “3D Social Virtual 
Worlds, Research Issues and Challenges”, IEEE Internet Computing, 
vol.12, issue 1, Jan/Feb 2008, pp.88-92. 
[12] Araujo, R. M., Rezende, E.A., Andrade, T.S., Chaves, V.M., Lopes, 
M.G., and Diirr, B., “People in Network, Collaboration for Action: 
New Supporting Requirements”, Proceedings of 11th International 
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design, 
Melbourne, Australia, 26-28 April, 2007, pp.939-944. 
[13] Wegerif, R., “The Social Dimension of Asynchronous Learning 
Networks”, Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, Vol.2, 
issue 1, pp 34-42. 
[14] Bierema, L, and  Meriam, S., “ E-mentoring: Using Computer 
Mediated Communication to Enhance the Mentoring Process, 
Innovative Higher Education, Vol.26, No 3, 2002, pp211-227. 
[15] Weaver, A.C. and Morrison, B.B., “Social Networking”, IEEE 
Computer, vol. 41, issue 2, Feb. 2008, pp.97-100. 
[16] Breslin, J. and Decker, S., “The Future of Networks on the Internet, 
the Need for Semantics”, IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 11, issue 6, 
Nov/Dec 2007, pp 86-90. 
[17] Gilroy, K, “Collaborative E-learning: the Right Approach”, ArsDigita 
Systems Journal, www.arsdigita.com/asj/elearning/, last accessed 18 
March 2010. 
 
 
40
FUTURE COMPUTING 2010 : The Second International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-107-6

