 
 
Assessment of MVAR Injection in Power Optimization for a Hydrocarbon Industrial 
Plant Using a Genetic Algorithm 
 
M.  T.  Al-Hajri                                                M. A. Abido                                     M. K. Darwish                                         
Computer & Electronic Eng. Dept.                         Electrical Engineering Department.      Computer & Electronic Eng. Dept. 
Brunel University                                                    King Fahad University (KFUPM)         Brunel University, U.K.                                   
Uxbridge, United Kingdom                                     Dhahran, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia      Uxbridge, United Kingdom  
e-mail:muhammad.al-hajri@brunel.ac.uk              e-mail:mabido@kfupm.edu.sa                e-mail:mohamed.darwish@brunel.ac.uk            
   
 
Abstract- In this paper, a genetic algorithm (GA) is considered 
for assessing the effect of Million Volt-Ampere Reactive 
(MVAR) power injection via shunt capacitors in optimizing the 
electrical power loss for a real hydrocarbon industrial plant. 
The subject plant electrical system consists of 275 buses, two 
gas turbine generators, two steam turbine generators, large 
synchronous motors, and other rotational and static loads. The 
minimization of power losses objective is used to guide the 
optimization process, and, consequently, the injected power in 
the grid is monitored. First, the optimal locations of MVAR 
injection will be identified using a voltage stability index. The 
potential of power loss optimization with and without MVAR 
injection versus the base case will be discussed in the results. 
The 
results 
obtained 
demonstrate 
the 
potential 
and 
effectiveness of the proposed approach to optimize the power 
consumption in both scenarios (with and without MVAR 
injection). Also, in this paper a cost appraisal for the potential 
daily, monthly and annual cost saving in both scenarios will be 
addressed. 
 
     Keywords-genetic 
algorithm, 
power 
loss 
optimization, 
electrical submersible pump, hydrocarbon facility, British thermal 
unit (BTU), millions of standard cubical feet of gas (MMscf).  
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Since 2009, an environment of urgency was created to 
deal with the exponential increase of the domestic energy 
used in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia. All stockholders since 
then are working together in many initiatives sponsored by 
the government of the kingdom to address the optimization 
and the efficiency improvement of energy in all utility 
sectors, especially, the electrical generation sector. The 
kingdom international commitment to reduce the CO2 
emission was another driver for energy optimization in the 
kingdom.  Optimizing the oil usage for electrical generation 
is also for the benefits of the oil producing countries.  The 
optimization of the energy sector will support the 
development of downstream petrochemical industries and 
other very promising industries. In addition, the need of 
shaping the high annual rate increase of energy demand 
becomes a major concern for most of the developing 
countries. For example, in Saudi Arabia, the annual electric 
demand increase is around 8% [1]. All these pressing critical 
issues push many countries to develop nationwide strategies 
for enhancing the electricity generation efficiency, reduce 
loss and invest in the renewable energy development.  
In light of the aforementioned challenges and others, GA 
was addressed in literature for optimizing the electrical 
power  
system loss. Optimizing the power loss of virtual IEEE 
system models, improving the performance of the GA by 
adapting different crossover and mutation techniques and 
creating a hybrid GA by combining it with other techniques, 
such as the swarm particles and Fuzzy logic, were among the 
many techniques addressed in literature. None of the 
previous studies addressed the application of GA in 
optimizing the power loss of real h hydrocarbon facility with 
small system footprint, shorter lines, large machines, 
combined cycle’s generation and large load.  [2]-[9].  
Generally, there are three approaches to solve the real 
power loss optimization problem by optimizing the reactive 
power flow. The first approach applies sensitivity analysis 
and gradient-based optimization algorithms by linearizing 
the objective function and the system constrains around 
operating points [10]. The gradient-based methods are 
usually subjected to be trapped in local minima which makes 
the obtained solution not optimal. Moreover, sensitivity 
factors calculation is a time consuming process.  The second 
approach uses a nonlinear programming technique [11]. This 
approach has many disadvantages such as long execution 
time, insecure convergence properties and algorithmic 
complexity. The third approach utilizes heuristic methods to 
search the solution space for the optimal solution. This 
approach is promising as it can overcome the possibility of 
trapping in local minima [9]. 
This paper considers an existing real life hydrocarbon 
central processing facility electrical power system model for 
assessing the potential of system loss minimization using the 
GA for two scenarios: without and with MVAR injection. In 
section 2 of the paper the problem will be formulated as 
optimization 
problem 
with 
equality 
and 
inequality 
constrains. Also, the voltage stability index will be 
introduced. In section 3, the GA will be employed to solve 
this problem. In section 4, the paper study scenarios will be 
developed. Finally, in section 5 the results technically and 
economically will be evaluated. 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

 
 
II. 
PROBLEM FORMULATION 
 
The problem formulation consists of three parts: the 
development of the objective functions, the identification of 
the system electrical constrains to be met; equality and 
inequality constrains; and the calculation of all load buses 
stability index (L-Index).  
 
A. Problem Objective Functions 
 
The objective function is to minimize the real power loss 
J1 (PLoss) in the transmission and distribution lines. This 
objective function can be expressed in term of the power 
follow loss between two buses i and j as follows: 
           J1 = PLoss = ∑
 𝒈𝒌 [ 𝑽𝒊
𝟐 + 𝑽𝒋
𝟐 − 𝟐  𝑽𝒊𝑽𝒋 𝐜𝐨𝐬(𝜹𝒊 − 𝜹𝒊)] 
𝒏𝒍
𝒌=𝟏
            (1) 
 
Where nl is the number of transmission and distribution 
lines; gk is the conductance of the kth line, Vi i  and Vj j   
are the voltage at end buses i and j of the kth line, 
respectively  [12] [13]. 
 
The real power injected (PRInject) in the utility grid at Bus# 
1 was monitored as J1 evolves. It is expected that PRInject will 
be maximized since it is inversely proportional to J1; a 
decrease in the J1 results in an increase in PRInject.  
 
B. Problem Equality and Inequality Constrains  
 
The system constrains are divided into two categories: 
equality constrains and inequality constrains [9][13]. Details 
are as follows: 
 
B.1  Equality Constrains 
 
These constrains represent the power load flow 
equations. The balance between the active power injected 
PGi, the active power demand PDi and the active power loss 
Pli at any bus i is equal to zero. The same balance apply for 
the reactive power QGi, QDi , and  Qli. These balances are 
presented as follows: 
 
                                 PGi− PDi −  Pli = 0                                            (2) 
 
                                 QGi− QDi −  Qli = 0                                          (3) 
 
The above equations cane be detailed as follow: 
  
PGi− PDi−𝑉𝑖 ∑
 𝑽𝒋 [ 𝐺𝑖𝑗𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝛿𝑖 − 𝛿𝑗) + 𝐵𝑖𝑗 sin (
𝑵𝑩
𝒋=𝟏
𝛿𝑖 − 𝛿𝑗)] = 0        (4) 
 
QGi − QDi−𝑉𝑖 ∑
 𝑽𝒋 [ 𝐺𝑖𝑗𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝛿𝑖 − 𝛿𝑗) − 𝐵𝑖𝑗 cos (
𝑵𝑩
𝒋=𝟏
𝛿𝑖 − 𝛿𝑗)] = 0    (5) 
 
where i = 1,2,…,NB;NB is the number of buses; PG and QG 
are the generator real and reactive power, respectively; PD 
and QD are the load real and reactive power, respectively; Gij 
and Bij are the conductance and susceptance between bus i and bus 
j, respectively.   
 
B.2  Inequality Constrains 
 
These 
constrains 
represent 
the 
system 
operating 
constrains posted in Table III and they are as follow:  
a. Generator and synchronous motor voltages; VG and 
VSynch; their reactive power outputs; QG and QSynch.  
b. The transformers taps. 
c. The load buses voltages VL.  
Combining the objective function and these constrains, the 
problem can be mathematically formulated as a nonlinear 
constrained single objective optimization problem as 
follows: 
 
Minimize J1   
Subject to: 
                                         g(x,u) = 0                                   (6) 
                                         |h(x,u)| ≤ 0                                  (7) 
where: 
x:   is the vector of dependent variables consisting of load  
bus voltage VL, generator reactive power outputs QG and 
the Synchronous motors reactive Power QSynch. As a 
result, x can be expressed as 
            xT= [VL1..VLNL, QGi…QGNG, QSynchi…QSynchNSynch]       
(6) 
u:  is the vector of control variables consisting of generator 
voltages VG, transformer tap settings T, and synchronous 
motors voltage VSynch. As a result, u can be expressed as 
                 uT 
= 
[VG1..VGNL, 
T1…TNT, 
VSynch1..VSynchNL]             
(8) 
 
g: are the equality constrains. 
h: are the inequality constrains. 
 
C. Voltage Stability Index (L-Index)  
 
 The L indicator varies in the range between 0 (the no 
load case) and 1, which corresponds to voltage collapse. This 
indicator uses the bus voltage and network information 
provided by the power flow program to measure the stability 
of the system. The L indicator can be calculated as given in 
[14]. For a multi-node system 
 
                                 
bus
bus
bus
I
Y
V


                         (9) 
 
By segregating the load buses (PQ) from generator buses 
(PV), (8) can be written as: 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

 
 
      [𝑰𝑳
𝑰𝑮] = [𝒀𝟏
𝒀𝟐
𝒀𝟑
𝒀𝟒] [𝑽𝑳
𝑽𝑮]                        (10) 
 
       [𝑽𝑳
𝑰𝑮] = [𝑯𝟏
𝑯𝟐
𝑯𝟑
𝑯𝟒] [ 𝑰𝑳
𝑽𝑮] = [𝒁𝑳𝑳
𝑭𝑳𝑮
𝑲𝑮𝑳
𝒀𝑮𝑮] [𝑰𝑳
𝑽𝑮]       (11) 
 
where  
VL , IL are load buses voltages and currents 
VG , IG are Generator buses voltages and currents 
H1 ,H2 ,H3 ,H4 are submatrices generated from Ybus Partial 
Inversion 
ZLL ,FLG , KGL ,YGG  are submatrices of H-matrix 
 
Therefore, a local indicator Lj can be worked out for each 
node j similar to the line model 
 
                                  Lj = |𝟏 −
∑
𝒊  𝑮  𝑭𝒋𝒊
 𝑽𝒊
𝑽𝒋
|              (12) 
 
For a stable situation the condition Lj ≤ 1 must not be 
violated for any of the nodes j. Hence, a global indicator L 
describing the stability of the whole system is given by: 
                     Lmax= MAXjL |𝟏 −
∑
𝒊  𝑮  𝑭𝒋𝒊
 𝑽𝒊
𝑽𝒋
|         (13) 
 
where L is the set of load buses and G is the set of 
generator buses.  
 
III. 
THE PROPOSED APPROACH 
A. Electrical System Model Data Collection  
 
The research electrical models system parameters were 
gathered and categorized in tables to be ready for developing 
the simulation model of the system. The gathered parameters 
include the followings: 
a. Generators type, voltage and capacity, including active 
and reactive capacity curves reflecting the operation 
limitations such as stator and rotor thermal limitations. 
b. The Generators BTU/kW equation and cost equation. 
c. Utility power system parameters (swing bus); bus voltage 
and short circuit MVA. 
d. System buses voltage constrains.  
e. Lines 
parameters, 
including 
the 
lines 
resistance, 
reactance, capacitance, length and voltage.  
f. Transformers parameters including primary voltage, 
secondary voltage, voltage taps, size and impedance. 
g. The large synchronous motor parameters, including 
active and reactive power curve reflecting the operation 
limitations such as stator and rotor thermal limitations. 
h. The large induction motor and the electrical submersible 
pumps (ESPs) parameters such as the active and reactive 
power demands. 
i. The lumped load Thousand Voltage-Ampere (KVA) 
rating. All loads except the motor rated > 5000 Horse 
Power (HP) and the ESP are modeled as lumped load. 
B. Optimal Locations of the Shunt Capacitors  
 
The L index described in (13) was employed to identify 
the most sensitive load buses with regard to voltage stability. 
These most sensitive load buses were selected for shunt 
capacitors connection.  
C. Generic Algorithm Implementation    
 
The implementation of the developed GA technique can 
be summarized in the following steps: 
1) Generate initial populations of chromosomes; each 
chromosome consists of genes and each of these genes 
represents either transformer tap settings, synchronous 
motors voltages, the generators voltages or shunt 
capacitors MVAR values. 
2) Assign fitness to each chromosomes as follows; 
a. Use the Newton-Raphson method to calculate the real 
power losses for each population [15]. 
b. Identify if the voltage constrains are satisfied.  
c. Identify if the Synchronous machines (generators and 
motors) capacity limitations are met.  
d. Assign fitness values to the populations that meet the 
voltage constrains; the population best power loss 
value (J1) divided by the base case power loss value. 
e. Assign penalty values to those populations that do not   
meet the voltage constrains; constant value (0.05). 
3) Identify the best population with its associated 
chromosomes that has the best objective function value 
and store it.  
4) Identify the chromosomes parents that will go to the 
mating pool for producing the next generation via the 
Random Selection method. This method works by 
generating two random integer numbers (each represents 
a chromosome). Then, these two randomly selected 
chromosomes fitness values are compared and the one 
with the better fitness value will go into the mating pool. 
This randomly selected chromosomes mechanism will be 
repeated until the population in the mating pool equals to 
the initial chromosomes population [16].   
5) Perform genes crossover for the mating pool parents via 
the Simple Crossover method [16]. In this method, the 
offspring chromosomes are generated by establishing a 
vertical crossover position for parent’s chromosomes and 
then crossover their genes.  
6) Perform gene mutation for the mating pool parents after 
they have been crossed over; the Random Mutation 
method was implemented [16]. In this method, the 
offspring chromosomes genes are mutated to new ones 
randomly from the genes domain. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

 
 
7) Go to Step #2 and repeat the above steps with the new 
populations generated from the original chromosome 
parents after being crossed over and mutated.  
8) Each time, identify the best population and compare its 
fitness value with the stored one; if it is better (meeting 
the objective function), replace the best chromosomes 
with the new ones. 
9) The loop of generation is repeated until the best 
population with its associated chromosomes, in terms of 
minimum real power loss, is identified or the maximum 
number of generations is met. The flow chart of the 
proposed approach implemented is shown in Figure 1. 
 
Start 
Random Initial Population (N)
Reading the Data & Line Matrix 
Meet System Constrains
(Identify The Best Solution)
Identify System 
Constrains
Crossover & 
Mutation 
Yes
No
STOP Criteria
Met 
Create the Next Generation
(Gn=Gn+1) 
Change Generator and Synch Motor bus voltage and  Transformer Taps
Store the Best 
Chromosome
Selection 
Stop
Print Result 
Power Flow Analysis 
(Newton-Raphson Method)
Assign Fitness Value
 
 
Figure 1.  The GA algorithm evolution process flowchart 
IV. 
STUDY SCENARIOS 
In this paper, three scenarios were studied: the base case 
scenario (system as usual), the optimal case scenario without 
MVAR injection, and the optimal case scenario with MVAR 
injection. In the optimal cases the best system parameters 
(chromosomes) that meet the minimum objective function 
(J1) are obtained. 
A.  Base Case Scenario 
 
Normal system operation mode was simulated to be 
benchmarked with the two optimal scenarios. Following are 
some of the normal system operation mode parameters: 
1) The utility bus and generators terminal buses were set at 
unity p.u. voltage. 
2) All the synchronous motors were set to operate very 
close to the unity power factor.   
3) All downstream distribution transformers and the captive 
synchronous motors transformers; off-load tap changers; 
were put on the neutral tap. 
4) The causeway substations main transformers taps were 
raised to meet the very conservative voltage constrains at 
these substations downstream buses; ≥ 0.95 p.u. Refer to 
Table I below. 
TABLE I 
 THE SELECTED FEASIBLE TRANSFORMERS TAPS VALUE 
Substation Number 
Transformer Tap 
Causeway Substation#1 
+3 (1.019 p.u.) 
Causeway Substation#2 
Neutral (1.0 p.u.) 
Causeway Substation#3 
+3 (1.019 p.u.) 
Main Substation Transformers 
+1 (1.006 p.u.) 
 
B. Optimal Case Scenario without MVAR injection 
 
To optimize the elevation process time the unfeasible 
transformers tap values (genes) were not selected. In other 
words, the genes values were limited to certain taps around 
the neutral taps out of the all taps full range; ±16 taps. Table 
II below posts the selected range of the transformers tap 
values and the percentage of the voltage change for each tap. 
 
TABLE II 
 THE SELECTED TRANSFORMER TAP FEASIBLE GENES VALUE 
Description 
Upper Tap 
Lower Tap 
Main Transformers 
+8 (0.625% ) 
-4 (0.625%) 
Causeway Main Transformers 
+8 (0.625%) 
-3 (0.625%) 
Captive Motors/Distribution Transformers 
+1 (2.5%) 
-1 (2.5%) 
Generator Step-up Transformers 
+5 (1.25%) 
-4 (1.25%) 
 
An initial 200 populations of feasible chromosomes 
(individuals) which meet both the buses voltage and 
synchronous machine reactive power constrains were 
identified. These feasible populations are associated with the 
first optimal scenario; without MVAR injection. The feasible 
populations with their associated chromosomes were subject 
to the GA evolutionary process of 20 generations guided by 
the objective function J1. The PRInject was monitored as J1 
evolved.  The GA process was set with 90% crossover 
probability and 10% mutation probability. The system 
parameters and the objective function value associated with 
the optimal solution of this scenario were identified. 
 
C. Optimal Case Scenario with MVAR injection 
 
The evolutionary process was optimized via the same 
method employed in the second case scenario. Another 
initial 300 populations of feasible individuals were identified 
in for the second optimal scenario; with MVAR injection. In 
this scenario, MVAR shunt capacitors are connected to the 
preselected buses; refer to Table IV. In this case, the MVAR 
chromosomes are extended to include MVAR injection 
considered as control variables. The feasible populations 
with their associated chromosomes were subject to 20 
generation of GA evolutionary process. The crossover and 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

 
 
mutation probability were set equal to those in the scenario 
without MVAR injection: 90% and 10%, respectively.  
 
V. 
 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
 
The results from the three scenarios, base case, without 
MVAR injection and with MVAR injection, will be analyzed 
in two categories: the system parameters analysis and the 
economic analysis.  
 
A. System Parameters Analysis  
 
The hydrocarbon facility simplified electrical system 
model, which is studied in this paper, is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2.  Simplified electrical system of the hydrocarbon processing facilty 
 
The system inequality constrains are posted in Table III.  
 
TABLE III 
 SYSTEM INEQUALITY CONSTRAINS  
Description 
Lower Limit 
Upper 
Limit 
GTG Terminal Voltage (VGTG) 
90% 
105% 
STG Terminal Voltage (VSTG) 
90% 
105% 
GTG Reactive Power (QGTG) Limit  
-62.123 
MVAR 
95.72 
MVAR 
STG-1 Reactive Power (QSTG) Limit 
-22.4 MVAR 
20.92 
MVAR 
STG-2 Reactive Power (QSTG) Limit 
-41.9 MVAR 
53.837 
MVAR 
Captive Synch. Motors Terminal Voltage  
90% 
105% 
Synch. Motors Terminal Voltage (VSychn) 
90% 
105% 
Causeway downstream Buses Voltage  
95% 
105% 
All Load Buses Voltage 
90% 
105% 
Main Transformer Taps 
+16 (+10% ) 
-16 (-10%) 
Generators Step-Up Transformer Taps 
+8 (+10% ) 
-8 (-10%) 
Base on the substation load buses stability index rank, the 
selected buses for shunt capacitors connection, together with 
the potential MVAR values, are posted in Table IV.  
   
TABLE IV 
 THE SELECTED BUSES FOR MVAR INJECTION 
Substation Number 
Bus Number 
Potential MVAR 
Substation#2 
13 and 28  
[8  8.5  9  9.5  10] 
Causeway Substation#1 
102 and 113 
[1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5] 
Causeway Substation#2 
124 and 137 
[2  2.5  3] 
Causeway Substation#3 
148 and159 
[2  2.5  3] 
 
The evolution of the objective function (J1) and PRInject 
values over the GA process is captured in Figure 3. The 
benchmark for the system real power loss and the injected 
power in the grid is demonstrated in Figure 4. There are 
0.202 Million Watts (MW) and 0.203 MW reduction in the 
system loss between the base case, the no MVAR and with 
MVAR optimal cases sequentially. The same amount of MW 
were injected in the grid for both scenarios.  
 
Figure 3.  J1 and PRInject value convergent for 10 generations 
 
The system for the two optimal cases demonstrates an 
improvement in the system buses p.u. voltage profile, which 
increases the robustness of the system (Figure 5).  
 
Figure 4. System power loss and injected power benchmark 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  The main system buses’ voltage benchmark 
The paper shows there is not much power loss reduction 
associated with MVAR injection scenario compared to the 
no MVAR injection scenario [17] due to the system stiffness 
and its small footprint. 
 
B. Economic Analysis  
The avoided cost due to the optimization of the system 
power loss is demonstrated in Figure 6 at daily, monthly and 
annual bases. The annual cost avoidance based on natural 
gas cost of $3.5 per MMscf is around $60,300/year and 
$60,400/year for the no MVAR and with MVAR optimal 
cases sequentially when compared to the base case. 
 
Figure 6.  The system power loss cost 
 
The revenue due to the power injection in the grid at both 
scenarios is shown in Figure 7.  
 
Figure 7.  Revenue due to power injection in the grid 
 
The figure illustrates the potential of the optimal 
scenarios in increasing the revenue using $37.3 MWh tariff 
rate; $65,200/year for the no MVAR optimal case and 
$65,500/year for the with MVAR optimal case benchmarked 
to the base case.      
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
This paper presented the potential of minimizing the 
power system loss for a real-life hydrocarbon facility using 
the GA base approach considering no MVAR and with 
MVAR injection scenarios. Consequently, the increase in the 
injected power to the grid due to the loss optimization was 
also captured. The paper demonstrated that the reduction of 
power loss associated with MVAR injection is minimum. 
The economic advantages of the optimal scenarios modes 
versus the base mode were highlighted in this paper. The 
economic advantages of the with MVAR injection scenario 
compared to the no MVAR scenario did not support the 
shunt capacitor installations as the advantages are minimal. 
Improvement to the system buses voltage profile was shown 
to be a byproduct of the system power loss optimization. 
Future study may need to address the effectiveness of 
different selection, crossover and mutation methods in 
optimizing the system   loss through GA evolutionary 
process. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors acknowledge the support of the Power 
System Planning Department/Saudi Aramco Oil Company, 
Brunel University and King Fahd University of Petroleum & 
Minerals for their support and encouragement throughout the 
study.  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] The Electricity Co-Generation Regulatory Authority (ECRA), 
“Annual Peak Load for the Kingdom”, 2014. 
[2] 
R. K. Kapadia and N. K. Patel, “Reactive Power Optimization Using 
Genetic Algorithm,” IEEE, Engineering (NUiCONE), Ahmedabad, 
2013. 
[3] P. Yonghong and L. Yi, “An Improved Genetic Algorithm for 
Reactive Power Optimization,” Control Conference (CCC), 2011 30th 
Chinese, pp.2105-2109. 
[4] 
M. R. Silva, Z. Vale, H. M. Khodr and C. Ramos, “Optimal Dispatch 
with Reactive Power Compensation by Genetic Algorithm,” 
Transmission and Distribution Conference and Exposition, 2010 IEEE 
PES. 
[5] D. Guan, Z. Cai and Z. Kong, “Reactive Power and Voltage Control 
Using Micro-Genetic Algorithm,” Mechatronics and Automation, 
Changchun, 2009, pp.5019-5024. 
[6] R. Suresh and N. Kumarappan, “Genetic Algorithm Based Reactive 
Power Optimization Under Deregulation,” ICTES 2007, India, pp.150-
155. 
[7] S. Durairaj and B. Fox, “Evolutionary Computation Based Reactive 
Power Optimization,” Information and Communication Technology in 
Electrical Sciences (ICTES 2007), India, 2007, pp.120-125. 
[8] 
W. N. W. Abdullah, H. Saibon and K. L. Lo, “Genetic Algorithm for 
Optimal Reactive Power Dispatch,” IEEE Catalog No: 98EX137, 
1998, pp.160-164. 
[9] K. Iba, “Reactive Power Optimization by Genetic Algorithm,” IEEE 
Trans. on Power Systems, Vol.9, No.2, 1994, pp. 685-692. 
[10] K. R. C. Mamandur and R. D. Chenoweth, "Optimal Control of 
Reactive Power Flow for Improvements in Voltage profiles and for 
Real Power Loss Minimization," IEEE Trans. on Power Apparatus and 
Systems, Vol. PAS-100, No. 7, 1981, pp. 3185-3193. 
[11] 
M. O. Mansour and T. M. Abdel-Rahman, "Non-Linear VAR 
Optimization Using Decomposition and Coordination," IEEE Trans. 
on Power Apparatus and Systems, PAS-103, No. 2, 1984, pp. 246-255. 
[12] 
Y. Hongwen and T. Junna, “Reactive Power Optimization Research of 
Power System Considered the Generation Transmission and 
Distribution,” Industrial Technology, Chengdu, 2008. 
[13] 
M. A. Abido, “Intelligent Control Course Notes,” King Fahad 
University of Petroleum & Minerals, 2007.  
[14] 
C. Belhadj and, M. A. Abido, “An optimized fast voltage stability 
indicator”, IEEE Budapest Power Tech ’99 Conference, Budapest, 
Hungary, 1999. 
[15] 
H. Saadat, “Power System Analysis”, book, 2nd edition, 2004, pp.232-
240. 
[16] 
M. T. Al-Hajri and M. Abido, “Assessment of Genetic Algorithm 
Selection, Crossover and Mutation Techniques in Reactive Power 
Optimization,” IEEE, CEC 2009, May 8-21, 2009, pp.1005-1011. 
[17] 
F. Namdari, L. Hatamvand and N. Shojaei, “Simultaneous RPD and 
SVC Placement in Power Systems for Voltage Stability Improvement 
using SOA,” IEEE UPEC 2014, Romania. 
  
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-389-6
FUTURE COMPUTING 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications

