Cloud Computing and the Enterprise Needs for Data Freedom 
 
Dalia Kriksciuniene 
Vilnius University 
Muitines str. 8, Kaunas, Lithuania 
dalia.kriksciuniene@khf.vu.lt 
Donatas Mazeika 
Vilnius University 
Muitines str. 8, Kaunas, Lithuania 
donatas.mazeika@khf.stud.vu.lt
 
 
Abstract— The article aims to investigate the problem, if the 
willingness and success of transferring enterprise operations to 
the cloud-computing infrastructure are related to the level of 
freedom of managing enterprise data. This problem emanates 
from the raising awareness of the enterprises, that submission 
of data for processing by the cloud computing solutions 
invokes risk of further transformations of data formats by 
vendor, and failure of keeping its compatibility to own data. In 
this case the enterprise could be unable to make archives, or to 
switch to another cloud service provider. The pilot survey 
explores attitudes of enterprise members and specialists of 
information technologies (IT) to the designed shadow service 
and is potential to increase customer trust for cloud computing 
services. The concept of shadow service architecture is 
suggested, which models the customized backup plan adjusted 
for managing data of the company as the compatibility matrix.  
Keywords-cloud 
computing; 
vendor 
lock-in; 
trust; 
compatibility matrix; shadow service architecture 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The main idea of cloud computing is to transfer on-site 
solutions, based on ownership and management of hardware 
and software products, to the IT services that can be accessed 
by Internet. Cloud computing solution providers have started 
massive marketing for enterprises encouraging them to shift 
from traditional IT to software on-demand. Implementation 
of new software solution is quite long and expensive process, 
while cloud computing offers service provision with lower 
initial costs, quick launch, and flexibility of software and 
hardware resources. 
Cloud computing issues are widely analyzed and 
discussed in scholarly literature. In [1], authors define cloud 
computing as a large-scale distributed computing paradigm 
that is driven by economies of scale. Cloud computing is 
claimed to be a new step in internet computing that provides 
large perspectives, but at the same time it raises issues in the 
architecture, design, and exploiting of existing networks and 
data centers [4]. In [3] Sakr, indicates that cloud computing 
is the transformation of IT from a product to a service. Many 
authors agree that this new type of computing brings new 
opportunities to enterprise, such as reduced costs, improved 
scalability, increased customization [3], experimenting with 
new services, ability to improve usage by adding more 
capacity at peak demand, and removing unexploited capacity 
[4]. Together with the new promising advantages, there have 
emerged issues of security, data privacy, technical risks, lack 
of system integration, which should be solved for building 
trust of users. 
The aim of this work is to analyze enterprise needs for 
ability to control its own data in cloud solutions and to 
investigate if services from cloud computing vendors should 
be modified in order to increase trust of the end-users and to 
avoid threat of vendor lock-in. 
The 
following 
section 
presents 
cloud-computing 
definitions, operating principles, risks and classification of 
products that are used in business practice. In the third 
section, the Software as a service (SaaS) type of cloud 
solutions is explored by conducting case study, which 
addresses needs of the end-users and analyses how the 
enterprise can manage its own data on cloud server. In the 
fourth section the concept of shadow service is substantiated. 
It aims to increase trust of user by enhancing flexibility of 
data monitoring. The findings of the research are 
summarized in the conclusion section of the article. 
II. 
BENEFITS AND RISKS OF CLOUD COMPUTING 
Cloud computing refers to the various software and 
hardware solutions that are provided by independent vendors 
for access via Internet. These solutions are easily scalable 
and simple to start using. The payments for these services are 
usually made for subscription. Cloud computing offers 
significant computing capability and economy of scale, and 
recently cloud computing has become a new promising mode 
of business computing [5][15].   
Cloud computing services can be classified to three main 
layers, reflecting different purposes of use: Software as a 
Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) [3][8]: 
• 
Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) layer applications are 
hosted by cloud computing providers and are 
available to customers over Internet, such as CRM, 
ERP, project management systems, document 
management systems, office suite programs etc. 
These solutions are targeted for business and home 
users. 
• 
Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) layer is targeted at 
software 
developers’ 
needs, 
it 
offers 
both 
development environment and tools as a service.  
• 
Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) layer delivers 
platform virtualization environment as a service [5]. 
Target users are system administrators, who analyse 
the needs for resources and ensure computing power 
[4]. 
121
FUTURE COMPUTING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-154-0

IaaS and PaaS are mainly used by developers and 
Independent Software Vendors (ISV) [6], while SaaS 
services are targeted for enterprise use [4]. As company data 
are the critical sources of competitive advantage, the 
enterprises are very serious about their safety and effective 
use, without any obstacles emanating from the chosen cloud 
service. 
SaaS applications can serve enterprise end-users, such as 
CEO, managers, administrators, for managing various 
business processes. The leading SaaS cloud-computing 
vendors are Salesforce.com, Google, IBM. The most popular 
SaaS solutions are the Google Apps office tools products, 
Salesforce.com, SugarCRM (CRM- customer relationship 
management systems), LotusLive (web-based collaboration 
tools). SaaS solutions have wide selection of functions [3]. In 
most cases they can be compared to analogous traditional 
software. They are easy to start, as they do not require 
specific programming or administration knowledge and 
could be especially suitable for small and medium 
enterprises that lack financial and human resources for 
investing to IT infrastructure: installing and maintaining 
hardware infrastructure and software applications [15]. By 
using “pay as you go” subscription model the enterprise can 
avoid costs of starting capital, and the running costs can be 
further regulated by subscribing resources and services that 
company needs at the time. Other benefits include 
scalability, reliability, security, ease of deployment, and ease 
of management for customers [7].  
Despite of many benefits the question about getting back 
company’s data is left open. If company subscribes some 
cloud services, it could be hard or impossible to make 
backup of all data and ensure that data could be reused of 
moved to other cloud vendor. One of the final conlusions of 
the extensive survey of 125 participants from over 100 
organisations by the KPMG consulting company states that 
cloud computing vendors are establishing their own, partly 
incompatible, standards to complicate integration with other 
vendor’s solutions [10]. 
Salesforce.com can serve as a case study of managing 
company data in cloud. In 2010, it had over 87 200 
customers and was recognized as a world leading CRM 
provider by Gartner [12]. All the services provided by 
Salesforce.com are based on cloud computing. Its most 
known product is CRM system for sales force automation. 
The possibilities for the enterprise to manage its own data by 
using Salesforce.com CRM system can be evaluated as 
limited:  
• 
It provides export possibility of all company data 
once a week only for subscribers of highest priced 
versions - Enterprise and Unlimited Editions.  
• 
For Professional Edition this feature has to be 
ordered for additional fee.  
• 
Group and Contact Manager editions do not have 
such feature [13]. 
• 
The provided backup is flat file format without any 
object relations [13].  
• 
The additional possibility is to take enterprise data 
from Salesforce.com with the help of third party 
applications from AppExchange (application shop), 
yet without any guarantee that they are compatible to 
the current version of cloud solution for backup of 
company data. 
The Saleforce.com case shows that one of the main 
disadvantages of cloud computing is the threat of locking 
company data’s lock at one vendor and lack of integration 
with other systems.  
Major threats of cloud computing can be summarized to 
the following risk categories [2]: 
• 
Policy and organizational risks: lock-in, loss of 
governance, compliance challenges, loss of business 
reputation, and cloud service termination or failure; 
• 
Technical risks: unavailability of service, resource 
exhaustion, intercepting data in transit, data transfer 
bottlenecks, and distributed denial of service; 
• 
Legal risks: subpoena and e-discovery, changes of 
jurisdiction, data privacy, and licensing. 
Policy and organizational risks can lead to difficulty of 
extracting data from the cloud service, and this is important 
reason why some companies refuse start using it [2]. It is 
recomended that cloud computing customers should have an 
alternative location for services, and the cloud provider 
would give proper data backup to ensure continuity even if 
the cloud computing provider went broke or acquired and 
swallowed up by a larger company [5].  
Technical risks can cause short-term disorders such as 
services unavailability due to server or connection failure, 
resource exhaustion, or Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks. 
Major technical risk is loss of Internet connectivity [15]. 
Although the technical risks can be considered similar to the 
generic Internet-related issues, but their impact for 
performing business processes in cloud environment is 
crucial, as it ads two additional sources of risk from cloud 
vendor and his internet provider to the existing risks 
emanating at the customer side and his internet service. 
Legal risks are likely to arise due to a customer data 
keeping in different countries. Due to different legislative 
systems there are risks that company’s data was 
unintentionally disclosed, the centralization of storage and 
shared tenancy of physical hardware imparts more risk of 
unwanted data disclosure, especially in cases of cloud vendor 
hardware being confiscated by law enforcement agencies or 
through civil suits [2]. Cloud computing providers are free to 
offer confusing privacy policies that can be unilaterally 
modified at any time without notice to users [14]. It is 
important that users could be confident to their data security 
and availability upon request in order to be able to change 
cloud vendor for resolving any type of risk. 
III. 
FEASIBILITY SURVEY 
The pilot survey was conducted in order to reveal the 
point of view of customers and potential users as related to 
the vendor lock-in problem, to discuss issues which hinder 
trust, and provide insights to feasibility of new shadow 
service which could ensure availability of data backup from 
cloud upon the request from customer. This pilot survey was 
122
FUTURE COMPUTING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-154-0

targeted to IT-professionals, analysts, cloud providers, and 
users. The survey questions included: 
• 
Expectations about cloud computing at the enterprise 
(Likert-type scale was applied [18]).  
• 
Awareness of data management and level of control 
in cloud. 
• 
The preference list of software solutions for most 
likely transfer to cloud according to trust in full 
control of enterprise data. 
The respondents for survey were accessed virtually via 
business information systems related groups of LinkedIn 
social network site. The pilot survey consisted of 10 
questions, 19 people responded to the survey. The majority 
of respondents (63%) indicated that they belong to IT-related 
industry, the other persons were from telecommunications, 
education, engineering, architecture, finance, banking, and 
insurance industries. Half of the respondents were IT 
professionals (53,3%), managers had a share of 26,6%, other 
professions were represented by one person each. The 
majority (75%) of respondents use SaaS cloud solutions 
(SalesForce.com, Google Apps, etc.). The IaaS cloud service 
layer was the second by popularity (18,8%). The remaining 
respondents did not use cloud services yet. 
The question if correspondents knew about their data 
management abilities in cloud computing was answered 
differently: 47,6% respondents were fully aware of the 
enterprise data format applied for data download from cloud 
service vendor. 17,6% respondents did not know if they 
could safely get back their data from cloud, the remaining 
respondents had no practical experience in this sphere. 
The perceived benefits and disadvantages of cloud 
computing were explored by Likert-type answer scale [18]. 
The highlighted benefits (strongly agree answer) were: 
increased mobility (56,30%), quick deployment (43,80%) 
and software flexibility (43,80%). Reduced costs were 
indicated as important benefit as well (agree answer – 
43,80%).  Majority of participants agreed that each type of 
concerns (lock-in in one vendor, cloud service termination or 
failure, possible unavailability of service, legal and data 
privacy risks) were equally important. Cloud service 
termination or failure was marked as one of the most 
important concerns (agree 41,18%; strongly agree 11,76%). 
The result shows that the enlisted risks are not yet resolved in 
satisfactory way and should be addressed in future. 
 
Figure 1.  Question: “Does the full control of company data would 
increase the trust line of cloud computing?”  (Distribution of answers by 
job roles) 
The answers to question “Does the full control of 
company data would increase the trust line of cloud 
computing?” and their distribution by job roles are presented 
in Fig.1. The positive answers were given by 76 % of 
participants, who agreed that this aspect of cloud computing 
is very important. Only two respondents (IT professionals) 
answered that they don’t know if the full control data 
management would reduce the risks. Three respondents (two 
IT professionals and director) expressed doubt of necessity 
of full data control. 
The remaining two questions were to determine which of 
IT solutions of the enterprise the participants would transfer 
without hesitation to the infrastructure of cloud computing, 
and what types of solutions could be transferred only in case 
of ability to fully control company's data. 
 
Figure 2.  Question: “Which local IT solutions would you transfer to 
cloud?” 
From Fig. 2, it is evident, that full control of company’s 
data participants would encourage transfer of more 
sophisticated and customized enterprise-based IT solutions to 
cloud, such as accounting software, business intelligence, 
human resources system, CRM. Office applications were 
most easily considered for use in current cloud solutions.  
The comments of the participants given to the question 
“What improvements are needed (if needed) to transform 
cloud computing to inevitable future model of IT?” revealed 
their confidence that cloud computing is the future model of 
IS. Security, safety, control were mentioned as absolute 
necessity. Less marketing, more transparent services, 
reviews and free market were recommended as well. 
The survey confirmed that the users and potential 
customers are aware of benefits of cloud computing solutions 
for enterprise, but are strongly concerned about risks. The 
risks of lock-in in one vendor, cloud service termination or 
failure, possible unavailability of service, legal and data 
privacy issues were of equal importance to most participants. 
Software mobility, quick deployment and flexibility were the 
main drivers which could encourage companies for IT 
transfer to the cloud. The ability to control data could 
increase trust to cloud services and subsequently lead to 
transfer to cloud not only standard, but the important 
customized IT solutions as well. The idea for enhancement 
of cloud service is proposed in the following chapter as the 
shadow service model. 
IV. 
SHADOW SERVICE ARCHITECTURE MODEL 
In order to avoid vendor lock-in, cloud service 
termination or failure, the shadow service idea is suggested. 
New service is aimed to shadow the compatibility of 
interests between customer and cloud vendor and always 
123
FUTURE COMPUTING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-154-0

monitor enterprise data for “ready” status, which means that 
enterprise can access and backup its data from cloud anytime 
and in various formats.  
In Fig. 4, the Architectural Framework for Cloud 
Computing is presented. It enhances basic scheme of cloud 
service, presented in [16]. The component of data 
compatibility management acts as the shadow service 
module, which could calibrate the interests of both customer 
and the cloud vendor. The shadow service has to track the 
amendments and changes of the cloud environment, which 
are performed by the vendor and to compare to the customer 
requirements for data formats. If the updates cloud vendor 
lead to further transformation of data, the rules have to be 
created and checked in order to inform the customer, if he 
can retrieve the data back from cloud in the required format 
for his in-site use, or possibly transfer it to the other vendor. 
 The shadow service module serves as a special layer, 
consisting of data compatibility tables and data compatibility 
rule engine. The data compatibility tables define the cloud 
service plan and compatibility matrix. The service plan is 
built before starting to use cloud services. The plan should 
include questionnaire, agreement, and other written typical 
documents for definition of 
• 
Most critical data to business continuity; 
• 
Data or documents that should be accessed without 
internet connection (synchronizing feature); 
• 
Maximum retrieval time of most critical and 
complete data. 
• 
Required backup formats (CSV, XML, JSON etc.). 
The compatibility matrix creates the layer of interaction 
between the customer and cloud vendor. It serves for 
monitoring status of customer data within cloud and is based 
on preparing specific backup plans for cloud computing 
customers. 
The 
desired 
importable, 
processing 
and 
exportable data formats for company (or default format 
selection if it is not known by company) are declared here. 
The matrix defines the possibilities from the providers’ side 
as well. It is used to trace changes of the customer data 
which could affect the compatibility of the backup data for 
using off-line or to transfer them to the other cloud vendor . 
It serves as a buffer when the connection or other technical 
risks arise. The shadow service idea aims for optimal data 
synchronization between cloud servers and company’s local 
computers. As the full data synchronization is difficult to 
achieve, the priorities have to be specified for data 
“freshness” and readiness for backup. One of the solutions is 
suggested in [17] as Re:FRESHiT protocol. It specifically 
addresses the problems of replication management in data 
clouds. Re:FRESHiT organizes virtual trees based on the 
sites’ freshness levels, and introduces a routing mechanism 
for reading data, while at the same time allowing users to 
specify their own freshness requirements [17].  
Compatibility matrix-based layer serves as a set of rules 
for processing data and managing files according to the 
request of the customer and capabilities of the cloud service 
vendor. This feature would generally allow company to get 
the agreed (or default) format of data before or after using 
cloud services. The basic structure of compatibility matrix is 
shown in Fig. 3. Data compatibility management structure 
consists of three objects, used for describing data formats 
(importable data, processing data, and exportable data), and 
aggregated object for data compatibility management. The 
descriptions of objects of the compatibility matrix are filled-
in when customer starts using service (either by asking 
customer to fill-in the questionnaire, negotiating service plan, 
or by offering default options).  
The preferences of the customer for the importable and 
exportable data’s formats are checked by cloud service 
vendor. If it is impossible for cloud vendor to import, process 
or export according to the requested specification, the 
corresponding rules within compatibility matrix are defined 
and further used for all company’s data backup and for -local 
data synchronization.  
Application of the shadow service and monitoring the 
compatibility matrix for data management could resolve 
problems with temporary connection breaks, because all 
critical data could be backuped according to the defined 
priorities and available for access from a local computer.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Compatibility matrix structure 
The main idea of the compatibility matrix is to maintain 
importable, processing and exportable data formats, types, 
relations, backups, priorities by the agreed requirements. 
Inevitably, the cloud service provider can develop and 
change its environment by changing data structure or 
formats, but all these changes should be updated in 
compatibility matrix and not to violate the existing rules.   
124
FUTURE COMPUTING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-154-0

Data compatibility management module consists of rule 
engine and compatibility matrix (Fig. 3). Compatibility 
matrix is filled-in jointly by the customer the vendor. Some 
default or standard options can be applied, as well as the 
customized articles of mutual agreement can be introduced 
here. The vendor has to check the customer information and 
requirements about data management, and generate rules for 
maintaining them. In case some rules become impossible to 
fulfill due to changes in the cloud environment, the 
compatibility matrix can show the changes and require new 
steps from customer and the cloud vendor for altering 
conditions of the service agreement. 
Data compatibility matrix stores information about all 
types of data: 
Importable data: defines, what type of data and files are 
imported to cloud service: 
• 
The importable data type (Date_type) could be file 
type or information of data array, which will further 
be organized to data tables.  
• 
Parent_type and Parent_id: defines how importable 
data is related with another customer data, for 
example companies and contacts are related via 
company key attribute.  
• 
File_type defines the import data source (XLS, CSV 
etc) or the allowed data format for upload.  
• 
Restrictions define maximum file sizes, and 
requirements for files information.   
• 
Program_version indicated the software, which was 
applied for creating original file. 
Processing data: combines metadata information about 
the status of processing customer files in cloud service.  
The Process_data_id and Data_type withing cloud 
environment are defined, changes in organizing data tables 
and the relations with other data (Parent_type and 
Parent_id), file types are set and checked by the vendor for 
defining rules of data compatibility. 
Exportable data: area is calibrated among customer and 
vendor. The backup formats, relations and downloadable file 
types are defined. 
Data compatibility table aggregated the information 
about 
importable, 
processing 
and 
exportable 
data 
interdependencies.  Any existing restrictions, priority rates 
for synchronisation, statuses, maximum size and other 
information are filled considering mutual agreement.  
The rule engine in created for managing and 
implementation of the compatibility matrix. If the agreement 
contains any particular requirement which is impossible to 
fulfil, it alters its status. In case some customer requirements 
for importable/exportable data were initialy confirmed, but 
later became incompatible due to changes in cloud 
environment, the status should change to „impossible“ or 
„partial“. In this case it could inform the customer about the 
increased risk and lead to further steps from his side or 
envoke obligations of the vendor to meet the requirements by 
customizing service.  
The shadow service layer has to constantly reveal status 
of compatibility of interests between customer and vendor, 
technical status of data and information of any vulnerabilities 
which could hinder interests fo preserving and managing 
enterprise data. Transparency of techical compatibility 
increases customer trust and reduces risk of lock-in as well. 
This shadow service enables companies to forecast 
further IT related strategies in order to fully control strategic 
data, and to reduce dependence on specific cloud service, 
because they know the format and integration level of 
enterprise data available from cloud vendor. 
The suggested model brings additional costs for cloud 
computing vendors due to support of enhanced functionality 
aimed to constant track of data conversion for fulfilling 
requests of the customers. Their compensation would be 
increase in trust from clients, and building potential for 
solving most urgent disadvantages of cloud computing. 
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
Cloud computing vendors provide their customers 
various IT solutions that are easy to start using, flexible and 
mobile. Nevertheless the issues of concern dealing with 
security, data privacy, technical risks related to getting 
company data back from cloud in the appropriate format 
should be resolved for successful usage of cloud solutions. 
The feasibility survey was conducted for exploring 
attitudes of the users and potential customers. It showed that 
main obstacles which hinder usage of service are related to 
possible cloud service termination or failure and vendor 
lock-in.  
New shadow service architecture was suggested, which is 
based on creating the technical solution for monitoring 
agreement between cloud service and the customer vendor 
for defining priorities, rules and formats for managing data. 
The data compatibility management model, consisting of 
compatibility matrix and rule engine is proposed as the 
framework for enabling shadow service. It allows achieving 
transparent technical compatibility of interests between 
customer and services by cloud vendor, and always monitors 
enterprise data for “ready” status.  
The compatibility matrix defines data freshness priorities, 
formats for data backup. It enables tracking changes 
performed with the data. The rule engine component enables 
to inform the customer, if he can retrieve the data back from 
cloud in the required format and ensures possibility to use 
the backup data with the local system of the customer and 
prevent from vendor lock-in situation. 
The requirement for enhancement of cloud services by 
monitoring the shadow service layer via compatibility matrix 
could increase the workload and costs. But it can increase 
trust of customers and encourage them to transfer to cloud 
the most specific and strategic solutions of the company such 
as accounting software, customer relationship management 
(CRM), and human resource management systems. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Foster, Y. Zhao, I. Raicu, and S. Lu, “Cloud computing and grid 
computing 360-degree compared,“ Grid Computing Environments 
Workshop (GCE '08), 2008. 
[2] T. Betcher, “Cloud Computing: Key IT-Related Risks and Mitigation 
Strategies for Consideration by IT Security Practitioners,” 2010.  
125
FUTURE COMPUTING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-154-0

[3] M.F. 
Sakr, 
“Cloud 
Computing/Virtualization,” 
The 
SANS 
(SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security) Institute, 2010. 
[4] G. Pallis, “Cloud Computing The New Frontier of Internet 
Computing, “ ISSN: 1089-7801, 2010. 
[5] J. Yang, “Cloud Computing Research and Security Issues,” 
Computational Intelligence and Software Engineering (CiSE), 2010 
International Conference 
[6] L. Qian, Z. Luo, Y. Du, and L. Guo, “Cloud Computing: An 
Overview,” 2009, pp. 626-631, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-10665-1_63. 
[7] H. Erdogmus, “Cloud Computing: Does Nirvana Hide behind the 
Nebula?, “ 2009, DOI: 10.1109/MS.2009.31 
[8] M. Ahrens, “Cloud Computing and the Impact on Enterprise IT,” 
2010, DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-15877-3_16  
[9] Salesforce, 
“Benefits 
of 
SaaS, 
“, 
2010. 
<http://www.salesforce.com/saas/benefits-of-saas/>  [last access 
22/07/2011] 
[10] KPMG, “KPMG is a global network of professional firms providing 
Audit, 
Tax 
and 
Advisory 
services,“ 
2010,  
<http://www.kpmg.com/Global/en/WhoWeAre/Pages/default.aspx>  
[last access 22/07/2011] 
[11] J. Schofield, “Freedom to move data is vital when it's in the clouds,“ 
2009, 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/ 
2009/jun/17/cloud-
computing- jack-schofield>  [last access 22/07/2011] 
[12] Salesforce, “Salesforce.com Positioned as a Leader in the Magic 
Quadrant 
for 
Sales 
Force 
Automation,“ 
2010, 
https://www.salesforce.com/company/news-press/press-
releases/2010/08/100825.jsp [last access 22/07/2011] 
[13] Salesforce, “Salesforce Pricing & Editions - Sales Cloud,” 2010, 
http://www.salesforce.com/crm/editions-pricing.jsp, 
[last 
access 
22/07/2011] 
[14] R. Sprague, “Cloud Privacy: Normative Standards for Information 
Privacy Management within Cloud Computing. University of 
Wyoming College of Business,” 2009. 
[15] K.R. Choo,”Cloud computing: Challenges and Future Directions” in 
Trends&Issues in Crime and Criminal Justica Vol.400, October 2010. 
Australian Institute of Criminology, 2010. 
[16] R.Clarke, ”User Requirements for Cloud Computing Architecture,” 
Proceedings of the 2010 10th IEEE/ACM International Conference 
on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing CCGRID '10, IEEE Computer 
Society,  2010, doi>10.1109/CCGRID.2010.20 
[17] T. Cristiana, H. Schuldt, Y. Breitbart, and H. Schek, „Flexible Data 
Access in a Cloud based on Freshness Requirements," Proceedings of 
the 2010 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Cloud Computing 
CLOUD 
'10, 
IEEE 
Computer 
Society, 
2010, 
doi>10.1109/CLOUD.2010.75 
[18] R. Likert, "A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes" in 
Archives 
of 
Psychology 
Vol 
14, 
1932: 
p.p. 
1–55. 
 
Figure 4.  An Architectural Framework for Cloud computing service with compatibility layer for shadow service  
126
FUTURE COMPUTING 2011 : The Third International Conference on Future Computational Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-154-0

