Conceptual Modeling for Environmental Niches and Potential Geographic 
Distributions Using UML GeoProfile 
 
 
Gerardo José Zárate, Jugurta Lisboa-Filho 
Departamento de Informática 
Universidade Federal de Viçosa (UFV) 
Viçosa, Minas Gerias, Brazil 
gerardo.zarate.m@gmail.com, jugurta@ufv.br 
Carlos Frankl Sperber 
Departamento de Biologia Geral 
Universidade Federal de Viçosa (UFV) 
Viçosa, Minas Gerias, Brazil 
sperber@ufv.br
 
Abstract— An ecological niche is defined by an array of biotic 
and abiotic requirements that allow organisms to survive and 
reproduce in a geographic area. Environmental data from a 
region can be used to predict the potential distribution of a 
species in a different region. Many formalisms for modeling 
geospatial information have been developed over the years. 
The most notable benefit of these formalisms is their focus on a 
high-level abstraction of reality, leaving unnecessary details 
behind. This paper presents a conceptual data schema for 
niches and potential geographic distributions using the UML 
GeoProfile formalism. The proposed data schema considers the 
geographic entities and environmental variables involved in 
the prediction of potential geographic distributions made with 
ecological niche data.     
Keywords-Geospatial database modeling; Ecological Niches; 
Potential Geographic Distributions. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Conceptual models are formalisms that illustrate entities 
and relationships between them in a diagram representation. 
These representations are abstractions of the objects and 
associations of the real world, leaving unnecessary details 
out.  Database design greatly benefits from conceptual 
modeling as it focuses on a high-level representation without 
taking into account implementation details [1][2]. 
Well-known approaches for modeling databases are the 
Entity-Relationship (ER) Model introduced by Peter Chen in 
1976 [3] and Object-Oriented techniques such as the Object-
Oriented Analysis (OOA), Object-Modeling Technique 
(OMT) and the standard Unified Modeling Language (UML) 
referred in [2]. These approaches help designers to model 
databases for almost every human activity. 
As Computer Science and technology evolve, there is a 
necessity to model complex situations in which databases are 
essential.  Databases for Geographic Information Systems 
(GIS) are a prime example of this.  The work of Bédard and 
Paquette [4] was the first to attempt to include geospatial 
information in database modeling. They proposed an 
extension of the ER formalism for modeling spatial data. 
Since then, many researchers have proposed new formalisms 
for geospatial data [1][5]. 
Those formalisms are capable of representing, at the 
abstract level, geographic features such as roads, buildings or 
rivers. Moreover, they are also able to represent 
environmental variables such as temperature or vegetation. 
The representation and abstraction of geospatial data benefits 
professionals and scientists in areas, such as Civil 
Engineering, Agriculture and Ecology, among others.     
The 
ecological 
niche 
and 
potential 
geographic 
distributions are fields of study in Ecology that have been of 
major research interest in the last years [6].  Ecological 
niches are defined by an array of biotic interactions and 
abiotic conditions in which a species can survive and 
reproduce [7]. An environmental niche is constructed only 
by abiotic conditions [8]. On the other hand, potential 
geographic distributions refer to areas or regions that have 
the appropriate set of conditions for a species to live and 
reproduce. Potential geographic distributions are usually 
calculated by mathematical algorithms. These algorithms use 
environment data and occurrences of a species to make 
predictions [9]. 
The aim of this paper is to model the entities, 
relationships and spatial phenomena of environmental niches 
and potential geographic distributions using a conceptual 
model for geospatial databases, providing a baseline for the 
design and implementation of repositories containing 
ecological niches and potential distribution data.  
The rest of this paper is structured as follow: Section II 
reviews the related work. Section III overviews the basic 
concepts of ecological niche theory including potential 
distributions. Section IV offers a summary of geospatial 
databases formalisms, focusing on UML GeoProfile [2][10]. 
Section V presents a conceptual data schema for 
environmental niches and potential geographic distributions 
and briefly discusses an implementation of the data schema. 
Finally, Section VI provides some final considerations. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
GIS applications work with geographical features 
(roads, rivers, buildings) as well as with environmental 
variables (temperature, humidity, soil). As mentioned in 
Section I, the aim of this paper is to model niche-based 
geographic distributions using a formalism for modeling 
geospatial databases.  Previous works have attempted to 
provide means to model niche and geographic distribution 
information [9][11][12][13]. This section summarizes prior 
efforts found in the literature. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Although it does not involve conceptual modeling of 
geospatial databases, the work in [9] emphasizes the 
importance of databases in GIS applications stressing their 
storage capabilities. Moreover, it provides a six-step guide 
for using ecological niche to predict potential geographic 
distributions. Finally, it describes how environmental 
variables are handled in GIS applications, highlighting the 
selection of the appropriate GIS data types. 
McIntosh et al. [11] developed a tool that helps 
ecologists design databases. The focus of their research is to 
simplify the design process for ecologists with no 
experience in database theory.  They provided previously 
created templates that help overcome common errors in 
defining relationships between entities. Models created in 
their tool can later be exported to a Database Management 
System (DBMS). The major drawback is the lack of support 
for geospatial capabilities. Entities cannot be labeled as 
points, lines, polygons or fields; contrary to conceptual 
models like those mentioned in Section IV. Even if not 
directly 
related 
to 
ecological 
niches 
or 
potential 
distributions, the work in [11] is a valuable effort because it 
recognizes the importance of databases for ecologists. 
Semwayo and Berman [12] presented the guidelines for 
representing ecological niches in a conceptual model. 
According to the authors, traditional ER and Object-oriented 
models fail to represent the granularity of an ecological 
niche. They propose an ontological engineering approach to 
model ecological data. Despite the fact that there is no 
reference to ecological niche theory, the focus of their study 
is modeling the relationships between humans and their 
environment.  Again, there is no support for geospatial 
capabilities. 
Finally, Keet [13] provides an overview of the principal 
concepts related to ecological niches and presents an 
Object-Role Modeling (ORM) diagram of the ecological 
niche. The proposed ORM diagram includes entities, such 
as species, fundamental niche, realized niche, hyper-
volumes and conditions. The work in [13] is an attempt to 
model ecological niches based on the concepts first 
introduced by Grinnell [14] and Hutchinson [15] from a 
database conceptual standpoint. 
Contrary to the described prior work, the data schema 
proposed in this paper is constructed around data used in 
niche-based geographic distributions, using a conceptual 
model with geographic and environmental capabilities. 
Ultimately, an implementation of the data schema in a 
DBMS would be capable of storing the necessary 
geographic and environmental data of ecological niches and 
potential geographic distributions. Before introducing the 
proposed schema, it is important to have basic concepts 
regarding 
ecological 
niches, 
potential 
geographic 
distributions and conceptual model for geographic data, 
which are discussed in Section III and Section IV. 
III. 
ECOLOGICAL NICHE THEORY 
According to [16], the term ecological niche was first 
introduced by Joseph Grinnell. Grinnell suggested that a 
species' niche is defined by its habitat requirements [14].  
This means that a niche is determined by all the 
environmental variables that enable the survival and 
reproduction of a species. 
A similar definition was given by Hutchinson, who 
introduced the concept of fundamental niche and defined it 
as an n-dimensional hypervolume determined by species 
requirements [7][9][15].  Hutchinson's definition is a 
quantitative approach that gives more clarity to the concept 
and leaves an open door for the development of 
mathematical techniques [16].  
Although 
Hutchinson's 
definition 
is 
rather 
straightforward, an implementation is not a simple task. The 
amount of dimensions in a hypervolume is potentially 
infinite. Dimensions such as temperature and soil 
characteristics can be easy to collect, while other variables 
like the diet of an organism are, in some cases, not 
accessible. Additionally, certain dimensions can be irrelevant 
to determine the fundamental niche [7][15]. 
The dimensions of the hypervolume can be classified as 
conditions and resources. Resources are consumed or used, 
which might lead to competition between organisms of the 
same or different species. Differently, conditions are 
environmental (abiotic) variables, such as temperature, 
precipitation and terrain aspect, among others [8].  
Depending on the dimensions considered, ecological 
niches can be classified as Grinnellian or Eltonian.  
Grinnellian niches (also referred as environmental niches) 
consider only environmental variables, which are, in most 
cases, considered scenopoetic, i.e., not affected by 
organisms. On the other hand, Eltonian niches focus on 
resources and relationships between organisms. The concept 
of n-dimensional hypervolume can be applied to both 
Grinnellian and Eltonian niches [8]. This paper, considers 
only environmental niches, as their data sets are becoming 
more available and data sets for Eltonian niches are still 
difficult to obtain [8]. Furthermore, data from environmental 
niches are more related to predictions of geographic 
distributions, which are also in the scope of this paper [9]. 
Others exploited concepts related to ecological niches are 
the realized niche and the geographic distribution of species. 
Hutchinson defined the realized niche as a subset of the 
fundamental niche restricted by species' biotic interactions 
[9][16]. According to Soberón, the realized niche occurs in 
the overlapping area between the geographic region with 
appropriate abiotic factors and the region in which there is a 
suitable combination of interaction between species [17]. 
The actual geographic distribution of a species would be the 
region that has the appropriate range of abiotic and biotic 
conditions, as well as being accessible to organisms 
[17][18]. The BAM Diagram (called BAM due to the labels 
in each circle of the diagram) [17] exhibited in Fig. 1 offers 
a graphic explanation of the concepts defined earlier. The 
circle A represents the area with the appropriate abiotic 
conditions (geographical expression of the fundamental 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

niche). The circle B is the area with suitable combination of 
interacting species. The intersection of A and B denotes the 
geographical extent of the realized niche. Circle M holds the 
regions accessible to the species. Finally, the overlapping 
region of A, B and M represents the geographic distribution. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. BAM Diagram for representing the fundamental niche [17] 
  
Additionally to the actual geographic distribution, 
potential geographic distributions are regions with suitable 
conditions for species to survive, i.e., the geographical 
extent of the fundamental niche [9][19].  Usually, data from 
species 
distribution 
(occurrences 
and 
environmental 
variables) are used in mathematical algorithms to predict 
potential geographic distributions [9][19][20][21]. The 
inputs for these algorithms are a set of occurrence data and 
environmental variables for both occupied and evaluated 
area. Outputs, on the other hand, are either regions with 
suitable conditions in which species are present (the 
intersection P of the three regions of the BAM diagram), or 
regions with suitable conditions where organisms are not 
present (areas representing the fundamental niche A minus 
P in the BAM diagram) [17].  
As mentioned in [6] and [22], since the 1990s, the 
methodologies based on Ecological Niche Modeling have 
increased significantly. There are several uses for niche 
related concepts in the literature including climate change 
projections, potential geographic distributions, species 
invasion 
projections, 
niche 
characterization, 
niche 
diversification, niche construction and habitat-suitability, 
among others [6][8][21][23][24][25].  
IV. 
CONCEPTUAL MODELS FOR GEOSPATIAL DATABASES 
Over time, computational systems have become more 
robust and sophisticated; hence, there is a necessity to handle 
complex data such as geospatial information. One of the 
major elements of a GIS is a database in which information 
is stored. Modern DBMS software, such as Oracle and 
PostgreSQL, have capabilities to manage geospatial data and 
provide additional benefits like security, redundancy or user 
control access.  
Database designing has three basic stages [26]: 
conceptual, logical and physical. The conceptual stage 
produces data schemas that represent a high-level abstraction 
of entities and relationships between them. The major benefit 
of using conceptual models is their independence of 
implementation details, which is the reason of their usage in 
Computer Science fields such as Databases. Notable 
conceptual models used in database modeling are the ER 
Model, OOA, OMT and the UML [2][3]. 
The work in [4] was the first attempt to create a 
conceptual model (formalism) dedicated to model geospatial 
databases from a conceptual standpoint. Bédard and Paquette 
proposed a geospatial extension of the ER formalism.  
Thenceforth, many researchers and professionals have 
proposed new methods or extended previous ones. 
Conceptual models for geospatial databases assist in the 
process of modeling geographical features as they are 
modeled as perceived by humans [27]. Moreover, the studies 
in [28] and [29] state that geospatial formalisms allow 
reduction in the number of entities and relationships without 
losing semantics. 
The studies in [1] and [5] present a timeline of the major 
geospatial formalisms and list their principal characteristics. 
According to Pinet [1], there are seven major goals shared by 
formalisms dedicated to model geospatial data: 
 
1) Representing basic geospatial objects such as 
points, lines, polygons, multiple points, multiple 
lines or multiple surfaces. 
2) Modeling geospatial relationships between objects. 
Examples of relationships are adjacency, overlap 
and disjoint. 
3) Description of the evolution of objects over time. 
4) Modeling objects that might have multiple 
representations depending of the geographical 
scale. 
5) Description of objects with uncertain boundaries or 
positions, for instance floods or areas of pollution. 
6) Representation of continuous geospatial data that 
can be measured in any location of the study area. 
7) 
Modeling structured networks. 
 
Usually, formalisms use pictograms to improve 
readability and to simplify the model [5]. A pictogram is a 
graphic symbol that resembles the real object that is being 
modeled. Fig. 2 shows the pictograms used in UML 
GeoProfile [10]. Notice that the pictograms cover most of 
the goals proposed in [1]. 
Comparing the various formalisms specialized in 
geospatial data is not in the scope of this paper. For a 
comparison and overview of different formalisms, refer to 
[1][2][5]. 
A. UML GeoProfile Overview 
UML GeoProfile is an UML profile specifically 
designed as a formalism for modeling geospatial databases 
in a conceptual level. As noticed before, a conceptual model 
represents an abstraction of reality and does not involve 
implementation details. Being an UML extension, UML 
GeoProfile allows the use of classes, associations, packages 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

and 
constraints, 
among 
other 
UML 
features 
[2]. 
Additionally, UML GeoProfile can be implemented in any 
Computer Aided Software Engineering (CASE) tool with 
UML profiles support. 
 
Figure 2. Pictograms used in UML GeoProfile [10]. 
 
The principal motivation behind UML GeoProfile was 
the standardization of previous models. To accomplish this, 
UML GeoProfile took the best offerings from different 
models and brought them together. As other formalisms, 
UML GeoProfile takes advantage of pictograms to simplify 
the model. In UML GeoProfile, pictograms are modeled as 
stereotypes. A UML stereotype allows designers to extend 
the terminology of UML in order to create new constructors 
[2][10]. Furthermore, UML GeoProfile takes advantage of 
UML packages to divide schemas in geospatial themes, e.g., 
vegetation, relief or hydrography. This characterizes related 
entities and provides better organization.  
UML GeoProfile follows the international standards for 
Geographic Information of the International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO) and the Open Geospatial 
Consortium (OGC) [10], which reduce inconsistencies 
between de jure and de facto standards [30]. Additionally, 
UML GeoProfile adopts a Model-Driven Architecture 
(MDA) approach. In MDA, models are first built in a 
Computation Independent Model (CIM); CIM models are 
later transformed to a Platform Independent Model (PIM). 
The third stage of the process is the Platform Specific 
Model (PSM), which is later converted to implementation 
code [10]. Further information on stereotypes, international 
standards and MDA can be found in [2][10][30]. 
V. REPRESENTING ENVIRONMENTAL NICHES AND 
POTENTIAL DISTRIBUTIONS USING UML GEOPROFILE 
This section describes how to model environmental 
niches and potential geographic distributions using UML 
GeoProfile as an MDA's Computational Independent Model 
(CIM). First, we illustrate the representation of individual 
entities, and, then, we propose an approach to represent 
environmental niches and potential geographic distributions 
in three packages that form a single database schema. 
A. Basic representations 
As stated in Section IV, UML GeoProfile uses 
stereotypes to represent geospatial entities (classes in 
UML). For instance, the Point stereotype is used to 
represent trees or occurrence data while the Polygon 
stereotype represents geographic areas such as cities or 
forests. Moreover, UML GeoProfile provides stereotypes to 
represent continuous data such as humidity and temperature. 
Fig. 3 exhibits a representation of occurrence data of species 
(a), the occupied area in which organisms live (b) and 
temperature (c) employing UML GeoProfile. 
 
 
Figure 3. Representations of occurrence data of a species (a), occupied 
area (b) and multiple representations of temperature (c). 
 
Additionally, UML GeoProfile supports multiple 
representations for geospatial entities. Depending on how 
data was initially collected, environmental variables can be 
represented in a diversity of GIS types. Fig. 3 (c) shows the 
representation of temperature displayed as Isolines, Grid of 
Points and Grid of Cells. 
B. Modeling Environmental Niches 
Predictive algorithms such as the Genetic Algorithm for 
Rule-Set Prediction (GARP) [31] work with a set of 
occurrence data and an array of environmental variables of a 
given area to predict geographic distributions. A range is 
defined for each variable (minimum and maximum values) 
to construct an n-dimensional hypervolume that restricts the 
conditions in which organisms can survive. 
Being a generic modeling approach, it is necessary to 
build a schema that supports data from different species and 
multiple regions occupied by organisms of the same species. 
Each region has its own hypervolume defined by an array of 
environmental variables. Furthermore, the amount of 
variables can also vary from region to region.  
Fig. 4 presents the proposed conceptual data schema for 
environmental niche data. Notice that the entities and their 
relationships are based on the literature for ecological niches 
and potential geographic distributions referenced in Section 
III. An occupied area (modeled with the Polygon stereotype) 
has one or multiple occurrences of a species. The 
relationship between the Occupied Area and Occurrence 
classes is modeled as a spatial relationship In, indicating 
that a species occurrence is inside a region. The term 
―occurrence‖ is preferred over ―organism‖ because the 
schema does not consider particular characteristics of 
organisms such as weight or age. The organism's location 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

(covered by the Point stereotype) is the most important 
piece of information. In addition, the schema does not take 
into consideration organisms’ movement. For that reason, 
an occurrence is related to not more than one occupied area. 
However, an organism can be identified in two or more 
areas over a period of time. Although an occurrence can 
represent the same organism, it is still related to at most one 
region in a particular moment. To solve the relationship's 
lack of congruence, the Temporal Object stereotype is also 
assigned to the Occurrence class. This allows an organism 
to be related to other regions in a different moment in time. 
Multiple environmental variables can be considered in 
an occupied area. In addition, a type of environmental 
variable can be analyzed in multiple regions as well. Here, 
the hypervolume is defined by the multiple instances of the 
Niche Axis (hypervolume dimension) association class, 
which cannot exist without the association between 
occupied areas and environmental variables.  
An association class is defined for each association 
between the two classes, indicating the units (ratio, degrees, 
inches) and the minimum and maximum values of a 
particular variable in a specific area. This approach presents 
a limitation: it is incapable of modeling relationships 
between dimensions of the hypervolume, e.g., if the 
temperature is higher than 30◦C, then the humidity must be 
between 90% and 99% [14]. These relationships depend 
entirely on the environmental variables and their variation. 
Consequently, it is difficult to predict and model them. 
Analytical tools or algorithms handle the relationships as 
rule sets used to predict geographic distributions [9][21]. 
Notice that in Fig. 4, a GeoField stereotype is not 
assigned to the Environmental Variable class as it was 
previously suggested. The reason behind this is that 
GeoObject classes (points, lines, polygons) and GeoField 
classes belong to different views of the reality and usually 
there are not topological relationships between classes of 
two different views [10]. That said, the lack of stereotype 
for the class is a non-issue. In order to construct a 
hypervolume it is only necessary to know the variable type 
and its range. Nevertheless, it is also important to provide a 
manner of including in the model the field from which the 
hypervolume data were extracted.  
 
 
Figure 4. Representation of environmental niches 
 
Figure 5. Possible environmental variables of an n-dimensional 
hypervolume. Multiple representations allow the use of different types of 
data sources. 
 
As mentioned before, the amount of dimensions in a 
hypervolume is potentially infinite. Hence, the final model 
strictly depends on the study case. Fig. 5 provides an 
example of the possible representation of the environmental 
dimensions (abiotic conditions) of a hypervolume. Notice 
the presence of the Temporal Object stereotype in some 
classes, meaning that certain abiotic conditions can vary 
over time, e.g., the monthly average temperature of a region.  
C. Representing Potential Geographic Distributions 
Predictive algorithms and tools operate with occurrence 
data and environmental variables to produce potential 
geographic distributions of a species (regions where 
organisms can live or survive) usually in the form of a grid 
of cells [9][19]. Fig. 6 shows the classes related to the 
potential distribution.  
The Evaluated Region class represents the boundaries of 
the area in which the distribution is projected; this is 
relevant to model because projections are usually done from 
a defined area to another. For example, the research in [9] 
used niche data of a pathogen from the United States 
(occupied area) and predicted distributions for Mexico 
(evaluated region); similar researchers are found in [19] and 
[21]. Evidently, environmental data from the evaluated 
region are also needed. These data are modeled in the same 
manner as the environmental dimensions of the niche 
hypervolume (refer to Fig. 5). 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Potential Geographic Distribution. The evaluated region is 
modeled as polygon and the distribution as a grid of cells.  
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Notice that the Evaluated Region and Potential 
Distribution classes are not associated because they belong 
to different views. Additionally, there is no relationship 
between a species (or its organisms) and the evaluated 
regions. Even if organisms occupy the latter, there is no 
evidence of a topological relationship. 
Finally, it is inevitable to acknowledge the necessity to 
link the field view classes (both abiotic conditions and 
Potential Distribution classes) to their corresponding region. 
This can be done through metadata that describes details 
such as coverage area or how and when data were obtained. 
D. Implementation of the data schema 
We implemented the conceptual data schema in 
PostgreSQL using the PostGIS geospatial extension and its 
geometry and raster data types to store geographic and 
environmental 
data. 
Non-geospatial 
entities 
were 
implemented using basic data types provided by the DBMS. 
To employ the data schema, first we took advantage of the 
software openModeller [32] to create the potential 
geographic distribution and ecological niche model of 
sample data (occurrences and environmental data) provided 
with openModeller. 
The results generated by one of the algorithms included 
in openModeller were later stored in the data schema using 
basic SQL statements and tools designed to load geospatial 
information into a PostgreSQL database. QuantumGIS and 
other GIS software with geographic analytical capabilities 
can be used to retrieve the information stored in the 
database (information can be filtered by species, area of 
interest, among others). This provides the benefit of having 
data for multiple species stored in a single place instead of 
different files. Furthermore, our approach can exploit all the 
advantages of a DBMS.  
 
VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
This paper presented a conceptual data schema for 
environmental niches and potential geographic distribution 
of species. The complete schema consists of the components 
exhibited in Figures 4, 5 and 6. The major limitations of this 
approach are the lack of support for relationships between 
dimensions of the niche's hypervolume and the inability to 
model classification values such as vegetation type. Both 
limitations are handled by predictive algorithms in a form of 
rule sets generated from the abiotic layers.  
The geospatial and temporal phenomena of the schema 
are modeled using UML GeoProfile stereotypes. UML 
GeoProfile was preferred over other formalisms for its 
capacity to model both object and field phenomena, as well 
as for the implementation of international standards, and 
MDA adoption. The proposed conceptual data schema 
represents no more than the CIM stage of the MDA. Future 
work includes implementation of the remaining MDA 
stages and development of a study case with real data. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project was partially financed by CAPES, OAS, 
CNPq and FAPEMIG. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] F. Pinet, "Entity-relationship and object-oriented formalisms 
for modeling spatial environmental data." Environmental 
Modelling & Software 33, 2012, pp. 80-91.  
[2] J. Lisboa-Filho, G. Sampaio, F. Nalon and K. Borges. "A 
UML profile for conceptual modeling in GIS domain". 
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Domain 
Engineering at CAiSE. Hammamet, Tunisia, 2010, pp. 18-31. 
[3] P. Chen, "The entity-relationship model—toward a unified 
view of data." ACM Transactions on Database Systems 
(TODS) 1.1, 1976, pp. 9-36. 
[4] Y. Bédard and F. Paquette, ―Extending Entity/Relationship 
Formalism for Spatial Information Systems‖. AUTO-CARTO 
9, Baltimore, 1989, pp. 818-827. 
[5] A. Miralles, F. Pinet, and Y. Bédard. "Describing spatio-
temporal phenomena for environmental system development: 
An overview of today’s needs and solutions." International 
Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Information 
Systems 1.2, 2010, pp. 68-84. 
[6] A. Peterson and J. Soberon. "Species distribution modeling 
and ecological niche modeling: getting the concepts right." 
Natureza & Conservação 10, no. 2, 2012, pp. 102-107. 
[7] J. Polechová and D. Storch; ―Ecological Niche‖ Encyclopedia 
of Ecology, Vol. 2, 2008, pp. 1088-1097, eds. Sven Erik 
Jørgensen and Brian D. Fath, Oxford: Elsevier. 
[8] J. Soberón, "Grinnellian and Eltonian niches and geographic 
distributions of species." Ecology letters 10.12, 2007, pp. 
1115-1123.  
[9] J. Blackburn, "Integrating geographic information systems 
and ecological niche modeling into disease ecology: a case 
study of Bacillus anthracis in the United States and Mexico." 
Emerging and Endemic Pathogens, Springer Netherlands, 
2010, pp 59-88. 
[10] J. Lisboa-Filho, F. Nalon, D. Peixoto, G. Sampaio, and K. 
Borges, ―Domain and Model Driven Geographic Database 
Design‖. In Domain Engineering: Product Lines, Languages, 
and Conceptual Models, 2013, pp. 375-399. 
[11] A. McIntosh, J. Cushing, N. Nadkarmi and l. Zeman, 
"Database design for ecologists: Composing core entities with 
observations." Ecological informatics 2.3, 2007, pp. 224-236.  
[12] D. Semwayo and S. Berman. "Representing ecological niches 
in a conceptual model." Conceptual Modeling for Adv. App. 
Domains. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 31-42.  
[13] M. Keet, "Representations of the ecological niche." WSPI 
2006: Contributions to the Third International Workshop on 
Philosophy and Informatics vol. 14, 2006, pp. 75-88. 
[14] J. Grinnell, "The niche-relationships of the California 
Thrasher." The Auk34, no. 4, 1917, 427-433. 
[15] G. Hutchinson, "Concluding remarks". Cold Spring Harbour 
Symposium on Quantitative Biology 22, 1957, pp. 415–427. 
[16] J. Chase and M.  Leibold, ―Ecological niches: linking 
classical and contemporary approaches”. University of 
Chicago Press, 2003. 
[17] J. Soberon, "Interpretation of models of fundamental 
ecological 
niches 
and 
species' 
distributional 
areas." 
Biodiversity Informatics vol. 2, 2005, pp. 1-10. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[18] N. Sillero, "What does ecological modelling model? A 
proposed classification of ecological niche models based on 
their underlying methods." Ecological Modelling 222.8, 2011, 
pp. 1343-1346. 
[19] D. Ward, "Modelling the potential geographic distribution of 
invasive ant species in New Zealand." Biological Invasions 
9.6, 2007, pp. 723-735.  
[20] M. De Meyer, et al. "Ecological niche and potential 
geographic distribution of the invasive fruit fly Bactrocera 
invadens (Diptera, Tephritidae). Bulletin of Entomological 
Research 100.1, 2010, pp. 35-48.  
[21] A. Peterson, "Predicting the geography of species’ invasions 
via ecological niche modeling." The quarterly review of 
biology 78.4, 2003, pp. 419-433.  
[22] H. Owens, et al. "Constraints on interpretation of ecological 
niche models by limited environmental ranges on calibration 
areas." Ecological Modelling 263, 2013, pp. 10-18. 
[23] K. Laland and N. Boogert, "Niche construction, co-evolution 
and biodiversity." Ecological Economics 69.4, 2010, pp. 731-
736. 
[24] A. Jiménez-Valverde, A. Peterson, J. Soberón, J. Overton, P. 
Aragón and J. Lobo. "Use of niche models in invasive species 
risk assessments." Biological Invasions 13.12, 2011, pp. 
2785-2797. 
[25] A. Hirzel, J. Hausser, D. Chessel, and N. Perrin, "Ecological-
niche factor analysis: how to compute habitat-suitability maps 
without absence data?" Ecology 83.7, 2002, pp. 2027-2036. 
[26] R. Elmasri, S. Navathe, ―Fundamentals of Database Systems‖ 
(6th Ed.), Addison Wesley, Boston, MA, 2010. 
[27] K. Borges, C. Davis, and A. Laender, "OMT-G: an object-
oriented 
data 
model 
for 
geographic 
applications." 
GeoInformatica 5.3, 2001, pp. 221-260. 
[28] C. Parent, S. Spaccapietra, E. Zimanyi, P. Donini, C. Plazanet 
and C. Vangenot. "Modeling spatial data in the MADS 
conceptual model." Int. Symp. on Spatial Data Handling, 
Vancouver, 1998, pp. 138-150. 
[29] Y. Bédard, C. Caron, Z. Maamar, B. Moulin and D. Vallière, 
―Adapting data models for the design of spatio-temporal 
databases‖. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 
Vol. 20, Issue 1, 1996, pp. 19-41. 
[30] J. Brodeur and T. Badard, "Modeling with iso 191xx 
standards" Encyclopedia of GIS, 2008, pp. 705-716. 07, IEEE 
Press, Dec. 2007, pp. 57-64, doi:10.1109/SCIS.2007.357670. 
[31] D. Stockwell, "The GARP modelling system: problems and 
solutions to automated spatial prediction." Int.  Journal of 
Geographical Information Science 13.2, 1999, pp. 143-158. 
[32] M.E. de Souza Muñoz,  et al. "openModeller: a generic 
approach to species’ potential distribution modelling." 
GeoInformatica 15, no. 1, 2011, pp.111-135.  
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

