Combining Territorial Data With Thermal Simulations to Improve Energy 
Management of Suburban Areas  
An application to the Walloon region of Belgium 
 
Anne-Françoise Marique and Sigrid Reiter 
Local Environment: Management and Analysis 
University of Liège 
Liège, Belgium 
afmarique@ulg.ac.be, Sigrid.Reiter@ulg.ac.be 
Asma Hamdi 
Energétique des Bâtiments et Systèmes Solaires 
Ecole Nationale d’Ingénieurs de Tunis 
Tunis, Tunisie 
Asma.hamdi86@gmail.com 
Maud Pétel 
Ecole supérieure du Génie Urbain 
Ecole des Ingénieurs de la Ville de Paris 
Paris, France 
Maud.Petel@eivp-paris.fr 
 
 
Abstract—Urban sprawl has been identified as a major issue 
for sustainable development. Energy consumption in suburban 
buildings, in particular, is a widespread issue because detached 
types of houses require significantly more energy to be heated 
than more compact urban forms. Energy efficiency is often 
presented as a viable approach to the mitigation of climate 
change, but research and studies mainly contend with 
individual buildings and do not address this issue at larger 
territorial scales or for a whole building stock. In this respect, 
this paper first presents a morphological definition of urban 
sprawl. This definition uses territorial and cadastral data 
available for the Walloon region of Belgium. Using this 
definition, a suburban type classification adapted to thermal 
studies is drawn up. A representative block of each type is 
selected to model energy use and to determine the total energy 
consumption of the whole suburban building stock. An 
application is then presented concerning a comparison of 
potential energy savings associated with several renovation 
strategies. The results of this exercise are presented and 
highlight the benefits of combining Geographic Information 
Systems (GIS) tools, territorial data and thermal simulations 
for the efficient energy management of suburban areas at the 
scale of the whole building stock. 
Keywords-urban sprawl; territorial data; urban GIS; energy 
consumption.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The expansion of urban areas, commonly referred to as 
urban sprawl, has been identified as a major issue for 
sustainable development [1]. Although opponents of sprawl 
argue that more compact urban forms would significantly 
reduce energy consumption both in the building and 
transportation sectors [2][3][4][5], low-density residential 
suburban districts are a reality in our territories and continue 
to grow. Such patterns of development are found in both 
developed and developing countries [6][7][8]. 
Much research has focused on urban sprawl and has in 
particular identified energy consumption in suburban houses 
as a major issue because detached houses consume 
significantly more energy than compact urban forms 
[1][9][10][11]. 
In 
the 
actual 
context 
of 
increasing 
environmental awareness, energy efficiency in buildings is in 
fact a topic widely studied in the literature and often 
presented as a viable approach to the mitigation of climate 
change. It has also become a central policy target in the 
European Union at both the national and local levels [12]. A 
well-known example of this dynamic is the adoption in 2002 
and the progressive integration into local laws of the 
European Energy Performance of Buildings Directive 
(EPBD). This directive requires all European countries to 
strongly enhance their building regulations and aims 
primarily to establish minimum standards for the energy 
performance of new buildings and existing buildings larger 
than 1000 m² that are subject to major renovation [13].  
Although this is a good step towards more sustainability 
in the building sector, two objections can be made to this 
directive and to much of the existing research and models. 
First of all, they adopt the perspective of the individual 
building as an autonomous entity and neglect the importance 
of phenomena linked to larger scales, although decisions 
made at the neighborhood and regional levels have important 
consequences for the performance of individual buildings 
and the transportation habits of the occupants [11][14][15]. 
Moreover, this approach is difficult to generalize to address 
the sustainability of a whole territory. Secondly, the EPDB 
Directive mainly applies to new buildings, whereas the 
existing building stock is huge, often poorly or non-insulated 
and takes a very long time to be renovated.  
To effectively address the issue of energy efficiency in 
the whole suburban building stock and to help reach the 
climate change targets adopted in the scope of international 
agreements, it is essential to surpass this “single-new-
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

building” approach. A large amount of territorial data is 
available, but it is rarely used where the sustainability of the 
territory, in particular the issue of energy consumption in 
buildings, is concerned. We propose to exploit these data, in 
combination 
with 
thermal 
simulations 
and 
energy 
performance indicators, to draw a regional cadastre of energy 
consumption in suburban areas and to test the impact of 
regional strategies applied to the whole suburban building 
stock. Note that the definition and the building type 
classification presented in this paper can also be adapted to 
urban and rural areas to cover the whole regional territory. 
In Section 2, the paper presents a morphological 
definition of urban sprawl adapted to thermal studies. The 
suburban building stock referred to by this definition is then 
classified into representative categories of buildings and 
neighborhoods (Section 3). This typological approach has 
already been used in the literature and proved to be of 
interest [2][11][16][17]. Two applications are proposed in 
Section 4 to highlight the usefulness of this approach: a 
calculation of the energy consumption of the whole suburban 
area of the Walloon region and a comparison of three 
renovation strategies at a regional scale. Our main findings 
and the reproducibility of this approach are discussed in 
Section 5. 
II. 
A MORPHOLOGICAL DEFINITION OF URBAN SPRAWL 
In this section, the existing classifications commonly 
used in Belgium are presented together with their limitations 
as far as morphological studies are concerned. Developed on 
this basis, our classification of urban types is presented and 
compared with existing ones and with an empirical survey. 
A. The existing classifications 
Based on qualitative and quantitative data, Van der 
Haegen and Van Hecke’s urban type classification [18][19] 
(Figure 1) assigns the 262 Walloon municipalities (589 in 
Belgium) to four categories based on the level of facilities 
provided and on residents’ locations with respect to work, 
shopping and services. This classification follows the same 
philosophy as the UK’s OPCP and the ECOTEC’s urban 
categories. The “operational agglomeration” is based on the 
morphological agglomeration. The “suburbs” are the first 
suburban area of a city. The density of population remains 
less than 500 inhabitants per square kilometer. Areas located 
further from the city, while keeping strong relationships with 
it (namely through home-to-work commutes), constitute the 
“alternating migrants area,” whereas the remaining areas are 
grouped under the “other areas” term. This category thus 
comprises not only rural and suburban districts but also 
secondary cities and municipalities located outside the 
influence of the main agglomerations. Although urban 
sprawl is particularly linked to the “suburbs” and the 
“alternating migrants areas” [20], low-density suburban 
neighborhoods are found in the four urban categories 
because the boundaries of the urban types are adapted to 
administrative borders, as observed in Figure 2.  
The Belgian urban settlements zoning (Figure 3) is a 
finer representation [21]. The size of an urban settlement 
(defined as groups of population living in neighborhood 
buildings) varies from a census block (i.e., a neighborhood in 
urban areas and a village in rural areas with more than 150 
inhabitants) to an aggregation of several census blocks 
separated by less than 100 meters. Updated in 2001 [22], this 
classification more adequately fulfills our purpose as it 
embraces morphologically contiguous urbanized areas and 
crosses over municipalities’ boundaries. However, rural and 
suburban areas are not differentiated. 
 
 
Figure 1. Van der Haegen and Van Hecke’s urban type classification. 
“Operational agglomerations” are black; “suburbs” are dark blue, dark 
yellow and dark green; “alternating migrants areas” are light blue and light 
green and “other areas” are white. 
 
Figure 2. Very different types of districts are found inside each urban type 
highlighted in Van der Haegen and Van Hecke’s classification. Example of 
a very dense district and a suburban district located in the “operational 
agglomeration” (municipality of Liège).  
 
Figure 3. The Belgian urban settlements zoning (in red). 
 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

B. Drawing a morphological urban type classification 
Although the two previous classifications are often used 
in national and regional research dealing with population and 
socio-economic issues, they do not seem adapted to 
morphological studies and do not allow the clear 
identification of suburban areas. To propose a better 
definition, an extensive review of the literature dedicated to 
urban sprawl was performed and three main characteristics 
of this phenomenon were highlighted: (1) low density, (2)  
mono-functionality and (3) discontinuity with traditional 
urban cores. The first parameter in particular is closely 
linked to the morphology of buildings. 
To 
determine 
our 
morphological 
urban 
type 
classification, we used the following territorial data set at a 
disaggregated scale: 
• 
Cartography (1/10,000) of the buildings and plots of 
the Walloon region drawn by the regional 
administration in charge of cartography; 
• 
Cadastral database: buildings’ date of construction, 
type of buildings (i.e., housing, commercial). 
We calculated the density of dwellings (shops, schools 
and others buildings were eliminated) in each of the 9,730 
census blocks of the Walloon region of Belgium. These 
census blocks were then classified according to the value of 
this index. The frequency distribution was divided into four 
parts, each containing a quarter of the population (Figure 4). 
The two central intervals (density in the range of 5 to 12 
dwellings per hectare) are identified as the suburban 
territory, as 52% of the building stock of Belgium is 
composed of detached and semi-detached houses. Census 
blocks presenting a dwelling density higher than 12 
dwellings per hectare are identified as “urban districts”, and 
those with a density lower than 5 dwellings per hectare are 
considered to be “rural districts”. Figures 5, 6 and 7 present 
the census blocks associated with each type. This approach 
crosses over municipalities’ boundaries and distinguishes 
three urban types based on morphological criteria. Note that 
in the rest of the paper, we will only consider the suburban 
territory (Figure 6). However, the developments presented 
below are also easily applicable to urban and rural areas. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. The frequency distribution of the density of the 9,730 census 
blocks. Quartiles are used to determine the urban area (density > 12 
dwellings per hectare), the suburban area (5 dw/ha < density < 12 dw/ha) 
and the rural area (density < 5 dw/ha). 
 
 
Figure 5. The urban area: districts presenting a built density higher than 12 
dwellings per hectare. 
 
 
Figure 6. The suburban area: districts presenting a built density in the range 
of 5 to 12 dwellings per hectare. 
 
 
Figure 7. The rural area: districts presenting a built density lower than 5 
dwellings per hectare (including unbuilt census blocks). 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

C. Comparison of our classification with existing ones 
The main assumption that guided the definition of our 
classification is that suburban districts are spread out over 
the whole territory, as observed in Figure 6. This definition 
thus resolves the issue highlighted in Section 2 and 
overcomes 
the 
two 
disadvantages 
of 
the 
existing 
classifications as far as morphologic research is concerned. 
Note that our definition of the urban areas corresponds fairly 
well to the urban settlements zoning. In addition, we are able 
to differentiate suburban and rural areas. 
The number of suburban districts in each municipality 
was then calculated and is presented in Figure 8 to highlight 
the parts of the territory where urban sprawl is common. This 
confirms that central municipalities (in particular the 
municipality of Namur in the center of the regional territory) 
may also contain a huge number of suburban low-density 
districts and that classification based on municipalities’ 
boundaries is not adapted to research dealing with the 
morphology of the urban form. The north part of the 
Walloon region (the Walloon Brabant, in the influence area 
of the metropolitan area of Brussels) is particularly 
concerned with urban sprawl. To a lesser extent, suburban 
districts are also located in the southern, less densely 
populated part of the region, and particularly in the extreme 
south under the influence of the metropolitan area of 
Luxembourg.  
 
 
Figure 8. The number of suburban districts (built density in the range of 5 
to 12 dwellings per hectare) per municipality. 
D. Comparison of our classification with a sample of 
inhabitants 
To test the relevance of the definition of urban sprawl in 
our urban type classification, a survey was conducted 
amongst a sample of 480 people working at the University of 
Liège [23]. These people were asked, amongst other 
questions dealing with urban sprawl and their quality of life, 
to give their address and to specify in which area they live 
(with a choice available between urban, suburban or rural 
districts) without any former indications. Their responses 
were encoded in a GIS and compared with our classification 
based on the built density. The results are quite good, as the 
majority of the answers given by the sample of people 
corresponded to our classification. Only 2.7% of respondents 
chose “suburban area” instead of “urban area”, 1.9% 
answered “suburban area” instead of “rural area” and 6.0% 
“rural area” instead of “suburban area”. This last result can 
be explained by the large dispersion of suburban districts 
within the territory; several people chose “rural area” 
because of a huge distance to the city center. Amongst the 
criteria given by the respondents to define urban sprawl and 
justify their choice, low-density, a large detached house with 
a garden located in a green environment, a quiet environment 
and the distance to city centers were most often cited. 
III. 
THE TYPOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION 
Finally, we studied a random selection of 300 houses 
amongst the 702,000 suburban buildings identified by our 
definition (Figure 6). We extracted, for each one, the 
following data: the type of neighborhood in which the house 
is located, the dimensions, the number of levels, the type of 
house (detached, semi-detached and terraced) and the 
dimensions of the plot on which the house is built. 
The neighborhood classification only takes into account 
the shape of the neighborhood, as our study deals with 
morphological criteria. The neighborhood classification 
assigns the 300 samples to four main categories (Figure 9). 
The linear district is composed of houses located on both 
sides of a road linking former villages or towns. This type 
represents 21% of the suburban building stock. The semi-
detached district (8%) consists of detached and semi-
detached houses. The “plot” district (20%) comes from the 
division by a private developer of a large site into individual 
plots and internal roads. The mixed district (30%) is more 
heterogeneous and is made up of individual houses together 
with older types of buildings (farms, old houses, etc.). A 
“composite” type is added to classify suburban blocks 
consisting of two different types of structures (9%). 12% of 
our sample does not correspond to any of these types. We 
considered these biases as acceptable in a study dealing with 
the whole suburban building stock of a region. 
 
 
Figure 9. Illustrations of the four suburban blocks: 1. The linear block; 2. 
The semi-detached block; 3. The plot block; 4. The mixed block. 
Analyses were then performed to identify the main 
characteristics of the suburban building stock. A large 
amount of the suburban building stock is composed of 
houses with a surface area in the range of 101 to 150 m². The 
mean surface area of the suburban building stock is 120 m² 
(standard deviation=40). The linear type is particularly made 
up of houses with a surface area in the range of 101 to 150 
m². Large houses are also mainly found in plot districts, 
whereas semi-detached districts are mainly made up of 
buildings with a surface area less than 100 m². The mixed 
type is characterized by a wider distribution among the four 
classes, confirming the definition of this type, which is based 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

on the diversity of the type and surfaces of buildings 
encountered. Buildings larger than 200 m² are exclusively 
found in the plot (very large houses on very large plots built 
by rich households) and mixed (old farms) types of districts. 
The size of the plots is not linked to the size of the houses as 
a R² of only 0.2 has been calculated.  
The “before 1930” and “between 1961 and 1980” classes 
of ages are well represented, which highlights different 
phenomena. First of all, the existing suburban building stock 
is old, and the renovation of the building stock is particularly 
low. Secondly, urban sprawl was particularly popular from 
the “golden sixties” until the eighties. After that, the 
phenomenon was still present but slowed down. Buildings 
built before 1930 are mainly located in mixed districts 
(64.8%), whereas those built after 1960 are mainly found in 
plot and, to a lesser extent, linear districts. Semi-detached 
districts are represented in each class of age of construction, 
which tends to prove that these kinds of suburban forms 
(mainly social housing built by public developers) are 
developed in all time periods. 
TABLE I.  
SURFACE AREA OF THE SUBURBAN BUILDING STOCK 
Partition by age class 
50-100 m² 
101-150 m² 
150-200 m² 
> 200 m² 
31.5% 
4.5% 
15.0% 
6.0% 
TABLE II.  
AGE OF THE SUBURBAN BUILDING STOCK 
Partition by age class 
Before 1930 
1931-1960 
1961-1980 
1981-1996 
After 1996 
38.3% 
14.3% 
30.0% 
10.4% 
7.0% 
 
We finally combined the surface area of the house, the 
age of construction and the type of district to highlight the 
most common combinations:  
• 
101-150 m² houses built before 1930 in a mixed 
district (11.9% of the suburban building stock). 
• 
101-150 m² houses built between 1961 and 1980 in a 
linear district (6.9%).  
• 
50-100 m² houses built before 1930 in a mixed 
district (5.1%). 
• 
101-150 m² houses built between 1961 and 1980 in a 
plot district (5.0%).  
• 
101-150 m² houses built between 1961 and 1980 in a 
plot district (5.0%). 
IV. 
APPLICATION: ENERGY MODELING 
In this section, the energy modeling of existing building 
stock based on the previous classification of urban types is 
first presented. The suburban type classification is then used 
to compare three renovation strategies at a regional scale. 
A. Energy modeling of the existing building stock 
A representative block and a representative building of 
each type highlighted in the classifications were selected to 
model the energy use of the whole suburban territory of the 
Walloon region of Belgium. Based on the evolution of 
regional policies concerning building energy performance 
and the evolution of construction techniques, the five age 
categories (pre-1930, 1931-1960, 1961-1980, 1981-1996 and 
1996-2008) were used to approximate a mean thermal 
conductivity of external façades from a “standard” 
composition of façades and from glazing attributes for the 
building envelope in each category. Detailed values (glazing 
and wall heat transfer coefficients and composition) are 
available in [11]. Dynamic thermal simulation software was 
then used to model each type of building and to calculate 
their energy requirements for heating (in kWh/m².year). 
The annual energy requirement for heating the whole 
suburban building stock was calculated according to the 
partition of each type of building in the whole suburban area 
of the Walloon region. The total annual energy requirement 
is equal to 19,914 GWh. The mean consumption for heating 
is equal to 232.8 kWh/m².year.  
A clear difference is observed between the heating 
energy requirements of houses and neighborhoods built 
before and after the first thermal regulations adopted in the 
Walloon region. Houses built after the first regulations 
consume 130 kWh/m² or less annually, whereas those built 
before 1980, especially dispersed houses, consume from 235 
to 401 kWh/m² annually. For semi-detached and terraced 
houses, the annual energy consumption falls between 84 and 
319 kWh/m² depending on the age of the building. For 
buildings of the same age, semi-detached and terraced 
houses consume 14.6% to 23.6% less energy than detached 
houses, highlighting the effect of connectivity on the energy 
performance of buildings. 
B. The impact of renovation strategies 
Figure 10 presents the potential energy savings 
associated with three renovation strategies dealing with 
energy efficiency in comparison with the existing situation 
(EX as calculated in the previous section). We determined 
the potential energy savings associated with a light upgrade 
(insulation in the roof and new high-performance glazing) of 
50% of the pre-1981 building stock (SC 1). This policy could 
reduce energy consumption of the whole suburban building 
stock by 10.8%. Adopting a more ambitious policy 
(improvement of the insulation of the whole building 
envelope) targeted at the 1961-1980 building stock (SC 2) is 
more interesting as far as energy savings are concerned.  
 
Figure 10. Potential energy savings (in kWh/m².year) related to three 
renovation strategies dealing with the improvement of energy efficiency in 
the existing suburban building stock. 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

In fact, as cavity walls became widely used after 1960, 
these houses are particularly well adapted to new insulation 
techniques used to retrofit existing walls (insulation is blown 
into the cavity), and insulating the roofs, the slabs and 
replacing glazing is fairly easy to achieve. This approach 
could reduce energy consumption of the whole suburban 
building stock by 26.5%. In the last scenario (SC 3), we 
assumed that the whole suburban building stock was 
retrofitted to fit actual standards for new buildings. The 
resulting energy savings are huge (62.6%). However, 
retrofitting the whole building stock is a very difficult target 
to reach even if households could significantly reduce their 
energy consumption. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Based on cadastral and territorial data, we developed a 
morphological definition of the Walloon suburban territory 
and a typological classification of suburban districts and 
residential buildings. The proposed definition allowed us to 
question the relevance of the existing classification of urban 
types and to prove the validity of a finer representation, 
especially as far as morphological studies are concerned. 
Thermal simulations were thus performed on a representative 
block / building of each type highlighted in the classification 
to estimate the energy consumption of the whole suburban 
building stock at a regional scale. The classification was then 
used to assess the impact of two renovation strategies and to 
compare their value as far as energy savings are concerned. 
The paper has thus highlighted the benefits of using GIS 
tools for territorial management and thermal topics. The 
combination of thermal simulations with territorial data, in 
particular, is relevant and useful to effectively address the 
issues related to energy efficiency in the building sector at a 
territorial scale. The same exercise will now be used for the 
urban and rural parts of the territory to address the whole 
regional building stock and to highlight the urban blocks that 
are a priority for retrofitting or for increased density. Finally, 
the method is sufficiently general, and the data used in 
Belgium are widely available in other regions, which makes 
the definition and the suburban type classification easily 
reproducible in other territories. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is funded by the Walloon region of 
Belgium (DG04, Department of Energy and Sustainable 
Building) in the framework of the “Suburban Areas Favoring 
Energy efficiency” project (SAFE). 
The research team thanks Charlotte Pierson, student at 
the University of Liège, and Véronique Wallemacq, 
researcher, for their contributions to this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] EEA, “Urban sprawl in Europe. The ignored challenge,” 
Report EEA l 0/2006, European Environment Agency, 2006. 
[2] M. Maïzia, C. Sèze, S. Berge, J. Teller, S. Reiter, and R. 
Ménard, “Energy requirements of characteristic urban 
blocks,” Proc. CISBAT 2009 Int. Scientific Conf. on 
Renewables in a Changing Climate: From Nano to Urban 
scale, 2009, pp. 439-44. 
[3] P. Newman and J.R. Kenworthy, “Cities and Automobile 
Dependence: A sourcebook,” Aldershot: Gower Publishing 
Co, 1989. 
[4] P. Newman and J.R. Kenworthy, “Sustainability and Cities: 
overcoming automobile dependence,” Washington DC: Island 
Press, 1999. 
[5] K. Steemers, “Energy and the city: density, buildings and 
transport,”. Energy and Buildings, vol. 35(1), 2003, pp. 3-14. 
[6] K. S. Nesamani, “Estimation of automobile emissions and 
control strategies in India," Science of the Total Environment, 
vol. 408, 2010, pp. 1800-11. 
[7] A. N. R. da Silva, G.C.F. Costa, and N.C.M. Brondino, 
“Urban sprawl and energy use for transportation in the largest 
Brazilian cities,” Energy for Sustainable Development, 
vol.11(3), 2007, pp. 44-50. 
[8] W. Yaping and Z. Min, “Urban spill over vs. local urban 
sprawl: Entangling land-use regulations in the urban growth 
of China’s megacities,” Land Use Policy, vol. 26, 2009, pp. 
1031-45. 
[9] A. F. Marique and S. Reiter, “A method to assess global 
energy requirements of suburban areas at the neighborhood 
scale,” Proc. 7th International Conference on Indoor Air 
Quality, Ventilation and Energy Conservation in buildings 
(IAQVEC 2010), 2010. 
[10] A. F. Marique and S. Reiter, “A Method to Evaluate the 
Energy 
Consumption 
of 
Suburban 
Neighbourhoods,” 
HVAC&R Research, in press. 
[11] G. Verbeek and H. Hens, “Energy savings in retrofitted 
dwellings: economically viable?,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 
37, 2005, pp. 747-754. 
[12] CEC, “Green Paper on Energy Efficiency or Doing More 
With Less,” Report CEC COM(2005) 265, Commission of the 
European Communities, Belgium, 2005. 
[13] EP, “Directive 2001/91/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 16 December 2002 on the energy performance 
of buildings,” Official Journal of the European Community, 
European Parliament and the Council, 2002. 
[14] E. Popovici and B. Peuportier, “Using life cycle assessment as 
decision support in the design of settlements,” Proc. 21th 
Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture (PLEA 
2004), 2004, pp. 1-6. 
[15] C. Ratti, N. Bakker, and K. Steemers. “Energy consumption 
and urban texture,” Energy and Buildings, vol.37(7), 2005, 
pp. 762-76. 
[16] P. J. Jones, S. Lannon, and J. Williams, “Modeling building 
energy use at urban scale,” Proc. of the 7th International 
IBSPA Conference, 2001, pp. 175-80. 
[17] E. Popovici, “Contribution to the Life Cycle Assessment of 
settlements,”. Ph.D. Thesis, Ecole des Mines de Paris, 2006. 
[18] H. Van der Haegen, E. Van Hecke, and G. Juchtmans, “Les 
regions urbaines belges en 1991,” Etudes statistiques de 
l’INS, vol. 104, 1996. 
[19] J. A. Sporck, H. Vand der Haegen, and M. Pattyns, 
“L’organisation spatiale de l’espace urbain,” La cité belge 
d’aujourd’hui, quel devenir?, 1985. 
[20] L. Brück, “La périurbanisation en Belgique,” SEGEFA, 2002. 
[21] H. Van der Haegen, M. Pattyn, and S. Rousseau, “Dispersion 
et relations de niveau élémentaire des noyaux d’habitat en 
Belgique: Situation en 1980,” Bulletin de Statistique, vol.67, 
1991. 
[22] E. Van Hecke, J. M. Halleux, J. M. Decroly, and B. Merenne-
Schoumaker, “Noyaux d’habitat et régions urbaines dans une 
Belgique urbanisée,” Monographie n°9. SPF Economie, 
P.M.E., Classes moyennes et Energie, 2009. 
[23] C. Pierson, “Approche sociologique de l’habitat périurbain,” 
Master thesis, University of Liège, unpublished. 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

