Index Keys Method for Analyses of Urban Public Spaces 
Methodological assumptions 
Małgorzata Hanzl 
Institute of Architecture and Town Planning 
Lodz University of Technology 
Lodz, Poland 
e-mail: mhanzl@p.lodz.pl 
 
Abstract— The paper proposes the index keys methodology of 
analysis of urban structures. Few hypotheses are formulated 
concerning the relation between the crowd of people 
representing a given culture and the urban settings, which 
constitute their habitus. The geometrical analyses of public 
spaces, including the examination of urban closures cross-
sections and urban silhouettes, draw upon the writings of 
Kazimierz Wejchert, widely recognised for his contribution to 
the theory of urbanism in Poland. Quantitative parameters 
describing the form of space are introduced, including: central 
angle, corrugation and regularity. Cultural aspects of given 
settings, as proved by the results of  preliminary descriptive 
analysis of the former Jewish district in Lodz, require 
developing methods of description of public spaces. 
Keywords-urban design; public spaces; urban morphology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
When looking for the relation between urban structures 
and the culture of space usage, there are three main issues, 
which should be considered: (1) physical features, including 
distribution, shape and size of forms defining the space, (2) 
the distribution and behaviour of the space’s users, which 
reflect a social order and (3) the flow of human movement, 
which finds its reflection in the sociometric layout of a given 
place. Flows are connected with movement/traffic and are 
related to space, following the definition by Yi Fu Tuan [31]. 
Concentrations enable contact and communication processes. 
They are static rather than dynamic, thus place related. Both 
types are closely interrelated, they inseparably interpenetrate 
each other. Whenever the human flow stops for a moment 
concentration occurs, though interrelations require more 
comfortable conditions to take place, among others: time and 
spatial arrangement. According to the theory formulated by 
Lynch [22], flows may be approached as paths and 
concentrations as nodes. Concentrations tend to a static form, 
while flows serve mainly as a means of getting to some 
destination. Taking into consideration mostly their static 
behaviour, the distribution of people in public spaces reflects 
social order. Cultural aspects of everyday space usage are 
reflected first of all by its internal organisation and 
arrangement. 
The paper is organised as follows: after the introduction, 
which points out at the anthropological understanding of 
situation and the definition of habitus, the main 
methodological assumptions are presented, with an emphasis 
on the explanation of index keys concept. Further the case 
study is discussed, which provides explanation for the 
development of methodology for detailed description of 
outdoor 
spaces. 
Section 
IV 
discusses 
analytical 
methodology, introducing several parameters intended for 
description of urban enclosures. Section V provides 
conclusions from the paper and presents further steps, which 
are to be taken in order to verify the presented methodology 
of analyses. 
A. Anthropological concept of situation 
In anthropology situation is defined as a theatre of human 
activities [24]. Goffman [10, p.18] refers to a situation as to 
“the full spatial environment anywhere within which an 
entering person becomes a member of the gathering that is 
(or does then become) present”. Anthropologists developed 
elaborated theory on ways in which a site is converted into a 
meaningful ‘place’, by inscribing human activities into the 
surroundings. The relationship between people and sites 
encompasses both: attaching meaning to space and 
“recognition 
and 
cultural 
elaboration 
of 
perceived 
properties of environments in mutually constituting ways 
through narrative and praxis” [20, p.14]. Schumacher [28] 
states that the role of architecture is to frame social 
communication [28, p.414]. Thomas, who introduced the 
concept of situation in the 1920s, defined it as a 
“constellation of the factors determining the behaviour” [30, 
p.8] after [28, p.420].  
B. The definition of habitus 
The morphological approach [23] refers the above 
concept to the urban structure introducing the notion of 
habitus. The set of identifiable cues, which may be qualified 
as culture-specific [25, pp.106-107], and referring to spaces, 
includes features like: “quality, size, shape, enclosing 
elements, paving, barriers, and links, etc.”, requires 
examination with regard to the distribution of human flows 
and concentrations and their intensities, and consequently 
occasions for contacts. Both Gehl [9] and Whyte [34] point 
at similar rules of use of outside spaces. The territorial 
distribution and exchange of nonverbal cues serves the 
communication purpose and usually certain semantics may 
be attributed to it [10]. The behaviour of a given human 
group in concentrations reflects its culture. The movement 
component tends to be more universal and less culture 
dependent, as Hillier and Hansen [18] claim. The thesis is 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

made that the rules, which govern the non-verbal 
communication component of the human group behaviour 
are the same ones, which govern the distribution of 
buildings. They represent the same culture of space usage. 
 
II. 
METHODOLOGICAL ASSUMPTIONS 
A proposal of the methodology for the analysis of public 
spaces is presented, based on the writings of Wejchert [32], 
widely recognised for his contribution to the theory of 
urbanism. Forgoing morphological descriptions of urban 
structures based on the analyses of plans, i.e., Conzenian 
school of urban morphology [33], and on the diachronic 
characteristics of constructions, i.e., Muratori’s tradition [2], 
do not allow for considerations of this kind. The actual, 
practice-based approach engages the definition of genius 
loci, notably in rehabilitation projects. The research tries to 
develop existing descriptions of urban spaces [8] by applying 
the anthropological approach as presented by Levi-Strauss 
[21] to the description of cities and urban structures, 
following and developing the methodology proposed, among 
others, by Rapoport [25, pp.106], who defined a 
comprehensive set of features allowing for drawing 
characteristics of physical structures, including the culture 
related ones. Hillier and Hansen [18, p.224] ponder on the 
method of investigating of encounters as morphic languages, 
concluding that the aim is to establish, how encounter 
systems acquire differential properties, which would have 
different manifestations in space. 
A. Theory of seeing – index keys concept 
Like in the paintings of Van Gogh, seeing is concentrated 
around few key points, which define, how a scene is 
perceived [29]. The analyses should provide observation of 
processes: flows and forces, and concentrate on their key 
points. Situations, which are the most important for the 
definition of cultural character, i.e., the moments of human 
interactions, particularly attract researchers’ attention [15] – 
they are static rather than dynamic. The methodology of key 
points, analogue to the anthropological method of making 
photographs by native observers, who are able to notice the 
clue activities important for their cultures and often 
unnoticeable for foreigners, allows for observation of 
socially meaningful activities, responsible for the formation 
of a cultural specific environment. 
The application of the ‘key points’ methodology assumes 
the choice of the most obvious perspectives when observing 
the environment. In the case of urban spaces, it means 
choosing these view axes, which provide cross-sections 
perpendicular to the main axe of a given path. The analyses 
of the cross-section and of the silhouettes may use, among 
others, the highly efficient methodology proposed by Gal & 
Doytsher [7], which allows to replace the Line of Sight 
(LOS) methodology of extracting silhouettes of groups of 
buildings. In the proposed methodology the simplest way to 
extract cross-sections and silhouettes is used, based on 
orthogonal projection. Although as Gestalt psychology 
proves in the perception of distant buildings the distances are 
shortened. Further methodology development should also 
take into consideration these processes as well as the way in 
which humans perceive environment, e.g., including 
perception of meaningful entities [12]. 
III. 
THE CASE STUDY 
The case study pertains to the former Jewish district in 
Lodz, in the 19th century, the district served as a habitat of 
the multiethnic society, in which Jews constituted a majority 
[16], [17]. These settings were commonly described as 
possessing a special ‘Jewish’ character. This notion is 
evoked by the form of public spaces, different than in other 
parts of the city. The study refers mainly to the areas of the 
Old Town and of the central part of Nowe Bałuty. An 
attempt has been made to define a certain set of features 
proper to the area, describing its morphological structure and 
referring mostly to the shape of public spaces, which is 
repeated in most Polish towns and neighbourhoods formerly 
populated by Jews [5]. The examination of the character of 
public spaces as they are perceived by observers, in the case 
of scapes, which do not exist in their original form, is based 
mainly on the analysis of archival photographs. The subject 
of analysis is first the shape of the public realm itself, in the 
2D plan view, the cross-section and street silhouette. 
Moreover the sequences of views in time and the character 
of buildings itself should be analysed.  
A. Shape of public spaces, sequential analysis - General 
features 
The essential features of the outdoor space, characteristic 
for the given area refer to the issues of scale and dimensions. 
The narrowness of streets and presence of numerous slight 
turns and directional differentiation, providing the notion of 
concavity, and therefore closing the perspective and assuring 
perceived and felt closure, are factors favouring direct 
physical interaction. Gehl [9] points at small dimensions of 
spaces as favourable for establishing relations. The 
irregularity of enclosures of streets, their broken line, the 
apparent lack of precise form, which enlarged the amount of 
border space, where people stop more willingly than in the 
centre of an open area, facilitates transactions, presentation 
of goods, etc. The abundance of such spaces enabled the 
location of numerous outdoor, commercial furniture. 
Attracting passers-by, was fostered by the presence of 
numerous small size elements in the outdoor space, 
providing 
sham 
shelter: 
stalls, 
kiosks, 
stands 
and 
presentations encouraging buying. Cullen [3, p.103] 
describes this phenomenon using the example of a street 
„cross”, the main function of which was to stop pedestrians. 
Whyte [34] defines the set of features of outdoor space 
fostering relations pointing at the location inside of the 
human flow. Gehl [9, p.150] underlines the role of the 
corrugation of the edge of space (through the presence of 
elements of urban equipment and the shape of walls 
themselves) as important for enhancing communal life.  
B. The ubiquity of commerce 
The basic character of the area of concern may be 
defined as the ‘ubiquity of commerce’. The space of 
commerce was not restricted to the main square, it was 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

present in the neighbouring streets and passages. Frequent 
protrusions of buildings, especially of commercial and 
service use (restaurants, etc) additionally influenced the 
presence of service in the public sphere, and thus improved 
the effectiveness of sale. Very rational management of space, 
lack of space without prescribed use, frequent overlapping 
and synergy of different uses of the same space completed 
the above picture. Jews often chose the settlement location in 
the direct proximity of commercial places. After settling, 
they usually redeveloped their environment introducing 
enhancements with regard to the requirements of commerce. 
C. Issues related to proxemics 
The proxemics approach, presented by Hall [15] and his 
successors, examines the relation between spatial patterns of 
space usage in different cultures and the material 
environment. The differences between morphological 
structures representing various cultures are particularly 
apparent in cities, which like Lodz had become a melting pot 
of many cultures. Hall [15] identifies direct relationships 
between interpersonal distances and other characteristics of 
individuals and communities and the way they shape their 
own physical environment. Hillier and Hanson [18, p.27] 
refer to the usage of space and the patterns of behaviour 
appropriate for different communities and ethnic groups as 
the determinants of the final shape of urban structures. 
According to Hillier [19] city is seen as a system of visual 
distances, strongly influenced by both perception and 
personal distances. 
In social groups, whose members are accustomed to 
residing in small spaces, social distances are usually smaller 
than in other groups. Assessment based on the descriptions 
of the crowd in literature or photos of the Ashkenazi Jewish 
population, which once used to live in Lodz, corresponds to 
that characteristic. The limited scale of outdoor spaces, 
narrowness of the passages and nooks, often even narrowed 
by the introduction of additional trade facilities, typical for 
most of former Jewish towns and districts, also fit into this 
profile. The analyses of crowd with the use of archival 
photographs, allow to distinguish apparent clusters of people, 
who grouped also when moving; thus the narrowness of 
sidewalks.  
D. Perception as a factor influencing the creation of space 
Strzemiński [29] pointed at the evolution of visual 
awareness along with the development of civilisation. Visual 
awareness was transformed together with the changes of 
socio-cultural settings. He noticed the result of economic and 
technical factors as well as the social structure proper to a 
given group of people, in the defined historical context. The 
notion of visual awareness, understood as the “cooperation 
of seeing and thinking” emphasises the role of cognitive 
absorption of perceived visual stimuli. Strzemiński [29] 
identifies two ways of development of visual awareness. In 
the rural cultures, it is the observation of the interior of an 
object, which finds its expression in the studies of nature. 
The second form was a silhouette vision, which developed 
from the primitive contour observation in economies based 
on hunting and breeding animals, that is in tribes accustomed 
to vast open spaces.  
The derivative of the silhouette vision was the 
perspective of simple parallel projection, and, in the further 
stage, the development of rhythm, including architectural 
rhythmisation, as a consequence of inclusion of the 
afterimage phenomena, natural for the perception processes 
taking place in vast open spaces. Another form of seeing, 
which was particularly apparent in communities, whose main 
occupation was commerce was seeing concentrated on ware 
attributes, with emphasis on the texture and weight of 
objects, usually devoid of larger perspective. The preserved 
iconography, 
mainly 
paintings 
by 
Jewish 
artists 
contemporary to the development of the ‘shtetl’ culture, 
confirms the assumption on their belonging to this group. 
The shape of urban settings analysed above also confirms the 
thesis about concentration on the content rather than on 
external appearance of activities and environment itself. 
Adorno [1, p.5] points at the role of artworks as medium 
reflecting the unconscious aspects of culture: „Artworks are 
afterimages of empirical life insofar as they help the latter to 
what is denied them outside their own sphere and thereby 
free it from that to which they are condemned by reified 
external experience.” The same refers to the urban settings, 
which perceived by a group of users answer their needs, 
including the aesthetic criteria. 
IV. 
THE ANALYTICAL METHODOLOGY 
A. Convex - definition 
Hillier and Hanson [18] defined a series of rules 
governing the spatial order of analysed settlements. They 
noticed that the definition of the basic spatial unit for 
analyses, which would be distinguishable in the geometrical 
way, is essential for further considerations. Referring to their 
theoretical apparatus such basic spatial unit, which may 
serve for description of public spaces, is a convex. A “fully 
convex fat space” is defined as “a part of a space, which 
represents the maximum extension of the point in the second 
dimension given the first dimension” [18, p.91]. In Hillier 
logic of space, the implicit assumption is made that all the 
cells, representing spaces, are similar units, both in size and 
in shape. It doesn’t describe the actual form of urban 
closures and the spatial edges are lacking. The critique 
concerns lack of geometrical description of buildings, which 
form urban settings, including their size, shape and 
distribution (e.g., [26]).  
Spaces, which are not defined spatially but by the 
presence of some other edges – like property borders, remain 
problematic. A more complete picture, which may serve to 
describe reality in a reliable way, requires introduction of the 
shape and size parameter(s) and multiplying them by three 
dimensions. Studies in human perception show a trend to 
generalise objects to wholes, if only the compounds are 
located close to each other, have similar attributes, may be 
described with the same contour line and their meaning, 
recognised from former experience, remains similar.  
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

B. Description of the form of space 
 
Figure 1.  Index points and cross-sections definition. I – geometrical 
central point, II – index key points, n – central angles for each cross-
sections, wn – widths of each unique part of wall 
The way in which an observer perceives space in the 
urban interior depends on the parameters of cross-section. 
Wejchert [32]. The basic features important for describing 
convex spaces are cross-section and walls silhouettes. The 
analysis of a wall silhouette allows for identification of 
required index points, which may further on serve for 
creation of cross-sections. Cross-sections may be created for 
any cue point of any unique physical form of objects 
surrounding the space change, i.e., the height and the shape 
of buildings.  
Each index point is referred by one cross-section, various 
cross-sections require association with distinguished index 
points. The starting point for each cross-section is located on 
the line, which is parallel to the wall and goes through the 
geometrical centre of the given convex; see Fig. 2. Cross-
sections are by definition perpendicular to the convex wall. 
In case of buildings or other constructions, which are set 
back from the convex edge and not perpendicular to it, the 
middle point of a building/construction is the location of an 
index point. Similar situation occurs in the case of buildings, 
which are located behind other buildings but their height 
exceeds  the height of the front building. 
The method may also serve for the description of some 
concavity closures. Yet, as their perception as one spatial 
unit is more the result of tradition than of their geometrical 
attributes, these shapes should be defined manually, i.e., 
divided into two or more basic convexes and then 
reconsidered as one whole. An example of a concavity space 
widely recognised as single urban interior is the L-shaped 
Piazza della Signoria in Florence. 
C. Central angle 
One of the most important parameters describing cross-
sections is the central angle. The central angle is an angle 
between a horizontal plane parallel to the floor at the height 
of 1,5m (the medium level of sight for humans) and a line 
going through the highest point of the building defining the 
closure in a given index point. The point belongs both to the 
silhouette line and to the cross-section. 
Wejchert [32] provides general rules for classification of 
closures basing on the description of heritage sites which are 
widely recognised as beautiful for their great proportions. 
The central angle values in most of the discussed squares 
range from 25° to 30°, e.g., Piazza Saint Marco in Venice - 
28° to 30°, Old Market in Warsaw - 30°. The angle smaller 
than 10° refers to closures, which are feebly read in space. 
Either the plan dimensions are too vast or the vertical 
dimension is not adequate to provide the proper definition of 
space.  
The closures of central angle parameter higher than 60° 
rarely serve as public piazzas. An important feature for their 
evaluation are lighting conditions proper for a given climate. 
The general attitude towards more densely built spaces has 
changed recently, their values being widely recognised after 
a break of Modernism. The former pejorative connotation of 
terms such as “canyon” or “well” [32] lost their previous 
importance along with common scarcity of defined spaces 
and dispersion of development. The central angle analysis is 
made for each of the cross-sections created at each of the 
index-points of the distinguished walls, and then combined 
for the walls forming the convexes, using the following 
formula (1), where 1, 2, 3, n are values of central angles 
of each of the defined cross-sections, n is the number of 
index points for each wall, wn is the width of a piece of a 
wall represented by a given index point and w is the length 
of the whole wall. 














w
w
w
w
w
w
w
w
n
n
n
n





2
2
1
1

D. Corrugation and size 
The urban spaces must be also measured using metric 
values. Humans, as Gehl asserts in the interview in a 
documentary film ‘Urbanized’ by Gary Hustwit “remain a 
small walking animal” and require spaces of human scale. 
The spaces, which are too large seam undefined. Gehl 
recognises a distance of 100m as a maximum, which allows 
the observer for proper reception of the environment. The 
assumed research methodology refers to the width of half of 
the closure, thus the distance shouldn’t exceed 50m. The 
actual dimensions of physical spaces reflect also the 
requirements defined by proxemics. The differences in 
personal distances influence both the perception of space and 
its production [13], [15] which means that we may assume 
that the size of space is perceived and designed differently by 
people of various cultural background. Continuing this 
thread the analysis of dimensions of public spaces proves 
that they remain culture specific.  
The definition of space may be either precise or haze. In 
the first case walls form clearly cut edges, in the second one 
buildings and other objects are scattered, forming a kind of 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

fuzzy boundary. As Wejchert [32] argues, the sight tends 
towards forms, which are ‘strong’ – which means: clearly 
defined - and towards layouts, which are concise. Parts or 
whole of the observed constructions may be hidden behind 
other objects, which occurs both in the vertical as in the 
horizontal plane. In case of breaks in the structure - i.e., 
openings in the walls, the closest object closing the 
perspective visible in the silhouette view is taken into 
consideration. Similarly a higher building located in the 
background should be taken into account as, constituting a 
part of a silhouette, it influences the actual central angle 
parameter. The index points, where there are no visible 
constructions are described with central angle value 0.  
In a situation, where buildings are set back from the line 
of frontages, the method allows for the description of an 
angle in the way similar to other cases. Variations of 
buildings’ set back are another parameter important for the 
definition of the space character. The line of frontages may 
be located in the edge of a given convex or set back, the set 
back may be regular or irregular, any of these attributes 
influence the perception of the space (Fig. 2). 
 
Figure 2.  Corrugation of the wall, an- set back or behind of a part of a 
wall, d – a distance of the wall from the central point of the cross-section. 
Corrugation may be defined using the formula (2), where 
  symbolises corrugation value of the wall and   - set 
back of a single part of the wall. The possibilities of 
comparison of different situations are enabled thanks to  the 
normalisation of set back values as in the formula (3), where 
a represents the set back in metric units and d – the distance 
of the wall from the central point of the cross-section. In case 
of some elements, set behind the lines of frontages shift 
should be provided as positive numbers. 
 

n
  n





d
an
 n 


E. Distribution of index points 
Further analyses include the distribution of index points, 
which reflects the distribution of buildings – each point 
belongs to a single building and the points are located in the 
middle of the facade. Such an analysis allows for easy 
detection of rhythms, repetitions, symmetries, axial layouts, 
etc. Distribution of index points may be described as 
clustered, spaced or scattered. It should be noticed that 
similar words are applied to the characteristics of the groups 
of people forming a crowd [6]. 
When analysing the index points distribution the 
parameter of regularity may be defined referring to an ideal 
pattern, which for each case would mean equal distribution 
of the number of points defined for a given wall (Fig 3). Any 
shift from the point resulting from an equal division should 
be measured and normalised by the width of the wall 
represented by each index point. The sum of all shifts 
divided by the number of index points describes the value of 
regularity for each wall. The regularity of the whole closure 
is described by the average value. The regularity may be 
described with the use of the formula (4), where  is the 
regularity parameter, r represents a single shift, w – width of 
a piece of a wall represented by a given index point and n is 
the number of index points for a given wall (5). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Regularity of the wall – method of description. 

n
  n





n
n
n
w
 r



V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
The challenge defined by Hall [14, p.55] that in a 
globalising world man must find out how “basic cultural 
systems such as time and space are used to organise 
behaviour” starts to influence contemporary urban design 
thought as numerous studies show [28]. The thread of 
cultural studies imports viable content to the proposal of 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

ontology for urban design, which is being developed e.g., by 
Duarte et al. [4]. The requirement to define the methodology 
of description of public space character has been recognised. 
The studies of urban morphology go through a period of 
intensive revival after a break associated with the activities 
of modernists [27] and attract the attention of numerous 
researchers all over the world, as Gauthier and Gilliland [8] 
describe in their comprehensive résumé.  
An extensive set of culture dependent features was 
defined by Rapoport [25]. The current study provides 
assumptions to the quantitative description of public spaces 
basing on the theory by Wejchert [32]. The concept of index 
points is introduced which enables examination of physical 
form of urban settings with the use of geometrical 
description. Basic values are defined, including the 
parameters of central angle, regularity and corrugation of the 
walls of the closure. Further development of the current 
theory is envisaged, including different approaches to the 
analyses of urban silhouettes and cross-sections, as well as 
its verification for the description of the assumed case study. 
The current research is an ongoing one. The further steps 
include validation of the proposed methodology in the 
experimental way and comparison of various urban 
environments. This may help to understand the diachronic 
aspects of urban development. The first step assumes 
exploratory modeling of various urban environments with 
the use of available software, including: (1) Google 
SketchUp; (2) CityEngine; (3) Rhino and comparison of 
results with the two-dimensional analysis explained hitherto. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. W. Adorno, Aesthetic Theory. London, New York: 
Continuum International Publishing Group, 2011. 
[2] G. Cataldi, G. L. Maffei, and P. Vaccaro, “Saverio Muratori 
and the Italian school of planning typology,” Urban 
Morphology, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 3–12, 2002. 
[3] G. Cullen, The Concise Townscape. Oxford: Elsevier 
Architectural Press, 2008. 
[4] J. P. Duarte, N. Montenegro, and J. N. Beirão, “Public Space 
Patterns Towards a CIM standard for urban public space,” in 
Respecting Fragile Places, Proceedings of the 29th 
Conference on Education in Computer Aided Architectural 
Design in Europe, 2011, pp. 79–85. 
[5] R. Dylewski, “Lubuski Orient,” Scriptores, vol. 2, 2003. 
[6] N. Fridman and G. A. Kaminka, “Towards a Cognitive Model 
of Crowd Behavior Based on Social Comparison Theory,” 
2007. 
[7] O. Gal and Y. Doytsher, “Fast and Accurate Visibility 
Computation 
in 
a 
3D 
Urban 
Environment,” 
in 
GEOProcessing 2012: The Fourth International Conference 
on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, 
and Services, 2012, no. c, pp. 105–110. 
[8] P. Gauthier and J. Gilliland, “Mapping urban morphology : a 
classification scheme for interpreting contributions to the 
study of urban form,” Urban Morphology, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 
41–50, 2006. 
[9] J. Gehl, Life Between Buildings, Using Public Space. 
Kopenhagen: The Danish Architectural Press, 2001. 
[10] E. Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, 
Monograph. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh, Social 
Science Research Centre, 1959. 
[11] E. Goffman, Behavior in Public Places, Notes on the Social 
Organization of Gatherings. New York: The Free Press, 1966. 
[12] S. Guberman, V. V. Maximov, and A. Pashintsev, “Gestalt 
and Image Understanding,” Gestalt Theory, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 
143–166, 2012. 
[13] E. T. Hall, Hidden Dimension. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 
1966. 
[14] E. T. Hall, Beyond Culture. New York: Anchor Books, 1989. 
[15] E. T. Hall, “Proxemics,” in The Anthropology of Space and 
Place, Locating Culture, S. M. Low and D. L. Lawrence-
Zuniga, Eds. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2009, pp. 51–73. 
[16] M. Hanzl, “Urban Structure as a Repository of Social Content 
– the Case Study of the Lodz ‘Jewish District’,” in REAL 
CORP Proceedings/Tagungsband, 2012. 
[17] M. Hanzl, “W poszukiwaniu śladów dawnej dzielnicy 
żydowskiej w Łodzi,” Kultura Enter, vol. 38, no. 9, vol. 40, 
no. 11, 2011. 
[18] B. Hillier and J. Hanson, The Social Logic of Space, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984 
[19] B. Hillier, “The genetic code for cities – is it simpler than we 
thought?,” in Complexity Theories of Cities have come of Age, 
TU Delft, 2009, no. September. 
[20] D. L. Lawrence and S. M. Low, “Locating Culture,” in The 
antropology of Space and Place, Locating Culture, S. M. Low 
and D. L. Lawrence-Zuniga, Eds. Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishing, 2009, pp. 1–47. 
[21] C. 
Levi-Strauss, 
Antropologia 
strukturalna. 
Warsaw: 
Wydawnictwo Aletheia, 2009. 
[22] K. Lynch, The Image of the City. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 
1960. 
[23] P. Panerai, J. Ch. Depaule, and M. Demorgon, Analyse 
urbaine, Marseille: Édition Parenthèses, 2009 
[24] R. S. Perinbanayagam, “The Definition of the Situation: An 
Analysis of the Ethnomethodological and Dramaturgical 
View,” The Sociological Quarterly, vol. 15, pp. 521–541, 
1974. 
[25] A. Rapoport, The Meaning of the Built Environment. A 
Nonverbal 
Communication 
Approach. 
Tuscon: 
The 
University of Arizona Press, 1990. 
[26] C. Ratti, “Space syntax: some inconsistencies,” Environment 
and Planning B: Planning and Design, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 
487–499, 2004. 
[27] J. Rykwert, The Idea of a Town, The Anthropology of Urban 
Form in Rome, Italy and the Ancient World. Cambridge, 
London: The MIT Press, 1989. 
[28] P. Schumacher, The Autopoiesis of Architecture A New 
Framework for Architecture, vol. 1. Great Britain: A John 
Wiley and Sons, Ltd, Publication, 2011. 
[29] W. Strzemiński, Teoria Widzenia. Kraków: Wydawnictwo 
Literackie, 1974. 
[30] W. I. Thomas, Primitive Behavior: An Introducton to the 
Social Sciences. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1937. 
[31] Y.-F. Tuan, Space and Place, The Perspective of Experience. 
Minneapolis, London: University of Minnesota Press, 1977. 
[32] K. Wejchert, Elementy kompozycji urbanistycznej. Warszawa: 
Wydawnictwo Arkady, 1984. 
[33] J. W. R. Whitehead and P. J. Larkham, Eds., Urban 
Landscapes, International Perspectives. London: Routledge, 
2000. 
[34] W. Whyte, The Social Life of Small Urban Places. New York: 
Project 
for 
Public 
Spaces, 
2009.
 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

