Understanding Geographic Routing in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks
Reinaldo Bezerra Braga
Joseph Fourier University (UJF)
Grenoble Informatics Laboratory (LIG)
STEAMER Team
braga@imag.fr
Herv´e Martin
Joseph Fourier University (UJF)
Grenoble Informatics Laboratory (LIG)
STEAMER Team
herve.martin@imag.fr
Abstract—Geographic routing in Vehicular Ad hoc Networks
(VANETs) has recently received considerable attention. Devel-
oping multi-hop communication in VANETs is a challenging
problem due to the rapidly changing topology and network dis-
connections. These problems result in failures or inefﬁciency in
traditional routing protocols used in Mobile Ad hoc Networks
(MANETs). With the widespread adoption of Global Position
System (GPS) and the progress on self-conﬁguring localization
mechanisms, geographic routing protocols offer promising
solutions for message delivery. In this paper, we present an
overview of geographic routing strategies in vehicular ad hoc
networks. In addition, we introduce the main challenges of
using geographic routing protocols in VANETs from different
perspectives and discuss some directions of future research on
this ﬁeld.
Keywords-Geographic Routing Protocols; Geographic In-
formation Systems; Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks
I. INTRODUCTION
Mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) are self-conﬁguring
and self-organizing multi-hop wireless networks, composed
by a set of mobile nodes that move around the network
and cooperate in transmitting packets among the nodes. A
MANET performs efﬁcient and robust procedures by provid-
ing routing functionalities for mobile nodes. For instance,
a unicast routing creates a multi-hop forwarding path for
a pair of source and destination nodes beyond the direct
wireless communication range. In addition, routing protocols
maintain connectivity if the links on the paths break due to
some problem, such as radio propagation, node movement,
or wireless interference.
In MANETs, the velocity of a mobile node is probably
equal to that of a walking person. If mobile nodes are
vehicles, these networks are called Vehicular Ad Hoc Net-
works (VANETs). Compared with MANETs, the velocity
of vehicles in VANETs is much higher since vehicles move
faster than walking persons [1]. The main motivation to
study routing protocols in VANETs is related to the expan-
sion of data exchange among vehicles in order to provide
robust applications for Intelligent Transportation Systems
(ITS). VANET applications can include on-board active
safety systems, providing communications among nearby
vehicles (V2V) and between vehicles and the roadside
infrastructure (V2I). However, several challenges have been
identiﬁed to adopt VANET utilization on a large scale.
The challenges are usually associated with the high node
mobility, dynamic scenarios and the scalability considering
the number of nodes. Therefore, it is important to develop
a robust routing protocol to provide an efﬁcient communic-
ation among nodes.
Currently, there are mainly two types of routing protocols
in VANETs: topological routing and geographic routing. In
topological routing, mobile nodes use topological informa-
tion to manage routing tables or search routes directly. In
geographic routing, each node knows its own position and
makes routing decisions based on the position of the destin-
ation and the positions of its local neighbors [2]. With the
widespread adoption of Global Position System (GPS) and
the progress on self-conﬁguring localization mechanisms,
geographic routing in VANET has garnered signiﬁcant at-
tention to provide promising solutions for message delivery.
In spite of the existence of a considerable number of
papers about geographic routing in mobile ad hoc networks
(MANETs) [3] [5], we perceived a lack of a speciﬁc
overview involving the use of geographic routing protocols
in vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs). This paper then
presents an overview of general concepts of geographic rout-
ing in vehicular ad hoc networks. In addition, we introduce
the main challenges of using geographic routing protocols
in VANETs from different perspectives and discuss some
directions of future research on this ﬁeld. The remainder of
this paper is structured as follows. We ﬁrst introduce basic
concepts of geographic routing and present some general
goals for designing a routing protocol in VANETs. We then
present the geographic routing protocols available in the
literature, followed by a discussion about these protocols.
Finally, we indicate some possible directions of future
research and conclude the paper.
II. BASIC CONCEPTS OF GEOGRAPHIC ROUTING
Although the research on geographic routing being more
recent than topological routing, it has received a special
attention due to the signiﬁcant improvement that geographic
information can produce in routing performance. Geographic
routing can be deﬁned as a type of stateless routing, in
which it is not required that a node performs maintenance
17
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

functions for topological information beyond its one-hop
neighborhood [6]. Consequently, geographic routing is more
feasible for large-scale networks than topological routing,
which requires network-wide control message dissemination.
Besides that, geographic routing requires lower memory
usage on nodes by maintaining the information locally.
In general, geographic routing is composed of two main
components: a location service and a geographic forwarding
process. The location service determines the position of the
packet destination in order to improve the routing process
for creating the path with source node, using intermediary
nodes. Consequently, the position of the packet destination
can be added in the packet header so that intermediate hops
can know where the packet is destined for [7].
Likewise, geographic forwarding is performed in two
modes, namely, geographic greedy-forwarding mode and
void-handling mode1. The greedy-forwarding mode deﬁnes
a next-hop node for packet forwarding taking into account
the positions of the current node, its neighboring nodes, and
the destination node. A node can obtain its own position via
a GPS receiver or through other localization algorithms. The
positions of the neighboring nodes can be acquired either
from a centralized neighborhood table at the node or in a
distributed method via contention among neighboring nodes
[10]. At last, the position of the destination node is included
in the packet header sent by the source node. However, if
some intermediate node knows a more accurate position of
the destination, it is able to update the position in the packet
header before forwarding the packet.
Geographic routing protocols offer some advantages over
traditional ad hoc routing strategies. First of all, the geo-
graphic forwarding process allows the path adaptation by se-
lecting the best next hop, if an intermediate node, previously
used, becomes unavailable. Due to the absence of a routing
creation process, this path selection does not need a table
maintenance procedure other than intermediate neighbors
and the propagation of control packets. Other advantages are
related to the capacity to utilize weight additional metrics
in order to select the next hop and the route alteration
node by node taking into account the QoS related to the
neighbors, such as bandwidth and delay [11]. However, some
challenges in geographic routing are still open and need to
be investigated [12].
• The difﬁculty to control the overhead required for dis-
tributed location database service of geographic routing
protocols. Although location based addressing offers
a convenient, naturally occurring, hierarchical address
structure in terms of name, city, state and country, it
may lead to excessive control overhead in conditions
of high mobility.
• The irregular distribution of vehicles on urban centers
1Sometimes it is called the back up mode or recovery mode in the
literature [7] [9]
makes route selection more complex, e.g. the shortest
path protocols may produce more frequent network
disconnections.
• High signal interference in the communication due to
the presence of large buildings. Therefore, a building or
lack of radio coverage can result in voids in the physical
network topology. These voids can obstruct the packet
forwarding process at local minima, where the neigh-
bors close to the destination are hidden/unreachable,
resulting in a failure.
In summary, the process to compute the best routes to
send packets in Vehicular Ad hoc Networks (VANETs) is
a difﬁcult task due to high node mobility and the existence
of unstable wireless links. To improve the performance of
geographic routing protocols, several solutions were created.
We present an overview of the main proposed techniques for
geographic routing and appoint the main challenges of using
geographic routing in vehicular ad hoc networks.
III. GEOGRAPHIC ROUTING IN VEHICULAR AD HOC
NETWORKS
Ad hoc routing protocols have to provide routing proced-
ures to select the best routes in order to send packets from
a source node to a destination node, taking into account the
utilization of multiple hops. In the same way, geographic
routing protocols can use location services to improve these
procedures. Figure 1 shows a general architecture of geo-
graphic routing in VANETs.
Application Layer
Safety
Infotainment
Traffic Efficiency
Transport Layer
TCP, UDP, Other
Network Layer
Geographic Routing Protocol
Physical Layer
802.11p
802.11 a/b/g
Management
Information Connector
Figure 1.
Geographic routing architecture for vehicular ad hoc networks.
As we can observe, a general architecture of geographic
routing in VANETs is composed of four main layers and
two additional modules to treat the geographic information.
The architecture could be seen as a top-down approach. The
ﬁrst layer is named Application Layer, which is used to offer
VANET applications as interfaces between users and com-
munication layers. The Transport Layer can operate using
traditional transport protocols (i.e. TCP or UDP) as well as
speciﬁc transport protocol for VANETS (i.e. Car-2-X [13]).
In the Network Layer we ﬁnd the services and procedures
provided by the geographic routing protocol, such as the
location services and the forwarding procedures. The last
18
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

layer is the Physical Layer, which can be operational using
conventional wireless communication protocols (i.e. IEEE
802.11a/b/g) and VANET wireless communication protocols
(i.e. 802.11p [14]).
Besides that, additional modules are vertically added
in the left and right sides of the architecture, namely,
Information Connector and Management. The Information
Connector operates as a cross-layer approach to support
efﬁcient and structured information exchange across the
layers. Likewise, the Management module is able to manage
this information for improving robustness and reliability of
packet delivery in vehicular communication.
In spite of the existence of these layers and modules,
our focus in this paper is related to geographic routing
protocols in VANETs. Therefore, we continue presenting the
services and procedures contained in the Network Layer.
As previously explained, a geographic routing protocol is
generally consisted of a location service and a geographic
forwarding strategy, which are described in the Sections IV
and V.
IV. LOCATION SERVICE
Kasemann et al. [15] introduced an example of location
service, which was called Reactive Location Service (RLS).
When the source node executes the RLS, it sends a message
to discover the position of the destination, containing the
identiﬁcation of the destination node in addition to its
identiﬁcation and position. The message is ﬂooded in the
network until the destination is reached or the Time-To-Live
expires. At the moment that the message is received by the
destination, a response of localization is sent to the source
node, containing the position of destination node [16].
In [17], the authors presented the Vehicle Location Service
(VLS) protocol, a map-based vehicle location service for
city environments. In summary, the information in digital
maps is used to perform location service. They present a
new method of partitioning the network and constructing
distributed location servers.
Another strategy to put in practice the location service
can be provided by cellular and infrastructure networks,
where each node notiﬁes its position to a speciﬁc server
that stores location information for a set of nodes. In the
proposal presented in [18], each node initially communicates
to each other one of its current location. The server for a
node is deﬁned as the set of nodes located within a circle of
limited radius, centered at its initial position. Before sending
a location update message the node geocasts such a message
to its server. In other words, the location update message is
unicasted using geographic routing until it reaches one node
inside the server. This message is then disseminated inside
the server’s circle. When the destination node is found, the
source node sends out two search messages. The ﬁrst is
oriented to the last known position of the destination, and the
second is forwarded in direction of the destination’s server.
When the search message arrives at the destination or a node
within the server, the source is notiﬁed with the current
location [19]. Once the destination’s position is known,
the geographic routing protocol initiates the geographic
forwarding.
V. GEOGRAPHIC FORWARDING
As
previously
described,
geographic
forwarding
al-
gorithms work in two different modes: greedy mode and
void-handling mode. The principal difference leads in de-
termining the situation where it is convenient to use each.
The greedy forwarding mode is used whenever possible, and
the void-handling mode is strictly used when the greedy
forwarding mode cannot be applied.
A. Greedy Forwarding
Several greedy-forwarding algorithms perform different
optimization techniques to select the next-hop node closest
to the destination node. Face routing [20] is one of the
fundamental algorithms for routing packets using compass
routing on geometric networks. The key idea is to select the
best path along the faces intersected by the line segments
between a source and a destination. To avoid loops using
face routing, it is required a planar graph of the original net-
work. A planar graph can be deﬁned as a sub graph without
crossing edges, which represents the same connectivity as
the original network. Therefore, face routing guarantees to
reach the destination after as long as the network topology
is a planar graph [21].
Source
Destination
A
B
Figure 2.
Greedy forwarding mode.
Figure 2 shows an example of the greedy forwarding
mode. As we can observe, the Source node sends a message
to the Destination node. Once the location service detects
the node positions, the greedy routing algorithm selects the
next-hope closest to the destination, for example, the node
A. Then, the node A chooses the next-hope using the same
selection rules until the message reach the Destination node.
When a node cannot locate the next-hope node, it can use the
void-handling mode [7]. In this model, the node decides to
route the packet around the void since there is a possibility
that a valid path from the source to the destination node
exists.
19
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

B. Void-handling Mode
The void-handling mode is strictly applied as a recover
strategy to deliver packets when the greedy forwarding mode
cannot be used due the existence of communications voids.
As cited in the Section II, a void occurs as a result of high
signal interference in the communication due to the presence
of large buildings. These buildings or lack of radio cover-
age can result in voids in the physical network topology.
Therefore, voids can obstruct the packet forwarding process
at local minima, where the neighbors close to the destination
are hidden/unreachable, resulting in a failure.
Communications voids are considered as a serious prob-
lem for any feasible geographic routing protocol. It is
important to know how to handle voids in an effective and
efﬁcient manner. Besides that, it is a difﬁcult task to predict
when and where a void will occur due to the unpredictable
patterns of node deployment and the uncertain dynamics
of time varying wireless network environments. Thus, data
packets can be lost in the network if a robust void-handling
strategy is not implemented, wasting network resources as
well as disabling communications between pair of nodes.
Source
Destination
B
C
D
Figure 3.
Void-handling mode.
Figure 3 presents an example of void-handling technique
due to occurrence of a communication void. According to
the example, a Source node desires to send a packet to
Destination node. However, the Source node is closer to the
Destination than any of its neighboring nodes that are loc-
ated within its radius. Consequently, it is not possible to send
a packet using the greedy forwarding mode. In this case, the
packet is said to have encountered a communications void
and can be sent by the path (A - B - C - D). Finally, the
Source node is called a void node while the shaded region,
without any nodes inside, is a void area.
The simplest void-handling strategy is ﬂooding the net-
work from the Source node to all neighboring nodes. If each
node executes the same procedure, this strategy will certainly
enable the packet to reach the Destination node when at
least a path is found. However, this strategy is effective but
inefﬁcient in relation to resource utilization, since each node
A
B
C
D
(a) Correct operation.
A
B
C
D
E
(b) Fail.
Figure 4.
Right Hand Rule.
has to forward the packet and the Destination node may
receive many copies of the same data packet from different
paths.
VI. CHALLENGES OF USING GEOGRAPHIC ROUTING IN
VANETS
There are several prerequisites on the availability of posi-
tion information in VANET environments, such as position-
awareness of each participating vehicle, e.g., a GPS receiver
installed on every vehicle. However, this assumption of using
position systems is possible due the multiplication of Global
Position System (GPS) and the progress on self-conﬁguring
localization mechanisms in urban scenarios. Thus, it is
important that each vehicle be aware of each neighbor
position. A way to perform the position updates is sending
beacon messages that indicate the current position of the
vehicle.
The Greedy Perimeter Stateless Routing (GPSR) protocol
is one of the most important algorithms to demonstrate the
basic concepts of geographic routing in vehicular ad hoc
networks. There are several proposals that use GPSR models
to offer new geographic protocols in VANET scenarios, such
as [22] and [23]. In summary, the GPSR is a purely local
decision strategy, since no route setup or maintenance is
required. Instead, forwarding hops are determined ‘on the
ﬂy’ [2]. It applies both greedy forwarding to send packets
using position information and a void-handling technique
through the perimeter mode as a recover strategy when the
greedy forwarding fails. In such a case, position information
points in the right direction but is not correlated with
available paths to the destination.
Two void-handling techniques are used in the perimeter
mode of GPSR protocol. The ﬁrst technique is similar to an
online routing algorithm for planar graphs and the second
20
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

A
B
V
(a) GG.
A
B
V
(b) RNG.
Figure 5.
Gabriel Graph (GG) and Relative Neighborhood Graph (RNG).
is a distributed planarization algorithm. The algorithm for
planar graphs is applied using the Right Hand Rule as
presented in Figure 4. As we can observe in Figure 4(a), if a
packet starts from the node A in direction to the node B, the
next node will be C, following the edges (A,B) and (B,C).
Thus, the complete in the graph is A → B → C → D → A.
The use of planar graphs is a good strategy for recovering
the local maxima problem2. By deﬁnition, the planar graphs
take into account those pairs whose edges do not cross or
intersect in the plane. However, in the example presented in
Figure 4(b), the graph that represents the VANET scenario
is not a planar graph. Consequently, the GPSR utilizes a
planarization algorithm.
According to Figure 4(b), if the path starts in the edge
(E,A) and the Right Hand Rule is applied, the path will
be composed by E → A → B → D. Therefore, the
node C is not reached. Two planarization algorithms are
utilized in the GPSR: Relative Neighborhood Graph (RNG)
and Gabriel Graph (GG) [24]. In summary, they perform
removing algorithms to generate connected RNG and GG
graphs. Based on Figure 5(a), a GG occurs if an edge (A, B)
is found and there are not other vertices with diameter equal
to the distance between A and B as well as do not cross
these two vertices. On the other hand, if we observe Figure
5(b), a RNG graphs occurs when an edge (A, B) is found
and the distance between A and B is minor or equal to the
distance among a vertex V and A or B. Hence, we can
conclude that a RNG graph is a sub graph of a GG graph.
The use of planarization algorithms in vehicular ad hoc
networks allows performing the Right Hand Rule due to
the elimination of crossing edges. However, the elimina-
tion algorithm can remove essential nodes in the VANET
2This problem occurs when the Source node is closer to the Destination
than any of its neighboring nodes that are located within its radius.
scenario, which can result in the network disconnection.
Other problem of using planarization algorithms is related
to the excessive number of hops. For example, a vehicle
can directly send a packet to the destination, but it sends to
the next-hop most close to the destination. Other problems
are associated to routing loops and wrong directions. The
routing loops occur, for example, when a source node is in
the right side of its two-hops neighbor node in the graph.
Likewise, the wrong direction problem is found when there
is more than one routing alternative, resulting in the use of
long routes to deliver the packets.
To avoid planar graphs problems, Lochert et al. created the
Geographic Source Routing (GSR) [2]. The key idea is to
use the information contained in digital maps to compute
routes, which creates an overlay network. The route is
calculated using the Dijkstra algorithm. Similarly to GSR,
Tian et al. proposed the Spatially Aware packet Routing
(SAR) [25]. They use an association among digital maps and
graphs. The routing process is based on the source routing.
In [26] the authors presented a geographic routing to avoid
routing loop problems in urban VANETs. GeoCross exploits
the natural planar feature of urban maps without resorting to
cumbersome planarization. Its feature of dynamic loop de-
tection makes GeoCross suitable for highly mobile VANET.
The same authors presented in [27] a new approach using
delay and disruption tolerant strategies, which is a hybrid
geographic routing solution enhancing the standard greedy
and recovery modes exploiting the vehicular mobility and
on-board vehicular navigation systems to efﬁciently deliver
packets even in partitioned networks.
VII. CONCLUSION
With the widespread adoption of Global Position System
(GPS) and the progress on self-conﬁguring localization
mechanisms, geographic routing in VANET has garnered
signiﬁcant attention to provide promising solutions for mes-
sage delivery. The main motivation to study routing proto-
cols in VANETs is related to the expansion of data exchange
among vehicles in order to provide robust applications for
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). VANET applica-
tions can include on-board active safety systems, providing
communications among nearby vehicles (V2V) and between
vehicles and the roadside infrastructure (V2I). However,
several challenges have to be overcome before application
on a large scale.
This paper presented main geographic routing strategies in
VANETs scenarios. It shows beneﬁts of use location-aware
routing and discusses strengths and weaknesses of those ap-
proaches. Finally, the issues that need further investigations
in this area were discussed.
REFERENCES
[1] Y.-B. Wang, T.-Y. Wu, W.-T. Lee, and C.-H. Ke, “A novel
geographic routing strategy over vanet,” apr. 2010, pp. 873
–879.
21
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

[2] C. Lochert, H. Hartenstein, J. Tian, H. Fussler, D. Hermann,
and M. Mauve, “A routing strategy for vehicular ad hoc
networks in city environments,” jun. 2003, pp. 156 – 161.
[3] I. Stojmenovic, “Position-based routing in ad hoc networks,”
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 128 –
134, jul. 2002.
[4] M. Mauve, A. Widmer, and H. Hartenstein, “A survey on
position-based routing in mobile ad hoc networks,” Network,
IEEE, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 30 –39, nov. 2001.
[5] Z. Jin, Y. Jian-Ping, Z. Si-Wang, L. Ya-Ping, and L. Guang,
“A survey on position-based routing algorithms in wireless
sensor networks,” Algorithms, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 158–182,
2009. [Online]. Available: http://www.mdpi.com/1999-4893/
2/1/158/
[6] H. Cheng and J. Cao, “A design framework and taxonomy
for hybrid routing protocols in mobile ad hoc networks,”
Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 10, no. 3, pp.
62 –73, 2008.
[7] D. Chen and P. Varshney, “A survey of void handling tech-
niques for geographic routing in wireless networks,” Commu-
nications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 50 –67,
2007.
[8] B. Karp and H. T. Kung, “Gpsr: greedy perimeter stateless
routing for wireless networks,” in MobiCom ’00: Proceedings
of the 6th annual international conference on Mobile comput-
ing and networking.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2000, pp.
243–254.
[9] M. Heissenbuttel, T. Braun, T. Bernoulli, and M. Wachli, “Blr:
beacon-less routing algorithm for mobile ad hoc networks,”
Computer Communications, vol. 27, no. 11, pp. 1076–1086,
2004.
[10] M. Zorzi and R. Rao, “Geographic random forwarding (geraf)
for ad hoc and sensor networks: energy and latency perform-
ance,” Mobile Computing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 2, no. 4,
pp. 349 – 365, oct. 2003.
[11] C. Lemmon, S. M. Lui, and I. Lee, “Geographic forwarding
and routing for ad-hoc wireless network: A survey,” in NCM
’09: Proceedings of the 2009 Fifth International Joint Con-
ference on INC, IMS and IDC. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2009, pp. 188–195.
[12] Q. Yang, A. Lim, S. Li, J. Fang, and P. Agrawal, “Acar:
Adaptive connectivity aware routing protocol for vehicular
ad hoc networks,” aug. 2008, pp. 1 –6.
[13] K. David and A. Flach, “Car-2-x and pedestrian safety,”
Vehicular Technology Magazine, IEEE, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 70
–76, mar. 2010.
[14] S.-Y. Wang and C.-C. Lin, “Nctuns 5.0: A network simu-
lator for ieee 802.11(p) and 1609 wireless vehicular network
researches,” sep. 2008, pp. 1 –2.
[15] W. Kiess, H. Fussler, J. Widmer, and M. Mauve, “Hierarchical
location service for mobile ad-hoc networks,” SIGMOBILE
Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 47–58, 2004.
[16] T. Camp, J. Boleng, and L. Wilcox, “Location information
services in mobile ad hoc networks,” vol. 5, 2002, pp. 3318
– 3324 vol.5.
[17] X.-y. Bai, X.-m. Ye, J. Li, and H. Jiang, “Vls: a map-based
vehicle location service for city environments,” in ICC’09:
Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE international conference on
Communications.
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2009,
pp. 2694–2698.
[18] J. Widmer, M. Mauve, H. Hartenstein, and H. Fubler,
“Position-based routing in ad hoc wireless networks,” pp.
219–232, 2003.
[19] M. C. Weigle, S. Olariu, M. Abuelela, and G. Yan, “Use
of Infrastructure in VANETs,” in Vehicular Networks: From
Theory to Practice, S. Olariu and M. C. Weigle, Eds.
USA:
Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2009.
[20] E. Kranakis, S. O. C. Science, H. Singh, and J. Urrutia,
“Compass routing on geometric networks,” in in Proc. 11
th Canadian Conference on Computational Geometry, 1999,
pp. 51–54.
[21] J. You, Q. Han, D. Lieckfeldt, J. Salzmann, and D. Timmer-
mann, “Virtual position based geographic routing for wireless
sensor networks,” Comput. Commun., vol. 33, no. 11, pp.
1255–1265, 2010.
[22] S. Rao, M. Pai, M. Boussedjra, and J. Mouzna, “Gpsr-l:
Greedy perimeter stateless routing with lifetime for vanets,”
oct. 2008, pp. 299 –304.
[23] S. Sun, J. Kim, Y. Jung, and K. Kim, “Zone-based greedy
perimeter stateless routing for vanet,” in ICOIN’09: Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd international conference on Information
Networking.
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2009, pp.
374–376.
[24] T.-H. Su and R.-C. Chang, “Computing the constrained
relative neighborhood graphs and constrained gabriel graphs
in euclidean plane,” Pattern Recogn., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 221–
230, 1991.
[25] J. Tian, L. Han, and K. Rothermel, “Spatially aware packet
routing for mobile ad hoc inter-vehicle radio networks,”
vol. 2, oct. 2003, pp. 1546 – 1551 vol.2.
[26] K. C. Lee, P.-C. Cheng, and M. Gerla, “Geocross: A geo-
graphic routing protocol in the presence of loops in urban
scenarios,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 474–488, 2010.
[27] P.-C. Cheng, K. C. Lee, M. Gerla, and J. Harri, “Geodtn+nav:
Geographic dtn routing with navigator prediction for urban
vehicular environments,” Mob. Netw. Appl., vol. 15, no. 1,
pp. 61–82, 2010.
22
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

