 
Temporal Distance Map: A Warped Isochrone Map Depicting Accurate 
Travel Times 
 
 
Elijah Nacar, Devak Nanda 
Texas Academy of Mathematics 
and Science, 
University of North Texas 
Denton, USA 
e-mail: ​elijahnacar@my.unt.edu 
e-mail: 
devaknanda@my.unt.edu  
Blake Albert, Christian Panici 
Department of Computer 
Science, 
Loyola University 
Chicago, USA 
e-mail: ​oli@oleacapita.com​, 
e-mail ​cpanici@luc.edu  
 
Mark V. Albert 
Computer Science and 
Computer Engineering, 
University of North Texas 
Denton, USA 
e-mail: ​Mark.Albert@unt.edu  
 
 
Abstract ​- The presented Temporal Distance Mapping tool
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
creates a visual representation in which distance on the map
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represents travel time rather than physical distance. In the age
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of routing applications, most people are more concerned with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the time it will take to reach a destination rather than its
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
physical distance. A river, mountain, or even traffic can make
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nearby points on a map seem distant by comparison, while
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
highways and fast public transportation lines can seem to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bring distant physical locations together. Utilizing travel data,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we can morph the shape of any mapped region to accurately
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
depict travel time. First, a traditional static image map for a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
specific location of interest is overlaid with a grid of points.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The travel time from the center point to each grid point is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calculated. Each grid point is then shifted radially toward or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
away from the center point depending on calculated travel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time. The rest of the map pixels are then shifted according to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the new gridpoint locations using an affine transformation. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this way, the original map is warped to represent travel time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relative to the center point. Although two destinations on a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
traditional map may have the same physical distance, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
travel time may be orders of magnitude different due to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
barriers or access to public transportation. This map better
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represents access to the surrounding area, and also provides a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
compelling visual representation to understand the local
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community in the context of what matters most to them - their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
time.    
 Keywords - euclidean; temporal distance; isochrone; metadata.  
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Travel time is one of the main concerns people have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when viewing a map, however, travel time is poorly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represented on most physical maps. Transportation systems
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bring distant physical points in closer proximity in terms of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time, while physical barriers can dramatically impact the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
travel time between closely located points on a map ​[1]​.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
When faced with the prospect of visualizing travel time,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
most turn to the isochrone map ​[2][3]​. An isochrone map
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
uses contour lines to represent equivalent travel time from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
single location ​[4]​. The isochrone map is used in geographic
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
[5][6]​, clinical ​[7]​, and astrophysical research [8]. Isochrone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
maps are widely used in research, however, they are also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limited in public use ​[9]​. Isochrone maps are not a common
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
tool in the general populace given the complexity to reach
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them with overlaid contours. It would be more beneficial to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
have a map representation which directly depicts the travel
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time for the everyday user. 
In the age of vehicle routing applications ​[10]​, drivers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are much more interested in how long it takes to reach a
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
location rather than the physical distance shown on most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
maps.
Isochrones
contours
display
these
“temporal
 
 
 
 
 
 
distances” but are only an overlay on a representation that is
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
less directly relevant to a person’s experience of the world
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
around them. The time it takes a person to reach a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
destination is far more important than the physical distance,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particularly in cities and would best be represented directly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the underlying representation, rather than as an overlay
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on a less relevant depiction of physical distance.  
We created a tool that uses the information present in a
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
polar isochronic map ​[11] and morphs the static image to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
present travel time as the distances. Web mapping services
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[12] currently overlay alternate routes and travel time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information onto a traditional map representation. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach only provides information for travel time between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two
locations.
A
user
may
want
to
have a better
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding of their surrounding area to consider alternate
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
destinations. Using current commercial mapping tools, if
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
someone was interested in comparing travel times within an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
area, they would need to calculate the travel distance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between every single point of interest ​[13]​. We offer a tool
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
that expedites this process while also offering visual clarity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that will better allow a comparison of travel times at a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
glance.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section II explores our method for warping the images
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
based on calculated travel time. Section III demonstrates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application of the temporal distance map tool for a variety
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of locations. Finally, the paper concludes with Section IV.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

All information and documentation relevant to the research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be found on the github repository [14]. 
II.
METHODS 
As an overview, the method for generating the warped
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
map begins with the creation of an overlaid and spaced
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rectangular grid of points. The travel time to the grid points
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
is calculated, and the grid points are moved radially in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proportion to travel time. The pixels of the original map are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then transformed based on the new locations of the grid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
points. We will now step through the process in more detail. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Plot of 961 euclidean points overlaid the static image of the 
location. Arrows and times represent the travel time between each 
corresponding geographic coordinate and the center 
 
 
To begin, we used Bing Maps API [14] calls to get a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
standard static image of the location. Then, on that image,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we overlaid a mesh of 961 points. The corresponding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
latitude and longitude were mapped to a normalized
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coordinate system ranging from 0 to 1 along each dimension
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
(Figure 1). For instance, (0.5, 0.5) is the center point on the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
map, and if the image depicted a latitude range of +56 to
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
+60 (or 56 N to 60 N) and a longitude range of +40 to +44
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
(or 40 E to 44 E) then the central point would be the middle
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of each range or the geographic coordinate (58 N, 42 E). 
Utilizing the Bing Maps Distance Matrix, we were able
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to efficiently find the travel time between every geographic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coordinate and the central location (Figure 1). Then, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proceeded to remap the grid coordinates based on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calculated travel time. First, we calculated an estimate of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
one minute of travel time in the normalized coordinates by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dividing the euclidean distance of the temporally furthest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
point on the map by its travel time. Using this estimate, we
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
then calculated the new distance the grid point should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the center. We maintained the same angle of the grid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
point relative to the center. This information provided a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
radius and angle from the center point for the new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transformed coordinate. Effectively this shifted each grid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
point radially from the center point depending on calculated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
travel time. 
 
 
Figure 2.​ ​The plot of 961 euclidean points post-transformation based on 
travel time. The points now form concentric circles around the center and 
the travel time is now properly represented and uniform around the image. 
 
Each grid point now has original coordinates and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transformed coordinates; however, they were spaced out
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
significantly given the computational resources necessary to
 
 
 
 
 
  
calculate travel time between all grid points and the center
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
point. In order to visualize the new coordinates, the pixel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coordinates of the original map also had to be transformed.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each
pixel
of
the original image was converted to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
normalized coordinates, and an affine transformation based
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the surrounding grid points was performed to transform
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the original, normalized pixel coordinates into the new map
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coordinates (Figure 2).  
 
Additionally, this coordinate transform was also used to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
create an animation to more readily observe the effects of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
warping due to travel time. The old and new coordinates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were then linearly interpolated from time t=0 at the original
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
coordinates to t=1 for the new transformed coordinates.  
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In this section, we display several applications of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Temporal Distance Map to observe and discuss the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

effect. The demonstrations are for Pennsport, Pennsylvania;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Miami, Florida; and Kansas City, Kansas. In these map
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transformations, notable changes can be seen due to distinct
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
geographic features and infrastructure. 
A. Transformation of Pennsport and the Delaware River 
The Delaware River acts as a natural boundary between
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Pennsport, a city on the edge
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
of the river with close proximity to both the Walt Whitman
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and Benjamin Franklin Bridges, is depicted in Figures 3 and
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
4. 
 
 
Figure 3.​  ​Static image of Pennsport from the Bing Maps API. 
 
Figure 4. ​ ​Morphed version of Pennsport. The location is transformed based 
upon travel time from the central(red) point. 
 
After transforming the image, the area immediately
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
around Pennsport begins to stretch relative to other areas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outside the first 15 minute contour. This is due to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
availability of ways to cross the river. Someone situated in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the heart of Pennsport needs to drive either North or South
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to one of the bridges in order to reach New Jersey on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opposite side; therefore, increasing the relative travel time.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notice how once the river is crossed (generally around the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
15 minute contour) other areas begin to squeeze together
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
due to the availability of roads once they cross the bridge. 
 
B. Transformation of Miami Bay, Key Biscayne, and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Everglades/Francis Wildlife Management Area 
The Eastern Coast of Miami has a variety of islands,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
harbours, and keys. Key Biscayne is located to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
South-East of Downtown Miami and is used as the center in
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Figure 5. Notably, Miami travel is more efficient along the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
coast given the geographic barriers to travel. Given these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
geographic barriers, the North-West and South-East corners
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the map both stretch due to how long travel takes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compared to travel along the coastal highways.
The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
North-West corner is faced with a journey across the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management area of both the Everglades National Park and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Big Cypress National Preserve, both of which have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
limited vehicle infrastructure. The South-East corner is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blocked by Key Biscayne, any traveler that wants to reach
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that corner of the map will need to choose to drive around
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key Biscayne on a boat or drive along Key Biscayne in its
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
entirety, increasing travel time when compared to other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regions on the map. There is, notably, a direct path through
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
a gap in Key Biscayne that would allow a boater to travel to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
the South-East corner uninterrupted, thus resulting in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
large uninterrupted zone of generally constant contour rings. 
 
 
Figure 5. Static image of Miami, Florida from the Bing Maps API. 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 6.  Morphed version of Miami, notice the warping of the ocean 
surrounding the Key Biscayne. 
 
Notably, the acceptable methods of travel would alter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the representations, so by altering the route options available
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e.g., allowing use of tolls, ferries, etc.) the resulting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representation would change. 
 
C. Transformation of Kansas City and Road Infrastructure 
Kansas City was chosen due to its transportation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure.
The
city
is
completely
covered
by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure, like highways and public transport systems,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
all of which influence the transformation depicted in Figure
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
5. 
 
 
Figure 7.​ ​Static image of Kansas City, Kansas from the Bing Maps API. 
 
Figure 8. Morphed version of Kansas City, notice how the abundance of 
highways morph the region. 
For the transformation in Figure 7, the contours reflect
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 minute intervals instead of the typical 15 minutes in other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
figures. This way, it is readily apparent how highways begin
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
to shift the image of the map. First, highways allow a driver
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to cover a large distance in a relatively short period of time.
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Thus, the warped image contracts along highways, a pattern
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
that is visible in any of the projections featuring a major
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
roadway Additionally, while Kansas City is known for its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
widespread road infrastructure, the top right corner of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
map is less connected with the city center. Therefore, during
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the transformation the map contracts everywhere except the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
top right corner, which is unreachable along a highway. 
These examples represent a cross-section of geographic
 
 
  
 
 
 
impacts on travel time. The river of Pennsport, the ocean
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and everglades of Miami, and the road infrastructure of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kansas City all warp the map in ways that are consistent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with a local understanding of travel time, but depict that
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information visually in a way that is more direct to a casual
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
observer. 
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This project was prompted by a desire to visualize
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
access to nearby locations in a way that is more relevant to
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
personal experience - travel time rather than physical
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
distance. We created an application that allows a user to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
enter a geographic location and returns a transformed map
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
of the region in a way that depicts travel time by distance on
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the map. 
The transformations more directly represent the impact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of geographic and infrastructure features on a person’s
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
experience navigating the local area. This new way of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representing distance can be used to inform personal travel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

decisions by providing a more direct comparison between
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
travel time and distance.  
The new projection would be most useful for travelling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in areas with unique geography that is unfamiliar to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
traveller. By being able to readily compare alternate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
destinations relative to one’s current location, travel time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be more intuitively used in selecting among the alternate
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
destinations. The implementation uses readily available map
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
API information, and a series of linear transformations and
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
interpolations allow for commercial scalability.  
There are a number of further advances possible. In this
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approach, locations were shifted radially from the center,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however allowing for angular movement of points may have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
led
to
fewer
artifacts
in
the
warped
representation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additionally,
this
approach identified a center point,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however, it is conceivable to create a representation without
   
  
  
 
 
an arbitrary center. By observing travels times between all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pairs of grid points, and creating a networked representation
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of grid points with connections weighted by travel time in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
force-directed
graph
layout.
This
would
create
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
representation stretching the image in slow-moving areas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and
compressing
along
fast
corridors,
but
without
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identifying a single central point. This would enable a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
representation for an entire region that could be shared or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
marketed for everyone in the region. 
The Temporal Distance Map presented here provides a
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
new way to visualize travel time. Isochrone maps provide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similar information, but this tool takes the concept a step
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
further by morphing the underlying representation to make
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the information present in isochrone contours more directly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accessible. This way the intuitive understanding of travel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
time for surrounding locations that a native resident feels is
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
more accessible to people new to an area and more directly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
represents information of importance to them - time rather
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
than distance. 
REFERENCES 
[1]
E.
Bielecka
and
A.
Bober,
“Reliability
analysis
of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interpolation methods in travel time maps - The case of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Warsaw,” Geodetski Vestnik, pp. 299-312, 2013 
[2]
J. van den Berg, B. Köbben, S. van der Drift, and L.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wismans, “Towards a Dynamic Isochrone Map: Adding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spatiotemporal Traffic and Population Data. Progress in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Location
Based
Services
2018,”
Springer
International
 
 
 
 
 
 
Publishing, 2018. pp. 195–209. 
[3]
S. Bies and M. van Kreveld, ”Time-Space Maps from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Triangulations. Graph Drawing,” Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
 
 
 
 
 
 
pp. 511–516, 2013. 
[4] 
R. A. Bryson, W. M. Wendland, J. D. Ives, and J. T.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andrews, “Radiocarbon Isochrones on the Disintegration of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Laurentide Ice Sheet,” vol. 1, pp. 1–13, 1969. 
[5]. 
A. Efentakis, N. Grivas, G. Lamprianidis, G. Magenschab,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and D. Pfoser, “Isochrones, traffic and DEMOgraphics,”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGSPATIAL International
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems.
 
 
  
 
 
 
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pp. 548–551, 2013. 
[6] 
A. K. Darvishan, S. H. Sadeghi, and L. Gholami, “Efficacy of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Time-Area Method in simulating temporal variation of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sediment yield in Chehelgazi watershed, Iran,” Annals of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Warsaw University of Life Sciences, 2010.  
[7] 
H. S. Oster, B. Taccardi, R. L. Lux, P. R. Ershler, and Y.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rudy,
“Noninvasive
Electrocardiographic
Imaging,”
 
 
 
 
Circulation, vol. 96 pp. 1012–1024, 1997. 
[8] 
D. A. ​VandenBerg, P. A. Bergbusch, and P. D. Dowler, “The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Victoria-Regina Stellar Models: Evolutionary Tracks and
 
 
 
 
 
 
Isochrones for a Wide Range in Mass and Metallicity that
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Allow for Empirically Constrained Amounts of Convective
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Core Overshooting,” Astrophys J, 2006. 
[9] 
N. ​Street, “TimeContours: Using isochrone visualisation to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
describe transport network travel cost,” Final Report, Jun.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2006.  
[10] P. ​Toth and D. Vigo, Vehicle routing: problems, methods, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applications. 2014.  
[11] H. Sutanto, “Polar coordinate-based isochrone generation,”
 
 
 
 
 
 
US Patent. 6668226, 2003.  
[12] D. Zhang et al., “Efficient evaluation of shortest travel-time
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
path queries through spatial mashups,” Geoinformatica, vol.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22, pp. 3–28, 2018. 
[13] A. Ozimek and D. Miles, “Stata Utilities for Geocoding and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Generating Travel Time and Travel Distance Information,”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stata J, vol. 11, pp. 106–119, 2011. 
[14]
Microsoft Corporation, 2020. “Bing Maps Documentation -
 
 
 
 
 
  
Bing Maps,” [online] Docs.microsoft.com, Available at:
 
 
 
 
 
 
<https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/bingmaps/> [Accessed 17
 
 
 
June 2020]. 
 
 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

