GIS- Interpolated Geotechnical Zonation Maps in Surfers Paradise, 
Australia 
Haider Al-Ani, Erwin Oh, Gary Chai 
Griffith School of Engineering 
Griffith University 
Gold Coast, Australia 
E-mail: h.al-ani@griffth.edu.au, 
y.oh@griffith.edu.au, g.chai@griffith.edu.au 
 
Bahar Nader Al-Uzairy 
 
Griffith School of Environment 
Griffith University 
Brisbane, Australia 
E-mail: bahar-nader.al-uzairy@griffithuni.edu.au
Abstract—Due to the escalating cost of site investigation in 
Australia, geotechnical data contributes substantially to the 
cost of engineering projects. The GIS (Geographic 
Information System) has been used as a vital tool in civil 
engineering in recent years for a variety of applications. The 
subsurface conditions of Surfers Paradise (as a case study) 
have been examined in terms of soil stiffness by using GIS. 
The Spatial Analyst extension in ArcMap10 has been 
employed to develop zonation maps for different depths in 
the study area. Each depth level has been interpolated as a 
surface to create zonation maps for the Standard 
Penetration Test SPT-N value of the soil for each depth. The 
Inverse Distance Weighting (IDW) method in the Spatial 
Analyst shows better representation for these zonation maps 
with certain parameters among 8 interpolation techniques. 
Keywords-soil stiffness; interpolation; Spatial Analysis, 
Inverse Distance Weighting (IDW); zonation maps 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Due to the escalating cost of site investigations in 
Surfers Paradise, geotechnical data are expensive and 
contribute substantially to the cost of the geotechnical 
work. Due to budgetary constraints, small projects often 
overlook site characterisation [1]. The GIS (Geographic 
Information System) has been used as a vital tool in civil 
engineering fields in recent years for a variety of 
applications. Statistical models have been developed in 
GIS and are widely used to evaluate landslide hazards 
[2][3][4]. In addition, Atkinson and Massari [5] developed 
a linear modelling of the susceptibility of land sliding in 
the central Apennines in Italy. Furthermore, GIS has been 
utilised to develop zonation map production and to 
estimate if further precaution is required for a safer area in 
Turkey [4]. In their study, three Standard Penetration Test 
(SPT) N value zonation maps have been interpolated by 
using GIS Spatial Analyst IDW method based on the field 
data [4]. 
In fact, geotechnical characterisation of an area was an 
arduous task before GIS because of complexity of soil 
logs and their data representation [6]. Thus, the need for 
the GIS which transforms all paper work (hard copies) 
into digital forms to make data quickly accessed and 
easily analysed, is inevitable. Zonation maps have been 
used in various disciplines providing information on slope 
stability, seismic microzonation, groundwater quality, 
watershed, vegetation, and landslide hazard assessment. In 
the past, zonation maps had been produced by using 
traditional paper maps or contour maps to show the 
distribution of zones within a map. Nowadays, in 
geotechnical engineering, for example, the zonation maps 
have been produced to determine the suitability of 
foundations in the residential area by using GIS [4]. Four 
case studies have been researched by Hellawell et al. [7] 
to verify the benefits of using GIS in geotechnical 
engineering in the United Kingdom. These case studies 
are related to small-scale geotechnical projects. The 
outcome of this study indicated that GIS’s output 
enhanced the analytical and technical range of these 
projects in comparison with traditional techniques and the 
high quality maps produced are comprehensible and 
popular with engineers.  
The Standard Penetration Test (SPT) is an in-situ test 
widely used because it is simple, fast conducted and low 
in cost [8] which had been developed around 1972 [9]. 
This test is used to determine soil constitutive behaviour, 
such as stiffness, to characterise the soil type (sand, clay, 
or gravel), and to provide some correlation with other 
properties of soil. Around 85 to 90 percent of 
conventional foundations are designed using SPT in North 
and South America [9]. 
In this paper, zonation maps have been developed for 
the soil stiffness in Surfers Paradise, Australia (see Fig.1). 
The purpose of this is to characterise the soil in terms of 
soil stiffness and to predict new SPT-N values from the 
existing data. This is to reduce the cost of soil 
investigation or at the very least to have an initial concept 
of the soil strength in the study area. This paper consists 
of, after the introduction, the methodology which has been 
used to achieve the results followed by presenting the 
results and discussion, and then, the conclusions have 
been drawn.  
 
   
 
Figure 1. The study area location 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II. 
METHODOLOGY 
Data have been collected from 35 locations within the 
study area which extends about 1.3 by 4.0 km. Surfers 
Paradise is a business and tourism hub in Gold Coast city, 
Australia. The collected data includes 1,754 soil stiffness 
values which have been used as an input to the GIS. This 
data have been geo-referenced by obtaining the Easting 
and Southing coordinates from Google Earth and 
validated by using GPS for selected locations. In 
ArcMap10 and under the Spatial and Geostatistical 
Analyst extensions, 8 interpolation techniques have been 
examined in terms of their suitability to represent the 
SPT-N data. This has been done at the same depth which 
at Reduced Level (R.L. -11.6 to R.L. -13.3 m). The 
utilised interpolation techniques were (1) Geostatistical 
Analyst tools which include: Inverse Distance Weighting 
(IDW), Diffusion, Global Polynomial, and Kernel 
methods (2) Spatial Analyst tools which comprise: 
Ordinary Kriging, Universal Kriging, Spline, and IDW. 
The examination of these interpolation techniques has 
been done by attempting all the parameters of each 
method as an input to develop the SPT-N zonation maps 
(See Table I).  
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
26 zonation maps have been established from the 
existing Standard Penetration Test SPT-N value data by 
using the Spatial Analyst Inverse Distance Weighting 
IDW interpolation technique. Only four Standard 
Penetration Test SPT-N value zonation maps have been 
presented in this paper at depths between R.L. -1.6 m to 
R.L. -25 m at different depth intervals. In addition, a 
comparison has been done among 8 interpolation 
techniques to examine which technique provides better 
representation for the SPT-N value in the study area “see 
Fig. 
2”. 
The 
Inverse 
Distance 
Weighting 
IDW 
interpolation technique provides better and reasonable 
representation 
for 
the 
SPT-N 
data 
among 
the 
aforementioned 8 interpolation techniques with certain 
parameters. These parameters are illustrated in Table II. 
Other interpolation techniques did not provide a correct 
representation. This has been discovered through 
matching the SPT-N values in the resulted zonation maps 
with the original input of the data where the resulted 
values was far away from the original input data. It shows 
that only the IDW technique provided a zonation maps 
with a resulted SPT-N values were very close from the 
original input data.  
It can be seen from Table II that the power of the 
formula being used in the mathematical computations of 
the IDW technique is power 2. From the literature, Lloyd 
[10] utilised the power 2 of IDW to interpolate the 
precipitation values in the UK. In addition, Ping et al. [11] 
have used IDW power 2 in the exploring of spatial 
dependence of cotton yield in Texas. 
TABLE I. THE EIGHT INTERPOLATION 
TECHNIQUES USED AND ITS RELEVANT 
PARAMETERS. 
GIS Tools 
Interpolation 
Technique 
Parameters 
Geostatistical 
Analyst 
IDW 
Output cell size, power, search 
neighbourhood, major semi 
axis, minor semi axis, max 
neighbour, min neighbour, 
angle 
Geostatistical 
Analyst 
Diffusion 
Output cell size, number of 
iterations, weight field, band 
width 
Geostatistical 
Analyst 
Global 
Polynomial 
Output cell size, order of 
polynomial, weight field. 
Geostatistical 
Analyst 
Kernel 
Output cell size, Kernel 
function, order of polynomial, 
output surface type 
Spatial Analyst 
Ordinary 
Kriging 
Output surface raster, 
semivariogram model 
(spherical, circular, 
exponential, Gaussian, linear), 
output cell size, search radius, 
number of points, maximum 
distance 
Spatial Analyst 
Universal 
Kriging 
Output surface raster, 
semivariogram model (linear 
with linear drift, linear with 
quadratic drift), output cell 
size, search radius, number of 
points, maximum distance 
Spatial Analyst 
Spline 
Output cell size, Spline type 
(regularized, tension), weight, 
number of points 
Spatial Analyst 
IDW 
Output cell size, power, search 
radius (Fixed, Variable), 
number of points, Max distance 
 
It has been also used for predicting and mapping of 
potassium soil by [12]. Other researchers have used the 
IDW method without mentioning to the power of this 
technique, such as [4]. Therefore, the value of power (2) 
which has been adopted in this research is considered 
according to [13], as a frequently used value. 
Fig. 3 represents a GIS based zonation map for the SPT-
N value at a depth of R.L. -1.6 to R.L. -3.2 m in Surfers 
Paradise. Most of the soil types at this depth have an N 
value of between 31 - 49 blows. This means that these soil 
types are dense sand, based on the soil classification given 
by Look [14] and based on the description provided in the 
soil investigation report of this location. 
TABLE II. ADOPTED INVERSE DISTANCE 
WEIGHTING (IDW) PARAMETERS. 
Method 
Output 
cell size 
Power 
Search 
Radius 
Distance 
Spatial 
Analyst 
IDW 
2.719E-05 
2 
Fixed 
0.25 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 2.  Comparison among eight interpolation techniques in GIS 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 3. SPT-N zonation map at depth R.L. -1.6 to R.L. -3.2 m 
However, there are some locations have an N value of 
between 0 to 4 and between 11 to 30 blows in the eastern 
parts of the study area. This reveals the occurrence of peat 
and medium dense sand in those locations respectively. In 
addition, there are well defined scattered red points 
throughout the map showing the occurrence of very dense 
sand with an SPT-N value of more than 50 blows. 
Fig. 4 shows a GIS based zonation maps for the SPT-
N value in Surfers Paradise at the depth of R.L. -3.2 to 
R.L. -5.0 m. It can be seen from this zonation map that the 
majority of the soil types at this depth has an N value of 
between 31 and 49 blows. This represents dense sand with 
an embedded peat and loose sand pocket in 5 different 
locations to the east of the study area. Also, many places 
have an N value of more than 50 blows which represent 
very dense sand. 
It can be seen from Fig. 5 that the dense sand is 
dominant at this depth level with an N value of between 
31 and 49 blows. There are some areas that have not been 
interpolated due to the lack of data in these locations. 
Further, other areas which have an N value of between 11 
to 30 blows represent stiff clay to medium dense sand 
with few very dense sand locations in the south and north 
east of Surfers Paradise.  
 
Figure 4. SPT-N zonation map at depth R.L. -3.2 to R.L. -5.0 m 
 Fig. 6 shows a GIS based zonation map at a depth of 
between R.L. -23.3 to R.L. -25.0 m in Surfers paradise. 
 
Figure 5. SPT-N zonation map at depth R.L. -18.3 to R.L. -20.0 m 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 6. SPT-N zonation map at depth R.L. -23.3 to R.L. -25.0 m 
It can be observed from this zonation map (see Fig. 6) 
that due to the lack of data in some locations at this depth 
level, only the centre of the Surfers Paradise area has been 
interpolated. It shows that the medium dense sand and 
stiff to very stiff clays are dominant with an N value of 
between 11 - 30 blows. Areas of very soft clays and very 
loose sand and peat have also been observed. 
These zonation maps have shown a representation for 
the SPT-N value data for all the soil types (sand, clay, 
peat, and organic clay) in the Surfers Paradise area by 
using the IDW interpolation technique in Spatial Analyst 
extension of the ArcMap. This is consistent with what has 
been reported by Al-Ani et al. [15] and Al-Ani et al. [16]. 
Similarly, 16 zonation maps have been developed in a 
densely settled area in Turkey by Orhan and Tosun [4] to 
determine the suitability of foundation soils. These 
zonation maps showed three geotechnical properties as 
follows: 6 zonating the soil class, 6 zonating the SPT-N 
value, and 4 for the uniaxial compressive strength at 1 m 
depth intervals from the depth of 1 m and up to the depths 
of 6.5 m. They also used the IDW technique to 
accomplish these zonation maps.   
Lu and Wong [13] stated that the IDW is one of the 
most frequently used deterministic models in spatial 
interpolation. The reason behind this is because it is easy 
to compute, relatively fast, and straightforward to 
interpret. In addition, Mueller et al. [17] stated that IDW 
has been used because it is simple and fast, in contrast to 
Kriging technique, which is time consuming and more 
complex than the IDW.   
In the literature, there no comparison has been 
reported among the interpolation methods with the 
purpose of selecting the suitable method to represent the 
geotechnical 
properties 
of 
soil 
in 
geotechnical 
engineering. However, a comparison between Ordinary 
Kriging and the IDW has been performed by [17] to 
assess soil fertility management in the UK. They showed 
that there are many opinions regarding the most suitable 
method in their discipline. Some of them stated that the 
Ordinary Kriging is better and some stated the IDW is the 
better option. They suggested doing a cross validation to 
verify which one is the better method. However, 
researchers have cautioned using cross validation in the 
selecting of interpolation methods for mapping purposes 
[18] and [19]. Further, Mueller et al. [17] stated that cross 
validation should not be used as the sole criteria for 
deciding whether or not the specific interpolation method 
must be used over another.  
The Spatial Analyst extension in GIS employs 
interpolation techniques to create a zonation map. The 
interpolation, in turn, is a procedure used to predict the 
values of cells at locations that lack sampled points [20]. 
As such, the input SPT-N value data have been used to 
predict SPT-N value in locations that lack sampled points.  
Therefore, regarding the validation of the results, the 
resulting zonation maps will be validated with a new data 
extracted from new engineering projects in the study area. 
However, from a geotechnical engineering point of view, 
the interpolated (predicted) values appear sensible as the 
resulted SPT-N values of the soil in certain selected 
locations are consistent and comparable with other 
engineering laboratory tests, such as dry density, moisture 
content, void ratio, shear strength, and compression index. 
These physical and engineering properties primarily 
indicate that there is a valid relationship between, for 
example, the interpolated high value of the SPT-N value 
(>50 blows for the very dense sand) and its related soil 
properties, such as high density (1.92 Mg/m3), low 
moisture content (1.5 %), low void ratio (0.23%), low 
compression index (0.11), and high shear strength (>200 
kPa). On the contrary, the resulting SPT-N values which 
have low SPT-N values (between 0 to 4 blows for the 
loose sand or organic soil), have magnitudes of low 
density (0.31 Mg/m3), high moisture content (239%), high 
void ratio (4.7 %), high compression index (1.23), and 
low shear strength (25 kPa). These results are also 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

consistent with what has been reported by Look [14] and 
Day [21].  
Miles and Ho [22] stated that the production of 
cartographic quality maps or representations can certainly 
provide support in many pertinent decision making 
processes. Therefore, this paper provides GIS based 
zonation maps for the Standard Penetration Test SPT-N 
value with an aim to facilitate the recognition of the soil 
stiffness in the study area. In addition, it is type of 
subsurface visualisation of soil in terms of soil strength at 
different depth levels. As such, Miles and Ho [22] 
emphasised that the visualisation can be supplemented by 
spatial queries of the model results where these queries 
can help in identifying possible correlations between input 
parameters and model predictions. Therefore, this paper 
provides a correlation between the SPT-N values and 
many geotechnical properties, such as dry density, 
moisture content, void ratio, compression index, and shear 
strength.   
Further, Player [23] pointed out that GIS can aid 
geotechnical engineers, as long as the geotechnical data 
has spatial attributes. Thus, the resulting GIS-based SPT-
N value zonation maps can help geotechnical decision 
makers through providing information on soil stiffness 
and the occurrence of problematic peat layer in the study 
area.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Based on the findings, the IDW interpolation 
technique showed a better representation for Standard 
Penetration Test N value to characterise the soil in Surfers 
Paradise. The IDW method has been identified as a better 
technique based on fixing the predicted points and 
comparing it with the original input points. It gives an 
actual representation for each input data compared with 
other interpolation techniques. Further, the zonation maps 
showed that the zonation maps developed by the IDW 
technique exhibited a homogenous distribution for the 
SPT-N value. Furthermore, the predicted points in the 
lack sampled areas showed a consistency in terms of the 
correlation with other geotechnical properties of soil.  
Four SPT-N value zonation maps have been developed 
at various depths. As such, the subsurface profile of the 
Surfers Paradise area has been examined and showed the 
occurrence of sands, clays, and peat with various ranges 
of stiffness magnitudes. This paper is a part of ongoing 
research to characterise physical and engineering 
properties of soil in Surfers Paradise, Australia. The next 
step of this research will be a cross validation for the 
resulting zonation maps and expand the study area to 
include the entire city of the Gold Coast, Australia. 
 
V. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. L. Ho and J. Skeels, ‘GIS modeling of the subsurface 
stratigraphy’ Proc. 12th Panamerican Conference on Soil 
Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA, 2003, PP. 22-26. 
[2] A. Carrara, M. Cardinali, R. Detti, F. Guzzetti, V. Pasqui, 
and P. Reichenbach ‘GIS techniques and statistical models 
in evaluating landslide hazard’, Earth Surface and 
Landforms, vol. 16, no. 5, 1991, pp. 427-45. 
[3] M. Xie, T. Esaki, and M. Cai, ‘GIS-based implementation of 
three-dimensional limit equilibrium approach of slope 
stability’ Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental 
Engineering, vol. 132, no. 5, 2006, pp. 656-660. 
[4] A. Orhan and H. Tosun, ‘Visualization of geotechnical data 
by means of geographic information system: a case study in 
Eskisehir city (NW Turkey)” Environmental Earth Science, 
vol. 61, 2010, pp. 455-65. 
[5]  P. Atkinson and R. Massari, ‘Generalized linear modelling 
of susceptibility to landsliding in the central Apennines, 
Italy’ Computer and Geosciences, Vol.24, No.4, 1998, 
pp.373-385. 
[6]  R. Higashi and R. Dias, ‘Potentialities of a geotechnical 
database in a GIS environment of the northern part of Rio 
Grande Do Sul State-Brazil’, Proc. 12th Panamerican 
Conference 
on 
Soil 
Mechanics 
and 
Geotechnical 
Engineering, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, June 2003, 
pp. 22-26. 
[7] E. Hellawell, J. Lamont-Black, A. Kemp, and J. Hughes, 
‘GIS as a toll in geotechnical engineering’, Geotechnical 
Engineering, vol. 149 (2), 2001, pp. 85-93. 
[8] J. Knappett and R. Craig, ‘Craig’s soil mechanics’, 8th ed., 
London and New York: Spon Press, 2012, pp. 232-233. 
[9] J. Bowles, ‘Foundation analysis and design’, 5th ed., New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1996, pp.154-156. 
[10] C. Lloyd, ‘Assessing the effect of integrating elevation data 
into the estimation of monthly precipitation in Great Britain. 
Journal of Hydrology 308, 2005, pp. 128–150. 
[11] J. Ping, C. Green, R. Zartman, and K. Bronson, ‘Exploring 
spatial dependence of cotton yield using global and local 
autocorrelation statistics’ Field Crop Research 89 (2–3), 
2004, pp. 219–236. 
[12] A. Bekele, R. Downer, M. Wolcott, W. Hudnall, and S. 
Moore, ‘Comparative evaluation of spatial prediction 
methods in a field experiment for mapping soil potassium’ 
Soil Science 168 (1), 2003, pp. 15–28. 
[13] G. Lu and D. Wong, ‘An adaptive inverse-distance 
weighting spatial interpolation technique’ Computers & 
Geosciences, vol. 34, 2008, pp. 1044-55. 
[14] B. Look, ‘Handbook of geotechnical investigation and 
design tables’, London: Taylor & Francis, 2007. 
[15] H. Al-Ani, E. Oh, L. Eslami-Andargoli, and G. Chai, 
‘Subsurface visualization of peat and soil by using GIS in 
Surfers 
Paradise, 
Southeast 
Queensland, 
Australia’, 
Electronic Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, vol.18, 
Bund. I, 2013, pp.1761-1774. 
[16] H. Al-Ani, L. Eslami-Andargoli, E. Oh, and G. Chai, 
‘Categorising geotechnical properties of subsoil in Surfers 
Paradise using geographic information system (GIS), Proc. 
3rd international conference on Geotechnique, Construction 
Materials and Environment, Nagoya, Japan, November 
2013, pp.53-58. 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[17] T. Mueller, N. Pusuluri, K. Mathias, P. Cornelius, R. 
Barnhisel, and S. Shearer, ‘Map quality for ordinary Kriging 
and inverse distance weighted interpolation’, Soil Science 
Society of America, 68, 2004, pp. 2042-2047. 
[18] N. Cresse, ‘Statistics for spatial data. revised edition’, New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1993. 
[19] P. Goovaerts, ‘Geostatistics for natural soil evaluation’, New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1997.  
[20] C. Childs, ‘Interpolating surfaces in ArcGIS spatial analyst’ 
ArcUser, July-September, 2004, pp. 32-35. 
[21] R. Day, ‘Soil testing manual procedures, classification data, 
and sampling practices’, Ohio: McGraw-Hill, 2001. 
[22] S. B. Miles and C. L. Ho, ‘ Applications and issues of GIS as 
tool for civil engineering modeling’ Journal of Computing in 
Civil Engineering, vol. 13, 1999, pp. 144-152. 
[23] R. S. V. Player, ‘Geographic information system GIS use in 
geotechnical engineering’ GeoCongress, ASCE, 2006, pp. 1-
6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

