EPOS: A FAIR Research Infrastructure  
 
Keith G Jeffery 
Keith G Jeffery Consultants 
Faringdon, UK 
Email: keith.jeffery@keithgjefferyconsultants.co.uk 
Daniele Bailo 
ERIC 
Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia 
Rome, Italy 
Email: daniele.bailo@ingv.it
Kuvvet Atakan 
Department of Earth Science 
University of Bergen 
Bergen, Norway 
Matt Harrison 
Director Informatics 
British Geological Survey 
Keyworth, UK
Email: kuvvet.atakan@uib.no 
Email: mharr@bgs.ac.uk
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The European Plate Observing System (EPOS) has 
been developed over some years and is now in transition to full 
operational status. It currently offers a portal with access to more 
than 200 data services, the portals of constituent research 
communities and prototype access to a service for Trans-National 
Access (TNA) to equipment and sensors as well as access to 
information on the organizations and persons involved in EPOS 
together with research capabilities.  From the beginning, EPOS 
was designed to support the FAIR (Findable, Accessible, 
Interoperable, Reusable) principles.  This paper explains how the 
EPOS architecture meets the specifications of FAIRness. 
Keywords- geoscience; data services; metadata; CERIF; 
catalog; research infrastructures; FAIR. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The architecture of EPOS was described in [1]. The present 
work focuses on how FAIR principles are applied in EPOS.  
The purpose of EPOS is to provide end-users – including 
researchers, educators, policymakers, industry employees, 
citizen scientists – with the ability to discover, contextualize 
and utilize the heterogeneous assets of the various geoscience 
communities through a homogeneous interface. 
A. Overview 
The architecture has been designed to satisfy the following 
criteria: 
1. Minimal interference with existing communities’ 
operations and developments, including Information 
Technology (IT); 
2. Easy-to-use user interface; 
3. Access to assets through a metadata catalog: initially 
services, but progressively also datasets, workflows, 
software 
modules, 
computational 
facilities, 
instruments/sensors, 
all 
with 
associated 
organizational information including experts and 
service managers; 
4. Progressive assistance in composing workflows of 
services, software and data to deploy on e-
Infrastructures to achieve research infrastructure user 
objectives. 
B. FAIRness 
From the beginning, EPOS was designed to be FAIR and 
EPOS participants were involved in the discussions leading to 
the FAIR principles [2] and also subsequent work on FAIR 
metrics within the FAIR Data Maturity Model Working Group 
of Research Data Alliance (RDA) [3].  The major 
contributions of this paper are to indicate (a) how FAIRness 
was achieved from the beginning of EPOS: (b) how our 
systems development approach maps to the FAIR principles 
using a ‘pyramid’ diagram. 
C. Previous Work 
EPOS provides an original approach to the provision of 
homogeneous access over heterogeneous digital assets and 
providing FAIRness. Previous work on homogenizing 
heterogeneity has been mainly within a limited domain (where 
standards for assets and their metadata may be consensual 
across the whole domain thus reducing heterogeneity) with 
manual processes and associated costs. Filematch [4] exhibited 
those problems. NASA has a Common Metadata Repository 
(CMM).  In 2013, NASA developed the Unified Metadata 
Model (UMM) [5] to and from which, other metadata 
standards are converted. This follows the superset canonical 
rich metadata approach already used in EPOS.  The Open 
Geospatial Consortium (OGC) has produced a series of 
standards.  GeoNetwork [6] has established a suite of software 
based around the OGC ISO19115 metadata standard; however, 
despite its open nature, this software ‘locks in’ the developer 
to a particular way of processing, does not assist in the 
composition and deployment of workflows and the metadata 
is insufficiently rich for automated processing. EarthCube [7] 
is a collection of projects providing designs and tools for 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

geoscience, including interoperability, in USA. The project 
encountered – by using pairwise brokering – the problem that 
it required n*(n-1) brokers instead of the n required if a 
canonical metadata approach is used. Auscope [8] includes 
AuScope GRID which, by using ISO19115, encounters the 
problems outlined above. GEOSS [9] uses the ‘system of 
systems’ approach, but this requires many bilateral interfaces 
with the combinatorial problem discussed above. 
     In essence, all these other approaches provide some degree 
of FAIRness (Finding, Accessing), but usually require human 
and manual work to achieve interoperability or reuse. 
     EPOS, with its superset rich canonical metadata, 
overcomes the problems concerning homogeneous access over 
heterogeneous assets and, furthermore, provides increasingly 
automated FAIRness. 
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
describes the architecture; Section III discusses the importance 
of metadata; Section IV demonstrates that EPOS is FAIR and 
Section V summarizes conclusions. 
II. 
ARCHITECTURE 
The Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) 
architecture of EPOS is designed to facilitate the research 
community and others in discovering and utilizing through the 
Integrated Core Services (ICS) the assets provided by the 
Thematic Core Services (TCS) communities.  The architecture 
was described in [1], but is recapitulated briefly for this paper. 
A. Introduction 
In order to provide end-users with homogeneous access to 
services and multidisciplinary data collected by monitoring 
infrastructures and experimental facilities (and to software, 
processing and visualization tools as well), a complex, scalable 
and reliable architecture is required. A diagram of the 
architecture is outlined in Figure 1.  
The key aspects are: 
1. National Research Infrastructures (NRI) hold the 
assets and provide metadata to describe them; 
2. Thematic Core Services (TCS) that relate to 
(currently 10) communities, each for a particular 
domain of geoscience. These communities harmonise 
progressively semantic aspects of metadata such as 
terminology in ontologies and also decide which NRI 
assets should be proposed for availability through 
EPOS; 
3. Integrated Core Services (ICS) that provide the 
portal, associated metadata catalog and thus provide 
Findability, 
Accessibility, 
Interoperability, 
and 
Reusability (FAIR). 
 
 
Figure 1. EPOS Architecture. 
 
B. ICS 
The EPOS-ICS provides the entry point to the EPOS 
environment.  ICS-C provides the portal and metadata catalog, 
with associated convertors, to accept metadata from TCS and 
ingest into the catalog.  ICS-D provides distributed 
computational resources including also processing and 
visualization 
services, 
of 
which 
a 
specialization 
is 
Computational Earth Science (CES). ICS-C provides the basis 
for deployment of workflows, including to ICS-D facilities, 
that in turn rely on e-Infrastructures such as Cloud Computing 
or supercomputing.  EPOS has also been involved in the 
VRE4EIC project [10] (and cooperating with EVER-EST 
[11]) to ensure convergent evolution of the EPOS ICS-C user 
interface and Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) for 
programmatic access with the developing Virtual Research 
Environments (VREs).  EPOS participates in the recently 
approved ENVRIFAIR project [12] that will improve the 
deployments to the European Open Science Cloud (EOSC) 
[13] (See Figure 2). 
 
 
 
Figure 2. EPOS Positioning. 
 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Workflow for the deployment (which may be a simple file 
download or a complex set of services including analytics and 
visualization) will be generated within the ICS-C, by 
interaction with the users.  The workflow will be checked by 
the end-user before deployment.  However, the detailed 
content/capability of the assets might not be known, e.g., the 
dataset may not contain the relevant information despite its 
metadata description, or the software may not execute as the 
user expects despite the metadata description.  The execution 
of the deployment is monitored and execution information is 
returned to the end-user.  The ICS represents to the end-user 
the infrastructure, consisting of services that will allow access 
to multidisciplinary resources provided by the TCS. These will 
include data and data products as well as synthetic data from 
simulations, processing, and visualization tools.  The key to 
this view of the geoscience domain is the metadata catalog 
using the Common European Research Information Format 
(CERIF) [14]. 
C. ICS-C 
The ICS-C consists of multiple logical areas of 
functionality, these include the Graphical User Interface 
(GUI), web-API, metadata catalogue, user management etc. A 
micro-service architecture has been adopted in the ICS-C, 
where each (micro) services is atomic and dedicated to a 
specific class of tasks.  The EPOS ICS-C system architecture 
is outlined in (Figure 3). The Microservices architecture 
approach envisages small atomic services dedicated to the 
execution of a specific class of tasks, which have high 
reliability [15][16]. Docker Containers technology was used. 
enabling complete isolation of independent software 
applications running in a shared environment. The 
communication between microservices is done via messages 
received and sent on a queueing system, in this case RabbitMQ 
[17]. As a result, a chain of microservices processes the 
requests.  
The current architecture includes an Authentication, 
Authorization, Accounting Infrastructure (AAAI).  This has 
been implemented using UNITY [18] and has involved close 
cooperation with CYFRONET, evolving to the integrated 
authentication 
system 
for 
research 
communities.  
Authorization is more complex, and is being developed 
incrementally, as it depends on rules agreed with the TCS 
(within the context of the financial, legal and governance 
traversal workpackages of EPOS-IP) for each of their assets, 
and included further metadata elements into the CERIF catalog 
to control such authorization. The latter has been prepared and 
awaits validation by the TCS.  Related to this, the GUI now 
provides a user notification pointing to a legal disclaimer for 
the EPOS system.  It should be noted that use of authentication 
and authorization does not preclude FAIRness, but does allow 
for protection of assets e.g. to allow a research team time to 
publish results based on their data before the data is made 
generally available. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. ICS-C Architecture. 
 
The topic of workflow has required pilot projects with TCS 
experts to clarify the requirements, available technologies and 
the difficulties of appropriate user interactions.  Working in 
cooperation with the VRE4EIC project we have the basic 
components for (a) a general workflow manager interface; (b) 
interfaces to specific workflow managers such as Taverna [19]. 
D. ICS-D 
ICS-D concerns workflow management, since once Found 
and Accessed, the assets are Interoperable and Reusable, using 
workflows distributed across e-Infrastructure components by 
ICS-D.  A specification of the metadata elements required for 
ICS-D has been developed, and is still being refined in the light 
of experience from the pilots mentioned above. ICS-D will 
appear to the workflow, or to the end-user, as a service 
accessed through an API. The deployment requires 
middleware.  Results from the PaaSage project [20] are 
relevant and the concurrent MELODIC project [21] offers 
optimization, including that based on dataset placement and 
latency.  Further refinement of requirements and the 
architectural interfaces continues. 
 
III. 
METADATA 
The core of the EPOS architecture is the metadata catalog 
and specifically the superset, rich, canonical metadata format 
chosen, namely CERIF. This allows EPOS to provide support 
for cross-domain, interoperable science while achieving the 
objectives of the FAIR principles. 
A. Introduction 
The metadata catalogue is the way of representing in a 
homogeneous way, the heterogeneous assets provided within 
the EPOS community.  The catalog defines what assets are 
visible to end-users.  It provides the required information to 
facilitate Finding, Accessing, Interoperating and Reusing 
(FAIR) EPOS assets. In fact, between Finding and Accessing, 
the use of a rich format like CERIF also allows 
contextualization: that is the assessment of relevance and 
quality of the asset for the purpose in hand.  Furthermore, the 
use of linking entities between base entities in CERIF, with 
MQ/Bus
PROXY
GUI
EPOS WebApi
Query Generator
DB Connector
Mapper
TCS Connector
TCS API
METADATA Catalogue 
(CERIF)
Workspace Connector
Workspace
Catalogue (MongoDB)
Ingestor
AAAI
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

role and temporal interval, provides automatically records 
describing provenance since it is possible to retrieve all link 
entity records related to a particular base entity, role or time 
interval in any combination.  The catalogue contains: (i) 
technical specification to enable autonomic ICS access to TCS 
discovery and access services, (ii) metadata associated with the 
digital object with a direct link to it, (iii) information about 
users, resources, software, and services other than data 
services (e.g., rock mechanics, geochemical analysis, 
visualization, processing).   
The CERIF data model was chosen because it: (1) 
separates base entities from linking entities, thus providing a 
fully connected graph structure; (2) using the same syntax, 
stores the semantics associated with values of attributes, both 
for base entities and (for role of the relationship) for linking 
entities, that also store the temporal duration of the validity of 
the linkage. This provides great power and flexibility. CERIF 
also (as a superset) can interoperate with widely adopted 
metadata formats such as Dublin Core (DC) [22], Data 
Catalogue 
Vocabulary 
(DCAT) 
[23], 
Comprehensive 
Knowledge Archive Framework (CKAN) [24], INSPIRE (the 
EC version of ISO 19115 for geospatial data) [25] and others 
using convertors developed as required to meet the metadata 
mappings achieved between each of the above standards and 
CERIF.  Currently 17 different metadata formats in geoscience 
are convertible with CERIF. The metadata catalogue also 
manages the semantics, in order to provide the meaning of the 
attribute values.  
     To recap, the use of CERIF automatically provides: 
(a) The 
ability 
for 
discovery, 
contextualization, 
interoperation and (re-)use of assets according to the 
FAIR principles [2] 
(b) A clear separation of base entities (things) from link 
entities (relationships); 
(c) Formal syntax and declared semantics; 
(d) A semantic layer, also with the base/link structure 
allowing crosswalks between semantic terminology 
spaces; 
(e) Conversion to/from other common metadata formats; 
(f) Built-in provenance information, because of the 
timestamped role-based links; 
(g) Curation facilities, because of being able to manage 
versions, replicates and partitions of digital objects 
using the base/link structure; 
These technical properties of CERIF provide that which is 
required to ensure FAIRness of the system.  The catalog is 
constantly evolving with the addition of new assets (such as 
services, datasets), but also increasingly rich metadata, as the 
TCSs improve their metadata collection to enable more 
autonomic processing. 
B. TCS Metadata 
The ‘treasure’ of EPOS is the assets provided, through the 
TCS communities from the NRIs.  These TCS Data, Data 
Products, Software and Services (DDSS) are described by 
metadata. The metadata describing those assets is supplied via 
the TCS IT experts and is harmonized as much as possible.  It 
is checked for quality, and registered in the granularity 
database (see below).  This relates to governance, including 
funding for the TCS.  It is then converted to CERIF via an 
intermediate format (see below). 
C. ICS Metadata 
The intermediate format is known as the EPOS baseline. It 
provides a minimum set of common metadata elements 
required to operate the ICS, taking into consideration the 
heterogeneity of the assets of the many TCSs involved in 
EPOS. It has been implemented as an application profile using 
an extension of the DCAT standard, namely the EPOS-DCAT-
AP.  The baseline can be extended to accommodate extra 
metadata elements, where it is deemed that those metadata 
elements are critical in describing and delivering the data 
services for any given community. Indeed, this has happened 
already when the original EPOS-DCAT-AP was found to be 
inadequate, and a new version with richer metadata was 
designed and implemented. 
     The metadata to be obtained from the EPOS TCSs, as 
described in the baseline document (and any other agreed 
elements) will be mapped to the EPOS ICS CERIF catalog. 
The process of converting metadata acquired from the EPOS 
TCS to CERIF will be done by in consultation with each TCS 
as to what metadata they have available and harvesting 
mechanisms 
     The metadata is ingested from the TCS community NGIs 
by various mechanisms, depending on local conditions.  In 
general, they expose an API allowing the metadata to be 
collected.  The metadata is transformed from local format to 
EPOS baseline and thence to CERIF.  These APIs, and the 
corresponding ICS convertors, collectively form the 
“interoperability layer” in EPOS, which is the link between the 
TCSs and the ICS. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. EPOS Metadata Baseline. 
 
     The EPOS baseline can thus be considered as an 
intermediate layer, that facilitates the conversion from the 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

community metadata standards such as ISO19115/19, DCAT, 
Dublin Core, INSPIRE, etc., describing the DDSS elements 
and not the index or detailed scientific data (See Figure 4). 
 
D. DDSS and Granularity Database 
As a part of the Requirements and Use cases Collection 
(RUC) from the TCSs, a specific list was prepared to include 
all data, data products, software and services (DDSS). The 
DDSS master table was originally implemented as Excel 
spreadsheets.  The DDSS Master Table was also used for 
extracting the level of maturity of the various DDSS elements 
in each TCS, as well as providing a summary of the status of 
the TCS preparations for the ICS integration and 
interoperability. The current version of the DDSS Master 
Table consists of 363 DDSS elements, where 165 of these 
already exist and are declared by TCSs to be ready for 
implementation. The remaining DDSS elements required more 
time to harmonize the internal standards, prepare an adequate 
metadata structure and so are available for implementation 
soon. In total, 21 different harmonization groups (HGs) are 
established to help organizing the harmonization issues in a 
structured way. In addition, user feedback groups (UFGs) have 
been established and work to give constant and structured 
feedback during the implementation process of the TCS-ICS 
integration and the development of the ICS. 
The rate of change of the DDSS maser table indicated that 
a different technology should be used.  The DDSS master table 
has been transformed to the granularity database because of 
the problems of referential and functional integrity using a 
spreadsheet; relational technology provides appropriate 
constraints to ensure integrity.  
An increasingly detailed RUC collection process is 
formulated and explained through dedicated guidelines and 
interview templates. A roadmap for the ICS-TCS interactions 
for the RUC collection process was prepared for this purpose 
and distributed to all TCSs.  
     In this approach, a five-step procedure is applied involving 
the following: 
• 
Step 1: First round of RUC collection for mapping the 
TCS assets; 
• 
Step 2: Second round of RUC collection for 
identifying TCS priorities; 
• 
Step 3: ICS-TCS Integration Workshop for building 
a common understanding for metadata  
• 
Step 4: Third round of RUC collection for refined 
descriptions before implementation; 
• 
Step 5: Implementation of RUC to the CERIF 
metadata; 
This procedure has been refined over man months, but is 
designed to ensure maximum richness, integrity and 
correctness of the metadata, since it is upon the quality of the 
metadata that the achievement of FAIRness depends. 
     Work is now complete in converting the DDSS tables (in 
Excel) to the granularity database using Postgres. This (a) 
facilitates finding particular DDSS elements, eliminating 
duplicates and checking the progress of getting DDSS 
elements into the metadata format; (b) simplifies harvesting to 
the metadata catalog. 
IV. 
DEMONSTRATING THAT EPOS IS FAIR 
The mapping of the FAIR principles to aspects of the EPOS 
architecture, demonstrates that the FAIR principles are 
supported by the EPOS architecture from metadata to service 
provision (Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 5. The FAIR Principles and the EPOS Architecture Pyramid [27] 
[28]. 
 
    The provision of FAIRness starts with the metadata as 
explained above. To achieve FAIRness, the metadata must be 
rich (many attributes), identify uniquely the asset with a 
Resolvable 
Universally 
Unique 
Persistent 
IDentifier 
(RUUPID), have available licensing information, use standard 
protocols, have an appropriate vocabulary, provide qualified 
references and provenance.  We believe to this should be added 
demonstrate both referential and functional integrity.  It is on 
the latter two quality measures that many other metadata 
formats fail.  
     Findability is achieved by the rich metadata.  Query on the 
rich metadata selects the metadata representing the assets of 
interest, including the RUUPID of the asset.  
     Accessibility is achieved by resolving the asset RUUPID 
and also ensuring the access conditions – in a licence (better a 
machine-representation of the conditions in the licence) or 
metadata concerning authorization from the AAAI – are 
respected. 
     Interoperability is achieved by the use of convertors 
between metadata formats, to provide homogeneous access to 
the assets through standard APIs.  If necessary, data formats 
can also be converted to a canonical form to allow co-analysis 
or display of heterogeneous datasets. 
     Reusability is achieved because of the richness of the 
metadata (many attributes), the provision of licence 
information allied to the authorization component of AAAI, 
the utilization of community standard formats and finally the 
provision 
of 
provenance 
information 
which 
comes 
automatically because of the time-stamped role-based 
relationships between base entities in CERIF. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

V. 
CONCLUSION 
Currently, 186 digital assets (rising progressively to 221) 
from the domain communities, supported by 281 webservices, 
are represented by CERIF metadata in the EPOS ICS-C 
catalog and made available FAIRly.  These services, described 
by the metadata, can be discovered, accessed, contextualized 
and (re)utilized individually or composed into workflows and 
hence become interoperable.  A GUI provides the user view 
onto the catalog, and it also provides a workspace to collect the 
metadata of the assets selected for use (Figure 6).  From the 
workspace a workflow may be constructed and deployed. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. EPOS-ICS Graphical User Interface. 
 
Future plans include: 
(a) Harvesting of metadata describing more assets: not 
only services, but also datasets, software, workflows, 
equipment; 
(b) Improving the GUI to allow workflow deployment 
with ‘fire and forget’ technology, or single-step with 
user checking and adjustment at each step; 
(c) Completion of the software to permit trans-national 
access to laboratory and sensor equipment; 
(d) Improved AAAI to give the domain communities 
finer control over FAIR utilisation of their assets; 
(e) The inclusion of virtual laboratory-type interfaces 
(virtual research environments), allowing users 
access and connectivity including open-source 
frameworks such as Jupyter notebooks [26], which 
are increasingly being used in some scientific 
communities. 
 
     The architecture outlined and demonstrated (in successive 
prototypes) in EPOS-IP has found favour (not without some 
criticism of course – leading to agile improvements) from the 
user community. The criticisms usually concerned: (a) 
simplifying the complexity of the user interface (achieved by 
the use of panes); (b) improvements in the quantity (more 
attributes) and quality of metadata to make Finding, Accessing 
Interoperating and Reusing easier – this was really a criticism 
of the TCS supplied metadata more than the ICS; (c) lack of 
harmonization – again this is the responsibility of 
harmonization 
groups 
across 
the 
TCS 
communities.       
Furthermore, the prototype system has passed Technological 
Readiness Assessment procedures within the governance of 
the EPOS-IP project.  Currently the ICS is undergoing pre-
production tests. The architecture meets the requirements, it is 
state of the art and has a further development plan.  The FAIR 
achievements are:  
1. EPOS architecture from the beginning was designed for 
FAIR, with EPOS staff involved in FAIR definition and 
subsequent indicators work; 
2. EPOS is already FAIR-compliant with RUUPIDs, rich 
metadata (many attributes), formal syntax, declared semantics, 
referential and functional integrity; 
3. The EPOS catalog already interoperates with 17 metadata 
‘standards’ in geoscience and wider; 
4. EPOS is open to interoperate with other RIs  
(a) directly; (b) via an ‘umbrella’ VRE; or (c) via EOSC; 
5.EPOS started with interoperable services which overcomes 
many problems with data and is anticipating EOSC. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors acknowledge the work of the whole ICT team in 
EPOS reported here, and the funding of the European 
Commission H2020 program (Grant agreement 676564) and 
National Funding Councils that have made this work possible. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. Jeffery, D. Bailo, K. Atakan, and M. Harrison “EPOS: 
European Plate Observing System” in Proc. Eleventh International 
Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, 
Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2019), pp. 79-86. 
 [2] 
FAIR 
Principles 
https://www.force11.org/group/fairgroup/fairprinciples (accessed on 
30 January 2020)  
[3] RDA Working Group https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-
data-maturity-model-wg (accessed on 30 January 2020) 
[4] P. Sutterlin, K. Jeffery, and E. Gill: “Filematch:  A Format for the 
Interchange of Computer-Based Files of Structured Data” Computers 
and Geosciences 3 1977)  pp.  429-468.  
[5] 
UMM: 
https://earthdata.nasa.gov/about/science-system-
description/eosdis-components/common-metadata-
repository/unified-metadata-model-umm (accessed on 30 January 
2020) 
[6] Geonetwork  https://geonetwork-opensource.org/ (accessed 30 
May 2019) 
[7] EarthCube: https://www.earthcube.org/ (accessed on 30 January 
2020) 
[8] AuScope: http://www.auscope.org.au/  (accessed on 30 January 
2020) 
[9] GEOSS: https://www.earthobservations.org/geoss.php (accessed 
on 30 January 2020)9) 
[10] VRE4EIC: https://www.vre4eic.eu/ (accessed on 30 January 
2020) 
[11] EVEREST: https://ever-est.eu/ (accessed on 30 January 2020) 
[12] ENVRI-FAIR: http://envri.eu/envri-fair/ (accessed on 30 
January 2020) 
[13] EOSC: 
https://ec.europa.eu/research/openscience/index.cfm?pg=open-
science-cloud (accessed on 30 January 2020) 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[14] 
CERIF: 
https://www.eurocris.org/cerif/main-features-cerif 
(accessed on 30 January 2020) 
[15] Newman, Sam. “Building Microservices”, O'Reilly Media, Inc., 
2015 
[16] International Journal of Open Information Technologies ISSN: 
2307- 8162 
[17] RabbitMQ: https://www.rabbitmq.com/ (accessed on 30 January 
2020) 
[18] UNITY: http://www.unity-idm.eu (accessed on 30 January 
2020) 
[19] Taverna: https://taverna.incubator.apache.org/ (accessed on 30 
January 2020) [20] PaaSage: https://paasage.ercim.eu/  (accessed on 
30 January 2020) 
[21] MELODIC: melodic.cloud/ (accessed on 30 January 2020) 
[22] DC: http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/ (accessed on 30 
January 2020) 
[23] DCAT: https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat/ (accessed on 30 
January 2020) 
[24] CKAN: https://ckan.org/ (accessed on 30 January 2020) 
[25] INSPIRE: https://inspire.ec.europa.eu/ (accessed on 30 January 
2020) 
[26] Jupyter: https://jupyter.org/ (accessed on 30 January 2020) 
[27] D. Bailo, (2019, July 10). “Four-stages FAIR Roadmap - 
FAIR "Pyramid"”. Zenodo. 
http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3299353 (accessed on 30 January 
2020) 
[28] D. Bailo, R. Paciello, M. Sbarra, R. Rabissoni, V. Vinciarelli and  
M. Cocco “Perspectives on the Implementation of FAIR Principles in 
Solid Earth Research Infrastructures” , Frontiers in Earth Science, vol 
8, 2020, p.3, DOI10.3389/feart.2020.00003    
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/feart.2020.00003 
(accessed on 30 January 2020) 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

