A Comparative Study of the Characteristics of Collisions Involving Bicycles on 
Frequently and Infrequently Used Bicycle Routes  
 
Joshua James Coniglio, Jianhong (Cecilia) Xia and Mark Ryan 
Department of Spatial Sciences 
Curtin University 
Perth, Western Australia 
email:joshua.coniglio@hotmail.com, c.xia@curtin.edu.au and mark_ryan.au@outlook.com 
 
 
Abstract— Cycling is a popular and sustainable transport 
mode. However, cyclists make up three percent of all road 
fatalities and fifteen percent of all road hospitalisations in 
Australia. Limited studies have been conducted to investigate 
the characteristics of Bicycle Motor Vehicle Crashes (BMVC) 
from a spatial perspective. This paper aims to compare the 
characteristics of BMVC on frequently and infrequently used 
bicycle routes within the Perth metropolitan region. It is 
broken down into two parts. The first part was to identify the 
frequently and infrequently used recreational bicycle paths 
based on Strava heat maps. The second task uses market 
segmentation 
with 
the 
Expectation-Maximisation 
(EM) 
algorithm to identify the major characteristics involved in 
BMVC on frequently and infrequently used routes. Through 
the findings presented in this study, the overall safety of these 
frequently used bicycle routes was determined. 
Keywords- freqently used bicycle route; bicycle crash 
characteristics; 
bicycle 
motor 
vehicle 
crashes; 
spatial 
distribution.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION   
Over the last decade, cycling has become increasingly 
popular not only as an environmentally friendly form of 
transportation, but as a healthy recreational activity 
undertaken individually or as part of a group. Cycling also 
poses more risk to severe injury in the event of a crash 
because the human body is unprotected against any 
hazardous road environments [1]. Various studies conducted 
by researchers into the risk factors involved in cycling 
related incidents along with the road and crash characteristics 
that contributed to the bicycle crashes. However, there is 
limited research comparing the characteristics of motorists, 
cyclists and vehicles on frequently used and unfrequently 
used routes.  
The main objective of this study is to identify the most 
frequently used bicycle routes within the Perth Metropolitan 
area and relate these routes to BMVC to evaluate the safety 
of these cycling routes. The purpose behind this study is to 
reduce the number of incidents involving cyclists in Perth by 
analyzing Perth’s current cycling infrastructure and major 
crash 
characteristics 
involved 
in 
order 
to 
provide 
recommendations for improvement. The rest of this paper is 
organized as follows. Section II describes the related studies 
according to the crash locations. Section III explains the 
methods used. Section IV addresses the results. The 
discussion and conclusions close the paper in Section V. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 This review primarily focuses on identifying hazardous 
environments for cyclists by examining the crash locations 
with the highest percentage of crashes and the road and 
driver characteristics, which may influence these crashes. 
The four main crash sites include crashes in traffic, on shared 
paths, off-road crashes and in cycle lanes. 
A. In Traffic Crash Locations 
According to Meuleners, Lee, and Haworth [2], 92.5 
percent of recorded cyclist crashes occurred within the Perth 
Metropolitan area, whilst the remaining 7.5 percent were 
located in rural areas [2]. This suggests that urban areas have 
more hazardous road environments that can threaten the 
safety of cyclists and increase their likelihood of suffering a 
severe injury. Severe injuries refer to cases where the victim 
is hospitalized or killed following a crash. One of the most 
severe crash sites are in traffic crashes, where a cyclist is 
travelling on the road but not within a bicycle lane. A study 
in the Australian Capital Territory by Rome et al. [4] in 2014 
identified that 31.9 percent of cycling crashes occurred in 
traffic and of those, 35.4 percent involved a motor vehicle 
[4]. Crashes between cyclists and motor vehicles, 
particularly cars, pose the greatest threat to the safety of 
cyclists. This is supported by Stevenson et al. [5] whose 
research into the safety of cyclists within an Australian urban 
road environment identifies that a cyclist has a 3.6 greater 
chance of being severely injured in a crash involving a motor 
vehicle than any other crash type [5]. 
B. Crashes on Shared Paths    
The next type of crash site that contributes to high crash 
statistics are shared paths, which account for 36.1 percent of 
crashes according to the results from the analysis conducted 
by Rome et al. [4]. Shared paths are off-road routes that are 
accessible by both cyclists and pedestrians. These paths 
however are often mistaken as bicycle only paths by cyclists 
thus justifying why cyclists were travelling at high speeds 
when they crash. Of the crashes that occurred on a shared 
path, 16.4 percent involved pedestrians, whilst 23.3 percent 
involved other cyclists. The cyclist either crashed into 
another road user or crashed trying to avoid a collision [4]. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Consequently, shared paths are associated with crashes that 
result in serious injuries suffered by cyclists. An important 
safety measure that could be implemented to reduce the 
percentage of shared path crashes could be to recognize 
shared paths by installing signs near the paths. This measure 
would be a cost effective attempt to communicate this 
information to cyclists and may encourage them to slow 
down. 
C. Off-Road Crashes 
Off-road paths is a broad term used to describe several 
locations that contribute to over half of the cycle related 
crashes that occur within Western Australia. Such locations 
include “sidewalks, driveways, yards, cycle paths, bike trails 
and parking areas” [2, p 1223]. Despite 58 percent of the 
crashes being located off-road, cyclists injured off-road were 
less likely to go to hospital to receive care than those injured 
on the road. As a result, many bicycle related crashes are not 
reported to police if the injuries sustained are only minor and 
do not require medical treatment [2]. From these off-road 
crashes, 82 percent and therefore the majority occurred on 
footpaths, which ran parallel to a road. Footpaths can be 
classified as off-road paths that accounted for 16.8 percent of 
all bicycle crashes within the Australian Capital Territory 
[4]. This is a relatively low percentage though compared to 
the Western Australia study, reinforcing the idea that many 
off-road crashes are not reported and therefore cannot be 
included in crash statistics. A study by Wegman, Zhang, and 
Dijkstra [6] suggests that a vital issue in relation to cycling 
crash data is the underreporting of such crashes to the 
appropriate authorities [6]. 
D. On-Road Cycle Lane Crashes 
The final type of crash site is on-road cycle lanes these 
are small lanes located on and run parallel to the road, and 
are dedicated to cycle traffic. They also assist in separating 
cyclists from motor vehicles in an attempt to improve road 
safety for cyclists [3]. Only 7.9 percent of crashes occur 
within on-road cycle lanes, which is the lowest percentage of 
crashes compared to any other crash site [4]. As a result, it 
can be debated that on-road cycle lanes are the safest way for 
a cyclist to travel. To back up this theory, multiple arguments 
can be made; firstly, on-road cycle lanes have the lowest 
number of crashes, secondly, it is illegal for a motor vehicle 
to cross over a solid line into the bicycle lane unless the line 
is broken. Lastly, there is a greater chance of an incident 
being reported to the police because the lane is located on a 
public road and the majority of these incidents often involve 
a motor vehicle [1]. 
III. 
METHODS 
This section presents data collection methods, the study 
areas and data analysis methods. 
A. The Study Area and Bicycle and Motor Vehicle Crash 
Data 
 The area of focus for this study is the Perth metropolitan 
area located in Western Australia (WA). The Western 
Australian road network was acquired from the Department 
of Transport (DoT) and was clipped to the study area. DoT 
also provided the shared paths data that consisted of shared 
paths, recreational shared paths and the principle shared 
paths. Lastly, the WA boundary was provided by Main 
Roads (See Figure 1). 
For this study, Main Roads provided their BMVC data 
from 2005 to 2014. This data contained 12057 records, of 
which 5755 were bicycle crashes. This total of bicycle 
crashes was lower than expected considering the ten-year 
time period, suggesting that many more crashes occurred but 
were not reported and therefore not included in the data. This 
needs to be taken into consideration when using the data 
throughout the study. The other records were all the 
motorized vehicles involved in bicycle crashes. These 
records are therefore referred to as vehicular crashes. It is 
possible for multiple vehicles and one bicycle to be involved 
in a crash, thus the reason why there are more vehicle 
records than bicycles. 
B. Frequently Used Bicycle Routes 
Multiple acquisition approaches were considered in order 
to obtain data in regards to the frequently used bicycle 
routes. As the main focus of this study, it was crucial that 
this data was accurate and current to ensure that the results 
and any recommendations based on the results were reliable. 
The first approach considered was using a GPS device 
attached to the bicycles of multiple frequent cyclists so that 
different routes could be acquired. The disadvantage of this 
approach however was that the data could be biased based 
towards the route preferences of those cyclists and therefore 
was not a good representation of all cyclists in Perth. 
The second approach was the use of existing data 
collected by Run and Cycling Tracking on the Social 
Network for Athletes (Strava). Strava is a mobile application 
that utilises mobile Global Positioning System (GPS) to 
record the routes of runners and cyclists worldwide. Using 
this data, Strava developed a global heat-map that displays 
the most highly used paths by runners and cyclists. An 
inquiry was sent to Strava requesting their cycling data for 
the Perth metropolitan area to be used for this study but no 
response was ever received. As a result, a third approach was 
ultimately taken. 
The frequently used bicycle routes data was obtained by 
digitising the data from a road network and the shared paths 
data based on Strava’s global heat-map. Care, time and 
precision was required to ensure the data was accurate in 
accordance with this heat-map. The shared paths data was 
used to obtain any paths that were not located along roads 
such recreational paths around the Swan River. The resulting 
digitized routes are therefore the most frequently used 
recreational cycling routes 
For simplicity, these frequently used paths are referred as 
the popular routes, which are highlighted in the Strava heat- 
map and all other paths are known as the unpopular routes. 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 1. The study area 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Identification of Major Characteristics of Drivers and 
Vehicles of BMVC. 
A data mining approach was taken for the second part of 
the analysis to identify the dominant characteristics of each 
variable involved in BMVC on the identified popular and 
unpopular routes. These characteristics will in turn identify 
vulnerable populations that are more prone to severe crashes. 
Data mining uses existing information to generate new 
information for a particular purpose. The method chosen to 
implement this approach is known as market segmentation 
with the use of the EM algorithm. Market segmentation is 
the process of separating a market into smaller groups known 
as market segments based on the similar characteristics from 
the market [7]. The EM algorithm is a clustering based 
algorithm that identifies the dominant characteristics of 
objects by implementing maximum likelihood principles. For 
model-based clustering, this algorithm is also known as 
mixture modelling and can be used for both categorical and 
numerical data. 
The crash data was broken down into four subsets so that 
cyclist crash characteristics on frequently used routes could 
be easily compared against those on infrequently used routes. 
Vehicle crashes were also of interest because each case that 
involved at least one vehicle in the crash data also involved a 
cyclist. As a result, characteristics of vehicles could have 
been contributing factors that caused the crashes to occur. 
For example, a drunk driver could hit a cyclist so the driver’s 
alcohol level would be an important factor that caused the 
crash. The original crash data was first broken down into 
bicycle only crashes and vehicle crashes. Using the 
frequently used bicycle routes (line geometry) and the crash 
sites (point geometry) within a Geographic Information 
System (GIS), the second task was to determine an 
appropriate distance (in metres) to classify if a bicycle crash 
had occurred on a frequently used route. Three distances 
were tested and the most appropriate was chosen. 
Firstly, a distance of 0 metres was used meaning the 
bicycle crashes had to intersect with the line geometry of the 
popular route. However, only 2 crash sites out of 5755 
records actually intersected with the popular routes line 
because the majority of crashes were slightly offset from the 
line. A distance of 10 metres was then implemented but 
crashes that occurred on roads parallel to the popular routes 
(i.e., in the other lane) were also selected. Ultimately, a 
distance of 5 metres was chosen because it selected all 
crashes on popular routes without selecting crashes in the 
opposing lanes near the popular routes. In other words, 
crashes within a 5 metre proximity of the popular routes 
were selected and classified as having occurred on the 
popular route. Crashes that occurred on unpopular routes are 
therefore the inverse of the popular routes selection. The 
same process was carried out for the vehicular crashes. Table 
I summarises the number of records for the four subsets. The 
last task was to clean the data by converting numerical data 
to categorical data because the data provided by Main Roads 
used numbers to represent categories. 
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF RECORDS PER CRASH SUBSET 
 
Bicycle Crashes 
Vehicular Crashes 
Total 
Popular Routes 
591 
597 
1188 
Unpopular 
Routes 
5164 
5705 
10869 
Total 
5755 
6302 
12057 
 
 
 
According to Xia et al. [7], there are three main steps 
involved to carry out this analysis. The first is to identify the 
spatial patterns involved. For this study there are only two 
patterns of interest, which are the crashes on popular routes 
compared against the crashes on the unpopular routes. The 
second step was to apply market segmentation with the EM 
algorithm to the variables for each crash subset using 
software called Weka. This generates between one to seven 
market segments in a table based on the characteristics 
inputted. In total, 10 tables were created so each crash subset 
had a table for each variable. Tables for the vehicle variable 
were not required for the bicycle crash subsets because the 
vehicle is a bike, thus there are no data in regards to the bike 
itself. The last step was to distinguish the major 
characteristics by interpreting the results from step two. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Using driver and vehicle variables, two tables were 
created from the results of the ten crash subset tables to 
identify the most statistically significant characteristics 
involved in bicycle and vehicular crashes. In each table, the 
dominant market segment is bolded for both cyclist and 
motorized categories for each movement pattern. The value 
in brackets indicates the percentage of the market that 
belongs to that cluster. The dominant value under each 
characteristic in each market segment (i.e., each row) is also 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

shaded. Characteristics with empty cells were not involved in 
the analysis of that crash subset because the characteristic 
was not deemed as relevant. Tables II to III show the results 
for each variable. 
For crashes on the popular routes, in the first row of 
Table II for example, 68% of bicycle crashes on popular 
routes involved a male between the ages of 40 to 49 who 
were wearing protective gear and only minor property 
damage was sustained as a result of the crash. This is 
therefore the largest and most significant market segment for 
that crash subset.  The other two segments were dominated 
by young male cyclists aged between 20-29, the majority of 
which were hospitalized or required medical attention.  
While for crashes on the unpopular routes, middle-aged male 
cyclists aged between 30-39 in segment 6 dominated and 
only minor property damage was sustained as a result of the 
crash. Young male cyclists aged between 10-19 in segment 5 
dominated and the majority of them did not wear protection. 
We did not find any noteworthy characteristics for motorists, 
except minor injuries were dominant for all segments of the 
motorists.     
    In Table III, 73% of the vehicular crashes on popular 
routes involved a car with a four-cylinder engine 
manufactured between 2000 and 2009 while the remaining 
27% of the market had a six-cylinder engine. Segment 2 
contains 73% of the vehicular crashes on popular routes and 
therefore is the dominant group. For vehicular crashes on 
unpopular routes, segment 1 is the most dominant with 60% 
of the market falling within this segment. The results from 
this segment are the same to that of segment two from the 
popular routes movement pattern. However, segments 4 and 
5 are worth noting because the dominant vehicle in segment 
4 is a station wagon rather than a car and segment 5 is the 
same as segment one for the popular routes. Together, 
segments four and five equal to just over a quarter of the 
market. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
The major characteristics of cyclists, drivers and motor 
vehicles were discovered. One vulnerable population were 
teenagers involved in severe bicycle crashes on the 
unpopular routes without wearing helmets. The age group of 
male drivers varied from young adults to middle aged who 
wore protective equipment such as seatbelts and were 
usually involved in incidences resulting in minor property 
damage. In incidences involving such drivers however, 
inattention and fatigue were the defining characteristics that 
would have caused the crash. Fatigue not only affects a 
drivers’ reaction time but leads to inattention. This threatens 
the safety of cyclists regardless if they are within an on-road 
cycle lane because cyclists on the road rely on other road 
users to overtake them safely. Surprisingly, the injuries 
sustained by crashes involving fatigue and inattention are 
minor but could have been much worse, especially in the 
case of a vehicle colliding with a cyclist.  
 Of the major vehicle characteristics, modern cars with 
four cylinder engines were mostly involved in crashes and 
could be related to the high number of crashes caused by 
young 
adults 
not 
paying 
attention 
while 
driving. 
Consequently, there is strong causation that the young 
drivers were using their phones whilst driving and therefore 
not paying attention to the road as it is easier to use a mobile 
device while driving a small automatic vehicle.  
In conclusion, the most frequently used recreational 
bicycle routes were identified using Strava’s global heat-
map. The major characteristics involved in bicycle-related 
crashes on and off the popular routes were also identified. 
The market segmentation method with the use of the 
Expectation-Maximisation algorithm successfully divided 
the crash data for each variable into groups that share 
common characteristics. These groups were examined in 
depth in comparison to each other and several justifiable 
theories were developed as a result.  
Overall, the popular recreational bicycle routes were 
found to be safe despite the high traffic flow and urgent need 
of maintenance. Not many crashes were found to have 
occurred on the popular routes compared to the unpopular 
routes, suggesting they are much safer and therefore should 
be utilised by regular recreational cyclists. This in turn, may 
reduce the number of cyclists involved in dangerous road 
incidents by diminishing the risk. The major limitation of the 
study is the methodology in defining popular and unpopular 
routes. Strava is mainly for recreation purpose. Many bicycle 
trips, with other purposes, such as work, haven’t been 
considered. In the future, other social media tool, such as 
Bikemap, can be used for understanding bike travel behavior 
in Perth in a more holistic way.  
 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
TABLE II.  
DRIVERS’ CHARACTERISTICS    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE III.  
  VEHICLES’ CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Boufous, L. D. Rome, T. Senerrick, and S. Ivers, “Risk factors for 
severe injury in cyclists involved in traffic crashes in Victoria, 
Australia,” Accident Analysis and Prevention vol. 49, pp. 404-409, 
2012, doi:  10.1016/j.aap.2012.03.011. 
[2] L. B. Meuleners, A. H. Lee, and C. Haworth, “Road environment, 
crash type and hospitalisation of bicyclists and motorcyclists 
presented to emergency departments in Western Australia,” Accident 
Analysis and Prevention vol. 39, pp.1222-1225, 2007, doi: 
10.1016/j.aap.2007.03.006 
[3] J. Parkin, and C. Meyers, “The effect of cycle lanes on the proximity 
between motor traffic and cycle traffic,” Accident Analysis and 
Prevention, 
vol. 
42, 
pp. 
159-165, 
2010, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.aap.2009.07.018. 
[4] L. D. Rome, S. Boufous, T. Georgeson, T. Senserrick, D. Richardson,  
and R. Ivers, “Bicycle Crashes in Different Riding Environments in 
the Australian Capital Territory,” Traffic Injury Prevention, vol. 15,  
pp. 81-88, 2014, doi:10.1080/15389588.2013.781591. 
[5] M. Stevenson, M. Johnson, J. Oxley, L. Meuleners, B. Gabbe, and G. 
Rose, “Safer cycling in the urban road environment: study approach 
and protocols guiding an Australian study,” Journal of the 
International Society for Child and Adolescent Injury Prevention, vol.  
21, pp. 1-5, 2014, doi:10.1136/injuryprev-2014- 041287. 
[6] F. Wegman, F. Zhang, and A. Dijkstra, “How to make more cycling 
good for road safety?” Accident Analysis and Prevention, vol.  44,  
pp. 19-29, 2012, doi:10.1016/j.aap.2010.11.010. 
[7] J. Xia, F. H. Evans, K. Spilsbury, V. Ciesielski, C. Arrowsmith, and  
G. Wright, “Market segments based on the dominant movement 
patterns of tourists,” Tourism Management, vol.31, pp. 464-469,  
2010, doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2009.04.013 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

