Privacy Concerns in Location-based Social Networks 
 
Fatma S. Alrayes, Alia I. Abdelmoty 
School of Computer Science and Informatics  
Cardiff University  
Cardiff, UK  
{F.S.Alrayes, A.I.Abdelmoty}@cs.cardiff.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—User location data collected on Location-Based 
Social Networks (LBSN) can be used to enhance the services 
provided by those applications. However, it can be potentially 
utilised for undesirable purposes that can compromise users’ 
privacy. This paper presents a study of the privacy implication 
of location-based information provision and collection in 
LBSN.  The study is supported by analysis of representative 
data sets from such applications.   The results demonstrate the 
need for further work on improving the visibility of the 
information collected to users of the Social Web, to allow them 
to better assess the implications of their location sharing 
activities. 
Keywords-location privacy; LBSN; location-based inference 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Massive interest in geographical referencing of personal 
resources is evident on the Web today. Geographic 
referencing has evolved to become a natural method of 
organising and linking information with the aim of 
facilitating its discovery and use. GPS-enabled devices are 
enabling individuals to store their mobility tracks, tag photos 
and events. Embracing these new location-aware capabilities 
by the social networks has led to the emergence of Geo-
Social Networks (GeoSNs) which offer their users the ability 
to geo-reference their submissions and to share their location 
with many other users. Subsequently, users can use the 
location identifier to browse and search for resources. 
GeoSNs 
include 
Location-Enabled 
Social 
Networks 
(LESNs), for example, Facebook, Twitter and Flickr, where 
users’ location is supplementary identification of other 
primary data sets, and Location-Based Social Networks 
(LBSNs), for example, Foursquare and Yelp where location 
is  an essential key for providing the service, 
GeoSNs collect real-time and large-scale location 
information on users as well as other contextual information 
including user relationships and user provided text updates 
possibly over long periods of time. In particular, LBSNs as 
opposed to LESNs enable sharing and collection of detailed  
personal location information, provide significant semantic 
data associated with the location, such as place name, type 
and address, as well as allow users to express their opinions 
and experience in terms of reviews and tips. As a result, 
users’ historical location information can be related to 
contextual and semantic information  publicly available 
online [1] and can be used to infer personal and sensitive 
information about users and for constructing comprehensive 
user profiles.  Possible derived information in such profiles 
can include user activities, relationships, interests and 
mobility patterns [2][3]. Such enriched location-based 
profiles can be considered to be useful if used to personalise 
and enhance the quality of use of the applications.  However, 
they can potentially be used for undesirable purposes and can 
pose privacy threats ranging from location-based spams to 
possible physical harm by any adversary [4]. Users may not 
be fully aware of what location information is being 
collected, how the information is used and by whom, and 
hence can fail to appreciate the possible potential risks of 
disclosing their location information. 
In this paper, we study the location privacy of users when 
using LBSNs. The aim of this study is to investigate the 
potential privacy implications of LBSNs by examining and 
demonstrating possible derived information from typical data 
sets collected by these applications for different types of 
users.   Foursquare was chosen as a representative LBSN 
application for conducting this study due to its popularity 
(over 40 million users across the world by September, 2013 
[5]). 
Firstly, the dimensions of the location privacy problem in 
LBSNs are examined in terms of the type of data collected, 
its visibility and accessibility by users of the application, as 
well as the possible exploitation of these data and the level of 
security in such services, in order to provide a better 
understanding of the privacy issues. Secondly, an analytical 
study is carried out, using a representative data set, to explore 
the location data content and the range of possible inference 
that can be made from them.  Usage patterns in the dataset 
are used to guide a classification of users of the application 
and in the analysis of the data.   
Previous 
studies 
focused 
mostly 
on 
examining 
spatiotemporal movement patterns in LBSNs [6][7].   Some 
studies explored users’ privacy concerns and attitude when 
sharing their location for social purposes, but  presented 
limited evaluations using restricted application scenarios 
[8][9].    
This paper presents a study of the privacy implications of 
location-based information provision and collection in 
LBSN.  The study is supported by analysis of representative 
data sets from such applications.   The results demonstrate 
the need for further work on improving the visibility of the 
information collected to users of the Social Web, to allow 
them to better assess the implications of their location sharing 
activities. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The rest of this work is organized as follows: section II 
provides an overview of  related work. Section III discusses 
the dimensions of the location privacy problem in LBSNs.  
Section IV describes the experiment conducted. Section V 
presents the result of the analyses. A conclusion of the work 
and future directions are given in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Two relevant questions to the problem being studied are: 
to what extent is location privacy a potential concern for 
users in LBSNs, and what sort of location-based inference is 
possible from the data collected by LBSNs.  In this section, 
related work on both issues is reviewed. 
A. Users Attitudes and Privacy Concerns in Geo-Social 
Applications 
A growing research interest has been witnessed over the 
past few years for studying users’ attitudes and privacy 
concerns of their location privacy and investigating how user-
empowered location privacy protection mechanism can 
influence their behaviour. Tsai et al. [8] developed a social 
location sharing application where participants were capable 
of specifying time-based rules to share their location and they 
were then notified of who viewed their locations.  Their 
findings suggested that the control given to user for setting 
their sharing preferences has contributed to the reduction of 
the level of  privacy concern of the participants. 
Similarly, Sadeh et al. [9] enabled users of their People 
Finder application to set rule-based location privacy controls 
by determining the where, when and with whom to share 
their location and were notified when their location 
information was requested. Participants were initially 
reluctant to share their location information and then tended 
to be more comfortable over time. Patil et al. [10] 
implemented a system that represents actual users’ workplace 
offering live feeds about users and their location, then asked 
those users to define permissions for their personal 
information sharing by setting various levels linked to four 
user categories. They found that these participants were 
concerned most about their location information and they 
utilised the permission feature to control it. Another study by 
Kelley et al. [11] showed that users were highly concerned 
about their privacy especially when sharing location with 
corporate-oriented parties. However, their location-sharing 
with advertising companies can be increased when offering 
more complex location privacy settings. 
Other work was carried out to examine how the 
employment of visualisation methods may impact users’ 
attitude to location privacy and behaviour. Brush et al. [12] 
studied users’ attitudes towards their location privacy when 
socially sharing their location or when tracking it using GPS 
for long periods of time and questioned whether using some 
obfuscation techniques can address users’ concerns. As a 
result, participants were concerned about revealing their 
home, identity and exact locations. They visually recognised 
and chose the best obfuscation techniques they felt protect 
their location privacy. In addition, Tang et al. [13] 
investigated to what extent presenting various visualisations 
of users’ location history can influence their privacy concerns 
when using location sharing applications.  They developed 
text-, map-, and time-based visualisation methods and 
considered spatiotemporal properties of sharing historical 
location. They noted that the majority of participants were 
concerned about their location privacy including their 
physical privacy when showing them their visualised location 
history and consequently preferred text-based visualisation 
when sharing location with other users, as it was perceived to 
limit the amount of information exposed.  
With regards to public GeoSNs, there is relatively few 
research works that examines privacy concerns of users.  
Lindqvist et al. [14] considered users’ motivations in using 
Foursquare and questioned their privacy concerns.  Their 
analysis showed that most of the participants had few 
concerns about their privacy and users who were more 
concerned about their privacy chose not to check into their 
private residence or to delay checking into places till after 
they leave, as a way of controlling their safety and privacy.   
A similar observation was noted by Jin et al. in [15], where it 
was found that users were generally aware of the privacy of 
their place of residence and tended not to provide full home 
addresses or blocked access to their residential check-ins to 
other users. 
In summary, it is evident that location privacy presents a 
real concern to users in location sharing applications, and 
particularly as they become aware of the data they are 
providing.  Previous studies may have been limited by 
several factors, including the size and representativeness of 
the sample user base used in the experiments conducted and 
the limited features of the proprietary applications used in 
testing [8][9][10][11].  Moreover, as far as we are aware, 
there are no previous studies that consider the problem of 
location privacy on public LBSNs.  
B. Location-Based Inference from GeoSNs 
There are some studies that utilised publicly available 
information from GeoSNs in order to derive or predict users’ 
location.  In [16], Twitter users’ city-level locations were 
estimated by only exploiting their tweets contents with which 
it was possible to predict more than half of the sample within 
100 miles of their actual place. Similarly, Pontes at al [17] 
examined how much personal information can be inferred 
from the publicly available information of Foursquare users 
and found the home cities of more than two-third of the 
sample within 50 kilometres. Sadilek at al. [18] investigated 
novel approaches for inferring users’ location at a given time 
by taking advantage of knowing the GPS positions of their 
friends on Twitter.  Up to 84% of users’ exact dynamic 
locations were derived. Interestingly, Gao et al. [19] 
formulated predictive probability of the next check-in 
location by exploiting social-historical ties of some 
Foursquare users. They were able to predict with high 
accuracy possible new check-ins for places that users have 
not visited before, by exploiting the correlation between the 
social network information and geographical distance in 
LBSNs [20]. 
Other works focussed on investigating the potential 
inference of social relationships between users of GeoSNs. 
Crandall et al. [21] investigated how social ties between 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

people can be derived from spatial and temporal co-
occurrence by using  publicly available data of geo-tagged 
pictures from Flickr. They found that relatively limited co-
occurrence between users is sufficient for inferring high 
probability of social ties.  Sadilek at al. [18]  also formulated 
friendship predictions that derive social relationships by 
considering friendship formation patterns, messages’ content 
of users and their location. They predicted 90% of friendships 
with accuracy beyond 80%. Additionally, Scellato et al. [22] 
investigated the spatial properties of social networks existing 
among users of three popular LBSNs and found that the 
likelihood of having social connection decrease with 
distance. Scellato et al. [23] developed a link prediction 
system for LBSNs by utilising users’ check-ins information 
and places properties. 43% of the all new links appeared 
between users that have at least one check-in place in 
common and especially those who have a friend in common. 
Studying and extracting spatiotemporal movements and 
activities patterns of users on GeoSNs have also attracted 
much research in recent years. Dearman et al. [24] exploited 
locations’ reviews of  Yelp in order to identify a collection of 
potential activities promoted by the reviewed location. They 
derived the activities supported by each location by 
processing the review text and validated their findings 
through a user questionnaire. Noulas at al. [25] studied user 
mobility patterns in Foursquare by studying popular places 
and transitions between place categories.  Cheng at al. [6] 
examined a large scale dataset of users and their check-ins to 
analyse 
human 
movement 
patterns 
in 
terms 
of 
spatiotemporal, social and textual information associated 
with this data. They were able to measure user displacement 
of consecutive check-ins, distance between users’ check-ins 
and their centre of mass, and the returning probability to 
venues. They also studied the factors affecting users’ 
movement and found considerable relationship between 
users’ mobility and geographic and economic conditions. 
More recently, Preotiuc-Pietro et al. [7] investigated the 
behaviour of thousands of frequent Foursquare users. They 
analysed users’ movements including returning probability, 
check-ins frequency, inter-event time, and place transition 
among each venue category. They were also able to group 
users based on their check-in behaviour such as generic, 
businessmen or workaholics as well as predicting users’ 
future movement. 
The above studies show that there is a significant 
potential for deriving  personal information form GeoSNs 
and hence imply the possible privacy threats to user of these 
applications. Whereas previous studies considered mobility 
and behaviour of large user groups and determined general 
patterns and collective behaviour, in this work we consider 
the privacy implications for individual users, with the aim of 
understanding possible implied user profiles from location 
data stored in LBSNs. 
III. 
LOCATION PRIVACY ON LBSNS 
Four aspects of location privacy on LBSNs can be 
identified.   These are related to the amount of data collected 
and its quality, its visibility and accessibility, its possible 
utilisation by potential users, and the level of security offered 
to the user by the application.  
A. Location Data  Collection  
Location data collection refers to the type of location data 
collected and stored as well as to its quality. 
Foursquare collects and records user location data 
automatically and continuously, by estimating the user’s 
current latitude and longitude from the device being used.  
User’s check-ins into specific places are verified against their 
estimated 
current 
location 
and 
recorded 
explicitly.   
Foursquare also states that it collects additional information 
from third parties services, that communicate with the 
application, including personal information and activities.  
User’s visit to a place is recorded by the user intentionally 
checking-in a place.  Check-ins are made against predefined 
venues.  Venues record detailed information about a 
geographic place, including a name, a type classification, 
coordinate point representation, and address.   In addition, 
users’ check-ins are also time stamped.   Depending on the 
frequency of check-ins, a user (and the system) is able to 
record a complete and highly specific spatiotemporal track of 
their mobility. 
B. Location Information Accessibility 
Location information accessibility is concerned with how 
much of users’ data are available and visible to others 
including the user, other users and the third parties of the 
service. 
Users’ pervious check-in information is provided to them 
in the form of check-in history where they can view their 
visited venues, date of the visit and any tips they have made. 
They are also able to access and download their check-in. 
However, users seem to have only a limited aspect of 
accessibility compared with what service provider can collect 
or exploit these data. For example, Foursquare states in their 
privacy policy that they record users’ location on a 
continuous bases even without users checking into venues, 
but users do not have access to this data. 
Almost all of the users’ information is publicly available 
by default and can be viewed by other users.  This includes 
profile information, tips, likes, friends list, photos, badges, 
mayorships, and check-ins. Users are only able to block 
access to their check-ins and photos by setting their view to 
‘private’.  
As for information disclosure to third parties including 
Foursquare API’s users, all of the publicly available users’ 
information is accessible by third parties including private 
users’ information such as check-ins in anonymous form that 
is not linked to individual users. Foursquare also indicates 
that they will share users’ personal information with their 
business partners and whenever is necessary in some 
situations, such as enforcement of law.  
C. Location Data  Exploitation 
Location information exploitation refers to how the 
application or third parties can utilise the data and for which 
purposes. 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Foursquare gives itself absolute privileges over using and 
manipulating user information as stated in their terms of use. 
 “By submitting User Submissions on the Site or 
otherwise through the Service, you hereby do and shall 
grant Foursquare a worldwide, non-exclusive, royalty-
free, fully paid, sublicensable and transferable license to 
use, copy, edit, modify, reproduce, distribute, prepare 
derivative works of, display, perform, and otherwise fully 
exploit the User Submissions in connection with the Site, 
the Service and Foursquare's (and its successors and 
assigns') business, including without limitation for 
promoting and redistributing part or all of the Site (and 
derivative works thereof) or the Service in any media 
formats and through any media channels (including, 
without limitation, third party websites and feeds).” 
From the above, it is clear that there are no commitments 
from the application provider as to how the data may be used 
or shared by the application or by other parties.  Hence, by 
agreeing to the terms and conditions, users effectively are 
giving away the data and unconditional rights to use the data 
to the application.   
D. Location Data  Security 
Location data security refers to the level of data 
protection provided by the application for securing the user’s 
data against the risk of loss or unauthorized access. 
Foursquare 
declares 
that 
the 
security 
of 
users’ 
information is not guaranteed and any “Unauthorized entry or 
use, hardware or software failure, and other factors, may 
compromise the security of user information at any time”. 
Without any commitment to responsibility for data security, 
the application provider is declaring the possible high risk of  
data abuse by any adversary or even by the application 
provider themselves. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT  
This analysis is carried out using a real-world dataset 
from Foursquare for the purpose of demonstrating privacy 
implications of user activity on LBSNs.  The effect of 
location data density and diversity on the possible inferences 
that can be made from the data is also analysed.  
A. Dataset 
The Foursquare dataset used in this analysis is provided 
by Jin et al. [15]. The dataset contains venue information and 
public check-ins for anonymised users around the wide area 
of Pittsburgh, USA from 24 February, 2012 to 22 July, 2012.  
It contains 60,853 local venues, 45,289 users and 127,6988 
public check-ins of these users.  
B. Approach and Tools Used 
 To study the possible impact of location data density on 
users’ privacy, users of the dataset were first classified into 
groups based on their check-in frequency. A filter was 
initially imposed to disregard sparse user activity.  Hence, 
users with less than five check-ins per month were removed 
from the dataset. The rest of the users were categorised into 
three groups based on their check-in frequency per day, to 
Moderate, Frequent and Hyper-active user groups, as shown 
in Table I. One representative user is selected from each 
group who has the nearest average check-ins per day to the 
average check-ins per for the whole group. Table II shows 
some statistics for the selected users.  
The R statistical package was used for analyses and 
presentation of results. The SQLDF package was used for 
querying, linking and manipulating the data and the ggplot2 
package was used for the presentation of the results of the 
analysis.  
V. 
RESULTS  
Analysis of the dataset questioned the sort of implicit 
user-related information that can be considered to be private 
that may be extracted using the location data collected.    The 
user’s spatial location history can be extracted, in the form of 
visits to venues and the exact times of such visits.   The 
places visited are identified and described in detail.  For 
example, user7105 visited ‘Kohl's’; a department store, 
located at latitude 40.51105772555344 and longitude  -
79.99340577016872 at 9 a.m. Monday 27/2/2012. 
The basic information on venue check-ins can be 
analysed further and combined with other semantic 
information from the user profile to extract further 
information that can compromise user’s privacy.  Analysis 
will investigate the relationship between users and places 
visited, their mobility patterns and the relationships between 
users and other users as follows:  
 
Degree of association between user and place.  
Relationship with individual place instances as well as 
with general place types or categories will be studied.  
Elements of interest will include visit frequency, and 
possible commuting habits in terms of the association 
between the visit frequency of places and their 
location.  
 
Spatiotemporal movement patterns.  Visiting 
patterns to individual places or to groups of places can 
identify regular movement patterns. In addition, a 
change of visit patterns can also be a significant 
pointer to user activity.  
TABLE I.  STATISTICS OF USERS’ GROUPING. 
Group 
Name 
Check-ins 
Range in Total 
Users 
Count  
Check-ins 
Range per 
Day  
Average  
Check-ins 
per Day  
Moderate  
Between 50 and 
300 
4902 
 
0.3 to 2  
1.15  
Frequent  
Between 301 
and 750 
880 
2 to 5  
3.5  
Hyper-
active  
Between 751 
and 1303 
24 
5 to 8.6  
6.8  
 
 
TABLE II. STATISTICS OF THE SELECTED USERS. 
Factor 
Selected Users 
User9119 
User7105 
User2651 
Number of total check-ins 
144 
511 
1019 
Average check-ins per day 
0.96 
3.4 
6.8 
Number of visited venues 
21 
99 
101 
Number  of  visited venues’ 
categories 
17 
47 
57 
Number  of  visited venues’ 
main categories 
10 
11 
17 
Number  of friends 
20 
10 
19 
 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 Degree of association with other users.  Relationship 
between users can be derived by studying their 
movement patterns and analysing their co-occurrence 
in place and time. 
A. The Moderate User 
The analysis results of user9119 selected from the 
moderate groups are as follows. 
1) Degree of Association Between User and Place  
Two frequently visited venues by user9119 are ‘Penn 
Garrison’ whose category is ‘Home’ and   ‘USX Tower’ 
whose category is ‘Office’ representing 44% and 36% 
respectively of the total check-ins. Home and office are  
highly sensitive places, yet they represent 80% of this user’s 
check-ins. Other visited place types with significantly less 
frequency include, ‘Nightlife Spot’:0.5%, ‘Travel & 
Transport’: 0.27%, and ‘Shop & Service’:0.27%.  User9119 
is also interested in ‘Hockey’, ‘Garden Center’ and 
‘Museum’ place types.  As could be predicted, the location of 
venues visited, indicates that most of the visited venues are 
close to ‘Home’ and ‘Office’, whereas this user commutes 
further away to visit some less frequent venues such as 
‘Hockey Arena’.   Figure 1 shows this user’s check-in 
frequency for different categories of venues classified by the 
time of day.  As can be seen from the figure, user’s 
association with sensitive places like home and place of work 
can be identified.  In addition, a strong association with other 
place categories is also evident.   
2) Spatiotemporal Movement Patterns 
About 40% of this user’s total check-ins occurs at 9 am, 
mostly in the ‘Office’ and at 7 pm, mostly at ‘Home’. More 
than two-thirds of the check-ins are between 10 am and 2 pm 
and between 6 pm and  11 pm, which indicates that this user 
commutes more frequently during these hours.  From the 
user’s weekly patterns of movement, it can be seen that 71% 
of the venues were visited after 6 pm.  Mondays and 
Thursdays are when this user is most active, representing 
41% of the check-ins. User9119 tend to go to ‘Nightlife 
spots’ more frequently during working days, whereas visits to 
other specific place types occur only at weekends, including, 
‘Salon or Barbershop’, ‘Coffee Shop’ and ‘Garden Centre’.  
This user typically starts commuting earlier on working days 
and visits more places than on weekends. Observing the 
check-ins by month shows that the months of May and June 
are the most active in terms of the check-in frequency, 
comprising 60% of total check-ins, as well as diversity of 
category of venues visited (99% of the total visited categories 
of venues occurred in those months, including the emergence 
of new categories such as ‘Museum’, ‘Airport’ and ‘Hotel’).   
The user was least active in April.    Figure 4 demonstrates 
this user's check-ins count in different categories of venues, 
classified by day and grouped by month.  
Some changes of this user’s habits can be noticed as well, 
which can suggest a change of the user’s circumstances. For 
example, the user has not visited any Nightlife spots in 
March and April and has not checked-in in any place on 
Sundays of June and July including ‘Home’ and ‘Office’. In 
addition, the user has not checked in any place for a period of 
 
Figure 1. The moderate users’ check-ins count, classified by the category of 
venues for different hours of the day.  
 
 
a week between the 21st and 28th.  User9119 last check-in 
before this week was on the 20th of April at ‘Home’.  This 
may indicate a possible period of time-off work in that week. 
3) Degree of Association with Other Users 
Co-location is used here to denote that users have visited 
the same venue.   This can be used as a measure of uses’ 
interest in a place. User9119 was co-located at  in 6 unique 
venue categories with two (out of twenty) friends.  
Spatiotemporal co-occurrence between users is co-
location at same place and time.  This can be used as a 
measure of relationship between users. User9119 shared 
three co-occurrences with two friends; once with friend1236 
at ‘American Restaurant’ and twice with friend15229 at 
‘Office’, which can indicate that friend15229 is a colleague at 
work. In fact, this user shared 95 co-occurrences with 52 
other users, 90% of which were in the ‘Office’ suggesting the 
probability of those users being work colleagues.  
B. The Frequent User 
Analysis of results of user7105 from the frequent user 
group is as follows.  
1) Degree of Association between User and Place 
Similar to the moderate user, user7105 most checked-in 
venue category is ‘Home’, whose location is identified in 
detail. However, the second most visited venue is a specific 
restaurant, whose category is ‘American Restaurant’, 
representing 25% of the total check-ins and 28% of category 
check-ins.  This visit pattern may indicate that this is the 
user’s work place.  
The third most visited venue category for this user is 
‘Bar’ (4%), that is a subcategory of ‘Nightlife Spot’, 
representing about 7% of check-ins. Generally, the third most 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

visited main category is ‘Shop & Service’ corresponding to 
10% of check-ins where specifically 40% of it to ‘Gas 
Station or Garage’ and 25% to ‘Drugstore or Pharmacy’. 
User7105 occasionally interested in visiting places described 
as ‘Great Outdoors’, ‘Professional & Other Places’ and ‘Arts 
& Entertainment’.  
The majority of the most frequently visited venues are 
within close distance to ‘Home’ and to the ‘American 
Restaurant’, whereas user7105 commutes further away for 
other less frequently visited places, such as, the   ‘Medical 
Center’.  
2) Spatiotemporal Movement Patterns 
Generally, about 20% of the check-ins occurs from 10 am 
to 12 pm, half of which are at ‘Home’. In addition, user7105 
tend to move the most between 3pm and 5pm, representing 
23% of his total check-ins to 46% of the visited venues’ 
categories.   More than half of the check-ins are at ‘Atria's’, 
which may indicate that the user starts his work shift in this 
place at that time.  This hypothesis can be ascertained by 
examining his subsequent check-ins, where 18% of the 
check-in happens between 12 am and 3 am at ‘Home’, 
possibly when the user comes back from work.   There is a 
high correlation in terms of place transition between ‘Home’ 
and the ‘American Restaurant’.  
When examining the weekly mobility, user7105 is more 
active  on Tuesdays followed by Saturdays corresponding to 
19% and 16% respectively of total check-ins. Noticeably, the 
majority of Friday and Tuesday check-ins occurs at 12 am, 
whereas Monday and Saturday at 4 pm.   Furthermore, this 
user has visited more diverse venues on Tuesdays followed 
by Thursdays and Wednesdays representing 53%, 43% and 
38% respectively of total visited categories.   
During the working week, this user tend to visit a ‘Bar’ 
(5%), especially on Tuesdays, and ‘Gas Station or Garage’ 
(4%). This may be reasonable considering his working shifts. 
While on weekends, ‘Grocery or Supermarket’ and 
‘Drugstore or Pharmacy’ venues are among the top four 
visited categories corresponding to 4% and 5% respectively 
of weekends’ check-ins.  
User7105’s check-in patterns was regular over the whole 
period. However, this user’s visits are more frequent and 
diversified in the month of March. Noticeably, about 28% of 
the check-ins between 12 and 3 am occurred in March, 
indicating a possible change of lifestyle. Figure 5 presents 
this user's check-ins count in different categories of venues, 
classified by day and grouped by month.  
3) Degree of Association with Other Users 
User7105 had co-locations in 36 unique venues from 19 
different categories with 7 friends.  In particular, 26 co-
locations are shared with the freind38466 at 14 venues 
categories including ‘Coffee Shop’, ‘Bar’, ‘Fast Food 
Restaurant’ and ‘Other Nightlife’. Co-locations shared with 
the rest of the friends include ‘Bar’, ‘Mexican Restaurant’, 
‘Hospital’ and ‘Government Building’. 
Moreover, 
user7105 
has 
16 
spatiotemporal 
co-
occurrences at 14 unique venues from 6 different categories 
with two friends where 14  co-occurrences with freind38466 
at 6 different categories including mostly ‘Bar’, ‘American 
Restaurant’, and ‘Sandwich Place’,  which can denote a close 
friendship between them. The other two co-occurrences are 
with friend15995 at ‘American Restaurant’ on May 13th and 
June 17th, 2012. The place and time of this user’s co-
occurrences with friends are shown in Figure 2.  Similarly, 
this user also has 89 co-occurrences with other users, who are 
not stated as friends, at 29 unique venues where 38% of these 
co-occurrences at ‘American Restaurant’ and 24% at ‘Plaza’. 
C. The Hyper-Active User 
The results of analysis for user2651 selected from the 
hyper-active user group are as follows. 
1) Degree of Association Between User and Place 
The first most visited venue by this user is a ‘Nightlife 
Spot’ corresponding to 15% of total check-ins. Two ‘Home’ 
venues were recorded, ‘My Back Yard’ and ‘La Couch’, 
representing 23% of the check-ins. Both home venues have 
the same location coordinates, implying that they are actually 
the same place. ‘Automotive Shop’, ‘Pool’ and  ‘Italian 
Restaurant’, representing 9%, 8% and 5% respectively of this 
user’s total check-ins indicating the user’s interests and 
activities which can be swimming and Italian food.  A 
particular instance with a vague category of ‘Building’ was 
among the top 10 most visited venues. Further investigation 
of this venue using the given place name  revealed that this 
building is a place where an international summit for creative 
people is held [26].  That indicates that user2651 is possibly 
an active participant of such an event. 
When considering the main category of the visited 
venues, this user generally visits ‘Shop & Service’, ‘Nightlife 
Spot’, ‘Arts & Entertainment’ and ‘Food’ on a regular basis, 
representing 17%, 14%, 11% and 10% respectively of this 
user’s check-ins. User2651 also usually visits ‘Gas Station or 
Garage’: 4%, and ‘Church’: 3%,  which can imply that this 
user is a person with faith.  The location of the visited venues 
can be clustered into two main areas on a map as illustrated 
in Figure 3.  One area is where the user’s ‘Home’ is location, 
as well as other frequently visited venues such as ‘Nightlife 
Spots’ and ‘Gym or Fitness Center’. The other area includes 
mostly less frequently visited venues such as ‘Hospital’.  
 
Figure 2.  Spatiotemporal tracks of the frequent user co-occurrences with 
friends. 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 3. Venues' coordinates visited by the hyper-active user by 
considering the frequency of visit. 
 
2) Spatiotemporal Movement Patterns 
Overall, 53% of residential check-ins occurs between 9 
am and 12 pm where user651. This user’s check-in frequency 
reaches the peak at 2 pm where 10% of the check-ins occurs 
and about two-third of them into the ‘Automotive Shop’.  
Moving towards the night, user2651’s check-in frequency 
reached another peak between 11 and 12 am representing 
18% of the check-ins in which more than half is into 
‘Nightlife Spot’ where this user may work at, and a third into 
‘Home’ when potentially returning home. Noticeably, this 
user tends to be more active at night since about 70% of the 
check-ins happens after 6 pm. 
 Surprisingly, 
weekends 
have 
similar 
check-in 
frequencies as working week, and Sunday has the highest 
higher check-in frequency among the week days which is not 
the expected movement habit for average people. Moreover, 
user2651 checks in considerably less at the ‘Automotive 
Shop’ and the ‘Pool’ on Wednesday and Friday respectively. 
However, user2651 checks in the ‘Automotive Shop’ and the 
‘Nightlife Spot’ even in weekends, which may suggest that 
this user has weekends work shifts. In addition, this user 
typically has some different priorities of visit between 
working week and weekend. For example, ‘Church’ is the 
sixth most visited venue category in weekends, whereas in 
working days, ‘Bar’ is the sixth most visited venue category. 
User2651 has regular check-in patterns over the whole 
period. However, in the months of June and July, the user’s 
check-ins into ‘Hotel’ and ‘Pool’ significantly increase 
representing 75% and 60% respectively of these venues total 
check-ins. Moreover, other categories or venues are highly 
visited in certain months. For instance, 35% of total ‘Gas 
Station or Garage’ check-ins occurs in April, which can 
indicate that this user commutes more at that time, and 40% 
of total ‘Church’ check-ins occurs in July. Figure 6 
demonstrates this user's check-ins count in different 
categories of venues, classified by day and grouped by 
month.  
3) Degree of Association with Other Users 
User2651 shares co-locations in 27 unique venues from 
19 categories with 9 friends where 13 co-locations are with 
friend12432 and 9 with friend12046. Most of co-locations 
with this user’s friends are in ‘Nightlife Spots’, ‘Gas Station 
or Garage’, ‘Pool’, ‘Flower Shop’ and ‘Bar’. This user also 
has 16 co-occurrences with three friends where 4 of them 
with friend12046 and 3 with friend12432 at a ‘Nightlife 
Spots’, ‘Pool’, ‘Flower Shop’ and with just  friend12432 at 
‘Automotive Shop’. As with other users, user2651 co-
occurred with 23 users at 12 distinct venues where half of 
these co-occurrences happened in ‘Bar’, ‘Automotive Shop’ 
and ‘Grocery or Supermarket’. 
VI. 
CONCLOSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we investigated the privacy implication of 
location-based information provision and collection in 
LBSNs.  The study is supported by analysis of a 
representative dataset from Foursquare. The results showed 
that it is highly feasible to infer rich personal information 
about users and their mobility. In particular, some of the 
possible inferences demonstrated are: 
 
Users’ spatiotemporal movement tracks and patterns.  
 
Users’ absence and presence in particular places. 
 
Visiting 
frequencies 
and 
possible 
degree 
of 
association with specific places or place types. 
 
Users’ commuting habits.  
 
Co-location patterns with other users and friends. 
More work needs to be done to investigate the following 
issues: 
 
The relationship between the density of information 
and the accuracy of the inference. 
 
 The effect of the integration of users’ data from 
different LBSNs. 
 
The relationship between the amount of information 
that can be analysed and the users’ perception of 
personal privacy. 
The study also demonstrates the need for further work on 
improving the visibility of the information collected to users 
of the Social Web to allow them to better assess the 
implications of their location sharing activities.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We acknowledge the use of the Foursquare dataset 
provided by Lei Jin; from the School of Information 
Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, USA. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Ruiz Vicente, D. Freni, C. Bettini, and C. S. Jensen, 
“Location-Related Privacy in Geo-Social Networks,” IEEE 
Internet Computing, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 20–27, May 2011. 
[2] 
D. Riboni, L. Pareschi, and C. Bettini, “Privacy in 
Georeferenced Context-aware Services : A Survey,” in in 
Privacy in Location-Based Applications, Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 151–172. 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[3] 
S. Gambs, O. Heen, and C. Potin, “A comparative privacy 
analysis of geosocial networks,” in SPRINGL  ’11 
Proceedings of the 4th ACM SIGSPATIAL International 
Workshop on Security and Privacy in GIS and LBS, 2011, 
pp. 33–40. 
[4] 
R. Shokri, G. Theodorakopoulos, J.-Y. Le Boudec, and J.-P. 
Hubaux, “Quantifying Location Privacy,” 2011 IEEE 
Symposium on Security and Privacy, pp. 247–262, May 
2011. 
[5] 
Foursquare, 
“About.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://foursquare.com/about. [Accessed: 29-Sep-2013]. 
[6] 
Z. Cheng, J. Caverlee, K. Lee, and D. Sui, “Exploring 
Millions of Footprints in Location Sharing Services.,” in 
ICWSM, 2011, vol. 2010, no. Cholera, pp. 81–88. 
[7] 
D. Preotiuc-Pietro and T. Cohn, “Mining User Behaviours: A 
Study of Check-in Patterns in Location Based Social 
Networks,” in Web Science, 2013. 
[8] 
J. Y. Tsai, P. Kelley, P. Drielsma, L. F. Cranor, J. Hong, and 
N. Sadeh, “Who ’ s Viewed You ? The Impact of Feedback in 
a Mobile Location-Sharing Application,” in CHI  ’09 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, 2009, pp. 2003–2012. 
[9] 
N. Sadeh et al., “Understanding and capturing people’s 
privacy policies in a mobile social networking application,” 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 401–
412, Oct. 2008. 
[10] S. Patil and J. Lai, “Who gets to know what when: 
configuring 
privacy 
permissions 
in 
an 
awareness 
application,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on 
human factors in computing systems (CHI 2005), 2005, pp. 
101–110. 
[11] P. G. Kelley, M. Benisch, L. F. Cranor, and N. Sadeh, “When 
are users comfortable sharing locations with advertisers?,” in 
Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors 
in computing systems - CHI  ’11, 2011, pp. 2449–2452. 
[12] a. J. B. Brush, J. Krumm, and J. Scott, “Exploring end user 
preferences for location obfuscation, location-based services, 
and the value of location,” in Proceedings of the 12th ACM 
international 
conference 
on 
Ubiquitous 
computing 
- 
Ubicomp  ’10, 2010, p. 95. 
[13] K. P. Tang, J. I. Hong, and D. P. Siewiorek, “Understanding 
how visual representations of location feeds affect end-user 
privacy concerns,” in Proceedings of the 13th international 
conference on Ubiquitous computing - UbiComp  ’11, 2011, 
pp. 207–216. 
[14] J. Lindqvist, J. Cranshaw, J. Wiese, J. Hong, and J. 
Zimmerman, “I’m the mayor of my house: examining why 
people use foursquare-a social-driven location sharing 
application,” in CHI  ’11 Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2011, 
pp. 2409–2418. 
[15] L. Jin, X. Long, and J. B. D. Joshi, “Towards understanding 
residential privacy by analyzing users’ activities in 
foursquare,” in Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Workshop on 
Building analysis datasets and gathering experience returns 
for security - BADGERS  ’12, 2012, pp. 25–32. 
[16] Z. Cheng, J. Caverlee, and K. Lee, “You are where you 
tweet: a content-based approach to geo-locating twitter 
users,” in CIKM  ’10 Proceedings of the 19th ACM 
international conference on Information and knowledge 
management, 2010, pp. 759–768. 
[17] T. Pontes, M. Vasconcelos, J. Almeida, P. Kumaraguru, and 
V. Almeida, “We Know Where You Live : Privacy 
Characterization of Foursquare Behavior,” in UbiComp  ’12 
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous 
Computing, 2012, pp. 898–905. 
[18] A. Sadilek, H. Kautz, and J. Bigham, “Finding your friends 
and following them to where you are,” in WSDM  ’12 
Proceedings of the fifth ACM international conference on 
Web search and data mining, 2012, pp. 723–732. 
[19] H. Gao, J. Tang, and H. Liu, “Exploring Social-Historical 
Ties on Location-Based Social Networks.,” in Proceedings of 
the Sixth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and 
Social Media, 2012, pp. 114–121. 
[20] H. Gao, J. Tang, and H. Liu, “gSCorr: modeling geo-social 
correlations for new check-ins on location-based social 
networks,” in Proceedings of the 21st ACM international 
conference on Information and knowledge management, 
2012, pp. 1582–1586. 
[21] D. J. Crandall, L. Backstrom, D. Cosley, S. Suri, D. 
Huttenlocher, and J. Kleinberg, “Inferring social ties from 
geographic coincidences.,” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 
107, no. 52, pp. 22436–41, Dec. 2010. 
[22] S. Scellato, A. Noulas, R. Lambiotte, and C. Mascolo, 
“Socio-Spatial Properties of Online Location-Based Social 
Networks.,” in ICWSM, 2011, pp. 329–336. 
[23] S. Scellato and C. Mascolo, “Exploiting Place Features in 
Link 
Prediction on 
Location-based 
Social 
Networks 
Categories and Subject Descriptors,” in Proceedings of the 
17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge 
discovery and data mining, 2011, no. Section 3, pp. 1046–
1054. 
[24] D. Dearman and K. Truong, “Identifying the activities 
supported by locations with community-authored content,” in 
Proceedings of the 12th ACM international conference on 
Ubiquitous computing, 2010, pp. 23–32. 
[25] A. Noulas, S. Scellato, C. Mascolo, and M. Pontil, “An 
Empirical Study of Geographic User Activity Patterns in 
Foursquare.,” in ICWSM, 2011, pp. 70–573. 
[26] “World 
Domination 
Summit.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://worlddominationsummit.com/faq/#primary-content. 
[Accessed: 05-Nov-2013].  
 
 
 
 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 4. The moderate user's check-ins count in different categories of venues, classified by day and grouped by month. 
 
 
Figure 5. The frequent user's check-ins count in different categories of venues, classified by day and grouped by month. 
 
 
 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 6. The hyper-active user's check-ins count in different categories of venues, classified by day and grouped by month. 
 
 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

