Identifying the Existence of Grass Coverage in Vineyards by Applying Time Series 
Analysis in Sentinel-2 Bands 
 
Daniel A. Basterrechea1, Lorena Parra1,2, Jaime Lloret1, and Pedro V. Mauri2 
1Instituto de Investigación para la Gestión Integrada de zonas Costeras. Universitat Politècnica de València, Valencia, Spain 
2 Instituto Madrileño de Investigación y Desarrollo Rural, Agrario y Alimentario, Madrid, Spain 
Email:dabasche@epsg.upv.es, loparbo@doctor.upv.es, jlloret@dcom.upv.es, pedro.mauri@madrid.org 
 
Abstract— The increasing tendency of the population puts 
pressure on vineyard farmers to supply food. In this context, 
grass coverage will be a low-cost solution to reduce outlays and 
reduce the maintenance of crops. In this paper, we present a 
remote sensing technique for determining the existence or 
absence of grass coverage in vineyards. To perform this study, 
we use Sentinel-2 images using red, green, and blue bands, as 
well as a water vapour band, near-infrared band, and 
normalized difference vegetation band. This technique has 
certain limits, such as low spatial resolution, and cloud 
presence when the images are obtained. The selected images 
have 10 m x 10 m spatial resolution, except for the band of 
water vapour band (60 m x 60 m). In this study, we propose the 
use of time-series analysis to overcome the problem of low 
spatial resolution. To perform this study, we obtain images 
from January and June of 2020. Using ArcGIS software, we 
applied different tools to obtain qualitative and quantitative 
information. Then, we analyzed the significance of observed 
differences in the time series analysis, applying Single Analysis 
of Variance. Our results indicate that the best results are 
related to the Near-infrared band with a p-value of 0.0020. 
Finally, the pixel values obtained for the time series analysis of 
Near-Infrared band indicate that the plots with grass coverage 
have values from -1000 to -1200. Meanwhile, values from -1200 
to -1500 are found in the plots without grass coverage. 
Keywords- Precision agriculture; Image processing; Sentinel-
2 bands; Vineyard monitoring. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The world population is increasing, expecting to reach 
between 8.1 billion and 10.6 billion by 2050. This growth 
causes the necessity to maximize the production of food [1]. 
The existing farming systems are not able to attain efficient 
food production levels. In this context, the research for new 
techniques is one of the concerns of the population instead 
of optimizing the use of natural resources. On the other 
hand, the pressure of the increment of food demand and the 
decrease in prices forces the farmers to try to increment their 
crop production. Thus, in some cases, farmers are using 
dangerous substances for the environment, massive use of 
water, or excess use of fertilizer to maximize their harvest. 
Nonetheless, the implementation of sustainable agriculture 
might increase productivity, minimizing the environmental 
impact of the activity. The proper management of natural 
resources will be an interesting way of solving the actual 
problem [3].  
In this context, the inclusion of new technologies in 
Precision Agriculture (PA) has been revealed as a 
technological solution. PA consists of the application of 
different techniques for the management of the agricultural 
stock. Therefore, it is possible to obtain optimum control of 
the production and of the required resources, and guarantee 
the sustainability of the activity. PA can be a solution to the 
problem of food security [4]. Another alternative is the 
application of conservation agriculture, which is based on 
the minimum disturbance of soil and the maintenance of 
grass coverage in the crops [5]. Its main advantages are the 
reduction of erosion and the improvement of water 
retention. In order to evaluate the degree of adoption of this 
practice, we need to evaluate with remote sensing the 
existence of grass coverage.  
One of the techniques used for monitoring crops is 
image processing. This technique has been used to a huge 
range of purposes such as detecting weed plants [6], 
monitoring the plant health [7], quantifying the harvest [8], 
and evaluating pollutant presence. To maximize the results, 
this method can be applied combined with terrestrial 
techniques [9]. One of the problems with image processing 
and remote sensing techniques is the low resolution of the 
used images. The images with high spatial resolution, are 
more expensive and are not usually utilized for general 
research. When the available spatial resolution cannot fit the 
requirements, there is an alternative, the use of time series 
analysis. The use of time series analysis has been done in 
[10] with sunflowers and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
(UAV). 
In this paper, we propose the use of images from the 
Copernicus Sentinel-2 satellite, with 10 m pixel resolution, 
to determine the existence or absence of grass coverage in 
vineyards. This evaluation will be done using images 
obtained at different moments of the year. We apply this 
methodology in the inner region of Spain, in the crops of 
IMIDRA, which is located in Alcala de Henares (Madrid). 
To obtain the required accuracy, we include in this analysis 
the following information from the satellite, including red 
band, green band, blue band, Water Vapour Band (WVP), 
Near-Infrared Band (NIR), and Normalized Differential 
Vegetation Index (NDVI) which is a combination of the Red 
band and NIR band.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The related 
work is outlined in Section 2. Section 3 presents the 
different techniques and the process of the study. The results 
are discussed in Section 4. Finally, the conclusions and 
future work are summarized in Section 5.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we outline the state of the art. In the 
summarized contributions, we include systems proposed for 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

PA and image processing techniques for monitoring 
different parameters of the land.  
Sun et al. [11] used a multispectral image to monitor the 
chlorophyll content in the field. They applied different 
fertilizers to the crops and used a multispectral Charge-
Coupled Device (CCD) camera to collect ground-based 
images in the green, red, and NIR bands. They developed a 
new Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI). 
Besides, they obtained the correlation between image 
parameters and chlorophyll content obtaining R2 of 0.88. 
They concluded that vegetation indices derived from a 
multispectral image could be used to monitor the 
chlorophyll content. Mishra et al. [12] applied advances in 
Object-Based Image Analysis (OBIA) and machine learning 
algorithms in dry savanna ecosystems for forest detection. 
To do this, they use remote sensing-based in the 
characterization of vegetation properties is savannas. In this 
case, they used a stack of Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) 
imagery, NDVI, and topographic variables with six different 
scale factors resulting in a hierarchical network of image 
objects. Additionally, individual vegetation morphology 
classes differed in the segmentation scale at which they 
achieved the highest classification accuracy, reflecting their 
unique ecology and physiognomic composition. Finally, 
their results showed the utility of the OBIA. 
Other authors, as Parra et al. [13] proposed image 
techniques to detect prejudicial weeds in lawns. To perform 
this study, they used a mathematical operation where the 
red, green, and blue bands, as well as, edge detection 
techniques, are used. Besides, they use a post-processing 
operation to reduce the false positives, changing the 
combination between the selected bands. Clever at al. [14] 
used the Sentinel-2 and Sentinel-3 images for the estimation 
of total crop and grass chlorophyll and N content by 
studying in situ crop variables and spectroradiometer 
measurements obtained for four different test sites. The 
obtained results confirmed the importance of the red-edge 
bands, 
particularly 
in 
Sentinel-2 
for 
agricultural 
applications, because of the combination with its high 
spatial resolution of 20 m. Rokhmana et al. [15] displayed 
some practical experiences of using UAVs based platform 
for remote sensing in supporting PA mapping. They 
proposed a system based on the aerial platform from Radio- 
Controlled plane, point and shoots digital cameras, and data 
processing with digital photogrammetric mapping. 
In this paper, we present a low-cost method for 
determining the existence of a grass coverage in the 
vineyard using plots with grass and others without grass 
coverage. To perform the study, we use Sentinel-2 images 
from different timelines. This application will be useful, to 
elaborate maps and analysis about the adoption of 
conservation agriculture. Furthermore, it can be used to 
study the need for specific actions to maximize its adoption 
in certain regions or to evaluate the changes in the 
agroecosystems after certain activities.   
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
In this section, the used materials and the methodology 
for the analysis of the data are presented. 
A. Selection of Satellite 
Satellite images are selected for detecting the grass 
coverage in vineyards. We use free satellite images to obtain 
a low-cost system of determining the existence of grass 
coverage. In this context, we decide to use images from 
Copernicus Sentinel-2. The Sentinel-2 is characterized by 
two polar-orbiting satellites placed in the same sun-
synchronous orbit, phased at 180º to each other. Moreover, 
Sentinel-2 provides information every ten days, which is 
enough for our objective. Besides, this satellite has two 
types of images. Firstly, we have “Level-1C” products, 
which give information on the top of atmosphere reflectance 
in cartographic geometry, and “Level- 2A” offers data of the 
bottom of the atmosphere reflectance in cartographic 
geometry. 
Moreover, Sentinel has a huge range of multispectral 
images, where the highest resolution is 10m x 10m. In this 
paper, we use only the six different bands included in Table 
1 and the Normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI). 
Table 1 displays the characteristics of the used bands. 
B. A proposed approach for the time series analysis  
Following we detail the principle that we follow to 
perform the time series analysis and detail the changes along 
the year in the studied plots with and without grass 
coverage.  
Regarding the obtained images with Sentinel-2, each 
pixel contains information about the surface, which includes 
the vineyard, the soil, and if it grass coverage exists. 
Nonetheless, the grass coverage is not present during the 
entire year, its presence in maximum in winter and almost 
null in summer, see Figure 1. 
In winter, the plant cover is greater due to the climate 
conditions. It is characterized by being wet and cold with a 
considerable rate of precipitation. On the other hand, in 
summer high temperatures predominate, where rainfall is 
drastically reduced, causing vegetation to wither and tend to 
disappear. These changes based on the season could be used 
to detect different pixel values in the bands. In this context, 
we hypothesize that, during the period in which grass 
coverage has a maximum presence (winter), the pixel values 
will be different from when the grass coverage is not present 
(summer) for plots with grass coverage.  
 
TABLE I. SENTINEL-2 SPECTRAL BANDS 
Bands 
Wavelength 
(nm) 
Resolution 
(m) 
Description 
B2 
490 
10 
Blue 
B3 
560 
10 
Green 
B4 
665 
10 
Red 
B8 
842 
10 
Visible and Near Infrared 
(VNIR) 
B9 
945 
60 
Water vapour 
 
Nonetheless, for plots without coverage, the pixel values 
of both seasons will be very similar. The differences 
between the data from winter and summer based on our 
hypothesis are displayed in Table 2. 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

To perform the study, we select images from January 
and June. We select these images taking into account the 
live cycle of the vineyard and grass in the different parts of 
the seasons. This information is essential to select the 
crucial moments in which images are gathered. In this case, 
in January the vineyard does not have any leaves because it 
is the part of the year when the tree is pruned. On the 
contrary, in June the vineyard begins to have leaves. 
Meanwhile, grass coverage changes between winter and 
summer. In this area, winter is cold with a high precipitation 
rate, and summer is characterized by high temperatures of 
low precipitation.  
C. Studied Zone 
The studied zone that we selected is located in the 
community of Madrid in the facilities of IMIDRA. We 
selected this location because there are huge vineyards 
where we have plots with grass coverage and others with 
non-coverage. It constitutes an optimum scenario to test the 
proposed system for monitoring the changes in the grass to 
determine the presence or absence of grass coverage.  
We classify the selected plots in two types: The ones that 
contain grass coverage (GC=1), and the ones that do not 
present grass coverage (GC=0). The plots and the 
classification can be seen in Figure 2. We select seven plots, 
4 of them without grass coverage, and 3 with grass 
coverage. We represent in red colour and label them as 1, 
the crops without grass coverage. On the other hand, we use 
the blue colour to represent plots with grass coverage, which 
are labelled as 0. In this context, we have the information on 
which plots present grass coverage and which do not.  
D. The software selected of analysis of time series  
For the analysis, we use a combination of the different 
bands detailed in Table 2, from the different seasons. A 
specialized program is needed for treating the obtained 
satellite images. In this case, we select the ArcGIS [16]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Scheme of pixel information content. 
 
TABLE II. SUMMARY OF EXPECTED CHANGES ACCORDING TO OUR 
HYPOTHESIS 
Bands 
Reflectance 
GC=1 
Reflectance 
GC=0 
Differences 
in 
reflectance 
GC=1 
Differences 
in 
reflectance 
GC=0 
B2 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Low 
B3 
Higher  
High  
High 
Low 
B4 
Low 
High 
High 
Low 
B8 
High 
High  
Low 
Low 
B9 
Higher  
High 
High 
Low 
Pixels 
of: 
GC=1 
Winter 
GC=1 
Summer 
GC=0 
Winter 
GC=1 
Summer 
Vid 
 
High 
percentage 
High 
percentage 
 
High 
percentage 
 
High 
percentage 
 
Soil 
Almost null 
Low 
percentage 
Low 
percentage 
Almost null 
Green 
grass 
coverage 
Low 
percentage 
Almost null 
Almost null 
Almost null 
 
 
Figure 2. Classification of plots in the studied zone. 
 
 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

In this context, we use some operations using this 
software. The first operation that we apply is the “Raster 
calculator”. This tool allows us to observe the qualitative 
differences between the same areas on both dates. The 
output for these tools is a new raster in which the pixel 
values are the differences between the initial (January) and 
final (June) scenarios. Thus, we will be able to identify the 
different colouration in pixels that represent plots with or 
without grass coverage. In addition, we will extract 
quantitative information as a raster by applying “Zonal 
Statistics as table” to obtain a table with pixel values for 
each plot. 
Finally, with the obtained data, we will use statistical 
software, Statgraphics Centurion XVIII [17]. With this 
software, we will perform statistical analyses to determine if 
the observed differences are statistically significant.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
In this section, we display the obtained images and the 
time series analysis that we use to determine the existence of 
grass coverage. First, we evaluate the different bands, 
analyzing which combination provides the highest visual 
difference between plots with and without grass coverage. 
Finally, we use statistical analysis to verify if differences are 
statistically significant or not.  
A. Band combination 
According to the analysis of data of obtained images, we 
can identify the following differences. In the range of bands 
from the visible spectrum (B2 to B4) of January, we find 
that the green band has the highest pixel values in plots with 
grass coverage. The blue band presents medium values, and 
the red band has the minimum pixel values in the plots with 
the grass coverage. On the other hand, in non-covered plots, 
the red band obtains higher values because there is more soil 
represented in the pixel, and it increases the reflectance in 
that specific wavelength. In addition, between NIR, WVP, 
and NDVI bands for the same season, the NIR band presents 
the highest pixel values for covered and no-covered plots. 
Figure 3 represents the RGB composition band and the 
single bands displayed. Besides, Figure 4 displays the other 
bands: the NIR band, WVP, and NDVI band. 
In order to evaluate the differences in grass coverage in 
all the selected plots, it is necessary to combine each one of 
the bands from winter and summer seasons as pointed in the 
time series analysis. Figure 5 shows the results of the 
combination of bands. In this case, red, green, blue, NIR, 
WVP, and NDVI seasonal band combinations displayed that 
the plots with grass coverage present low pixel values, 
represented in a darker colour. The pixel represents the 
difference between the winter and summer values in each 
band. Besides, plots without grass coverage will display 
higher pixel values, symbolized in a lighter colour.  
Figure 5 displays the image combination results. 
Moreover, in the visible spectrum (red, green, and blue 
bands), the obtained changes are not visually significant. 
Nevertheless, in the NIR, WVP, and NDVI bands, we can 
observe differences in pixel values between the selected 
plots (red plots and blue plots). 
Considering the spatial resolution of used images, it is 
relativity challenging to observe visual changes in the crops. 
Therefore, the use of a statistical analysis will be necessary 
to determine which band combination is the best one for 
detecting the presence of grass.  
B. Statistical analysis 
It is necessary to quantify the changes in the pixel value 
numerically. The Statgraphics software allows us to analyze 
the pixel values obtained from the combined results, getting 
statistical information from each image.  
 
Figure 3. Visible spectrum bands. 
 
Figure 4. Near-infrared band, water vapour band, and vegetation index band. 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Table 3 displays the “MEAN” for all the bands for 
different value in each one of the evaluated plots. With this, 
we can observe the differences between winter and summer, 
analyzing which band is the best for detecting changes. 
Then, the application of an Analysis of Variance 
(ANOVA) procedure is required. This method is used to 
evaluate the values for each band combination and 
determine the significate grade of the values. To better 
illustrate the differences between the plots with and without 
grass coverage, we present Figure 6. Figure 6 is composed 
of six graphics. These graphics represent the data of the two 
classifications of plots as a box and whiskers diagrams. The 
box and whiskers diagrams, also known as box-plots, 
represent the similarity between the values of grass-covered 
plots and plots without grass. The data present higher 
similarities among them when there are higher overlapping 
between the plots classified as 1 and 0. The purpose is to 
find the band for which the difference among the calculated 
raster is maximum for both groups (GC=1 and GC=0). In 
this case, we can observe that all graphics indicate a certain 
distance between the values of both groups of plots. 
Nonetheless, the blue band is the only one that has the 
values of both groups close to each other. To complete the 
verification, we determinate the statistical significate of the 
values. We use the p-value to verify the significance of the 
observed differences. To be considered as a significant 
difference, the p-value must be smaller than 0.05.  
Table 4 summarizes de p-values for all the band 
combinations. We observe that all the bands have significant 
values, except for the blue band. The best range of values is 
represented in the NIR, NDVI, and WVP bands, with the 
most accurate results being of the NIR band (p-value of 
0.0020).  
 
TABLE III. MEAN OF THE PIXEL VALUES OF DIFFERENT BAND 
COMBINATIONS FOR COVERED AND NON-COVERED PLOTS. 
Classific. 
Red 
Green  
Blue 
NIR 
WVP 
NDVI 
1.GC=0 
-775 
-632 
-456 
-1336 
-831 
-0,12 
2. GC=0 
-618 
-623 
-422 
-1464 
-881 
-0,16 
3. GC=0 
-775 
-697 
-491 
-1399 
-871 
-0,11 
4. GC=0 
-892 
-756 
-557 
-1411 
-870 
-0,09 
5. GC=1 
-1246 
-854 
-620 
-1113 
-785 
0,02 
6. GC=1 
-1179 
-797 
-582 
-1006 
-763 
0,03 
7. GC=1 
-1061 
-798 
-553 
-1176 
-799 
-0,02 
 
Figure 5. Results of combined images of January and June. 
 
Figure 6. Box and Whiskers diagram of band values.
 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

TABLE IV. THE P-VALUE OF ANOVA ANALYSIS FOR SELECTED BANDS 
Bands 
B4 
B3 
B2 
B8 
B9 
NDVI 
p-Value 
0.0043 0.0184 0.2611 0.0020 0.0036 0.0021 
 
The results show that the best band to differentiate 
whether vineyard crops have grass cover or not is the NIR 
band. The pixel values of the resultant raster (time series 
analysis) for this band have different values for plots wit and 
without grass coverage. Plots with grass coverage have pixel 
values from -1000 to -1200. On the other hand, plots 
without grass coverage are composed of pixels with values 
from -1200 to -1500.  
Although we have demonstrated that the time series 
analysis might help to overcome the drawback of the low 
spatial resolution in this application, the methodology used 
in this study presents certain limitations. The presence of 
clouds might be a limitation in cases that, due to life cycles 
of crop and grass, images form periods with high presence 
of clouds are required. Moreover, the technique used could 
increase its efficiency considerably in plots with a greater 
extension, resulting in getting relevant information. 
Furthermore, due to the limited extension of the studied area 
and its low variability, our results cannot be applied in the 
different regions of Spain.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We present a methodology, based on time series analysis 
to determine the existence or absence of grass coverage in 
vineyards. The target of this system is to provide a fast, 
remote, easy to use, and cheap method to evaluate the 
adoption of conservation agriculture. In this study, we use 
Sentinel-2 images, using different bands such as red, green, 
blue, NIR, WVP, and NDVI bands. The comparison of 
bands from different moments of the year allows us to 
evaluate the changes between the selected plots to determine 
the existence or absence of grass coverage. Our results 
indicated that the best band for the time series analysis is 
NIR band, followed by the NDVI band, and WVP band. 
For future work, we will improve our study by including 
different region vineyards to verify the efficiency of this 
application. Furthermore, we will evaluate if it is possible to 
use other time series combinations avoiding the use of data 
from January due to the high probability of clouds in this 
month. Finally, we plan to test this method in orange crops. 
These present an added difficulty due to the position of the 
crops (trees more closely together) and the arrangement of 
leaves throughout the year, which may cause a greater 
probability of error when detecting the grass cover. The 
introduction of a soil gloss correction, such as the SAVI and 
MSAVI, will also be explored. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work has been partially funded by the European 
Union through the ERANETMED (project ERANETMED3-
227 SMARTWATIR, by the "Ministerio de Economía y 
Competitividad" in the "Programa Estatal de Fomento de la 
Investigación 
Científica 
y 
Técnica 
de 
Excelencia, 
Subprograma Estatal de Generación de Conocimiento" 
within the project under Grant TIN2017-84802-C2-1-P, and 
by Conselleria de Educación, Cultura y Deporte with the 
Subvenciones para la contratación de personal investigador 
en fase postdoctoral, grant number APOSTD/2019/04. 
REFERENCES 
[1] O. F. Godber and R. Wall, “Livestock and food security: 
vulnerability to population growth and climate change”, Global 
change biology, vol. 20, no 10, pp. 3092-3102, 2014. 
[2] S. J. Vermeulen, B. M. Campbell, and J. S. I. Ingram, “Climate 
change and food systems”, Annual review of environment and 
resources, vol. 37, pp. 195-222, 2012. 
[3] M. Ruiz-Colmenero, R. Bienes, and M. J. Marques, “Soil and 
water conservation dilemmas associated with the use of green 
cover in steep vineyards”, Soil and Tillage Research, vol. 117, pp. 
211-223, 2011. 
[4] R. Gebbers and V. I. Adamchuk, “Precision agriculture and 
food security”, Science, vol. 327, no 5967, pp. 828-831. 2010 
[5] C. Thierfelder, S. Cheesman, and L. Rusinamhodzi, “A 
comparative analysis of conservation agriculture systems: Benefits 
and challenges of rotations and intercropping in Zimbabwe”, Field 
crops research, vol. 137, pp. 237-250, 2012. 
[6] L. Parra et al., “Edge detection for weed recognition in lawns”, 
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 2020, vol. 176, p. 
105684. 
[7] J. K. Patil and R. Kumar, “Advances in image processing for 
detection of plant diseases”, Journal of Advanced Bioinformatics 
Applications and Research, vol. 2, no 2, pp. 135-141, 2011. 
[8] L. Garcia et al., “Quantifying the Production of Fruit-Bearing 
Trees Using Image Processing Techniques”, In The Eighth 
International Conference on Communications, Computation, 
Networks, and Technologies (INNOV19), pp. 14-19, 2019. 
[9] M. Possoch et al., “Multi-temporal crop surface models 
combined with the RGB vegetation index from UAV-based images 
for forage monitoring in grassland”, The International Archives of 
Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information 
Sciences, vol. 41, pp. 991, 2016. 
[10] F. A. Vega, F. C. Ramirez, M .P. Saiz, and F. O. Rosua, 
“Multi-temporal imaging using an unmanned aerial vehicle for 
monitoring a sunflower crop”, Biosystems Engineering, vol. 132, 
pp. 19-27, 2015. 
[11] H. Sun et al., “Monitoring of maize chlorophyll content based 
on multispectral vegetation indice”, Multispectral, Hyperspectral, 
and Ultraspectral Remote Sensing Technology, Techniques and 
Applications IV. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 
2012. pp. 852711. 
[12] N. B.  Mishra and K. A. Crews, “Mapping vegetation 
morphology types in a dry savanna ecosystem: integrating 
hierarchical object-based image analysis with Random Forest”, Int. 
Journal of Remote Sensing, vol. 35, no 3, pp. 1175-1198, 2014. 
[13] L. Parra et al., “Comparison of Single Image Processing 
Techniques and Their Combination for Detection of Weed in 
Lawns”, International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, 
Valencia, 2019, vol.12, no. 3–4, pp. 177–190. 
[14] J. G. Clevers and A. A. Gitelson, “Remote estimation of crop 
and grass chlorophyll and nitrogen content using red-edge bands on 
Sentinel-2 and-3”, International Journal of Applied Earth 
Observation and Geoinformation, vol. 23, pp. 344-351, 2013. 
[15] C. A. Rokhmana, “The potential of UAV-based remote 
sensing for supporting precision agriculture in Indonesia”, Procedia 
Environmental Sciences, vol. 24, no 2015, pp. 245-253, 2015. 
[16] 
Esri. 
ArcGIS. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.esri.es/es-es/home  [Retrieved: October, 2020]. 
[17] 
Statgraphics. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://statgraphics.net/. [Retrieved: October, 2020]. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

