Study on the Composition of the Residential Environment and Environmental Cognition 
 in Collective Housing 
 
Hirotomo Ohuchi 
Dept. of Architecture College of Industrial Technology 
Nihon University 
Chiba, Japan 
oouchi.hirotomo@nihon-u.ac.jp 
Katsuhito Chiba 
Graduate School of Industrial Technology 
Nihon University 
Chiba, Japan 
k.chiba0730@gmail.com 
 
Setsuko Ouchi 
Ohuchi Environmental Design Lab. 
Chiba, Japan 
setsukoouchi@gmail.com 
 
Yuta Takano 
Graduate School of Industrial Technology 
Nihon University 
Chiba, Japan 
yuta_t860709@yahoo.co.jp 
 
Abstract—This paper investigates, analyzes, and considers 
the living environment, the characteristics of environmental 
perception, and their relationships, based on a survey of the 
residents of the housing complex in Makuhari Baytown, which 
was built using a new planning technique. In this study, it was 
found that the average size of the cognitive domain of the 
residents that has a courtyard which is available for a non-
resident   tends to increase. 
Keywords-Environmental 
recognition; 
Cognitive 
area; 
Collective housing; Makuhari Baytown; Living environment 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The plan for the center of the complex was to make it 
multistory, and to use standardization, which is one of the 
modern city theories followed in the design of a housing 
complex on an urban scale, with the aim of alleviating the 
shortage of houses. However, a uniform plan that does not 
consider the surrounding environment would result in a 
housing complex that would deteriorate after a time, and 
would eventually be destroyed, be rebuilt, or become 
antiquated, fall into ruin, and transform the district, making 
it quite different from the original plan. It is necessary to 
consider the environmental conditions of existing buildings 
and the original city plan and building codes, along with the 
surrounding environment, in order to ensure the plan will 
result in a sustainable housing complex. This consideration 
changes the existing problem, which is quantitative, to a 
qualitative problem.  
In the previous study, [6] Sketched maps drawn by 
children have analysed and considered the relationships 
between the actual physical environment of the town and the 
images that children drew of their environment, as well as 
the mutual relationships between the environmental changes 
that affect the children’s spatial cognition. 
Landscape recognition is the process by which an 
inhabitant recognizes the regional landscape. Regional 
symbiosis, which has been increasingly important in the 
recent years, is based on the premise that the resident feels 
that the surrounding environment is common property. 
Therefore, the shared recognition of the local landscape, 
which is valuable common property, is important.  
The local landscape is defined by the correlation 
between morphological character, a physical-environment 
characteristic of space, and cognition based on spatial vision. 
Moreover, the visual information a person receives in daily 
life defines the cognitive region, which is a composite 
image of visible things and invisible things in specific 
positions. Landscape recognition is formed by relationship 
between the explicate order (visible cognitive region of 
consideration) and the implicate order (subconscious 
invisible cognitive region). The explicate and implicate 
orders are inseparable reciprocal processes  (Figure 1).  
Therefore, environmental recognition is analyzed based 
on landscape recognition. 
Figure 1.  Conception of Landscape recognition. 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II. 
INVESTIGATION AND OUTLINE OF ANALYSIS 
A. Region for research investigation 
The investigation covered Makuhari Baytown, a 
residential housing area in the new center of the city of 
Makuhari, and constructed by a Chiba prefecture corporate 
agency in the Tokyo Bay shore area. It was possible to 
house 26,000 people in the 84-ha area, and 8,900 
households were planned (Figure 2) .The route enclosing the 
housing area was constructed as the first part of the 
residential quarter plan (Figure 3). 
The design was based on the guidelines, and an inside 
layer, a multistory section, and a high rise area are allocated 
in every city block. The layout of the plan included the 
development of a route enclosing the residential housing, and 
another enclosing the entire residential quarter (Figure 3). 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Location map of Japan in Makuhari 
 
Figure 3.  Investigation aerial photograph (2006) 
 
Figure 4.  Arrangement plan 
 
In many commercial and residential buildings, the lower 
floors house commercial facilities, which led to the 
invention of “The city is made in the house” development 
concept. The population, the number of houses, and the 
number of households, have all expanded during the passage 
of 15 years from the town’s opening. As of August 2009, 
around 40 housing complexes have been built so far, and the 
population now exceeds 23,000. 
B. Methods of analysis 
In the present study, residents of apartments and 
condominium complexes in the town were asked to 
complete a perceived area questionnaire survey. Next, a 
multivariate analysis was done to analyze the address space 
configuration of the research zone and the residents’ 
perceptions of the space surrounding them, which were 
quantified. The individual data obtained from the 
questionnaire was analyzed and a factor axis was extracted. 
The patterns were analyzed, and the features of the 
perceptions of the residents in the apartment and 
condominium complexes in Makuhari Baytown were 
obtained from a series of analyses. 
C. Outline of the investigation 
Investigation period: 25, 26 July, 1, 2, 7, and 31 August, 
and 8 September, 2010. 
The search procedure: Residents of 43 residential buildings 
in the housing complex were given the questionnaire survey 
to complete. 
 
 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

TABLE I . OUTLINE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To clarify each resident’s cognitive domain, the 
questionnaire survey was done by the by Sphere graphic 
method*. Residents had to have lived in the housing 
complex three years or more, and had to be at least 10 years 
old. To ensure there was no bias, the questionnaire survey 
covered each region of “Makuhari Baytown”. 
The survey content. The following items were investigated: 
①Attribute investigation 
②Consideration range survey recognized local resident 
③Rote investigation in daily life 
④Perceived area survey in range of action 
⑤Perceived area component investigation in range of action 
⑥Perceived area survey of responses to phrases such as 
familiar waterside, familiar green space, and bustle 
⑦Perceived area component investigation 
⑧Landmark investigation 
⑨Visible consideration investigation of component of ②, 
⑤, ⑦ and ⑧. 
⑩Comparative study of the current housing and previous 
type of residence 
The survey was conducted according to the overview above, 
and we obtained 164 valid responses, which are summarized 
in TABLE I and TABLE II. Cognitive domain data were 
obtained, and we considered the data analysis as a 
multivariate analysis. 
 
 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
TABLE II .  DATA ON THE RESPONDENTS 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Cognitive Region Map “Familiar Waterside” (All) 
*Sphere graphic method                                                                            
This method is effective when focused on a subject who has adequate 
recognition of the area. It is suitable for studying elatively limited spaces in 
small areas, such as the area surrounding a personal dwelling. The subject’s 
cognitive area is obtained by indirectly exploring the structure through a 
spread, a spatial break, etc. 
III. 
CONSIDERATION OF RESIDENTS’ ENVIRONMENTAL    
PERCEPTION 
Subjects from the study demonstrated their cognitive 
domains by sphere graphic method such as “My Town,” 
“familiar waterside,” “familiar green,” “buzz,” “action 
range,” and “neighbors.” From their responses, cognitive 
domain diagrams were created (Figure 4).  
The perceived area chart, in which all residential 
buildings in Makuhari Baytown had been summarized, was 
analyzed. The division perceived area chart was made for an 
inside layer, multistory, and high rise residential buildings to 
compare the analyses of the cognitive domains of each 
residential building type by height. This comparison analysis 
was carried out. 
 
IV. 
CONSIDERATION OF COGNITIVE CONSTRUCT THAT 
USES MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS 
This section considers the psychological impact of the 
Makuhari Baytown design on its residents. An important part 
in the plan was the “Enclosed roadside” concept to target 
residents of residential mid-rise buildings (Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6.   Characteristic of enclosed residence along the road 
 
TABLE III . ITEM CATEGORY TABLE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Examples of the shaft to extract the common factors by 
quantification III* by using multivariate data obtained from 
surveys of previous chapters, we discuss factors that are 
critical to the recognition of residents (TABLE III).  
Quantification III was employed for 82 samples and 
residential buildings in which residents lived in the middle 
floors. 
 
The first axis “Correlation coefficient:” 0.492140 
The number of years in residence increased more than the 
item category plot chart, and the thing that decreases is 
understood (Figure 7). Moreover, it ranks highest in an item 
range high-ranking table (TABLE IV).The first axis is 
interpreted from the above-mentioned factor as a settled axis. 
 
The second axis “Correlation coefficient:” 0.450089 
The attribute becomes a quick fact from the item category 
plot chart in the positive direction, and the thing that is a 
physical element is understood in the negative direction 
(Figure 6). It ranks highest in an item range high-ranking 
table (TABLE IV). The second axis is interpreted from the 
above-mentioned factor as the axis of the formation of the 
local resident perceived area. 
 
The third axis “Correlation coefficient:” 0.418563 
It becomes impossible to use the degree of openness to the 
courtyard from the item category plot chart in the positive 
direction, and the thing that can be used in the negative 
direction is understood. The arrangement form understands 
similarly and the thing that there is all sides enclosing type in 
the positive direction, and L type is located in the negative 
direction is understood . The third axis is interpreted from 
the above-mentioned factor as the axis of the degree of 
freedom of access to the courtyard. It has been understood 
that “Liberating level of the courtyard” is a factor that alters 
the perception characteristics of the residents. 
 
TABLE IV .  TOP TABLE ITEM RANGE 
 
 
 
*Quantification#III  
 The purpose of this analysis is to classify samples from relationship 
between categories (characteristic items) and the samples. The result is 
shows as scatter diagrams. 
The procedure of the analysis is 
1) the relationship between categories are analysed, 
2) from the result, reveal latent common factor showed as axes of scatter 
diagrams (Item category plotting fig.) . 
3) By the possession of samples on these scatter diagrams (Sample plotting 
fig.), they are classified, and their characteristics are grasped. 
 
 
 
V. CONSIDERATION OF STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN THE 
RESIDENT FACTOR ANALYSIS AND TYPOLOGY 
This study used samples obtained from the results in a 
score quantification # III, cluster analysis (Ward method), 
and revealed the characteristic features of each type of 
pattern recognition by each resident that typify the be. 
This paper identified at least 40 patterns in types I-IV. 
Euclidean distance cluster analysis helped obtain a 
dendrogram  (Figure 6, Figure 7). 
 
  
Figure 7.   Cluster analysis  dendrogram (Ward method) 
Type I (30 samples) 
Type I represents large residential buildings with open 
entry to a courtyard that is open to residents only. The 
average length of residency was 11.3 years. Many factors are 
involved, but they do not include a time element. 
 
Type II (14 samples) 
This type consists of a residential building with an open 
courtyard that is accessible to residents only. The average 
length of residency was 15 years. 
 
Type III (15 samples) 
In regard to the degree of openness of the courtyard entry, 
this type consists of large residential buildings with an open 
entry to the courtyard, which is also available to non-
residents. Attributes of the neighborhood that form the 
cognitive domain include a time element. 
 
Type IV (23 samples) 
Type IV comprises large residential buildings with an 
open courtyard also available only to non-residents. The 
average length of residency was 7.5 years. The cluster 
analysis was made based on the four patterns of local 
resident perceived area charts (Figure 8). 
 
TypeI: Perceived area mean value: 11.61 ha 
TypeII: Perceived area mean value: 11.26 ha 
TypeIII: Perceived area mean value: 95.94 ha 
TypeIV: Perceived area mean value: 42.81 ha 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 8.   Pattern sample plot chart 
Figure 9.    Cognitive region map “neighborhood” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

VI. SUMMARY 
The results of the above-mentioned analysis show the 
relationship between the characteristics of the living 
environment in Makuhari Baytown and the perception of the 
environment by the residents. 
 
1. When the patternizing of the residents in the courtyard 
type route house is done according to the local resident 
perception characteristic, the factor of “Settle down”, 
“Formation of the local resident perceived area,” and 
“Degree of freedom of access to the courtyard” are the key 
indicators. 
 
2. As the pattern characteristic, in pattern 1, there are a lot of 
ratios of the residential building with a courtyard that only 
the resident can use, and the length of residency was the 
longest in Type I. In Type Ⅱ, the residential building has a 
courtyard that only the resident can use, and the average 
length of residency is the longest in this type. The perceived 
area mean value for this type is the lowest. Type III is a 
pattern that there are a lot of ratios of the residential building 
with a courtyard that can be used exclusively by the resident, 
and the residency years are short. The perceived area mean 
value is the maximum. Type IV is a pattern that there are a 
lot of ratios of the residential building with a courtyard that 
can be used exclusively by the resident, and in this type the  
 average length of residence is the shortest. The design 
characteristics of the courtyard type and the composition of 
the cognitive area were able to be considered by  
analyzing the living environment of the type of courtyard 
and “Local resident” perception characteristics. It is thought 
that the results achieved in this master’s thesis will lead to a 
theory relating to techniques for planning and constructing a 
uniform current housing complex and for city planning that 
considers characteristics of the location as well as those 
relating to the types of residents and the surrounding 
environment. 
 
References 
[1] Hitomi Fujioka, Chiaki Tagami, Hironori Negoro, and Hirotomo 
Ohuchi “Research on spatial cognition in children with sketch map”, 
Proceedings of the 18th Annual Paper on Environmental Information 
Science, no. 18, pp. 7-12, Nov. 2004 
[2] Satoshi Yamada and Hirotomo Ohuchi "Research on environmental 
awareness of residents living in the body housing a collection of 
skyscrapers",Proceedings of the planning system,AIJ, no.18 pp.1749-
1757, May 2008 
[3] Akira Ito, Setsuko Ouchi and Hirotomo Ohuchi “Study on spatial 
composition and structure of the city's image of children as an 
educational environment - about the relationship between real space 
images of children in Makuhari and Tsukishima -"Annual Meeting 
Proceedings, AIJ, pp. 171-172 , Sep 2010 
[4] Setsuko Ohuchi and Hirotomo Ohuchi ”Study on urban space 
composition as an educationalenvironment and image structure of 
children-Relation between actual space and child image-" XXIII UIA 
World Congress Torino 2008 
[5] Ikeda, Daisaku. Dialogue on Life, Tokyo, Ushio shuppansha, 1974.  
[6]  Makiguchi, Tsunesaburo The Geography of Human Life, Tokyo, 
Seikyo Bunko, 1971. 
[7] Hirotomo Ohuchi, Satoshi Yamada and Setsuko Ohuchi “Study on 
Child Spatial Cognition Using Sketched Maps of Urban Housing 
Projects Centering on Educational Institutions” Journal of South 
China University of Technology 35, pp. 205-208, Oct. 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

