A Spatial Decision Support System for Waste  
Management in Municipal Society of Lahore City  
 
Muhammad Haris 
GIS Centre, PUCIT 
University of the Punjab 
Lahore, Pakistan 
e-mail: haris@pucit.edu.pk 
Beenish Fatima 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
NUCES 
Lahore, Pakistan 
e-mail: beenish.fatima@nu.edu.pk
 
 
Abstract— The paper discusses waste management issues in 
urban regions, which is an area of concern in highly populated 
cities of developing countries. Lahore, being the second most 
populated city of Pakistan, is also facing waste management 
issues, with both private and public organizations struggling to 
cater to it. A government operated housing society in Lahore 
named WAPDA (Water and Power Development Authority) 
Town is facing this issue due to improper waste dumping by 
residents. To resolve this problem, a door-to-door survey was 
conducted in the G5 block of the housing society. The survey 
results showed that most of the residents were not satisfied 
with waste management services and reported that absence of 
waste bins was a major reason for inappropriate waste 
dumping. Identifying the best possible location for placement 
of new waste bins made this a spatial decision-making 
problem. The required spatial data was collected using 
physical street surveys and mapping in ArcGIS 10.2 software. 
The existing waste dumping locations were taken as 
alternatives. Additionally, multiple criteria were chosen for 
evaluation 
which 
were 
given 
weights 
using 
pairwise 
comparison method, while various geo-processing tools were 
used to evaluate the criteria. Finally, alternatives were scored 
in terms of their appropriateness using Analytical Hierarchical 
Process (AHP), a multi-criteria decision-making technique. 
The proposed solution will help in minimizing improper waste 
dumping, leading to a positive environmental impact on the 
housing society. 
 
Keywords- GIS; Multi-criteria Decision Making; Waste 
Management; Spatial Modeling. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Massive population rise, unmanaged urbanization and 
uplift of living standards have greatly contributed to the 
increasing rate of solid waste generation in developing 
countries [1]. For urban planners, waste management in 
municipal areas has become a major problem. Its severity is 
manifold in developing countries because of inadequate 
urban planning and scarcity of resources [2]. 
This is the case in Pakistan as well, where poor planning 
in cities and high rate of urbanization have led to many 
problems [3]. One of the major issues in urban areas is 
waste management, which has adversely affected Lahore, 
the second most populated city in Pakistan. Even one of the 
best housing societies in Lahore, like WAPDA Town are no 
exception. The waste management issue in the housing 
society is primarily caused by residents disposing of waste 
at inappropriate locations including open plots, near 
electricity poles or at street corners. Open garbage dumps, 
which are exposed to stray animals and rain, lead to waste-
related diseases in the society. To handle rising concerns 
over this matter, WAPDA Town management recently ran a 
campaign with the title “Clean WAPDA Town”. The 
campaign aimed to educate residents about proper disposal 
of waste by placing banners bearing motivational 
cleanliness messages throughout the housing society. 
Unfortunately, this campaign did not have any positive 
impact on the issue. Meanwhile, the residents raised 
complaints about waste spreading due to severe lack of 
waste bins. 
The passiveness of the society administration to solve this 
issue was mainly due to budget constraints. Hence, the 
administration was unable to figure out the appropriate 
count and location for placing waste bins in any block of the 
housing society. To solve this problem, firstly a relatively 
small but congested block of G5 was selected. Then, 
through research, a detailed methodology was developed 
with the proposition that lack of waste bins was the main 
issue behind improper disposal of waste by residents. 
Finally, the survey data coupled with Geographical 
Information System (GIS) and multi-criteria decision-
making techniques helped in identifying the optimal 
locations for placement of waste bins. The proposed 
methodology of waste bin placement can improve the 
cleanliness of the block and eventually can play a significant 
role in city-wide waste management. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
discusses in detail the methodology used for evaluating the 
locations for waste bin placements. Different alternative 
locations for bin placement were chosen using a Global 
Positioning System (GPS) survey. Finally, using a multi-
criteria evaluation technique, the alternatives were ranked 
depending on how appropriate they were considered. Section 
III describes the results obtained from the methodology in 
terms of spatial context. At the end, Section IV lists the 
benefits gained through this work and briefly proposes a 
validation approach as future work. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II. 
METHODOLOGY 
This research work aims at solving the waste 
management issue in WAPDA Town, for which a door-to-
door survey was carried out in G5 block. The approximate 
area of this block is 67000 m2 which includes 337 houses 
and 18 empty plots. The survey questionnaire results from 
80 households showed that almost 96% of residents of the 
block were unsatisfied with waste management. Moreover, 
65% of residents pointed out that the issue of waste 
management was due to lack of waste bins in the block. 
Through street survey, it was found that only one large bin, 
provided by the management, was placed in the block near a 
commercial area. Placement of new bins was seemingly the 
obvious solution, but due to the budget constraints, the 
management could place only a limited number of such 
bins. 
This transforms the issue under consideration into a 
decision-making problem, where a selected number of 
options are to be chosen from a set of available alternatives 
(bin placement locations) based on certain factors. Being a 
spatial problem, GIS can facilitate this process. GIS 
combines spatial data with quantitative and qualitative 
information [4] and it has been quite extensively used in 
solving 
municipal 
solid 
waste 
management 
issues 
[7][8][12]. Some highly unstructured social problems 
require decision making by the municipal administration. 
For such cases, the fusion of GIS with decision making has 
formed the domain of Multi Criteria Spatial Decision 
Making (MCSDM) [13]. The MCSDM has been effectively 
used in solving various spatial waste management issues 
[5][6]. The application of MCSDM for waste management 
is mainly focused on the following matters: 
i 
decision making for the selection of most 
appropriate landfill site selection [5][6] 
ii 
optimizing waste collection procedures [7][12] 
iii 
reallocation of existing waste bins [7] 
The major shortcoming in existing research work is that 
these waste management practices have been focused 
primarily on dumping of garbage after collection from waste 
bins. Nothing substantial has been discussed about 
cleanliness issues of the study area due to improper waste 
dumping by the residents. Moreover, the study areas in prior 
works have been mostly quite large in geographical extent 
[5][6][7], and hence the specific issues at the block level of a 
municipal society are overlooked. This has led to the 
selection of less than optimal criteria for decision making 
related to waste management. Our research work attempts to 
fill in these shortcomings by working on a relatively small 
area of G5 block and focusing on waste disposal issues 
caused by residents. Through multiple surveys, the root 
cause of improper waste dumping was found to be lack of 
available waste bins. With this finding, the primary objective 
of the current work has been to improve waste management 
of WAPDA Town at the grass root level by proposing the 
most appropriate locations for placement of waste bins. 
After narrowing down the problem, a GPS survey was 
done in the G5 block. The Android application GPS Logger 
[14] was used for surveying and the results collected 14 
GPS points of improper waste dumping. The collected GPS 
points were converted into shapefile and visualized in 
ArcGIS Desktop 10.2 [9]. These GPS survey locations were 
taken as alternatives for placement of waste bins. For the 
evaluation of alternatives, seven different criteria were 
selected, as listed in Table 1. The choice of criteria was 
dependent on the sources of garbage generation and 
dumping specifically for the G5 block. Primary sources of 
garbage generation include houses and commercial areas. 
Moreover, the primary target locations for garbage dumping 
by residents includes empty plots, poles, roads, and existing 
bins. Another criterion named ‘proposed bins’ considers the 
distance between the bin under consideration and the nearest 
proposed bin. This criterion is of vital importance, since too 
close or too far placement of new bins would significantly 
affect the waste dumping practices of the block’s residents.  
For the evaluation of criteria, data was prepared by the 
combination of GPS surveys and digitization over geo-
referenced satellite imagery, as shown in Figure 1. The data 
for criteria C1 (Houses), C3 (Roads and streets), C4 (Empty 
plots) and C5 (Commercial areas) was prepared by 
digitizing in ArcGIS Desktop 10.2. There were 337 houses, 
18 empty plots, 3 commercial points and 17 road segments. 
The data layers prepared using ArcGIS Desktop were stored 
in Shapefile format. The data for C2 (Poles), C6 (Existing 
bins) and C7 (Proposed Bins) was prepared using GPS 
survey points. There were 56 poles, 14 points of improper 
waste dumping and only one existing bin. The improper 
waste points were considered as proposed bin locations 
(alternatives). The average accuracy of GPS points was 5-7 
meters. The GPS points acquired were in Keyhole Markup 
Language (KML) format, which were then converted into 
Shapefile format to be used in ArcGIS Desktop. The 
geometry type of data layers for C2, C5, C6 and C7 was set 
as point, for C3 as polyline, and for C1 and C4 as polygon. 
The coordinate system for data layers was set to World 
Geodetic System 1984 (WGS84) [15].  
After the data preparation, a pairwise comparison 
technique was used to assign weights to the criteria 
[10][11]. The criterion C1 (Houses) bear the highest weight 
because G5 being a congested block has a high ratio of 
garbage generation per unit area. For waste dumping, the 
places found to be most prone were roads, empty plots and 
poles. Hence, their weights are comparatively high. All the 
selected criteria, their reasoning and calculated weights are 
given in Table 1. It is noteworthy to mention that the higher 
the value of a criteria, the more it favors the alternative. 
The next step was to define an appropriate coverage area 
for each alternative. For this purpose, the Thiessen polygon 
tool in ArcGIS Desktop was used. The Thiessen polygon 
takes as input the alternative points and outputs the polygon 
enclosing each alternative. Polygons are generated in such a 
way that any location within a specific polygon is closer to 
the alternative within the polygon than to any other 
alternative point (as shown in Figure 2). In other words, 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 1. Block G5 detail map. 
these polygons partition the available area according to 
alternatives and hence serve as base service area for 
evaluation of selected criteria.  
For the most accurate ranking of waste bins 
(alternatives), the well-known multi-criteria decision-
making technique of AHP was used, which focuses on 
ranking alternatives based on specific criteria with assigned 
weights [11]. Finally, different geo-processing tools from 
ArcGIS Desktop were used to evaluate the value of each 
criteria. 
 
For determining the values of C1-C5, the Spatial Join 
tool in ArcGIS Desktop was used. It counted the value of 
specific criteria (e.g. no. of poles) within the geographical 
extent of base service layer and assigned it to the alternative 
enclosed within it. Then, the value of the criteria (for each 
alternative) was normalized to fall between 0 and 1. To 
calculate the values of C6 and C7, the Near tool in ArcGIS 
Desktop was used. It calculated the distance from each 
alternative to the nearest existing bin and proposed bin 
(alternatives), respectively. The values of all criteria are 
finally represented as individual attributes in the alternative 
data layer. 
Lastly, using the formula of Weighted Sum Model 
(WSM), the final value of each alternative was calculated. 
WS (Ax) = ∑y (Ax(Cy) * W(Cy) 
(1) 
where, 
WS(Ax) = Total weighted score of Alternative x  
Ax (Cy) = Score of Alternative x for Criteria y 
W(Cy) = Weight of Criteria y 
Sorting the value of alternatives in descending order lists 
the optimal locations for waste bin from best to worst. 
Figure 3 summarizes the proposed methodology in terms of 
three phases namely, exploratory, empirical and analysis, 
while Figure 4 briefly depicts the phases of decision 
making. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The final weighted score of alternatives was used to 
spatially visualize waste bin locations with symbols of 
different sizes. The size of the symbol is proportional to its 
importance. The larger the size of an alternative (yellow 
circles), the better location it represents for waste bins, as 
shown in Figure 5. Moreover, each alternative location is 
serially labeled (in descending order) based upon its final 
weighted score. From the Figure 5, it can be analyzed that 
the alternatives which are spatially near the center of the 
block are better for being selected as waste bin locations i.e. 
alternatives labeled 1, 2, 3 and 4. On the other hand, 
alternatives labeled 12, 13 and 14 are the least optimal 
locations. It can be inferred from this analysis that the G5 
block is affected by improper waste dumping mostly at the 
center, caused by congested housing and narrow roads. 
Hence, priority should be given to bin placements at these 
locations that are highly prone to improper waste dumping 
by the residents. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Waste management is a major environmental issue in 
developing 
countries 
including 
Pakistan. 
Limited 
maintenance budget has adversely affected WAPDA Town 
residents, due to lack of available waste bins. GIS in 
collaboration with multi-criteria decision-making techniques 
helps the management in efficiently determining the 
location of waste bins. The proposed solution has a two-fold 
advantage. Firstly, due to the generic nature of the required 
dataset, this spatial decision solution can be applied to other 
blocks of the society or in various metropolitan areas of 
Lahore city. Secondly, altering the criteria and their weights, 
various outputs can be retrieved. This helps in achieving 
flexible decision making. According to the budget 
constraints of a specific area, management can choose the 
top locations for bin placement. The goal achieved through 
this work is a well-researched solution to the cleanliness 
issue in WAPDA Town. All previous efforts have been in 
 
Figure 2. Thiessen polygon map. 
 
Figure 4. Decision making process. 
 
Figure 3. Proposed methodology chart. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

vain due to lack of any statistical data and analytical 
calculations, while the current research work includes both, 
the surveyed data and spatial analytics. 
In the next phase of this research work, actual placement 
of waste bins is expected at locations retrieved through the 
proposed solution. Upon placement of bins, further analysis 
would be carried out to measure any improvement in 
improper waste dumping by residents in the vicinity of the 
bin. Reduction of improper waste dumping will authenticate 
the selection of criteria and their weights; else brainstorming 
would be done for altering these parameters. This iterative 
process will eventually mature the spatial decision-making 
procedure for waste management. Lessons learned from 
these outcomes can be used to cater waste management 
issues in other blocks or municipal societies of Lahore city. 
Since the final weighted score is a direct measure of the 
importance of the waste bin location, another future prospect 
could be to place waste bins of different sizes depending 
upon the calculated score. This will, in turn, help in efficient 
utilization of the financial resources of the administration. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Zhu Minghua et al., "Municipal solid waste management in 
Pudong New Area, China," Waste Management no. 29, pp. 
1227-1233. Crown Copyright 2008 Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
[2] P. V. Gorsevski, K. R. Donevska, C. D. Mitrovski, and J. P. 
Frizado, "Integrating multi-criteria evaluation techniques with 
geographic informationsystems for landfill site selection: A 
case study using ordered weighted average," Waste 
Management no. 32, pp. 287-296, 2011 Elsevier Ltd. 
[3] Q. Hamid, M. H. Chauhdry, S. Mahmood, and M. S. Farid, 
"Arc GIS and 3D Visualization of Land Records: A Case 
Study of Urban Areas in Punjab," in National Academy 
Science Letters, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 277-281, August 2016. 
[4] D. K. Themistoklis, P. K. Dimitrios, and P. H. Constantinos, 
"Siting MSW landfills with a spatial multiple criteria analysis 
methodology," doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2005.04.002. 
[5] I. Mahamid and S. Thawaba, “Multi criteria and landfill site 
selection using GIS: a case study from Palestine,” The Open 
Environmental Engineering Journal, 2010. 
[6] M. A. Alanbari and Q. Al-Mseiab, “Landfill Site Selection 
Using GIS and Multicriteria Decision Analysis,” Engineering 
no. 6, pp. 526-549, 2014.  
[7] C. Chalikas and K. Ladaridi, "A GIS based model for the 
optimisation of municipal solid waste collection: the case 
study of Nikea, Athens, Greece," WSEAS Tranasctions on 
Environment and Development, vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 640–650, 
2009 
[8] H. Abdulai, R. Hussein, E. Bevilacqua, and M. Storrings, 
“GIS Based A and Analysis of Municipal Solid Waste 
Collection System, in Wa, Ghana,” Journal of Geographic 
Information System, no. 7, pp. 85-94, 2015. 
[9] ArcGIS Desktop by ESRI. (February 23, 2018). Retrieved  
from http://desktop.arcgis.com/en/. 
[10] Pairwise comparison. (February 23, 2018). Retrieved  from 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pairwise_comparison. 
[11] Pairwise comparison. (February 23, 2018). Retrieved  from 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analytic_hierarchy_process. 
[12] A. Kallel, M. M. Serbaji, and M. Zairi, “Using GIS-Based 
Tools for the Optimization of Solid Waste Collection and 
Transport: Case Study of Sfax City, Tunisia,” Journal of 
Engineering, vol. 2016, article ID 4596849, 7 pages, 2016. 
doi:10.1155/2016/4596849. 
[13] E. 
Triantaphyllou, 
“Multi-Criteria 
Decision 
Making 
Methods,” Multi-criteria Decision Making Methods: A 
Comparative Study. Applied Optimization, vol 44. Springer, 
Boston, MA. 
[14] “GPS Logger for Android” (March 11, 2018). Retrieved  from 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.mendhak.g
pslogger. 
[15] “World Geodetic System” (March 11, 2018). Retrieved  from 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Geodetic_System. 
 
 
TABLE I.  
CRITERIA DESCRIPTION 
Code 
Criteria 
Weights 
Description 
C1 
Houses 
0.42 
Each 
house 
represents 
specific 
amount 
of 
daily 
waste. 
C2 
Poles 
0.09 
Waste dumbing is done by 
residents near electric poles. 
C3 
Roads and 
streets 
0.12 
Accessibility of alternative 
through main road and streets 
C4 
Empty plots 
areas 
0.18 
Waste dumbing is done by 
residents inside empty plots. 
C5 
Commercial 
areas 
0.04 
Commercial areas generate 
more waste as compared to 
houses 
C6 
Existing bin 
0.06 
Distance from the nearest 
existing waste bin. 
C7 
Proposed 
Bin 
0.09 
Distance from the nearest 
proposed 
waste 
bin 
(alternative) 
 
 
Figure 5. Decision making result. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

