A Tool for Spatially Based Prediction of Consumer Lawsuits against Electric Power
Companies
Domingos A. Dias Junior, Johnatan C. Souza, João O. B.
Diniz, Geraldo Braz Junior, João D. S. Almeida, Anselmo
Cardoso de Paiva
Applied Computing Group (NCA)
Federal University of Maranhão (UFMA)
São Luís Brazil
Email: {domingos.adj; johnatancarvalho; joao.bandeira;
geraldo; jdallyson; paiva}@nca.ufma.br
Erika W. B. A. L. Alves
Equatorial Energy, Brazil
São Luís, Brazil
Email: erika.assis@equatorialenergia.com.br
Abstract—The main purpose of an energy company is the
provision of services to the final consumer. This does not mean
that completely avoiding failures of the system is an easy task.
These failures could lead to problems in the relationship
between the energy company and the clients, resulting in
judicial dispute. Thus, it is interesting for a power company to
preemptively identify the consumers who are dissatisfied.
Therefore, it is important for company executives to identify
regions or groups of consumers that are related to the same
cause that motivated a lawsuit. Thus, the present work aims to
propose a tool
for spatial
analysis and spatially
based
prediction of consumer lawsuits against an electric power
company using data mining and machine learning techniques.
The results obtained from a database of an electric power
company in Brazil showed results with 96.52% sensitivity in
identifying consumers with lawsuits related to Unregistered
Power Consumption (UPC). Also, a tool for visualization and
spatial analysis of this group of clients is presented.
Keywords - lawsuit; electricity sector; consumer profile;
geoanalysis; geovisualization.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays,
many
researchers
have
been
studying
problems in large volumes of data to analyze the consumer
profile, using the concepts of both data mining and machine
learning. We can define data mining as the process of
exploring large amounts of data looking for consistent
patterns. One way to find consistent patterns and associations
within databases is to use machine learning techniques [2].
The energy market in several countries is changing,
basically due to the deregulation of the market and the
emergence of judicial and administrative mechanisms for
consumer protection [3]. The main purpose of an energy
company is to provide services to the final consumer, even
though it is very difficult to completely eliminate failures of
the system [4]. System failures could result in a judicial
dispute between the customer and the energy company. For
that reason, it is useful for a power company to preemptively
identify the consumers who are dissatisfied and also to
identify the reasons of this in order to generate action plans
to avoid lawsuits and increase the quality of service. Thus,
there is a need for a prediction service for lawsuits.
By analyzing large data in companies and providing
prediction services based on machine learning techniques,
companies have valuable data from their customers, so they
can
act
effectively
and
accurately
on
certain
issues.
However, the prediction of isolated client’s lawsuits often
does not reflect the robustness of a lawsuit prediction
service. When it comes to electric power companies, the
service provided encompasses a great number of customers
at the same time (neighborhoods, cities, states). For example,
the
Equatorial
Energy
Group
is
responsible
for
the
distribution of electricity in the states of Para, Maranhão,
Piauı, and Alagoas, with over 5 million customers in Brazil. 
Often, a customer’s dissatisfaction with the service
delivered can be motivating for other neighboring customers
to file a lawsuit against the company. A practical example
could be when a customer who has had the power supply
interrupted for 24 hours is appointed as a potential customer
to initiate a lawsuit through a prediction system. Usually, this
interruption is not individual, so neighboring customers may
also have this same profile and thus could potentially seek
justice.
A tool for spatial analysis and spatially based prediction
of consumer lawsuits against an electric power company that
enables the company and its executives to look at the
prediction of a group of customers in different or even risky
locations provides a much more robust mechanism for
addressing the problem. Because executives have such
information, they can address more accurately the concerns
of customers (or neighboring customer groups) at greater risk
of filing lawsuits, thereby reducing costs to the company
and, above all, increasing customer satisfaction and positive
relationships with the company.
For the reasons mentioned above, the present work
propose a tool for spatial analysis and spatially based
prediction of consumer lawsuits against an electric power
company
using
data
mining
and
machine
learning
techniques. Because it is a tool for prediction of lawsuits,
the paper presents a series of benefits, which we can
highlighted as follows:
•
A way of customer group prediction visualization
and analysis for electric power companies.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

•
The system is applied industrially and with real
data.
•
Assists the company in establishing the risk of
receiving legal proceedings.
•
Helps managers and executives understand the
motivation of lawsuits to generate planning and
prevention actions.
•
Helps improve customer service and response based
on a robust and intelligent method.
•
Helps improve client’s satisfaction by avoiding
lawsuits.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the main related works. Section III presents the
proposed tool of prediction of consumer lawsuits. The results
are given in Section IV. Finally, a conclusion on the results
obtained is given in Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK
Despite being techniques with huge social appeal and
great concern among power companies, computational
methodologies based on data mining and machine learning
are still very scarce, especially for the purpose of providing a
completely
automatic
method
of
predicting
lawsuits.
However, there is some work in the literature dealing with
customer
satisfaction,
consumer
profile
analysis,
and
consumer churn in companies. These works will still be
listed as related works because they were fundamental for
the basis of the work proposed here, even if it is not possible
to compare them directly with our proposed method.
Customers file a lawsuit because they want to be treated
fairly by the company when a service failure occurs.
Identifying customers who are likely to file a lawsuit against
the company can also be considered as an identification of
customer dissatisfaction. The company suffers a considerable
monetary loss when some clients leave it, in addition to the
procedural costs generated. This is classified as Customer
Churn Prediction (CCP), where techniques based on machine
learning, regression analysis, and predictive modeling are
used to estimate the likelihood that customers will leave the
company. CCP is a common problem in sectors such as
telecommunications, [5], banking [6], e-commerce [7], and
gaming [8].
A
growing
demand
for
new customers
intensifies
competition among commercial banks. To increase profits
for ongoing operations and increase core competitiveness,
commercial banks must avoid losing customers while at the
same time acquiring new customers. In [6], the churn of
commercial bank customers is predicted based on the
Support Vector Machine (SVM) model and uses the random
sampling method to improve the SVM model. When the
ratio is 1:10 (churners:non-churners), the model has better
results. Gordini and Veglio [7] developed a tailor-made
churn prediction model for the SVM-based Business-to-
Consumer (B2C) industry.
Amin et al. [9] propose a decision-making technique
based on the Approximate Set Theory (AST) to extract
important decision rules related to customer turnover. The
AST classification based on genetic algorithms outperforms
other rule generation algorithms used. Subsequently, the
authors proposed a new CCP approach based on the concept
of estimation of classifier certainty using distance as a factor
[5]. It was found that the distance factor is strongly related to
the certainty of the classifier.
Milosevic et al. [8] also presented a methodology for
preventing customer churn, however, focusing on the game
industry freemium. They evaluated learning models, such as
decision trees, logistic regression, random forest, gradient
boosting, and naive Bayes for churn prediction. The gradient
boosting model showed better performance than the others.
They
also
proposed
a
personalized
churn
prevention
approach, identifying game features that are potentially
interesting to the user and using them to customize
notifications.
The relationship between previous events, which could
be handled individually, with the quality and fidelity of the
relationship is the purpose of Francisco et al. [10] proposed
work involving a mobile phone company. The study
confirmed (directly and indirectly) the assumptions of a
positive and significant effect between satisfaction, trust and
commitment and their antecedents.
According to Siu et al. [11], customers complain because
they want to be treated fairly by the company when a service
failure occurs. This study investigates the role of justice in
retaining customers who
had failed restaurant service
experiences. As a result, the authors confirm the relationship
of fairness between prior and subsequent satisfaction.
In a previous study, we proposed a method of predicting
unregistered
power
consumption
lawsuits
and
related
variables [12]. The method proved to be robust in the task of
classifying these types of customers, however, in our first
study, we attempted to build an effective computational
method and not a tool for corporate use. Also, the method in
our previous work was not an extensible method, using only
eXtreme Gradient Boosting. Thus, in this work, we propose
the development of a tool for spatially based prediction of
consumer lawsuits against electric power companies in a
way that is intuitive and helps companies’ managers
increase customer satisfaction. This paper differs from our
first work in several points, mainly in the fact that our
present work is an extensible method which allows the
insertion of new classifiers and offers a usable tool. Also, our
previous work did not use the entire database, only a small
proportion for the elaboration of the method. In the current
work, we use the entire database of an electricity company.
Based on what is observed in the literature, and the
importance of preventing customer lawsuits, the method
proposed in this paper is based on the construction of a
predictive model. For this, we use features extracted from the
temporal relationship data of consumers of an electric
company. The goal is to detect, in advance, cases where the
customer may be dissatisfied and may go to court against the
power company, and thus provide preventive information for
managers and technicians to best address the problem.
We can see that many works propose ways to predict
possible
customer
complaints,
intention
to
leave
the
company or prosecute it. The works above mentioned do not
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

offer a tool for individual or joint customer analysis. It is
observed that the joint relationship of customer groups is
something to be explored since features of customer groups
in certain regions can be crucial in deciding lawsuits,
especially in the case of customers of electric power services.
The dissatisfaction of a customer can motivate his neighbors
to file lawsuits against the company.
This paper presents a work done to provide electrical
power companies and their executives with a tool for spatial
analysis and spatially based prediction of consumer lawsuits.
We propose a prediction method based on the customer
behavior within the company; these predictions are plotted
and visualized spatially. Thus, the company executives have
a precise view of the problem and may take action to reduce
customer dissatisfaction.
III.
MATERIALS AND PROPOSED METHOD
The methodology is organized into the following five
steps:
data
acquisition,
feature
extraction,
training,
prediction, analysis and spatial visualization. These steps are
described in the next subsections.
A. Data acquisition
This work uses a private database from Equatorial
Maranhão Energy Distributor. The database has customer
information from various company sectors. Such information
involves consumption history, supply discontinuity, financial
information, customer complaints, equipment used for each
one, etc.
The database used is accompanied by the ground truth for
each customer, that is used in the prediction step to calculate
validation metrics. Some customers already had a lawsuit
against the company. Thus, it is possible to build a method to
learn these patterns and later apply the pattern model to new
customers.
After the data acquisition step, the data is organized into
semantic groups to identify which features are relevant for
the prediction of lawsuits. Also, we consider the generation
of new features from these. This is done as good predictions
require representative features for the classifier.
B. Fature extraction
In this step, we analyze what features are considered
relevant to build the electric company customer profile.
Also, we describe the techniques used to refine and create
new representative features. The features that we used are:

General Information: individual features information
of each client like spatial location, neighborhood,
type of client (residential or commercial).

Power consumption: features about consumption
profile of each client.

Power Loss: features related to occurrences of loss
of energy or failure of distribution.

Invoices: features that show if there were invoices
caused by having UPC with that customer.

Financial: historical payment behavior of a particular
customer.

Law: previous legal actions taken by the customer.
All features are preprocessed before the recognition step.
In addition, it is necessary to analyze customers with a
temporal perspective, that is, from customer information up
to a certain period and predict their possible behavior for the
later period. Thus, in addition to making data processing
necessary, it is relevant to simulate time intervals in the
database. To do this, we modeled the techniques for handling
features with Feature Tools (an open-source Python tool for
automated feature engineering), as described below:

Numeric features are normalized, i.e. their values are
converted to a single scale, that is, a single range of
values;

Categorical features are converted to numeric, using
one
hot
encoding
[13],
which
creates
binary
variables for each category;

Mutual
features
are
created
using
descriptive
statistics:
mean,
median,
standard
deviation.
Moreover, such mechanisms are used because of a
temporal
perspective
of
the
information,
for
example, the standard deviation of consumption of
each customer is calculated taking into account their
history in the last 18 months.
Thus, the data were processed to aggregate temporal
information using statistics. New features were created from
the initial information, enabling the analysis of customer
behavior at various time intervals. Below, we present the
procedure of training of classifiers of the methodology.
C. Training
The training step is responsible for choosing the best
algorithm to recognize, based of previously computed
features, if the client has intentions to file a lawsuit. We
evaluate two algorithms: Extreme Gradient Boosting and
Balanced Bagging Classifier. To evaluate, it is important to
define metrics. In this paper, the chosen metric was
sensitivity, since, in the case of lawsuits, the important thing
is to be able to predict the largest number of possible
lawsuits. The following are the two classifiers evaluated so
far by the method:

Extreme
Gradient
Boosting
[14]:
Tree-based
machine learning algorithm that implements an
optimization of the Gradient Boosting method,
which is a technique that produces a predictive
model from the union of less robust classifiers,
showing better performance than if they were used
in isolation.

Balanced Bagging Classifier [15]: It consists in an
unbalanced data handling technique, which selects
by default 10 subsets of the initial data and performs
random sampling.
The large number of individuals present in the database
makes it impossible to train multiple models due to time and
memory limitations. Thus, we divide the database randomly
into 60% training and 40% for testing. From training, 10% of
the data is taken to validate the model. Sampling is made
keeping all individuals who filed a lawsuit and three times
more individuals who did not file a lawsuit (1:3). The test
dataset is used in the next step and remains as it is. All
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

models are submitted to the same database and ranked
according to the specified metric.
In the training step, the best classifier is chosen. As
already mentioned, two classifiers were evaluated in this
step. These are Extreme Gradient Boosting and Balanced
Bagging Classifier. During training, each model generated
by these classifiers is validated, and the classifier parameters
are estimated using Random Search [16]. After a series of
iterations, the best result achieved in validation is maintained
as the best estimated classifier.
Once this is done, the classifier is submitted to the next
step of the method, that is the prediction on a test dataset, as
described below.
D. Prediction
After the training step, with the best classifier selected,
the best model is applied to the rest of the database. Thus, for
each customer of the company, it is possible to measure the
percentage probability that the customer will initiate a
lawsuit or not. A client who is going to initiate a UPC
lawsuit is considered to be one that has more than 50%
probability, according to the previously estimated model.
To validate the prediction results of the model as a
whole, global metrics are calculated in the test dataset to
verify the robustness of the generated model. For this,
metrics of sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy are extracted.
Accuracy (Acc) represents the proportion of true results
(true positives and true negatives) in the population.
ܣܿܿ=ܶܲ+ܶܰ
ܶܲ+ܶܰ+ܨܲ+ܨܰ(1)
Sensitivity (Sen) expresses the number of true positives
(clients with UPC correctly classified) divided by the total
number of positive cases.
ܵ݁݊ =
ܶܲ
ܶܲ +ܨܰ(2)
Specificity
(Spec)
represents
the
number
of
true
negatives (customers without UPC correctly classified)
divided by the total number of negative cases.
ܵ݌݁ܿ =
ܶܰ
ܶܰ +ܨܲ(3)
After all predictions of all consumers are generated and
stored, we propose a tool for analysis and visualization of
these data. Based
on
the
latitude and
the
longitude
information of each client, it is possible to show them on the
map, and, with the prediction values of each one, it is
possible to make a spatial analysis of the lawsuits.
E. Spatial analysis and visualization
As a central point in the prediction of lawsuits, we have
the identification of the clients with high probability to file a
lawsuit and the determination of the more important causes
that lead the predictor to this classification.
The
Tobler’s
first
law
of
geography
states
that
“everything is related to everything else, but near things are
more related than distant things”. Based on this, we have that
spatially grouped clients in general receive the same service
quality
and
experience
the
same
troubles
in
the
consumer/provider relationship. In this work we used a
geographic information system to manage and visualize
several aspects of the lawsuits prediction, thus improving the
company capacity to understand the problems and launch
action plans to avoid the consumer dissatisfaction.
We
theorize
that
the
geovisualization
of
lawsuit
predictions and their variables that strongly influence this
prediction may offer an understanding of the dissatisfaction
cause and the need actions the must be performed to increase
the service quality. In this sense, we propose and develop a
visualization tool that offers a visualization of prediction
evaluation in different ways. This tool is shown in Figure 1.
Equatorial
Maranhão’s
consumers
are
defined
by
contract accounts, and several users are linked to a traffic, so
in the analysis, users of the tool can search for isolated
consumers and/or traffic (Figure 1(A)). As an end-user
visualization
and
analysis
tool,
it
has
a
number
of
mechanisms that make it easy to search processes through
filters (Figure 1(B)). Because it comprises an entire state of
Brazil, there is a filtering option by Region (North, South,
East, Northwest, Center); when selecting the region, the
sectional and city areas are defined, which the user can also
select through the filters; type of fare used; and the number
of consumers that will be displayed (5000, 10000, or 50000).
Because
the
prediction
presents
the
probability
by
consumers, the user is free to define the percentage of
probability they want to see on the map (Figure 1(C)).
Furthermore, it is known that several features are extracted in
the training step, and the prediction is evaluated by the
features that influence the most the classifier decision, i.e.,
the
variables
that
strongly
influence
this
prediction.
Therefore, the tool allows the visualization of the 10 most
important features for each client and/or group of clients
(Figure 1(D)). By clicking on the clusters (green, yellow and
blue circles with number of consumers), this tab is redefined
with the features of that customer group.
Another analysis that can be done is to select the client
individually (blue marker). When this is done, a new field
displays the contract accounts, the total probability, and the
top ten features associated with the likelihood of triggering a
lawsuit (Figure 2). Finally, the visualization and analysis is
dispersed on the map defined by clusters or individual
consumers, from the selection of filters. Through this series
of mechanisms, managers are able to act accurately on the
problem, trying to remedy problems with lawsuits and
consequently reduce customer dissatisfaction.
In the next section, we will discuss the results of the
proposed method steps and how the use of a geoanalysis and
visualization tool can be crucial in basic service delivery
companies such as Equatorial Maranhão.
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This section presents and discusses the results obtained
with the proposed method for the prediction of power
consumption lawsuits. For evaluation, the acquired database
was divided into two sets: training and test.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 1. Spatial analysis and visualization tool for customer lawsuits prediction.
Figure 2. Individual analysis by contract account.
The client can go to court for a number of issues, which
are defined during the court proceedings. In this paper the
subject
approached
for
prediction
of
lawsuit
was
Unregistered Power Consumption (UPC). This matter was
chosen because it is the subject with the most lawsuits and
that generates the most expenses for Equatorial Maranhão.
The distribution of the proportion of clients with and without
UPC is shown in Table I.
TABLE I. THE PROPORTION OF CLIENTS WITH UNREGISTERED
CONSUMPTION SUBJECT IN TRAINING AND TEST DATASET.
Dataset
Consumer with UPC
Consumer without UPC
Total
Train
8.560
1.476.042
1.484.602
Test
5.714
998.442
1.004.156
Total
14.274
2.474.484
2.488.758
Approximately 2.5 million consumers were analyzed
with the proposed method, however, a large imbalance in the
datasets
is
noticeable.
In
the
feature
extraction
step
(Subsection III-B), 245 variables were retrieved directly
from the database, while 925 were created from these by
their temporal analysis, the transformation of categorical
variables with one hot encoding and the use of descriptive
statistics, totaling 1170 features.
Then, in the training step (Section III-C), the best
classifier was decided when evaluating the 10% reserved for
validation.
Extreme
Gradient
Boosting
yielded
90.3%
sensitivity results in this step, while Balanced Bagging
reached 93.6%. For this reason, Balanced Bagging was
chosen to be the classifier that will make the prediction in the
next step.
At the prediction step, the remainder of the database was
evaluated by the model created in the training step, and thus
generated the likelihood of a client to go to court against the
company. To assess the robustness of the method, global
validation metrics were generated, which are shown in Table
II.
TABLE II. RESULT OF PREDICTION STEP USING BALANCED
BAGGING.
Subject
Acc (%)
Sen (%)
Spec (%)
UPC
91.86
96.52
91.83
As can be seen from Table II, the Balanced Bagging
classifier proved robust results in the classification of new
customers. Company managers can use this information,
which has 96.52% sensitivity, in predicting UPC to avoid
legal costs and improve quality.
However, despite this important information, there is a
need to present the information more accurately, not just
numerically. So, we use spatial analysis to visualize more
effectively large or micro relationships between clients. As
presented in Section III-E, a number of filtering mechanisms
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

are presented for better map viewing. These mechanisms are
crucial for geoanalysis, as executives can go directly to high-
risk regions that are most likely to start legal action.
(A)
(B)
Figure 3. Case study: (A) Selecting an individual consumer, blue marker
and (B) Display of variables that influence that consumer to file a lawsuit.
Based on an individual analysis, the manager can see
which variables will influence that customer to start legal
action against the company and act incisively. An example
of this analysis in a case study can be seen in Figure 3 where,
after filtering the interface, the user selects the individual
consumer (blue marker, Figure 3A) and a new field with
information of the most influential variables is presented
(Figure 3B). By analyzing the variables, it is possible to
obtain what influences the client the most, for example, the
lack of energy in recent days. We can note that the customer
has certain features that can influence him to file a lawsuit
against the company, and that there is a 92.46% probability
of going to court (Figure 3B). Also, the most probable cause
is, for example, power outages. Then, the tool user can select
the customer group (green, yellow and red circles), which
that individual customer is contained in and the variables
will be updated. So, managers will realize that not only a
single customer, but the neighborhood is also going through
the same problem and that the company’s performance needs
to reach that group of consumers to increase customer
satisfaction with the company. Thus, the tool not only shows
the percentage of dissatisfaction generated by the classifier,
but also presents the possible variables that influenced
consumers and groups of consumers to trigger actions, all
combined with a friendly and intuitive geovisualization and
analysis tool.
It is important to note that this is just a case study in
which the tool can facilitate the use of company executives.
Because it is a basic service delivery company and
encompasses an entire state of the federation, the use of
computational
tools
to
help
improve
satisfaction
is
increasingly needed. A spatial analysis tool that aggregates
lawsuit prediction information, as well as facilitating the
company’s operations, also proves to be an ally in the
constant search for improvements in customer service.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper presents a spatial geoanalysis tool which
predicts an electric power company customer’s behavior.
The prediction system is designed to allow its results to be
used to avoid public disputes, e.g., in court trials. The work
presents
a
prediction
system
based
on
computational
intelligence techniques for prediction in a company from
Maranhão state, Brazil. The method was applied to a
database of more than two million customers and proved to
be robust in hitting customers coming with UPC lawsuits
against the company, resulting in a sensitivity of 96.52%.
Also, the geoanalysis tool presents the predictions of
each client along with the variables that most influenced
each of them. This tool has a user-friendly interface and
several features for customer and customer group analysis,
allowing company managers to act incisively on issues in a
variety of areas that the company understands by reducing
legal costs and increasing customer satisfaction. The tool
also allows a complete visualization and analysis of the most
diverse areas and the most diverse consumers of the state.
However, improvements are suggested as future work,
such as acting on new judicial subjects (not only in UPC),
using more classifiers in the training and prediction step, and
generating
other
forms
of data
visualization
such
as
heatmaps. Other spatial features can be added to search for
improvements, analyze the various features of the database
and verify the importance of spatial information for the
robustness of the method, implement a tool in other basic
service companies and, finally, create new features that can
improve the classifier.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Equatorial Energy for
the financial support provided through the National Electric
Energy
Agency
(ANEEL)
Research
and
Development
Program (R&D), PD-00037-0031/2019.
REFERENCES
[1]
P.-N. Tan, Introduction to data mining. Pearson Education India,
2018.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[2]
M. Mohri, A. Rostamizadeh, and A. Talwalkar, Foundations of
machine learning. MIT press, 2018.
[3]
V. A. Ibanez, P. Hartmann, and P. Z. Calvo, “Antecedents of
customer˜ loyalty in residential energy markets: Service quality,
satisfaction, trust and switching costs,” The Service Industries
Journal, vol. 26, no. 6, 2006, pp. 633–650.
[4]
R. Johnston and A. Fern, “Service recovery strategies for single and
double deviation scenarios,” Service Industries Journal, vol. 19, no.
2, 1999, pp. 69–82.
[5]
A. Amin, F. Al-Obeidat, B. Shah, A. Adnan, J. Loo, and S. Anwar,
“Customer churn prediction in telecommunication industry using
data certainty,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 94, 2019, pp. 290
– 301.
[6]
B. He, Y. Shi, Q. Wan, and X. Zhao, “Prediction of customer
attrition of commercial banks based on svm model,” Procedia
Computer Science, vol. 31, 2014, pp. 423 – 430, 2nd International
Conference
on
Information
Technology
and
Quantitative
Management, ITQM 2014.
[7]
N. Gordini and V. Veglio, “Customers churn prediction and
marketing retention strategies. an application of support vector
machines based on the auc parameter-selection technique in b2b e-
commerce industry,” Industrial Marketing Management, vol. 62,
2017, pp. 100–107.
[8]
M.
Milosevic,
N.
Zivic,
and
I.
Andjelkovic,
“Early
churn
prediction´ with personalized targeting in mobile social games,”
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 83, 2017, pp. 326 – 332.
[9]
A.
Amin
et
al.,
“Customer
churn
prediction
in
the
telecommunication
sector
using
a
rough
set
approach,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 237, 2017, pp. 242–254.
[10]
E. C. Francisco-Maffezzolli, P. H. M. Prado, W. V. da Silva, and R.
Z. Marchetti, “Evaluation of the customer relationship quality and
propensity to
change mobile telephone operators,” Brazilian
Business Review, vol. 8, no. 4, 2011, pp. 1–22.
[11]
N. Y.-M. Siu, T. J.-F. Zhang, and C.-Y. J. Yau, “The roles of justice
and customer satisfaction in customer retention: A lesson from
service recovery,” Journal of business ethics, vol. 114, no. 4, 2013,
pp. 675–686.
[12]
F. Y. Oliveira et al., “Prediction of unregistered power consumption
lawsuits and its correlated factors based on customer data using
extreme gradient boosting model,” in 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics (SMC). IEEE, 2019,
pp. 2059–2064.
[13]
J. Buckman, A. Roy, C. Raffel, and I. Goodfellow, “Thermometer
encoding: One hot way to resist adversarial examples,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
[14]
T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting
system,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM sigkdd international
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 2016,
pp. 785–794.
[15]
G. Lemaıtre, F. Nogueira, and C. K. Aridas, “Imbalanced-learn: A 
python toolbox to tackle the curse of imbalanced datasets in
machine learning,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol.
18, no. 1, 2017, pp. 559–563.
[16]
J. Bergstra and Y. Bengio, “Random search for hyper-parameter
optimization,” Journal of machine learning research, vol. 13, no.
Feb. 2012, pp. 281–305.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

