The spatio-temporal semantics from a perdurantism perspective
Benjamin Harbelot∗, Helbert Arenas†, Christophe Cruz‡
Laboratoire Le2i, UMR-6302 CNRS,Departement Informatique
University of Burgundy
Dijon, France
∗benjamin.harbelot@checksem.fr, †helbert.arenas@checksem.fr, ‡christophe.cruz@u-bourgogne.fr
Abstract—In this paper we present the “continuum model”.
Our work follows a “perdurantism” approach and is designed
to handle dynamic phenomena extending the 4D-ﬂuent with
the use of semantic web technologies. In our approach we
represent dynamic entities as constituted by time slices each
with semantic, geometric and temporal components. Our model
is able to link the diverse representations of an entity and allows
the inference of qualitative information from quantitative one.
The inference results are later added to the ontology in order to
enhance the knowledge base. The model has been implemented
using OWL and SWRL. Our preliminary results are promising
and we plan to further develop the model in the near future
to increase the suitable data sources.
Keywords-spatio-temporal; semantics; GIS; perdurantism.
I. INTRODUCTION
For the design of a spatio-temporal knowledge system,
it is necessary to consider the three components of an
entity representation: 1) Spatial: consisting in the geometry,
2) Temporal: which deﬁnes the interval of existence of
the geometries and ﬁnally 3) Semantic: which deﬁnes a
meaning for the entity beyond the purely geographic one [1].
Currently available GIS tools lack the capacity to perform
inference or reasoning on information from spatio-temporal
dynamic phenomena. An alternative to classic GIS tools
are Semantic Web technologies, tools speciﬁcally designed
to perform reasoning and inference. In this research we
use Semantic Web technologies to develop the “continuum
model”, an ontology that allows us to represent diverse
dynamic entities and analyse their relationships along time.
Traditionally ontologies are static in the sense that the
information represented in them does not change in time
or space. In this paper we introduce the continuum model,
an ontology that extends the 4D-ﬂuent providing it with the
required capabilities to keep track of spatial and semantic
evolution of entities along time.
In Section II we discuss related work in the ﬁeld of
spatio-temporal knowledge representation. In Section III
we introduce the continuum model, we present the model
speciﬁcation using description logics, in Section IV we
describe how the model operates using an example and later
we indicate our conclusions and future work.
II. RELATED WORK
The development of a spatial-temporal knowledge system
involves two aspects, ﬁrst the representation of the knowl-
edge and second, the necessary mechanisms to perform
analysis and querying.
A. Representing temporal data
The two main philosophical theories concerning the rep-
resentation of object persistence over time are: endurantism
and perdurantism. The ﬁrst one, endurantism, considers
objects as three dimensional entities that exist wholly at any
given point of their life. On the other hand, perdurantism,
also known as the four dimensional view, considers that
entities have temporal parts, “time slices” [2]. From a per-
durantism point of view the temporal dimension of an entity
is composed by all its time slices. It therefore represents the
different properties of an entity over time as ﬂuent. A ﬂuent
is a property valid only during certain intervals or moments
in time. From a designer point of view, the perdurantism
approach offers advantages over the endurantism allowing
richer representations of real world phenomena [3].
The implementation of a perdurantism approach within
an ontology, requires the conversion of static properties into
dynamic ones. The two primary Semantic Web languages are
OWL and RDF, unfortunately both of them provide limited
support for temporal dynamics [4]. The OWL-Time ontology
describes the temporal content of web pages and temporal
properties of web services. Moreover, this ontology pro-
vides good support for expressing topological relationships
between times or time intervals, as well as times or dates
[5]. However OWL allows only binary relations between
individuals. In order to overcome this limitation several
methodologies have been proposed for the representation of
dynamic objects and their properties. Among the most well
known are the temporal description logic, temporal RDF,
versioning, reiﬁcation, N-ary relationships and the 4D-ﬂuent
approach.
Temporal RDF [6] proposes an extension of the standard
RDF for naming properties with the corresponding time
interval. This allows an explicit management of time in RDF.
However Temporal RDF uses only RDF triples, therefore it
does not have all the expressiveness of OWL for instance,
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

it is not possible to employ qualitative relations. Reiﬁcation
is a technique used to represent n-ary relations, extending
languages such as OWL that allow only binary relations
[7]. In [4], the authors developed a lightweight model
using Reiﬁcation. The model is designed to be deployed on
top of existing OWL ontologies extending their temporal
capabilities. The model also implements a set of SWRL
(Semantic Web Rule Language) operators to query the
ontology. Reiﬁcation allows the use of a triple as object or
subject of a property. But this method has also its limitations,
for instance the transformation from a static property into
a dynamic one increases substantially the complexity of the
ontology, reducing the querying and inference capabilities.
Additionally reiﬁcation is prone to redundant objects which
reduces its effectiveness. Versioning is described as the
ability to handle changes in ontologies by creating and
managing multiple variants of them [8]. However, the major
drawback of Versioning, is the redundancy generated by the
slightest change of an attribute. In addition, any information
requests must be performed on multiple versions of the
ontology affecting its performance.
The 4D-ﬂuent approach is based on the perdurantism
philosophical approach.It considers that the existence of an
entity can be expressed with multiple representations, each
corresponding to a deﬁned time interval. In the literature
4D-ﬂuent is the most well known method to handle dynamic
properties in an ontology. It has a simple structure allowing
to easily transform a static ontology into a dynamic one
although it has some limitations [9]. The 4D ﬂuent approach
allows the recording of frequent time slices but it can not
handle explicit semantics. This fact causes two problems:
1) It is difﬁcult to maintain a close relationship between
geometry and semantics; and 2) It increases the complexity
for querying the temporal dynamics and understanding the
modelled knowledge. Furthermore, this approach does not
deﬁne qualitative relations to describe the type of change
that has occurred or to describe the temporal relationships
between objects. We cannot then know which entities have
undergone a change and what entities might be the result
of that change. Regardless of its limitations the 4D-ﬂuent
approach offers a solid starting point for the representation
of temporal information in OWL. A work based on 4D-ﬂuent
is SOWL, which extends the ontology OWL-time making it
able to handle qualitative relations between intervals, such
as “before” or “after” even with intervals with vague ending
points [10].
B. Querying the ontology
Traditionally SPARQL has been the most common lan-
guage to query an ontology. SPARQL is a W3C recommen-
dation that operates at the level of RDF graphs. However,
the queries become relatively complex in a space-temporal
system. An extension of this language, st-SPARQL [11],
deﬁnes new functions that allow it to handle geometries but
not temporal data. St-SPARQL is based on an extension of
RDF called st-RDF that integrates contact geometries and
incorporates time in RDF. St-SPARQL and SPARQL are
both based on RDF graphs, therefore it is impossible to draw
any inference with them.
In [12] the authors introduce a model in which spatial-
temporal information contained in a database and a spatial-
temporal inference system work together. However, no
information is given on the Semantic Web technologies,
only the Java language is quoted as a component of the
inference engine, therefore the universality and effectiveness
of the inference system can be questioned. Another work is
[13] in which the authors propose a reasoning system that
combines the topological calculus capabilities of a GIS and
the inference capabilities of the semantic web ﬁeld. However
the notion of time is not incorporated in this model.
The capability of switching from quantitative to qualita-
tive data is only possible with a reasoning system. In the
case of SOWL this is possible thanks to the implementation
of SWRL built-ins. In SOWL the built-ins allow the system
to infer topological, directional and metric relations between
entities. Qualitative information can be inferred from quan-
titative one and can be used as an alternative in the case
of missing quantitative data. In order to query the ontology
the developers of SOWL implemented a language similar
in syntax to SQL. This language performs simple spatial-
temporal querying for both static and dynamic data [10].
Our literature review suggest us that the most suitable
approach to develop a spatial-temporal knowledge system
should follow a 4D-ﬂuent approach using SWRL built-ins to
perform complex queries and reasoning. In the next section
we will describe how we implemented this approach in the
continuum model.
III. THE CONTINUUM MODEL
The 4D-ﬂuent approach does not allow an entity to change
its nature, only allows the change of the value of some
of its properties. However the semantics associated with
a geometry may change. For example a land parcel may
change from being forest into being urban. In this example
the geometry has not changed, however there is a semantic
change (See ﬁgure 1A). It is equally possible that the
semantics might not change while the geometry evolves.
For instance, a given urban land parcel might expand by
purchasing neighbouring parcels (see ﬁgure 1B).
In order to represent a dynamic entity in the continuum
model we create a set of object time slices, each constituted
by three components as depicted in ﬁgure 2A: 1)Semantic:
To describe the knowledge associated with the entity. 2)
Spatial: It is the graphical representation. 3) Temporal: It
represents the interval or time instants that describe the
temporal existence. The goal of the continuum model is
to follow the evolution of entities though time. To achieve
this goal the model records the changes that entities might
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 1.
Examples of the evolution A) Two different semantic objects
for the same geometry. B) Two related geometries for the same semantic
object.
Figure 2.
A) The three components of an entity within the continuum
model. B) Using the continuum model to represent the evolution of an
entity.
go through in their semantic or spatial components along
time. For this purpose the model creates a new component
representation every time a change occurs (spatial or se-
mantic). The resulting child object retains all the remaining
characteristics from the original parent object. Each change
adds to the genealogy of the spatio-temporal objects. The
parent-child relation is recorded in the system, allowing
the analysis and querying of the information. The model
enforces a coherency between the time intervals of objects
contained in the system.
Figure 2B depicts an example of objects genealogy. In
this example objects “o4” and “o5” are children of object
“o3”, and are the result of an spatial change in the parent
object. The system enforces temporal coherency, children
objects can not occur before the parent interval. It is possible
to characterize the evolution of each object in the model
according to the conceptual hierarchy depicted in ﬁgure 3.
The continuum groups related objects, which have a valid
Figure 3.
Qualiﬁcation of transition in the spatial graph.
Figure 4.
Allen temporal relations.
Figure 5.
Using Allen temporal relations to infer new knowledge.
time interval of existence.The model links individual objects
to their context. For instance an object can belong to more
than one continuum, therefore continuums can intersect. Our
system allows the deﬁnition of qualitative relations between
spatial-temporal objects, even when this object belong to
different continuums. Figure 2B depicts the evolution of an
entity and how the continuum concept is used to study it.
In our model we have implemented qualitative temporal
relations based on binary and mutually exclusive relations as
proposed by Allen [14] (see ﬁgure 4). The addition of Allen
relations increase the expressive power of the system by
adding qualitative information in addition to the quantitative
one. By using deﬁned Allen relations between intervals we
can obtain qualitative information even from intervals with
vague endpoints in a similar fashion to [9]. For example,
ﬁgure 5 depicts intervals “I1”, “I2” and “I3”. While we
know the start and ending points of “I1”, we do not know
the ending point of “I2”, and we do not know the starting
point of “I3’. However we know that “I1” meets “I2” and
that “I2” contains “I3”. Then we can infer that because
“I2” contains “I3”,then “I3” must be after “I1”, even if
the information about start and ending points is incomplete.
Lack of knowledge caused by semi closed intervals is largely
ﬁlled by the integration of Allen relations to the model.
In GIS, objects or regions are represented by points,
lines, polygons or other more complex ﬁgures based on
these geometries. All these geometries are deﬁned using
the coordinates of points which are quantitative information.
There are mainly three types of relationships between ge-
ometries: directional, metric, and topological relationships.
The topological analysis between two objects is done us-
ing the models: Dimensionally Extended Nine-Intersection
Model (DE-9IM) or RCC8 [15]. In both cases, we obtain
an equivalent set of topological relationships for speciﬁc
regions. To calculate the spatial relationships between two
geometries the DE-9IM model takes into account the inside,
the outside, and the contour of the geometries leading to the
analysis of nine intersections as described in [15] .
There are eight possible spatial relationships of the result-
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Table I
TOPOLOGICAL PREDICATES AND THEIR CORRESPONDING MEANINGS.
Topological
Predicate Meaning
Equals
The Geometries are topologically equal.
Disjoint
The Geometries have no point in common.
Intersects
The Geometries have at least one point in common (the
inverse of Disjoint).
Touches
The Geometries have at least one boundary point in com-
mon, but no interior points.
Crosses
The Geometries share some but not all interior points, and
the dimension of the intersection is less than that of at least
one of the Geometries.
Overlaps
The Geometries share some but not all points in common,
and the intersection has the same dimension as the Geome-
tries themselves.
Within
Geometry A lies in the interior of Geometry B
Contains
Geometry B lies in the interior of Geometry A (the inverse
of Within)
ing analysis-9IM (see table I).
The relationships based on quantitative information can be
translated later into qualitative data [16], in a similar fashion
as we have described for the temporal aspect. By analysing
a set of moments and time intervals it is possible to deduce
qualitative topological relationships between objects.
In this section we use a Tarski-style speciﬁcation to
describe the model main components.
To represent time intervals we follow the semantics sug-
gested by Artale and Franconi (1998). We can think of the
temporal domain as a linear structure T composed by a set
of temporal points P. The components of P follow a strict
order <, which forces all points between two temporal points
t1 and t2 to be ordered. By selecting a pair [t1, t2] we can
limit a closed interval of ordered points. The set of interval
structures in T is represented by T ⋆
< [17].
Temporal Points:
P
PI ⊆ ∆I
Time Intervals:
T ⋆
<
[to, tf]
.= {x ∈ P|to ≤ x ≤ tf, to ̸= tf}inT
To deﬁne the relations identiﬁed by Allen [14] (See ﬁgure
4) we ﬁrst deﬁne two intervals i1 and i2: T ⋆
<(i1) , T ⋆
<(i2),
being ito the starting point and itf the ending point of the
intervals.
Before(i1, i2)
(i1tf < i2to)
Meets(i1, i2)
(i1tf = i2to)
Overlaps(i1, i2)
(i1tf > i2to) ∧ (i1tf < i2tf)
Starts(i1, i2)
(i1to = i2to) ∧ (i1tf < i2tf)
During(i1, i2)
(i1to > i2to) ∧ (i1tf < i2tf)
Finishes(i1, i2)
(i1to > i2to) ∧ (i1tf = i2tf)
Equasl(i1, i2)
(i1to = i2to) ∧ (i1tf = i2tf)
The Spatial representation of an object (SR) is composed
by a spatial reference system (SRS) and a geometry (G) (A
more complex deﬁnition is possible, however for the sake
of simplicity we will refer only to the essential components
of a geographic feature deﬁnition).
Spatial Reference System: As deﬁned by the European
Petroleum Standards Group (EPSG) [18]
SRSI ⊆ ∆I
Geometries: A set of coordinates that deﬁne points, lines,
curves, surfaces and polygons.
GI ⊆ ∆I
∀HasSRS.SRS ≡ {x ∈ ∆I|∀s.(x, s) ∈ HasSRSI → s ∈
SRSI}
∀HasGeom.G ≡ {x ∈ ∆I|∀g.(x, g) ∈ HasGeoI → g ∈
GI}
Then the spatial representation can be deﬁned as:
SR ≡ ∀HasSRS.SRS ⊓ ∀HasGeom.G
The spatial relations between geometries are deﬁned by
the Extended Nine-Intersection model (DE-9IM) [15].
The semantic component of the objects is represented by
S. It describes the nature of the entities and can be composed
by one or more alphanumeric properties.
Each object time slice (O) in the continuum model has
three components: 1) a time interval (T ⋆
<), 2) a spatial
representation (SR) and 3)a semantic component (S).
O ≡
∀HasSR.SR
⊓
∀HasInterval.T ⋆
<
⊓
∀HasSemDef.S
In
the
continuum
model
a
change
on
the
spatial
representation or on the semantic component generates
a new object which has a child - parent relationship
with
the
original
object,
additionally
we
know
that
the
time
interval
of
the
parent
object
meets
the
time interval of the child object (see ﬁgure 4). The
parent
child
relationship
between
object
o1
and
o2
is
deﬁned
by
the
relationships
between
their
spatial
representations (o1sr and o2sr), their semantic deﬁnitions
(o1s and o2s) and their time intervals (o1i and o2i)
∀HasChild.O
{o1 ∈ OI|∀o2.(o1, o2) ∈ HasChildI →
o2 ∈ OI∧
∃((o1sr ̸= o2sr) ∨ (o1s ̸= o2s))∧
(meets(o1i, o2i))}
where: {o1, o2}
∈
O , {o1sr, o2sr}
∈
SR and
{o1s, o2s} ∈ S
The spatial transitions in the model are a subset of the
HasChild relationship: SpatialEvolution ⊑ HasChild
We have implemented the following spatial transitions: (see
table I for a deﬁniton of topological relations)
Merge(input, output)
input = {a1, a2..an}|∀x ∈ input → SR(x)
SR(output) ∧ output = (a1 ∪ a2 ∪ . . . an)
Split(input, output)
SR(input) ∧ output = {a1, a2..an}|∀x ∈ output →
SR(x)
Equals(input, output)
Delete(input, output)
SR(input) ∧ Equals(output, ∅)
Grow(input, output)
{input, output} ∈ SR ∧ Within(input, output)
Shrink(input, output)
{input, output} ∈ SR ∧ Contains(input, output)
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 6.
City of New Orleans along time.
IV. EXAMPLE CONTINUUM
The continuum model is ﬂexible enough to be adapted in
multiple ﬁelds. For this example we will use it to study the
urban evolution of the city of New Orleans, Louisiana. Fig-
ures 6 and 7 represent the urban evolution of the entity “city
of New Orleans”. Each one of its multiple representations
along its history is a time slice. Figure 6 depicts the urban
evolution of the city, we can see the historic French Quarter,
founded in 1718 (Figure 6A), and how the city grew until
around 1853 (Figure 6C) when it went trough a conurbation
process with the cities of Greenville, Jefferson and Lafayette
(Figure 6B). The city continued its growth and by 1949 it
reached its approximately modern size. In August of 2005
Hurricane Katrina landed near the city causing a major ﬂood,
also depicted in ﬁgure 6D. First we deﬁne the class Human
Settlement (HS) as a subclass of the objects (O), HS ⊑ O
therefore it has all three components, spatial (SR), temporal
(T ) and semantic (S).
The conurbation process involves two cities merging.
Using the model we can represent the process as:
{a1, b} ∈ HS|Contains(a1sr, bsr) ∧ Meets(a1i, bi)
→ ConUrbation(a1, b)
Figure 9 depicts the form how the model will be used
in the New Orleans example. The spatial representation of
the time slice Nola2 contains the spatial representation of
Jefferson, therefore there is a conurbation process by the
year 1853.
Figure 6D depicts the area ﬂooded by Hurricane Katrina
in 2005.We can create a new class risk areas as RA (RA ⊑
O), representing the ﬂooded area. Then we can identify the
process growth in risk area as:
{a, b} ∈ HS ∧ r ∈ RA|Grow(a, b)∧
(Overlaps(asr, rsr) = ∅) ∧ (Overlaps(bsr, rsr) ̸= ∅)
→ GrowthInRiskArea(a, b)
V. CONCLUSION
Figures 8 depicts the representation of the urban growth
using the classic 4D-ﬂuent approach, while ﬁgure 9 depicts
the continuum model. In the later, following the approach
by Welty and Fikes, classes TimeSlice and TimeInterval
Figure 7.
Time frame or urban evolution
Figure 8.
Representation using the 4D ﬂuent
with properties TimeSliceOf and HasInterval are introduced
to allow the ontology to handle temporal entities. Class
TimeSlice is the domain class for entities representing
temporal parts and class Interval is the domain class of
intervals. A time interval holds the temporal information
of a timeslice. Property TimeSliceOf connects an instance
of class TimeSlice with an entity, and property HasInterval
connects an instance of class TimeSlice with an instance
of class Interval. Our model enhances the understanding
of the data represented in the ontology. First, we removed
the notion of TimeSlice which does not refer to any object
in the real world. TimeSlice are replaced by instance from
explicit Class providing an explicit semantic. Moreover, the
4D-ﬂuent approach is enhanced by adding several types
of qualitative relations.Temporal Allen relations and spatial
relationships resulting from analysis-9IM. Understanding
data semantics is at the core of our work providing an easier
way to manage data and reduces queries complexity. When
using, reasoning capabilities speciﬁc to the web semantic,
the system may enrich itself the knowledge store in the
ontology. Our model offers explicit semantic and ﬂexibility
for semantics interoperability between information systems
Figure 9.
Representation using the continuum model
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

and data sharing.
The rules are executed via a graphical interface using the
Jena API to connect to the ontology and JDBC to access the
database. The application automatically detects the presence
of spatial built-ins in SWRL rule and automatically starts the
calculation in the database. However, we note two limitations
to this model: 1) the treatment of a query containing a spatial
built-ins can be very long depending on the number of geom-
etry involved in spatial analysis, 2) the execution of SWRL
rule containing spatial built-ins is currently dependent on
our application and cannot be executed, for example, from
traditional plugin SQWRL Tab Query of the Prot´eg´e tool.
A spatial built-ins uses quantitative data to launch a spa-
tial analysis which establishes qualitative relations between
the geometries involved in the calculation. Currently, our
system can automatically rewrite SWRL rules containing
spatial built-ins. On one hand, this allows not repeating
the calculations that have already been performed. On the
other hand, it also provides a SWRL rule no longer con-
taining spatial built-ins but rather a qualitative relationship
expressed through a property deﬁned in the ontology. For
example, this rules asking for people within a restaurant:
feat : restaurant(?x) ∧ feat : people(?y) ∧ spatialswrlb :
Within(?x, ?y) → sqwrl : select(?x)
will be rewritten as:
feat
:
restaurant(?x) ∧ feat
:
people(?y) ∧ sa
:
HasWithin(?x, ?y) → sqwrl : select(?x)
However, the addition of new objects in the ontology as
well as in the spatial database can make the result of the
rewritten query incomplete. It should be necessary to restart
a calculation with a spatial built-in to update the qualitative
relationships between geometries.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Yuan, “Use of a three-domain representation to enhance
GIS support for complex spatial-temporal queries,” Transac-
tions in GIS, vol. 3, pp. 137–159, March 1999.
[2] C. Welty and R. Fikes, “A reusable ontology for ﬂuents
in OWL,” in Proceedings of 2006 conference on Formal
Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS 2006), 2006, pp. 226–
236.
[3] M. Al-Debei, M. Mourhaf Al Asswad, S. de Cesar, and
M. Lycett, “Conceptual modelling and the quality of ontolo-
gies: Endurantism vs. perdurantism,” International Journal of
Database Management Systems, vol. 4, no. 3, June 2012.
[4] M. O’Connor and A. Das, “A method for representation and
querying temporal information in OWL,” in Proceedings of
Biomedical Engineering Systems and Technologies BIOSTEC
2010, 2010, pp. 97–110.
[5] J. Hobbs and F. Pan, “Time ontology in OWL,” (Online)
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/, (Accessed on November
2012).
[6] C. Gutierrez, A. Hurtado, and A. Vaisman, “Introducing
time into RDF,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, vol. 19, pp. 207–218, February 2007.
[7] P. Hayes, “RDF semantics, W3C Recomendation, 10 february
2004,” (Online) http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-mt/, 2004, (Ac-
cessed on November 2012).
[8] M. Klein and D. Fensel, “Ontology versioning on the Seman-
tic Web,” in Proceedings of the First International Semantic
Web Working Symposium SWWS’01, July 2001, pp. 75–91.
[9] S. Batsakis and E. Petrakis, “SOWL: Spatio-temporal repre-
sentation reasoning and querying over the semantic web,” in
Proceedings of the 6th. International Conference on Semantic
Systems I–SEMANTICS 2010, September 2010, pp. 15:1–
15:9.
[10] ——, “SOWL: a framework for handling spatio-temporal in-
formation in OWL2.0,” Rule Based Reasoning, Programming,
and Applications Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
6826, pp. 242–249, 2011.
[11] M. Koubarakis and K. Kyzirakos, “Modeling and querying
metadata in the semantic sensor web: The model stRDF
and the query language stSPARQL,” in The Semantic
Web: Research and Applications, ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, L. Aroyo, G. Antoniou, E. Hyvnen,
A. Teije, H. Stuckenschmidt, L. Cabral, and T. Tudorache,
Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, vol. 6088, pp.
425–439. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-13486-9 29
[12] K. Ryu and Y. Ahn, “Application of moving objects and
spatiotemporal reasoning,” 2001, a TIMECENTER Technical
Report.
[13] A. Karmacharya, C. Cruz, F. Boochs, and F. Marzani,
“Integration of spatial processing and knowledge processing
through the semantic web stack,” in GeoSpatial Semantics,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, C. Claramunt,
S. Levashkin, and M. Bertolotto, Eds.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg,
2011,
vol.
6631,
pp.
200–216.
[Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-20630-6 13
[14] J.
Allen,
“Maintaining
knowledge
about
temporal
intervals,”
Communications
of
the
ACM,
vol.
26,
no. 11, pp. 832–843, Nov. 1983. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/182.358434
[15] C. Strobl, Encyclopedia of GIS Springer.
Springer, 2008,
ch. Dimensionality Extended Nine–Intersection Model (DE–
9IM), pp. 240–245.
[16] N. Brisaboa, I. Mirbel, and B. Pernici, “Constraints in spatio-
temporal databases: A proposal for classiﬁcation,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 3th. International Workshop on Evaluation of
Modeling Methods in System Analysis and Design, 1998.
[17] A. Artale and E. Franconi, “A temporal description logic
for reasoning about actions and plans,” Journal of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Research, vol. 9, pp. 463–506, 1998.
[18] R.
Lake,
“Introduction
to
GML,”
2004,
http://www.w3.org/Mobile/posdep/GMLIntroduction.html.
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

