Extended Named Entity Recognition Using Finite-State Transducers:
An Application To Place Names
Mauro Gaio, Ludovic Moncla
Laboratoire d’Informatique, Universit´e de Pau et des Pays de l’Adour (LIUPPA)
64000 Pau, France
Email: mauro.gaio@univ-pau.fr
ludovic.moncla@univ-pau.fr
Abstract—The textual geographical information is frequently or-
ganized around spatial named entities. Such entities have intrinsic
ambiguities and Named Entity Recognition and Classiﬁcation
methods should be improved in order to handle this problem.
This article describes a knowledge-based method implementing
a full process with the aim of annotating in a more precise way
the spatial information in the textual documents. This gain in
accuracy guarantees a better analysis of the spatial information
and a better disambiguation of places. The backbone of our
proposal is a construction grammar and a cascaded ﬁnite-state
transducers. The evaluation shows that the introduced concept of
hierarchical overlapping, is very helpful to detect a local context
associated with Named Entities.
Keywords–Geo-information processing; Geo-spatial Web Ser-
vices and processing; Geo-spatial data mining.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Different from other forms of geographical data, text-based
spatial descriptions are subject to all sorts of ambiguities that
prevent effective use [1]. ‘Geocoding’ textual documents refers
to the function of creating unambiguous representation (i.e.,
footprint) of those text-based spatial descriptions. Signiﬁcant
efforts have been invested in geocoding, however, in order
to achieve such a function it is clear that one must ﬁrst
correctly annotate spatial descriptions in the text. Such process
is commonly known as ‘geoparsing’.
The purpose of this article is to describe a method for
implementing a full geoparsing process. A formal grammar
describes the concept of extended spatial named entity and
their relations with movement verbs. A cascaded ﬁnite-state
transducers implements a parser with respect for the grammar
rules. The parser annotates places and their spatial and verbal
relations in order to produce an output including the more
detailed description as possible.
We introduce the concept of ‘Extended Named Entity’ as
an entity built with both categories of proper names [17] (i.e.,
pure and descriptive), and that can be composed of one or
more other concepts. Whereas most NERC systems, such as
OpenCalais [2], DBpedia Spotlight [2], OpenNER [3], CasEN
[4] and Stanford NER [5], usually only consider pure proper
names.
We argue that for a ﬁne-grained task, such as marking,
classifying and disambiguating spatial named entities, it is
essential to consider more accurately the spatial information
in relation with named entities [6].
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we
present the theoretical background and some work useful to
implement an automatic process on extracting valuable spatial
information in texts. In Sections III-A and III-B, we describe
the core principles for establishing our construction grammar.
In Section III-C, we brieﬂy describe the implemented solution
and we assess the results of a series of evaluations, and Section
IV concludes this paper.
II.
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In computational linguistics, parsing is the process of
analysing natural language data in accordance with the rules of
a formal grammar. In order to automatically parse such data,
it is initially necessary to agree on the grammar to be used.
Syntactic parsing, then, is the task of recognizing a sentence
and assigning a syntactic structure to it. Parsers can be viewed
as searching through the space of possible parse trees to ﬁnd
the correct representation for a given input, using two basic
search strategies: top-down search and bottom-up search. The
top-down strategy tries to build the correct tree from the root
node to the leaves, whereas in the bottom-up strategy the parser
starts with the words of the input, and tries to build trees from
the leaves to the root node, by applying, one by one the rules
of the grammar.
Alongside the development of these parsers the notion of
construction grammar emerged. This kind of grammar evolved
out of work initiated by [7]–[9] and assigns a major role to the
concept of construction as a theoretical entity. As speciﬁed by
[10] the elements of the grammar are constructions: a construc-
tion is a pattern used to generate the elements of a language,
or to extract these elements from an instance produced from a
language. Construction grammars may specify a semantics that
differs from the sum of the lexical meanings of its components.
Construction grammars can reuse concepts already employed
in other linguistic theoretical frameworks, such as Noun Phrase
(NP) or Verb Phrase (VP), or Prepositional Phrase (PP). In
this kind of construction, a feature structure is usually used to
represent the elements of the language. A feature structure is a
set of attribute-value pairs; the value can be atomic or another
feature structure. A feature structure can be represented as a
directed acyclic graph (DAG), with the nodes corresponding to
the variable values and the paths to the variable names. Often
however, feature structures are written as follows:


role
target
named entity
" component
noun phrase
category
descriptive
type
location
#


Local and global ambiguities are perhaps the trickiest prob-
lem that parsers have to tackle. This problem is particularly
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

important when the parser is based on a complex grammar. In
the literature, many strategies have been proposed to remove as
many ambiguous cases as possible. Currently, in tasks known
as Named Entity Recognition and Classiﬁcation (NERC) the
problem of ambiguities remains unresolved for some contexts.
The notion of ‘Named Entity’ (NE) was formally established at
the Sixth Message Understanding Conference (MUC-6, 1995).
From the beginning the notion included names of persons,
locations and organisations, but also numerical expressions of
time, date, money, etc.
A considerable amount of work in NERC research takes
the language factor as a parameter and in this body of work
a signiﬁcant proportion is devoted to the study of English,
but French is also considered [11] [12], as well as other
languages. The impact of literary genre (narrative, memoir,
journalism, etc.) and domain (supply of raw materials, market
or economic intelligence, politics, etc.) is a problem that has
been more recently addressed in the NERC literature. Globally
approaches for named entity parsing cover a huge variety of
strategies, methods and representations. These approaches are
generally classiﬁed in two main categories, data-driven ap-
proaches and knowledge-based approaches. One of the earliest
research papers in the ﬁeld of NERC was written by [13]. Her
approach was based on heuristics and handcrafted rules, in
other words was knowledge-based, this is also the case of our
proposal. This kind of approach do not require a complete
parse for all the input. A shallow parse of input sentences
may be sufﬁcient; as it is usually the case in information
extraction systems that focus on the segments in a text that are
likely to contain valuable information. Many different methods
can be used, but, it should be mentioned that a ﬁnite-state
automaton is probably the most widely used mathematical
device to implement shallow parsers. Some implementations
make use of cascaded ﬁnite-state transducers to produce tree-
like representations. Because regular languages and relations
can be encoded as ﬁnite automata they can be more easily
manipulated than more complex languages; cascaded ﬁnite-
state transducer principle have therefore turned out to be very
useful for linguistic applications, in particular for shallow
parsing. Generally, there are different ﬁnite-state transducers at
different stages. Each stage bundles a set of items in a package
that will be considered as a single element in the next stage.
Parsing that is solely concerned with geographical data
is known as geoparsing and aims at extracting keywords
and keyphrases describing geographical references from un-
structured text. There are currently several types of speciﬁc
ambiguity involved in geoparsing and more speciﬁcally with
the problem of toponym recognition.
Toponym disambiguation is deﬁned as a subtask of to-
ponym resolution and is complementary to the subtask of
toponym recognition. It involves associating a non-ambiguous
location with a place name [14]. According to [15], the
approaches for disambiguating toponyms can be classiﬁed in
three categories: supervised or data-driven approaches, map-
based approaches and knowledge-based approaches. Data-
driven approaches are based on machine learning algorithms
and exploit non-geographical content and events to build prob-
abilistic models using spatial relationships between entities
(i.e., persons, organisations) and places. As pointed out by
[16], a place is more likely to be located near other places
mentioned around it. Knowledge-based approaches aim at con-
sidering semantic relations between named entities, concepts or
key terms such as social, associative or lexical relatedness and
not only co-occurrence statistics of terms. These methods use
knowledge sources (gazetteers, ontologies, etc.) to determine
whether other related toponyms in the knowledge source are
also referred to the document, or exploit additional information
from the toponyms, such as importance, size or population
counts. Finally, map-based disambiguation approaches use
other unambiguous and georeferenced toponyms found on the
same document as context for disambiguation.
As previously mentioned, NERC approaches are clas-
siﬁed in two main categories, data-driven approaches and
knowledge-based approaches. The main drawback of data-
driven approaches is the lack of classiﬁed collections and the
need for large corpora of annotated ground truths. Knowledge-
based methods are more suitable for approaches based on
domain-speciﬁc corpus analysis and rules are described in a
readable way and are easy to modify and maintain. This is the
case in our proposal, where the goal is to design and implement
a parser, based on a bottom-up stategy, for recognising and
classifying places in a dynamic space context mentioned in
French, Spanish or Italian texts.
III.
ANNOTATING SPATIAL DESCRIPTIONS
A. Extended Named Entity (ENE) structure
According to [17] there are two categories of proper names:
pure and descriptive. Pure proper names can be simple (i.e.,
composed of a single lexeme) or complex (i.e., composed of
several lexemes) and are composed of proper names only.
Descriptive proper names refer to a composition of proper
names and common names (i.e., expansion). In other words,
descriptive proper names overlap pure proper names. Descrip-
tive proper names refer to a NE built with a pure proper name
and a descriptive expansion. This expansion can change the
implicit type (e.g., location, person, etc.) of the initial pure
proper name.
We deﬁne several levels of overlapping (0, 1, 2, etc.) for
the representation of ENE. Each level is encapsulated in the
previous level.
Level 0: refers to pure proper names. It can be seen
as the core component of an ENE. Thus, we consider NE as a
special kind of ENE. Examples (1) illustrate level 0 entities:
Arag´on → one entity (location)
Greenpeace → one entity (organisation)
Charles de Gaulle → one entity (person)
(1)
Level 1: refers to descriptive proper names composed
of a pure proper name (i.e., an entity of level 0) and a common
noun (i.e., expansion). The following examples (2) show the
representation of ENE. In these cases, and according to a same
given ontology, descriptive expansions may not change the
implicit or default nature of the object described by the proper
name; they just specify the nature or the feature type.
comunidad aut´onoma de

Arag´on
‘autonomous community of Arag´on’
ufﬁcio italianno di

Greenpeace
‘Greenpeace Italian ofﬁce’
(2)
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

However, when the associated term has not the same type
of the intrinsic or default type of the pure proper name, it
deﬁnes a new entity that overlaps the pure proper name one.
The following examples (3) show that an entity may contain
the name of another entity, and that the new entity may have
a different type, examples (3b. - 3c.).
a. Delta del

Ebro
‘Ebro Delta’
→ two entities, Ebro (location) and Delta del Ebro
(location)
b. si`ege social de l’

Unicef
‘Unicef headquarters’
→ two entities, Unicef(organisation) and si`ege social
de l’Unicef (location)
c. sindaco di

Genova
‘mayor of Genoa’
→ two entities, Genova (location) and
sindaco di Genova (person)
(3)
Level >1 : refers to a descriptive proper name com-
posed of another descriptive proper name. ENE of level >1
are built with ENE of level 1 and with one or more descriptive
expansions, as shown on the examples (4a. - 4b.). The behavior
is the same as for the previous level, i.e., the expansion can
change the type of the object described by the ENE of level 1.
In fact, there is not really a limit to the overlapping. However,
it is quite uncommon to ﬁnd an ENE of a level greater than 3.
The example (4c.) show an ENE of Level 3.
a. portavoce della

Villa M´edicis a Roma
‘spokesperson of the Villa M´edicis in Rome’
b. club de pelota vasca de la

ciudad de San Sebasti´an
‘Basque pelota club of San Sebastian city’
c. d´epression karstique dans le
NN NN

territoire aride au sud de la r´egion d’ Aragon
‘karstic depression in the arid land south of the
Aragon Region’
(4)
We have considered the annotation of ENE as a shallow
parsing and the grammar to be used as a speciﬁc construction.
The core of the grammar is given in 5.
With this kind of grammar and with a parser based on a
bottom-up strategy each level of the ENE can be marked, from
the pure proper name to the whole ENE and it can distinguish
between two types of ENE, ‘absolute’ refering to standard
spatial ENE and ‘relative’ refering to spatial ENE associated
with spatial relations (i.e., ‘offset’ and ‘measure’).
S
→
ENE
ENE
→
ENEA | (Term) ENER
ENER
→
Offset ENEA | Offset ENER
ENEA
→
(Term) ProperNoun | Term ENEA
Term
→
Nominal Det
Nominal
→
Noun
|
Nominal Noun
(5)
Offset can be seen as an adverbial clause. For instance,
taking example (4c.), using the proposed NERC process it
produces the results represented in feature structure form in
Fig. 1.
ENER


level
3
type
place name
comp.
NP,OFFSET,
ENER


level
2
type
place name
comp.
NP,IN,OFFSET,
ENEA


level
1
type
location
cat.
descriptive
comp.
NN,IN,
ENEA


level
0
type location
cat.
pure
comp. NNP
lex. Aragon


lex.
r´egion d′Aragon


lex.
territoire aride au sud
de la r´egion d′Aragon


lex.
d´epression karstique dans le territoire
aride au sud de la r´egion d′Aragon


NP=Noun phrase, NN=Noun, IN=Preposition, NNP=Proper noun, singular
Figure 1. The annotation of an ENE.
With respect to the speciﬁc problem of the NERC category
of place names, this makes it possible, in particular, to move
beyond reducing a place to a name and then geocoded with a
single set of coordinates, a model that is still predominant in
Geographic Information Science [18].
Standard NER tools consider only the entity ‘Aragon Re-
gion’, and therefore lead to inaccuracies in classiﬁcation and/or
disambiguation. Of course this must be consistent with the
discourse context.
B. Movement verbs and Extended Spatial Named Entity struc-
tures
In view of our aim of automatically producing the more
detailed description to achieve a better disambiguation, we
propose to use additional information in relation with NE.
For a better understanding of the spatial context of a NE, the
linguists have highlighted the importance of the use of motion
verbs, especially in Romance languages [19]. That is why we
opted for taking into account movement verbs in the parsing
process.
The core of the ‘VT’ grammar proposed hereafter can
be seen both as a specialisation and as an extension of the
ENE construction grammar. The symbol V represents a set of
movement verbs and the symbol T a set of n-tuples, i.e., a
composition of elements belonging respectively to three sets:
SO a set of spatial offsets, TG a set of geographical noun
phrases and E a set of ENE.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Consider the following sentence 6:
descendre sur le territoire aride au sud de la
r´egion d’Aragon.
‘go down onto the arid land south of the
Aragon region.’
(6)
Example
(6)
has
the
following
VT
struc-
ture
=
(v, t),
with:
v
=
descendre,
t
=
sur le territoire aride au sud de la r´egion d’Aragon.
With t respectively composed of: tg3 = ∅, so3 = sur,
ENE2
=
territoire aride au sud de la r´egion d’Aragon,
tg2
=
territoire aride,
so2
=
au sud de,
ENE1
=
la r´egion d’Aragon, tg1 = r´egion, so1 = ∅, ENE0 = Aragon.
The set SO of spatial offsets is composed of locative phrases
in which, at least in verb-framed languages such as French,
the role of prepositions is central. A large number of studies
have shown that prepositions are involved in the operation
of spatial tracking, or location. With respect to the location
concept,
following
the
conclusions
of
work
conducted
according to Talmy’s [20] and Vandeloise’s [21] proposals,
prepositions contribute signiﬁcantly to bringing together two
entities: a locator and a localised entity (i.e., a landmark and
a target in Vandeloise’s terms). The phrase used as locator
must have spatial properties that facilitate its identiﬁcation
and the explanation of the spatial relationship in which it is
involved. Linguistically, there are three kinds of phrases that
can serve as locators: noun phrases including a name with
spatial properties, noun phrases indicating distance, e.g., le
refuge se trouve `a trois kilom`etres ou `a une heure de marche
(‘the refuge is three kilometers or an hour’s walk away’) or
orientation, e.g., prendre la bretelle de droite (‘take the exit
on the right’) and noun phrases evoking an activity that may
be associated with a place, e.g., je me rendais au cours de
natation (‘I was on my way to my swimming lesson’).
The ﬁrst category of phrases used as locator is the most
common one and it can be associated to the greatest number
of prepositions. The proposed VT construction grammar relies
only on this category. In this category, the included name can
be of two types: place names and the names of concrete objects
(objects that can be located in the same place at the same
time), in other words the ENE elements contained in the set E.
Frequently, a particular sub-group consisting of noun phrases
referring to speciﬁc parts of a locator (the peak, the bottom, the
slope, the interior) is considered separately. They are unique in
that they are considered suggestive of spatial properties only if
they are in relation with ENE via prepositions such as de (from)
and `a (to, at). In the VT structure, the set TG represents this
sub-group of noun phrases.
What can be retained from the literature is that the same
prepositional phrase can be used to describe a variety of spatial
situations, and that the discriminating factors are at the level
of modalities of action. As pointed out by various studies,
location is a static principle unless a dynamic component
related to the verb also operates. Moreover, languages are not
fully part of one category or the other [22]. For instance, in
English, which is mostly a satellite-framed language, there are
many verbs, such as: ‘enter, exit, ascend, descend’, that refer
both to Motion and Path. Conversely, in verb-framed languages
there are also some satellite-framed expressions such as partir
de (‘to leave’), partir `a (‘to go’) where the path is encoded in
the French prepositions de and `a.
[23] proposed to classify motion verbs according to the
‘aspectual’ properties of movement called hereafter ‘polarity’.
The three polarities are initial (e.g., to leave), median (e.g., to
cross) and ﬁnal (e.g., to arrive). Without changing the intrinsic
polarity of the verb, the preposition can change what could
be called the focus of the displacement. More speciﬁcally, the
association of a motion verb with a spatial preposition can
change the focus of the displacement and take on the polarity
of the preposition instead of that of the verb. Undeniably,
’leaving from Paris’ and ’leaving for Paris’ are two expressions
with radically opposite focus of the displacement. If we
consider the role played by the name, in one case, the place
name is the origin of the displacement, and in the other case
the place name is the destination. The place name Paris is
the target, so the polarity of the whole expression may be
considered as ﬁnal.
The VT construction grammar aims to be a computational
synthesis of the work on the means used by the language to
express displacement, the work on the functioning of move-
ment verbs in a sentence, and the work on the combinatorial
principles of these verbs with different prepositions. The core
of the grammar is given in 7.
S
→
V T
V
→
V erb | V erb SO
C
→
Conjonction | ,
LT
→
ENE C T
T
→
(SO) (det) ENE |
(SO | ENE) T | (SO) LT
(7)
SO can be seen as a spatial adverbial clause.
Of course, in order to take into account the combinations,
which by their structure are inconsistent with French, the real
grammar is more complex. The VT construction grammar reuse
a sub-set of the concepts employed in a traditional parts-of-
speech (POS) grammar.
The bottom-up parser, based on the real grammar and
implemented with a cascade of transducers, can be viewed as
searching through the space of possible parse trees to ﬁnd the
correct parse tree for a given ‘VT’ phrase. Then if a correct
parse tree is found the ENE becomes a candidate to be an
Extended Spatial Named Entity (ESNE).
Finally, consider the following sentences :
Emprunter successivement rue des Capucins et
rue de Compostelle.
‘Walk down Capucins Street and then
Compostelle Street.’
Prendre `a gauche apr`es l’entr´ee de l’usine de Fontanille.
‘Turn left after the entry to the Fontanille factory.’
Suivre la route depuis le hameau Lic jusqu’`a la
Chapelle Saint-Roche.
‘Follow the road from the hamlet Lic to the
Chapelle Saint-Roche.’
(8)
These sentences are extracted from a French hiking de-
scription. For each of them the cascade of transducers found
a correct parse tree. So each marked ENE becomes a potential
ESNE but ﬁrst all the ambiguities must be removed. In fact,
most of the descriptive proper names used to build the ENE in
these sentences are very common proper nouns and moreover
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

refer to small localised objects. These are speciﬁc aspects that
may cause ambiguity.
For our experiments we used the multilingual Perdido
corpus [24], which is a TEI [25] compliant gold-standard
corpus containing 90 hiking descriptions (French, Spanish and
Italian) manually annotated. Hiking descriptions are a speciﬁc
type of document describing displacements using geographical
information, such as toponyms, spatial and motion relations,
and natural features or landscapes. The corpus analysis shows
that only 2% of ENE are not referring to spatial entities.
Furthermore, 53% of the occurrences of ESNE are contained
within a VT structure and 47% are associated with feature
types (i.e., 53% of ESNE belong to the level 0) and a very few
number of ESNE (3%) are built with more than one expansion
(level >1). Additionally, about 59% of verbs are motion verbs.
Median and ﬁnal motion verbs are the most frequent ones and
only 3% of verbs belonging to a VT structure refer to verbs of
perception.
C. NERC Processing and Evaluation
As we saw above, we consider only two types of named
entities: spatial and non-spatial, and ENE and ESNE are con-
sidered as described in the previous sections. With respect to
the NERC task, we implemented the construction grammars
previously described using an hybrid solution combining a pre-
processing POS analysis, a cascaded ﬁnite-state transducers for
annotating the segments in a text containing valuable informa-
tion, and external resources for the named entity classiﬁcation
task. The pre-processing component of the Perdido processing
chain (PPC) transforms and pre-annotates raw texts with dif-
ferent process: sentence splitting, tokenisation, lemmatisation,
and POS tagging. These shallow linguistic tasks are language
dependent and are done by standards POS taggers. We propose
to integrate different POS taggers in order to solve language
or performance issues. Thus, we developed an integration
framework designed to handle the output provided by different
POS taggers, which use various tag-sets to assign grammatical
categories of words. The integration framework implements a
generic transformation to standardise tag-sets in order to turn
the POS taggers output into a compliant input format for the
next component of the PPC. The main component of the PPC
deals with the automatic annotation of ENE and geospatial
information such as VT structures. The proposed cascaded
ﬁnite-state transducers, which annotates spatial information
and ENE was developed using the CasSys program available in
the Unitex platform [26]. For the development of the PPC, we
have followed the principles introduced for the development
of the CasEN system [27], which implements a combination
of two cascaded ﬁnite-state transducers. The ﬁrst one called
analysis cascade is the core of the annotation process, it
executes a sequence of transducers which annotate elements in
a speciﬁc order. The second cascade called synthesis cascade
transforms the output of the ﬁrst cascade (XML-CasSys) into
the TEI-compliant XML markup language described in [28].
We have designed web services [29] for the POS and NERC
components of the PPC. The Perdido POS web service returns
the result of the POS processing using the Unitex compliant
input format and the Perdido NERC web service returns the
TEI-compliant XML results.
The NERC task was evaluated using both manual POS
processed texts (POS 100% corrected) and a fully automatic
process (automatic POS processed texts) in order to show the
Figure 2. Comparison of the percentage of slot errors of Perdido I and
Perdido II (French).
percentage of errors introduced during the pre-processing step
of our method. The conﬁguration for experiments done with
manually corrected POS is called Perdido I hereafter and the
conﬁguration for experiments done with POS automatically
processed Perdido II.
TABLE I. NUMBER OF CORRECTLY DETECTED ENE WITH PERDIDO I AND
II (FRENCH).
N
Perdido I
Perdido II
level 0
304
235
77%
244
80%
level 1
332
302
91%
280
84%
level 2
20
16
80%
17
85%
level 3
4
0
0%
1
25%
total
660
553
84%
542
82%
Table I shows the number of ENE that were correctly
detected by Perdido I and Perdido II without any errors and the
column ‘N’ shows the reference number of ENE in the French
Perdido gold-standard corpus. The evaluation of the automatic
NERC task gives a number of correct recognition (i.e., true
positives) of 553 ENE with Perdido I and 542 ENE with
Perdido II over a total number of 660 ENE, which represents
84% and 82% respectively with Perdido I and Perdido II. For
further details concerning the evaluation of the results, we used
the SER metric [30] which represents the total slot error rate
taking into account the different types of errors related with
the NERC task (i.e., insertion, deletion, classiﬁcation, boundary
detection and both classiﬁcation and boundary detection).
Fig. 2 shows the comparison of the percentage of the
different slot errors used in the SER metric. Each bar on
this chart refers to the percentage of errors, thus, the lower
the percentages are, the better the results are. Concerning
errors of insertion (i.e., false positives), it can be seen that
Perdido II (5%) makes more errors than Perdido I (0.5%). This
can be explained by the fact that as Perdido I is based on a
manually corrected POS pre-processing, there is no ambiguity
or mistake concerning which words are proper names or not.
This can explain also errors of deletion, 4% with Perdido II and
only 2% with Perdido I. Then the difference of 1% between
Perdido I and Perdido II concerning classiﬁcation errors is
not signiﬁcant. Indeed, the percentage of classiﬁcation errors
refers to the number of errors over the number of detected
entities (i.e., deletion errors are not taken into account in the
calculation). The evaluation process gives a total SER of 10%
with Perdido I and 17% with Perdido II. As expected, the
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Perdido I conﬁguration, which is based on a manual POS
analysis, obtains better results than the Perdido II conﬁgura-
tion. Approximately seven percent of the errors are introduced
by the POS pre-processing step of our method. However,
considering the different levels of encapsulation (ENE) and all
the different types of errors, 17% of SER and 82% of correct
recognition of ENE is a good score.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
With respect to the annotation of spatial information used
to extract geographical data from text-based spatial descrip-
tions, we have proposed a geoparser based on construction
grammars implemented with two cascaded ﬁnite-state trans-
ducers. As a computational synthesis of the work on the
expression of space and motion in natural languages, we
described the construction grammar VT which aims to mark
and formalise the relations between ENE, geographical terms,
spatial relations and movement verbs. We have shown that
the hierarchical overlapping introduced by the concept of ENE
is very helpful to detect a local context associated with NE.
For instance, the local context contained within ESNE, such as
feature types, helps to produce a detailed description that can
be used for a better analysis of the spatial information and a
better disambiguation of places. The feasibility of our proposal
has been evaluated using a corpus of hiking descriptions and
obtains an overall SER score of 17%.
To our knowledge NERC is an important pre-processing
step for most of these tasks and automatic NERC process for
Indo-European languages might be more or less challenging
(e.g., for German it is especially challenging). Our proposal
relies on the TEI standard which is widely used in digital
humanities and linguistics for Indo-European languages. Thus,
the work in progress is to deﬁne several other speciﬁc ﬁnite-
state transducers, each one adapted to the speciﬁc needs of
a given Indo-European language but all based on the same
generic core layer. The proposed generic core layer may be
used to create and share pre-processed corpus.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially supported by: the Com-
munaut´e d’Agglom´eration Pau Pyr´en´ees (CDAPP) and the
Institut National de l’Information G´eographique et Foresti´ere
(IGN) through the PERDIDO project; the Spanish Gov-
ernment (project TIN2012-37826-C02-01); and the Aragon
and Aquitaine Regional Governments cooperation programme
through the YACA project.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. R. Larson, “Geographic Information Retrieval and Spatial Browsing,”
GIS and Libraries: Patrons, Maps and Spatial Information, Apr. 1996,
pp. 81–124.
[2]
OpenCalais, http://www.opencalais.com/, 2017, [accessed 2017-01-12].
[3]
OpenNER, http://opennlp.apache.org/, [accessed 2017-01-12].
[4]
CasEN, http://tln.li.univ-tours.fr/Tln CasEN eng.html, [accessed 2017-
01-12].
[5]
Stanford-NER, http://nlp.stanford.edu/ner/, [accessed 2017-01-12].
[6]
L. Moncla, W. Renteria-Agualimpia, J. Nogueras-Iso, and M. Gaio,
“Geocoding for texts with ﬁne-grain toponyms: An experiment on a
geoparsed hiking descriptions corpus,” in Proceedings of the 22Nd
ACM SIGSPATIAL.
Dallas, TX, USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 183–192.
[7]
C. J. Fillmore, “Syntactic Intrusions and The Notion of Grammatical
Construction,” Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society,
vol. 11, no. 0, Jun. 1985, pp. 73–86.
[8]
G. Lakoff, Women, ﬁre, and dangerous thinks – What categories reveal
about the mind.
University of Chicago Press, 1987.
[9]
R. W. Langacker, Foundations of Cognitive Grammar: Volume I:
Theoretical Prerequisites.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,
1987.
[10]
Y. Yannick-Mathieu, “La Grammaire de Construction,” Approches
syntaxiques contemporaines, no. 48, 2003, pp. 43–56.
[11]
T. Poibeau, “Extraction automatique d’information: du texte brut au web
s´emantique,” in Extraction automatique d’information: du texte brut au
web s´emantique.
Herm`es Lavoisier, 2003.
[12]
N. Friburger and D. Maurel, “Finite-state transducer cascades to extract
named entities in texts,” Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 313, no. 1,
Feb. 2004, pp. 93–104.
[13]
L. F. Rau, “Extracting Company Names from Text,” in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Applications.
Miami Beach: IEEE, 1991, pp. 29–32.
[14]
J. L. Leidner, Toponym Resolution in Text: Annotation, Evaluation
and Applications of Spatial Grounding of Place Names.
Universal-
Publishers, Jan. 2007.
[15]
D. Buscaldi and P. Rosso, “A conceptual density-based approach for
the disambiguation of toponyms,” Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci., vol. 22, no. 3,
Jan. 2008, pp. 301–313.
[16]
D. A. Smith and G. Crane, “Disambiguating Geographic Names in a
Historical Digital Library,” in Proceedings of the 5th European Confer-
ence on Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries, ser.
ECDL ’01.
London, UK: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 127–136.
[17]
K. Jonasson, Le nom propre.
Duculot, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium,
1994.
[18]
R. S. Purves and C. Derungs, “From Space to Place: Place-Based
Explorations of Text,” International Journal of Humanities and Arts
Computing, vol. 9, no. 1, Mar. 2015, pp. 74–94.
[19]
M. Aurnague, “How motion verbs are spatial: The spatial foundations
of intransitive motion verbs in French,” Lingvisticae Investigationes,
vol. 34, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1–34.
[20]
L. Talmy, How language structures space, ser. Berkeley cognitive
science report.
Berkeley, CA, Etats-Unis: Cognitive Science Program,
Institute of Cognitive Studies, University of California at Berkeley,
1983, no. 4.
[21]
C. Vandeloise, L’Espace en franc¸ais. S´emantique des pr´epositions
spatiales.
Editions du Seuil, 1986.
[22]
S. Pourcel and A. Kopecka, “Motion expression in French: typological
diversity,” Durham & Newcastle working papers in linguistics, vol. 11,
2005, pp. 139–153.
[23]
J.-P. Boons, “La notion s´emantique de d´eplacement dans une classiﬁ-
cation syntaxique des verbes locatifs,” Langue Franc¸aise, no. 76, 1987,
pp. 5–40.
[24]
L. Moncla, M. Gaio, J. Nogueras-Iso, and S. Musti`ere, “Reconstruction
of itineraries from annotated text with an informed spanning tree
algorithm,” International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
vol. 30, no. 6, 2016, pp. 1137–1160.
[25]
TEI, “Text encoding initiative,” http://www.tei-c.org/, 2017, [accessed
2017-01-12].
[26]
Unitex, “Unitex/gramlab: an open source, cross-platform, multilingual,
lexicon- and grammar-based corpus processing suite,” http://www-igm.
univ-mlv.fr/∼unitex/, 2017, [accessed 2017-01-12].
[27]
D. Maurel, N. Friburger, J.-Y. Antoine, I. Eshkol-Taravella, and D. Nou-
vel, “Cascades de transducteurs autour de la reconnaissance des entit´es
nomm´ees,” TAL, vol. 52, no. 1, 2011, pp. 69–96.
[28]
L. Moncla and M. Gaio, “A Multi-layer Markup Language for Geospa-
tial Semantic Annotations,” in Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on
Geographic Information Retrieval, ser. GIR ’15.
Paris, France: ACM,
2015, pp. 5:1–5:10.
[29]
PERDIDO, “Expanded named entity annotation service,” http://erig.
univ-pau.fr/PERDIDO/api.jsp, 2017, [accessed 2017-01-12].
[30]
J. Makhoul, F. Kubala, R. Schwartz, and R. Weischedel, “Performance
measures for information extraction,” in In Proceedings of DARPA
Broadcast News Workshop, 1999, pp. 249–252.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

