An Evaluation of Semantically Enriched Spatial Data Infrastructure 
 
Hamon Barros Henriques 
Computer and Systems Depart. 
Federal Univ. of Campina Grande 
Campina Grande, Brazil 
hamon@copin.ufcg.edu.br 
Fabio Gomes de Andrade 
Computer and Systems Depart. 
Federal Institute of Paraíba 
Cajazeiras, Brazil 
fabio@ifpb.edu.br 
 
 
Cláudio de Souza Baptista 
Computer and Systems Depart. 
Federal Univ. of Campina Grande 
Campina Grande, Brazil 
baptista@dsc.ufcg.edu.br
 
 
Abstract— Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDI) have become an 
important 
solution 
for 
easing 
the 
interoperability 
of 
geographic data offered by different organizations. An 
important challenge that must be overcome by such 
infrastructures consists in allowing their users to easily 
locating the available data. Presently, this task is implemented 
by means of catalog services, which still have important 
limitations that prevent effective data retrieval. Due to those 
limitations, many research works have been developed to 
improve information retrieval in SDIs. One of such works is 
Semantically Enabled Spatial Data Infrastructures (SESDI), 
which is a framework that uses a model-based on information 
at feature type level and ontologies. The first results obtained 
during the experimental evaluation of SESDI showed that it 
improved the quality of several kinds of queries concerning 
geographic data. Nevertheless, a deeper evaluation, besides the 
comparison 
to 
catalog 
services 
provided 
by 
other 
infrastructures, was still necessary. Aiming at meeting this 
need, this paper describes an experiment carried out in order 
to deepen that evaluation. In this experiment, the performance 
of SESDI was compared with catalog services offered by other 
two infrastructures. The results obtained from the new 
experiments showed the viability of the solution used to 
implement the framework. 
Keywords-spatial data infrastructure; catalog service; spatial 
database; GIS. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDI) have become 
popular as an important solution for allowing the 
interoperability of geographic data supplied by different 
organizations. In order to achieve this interoperability, these 
infrastructures are created based on a set of norms and 
standards that must be adopted by all of their components. 
In this standardization scenario, the standards specified 
by the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) [1] have played a 
key role. Important examples of these standards include the 
services that give support for accessing geographic data, 
such as Web Map Service (WMS) [2] and Web Feature 
Service (WFS) [3]. These services allow the clients to have 
access to geographic data offered by a given provider using a 
standard interface, with no need to be aware of the details 
about its storage. Each instance of these services gives access 
to a set of feature types. On the other hand, each feature type 
represents a layer present in the dataset offered by a 
provider. Since their proposal, the OGC web services have 
played a key role for the development of spatial data 
structures, being used in the implementation of many of the 
current infrastructures. 
Besides interoperability, an important challenge which 
must be overcome by SDIs consists in allowing the clients to 
easily locating the available data and services. Presently, this 
problem is usually solved by the implementation of catalog 
services. In a catalog service, geographic data providers must 
supply a metadata containing detailed information about 
their dataset. On the other hand, clients of a SDI may use this 
service in order to find out the geographic data they are 
interested in. 
Although having led to important advances, the present 
catalog services still have some limitations. One of these 
limitations is that they solve their queries solely based on the 
information contained in the metadata records created by the 
geographic data providers. Since these records normally 
describe the datasets offered by a service as a whole, they 
usually bring little or even no information concerning the 
spatial, thematic and temporal characteristics of each feature 
type, which constrains the information retrieval process. 
Another important limitation is that most of the present 
catalogs solve queries with thematic constraints based on 
keywords only. This characteristic causes the catalog to 
discard, during the information retrieval process, relevant 
resources that are described with terms related to the theme 
defined in the query, which reduces the recall of these 
queries. 
Throughout the years, many research works have been 
proposed with the objective of overcoming these limitations. 
One such work is Semantically Enabled Spatial Data 
Infrastructures (SESDI) [4]. SESDI is a framework that uses 
a model-based on metadata at feature type level and 
ontologies to improve the retrieval of geographic data 
offered by an SDI. During the evaluation of this framework, 
the results achieved by its search engine were compared with 
the results achieved by similar queries submitted to the 
catalog service offered by a present SDI. This validation, 
which used the North-American SDI (NSDI) [5] as case 
study, showed that SESDI improved the quality of several 
kinds of queries. Nevertheless, a deeper evaluation, besides 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the comparison to other available catalog services, was still 
necessary. 
Aiming at meeting this need, this paper describes an 
experiment carried out to deepen the evaluation of SESDI. In 
this experiment, the performance of SESDI was compared 
with the catalog services offered by other two infrastructures, 
namely the Canadian Spatial Data Infrastructure [6] and the 
Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS) [7]. 
During the experiment, each solution was evaluated based on 
four query types: spatial, thematic, temporal and global. 
Besides allowing a deeper evaluation of SESDI, this paper 
offers as contribution an analysis of the performance of the 
studied catalog services, evaluating their quality at solving 
several kinds of queries involving spatial data. 
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, we approach related works. Section III gives an 
overview of the two approaches studied in this work. Section 
IV focuses on the experiment design, describing the 
dependent variables, the response variables, the experimental 
units, the research hypotheses and the data collection 
process. Section V describes the results achieved with the 
experiment. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper, and 
discusses further work to be undertaken. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Recently, many works have been proposed with the 
objective of improving the retrieval of geographic data and 
services from spatial data infrastructures and geographic 
portals. Some of these works are concerned with the retrieval 
of services. Stock et al. [8] developed a solution in which the 
services are retrieved from information defined in a feature 
type catalog that defines the structure and the relationships 
among the feature types offered by the SDI. Lutz et al. [9] 
associated the output parameters of each service to concepts 
defined in application ontologies to improve information 
retrieval in disaster management applications. In another 
work, Lutz [10] used first order logic to generate a signature 
which describes the semantic of the services offered by an 
SDI. In the approach developed by Lemmens et al. [11], 
services were classified and retrieved according to a 
geospatial web services ontology. Other proposed solutions 
[12][13] described the available services as tasks. Li et al. 
[14] proposed a solution which expands the terms defined in 
the query of a client in order to improve the retrieval of 
geographic web services that offer data about the Arctic 
region. The disadvantage of all these works is that they do 
not take into account the information offered at feature type 
level during the resolution of queries. 
Some of the developed works manage to solve queries 
based on information at feature type level. Janowicz et al. 
[15] developed a solution which used a semantic similarity 
measure based on ontologies to retrieve geographic data. In 
another work, Zhang et al. [16] proposed a solution that 
resolves queries for feature types using specific ontologies 
related to four types of dimension: location, theme, geometry 
and properties. Li et al. [17], in turn, implemented a solution 
that resolves thematic queries at feature type level using a 
keyword-based approach, which constrains the quality of this 
kind of query. A disadvantage of all these studies is that they 
do not approach the resolution of temporal queries, which are 
important for many queries involving geographic data. 
Finally, some proposed works deal with the retrieval of 
geographic metadata, and do not focus on a specific kind of 
resource. Smits and Friis-Christensen [18] developed a 
solution which uses a multilingual thesaurus to describe the 
information offered in the catalog of an infrastructure. 
Athanasis et al. [19], in turn, developed a solution that 
describes the resources offered by an SDI by means of 
metadata based on a series of ontologies. Chen et al. [20] 
used OWL-S to describe the semantics of data offered 
through geographic web services. Despite their importance 
and relevance, these works cannot solve queries based on 
information at feature type level. Also, these solutions do not 
support the resolution of temporal queries. 
III. 
CATALOG SEVICES VERSUS SESDI 
This section provides an overview of the two approaches 
that were compared during the experiment. First, we show 
how the queries are solved by the current catalog services. 
After that, we show the approach used in the implementation 
of SESDI. 
A. Catalog Service 
Currently, geographic data providers use the catalog 
service to advertise their resources. For this, they create a 
new metadata record into the catalog service. During this 
process, they supply metadata that describe their datasets, 
according to the geographic metadata standard adopted by 
the SDI. Some examples of these metadata include the title 
of the dataset, the coordinate systems and the projection used 
in the production of data, and the URL from which the 
service can be invoked. The metadata provided by each 
metadata record are used by the catalog service during the 
query resolution process. Since geographic data providers 
normally use a single metadata record to describe their 
datasets as a whole, current catalog services have limitations 
to solve spatial, thematic, temporal and global queries.  
Regarding spatial queries, the main limitation is that data 
providers normally define a single bounding-box to represent 
their datasets. Then, during the searching process, the catalog 
selects all the records whose bounding-box intersects (or 
contains) the geographic region defined in the query. 
Nevertheless, it is possible to notice that sometimes the 
feature types provided in a dataset cover different regions, 
which causes some limitations to the searching process. To 
understand these limitations, suppose the case depicted in 
Figure 1, which describes a dataset about flooding. In that 
figure, the feature types present in the dataset are represented 
as green rectangles, while the blue rectangle represents the 
spatial, thematic and temporal information provided in the 
metadata record that describes the dataset. Also, suppose B1 
and B2 are two bounding-boxes covering two different 
regions that do not overlap each other. In Figure 1, the 
geographic extent provided in the record is B1, which 
represents the region that is covered by most of the feature 
types of the dataset. Then, if a user poses a query looking for 
maps about the region B2, the catalog service discards the 
record depicted in that figure, even its dataset has a feature 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

type that satisfies the search criteria. Moreover, if a user 
poses a query for maps about the region B1, the catalog 
returns the record. After that, the user needs to access the 
service to identify, among the entire feature types of the 
dataset, just the ones that are relevant to his/her query. This 
process can be quite tedious and tiring for the user, since a 
query may return a large volume of records and each service, 
in turn, may offer a large number of feature types. The 
limitations regarding spatial queries can be extended to 
temporal queries. Moreover, in temporal queries these 
limitations are even bigger, since many providers do not 
provided the metadata about the temporal extent of the 
dataset.   
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of a metadata record. 
Regarding thematic queries, the main limitation is that 
catalog normally solves queries based on keywords. During 
the searching process, the catalog selects the records that 
contain in their description the keyword used in the query. 
Then, relevant records that contain in their description 
keywords that are related to the theme requested in the query 
can be discarded during this process. For example, suppose 
the case depicted in Figure 1 again. If a user poses a query 
for maps about disasters, the record showed in the figure is 
not selected by the catalog service, even its dataset offers 
several feature types that are relevant to the user. Finally, 
global queries are even more difficult to solve by using the 
current catalogs, since they present the limitations 
concerning all the dimensions used in the query.  
 
B. SESDI 
SESDI is a framework proposed with the objective of 
easing the retrieval of geographic data offered by SDIs, and 
aims to overcome some of the limitations of the present 
catalog services. In order to achieve this goal, it solves the 
queries of the clients based on a model that adapts classic 
Information Retrieval (IR) techniques to the domain of 
geographic data. In this model, the services that offer access 
to geographic data, such as WMS and WFS, are described as 
a set of feature types, in the same way as the documents are 
described as a set of keywords in the classic information 
retrieval models. Another important characteristic of SESDI 
is that it uses ontologies to describe the semantic of the 
feature types offered by the service, in order to improve the 
quality of the queries with thematic constraints. Finally, the 
framework proposes a search engine that explores the spatial, 
thematic and temporal relationships among the feature types 
offered by a service in order to generate the results retrieved 
in their queries. 
In order to implement its model, the SESDI identifies the 
spatial, thematic and temporal characteristics of each feature 
type present in the dataset offered by the services registered 
in the catalog service of the infrastructure. To perform this 
task, it processes the information of each metadata record in 
order to retrieve information concerning the services offered 
by the SDI. After that, it invokes the GetCapabilities 
operation of each identified service in order to retrieve its 
capabilities document. The objective of this stage is to 
retrieve more detailed information about its feature types.  
At the end of these stages, the framework processes the 
information contained in the metadata record and in the 
capabilities document to identify the spatial, thematic and 
temporal characteristics of each feature type. This entire 
process is called tagging and is split into three stages: spatial 
tagging, thematic tagging and temporal tagging. It is 
important to take in mind that the tagging process is executed 
for each feature type identified by the framework. The 
following paragraphs describe the tagging process. However, 
more detailed information about this process can be found in 
[4]. 
In the spatial tagging, the SESDI identifies the 
geographic region covered by the feature type. That 
information, which is represented as a bounding box, is 
obtained from the feature type description in the capabilities 
document retrieved from the service.  
In the thematic tagging, the framework tries to identify 
the semantics of the data provided by the feature type. It 
accomplishes that task by relating the feature types to 
concepts defined in ontologies. In the current version, the 
SESDI uses a set of ontologies about several application 
domains. During the thematic tagging, the framework 
processes the keywords list provided for the feature type in 
the capabilities document of the service. If no keywords are 
provided for the feature type, its title is used as the input for 
that process. Then, the SESDI matches each keyword (or the 
title of the feature type) to the names of the concepts used in 
its ontologies. Whenever a match is identified, the 
framework generates a tag associating the matched concept 
to the feature type. When a matching cannot be identified, 
the SESDI poses a query in the Wikipedia and tries to 
retrieve a page related to the keyword. If more than one page 
is retrieved, a ranking for each page is generated by using 
techniques of classic information retrieval, and the page with 
the highest ranking value is selected. After that, the 
framework matches the title of the selected page, as well the 
name of each category used in the page description, to the 
concepts used in its ontologies. The thematic tags generated 
during this process are associated to the feature type 
description and stored in a database. If no matches are 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

identified during the tagging process, the framework does 
not generate any tag to the feature type. 
Finally, the temporal tagging consists of identifying the 
time period of the feature type. Since the capabilities 
document does not provided metadata specific to describe 
temporal information, the SESDI processes the title and the 
text description of the feature type in order to find temporal 
expressions that provides that information. When one or 
more temporal expressions are found, their values are 
converted into a time interval. On the other hand, if the 
framework cannot identify any temporal expression, it 
assumes that the time interval of the feature type is the same 
defined in the metadata record. Furthermore, if no value is 
provided for temporal extent in the metadata record, the 
value null is used as the time interval of the feature type. 
After the tagging process, the metadata generated by SESDI 
are stored in a local database, along with some description 
about the feature type and its respective service. Figure 2 
shows the metadata generated by SESDI for the feature types 
depicted in Figure 1 after the tagging process. 
A key difference between SESDI and the present catalog 
services is that SESDI solves queries based on the metadata 
identified for each feature type during the tagging process. 
Another important difference is that SESDI returns to the 
users only the feature types that satisfy the search criteria, so 
clients do not need to access the service to identify the 
feature types of his/her interest. For example, if a user poses 
a spatial query for maps about the region B2, the framework 
is able to identify that the feature type “Flooding (2010-
2012)” is relevant for the query. Moreover, if a user poses a 
query for maps about the region B1, the framework returns 
only the feature types that satisfy the constraint defined in 
the query. Another important difference is that the SESDI 
uses thematic tags associated to concepts defined the 
ontologies. Then, when a user poses a query for a specific 
theme, the framework is able to return as the feature types 
that are tagged exactly with the theme used in the query as 
the ones that are tagged with a concept related to it.  
 So, the study described in this paper was intended to 
carry out a deeper evaluation of the performance of these two 
kinds of approach. This approach was based on an empirical 
experiment, where we defined the controlled variables, 
which are the variables subject to adjustments before the 
execution of the experiment, and the dependent variables, 
which result from the experiment. Besides, with these 
variables, we elaborated the hypotheses to be verified. The 
next sections describe, respectively, the experiment design 
and the evaluation of the results. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT DESIGN 
The experiment followed the same strategy of the 
evaluation used in [4], which employed recall and precision 
metrics to evaluate the performance of SESDI with respect to 
catalog services of the Canadian SDI and of the GEOSS. For 
each kind of query (spatial, temporal, semantic and global), 
the performance was measured according to the recall 
(number of relevant results) and precision (quality of the 
relevance) of the results. On the other hand, at the service 
level, recall and precision were evaluated with basis on the 
number of retrieved services. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of feature type metadata generate by SESDI. 
The kinds of queries used in the research are classified as 
purely spatial, purely semantic, purely temporal and global. 
The purely spatial queries are intended to search for maps 
that intersect, partially or entirely, a certain location of 
interest to the user (e.g., which cities are crossed by the São 
Francisco river?). The purely semantic queries, in turn, are 
intended to retrieve maps that describe geographic data about 
a certain theme (subject) (e.g., which maps refer to 
beaches?). The purely temporal queries have the objective of 
retrieving the maps that refer to a certain time interval (e.g., 
which maps refer to the decade of 1950?). Finally, the global 
queries retrieve maps that deal with a certain theme in a 
certain location and in a time interval, that is, these queries 
meet more than one constraint type (e.g., which maps refer to 
beaches in Brazil in the decade of 1950?). 
The controlled variables used in the experiment were: 
kind of query used (purely spatial, purely temporal, purely 
semantic or global) and the used tools (SESDI and the 
catalog services of the Canadian SDI and of the GEOSS). On 
the other hand, the dependent variables used to compare the 
performance of SESDI with respect to the studied SDIs were 
recall and precision. These are the main metrics for 
evaluation of the performance of the information retrieval 
system. The recall is measured as the ratio between the 
number of relevant resources retrieved and the number of 
relevant resources that exist in the system. The precision is 
measured as the ratio between the number of relevant 
resources retrieved and the total number of resources 
retrieved. 
The experimental units were composed by the 
comparisons of SESDI with the Canadian SDI and the 
GEOSS. For each of them, twenty queries of each type were 
performed [21]. For each round of testing, the query that was 
held in the SESDI was held too in the SDIs studied. 
Moreover, during the comparison between the SESDI and 
the SDIs, the queries were held on the same set of metadata. 
Before the formulation of the hypotheses, the concepts of 
independent 
variables 
and 
response 
variables 
were 
formalized, in order to provide a better visualization of the 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

presented information. The independent variable "query 
type" was formalized by the symbols e, s, t and g, for the 
spatial, semantic, temporal and global levels, respectively, 
while the independent variable "used tool" was formalized 
by the symbols sd, c and g, representing SESDI, the 
Canadian SDI and the GEOSS SDI, respectively. In order to 
represent the response variables "precision" and "recall", the 
following functions were formalized: 
• PFT: represents the precision at feature type level, 
which evaluates the quality of the feature types 
retrieved from each approach; 
• PS: represents the precision at service level, which 
evaluates the quality of the services retrieved from 
each approach; 
• CF: represents the recall at feature type level, which 
evaluates the quantity of relevant feature types 
retrieved from each approach; and 
• CS: represents the recall at service level, which 
evaluates quantity of relevant services retrieved from 
each approach. 
 
The objective of this study was to evaluate the 
performance of SESDI with respect to the catalog services 
provided by some existing SDIs. The null hypotheses 
formalized to describe the comparisons between SESDI and 
the SDIs used as case studies are depicted in Table I. The 
first column describes if the hypothesis represent a query at 
level of service or feature type. The second and third 
columns represents, respectively, the null hypotheses used 
during the comparison between SESDI and the catalog 
service provided by the Canadian SDI and GEOSS. In Table 
I, each hypothesis represents a comparison between the 
performance of SESDI and the catalog service provided by a 
SDI. These hypotheses were formulated based on the metrics 
presented above (PFT, PS, CF and CS). For example, the 
hypothesis H01assumes that the precision at feature type 
level in the spatial queries held in SESDI is less or equal than 
the precision at feature types level in the spatial queries held 
in Canadian SDI. For each hypothesis defined in Table I, we 
performed statistical tests to try to refute it. The results of 
statistical tests are showed in Tables II and III. 
The process of collecting the research data occurred in a 
semi-automatic and individual manner for each one of the 
queries. 
The first step was the generation of the baseline. In this 
stage, the relevant results to be retrieved in one of the query 
types were obtained. For this, the records which should be 
returned by a query were previously selected, generating a 
baseline that was used to compare the results obtained from 
each approach. Once generated, the baseline was stored in a 
file. Next, we present the criteria used for generation of the 
baseline for each query type: 
• 
Purely spatial query: the baseline for the feature 
type level was composed of all the layers whose 
bounding-box intersected the geographic region 
defined in the query. On the other hand, for the 
service level, the baseline was composed of all the 
services that offered at least one layer present in the 
baseline for the feature type level; 
TABLE I - TABLE OF FORMALIZED NULL HYPOTHESES 
 
 
• Purely temporal query: for the feature type level, 
the baseline was composed of all the layers whose 
temporal extension intersected the time interval 
defined in the query. On the other hand, for the 
service level, the baseline was composed of all the 
services that offered at least one layer present in the 
baseline for the feature type level; 
• Purely semantic query: for the feature type level, 
the baseline was composed of all the layers that 
offered data about the theme used in the request, or a 
theme related to it. On the other hand, for the service 
level, the baseline was composed of all the services 
that offered at least one layer present in the baseline 
for the feature type level; 
• Global query: for the feature type level, we 
considered all the layers that met the three constraints 
(spatial, temporal, and semantic) defined in the 
request. On the other hand, for the service level, the 
baseline was composed of all the services that offered 
at least one layer present in the baseline for the 
feature type level. 
 
The second step was the execution of the queries. In this 
stage, the query was formulated according to its criteria and 
performed both in SESDI and in the catalog service of the 
SDI. 
Finally, in the last step, we compared the results obtained 
from the two approaches. During this stage, we generated an 
output file containing information about the experiment. This 
file stored information about the number of services and 
feature types in each baseline. Moreover, for each approach, 
the file stored the number of services retrieved, the number 
of feature types retrieved, the number of relevant services 
retrieved and the number of relevant feature types retrieved. 
Then, we used the information stored in that file for the 
computation of the precision and recall metrics.  
In order to make the analysis of results easier, a tool was 
developed to compute the data concerning the dependent 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

variables (precision and recall) of this research, consolidating 
them into a single file. This way, the consolidated data can 
be observed in the files related to the comparison between 
SESDI and the Canadian SDI [22] and between SESDI and 
the GEOSS SDI [23]. 
V. 
RESULTS OF THE EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 
After collecting the data, it was necessary to employ the 
hypotheses tests to infer about the hypotheses cited in 
previous section. To accomplish this task, we used a 
methodology proposed by Wohlin [24]. According to this 
method, we firstly verified the normality, aiming to check 
whether the data come from a normal distribution. Next, we 
collected the homoscedasticity of the data in order to tell 
whether there is variance or not in the data. Both normality 
and homoscedasticity allow one to decide about the use of 
parametric or non-parametric tests. Since every statistical test 
needs a null hypothesis to infer about it, the tests used here 
result in a p-value (probability value) that, depending on its 
value, may deny or not the hypothesis of the test according to 
the significance level adopted. 
In order to verify the normality, we used the Shapiro-
Wilk, Anderson-Darling, Skewness and Kurtosis tests [24], 
with significance level of five percent, besides the QQ-plot 
graphics. Moreover, in the comparison of SESDI with the 
Canadian SDI and the GEOSS, the data are not from a 
normal distribution. Since most tests point that the data 
involving controlled variables with the dependent variables 
are not normal, a few data were pointed as normal in some 
tests, but the QQ-plot graphic concerning them allowed us to 
see their non-normality. The results of the tests and the QQ-
plot graphics can be seen in [25]. 
Since the collected data are not normal, the Levene test 
[24] was used to perform the verification of the 
homoscedasticity aspects with a significance level of five 
percent. The results of the tests related to the data of the 
comparisons between the SESDI and the catalog services of 
the Canadian SDI and of the GEOSS can be seen in [25]. 
As we mentioned before, the data were not retrieved 
from a normal population. So, we used a non-parametric test 
to infer about the experiment hypotheses. Since the data were 
collected in a dependent manner, we needed to use a non-
parametric test of the paired samples. Besides, the 
hypotheses of the experiment compared to data groups. For 
this reason, we chose the Mann–Whitney with significance 
level of five percent. 
The results of the test for each hypothesis listed in Table 
I, related to the performance comparison between SESDI and 
the Canadian SDI, are presented in Table II. Such results are 
coded in two colors: green, when the null hypothesis was not 
refuted (p-value is above the significance level adopted - 
5%) and red, when the null hypothesis was refuted (p-value 
is smaller than the significance level adopted - 5%). Table II 
shows that most of the hypotheses related to comparison 
between SESDI and the Canadian SDI were refuted. These 
results lead us to conclude that SESDI had better 
performance for most cases, since the null hypotheses 
presented assume the inferiority or equality of the response 
variables for all query types. The table shows that the 
hypotheses H0-5 and H0-13 were not refuted, which means 
that we cannot state that SESDI improves the recall for 
spatial queries at service and feature type levels. 
TABLE II - RESULTS OF THE MANN-WHITNEY TESTS APPLIED TO 
THE COMPARISON OF SESDI WITH THE CANADIAN SDI 
 
 
The results of the test for each hypothesis listed in Table 
I, related to the performance comparison between the SESDI 
and the GEOSS SDI, are presented in Table III. In that table, 
it is possible to notice also that most of the hypotheses 
related to the performance comparison between the SESDI 
and the GEOSS SDI were refuted, which allows us to 
conclude that the performance of the SESDI was superior to 
that of the GEOSS SDI for most cases. The only hypothesis 
that was not refuted (H0-22) shows that there is no statistical 
significance to state that SESDI improved recall of temporal 
queries at feature type level.  
To better illustrate the results presented above, the 
returns a semantic query used in the experiment are shown 
below. The consultation aimed to find maps for "boundaries" 
and obtained a precision level of feature type 100% in the 
SESDI, i.e., all relevant services were recovered, while the 
IDE obtained at a precision level of 11% of feature type. 
TABLE III - RESULTS OF THE MANN-WHITNEY TESTS APPLIED TO 
THE COMPARISON BETWEEN SESDI AND GEOSS 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
This research was intended to perform a deeper 
evaluation of the performance of the SESDI framework 
during the retrieval of geographic data offered by SDIs. In 
order to perform this evaluation, the performance of SESDI 
was compared with the performance of two catalog services 
presently offered by two infrastructures: The Canadian SDI 
and the GEOSS SDI. Faced with the results presented above, 
one can conclude, with a significance level of five percent, 
that: 
1) 
For all types of queries, SESDI had better precision 
than the Canadian SDI for most of the queries 
executed at the feature type level; 
2) 
For the global, purely temporal and purely semantic 
query types, SESDI had a better recall at feature 
type level, compared to the Canadian SDI. As for 
the purely spatial queries, there was not statistical 
significance to state which approach had better 
performance;  
3) 
For all types of query, SESDI had better precision  
in the service level than the Canadian SDI; 
4) 
For the global, purely temporal and purely semantic 
query types, SESDI had a better recall at service 
level than the Canadian SDI. As for the purely 
spatial queries, there was not statistical significance 
to assert which approach had better performance; 
5) 
For all types of query, SESDI had better precision at 
the feature type level than the GEOSS SDI; 
6) 
For the purely spatial, purely semantic and global 
query types, SESDI had a better recall at the feature 
type level than the GEOSS SDI. As for the purely 
spatial queries, there was not statistical significance 
to state which approach had better performance;  
7) 
For all types of query, SESDI had better precision at 
service level than the GEOSS SDI; 
8) 
For all types of query, SESDI had better recall at 
service level than the GEOSS SDI. 
 
Based on the results, we could conclude that the solution 
used to implement SESDI is viable, since it improved recall 
and precision for most queries used during experimental 
evaluation. As a suggestion for future work, SESDI could be 
compared with other catalog services. The results achieved 
with such experiments could add still more value to the 
object of study of this research. 
Another suggestion for future works would be the 
implementation of the universalization of the language used 
by SESDI. With this, it would be possible to compare SDIs 
with languages other than English. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Lupp, M. (2008). Open geospatial consortium. In Shekhar, S. and 
Xiong, H., editors, Encyclopedia of GIS, page 815. Springer. 
[2] Open Geospatial Consortium, “Ogc web map service interface,” OGC 
03-109r1, Version 1.3.0, January 2004. 
[3] ——, “Web feature service implementation specification,” OGC 04-
094, Version 1.1.0, May 2005. 
[4] F. G. de Andrade, C. de S. Baptista, and C. A. Davis Jr, “Improving 
geographic information retrieval in spatial data infrastructures.” 
GeoInformatica, Jan. 2014, doi: 10.1007/s10707-014-0202-x. 
[5] http:// http://www.fgdc.gov/nsdi/nsdi.html [accessed: 2014-01-20] 
[6] http://geoconnections.nrcan.gc.ca/[accessed: 2014-01-20] 
[7] http://www.earthobservations.org/geoss.shtml[accessed: 2014-01-20] 
[8] K. M. Stock et al., “A semantic registry using a feature type catalogue 
instead of ontologies to support spatial data infrastructures.” 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, vol. 24, 
no. 2, Feb. 2010, pp. 231–252.   
[9] M. Lutz, J. Sprado, E. Klien, C. Schubert, and I. Christ, 
“Overcomingsemantic heterogeneity in spatial data infrastructures.” 
Computers Geosciences, vol. 35, no. 4, Apr. 2009, pp. 739–752.  
[10] M. Lutz, “Ontology-based descriptions for semantic discovery and 
composition of geoprocessing services.” GeoInformatica, vol. 11, no. 
1, Mar. 2007, pp. 1–36.  
[11] R. Lemmens, R. A. de By, M. Gould, A. Wytzisk, C. Granell, and P. 
van Oosterom, “Enhancing geo-service chaining through deep service 
descriptions,” T. GIS, vol. 11, no. 6, Dec. 2007, pp. 849–871. 
[12] M. Molina and S. Bayarri, “A multinational sdi-based system to 
facilitate disaster risk management in the andean community.” 
Computers Geosciences, vol. 37, no. 9, Sep. 2011, pp. 1501–1510.  
[13] N. Wiegand and C. García, “A task-based ontology approach to 
automate geospatial data retrieval,” T. GIS, vol. 11, no. 3, Jun. 2007, 
pp. 355–376. 
[14] W. Li, et al., “Semantic-based web service discovery and chaining for 
building 
an 
arctic 
spatial 
data 
infrastructure.” 
Computers 
Geosciences, vol. 37, no. 11, Nov. 2011, pp. 1752–1762.  
[15] K. Janowicz, M. Wilkes, and M. Lutz, “Similarity-based information 
retrieval and its role within spatial data infrastructures.” in GIScience, 
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, T. J. Cova, H. J. Miller, K. 
Beard, A. U. Frank, and M. F. Goodchild, Eds., vol. 5266. Springer, 
Sep. 2008, pp. 151–167.  
[16] C. Zhang, T. Zhao, W. Li, and J. P. Osleeb, “Towards logic-based 
geospatial feature discovery and integration using web feature service 
and geospatial semantic web.” International Journal of Geographical 
Information Science, vol. 24, no. 6, Jun. 2010, pp. 903–923.  
[17] Z. Li, C. P. Yang, H. Wu, W. Li, and L. Miao, “An optimized 
framework for seamlessly integrating ogc web services to support 
geospatial 
sciences.” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Geographical 
Information Science, vol. 25, no. 4, Apr. 2011, pp. 595–613. 
[18] P. C. Smits and A. Friis-Christensen, “Resource discovery in a 
european spatial data  infrastructure.” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., 
vol. 19, no. 1, Jan. 2007, pp. 85–95.  
[19] N. Athanasis, K. Kalabokidis, M. Vaitis, and N. Soulakellis, 
“Towards a semantics-based approach in the development of 
geographic portals,” Comp. Geosci, vol. 35, Feb. 2009, pp. 301–308.   
[20] N. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Hu, and L. Di, “A capability matching and 
ontology reasoning method for high precision ogc web service 
discovery.” Int. J. Digital Earth, vol. 4, no. 6, Jun. 2011, pp. 449–470.  
[21] http://zip.net/bcmbc2[accessed: 2014-01-20] 
[22] http://zip.net/bkmbzd[accessed: 2014-01-20] 
[23] http://zip.net/bkmbzc[accessed: 2014-01-20] 
[24] C. Wohlin et al., Experimentation in Software Engineering. 
Heidelberg, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2012.  
[25] http://zip.net/bll9Wz[accessed: 2014-01-20] 
 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

