Geographical Information Systems Participating into the Pervasive Computing
Nuhcan Akçit
Department of Geodetic and Geographic Information
Technologies
Middle East Technical University
Ankara, Turkey
nuhcan@metu.edu.tr
Emrah Tomur
Department of Information Systems
Middle East Technical University
Ankara, Turkey
etomur@metu.edu.tr
Mahmut Onur Karslıoğlu
Department of Civil Engineering,
Geomatics Engineering Division,
Department of Geodetic and Geographic Information Technologies
Middle East Technical University
Ankara,Turkey
karsliog@metu.edu.tr
Abstract—The popular term “pervasive computing” describes
the concept of computers being everywhere. The Geographic
Information System (GIS) technology began with completely
centralized systems after the influence of the Internet; the GIS
then changed into decentralized systems. In the last few years,
the GISs have been included in many areas of pervasive
computing,
such
as the Internet
of
Things
and sensor
networks. Changing and developing states of the GIS such as
Internet, mobile, web GIS, ubiquitous GIS, the Internet of
Things and sensor network are the different elements of the
evolution. From the beginning of the evolution until today,
pervasive computing is described in this study. In addition to
GIS as a part of pervasive computing technology, the activity
of Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), which works on
geospatial and location standards in these technologies, is also
discussed. This paper investigates the evolution of GISs from
centralized systems to a distributed system, summarizes the
steps and use areas of the GISs to participation in pervasive
computing,
and
compares
different
GISs
concepts
in
application areas. In addition, future trends and expectations
of the GISs are included.
Keywords-GIS; pervasive computing; WEB GIS; mobile
GIS; Internet of Things
I. INTRODUCTION
The Geographic Information System
(GIS), a system
designed to store, capture, analyze, manipulate, and manage
all types of geographic data, is an interdisciplinary area that
combines cartography, analysis, statistics, and computer
technology [1].
In recent years, ubiquitous and pervasive computing
domains have increased considerably. They are a part of the
daily life because of the technological evolution and new
applications. In this paper, the goal is to provide information
about geographic information science, a system that has
developed considerably and is involved in our lives more
than ever. The fundamental areas of geographic information
science are remote sensing, surveying, photogrammetry, and
analyzing spatial data.
The focus of this paper is GISs, which are becoming part
of the ubiquitous computer domain. In this paper, we
provide
a
brief
information
about
the
GIS
and
its
development from the 1990s to 2010. We mainly focus on
after 90’s because distributed and Internet GIS [2] started to
be formed in this period, and our ubiquitous domain is more
interested in development after 90’s. We also discuss future
trends in this area. The GISs are huge; therefore, we focus
on the development and evolution of the ubiquitous and
pervasive computing domains. Thus, elements of the
development of the GISs are beyond the scope of this paper.
The GIS is not familiar to the public. We first provide
general information about the GIS and application areas.
Then, we discuss the evolution of the GIS from the 1990s to
today [2]. In the last few years, the GISs have become a
larger part of the ubiquitous domain [7]. This study is a brief
summary based on books, articles, and other sources. We
mainly investigate information about the GIS, development
stages, and evolution steps until today.
This paper is structured as follows: We discuss GISs in
Section 2. The effects of the Internet on GISs are analyzed
in
Section
3.
Data
Centralized-distributed
GISs
are
considered in the Section 4. Decentralized distributed GISs
are considered in Section 5 (location-based services, web
GIS,
mobile
GIS,
the
open
geospatial
consortium,
ubiquitous GIS sensor network, and the Internet of Things).
II. THE GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Generally, GISs are systems that “integrate hardware,
software, and data for capturing, managing, analyzing, and
displaying the different forms of geographically referenced
information” [3]. All types of geographically references data
can be organized by The Geographic Information Systems.
Today, the major components of GISs are people, hardware,
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-326-1
129

software, data procedures, and the network [3]. A GIS allows
us to understand all types of reports, data, and visualize,
interpret, and find relationships between them. A GIS helps
people answer questions and solve problems by looking for
data in a way that is quickly understood and easily shared.
GIS technology is used by any kind of work which can be
integrated easily with GIS. Spatial analysis is mainly used in
many areas; thus, with the help of the GIS, analyzing data
and finding results in different domains is easy, a key
element of the GIS.
General benefits of using the Geographic Information
Systems include saving money, increasing efficiency, aiding
in making better decisions, improving communication,
keeping records better and deleting the managing data
geographically or the relations [4]. Different types of data
management and different types of software deal with
different types of data. However, these details are beyond the
scope of this paper. In many open source and commercial
programs, the usage is based on the work someone wants to
do exactly, which means the selection changes with the
context of the work. Only basically say that the data types
include different raster, vector and hybrid format[3]. The
data sources include images, digitized or scanned maps, GPS
data, and data transferred from other places with the required
program.
What is unclear about the GISs are whether; systems are
inter-disciplinary or a separate discipline. According to
some, the GISs are inter-disciplinary; others believe since the
system has been developed, it is a separate discipline. Since
this issue does not affect the capability or development of the
GIS, this issue is not important in this paper. This paper
focuses on GIS capabilities and how the GISs have affected
daily life since being developed in the 1990s.
Now looking at some little information on how GIS is
developed at first. The GIS was first developed in Canada in
the mid-1960s to identify land resources, where they were,
and how they were used. In the late 1970s, Harvard
University's Laboratory for Computer Graphics and Spatial
Analysis developed a general purpose GIS [1][5]. In the
early 1980s, the price of computing hardware decreased,
which helped sustain the software industry and led to the
development of cost-effective applications. This is making
the more powerful and efficient standalone systems which
have been introduced in the 1980’s. During the 1990s, map
analysis and modeling start to increase this software
programs. After the 1990s, the Internet grew rapidly, which
led to new concepts: distributed GIS and Internet GIS [2].
III. EFFECT OF THE INTERNET ON THE GEOGRAPHIC
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
The Internet grew rapidly in the 1990s, and has become
part of society. Ubiquitous access to the Internet makes it
more powerful for people to process, exchange, and access
information. The Internet also changed GIS data access,
manipulating, and sharing. The Internet led to an important
change and improved GIS in terms of spatial analysis. The
Internet affected the GIS in three areas: data access, spatial
information distribution, and processing [2]. The Internet
provides analytical results for a much wider audience than
the traditional GIS. People start to search online and use
free search and query analysis for spatial objects without
purchasing expensive GIS software. In the processing field,
the Internet enhances the reusability and accessibility of the
analysis tools and dynamic download and upload, which
also helps interactive work on data, which is discussed later
in this current study.
Accessing data over the Internet was the first step for the
Internet GIS [2]. Accessing data online allows people who
have stand-alone GIS on their local machines to transfer
data over the Internet. This method is suitable for accessing
data quickly and easily but harder for the analyzing data
independent from the location, which is the next important
step. Online GIS processing continues to improve to
increase the analytical abilities of the Internet.
IV. DATA CENTRALIZED- DISTRIBUTED GIS
The GIS influenced the advancement of information
technology.
The
development
of
the
GIS
resembles
computer development, which evolved from a mainframe
GIS to a desktop GIS [2] and then distributed GIS, which
includes Internet GIS and mobile GIS.
Distributed GIS has subtypes which are Local Area
Network (LAN) based GIS, Internet based GIS and mobile
based GIS. In this paper we are interested with the
distributed GIS refers to GIS programs working on the
internet (Internet GIS) or wireless network environments
(mobile
GIS)[2].Distributed
GIS
is
mainly
based
on
improving the Internet and wireless technologies based on
the rapid expansion of low-cost bandwidth [2] over the
Internet, and web-enabled desktop and mobile devices.
The distributed GISs differentiate the client-server LAN-
based traditional method [2], which does not require the
installation of a GIS program on the user’s desktop. This
method relies on the access to analytical tools and data
anywhere through Internet access or wireless coverage. The
client is any device that can be connected to the Internet or
may be connected to a wireless capable device to access the
data or tool. There are two concepts in distributed GIS:
Internet GIS [2] (can be wired or wireless also) and mobile
GIS (wireless). This is important because depending on
whether
communications
are
wired
or
wireless,
the
applications may change. Although these issues are very
important for developing a GIS, the interoperability of the
data is very important.
V. DECENTRALIZED DISTRIBUTED GIS
In distributed GISs, many names are used: online GIS,
distributed geographic information (DGI), web-based GIS,
or web GIS [2][6]. Internet GIS and web GIS sound as if
they are the same, but they are completely different from
each other. Internet GIS involves using the Internet to
exchange data, perform analysis, and present results;
however, web GIS primarily uses the World Wide Web
(WWW). Internet GIS and web-based GIS use the client
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-326-1
130

server as a model [2][7]. Web GIS uses web browsers,
which are a major part of the Internet, but Internet GIS is
broader and, it uses more than browsers.
Distributed GIS mainly uses the client server as a model
[2][7]. The server itself performs the job and sends the
result to the client or sends the data and analysis tool to the
client to calculate the result. The connections and the
communication are based on the standards of the client
server or Internet standards (which are not discussed in this
section because they are the same as the general use of
Internet standards and the client-server architecture). The
thick and thin client model can be also seen as distributed
GIS [2].
Distributed GIS are hosted on several hosts connected
by a communication network. One subclass of such
distributed GIS is Internet GIS. WebGIS is a subclass of
Internet GIS which is significantly more usage last years
based on the WWW (World Wide Web), and its add-ons to
provide interactivity between the user and the distributed
GIS program. To enable interactivity, HTML (Hyper Text
Markup
Language),
XHTML
(Extensible
Hyper
Text
Markup Language), WAP (Wireless Application Protocol),
and vector-based GIS can be used [2]. Users can then
manipulate the data and maps interactively. Users also can
perform GIS functions such as rendering, spatial queries,
and spatial analysis using a web browser or other Internet-
based applications.
Distributed GISs take advantage of the Internet as a
distributed system [2], which means GIS data and the
analysis tool can be on different computers over the
Internet. The data can be in different places at a company or
institution and, it can be accessed, combined, or analyzed
with help of the Internet or intranet. In addition, public
agencies can provide data for users or other providers.
Individuals can search and download data or tools over the
Internet. Choosing different applications for different types
by the same user is possible. The main advantage of
distributed GIS [2] is being connected dynamically to data
sources. Real-time information can be used in a real-time
connection such as a real-time satellite image, emergency
response information, and traffic movement.
Another important issue is the accessibility of the GIS
from different platforms. It must not be limited to one type
of a system. As long as people have connections to the
Internet, individuals can access and use distributed GIS.
Cross-platform
and
inter-operable
GIS
tools
[2]
are
important, so everybody can access or operate the tools
independently
of
the
system
they
use.
In
addition,
interoperability means individuals can access the GIS from
various
devices.
The
Open
Geodata
Interoperability
specification [2] and geography markup language (GML)
[8] by the Open GIS Consortium (OGC) set standards and
rules for interoperability [2][8]. (There are also many
different standards for other concepts that are created by the
OGC during 2000s, which will be discussed in detail later.)
Distributed GISs are required for many purposes. One is
the uniqueness of the data over the Internet. For example, a
road map is more usable by tourists if there are points of
interest on the map (hotels, parks, restaurants). This
example shows the importance of using geographic data
increasing with the inter-operability and cross-platform
issues [8], people rarely focus on this issue for actual
implementation in the beginning. These needs must be
achieved in cross-platform programs when a system is
designed in concept of the GIS. It must be well defined to
make the program truly inter-operable and cross-platform.
This requires the community to revise meta-data. This
requirement led to research on meta-data for geospatial data
and software components in the late 1990s. Integrated meta-
data is one of the successful points of distributed GIS.
Distributed GIS is used in many other areas today [2],
which means a flexible and dynamic scheme is more usable.
Delivering
data
with
traditional
GIS
has
difficulties.
Different programs have unique processes and data sets that
make life more difficult. Needs are divided into three
perspectives:
management,
user,
and
implementation
perspectives [1][2]. From the management perspective,
there are two main reasons why distributed GIS should be
more useful. First is the globalization of geographic
information series distribution. Data were distributed in
papers or paper maps previously, but in recent years, many
data sources have become publicly available on the Internet.
To provide a GIS community global system, they built data
to distribute [6] online in the 1990s. It provided a large
scope for conducting scientific research, and GIS users
obtain information easily from the community. Second,
Internet GIS services are related to decentralization of
managing and updating the system [2] [6]. Data gathering
techniques such as global positioning systems (GPSs),
satellite images, remote sensing data, and other GIS [1][9]
application
data
mean
people
must
deal
with
huge
databases. Since the databases are huge, this creates
maintenance and update issues. Internet GIS provides a
solution to this situation. Data sets are maintained at the
source site instead of a centralized location [2]. Another
advantage is the increasing reliability failure of one
location.
Thus,
the
entire
distributed
Geographic
Information System does not fail. This increases the
efficiency of the system and reduces the cost of maintaining
the database.
From the user perspective, there are three main reasons
why Internet-based distributed GIS services are important.
The first is the huge GIS data sets and processing are not
possible. Smaller workstations and a distributed system
provide a chance for dynamic processing at servers and
encapsulate the results for return to the client. The second is
customization of GIS modules. With distributed GIS,
individual software modules are updated, which provides
more flexible solutions to users. The third reason is the
public’s demand for location-based information due to the
popularity of the Internet and mobile devices. Popularity
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-326-1
131

began with the GPS, in-car navigation, and wireless access
to the Internet. Distributed GIS services have a real potential
to bring GIS to the masses [2].
From the implementation perspective, there are three
main problems in distributing the system. The first is that
Internet-based GIS [2] services lack high-level architecture,
which means there are temporary solutions for distributed
systems. The second problem is the interoperability issue
[8] of data and processes. The third problem is data
overload because of the many different sources. Each source
may have the same data. This means loss of power and high
costs to duplicate the data from different databases. These
are solved if the GIS users have the knowledge required to
integrate different sections and critical issues.
Distributed GIS has a wide range of applications that
can be categorized into four main groups: data sharing and
dissemination, simple search and querying, online data
processing, and location-based services. In data sharing, the
system shares data on the Internet perhaps over a web
browser,
FTP,
or other
type
of Internet
application.
Information is disseminated via maps and data processes by
specialists. Specialists give users user permission to use
these materials. Online processing makes people work on
providing inter-operable software development, or they
process different parts of the problem and put them together
to solve problem with online processing. Another important
process is location-based services (LBS) [2][10], which
refer to real-time implementation. LBS help people find the
best route to their destination. Distributed GIS can meet
needs easily. In addition, mobile GIS [2][7], which is
described in detail later, can offer mobile users real-time
traffic information, landmarks near users, and points of
interest.
A.
Location-Based Services (LBS)
The development of technology and technological trends
has involved more location-based services in daily life.
Improvement
in
distributed
GIS
also
aided
in
the
development of location services.
Technology
is
rapidly
changing,
particularly
in
Geographic Information Systems. GNSS is the global
navigation satellite system. One type of GPS (global
positioning system) is operated by the United States.
However,
there
is
also
GLONASS
(Globalnaya
Navigatsionnaya
Sputnikovaya
Sistema),
which
was
operated by Russia. Other systems in development include
Galileo (the European Union [EU]) and Beidou (China) [9].
There are also GISs that are not GNSS: radio frequency
identification
and
location-sensing
technologies
with
varying accuracy.
Location-based services [2][10] are mainly services or
applications that extend spatial information processing to
users or GIS capabilities via the Internet or wireless devices.
GIS capabilities are based on the networked or distributed
concept. Many LBS are used today, including social
networking. LBS are targeted at many people, and are inter-
operable and cross-platform [8][10]. LBS evolved from
online map services and Internet GIS applications. LBS are
used for more concentrated lightweight devices [10]; GIS
applications are more general. However, LBS definitions
and uses overlap with those of the GIS.
Since GIS have interoperability and cross-platform
issues, LBS evolved from GIS for more cross-platform and
diversity. LBS have more simultaneous and dynamic
processes [10] in which data are obtained from the traffic or
remote sensed by satellites, which is based on GIS
applications and concepts. LBS were developed for more
independent use and are useful only for location services.
There are different types of LBS; however, since the 2000s
mobile phones have been equipped with GPS receivers.
Thus, all over the world, this type of LBS is commonly
used.
LBS capabilities are limited to finding locations and
tracking objects with small sensors [2][10]. Locations are
found based on the following questions: Where am I going?
How do I get there? Where am I now? LBS work very well
in this context. LBS have two modes: pull and push [10].
The
push
mode
services
are
pushed
to
the
user
automatically and are not based on needing the information.
In the pull mode, the user requests the data voluntarily to
access information.
The object tracking capability of LBS with small sensors
is attached to the object that people want to track. However,
sensor networks are better at tracking objects, and will be
discussed later. The sensor network is better at giving users
what they need to track. In the future, ubiquitous computing
based on Weiser’s visions will help improve [11] LBS.
LBS applications must be designed from the user’s
perspective in the GIS context. LBS work thanks to the
georeferencing system, which may use GPS (or any GNSS
system) for global positioning or take the initial location as
a georeference and calculate indoors based on geometric
models.
There
are
actually
two
types
of
modeling:
geometric and symbolic modeling. GIS use geometric
modeling
to
calculate
LBS.
Geometric
models
have
limitations since the public uses more verbal location with
expressions
of
spatial
features,
location,
and
spatial
relations. Some initiatives are integrating symbolic and
geometric modeling. A new concept is the semi-symbolic
model that contains a geometric location and a symbolic
representation. Context-aware computing is also part of
LBS, but the context is the most difficult part [10]. The
context affects users’ actions, behavior, and information
retrieval. The context used by mobile users changes
frequently; therefore, the LBS must take the changing issues
continuously to provide service to mobile users. Geospatial
data are a key concept in LBS [10], which means this topic
is related to the GIS. It uses mainly geospatial data and GIS
to
determine
locations.
Determining
the
location
is
meaningless if it does not refer to a georeference place. If
georeferencing is not used, positions are found relative only
to other materials; thus, people do not know where they are
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-326-1
132

exactly. In addition, the base layer and additional position
information are needed to find locations on the earth.
The model mainly proposed a domain of ubiquitous
computing with some exceptions, data modeling conducted
in GIS. LBS can be treated as a special type of geographic
information services. Research on spatial ontologies has
implications for the development of LBS. The uncertainty
of geographic information is linked to data processing and
modeling in LBS [10].
The ubiquitous use of the GIS [12] affects many
concepts in this domain. The next-generation GIS is related
more to the ubiquitous domain since information from the
mid-2000s reflects technology today. In addition, the OGC
has a role as this organization creates regulations regarding
the interoperability of LBS in terms of geographic and
geospatial aspects.
B.
Web GIS
The rapid expansion of the Internet has led to new
disciplines; Web GIS is one of them. It changes geospatial
information
by
acquiring,
publishing,
sharing,
and
visualizing. Web GIS is a milestone in the development of
the GIS. In 1993, the first web GIS was introduced, by the
Xerox Pablo Alto Research Center (PARC) Web-based map
viewer [2][7][11]. It was an experiment for retrieving
information on the web that did not directly access data.
This viewer provides simple zooming, layer selection, and
map projection capabilities. The GIS can be used without
local installation.
New web GIS [2][7] applications then emerged: in 1994,
the Canada National Atlas Information Service and in 1995,
topologically
Integrated
Geographic
Encoding
and
Referencing (TIGER), a US mapping service. In 1996,
MapQuest, a web application that allows people to view
maps, look for local businesses, find the optimal routes to
destinations, and plan trips, was introduced. It is still used
today.
Web 2.0 formed at the end of the 1990s and after that
Web GIS changed [2][7]. Then, Web GIS evolved from web
browsers to a web GIS that served desktop and mobile
clients in addition to web browsers. This distributed
information system has a server and a client where the
server is a web application server and the client is a mobile
application, a desktop application, or a web application
server. The server contains an URL, so it can be easily
reached by users [2]. The client sends a request and receives
a response from the server. Today, web GIS refers to a type
of any GIS that uses the web [7].
Web GIS is closely related to Internet GIS and
geospatial web. However, they are slightly different. The
relation between GIS and web GIS is shown in Fig. 1 [7].
The Internet supports many services; web is only one of
them. A GIS that uses a service other than a web service on
the Internet is considered Internet GIS. Web GIS is more
frequently used on the Internet, which means web GIS is the
most pervasive of the Internet GIS [2][7].
Figure 1. Types of GIS.
The geospatial web (geo web) is another term used
instead of web GIS [2][7][13]. The geo web is slightly
different from web GIS. The geo web merges geospatial
information
with
non-geospatial
information
[2][13].
Another
explanation
is
that
the
emerging
geo
web
distributes global GIS, collaborates on information and
knowledge
with
widespread
worldwide
sharing
and
interoperability [2][8][13]. This gives the idea that the geo
web may be more developed in the future than web GIS to
achieve the whole requirements.
The main characteristics of Web GIS are :global reach, a
large number of users, better cross-platform capability
[2][7][13] (because all web browsers use standards), low
cost average by the number of users, easy to use by end-
users, unified updates, and diverse application based on the
use region. These characteristics create advantages, but also
challenges. Web GIS stimulates public participation, but
users with no GIS background must be considered. The
increase in user numbers must be considered to provide
good service based on the users’ hardware, connection, and
software limitations or capacity. These issues must be
considered for appropriate communication or use.
Web GIS [7] can provide all GIS functions but also has
unique
strengths.
These
strengths
include
collecting
geospatial information, mapping and querying functions,
disseminating and analyzing geospatial information. An
example of collecting geospatial information is an open
street map formed by volunteers who collect data and share
them in
different
parts
of
the
world. This
includes
volunteered geographic information (VGI) [7]. We do not
provide the details in this study as it is beyond the scope of
the paper.
Web GIS is a new business model used by companies
(the business location and the sponsor location of web sites
on the map advertise them). It is a powerful tool for e-
government. They have grown since 1993 and web GIS has
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-326-1
133

grown more, but the fact that they engage the powerful
representation and analysis capability of the GIS [7] makes
things on online maps easy to understand. Another use is the
infrastructure for e-science, which provides a low-cost,
newly established readily accessibility infrastructure for
computing capability. Web GIS [2][7] uses a component of
daily life with the spread of mobile devices and the mobile
web. Web GIS helps us in everyday life, by telling us where
to go, what to do, where to eat, and how to get there based
on LBS.
C.
Mobile GIS
Mobile GIS refers to mobile use of the GIS [2][7]. A
special aspect of mobile GIS is when data users are in
someplace and are interested in information about a
particular location. There are four types of locations in a
GIS [2]: the user’s location (u), storage location of data (d),
the location where it is been processed (p), and the area
subject to the GIS project(s). In a traditional GIS, the user
sits at the location and projects to the world in which (u) not
equal to (s). However, in mobile GIS u=s, which means the
user is located at the projected area [7].
In the 1990s, mobile GIS were used for vehicle
navigation and field surveying. GIS data were obtained
from preloaded data in the system with a disconnected mode
[9]. Then, with the advantages of wireless technologies, a
GIS application is instantly connected to the Internet in real
time to gather or view data [2]. These applications use web
GIS services over the Web, which are advantages of the
latest updates of the data and post the new data on the
application to the server. That means that over the years
mobile GIS has evolved to connect online to the resources
and become a component of web GIS [7]. Mobile GIS
overlaps with some parts of web GIS.
Since the use and popularity of mobile devices have
increased, the increasing speed of data transfers by wireless
networks has forced users to adopt the new form of web
GIS, which is mobile GIS. Mobile GIS functions are quite
compatible
with
some
GIS
functions.
The
following
functions work well with mobile GIS [2][7]: information
capture and updating, dissemination, storage, analysis, and
presentation. Based on the types of applications, there are
two mainsubtopics: consumer mobile GIS application and
enterprise mobile GIS application.
The consumer mobile GIS application answers general
daily life requirements, which mainly refers to location
services based on LBS [2][10] and provides added value
such as points of interest. Enterprise mobile applications are
used to complete tasks such as field mapping queries and
decision support, field inspection and inventory of assets,
field
surveying,
incident
reporting,
collaboration,
and
tracking. Enterprise applications have more functions than
consumer applications.
The advantages of using mobile GIS instead of a paper
application are mobility, large volume of users, location
awareness, versatile means of communication, and near-
real-time information [7]. Supporting technology of these
types of application include mobile phones, pocket PCs,
portable PCs, and special devices such as operating system
embedded or GPS receiver-embedded mobile devices.
Mobile positioning [7] techniques used in mobile GIS
include the navigation satellite-based approach, cellular-
network-based approach, cellular-network-based approach,
assisted GPS approach, Wi-Fi based approach, and IP
address-based approach. In addition to mobile approaches
some use different types of browsers such as mini browsers,
full html, mobile browser plug-ins, and WAP.
D.
Open Spatial Consortium
The OGC is an international industry consortium of 482
companies, government agencies, and universities that make
sure publicly available interface standards are developed
[2][8].“OGC® Standards support interoperable solutions
that ‘geo-enable’ the Web, wireless, and location-based
services and mainstream IT” [8]. The standards empower
technology developers to make complex spatial information
and
services
accessible
and
useful
for
all
types
of
applications.
The standards are developed in unique consensus
supported
by
the
OGC's
industry,
government,
and
academic members [8]. Members want to make certain the
geoprocessing technologies interoperate, or are "plug and
play.” Products based on OGC standards receive the OGC
certificate [8]. For interoperability and standardization
issues, if people want to be in the market or create products
that work well and are compatible with other products, they
must follow OGC standards.
OGC standards are the documents established
by
consensus and accepted by members that have achieved the
optimal degree of interoperability [8]. In 1998, the first
standards were created; in 2000, the first web service
standard was created; in 2004, the name was changed into to
its current name; and today, there are 35 standards and 482
members [8].
The most important OGC standards are the sensor web
standards [8], a type of sensor network. Many people think
it is part of information technology, but the sensor network
is in the geospatial domain. The main topic areas for which
the OGC creates standards include cryoscopy, hydrology,
meteorology/oceans,
defense,
intelligence,
sensor
web,
aviation, and 3D modeling and visualization.
When
the
OGC
was
first
started
in
1994,
the
organization was interested only in creating standards for
distributed GIS data and software interoperability [8].
Today, open GIS web coverage service, open GIS web
processing service, open GIS service model implementation
standard, open GIS georeference table joining standards,
and geography mark-up language (GML) [2][8] standards
are examples of standards created by consensus of the OGC.
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-326-1
134

E.
Ubiquitous GIS
Ubiquitous GISs are based on a type of geographic
information provided to users or systems at any time and
any
place
through
communication
devices
when
the
distributed system was formed [2][12][14]. Ubiquitous GIS
(UBIGIS) is closer to the aim that people access data and
processing them at anywhere and anytime. The information
provided for the user is based on the user’s context. The GIS
has contextual awareness. It includes a set of practices and
standards for spatial and geographic information which is
accessible in public by users. Its importance is that UBIGIS
also processes the applications.
According to some researchers, four criteria must be
applied (“distributed,” ”disaggregated,” “decoupled,” and
“interoperable”) for UBIGIS [12] [14]. In computing area
and distributed GIS, interoperability is the most difficult
issue; it is negotiated by the OGC. UBIGIS applications
must adhere to the following standards:support applications,
numerous users, collaborative work, working online and
off-line, multi-functional, security, and integration with
other applications and various networks [11][12][14].
The future development of mobile GIS in
many
disciplines and application areas are toward ubiquitous GIS
which are: augmented reality, public participation GIS,
dynamic demography, and 4D GIS [7] [12]. These topics
are more related to ubiquitous GIS. Augmented reality
combines information from databases with information from
the senses. This is implemented in medical settings where
mobile GIS are used instead of the senses [7][14]. For
example, visually impaired people navigate with mobile
GIS. Public participation GIS (PPGIS) makes each mobile
phone owner as being a sensor [7]. This allows people to
add data to the network collectively in real time. In addition,
real-time
environmental
monitoring
networks
harvest
valuable data from the intelligence of public participation.
Dynamic demography is for the planning of traffic and
transportation choosing retail store place and simulating
diffusion of disease based on these demographic data. A
four-dimensional GIS performs by collecting mobile GIS
data in real time for 4D [7]. For faster networks with 4G, the
GIS must become more ubiquitous for users.
F.
Sensor Network
A
wireless
sensor
network
is
a
geographically
distributed network that monitors physical or environmental
conditions. Sensor networks are formed by sensor nodes
called “motes” [15]. Motes ease communication between
each other [15]. They are consisting of radio transceivers
which also contain memory, onboard power supplies and a
variety of sensors. The motes work by collecting and
analyzing the sensor readings independently but can also
link up with neighboring motes with mesh topology to send
information to each other or to the sink [15]. There are
different applications in different areas and many more
details; however, in this paper, we are more interested in the
sensor web. This is a type of wireless sensor network based
on automatically communicating sensors and reacting to
phenomena. The sensor network is defined after the sensor
web.
A
sensor
web
is
a
system
that
is
wireless,
an
intercommunicating spatially distributed sensor that is
deployed to monitor and explore the environment [8][16]. It
is capable of automated reasoning, and it responds to
changing environment conditions and carries out automatic
recovery after automatically sensing a diagnosis. OGC-
defined
protocols
create
abstract
heterogeneous
communication inside or between different networks by
abstracting the basis and communication standards of the
sensor
web
[8][16].
Sensor
Web
Enablement
(SWE)
standards have been created by the OGC [7][8]. It is also
related to the communication protocols and types of the
hardware. Defining accessing sensor network is in real-time
or archived data using standard protocols and application
programming interfaces [8]. This issue is starting to relate to
the “Internet of Things” issue, in which real object world is
directly related to the Internet. The sensor web is a network
of sensors accessible to the sensors, and stored old data can
be discovered using the OGC standard protocols and APIs
[8].
G.
Internet of Things
The
Internet
of
Things
was
first
mentioned
as
identifiable objects in the virtual world, on the internet
places with tags [17]. The Internet of Things is a trending
topic today, which means real world objects communicate
with each other from the base on the Internet directly; the
sensor web is also part of this relation. It is really a new area
to improve nowadays and is expected to be fully constructed
by 2020. Protocols and key applications were introduced to
us a few years ago, and they are developing now. However,
technical details are beyond the scope of this paper. Key
applications used today include a sensor web used for
intrusion detection or environmental monitoring. Various
organizations are working in this area and have proposed
objects with auto IDs to communicate with each other over
the Internet. Radio frequency Identification (RFID) tags are
a prerequisite of the Internet of Things [21].
The most important application of the Internet of Things
is the smart grid, an electrical grid that uses information and
communications technology to obtain and use information,
such as information about suppliers and consumers, in
automated processes to improve the efficiency, reliability,
economics, and sustainability of electricity production and
distribution [18]. Another important application is electric
vehicle
charging,
for
which
the
standards
are
being
determined.
Two
critical
standards
that
have
been
introduced are for plugs and charging stations for extended
use with one charge later, so different areas can charge
different vehicles [18].
Since this area is still being developed, we will see
clearer details and more applications in the future. In the
next 10 years, many applications will be distributed and
affect our daily lives with this application. Application
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-326-1
135

fields include waste management, emergency response,
intelligent shopping, smart product management, smart
meter, and home automation. Several applications are not
distributed, such as the home automaton application sensor
network, but they are distributed around the house and
provide information about the house that is connected to
other processes that may act automatically.
VI. FUTURE GIS TRENDS AND RESEARCH AREAS
Future GISs research topics include VGI, PPGIS,
geocollaboration,
geotagging,
geoparsing,
geotargetting,
online VR, Digital Earth, and cloud-based GIS. Future
trends include faster and more mobile Internet and a smarter
and more sociable web.
VGI is geospatial data about the environment generated
by users [7] instead of producers. Examples include
wikimaps, (Picasa, Panoramio, Flickr albums (geotagging)),
OpenStreetMap, and Facebook (for location tagging). It
provides public participation in GIS as people act as
sensors, using their free time to provide data. Usually,
producing data requires training, but since there are many
data, we can choose the valuable one. In addition, people’s
adding data voluntarily will also help improve PPGIS
[7][20].
PPGIS is people participation in GIS. It is a type of VGI,
but requires more people to add data. PPGIS differs from
VGI because participation is needed in decision making
through the use of GIS [7][20]. PPGIS wants public
participation in satellite image, digital maps, and sketches.
However, PPGIS has technical and social barriers. Some
people not want to attend public organizations at specific
times, and some are not comfortable speaking at public
forums. Some people may find it hard to use these
technologies.
Most
current
PPGIS
applications
are
experiments or pilot studies [20]. The plan is to involve the
public in PPGIS in a web-map-based approach with specific
comments with environmental areas, blog and photo sharing
web sites. A social networking approach may help improve
PPGIS.
Geocollaboration also called collaborative GIS, concerns
a group of people working together on the same task [7].
Two types of spatial collaboration talk about the same
location at different places looking at the same part of the
map, the second one temporarily can be synchronous or
asynchronous [7]. Five characteristics must be completed:
facilitating dialog, accounting for group behavior, drawing
the group’s attention, allowing private work, and allowing
saved and shared sessions. The possibility of increasing
geocollaboration is promising for the future.
Geotagging involves adding location information to
photos, videos, or other digital data [7]. This can be done
automatically and manually. Photos taken with devices with
GPS receivers are automatically geotagged, and others are
manually geotagged. Geotagging provides value to a GIS by
spatially organizing
photos
and
other
types
of data,
enriching
the
geographic
information,
and
providing
valuable data for data mining.
Geoparsing is the process of converting geographic
locations to textual words or phrases in a document [7]. It is
a new research area and can be linked to the semantic web
[7]. Geoparsing searches documents quickly, plots locations
on the map easily, and organizes a mass of documents
spatially.
Geotargetting determines the physical location of the
user and provides related content based on that information.
An example is advertising swimsuits in hot regions and near
sea locations and advertising warm coats in colder regions
[7]. Methods for obtaining physical locations include
obtaining user’s registration information or a user’s IP
address
or
from
GPS
receivers
in
mobile
phones.
Geotargetting helps provide precise advertising based on
location, prevents suspicious payments, and by legal and
license regulation online services or products are delivered
only certain countries and regions.
Virtual reality (VR) interacts with the real world
virtually to examine or do things [7]. This provides
vividness and interactivity. Online VR can rotate various 3D
objects (Earth), viewing 3D structures (such as buildings
you can see inside before you go), and high-end specialized
VR, which is used in game consoles to make players feel as
if they are inside the game.
Digital Earth is partly created with 3D mapping, Google
Earth, or NASA World Wind, but the real target is eight key
elements for Digital Earth: multiple connected digital earths
for different needs of audience, problem oriented, allowing
the search of the time and space to find similar situations,
asking questions about changes, enabling complex data and
analysis
services,
supporting
visualization
of
abstract
concepts and data types, multi-disciplinary education lab,
and open access for the multiple different platforms and
technologies [7][22].
Cloud GIS is GIS software and services on a cloud
infrastructure and accessing GIS capabilities using web
services. Cloud GIS is a computer paradigm for on-demand
network access shared facilities [7][19]. Cloud computing
offers an alternative method for GIS software and services
to users or customers. Instead of running a GIS on computer
systems, with a cloud GIS, the software and services reside
on cloud servers mainly (not every time) and are made
available through web technologies [19]. With the help of
cloud computing, powerful tools are not needed because
work may do on the server. However, a disadvantage is that
the services may not be available all the time. A cloud GIS
may reduce the cost of buying hardware or software to
deposit data.
For the future trends, faster and more mobile Internet
will be based on the development of a prototype being
tested in the USA: 100 Gbit Internet. If the work goes well,
this improved area will also affect the GIS. More IP
addresses may provide IDs for all objects in the Internet of
Things with help of IP6. More mobile is based on faster
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-326-1
136

mobile network technology with the impact and tests
conducted
with
4G
networks.
Using
more
collective
intelligence, lightweight programming models, software
running on multiple devices, open geospatial web service,
making more powerful web clients, mobile serving the
pervasive platform, more intelligence on web GIS, and
serving GIS directly from clouds are future research areas.
VII. CONCLUSION
The aim of this paper was to summarize the important
concepts and main points of the GIS in the pervasive area.
The main concepts of the GISs which are very important
last few years, provided information about application areas,
and compared some areas with each other. GIS use is based
on the user’s conditions and is application specific. In
addition, GIS is a growing area. Many books and materials
explain GIS in technical detail and provide examples.
Mainly
GIS
challenge
continues
because
of
the
technological evolution. This paper outlined
the
GIS
evolution
up
to
participation
in
the
pervasive
area,
summarized the main points, and examined the beginning
and current states of GIS. Mainly to sum up the work the
internet effect on the GISs are positive and make the
technology involve more our daily lives. Also the evolution
continues, so we see many new things couple of years and
these technologies growing and more important next years.
As the challenge increases it is positive effect on the people.
To
conclude
distributed
and
wireless
systems
make
everything become easier than ever before, also examined
new research concepts and future trends and suggested GIS
trends that should be investigated in the future.
REFERENCES
[1] Longley, P. (Ed.). (2005). Geographic information systems and
science. John Wiley and Sons.
[2] Peng, Z. R., and Tsou, M. H. (2003). Internet GIS: distributed
geographic information services for the internet and wireless
networks. John Wiley and Sons.
[3] Worboys, M. F., and Duckham, M. (2004). GIS: a computing
perspective, CRC press.
[4] Geographic Information Systems (GIS) retrieved: January
2014.
http://www.esri.com/~/media/c371f47805c345fa84d32ac8a675046
e.pdf
[5]
History
of
GIS
,
retrieved
January
2014.
http://www.geog.ubc.ca/courses/klink/gis.notes/ncgia/u23.html.
[6] Tait, M. G. (2005). Implementing geoportals: applications of
distributed
GIS.Computers,
Environment
and
Urban
Systems, 29(1), 33-47.
[7]
Fu,
P.
and
Sun,
J.(2010). Web
GIS:
principles
and
applications.Esri Press.
[8] Open Geospatial Consortium, retrieved: January 2014.
http:// www.opengeospatial.org
[9]
Lemmens,
M.(2011). Geo-information:
technologies,
applications and the environment (Vol. 5). Springer.
[10] Jiang, B., and Yao, X.(2006). Location-based services and
GIS
in
perspective.
Computers,
Environment
and
Urban
Systems, 30(6), 712-725.
[11] Weiser M.(1994, March). Ubiquitous computing. In ACM
Conference on Computer Science (Vol. 418).
[12]Mnzis, A. H. ,and Msc, C.(2000). The Road to Ubiquitous The
Geographic
Information
System
s
Roam
Anywhere-Remain
Connected.
[13] Scharl, A. and Tochtermann, K.(2007). The Geospatial Web:
How Geobrowsers, Social Software and the Web2.0 Are Shaping
the Network Society. Springer,
[14] Posland, S.(2011). Ubiquitous computing: smart devices,
environments and interactions. John Wiley and Sons.
[15] Karl, H., and Willig, A.(2007). Protocols and architectures for
wireless sensor networks, John Wiley and Sons.
[16] Di, L.(2007, February). Geospatial sensor web and self-
adaptive Earth predictive systems (SEPS).In Proceedings of the
Earth Science Technology Office (ESTO)/Advanced Information
System Technology (AIST) Sensor Web Principal Investigator (PI)
Meeting,
San
Diego,
USA (pp.14).
http://esto.nasa.gov/sensorwebmeeting/papers/di.pdf.
[17] Tan, L., and Wang, N.(2010, August). Future internet: The
internet of things. In Advanced Computer Theory and Engineering
(ICACTE), 2010 3rd International Conference on (Vol. 5, pp. V5-
376). IEEE.
[18 ]Hersent,
O., Boswarthick,
D., and Elloumi, O.(2011). The
Internet of Things: Key Applications and Protocols. John Wiley
and Sons.
[19] Bhat, M.A., Shah, R. M., and Ahmad, B.(2011).Cloud
Computing: A solution to Geographical Information Systems
(GIS). International
Journal
on
Computer
Science
and
Engineering, 3(2).
[20] Roche, S., Mericskay, B., Batita, W., Bach, M., and Rondeau,
M.
WikiGIS
Basic
Concepts:
Web
2.0
for
Geospatial
Collaboration.Future Internet 2012, 4, 265-284.
[21]
That
'Internet
of
Things’,
retrieved
January
2014.
http://www.rfidjournal.com/articles/view?4986.
[22]
NASA
World
Wind
retrieved
January
2014.
http://worldwind.arc.nasa.gov/index.html
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-326-1
137

