Distributed System Architectures, Standardization, and Web-Service Solutions in 
Precision Agriculture 
 
Katja Polojärvi 
School of Renewable Natural Resources 
Oulu University of Applied Sciences 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: katja.polojarvi@oamk.fi 
 
Markku Koistinen 
Plant Production Research 
MTT Agrifood Research Finland 
Vihti, Finland 
e-mail: markku.koistinen@mtt.fi 
Mika Luimula, Pertti Verronen, Mika Pahkasalo 
CENTRIA Research and Development 
RFMedia Laboratory 
Ylivieska, Finland 
e-mail: {mika.luimula, pertti.verronen,  
mika.pahkasalo}@centria.fi 
Jouni Tervonen 
Oulu Southern Institute 
RFMedia Laboratory 
University of Oulu 
Ylivieska, Finland 
e-mail: jouni.tervonen@oulu.fi 
 
 
 
Abstract—Effective 
precision 
agriculture 
requires 
the 
gathering and managing of geospatial data from several 
sources. This is important for the decision support system of 
automated farming. Distributed system architecture offers 
methods to combine these variable spatial data. We have 
studied architectural and protocol choices of distributed 
solutions and built up a demonstration implementation of the 
system. As one of the key factors of the system is 
interoperability, we applied standards for geospatial and 
agricultural data, a location-based service platform, and a 
technology of geosensor networks in the implemented system. 
We successfully demonstrated the interoperability and 
scalability requirements and functionality of the implemented 
system.  
Keywords- 
precision 
agriculture; 
spatial 
data; 
interoperability; distributed system architecture 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In automated farms, agricultural operations and processes 
are planned, executed, monitored, and assessed with the help 
of spatially referenced data. Spatial variability and changes 
in production conditions can be monitored by specific 
sensors, and thus can be taken into consideration when 
production inputs of precision agriculture (PA) are planned 
and executed. However, the realization of any expected 
higher productivity requires that decision-making and 
farming operations are based on spatial data of good quality 
and accuracy. Effective use of data also necessitates that data 
originating from internal (farm equipment and software) and 
external data sources (e.g., meteorological data) can be easily 
integrated and transferred between different hardware, 
software, and information systems [1][2]. Besides this, a 
refined and integrated analysis of the data acquired and the 
transformation of these data into information and knowledge 
useful for decision-making are also required [3].  
The 
many 
existing 
data 
acquisition 
systems, 
documentation tasks, and precision farming applications 
result in a variety of data formats and interfaces, making data 
management complex in PA [1]. In addition to limitations in 
data exchange and communication between incompatible 
systems, lack of time, knowledge, or motivation of farmers 
to evaluate data from PA are among the key problems in data 
management, and result in great demand for automated and 
time-effective expert systems for the handling of precision 
farming data [3]. Because PA requires external services and 
cooperation with many partners, interaction and sharing of 
spatial data between a farmer and stakeholders must also be 
provided. Instead of data format conversions, coordinate 
transformations, and other forms of manual processing of 
heterogeneous data, effective information management is 
currently based on web-enabled spatial database systems, 
providing one of the most interoperable environments for 
distributed computing [4]. 
The purpose of the system design presented in this paper 
is to develop and implement the acquisition, storage, 
transfer, and management of spatial data produced in various 
operations of PA. In addition, one of the purposes is also 
assure the quality of spatial data by utilizing appropriate 
standards: ISO 11783 in agricultural vehicles and OGC’s 
(Open Geospatial Consortium) standards in wireless soil 
measurements. The development of the system is inspired by 
the architecture of a farm management information system 
(FMIS) designed in a Nordic project, ‘InfoXT’ [3]. We 
applied a location-based service platform and a technology 
of geosensor networks in the development of the system with 
the aim to demonstrate interoperable solutions for the FMIS. 
Implementation of communication and data interchange in 
the system is based on geospatial standards such as WFS 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

(Web 
Feature 
Service), 
SensorML 
(Sensor 
Model 
Language), GML (Geographic Markup Language), and 
BXML (Binary Extensible Markup Language). Our previous 
experiments of BXML, SensorML, and ISO 11783-based 
data transfer are utilized in the development work.  
In Section II, the main technologies and relevant 
standards related to distributed systems in agriculture will be 
discussed. Developing this kind of distributed system 
especially requires expertise related to location platforms and 
geosensor networks. Based on this introduction, the use of 
chosen standards will be further explained in this paper.  
Section III introduces the demonstration implementation of 
the system. The conclusion and future work are presented in 
Section IV.       
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In order to automate agricultural operations and 
processes we will need to build systems that are able to 
collect data from machines and from the field. Geosensor 
networks are among the new technologies that can be used to 
monitor agricultural phenomena. The technology is under 
intensive development and its application possibilities are 
gradually 
widening. 
Geosensor 
networks 
present 
a 
multidisciplinary research area, combining such fields as 
geoinformatics, computer sciences, telecommunications, and 
sensor technologies. Nittel et al. [5] have defined geosensor 
networks (GSN) as a sensor network that monitors 
phenomena in geographic space. This geographic space can 
range in scale from confined indoor conditions to highly 
complex outdoor environments. 
 Location platforms can be classified as device-centric, 
decentralized middleware-based, and centralized platforms 
[6]. Location-based service platforms can be considered as 
one form of distributed Geographical Information Systems 
(GIS). A distributed GIS can be defined as a network-centric 
GIS tool that uses a wired or a wireless network for 
providing access to distributed data, disseminating spatial 
information and conducting GIS analysis [7]. 
The main actors in this research field have been the Open 
Geospatial Consortium (OGC) research network and the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). 
According to OGC [8], their OpenGIS Interface Standard 
defines OpenLS Core Services, which form the Services 
Framework for the GeoMobility Server (GMS). These 
services cover Directory Service, Gateway Service, Location 
Utility Service, Presentation Service, and Route Service. 
GMS, as a location services platform, hosts not only these 
services but also Location Content Databases accessed 
through OGC Interfaces such as Web Map Server (WMS) 
and Web Feature Server (WFS). WMS produces maps of 
spatially referenced data dynamically from geographic 
information in a raster graphic format such as PNG (Portable 
Network Graphics), GIF (Graphic Interchange Format), or 
JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group), or in a vector 
graphic format, e.g., in SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics) 
format. Moreover, WMS generates a map when requested 
from spatial data stored in GML format, which is an XML 
(Extensible Markup Language) grammar for expressing 
geographical features [9]. 
 
Figure 1.  ISO 11783 [13] Task-Controller interfaces and transfer methods. 
For geosensor networks, the main part of OGC’s work is 
made under Sensor Web Enablement (SWE), which is a suite 
of specifications related to sensors, sensor data models, and 
sensor web services. The goal of SWE services is to enable 
sensors to be accessible and controllable via the Internet 
[10]. SWE consists of Observations and Measurements 
Schema (O&M), Sensor Model Language (SensorML), 
Transducer Markup Language (TML), Sensor Observations 
Service (SOS), Sensor Planning Service (SPS), Sensor 
AlertService (SAS), and Web Notification Services (WNS). 
XML is a key part of this infrastructure and all the services 
and content models are specified in XML schemas [11].   
NASA has used OGC’s SWE specifications in their 
geosensor networks and sensor web applications. Their EO-1 
sensor web architecture is currently being updated to support 
an interface standard in development by the SWE group. 
This Earth Observing-1 Mission has been operating an 
autonomous, integrated sensor web linking dozens of sensor 
nodes in 24/7 operations since 2004. The use of sensor web 
technologies has been very successful with a number of cost-
effective impacts on maintenance. These sensor web 
technologies have been used in the National Snow and Ice 
Data Center, and in the Cascade Volcano Observatory. In the 
first case, these technologies were applied to track ice 
formation and melting and use this information in EO-1 
analysis. In the latter case, the goal was to acquire high-
resolution infrared data of Mt. St. Helens [12]. 
An important standard for precision agricultural solutions 
is the so-called ISOBUS standard, i.e., the ISO 11783 
standard family. The main focus of this standard is to define 
the bus and the control processes used in tractors and 
machinery for agriculture and forestry. It enables the 
hardware compatibility of tractors and different agricultural 
implement devices such as seeders, fertilizers, and 
harvesters. In addition, Part 10 [13] of the standard defines 
the data interchange between the farm management 
information system and the task controller (TC) process of 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the vehicle (tractor and implement device). The standard 
precisely defines the standardized data transfer and data 
transfer file in the XML format. According to the standard, 
the task controller is physically divided between the FMIS 
(farm management information system) and the vehicle. The 
ISO 11783 standard does not define the actual transfer media 
and the data format can be either a proprietary or a 
standardized data format. Figure 1 shows the proprietary 
version of data transfer where some parts of the Task-
Controller are situated within the FMIS-subsystem instead of 
entirely at the vehicle equipment. The standardized option 
means that the ISO 11783 XML files are used in transferring 
between FMIS and vehicle equipment. In both options, the 
actual transfer media can be cable, transferable memory 
device, or some radio communication method. 
The transfer of the actual XML files is not desirable 
when wireless radio communication methods are used since 
the larger data amount has the disadvantage of increased 
operational costs or a disturbingly long time spent on the 
data transfer. In our previous study [14], we have 
demonstrated the data transfer between FMIS and vehicle 
equipment using the radio protocol of IEEE 802.15.4 
standard [15] and a compressed data format that is truly 
proprietary. The binary format XML compression methods 
based on the OGC’s SensorML standard and BXML, the 
best practices specification [16][17] demonstrated in [18], 
are achievable for this purpose. Our suggestion is to use the 
compressed XML data format to achieve convenient wireless 
transfer media while simultaneously minimizing resource 
and cost requirements. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SYSTEM 
The system is implemented utilizing a location-aware 
system platform called Locawe that is developed at 
CENTRIA Research and Development, Ylivieska, Finland. 
The architecture, the use of geosensor network-related 
standards, several field experiments, and industrial pilots 
related to this platform have been introduced in [18][19]. The 
Locawe platform is a client-server solution for outdoor and 
indoor conditions. This platform consists of mobile units and  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The use of GSN nodes with mobile devices in the Locawe 
Platform in previous studies. 
 
Figure 3.  Agricultural sensor data delivery from various sources by 
utilizing OGC’s WFS. 
servers for services like tracking and communication. It is 
possible to create user interfaces, which include video, 
location, and identification information on the map or on the 
floor plan [20]. In our previous experiments in agriculture 
reported in [14][18], the communication between GSN nodes 
and mobile devices was in a binary format based on OGC’s 
SensorML standard and BXML best practices specification 
[16][17] (Fig. 2). 
Figure 3 shows the implementation of the distributed 
system architecture. In the Locawe server, OGC’s WFS 
standard acts as an interface between the SQL (Structured 
Query Language) database and applications. WFS messages 
contain basic XML definitions and action determinations. 
The data needed for executing queries are implemented in 
XML format, which can contain, e.g., GML type definitions. 
WFS requires login action to recognize user rights, which 
will determine what kind of queries the user can do. WFS 
manages the SQL database and correct data format. WFS 
messages can contain images in raw byte format or vector 
data in GML format.   
We demonstrated the interoperability of the system by 
delivering spatial agricultural data to the server from various 
sources. The WFS interface manages data delivery from an 
underground geosensor network to a laptop as a gateway. It 
also handles data delivery to the Locawe server from the 
vehicle task controller via the servers of MTT Agrifood 
Research Finland. Spatial harvester data collected by MTT 
were also used as data in the demonstrations of AgriHandler 
and AgriViewer applications. 
A. Underground Geosensor Network 
The main focus of the implementation of this study was 
the demonstration of architectural and protocol choices. The 
design of equipment of soil property measurements was 
beyond the scope of this paper. The proof of concept type 
and validation measurements were performed with wireless 
sensor nodes, which were neither optimized nor actually 
aimed for soil measurements. Our wireless sensor nodes used 
the 868 MHz frequency band version of the IEEE 
802.15.4/ZigBee standard with the power level of 11 dBm. 
According to [21], this ISM (Industrial, Scientific, and 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Medical) frequency band is the most suitable and practical 
compromise solution for wireless soil measurements. The 
wireless sensor nodes were underground at a depth of 30 cm. 
In our validation measurements, the range of 28.5 meters 
was achieved with favorable conditions, i.e., with relative 
low soil moisture. The long-term measurements of actual 
wireless underground soil scout prototypes are reported by 
[21][22]. These measurements showed that soil attenuation 
has a strong dependence on soil moisture. 
Underground sensor nodes give measurement values to a 
main node device that is connected to a laptop. This PC and 
the main node communicate using a proprietary structure 
called the CENTRIA Protocol. It is designed for use in 
communications with low-rate devices. The used geosensors 
do not have any locating property, but the location of the 
sensors on the field can be set by the user with help of the 
developed PC software. For absolute location, the 
coordinates collected by a GPS (Global Positioning System) 
device on the field must be inserted in the PC where the 
application will use them automatically. 
B. User Interfaces 
The demonstrated system has two applications as user 
interfaces for the database. AgriHandler application (Fig. 4) 
enables administration of farm and field data in the database 
through the WFS interface. Depending on user rights, the 
AgriHandler application can act as administrator tool or data 
handler tool with lower rights. An idea of the development 
of the application is to demonstrate how handled and 
analyzed precision farming data, e.g., interpolated nutrient 
balance maps, could be provided for a farmer (customer) as 
external information services. The quality and usability of 
handled and analyzed data is better compared to raw data. 
As a service provider, a data handler can get information to 
a local file and update the information in the database with 
the analyzed spatial data by messages over HTTP 
(Hypertext Transfer Protocol) POST to the WFS interface. 
 
 
Figure 4.  AgriHandler application showing the event information. 
 
Figure 5.  AgriViewer web application showing basic information and 
analyzed data related to the event. 
These collected data of information (events) have own 
database tables and when the coordinate system is changed, 
a new table will be generated in the database. Inheritance of 
the events was taken into consideration in the database 
design. The application was demonstrated with crop yield 
data as vector points (MIF - MapInfo Interchange File) and 
images (PNG). The application also enables administration 
of geosensor network data. At the moment, AgriHandler 
supports WGS84 and ETRS-TM35FIN coordinate systems. 
In the AgriViewer web browser (Fig. 5), end-users are 
able to view the same data explained above. The WFS 
interface is used only in authentication. Users have read-
only rights in this web application. 
C. Vehicle Task Controller 
Dependable and efficient wireless communication may 
be challenging in mobile plant production in rural areas. 
However, this is an essential element in an approach where 
the assisting services supporting farming activities and 
knowledge management are based on a cloud computing 
paradigm. 
In this demonstration (Fig. 6), the TC simulation was 
implemented giving high priority to the mobile connectivity 
challenges. Data packet size makes a difference in low 
mobile band width regions. The data collection itself is 
driven by GPS clock frequency, which is 5Hz when the 
signal strength is acceptable. Our approach to the dead 
network region dilemma is based on an idea to adjust the 
data transfer rate (from the TC to the cloud service) 
according to the mobile connection strength. In practice, this 
means that one collected data sample (that is, one data row) 
is sent to the service in every GPS clock cycle if the mobile 
connection strength is acceptable. In the case of mobile  
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 6.  Main actors in real-time data collection of mobile farming. 
connection strength dropping below the threshold level, the 
TC starts buffering data locally. The transactions continue 
when the connection is restored again. In this way, also near 
real-time data transfer is achieved, an essential factor in 
implementing, e.g., real-time advisory services.  
In this demonstration, the mobile connection monitoring 
element was excluded since the data collection and 
sampling were simulated. The transferred data samples were 
based on actual harvest data. Adequate data sample transfer 
rates from cellular (3G) and Ethernet network were 
achieved for, e.g., remote monitoring and advisory service 
implements. 
The sample TC implement is simple yet powerful 
enough to handle SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) 
communication and the extensive parsing of XML 
documents required for SOAP requests and responses. The 
client was implemented without using any of the specialized 
Java SOAP classes and it is based on an article by 
DuCharme [23].  
Architectural components consist of the following: 
• 
Main class for handling the data transfer task 
• 
Class for handling the SOAP requests and responses 
• 
Class for parsing XML documents required for 
SOAP requests and responses 
• 
Class for providing appropriate log in and log out 
request XML documents 
• 
Class for simulating the microcontroller that 
provides the data collection functionalities from the 
sensors 
Total compiled size is 18.7 kb. 
A data transfer sequence starts when the client requests a 
session ID by sending a login request to the service. If 
username is authorized, the session ID for further SOAP 
requests is returned. After that, the main class creates a data-
fetching sample provider object and begins transactions 
using SOAP requests called “insert crop info”. A data 
transfer sequence ends with a log out request. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Basic functionality of the implemented distributed 
system architecture was demonstrated and tested. Interfaces 
were designed and implemented in such a way that 
requirements for interoperability and scalability were 
fulfilled. The use of chosen standards tackled both 
interoperability and quality requirements. Furthermore, in 
this paper the research focus was on proof of concept 
demonstration rather than actual performance evaluation. 
However, a full performance will be evaluated in a near-
deployment phase. 
In this demonstration, interoperability of the system was 
implemented with OGC’s WFS interfaces, which managed 
delivery of spatial data as vector data and images. Besides 
the WFS interface, the implementation of the system could 
be developed further with OGC’s Web Coverage Service 
(WCS) interface, which enables delivery of the spatial data 
in raster format.        
Raw spatial data acquired in various operations of PA 
requires a lot of processing and analyzing before it can be 
utilized in decision-making. In the future, methods for 
automated handling and analyzing of spatial agricultural data 
should be developed to advance the information services 
provided for farmers. Implementation of the system 
architecture applying OGC’s Web Processing Service (WPS) 
interface could provide functionalities for geospatial 
processing of data.  
In the developed system, the usability of the graphical 
user interfaces was out of the focus. User acceptance and 
user experiences will be studied further in order to obtain 
applications that are fast and easy for farmers to utilize 
without special knowledge in the use of computers and 
databases. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors want to thank everybody who has 
contributed to discussions of the topic and made this study 
possible. This work was supported by several European 
Regional Development Fund Projects. The authors are 
grateful to all external financial supporters of these projects: 
Council of Oulu Region, City of Oulu, City of Ylivieska, 
Kerttu Saalasti Foundation, Ylivieska Sub-Region, Nivala-
Haapajärvi Sub-Region, and Haapavesi-Siikalatva Sub-
Region. The authors warmly thank the Croptech team of 
MTT Agrifood Research Finland, especially team leader L. 
Pesonen and researcher J. Kaivosoja. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Steinberger, M. Rothmund, and H. Auernhammer, “Mobile 
farm equipment as a data source in an agricultural service 
architecture,” Computers and electronics in agriculture, vol. 
65, 
Oct. 
2008, 
pp. 
238-246, 
doi:10.1016/j.compag.2008.10.005. 
[2] E. Nash, P. Korduan, and R. Bill, “Applications of open 
geospatial web services in precision agriculture: a review,” 
Precision Agric, vol. 10, Aug. 2009, pp. 546-560, 
doi:10.1007/s11119-009-9134-0.    
[3] L. Pesonen, H. Koskinen, and A. Rydberg, InfoXT – User-
centric mobile information management in automated plant 
production. Oslo, Norway: Nordic Innovation Centre, 2008. 
[4] A. K. W. Yeung and G. Brent Hall, Spatial Database Systems. 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer, 2007. 
[5] S. Nittel, A. Stefanidis, I. Cruz, M. Egenhofer, D. Goldin,  A. 
Howard,  A. Labrinidis, S. Madden, A. Voisard,  and M. 
Worboys,  “Report from the First Workshop on GeoSensor 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Networks,” SIGMOD Record, vol. 33(1), Mar. 2004, pp. 141-
144, doi:10.1145/974121.974146. 
[6] M. Zündt, A Distributed Community-Based Location Service 
Architecture. Doctoral Dissertation. Germany: Technical 
University of Munich, 2007. 
[7] X. Chu and R. Buyya, ”Service Oriented Sensor Web,” in 
Sensor Network and Configuration: Fundamentals, Standards, 
Platforms, and Applications, N. P. Mahalik, Ed. Germany: 
Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 51-74. 
[8] OGC – Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc., OpenGIS 
Geography Markup Language (GML) Endocing Standard, 
Version 3.2.1, Aug. 2007. 
[9] J. Kangasharju and S. Tarkoma, “Benefits of alternate XML 
serialization formats in scientific computing,” Proc. of the 
2007 workshop on Service-oriented computing performance: 
aspects, 
issues, 
and 
approaches, 
2007, 
pp. 
23–30, 
doi:10.1145/1272457.1272461. 
[10] A. Sheth, C. Henson, and S. S. Sahoo, “Semantic sensor 
web,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 12(4), Jul. 2008, pp. 78–
83, doi:10.1109/MIC.2008.87. 
[11] M. E. Botts, G. Percivall, C. Reed, and J. Davidson, “OGC 
Sensor Web Enablement: Overview 
and high level 
architecture,” Proc. of the 2nd International Conference on 
Geosensor Networks, 2006, pp. 175–190. 
[12] S. Chien, D. Tran, A. Davies, M. Johnston, J. Doubleday, R. 
Castano, L. Scharenbroich, G. Rabideau, B. Cichy, S. Kedar, 
D. Mandl, S. Frye, W. Song, P. Kyle, R. LaHusen, and P. 
Cappaelare, “Lights Out Autonomous Operation of an Earth 
Observing Sensorweb,” Proc. of the 7th International 
Symposium on Reducing the Cost of Spacecraft Ground 
Systems and Operations (RCSGSO 2007, AIAA), Jun. 2007.  
[13] International Organization for Standardization, ISO 11783-10, 
Tractors and machinery for agriculture and forestry – Serial 
control and communications network - Part 10: Task 
controller 
and 
management 
information 
system 
data 
interchange, 2009.  
[14] J. Tervonen, V. Sorvoja, M. Tikkakoski, I. Hakala, P. 
Weckström, M. Bialowas, H. Malinen, and M. Turpeenoja, 
“Control System Utilising Wireless Communication and GPS 
Position for a Direct Seeding Drill,” Proc. of International 
Conference on Machine Automation (Smart Systems 2006 & 
ICMA 2006), Jun. 2006. 
[15] The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, IEEE 
802.15.4, Wireless Medium Access Control and Physical 
Layer Specifications for Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area 
Networks, Sep. 2006. 
[16] OGC – Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc., OpenGIS Sensor 
Model Language (SensorML) Implementation Specification, 
Version 1.0.0, Jun. 2007. 
[17] OGC – Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc., Binary Extensible 
Markup Language (BXML) Encoding Specification, Version 
0.0.8, Jan. 2006. 
[18] M. Luimula, Z. Shelby, J. Markkula, J. Tervonen, P. 
Weckström, and P. Verronen, “Developing Geosensor 
Network Support for Locawe Platform - Application of 
Standards in Low-Rate Communication Context,” Proc. of the 
International Conference on Pervasive Services (ICPS 2009), 
ACM 
Press, 
Jul. 
2009, 
pp. 
73-82, 
doi:10.1145/1568199.1568211. 
[19] M. Luimula, Development and Evaluation of the Location‐
aware Platform. Main Characteristics in Adaptable Location‐
aware 
Systems. 
Doctoral 
dissertation. 
Finland: 
Oulu 
University, Acta Universitatis Ouluensis,  2010. 
[20] M. Luimula, K. Sääskilahti, T. Partala, S. Pieskä, and J. 
Alaspää, “Remote Navigation of a Mobile Robot in a RFID‐
augmented 
Environment,” 
Personal 
and 
Ubiquitous 
Computing, vol. 14, 2010, pp. 125‐136, doi:10.1007/s00779-
009-0238-3. 
[21] J. Tiusanen, “Wireless Soil Scout prototype radio signal 
reception compared to the attenuation model,” Precision 
Agric, vol. 10, 2009, pp. 372-381, doi:10.1007/s11119-008-
9096-7.  
[22] J. Tiusanen, “Validation and results of the Soil Scout signal 
attenuation model,” Biosystems Engineering, vol. 97, May 
2007, pp. 11-17, doi:10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2007.02.005.   
[23] B. DuCharme, A simple SOAP client - A general-purpose 
Java 
SOAP 
client, 
May 
2001, 
<http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/xml/library/x-
soapcl/index.html> 22.11.2011. 
 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

