Development of Data Quality Improvement Method for Hydrodynamic Model of
Urban Drainage System Using GIS Capabilities
Cagri Cimen
Department of Water and Environment
Y¨uksel Proje Inc.
Ankara, 06610, Turkey
e-mail: ccimen@yukselproje.com.tr
Anil Olgac
Department of Water and Environment
Y¨uksel Proje Inc.
Ankara, 06610, Turkey
e-mail: aolgac@yukselproje.com.tr
Rouhollah Nasirzadehdizaji
Department of Water and Environment
Y¨uksel Proje Inc.
Ankara, 06610, Turkey
e-mail: rnasirzadeh@yukselproje.com.tr
Abstract—The pressure on urban drainage systems has in-
creased in recent years due to population growth, urbanization,
industrialization, and climate change. The rise in impervious
surfaces, such as buildings, roads, and parking lots, as well as
airports, ports, and logistics centers, exacerbates the situation.
This situation can cause overflows, particularly downstream, as
the increase in impervious surfaces leads to shorter periods for
surface runoff to be collected and quickly diverted into the
drainage system, resulting in large increases in peak flow rates.
To plan the existing urban drainage system with current and
accurate data using hydrodynamic model tools, it is essential
to consider accurate and based on real conditions planning of
urban drainage systems and the application of hydrodynamic
models that can simplify complex structures into mathematical
expressions. In this regard, Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) are an effective method for the preparation of various
input datasets in accordance with the format and precision
required by the hydrodynamic models. This study proposed
a methodological approach to prepare critical large-scale data
for the hydrodynamic model set up in a GIS environment,
aiming to improve the accuracy of analysis results and reflect
the real-world situation. Through geospatial analysis and the
use of GIS environmental capabilities, key input data, such as
Digital Elevation Models (DEMs), land use, buildings’ polygons,
and catchment areas, were prepared to represent real-world
conditions in the model scenarios. The prepared data in the
GIS environment provide a detailed and precise representation
of complex structures for mathematically realistic simulations.
The main finding of this work highlights the importance of
using geospatial analysis and GIS tools to prepare input data
for hydrodynamic models of urban drainage systems, leading to
improved accuracy and efficiency of urban drainage services.
Keywords—Geographic Information System; sustainable urban
drainage; urbanization; stormwater system; climate change.
I. INTRODUCTION
Accurate data that reflects real-world conditions play an
important role in planning sustainable urban drainage sys-
tems. In metropolitan areas, population growth and unexpected
urban development lead to increasing challenges, difficulties,
or insufficient planning to meet the future demands of urban
infrastructure services, such as urban drainage systems [1] [2]
[3]. In line with this, the existing urban drainage systems need
to be improved to comprehensively utilize the simulations of
different complex and large-dimensional data to incorporate
all the dynamics of the real situation.
Improvements of the physical data sets of the existing
stormwater system (ground elevation, flow elevation, size,
route, etc. of pipe and manhole system elements) and creeks
(route, cross-section, profile, etc.) prior to the integration of
these data into the hydrodynamic model are the subject of
much more detailed studies. To this end, with engineering
approaches the GIS environment is an efficient system for the
preparation of input datasets in accordance with the format
and precision required by the hydrodynamic models. With the
improvement of the quality of input data and incorporation of
hydrological information, hydraulic analysis of urban drainage
systems can be efficiently performed. However, such analy-
ses are generally performed on models of systems that are
independent of each other. The hydrodynamic model and its
hydraulic analysis are performed either for the Stormwater
Collection System (SWCS) alone or for the creeks individu-
ally, and the system capacity and its dimensions are determined
by the rainfall data used.
The hydraulic analyses may not always reflect the interac-
tion with time according to the existing conditions in the model
results due to the site characteristics. Accordingly, the analysis
results either encounter over-design upstream and downstream
of the system or insufficient sizing in the downstream portion.
Furthermore, since the evolution of downstream conditions
over time cannot be clearly defined in non-integrated models,
it is difficult to obtain holistic simulations. However, in 2-
Dimensional (2D) models, time-dependent and dynamic solu-
tions of integrated holistic models of the stormwater collection
system and creeks, the relationship of the systems with their
environment can be analyzed in terms of time variables, espe-
cially by defining additional data reflecting real conditions to
the models. In this way, mainly at the points where the systems
are connected to each other (i.e., junctions), and towards the
upstream or downstream impacts can be analyzed closer to the
actual situation. Hence, the improvement of the data to quality
and accuracy that can be integrated into the model, especially
focusing on the required data for the hydrodynamic models,
ensures the model’s precision and effectiveness in reflecting
the real condition. The important data include the physical
data for stormwater and creeks, as well as hydrological inputs
that are the main data for any 1D or 2D hydraulic models.
The DEM with a certain precision, land use data including
geometry and land use types, buildings’ polygon, and surface
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

water catchment areas are fundamental data for hydrodynamic
models and thus for the efficient urban drainage system design
and implementation.
The DEM data, which digitally represents the earth’s surface
topography, is used for many different purposes. One of the
applications of DEM data is to create hydraulic or hydrody-
namic models. The analysis of these models’ results leads to
obtaining different outputs for monitoring and investigation
of the hydraulic and hydrologic process of the system, such
as pipeline capacities, flood maps (flood extensions, depth,
and velocity), etc. Hence, terrain data plays an important role
in determining the accuracy of floodplains. Different methods
are available for creating and obtaining the DEM data. One
of them is Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR) to make
high-resolution maps for digital 3-D representations of areas
on the earth’s surface. It has been stated by various researchers
that the floodplain maps derived from this dataset give much
more accurate results than the maps obtained using other
available topographic datasets in the world due to their very
high resolution [4] [5] [6].
Land use maps, on the other hand, contain different informa-
tion related to land, such as land use types and geometries, and
are mainly obtained from the Coordination of Environmental
Information (CORINE) land cover maps [7]. Land use maps
provide geographic information on land cover, including land
use/cover characteristics and changes, vegetation state, water
cycle, and earth’s surface energy variables, to a wide range of
users in environmental terrestrial applications. In addition to
these maps, some numerical boundaries should be integrated
into the model in order to define the existing conditions in the
hydrodynamic model.
The objective of this study was to enhance the accuracy and
efficiency of urban drainage services by utilizing geospatial
analysis and GIS tools to prepare input data for hydrodynamic
models of urban drainage systems. Specifically, the study
proposed a methodological approach to improve the physical
data sets of the existing stormwater system and creeks prior to
their integration into the hydrodynamic model. The remainder
of the paper is structured as follows: Section II details the
methodology employed to enhance the physical data, including
its integration into the hydrodynamic model and preparation
in the GIS environment. Section III highlights the significance
and contributions of this work in improving hydrodynamic
models for urban drainage systems, resulting in the provision
of efficient and adequate urban drainage services.
II. METHODOLOGY
The impact of surface runoff on urban areas can be reduced
through the implementation of Low Impact Development
(LID) techniques and a Sustainable Urban Drainage System
(SUDs), which integrate traditional drainage systems with LID
methods. This approach will make urban areas more resilient
and sustainable in the face of climate change and contribute
to Water Sensitive City (WSC) targets and Integrated Urban
Water Management (IUWM). Monitoring and evaluating the
effectiveness of the SUDs is crucial for ensuring their long-
term success. The preparation of input data for a hydrodynamic
model using GIS capabilities involves several engineering
approaches that aim to ensure the continuity of physical
datasets from upstream to downstream. These methods resolve
stability issues that may arise from using DEMs, prepare rel-
evant hydrological and hydraulic parameters, such as rainfall
patterns and runoff coefficients, and create design data, such
as rainfall catchments. Hence, these techniques enable the
hydrodynamic model to run smoothly and provide accurate
results. Therefore, the focus of this study was to develop
a method for improving the data quality of hydrodynamic
models of urban drainage systems using GIS capabilities. The
hydraulic modeling process for the assessment of the adequacy
of existing stormwater collection systems and creeks includes
the following steps.
• Transferring the physical data of the urban drainage
system, including the stormwater collectors and creeks,
which have been improved and of sufficient quality, to
use in the hydraulic model.
• Definition of initial condition boundaries for each hydro-
logical scenario.
• Definition of surface flow coefficients.
• Defining the surface roughness coefficient.
• Identification of the surface model (i.e., DEM).
• Definition of the land use map.
• Defining buildings’ polygon to the model.
• Identification of sub-basins to the hydraulic program.
• Running the hydraulic model of the relevant basin.
In general, urban drainage system analyses are performed by
integrating the data of the system into the model and defin-
ing the hydrological/hydraulic inputs. Whether the physical
data for the system is obtained from relevant institutions or
generated from classified data, these data are necessary to
improve the quality and convert it into the appropriate format
for entry into the hydrodynamic model. In the improvement
of data quality and to ensure upstream-downstream continuity,
the information of all system elements from the upstream
of the system to the discharge point is transferred to the
database. The next step in the setup of the model is the
introduction of hydrologic data into the model, identifying
initial conditions, such as rainfall intensity, and the collection
time (time of concentration). By introducing surface discharge
and roughness coefficients into the model as hydraulic pa-
rameters, the model setup process is completed at a level
sufficient for a general analysis of the system. However, more
precise planning is needed because of the global trend of
planning for the WSC targets through the SUDs, an important
pillar of IUWM, and the LID framework. Accordingly, for
a sustainable urban drainage system, the actual conditions
need to be defined mathematically in order to analyze the
hydrodynamic model of the system more precisely. These
inputs containing real conditions are primarily DEM data and
land use maps, buildings’ polygon, and catchment areas for
the stormwater collection systems.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

LiDAR data, which is used as a digital elevation model and
includes precise elevation information of the earth’s surface
needed is important data for 3-D modeling the terrain features,
such as buildings, transportation, flow channels, etc. The use of
LiDAR data is to carry out accurate engineering calculations
along with the analysis of the current situation, to plan the
urban drainage system. For the analysis and planning of urban
drainage systems, in addition to the surface digital model, land
use data including land use type and geometric shape and their
attribute information is required in the hydrodynamic model.
The land use data provide the possibility to evaluate the results
of the analysis based on the land utilization of the existing
system. In order to define the actual condition of the terrain
in the model, buildings’ polygons representing the densest
structures need to be integrated into the surface model along
with land use data. In addition, the sub-basins, which form the
accumulation areas of the superficial flow of rainfall, need also
to be introduced into the model. The urban drainage system
areas covered by rainfall and resulting runoff are defined in the
model to accurately calculate the model’s flow and to allow the
model to identify the actual flow from the defined precipitation
rate. The workflow schema for setting up and running the
model is shown in Figure 1. The workflow diagram outlines
the process from model setup to model runtime, and shows
the datasets defined and integrated into the model.
Figure 1.
Workflow diagram for setting up and running a hydrodynamic
model of an urban drainage system.
In the first stage of the urban drainage system modeling
setup, the main inputs are rainfall patterns, runoff and rough-
ness coefficients, and the physical data of the system, as
indicated by the green clusters. For more accurate modeling
results as specified earlier, the inputs that reveal the actual
situation are shown in cyan color clusters (second stage)
and include LiDAR, buildings’ polygon, land use, and sub-
basin areas. After the model setup, the process of running
the hydrodynamic model includes both the optimizations in
associating the model with the input data and the control
and validation of the process steps in the input-run-outcome
process (third stage). After all arrangements and controls, the
results of the analysis are captured and interpreted for the
urban drainage system planning (fourth stage). The procedures
for preparing input data in a GIS environment prior to hy-
drodynamic model installation and processes are discussed in
detail in the following sub-sections.
This study has performed the GIS operations and geospatial
processing and analysis with the potential use of the open-
source Quantum Geographic Information System (QGIS) [8]
software.
A. Digital Elevation Model
In general, a DEM derived from any remote sensing data
source represents the elevation of the bare ground surface,
excluding features, such as buildings and trees. This is because
the technology used to generate DEMs is primarily designed
to capture elevation information of the ground surface, rather
than the elevation of other features above the ground. However,
with LiDAR data, it is possible to generate a DSM (Digital
Surface Model) that includes the elevation of all features on
the surface, including buildings and trees. The DSM can be
derived from the same LiDAR data that is used to generate the
DEM, by including all the points in the LiDAR point cloud,
rather than just the ground points. It is important to note that
while the DSM provides a more comprehensive representation
of the surface, it may not be suitable for some applications
that require the elevation of only the bare ground, such as
hydrological or hydraulic modeling. In these cases, the DEM
derived from LiDAR data needs to be modified and improved
with the applied techniques.
Although the LiDAR data with a resolution of 0.25x0.25
meters provided in the study was perfectly well for the
hydraulic model, however, this data was not used in both
hardware and temporal terms due to its need for a very large
memory capacity. Hence, the resolution of this data has been
used for the urban area with a resolution of 2.00x2.00 m by
various optimization processes. There have also been several
procedures to reflect creeks on the surface model to calculate
the superficial flow. For processing the rehabilitated creeks
to the DEM, by using the required items (i.e., the starting
end codes, cross-sections, and dimensions), the rehabilitated
creeks’ base and its slop guidelines ( i.e., top and upper bound-
ary lines) are defined according to the width, slop inclination
and cross-section types. The height values of the points in the
creek base are calculated along the creek, depending on the
slope of the stream, by creating a point every 1 m on the lines.
The values of the points on the upper slope and boundary lines
on the slope of the creeks were calculated by determining the
elevation at the relevant location, taking into account the base
slope of the creek. LiDAR data was primarily converted into
a point data type for each basin. Then, the points were deleted
within the region up to the threshold value (50 cm) outside
the outer part of the rehabilitated creeks (on-slope boundary
lines). Points excluding these removal points are merged with
the set of points created for the rehabilitated creek. As shown
in Figure 2 the merged file is the final data to be used as a
modified surface model to input to the hydrodynamic model.
B. Land Use Map
An assessment of an urban drainage system by overlap-
ping an existing land-use map is a priority process. There
are critical assessments of the impact of drainage systems
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 2. Surface model modification processes.
overlapping with land use, such as different types of settle-
ments, industrial-commercial-public areas, infrastructure facil-
ities, such as roads-ports-airports, and zoning plans involving
different types of uses, such as agricultural and forest zones. In
this study, the CORINE land cover map is used as the land use
data. The analysis of how the extent of the land use boundary
including the existing urban drainage system or the impact on
the land use type in the model has been conducted through
the GIS.
C. Buildings’ Polygon
In the improvement process of buildings’ polygons, which
is an important input to the model, topological analysis is
performed first. In these analyses, the ”must not overlap”,
”must not have gaps”, and ”must not have duplicates” rules
were applied. Without these corrections, the meshing process
produces a large number of triangles formed in small areas
of geometrically and hydraulically insignificant dimensions,
including small areas that cannot be detected easily. Hence,
it maximizes the meshing time and modeling time, distorts
modeling stability, and may even cause the model to fail.
There is no existing ready-made GIS application or plugin to
eliminate errors detected in the analysis. For this reason, the
”Aggregate”, ”Simplification” and ”Deleting Holes” functions
were used in GIS for the buildings’ polygon dataset. The
detailed specifications of the ”Aggregate”, ”Simplification”
and ”Deleting Holes” functions for buildings’ polygons are
provided below.
Buildings that are too close together cause small triangles
during the meshing process. In the experiments, it has been
seen that it is necessary to simplify the buildings closer than
2 m, which do not cross streets, into a single polygon. To
this end, different GIS methods have been applied, however,
the ”Aggregate Polygons” process has resulted in favorable
results. In order to convert the shortest side of the building into
two or three cells, the cell size should be small enough. The
values of the input cells encompassed by the coarser output
cells are aggregated by one of the maximum, minimum, mean,
median, and sum statistics for the input cells’ value. No data
values were ignored by the aggregation calculation.
The ”Simplification of polygons” as the generalization op-
eration of the boundaries was used to remove the extraneous
bends and small intrusions and extrusions from the buildings’
polygon boundaries without destroying their essential shape.
The ”Point remove” and ”Bend simplify” algorithms were
applied for non-orthogonal polygon boundaries. The ”Point
remove” is efficient for data compression and for eliminating
redundant details; however, the line that results may contain
sharp angles and spikes that reduce the cartographic quality of
the line. The ”Point remove” algorithm is used for compression
or small amounts of data reduction and when high cartographic
quality is not needed. The ”Bend simplify” was applied for
shape recognition to detect bends, analyze their characteristics,
and eliminate insignificant ones. In this method, a bend that’s
too narrow is widened slightly to satisfy the tolerance. The
resulting line is more faithful to the original and provides
better cartographic quality. In order to achieve the minimum
triangle size of the mesh, it needs to reduce the number of
fractures on the buildings’ polygon without distorting their
shape. Simplifying buildings’ polygon is used for reducing
the detail at the boundaries of buildings while maintaining the
basic shape and size of the buildings. Buildings are usually
rectangular areas; therefore, the simplification process pre-
serves and maximizes rectangularity. Each individual building
itself has been simplified. Buildings connected by straight lines
were not simplified as a group but on the whole boundary
of a building. Thereby, this method describes buildings as
topologically discrete, connected by straight lines close to
parallel to each other, and connected by more complex paths.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The boundaries of discrete buildings or buildings connected
by straight lines were modified so that all angles close to
90 degrees still remained exactly 90 degrees. Some edges
were smoothed, reducing the number of fractures, but the
areas remain roughly the same as the original [9]. The max-
imum degree of simplification is reached when a building is
reduced to a quadrilateral. Once the simplification tolerance
is relatively large relative to the size of the building, the
building is simplified directly to a rectangle centered on its
center of gravity, but the area remains the same. The sides of
the resulting rectangle are in the same ratio as the sides of
the bounding box aligned to the longest side of the original
building.
Areas between buildings or adjacent building blocks are
considered as the terrain surface in the model and if these
gaps are not cleared before being imported to the model,
during the meshing, the model fills these gaps with triangles.
accordingly, these areas are going to fill up like puddles during
modeling. In order to avoid this problem, it has been accepted
to include these spaces as building areas. For this process,
the holes were deleted or filled using a GIS operator called
”Deleting holes”. This operator generates a new output feature
class containing the features from the input polygons with
some parts or holes of a specified size deleted and exploded
into single parts. The ”Deleting Holes” operator combines
both of the above functionalities which can optionally specify
a maximum area of hole to delete. In this algorithm, the
maximum area parameter refers to the maximum size of the
hole to be filled. Hence, an optional minimum area parameter
allows only holes smaller than a certain area threshold to
be removed. For instance, leaving this parameter at 0.0 the
algorithm removes all hole sizes. An example of the described
generalization of buildings’ polygon is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Illustration of used GIS operations to buildings’ polygon data quality
improvements and their results for the sample dataset. (a) Original data, (b)
the aggregated polygons, (c) simplified polygons, and (d) deleted holes from
the buildings’ polygon.
Therefore, the created new output data created from the
outer boundaries contained polygons of filled holes with
preserved attributes of the data. The resulting polygons were
then manually checked and loaded into the hydrodynamic
model.
D. Water Collection Catchments
In a 2D hydrodynamic model for analysis of an urban
drainage system involving major stormwater collection lines
and creeks, modeling can be performed on a macro-scale with
only the terrain model and urban drainage systems without
additional definitions of terrain specifications. However, the
use of large basins in 2d modeling to avoid the impact of
minor network pipes not entering the model, and therefore,
using large basins as sub-basins in 2d modeling in the planning
of a micro-scale urban drainage system provides more detailed
and realistic results. For this, different tools and plugins
are used (e.g., SWAT, SWAT+, ArcGIS Hydrographic Tools,
SAGA Terrain Analysis- Hydrology, etc.) prior to running the
hydrodynamic model.
The delineation of sub-basins is a time-intensive process
that requires a high level of computing capacity due to the size
of the surface model data and the abundance of components.
Figure 4 shows the terrain surface model improved from
LiDAR data (right) and the system’s physical data defined
in the hydrodynamic model including stormwater collection
systems ( i.e., pipelines networks) and delineated sub-basins
and collection basins by Voronoi (Thiessen) polygon’s method
in the GIS environment (left).
Figure 4. Example of a sub-basin delineated with SWAT+ plugin.
In this study, the delineation of sub-basin boundaries was
mainly carried out on QGIS, an open-source GIS software, and
through its compatible hydrological processing and analysis
plugin called SWAT+ [9]. In the delineation process, the
improved DEM data (i.e., eliminated above-ground features)
derived from LiDAR data was used as the surface model. In
the sub-basin delineation procedure, the outlets and discharge
points, the definition of upstream-downstream continuity in
physical data, and the stormwater collection system (the
program considers the stormwater collection system as a
streamline) are also introduced to the model allowing the
program to establish sub-basin boundaries accordingly. In
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

order to distribute the incoming flow to the manholes, the
delineated basins were divided also into collection basins of
manholes by Voronoi (Thiessen) polygon’s method which is
also available in QGIS [8].
E. Mesh Corrections Based on the Buildings’ Geometry
Buildings are not located within stormwater collection sys-
tems and the building’s polygons have been excluded from
the calculation since the building’s polygons are defined as
void and without meshing as shown in Figure 5 (left). Hence,
the buildings’ geometries needed to be defined in the model
as a component of the stormwater collection systems. In other
words, each building’s block is introduced into the model using
GIS as a discrete catchment. Additionally, to transfer the roof
rain waters to the surface mesh, as shown in Figure 5 (right),
the buildings’ roof drainage points are defined and the outlet
flow elevations were adjusted to form a 1/100 slope depending
on the mesh elevation code. Therefore, by using this method
the buildings’ polygons have been defined to be considered
in the hydrodynamic analysis. Mesh Corrections Based on the
buildings’ geometry and definition of buildings’ roof drainage
points to the model. Figure 5 shows the building’s polygons
as void and without meshing (left), and the definition of
buildings’ geometries in the model as the component of the
stormwater collection systems (right).
Figure 5. Mesh corrections for buildings’ geometries.
The symbols with black lines and arrows in Figure 5 (left)
are indicating the buildings’ roof water drainage points on each
building’s block, and the outlet flow to transfer the roof rain
waters to the closest surface mesh.
III. CONCLUSION
The achievement of long-term planning and sustainable
stormwater management systems in terms of environmental,
and economic to ensure adequate and efficient urban drainage
services is important in order to adapt to today’s fast-growing
conditions. In terms of sustainable management practices,
precise planning with accurate and actual data that represents
reality needs to be targeted throughout the engineering, admin-
istrative and economic measures for the continuity of service
quality in which investment and operation strategies are in
accordance with the smart city concept. To meet the needs of
urban drainage systems to adapt to the predicted circumstances
and changes that vary depending on the population growth
trend, fast development of cities, and climate change issues, It
is appropriate to conduct an analysis of the actual situation
of the system. In this framework, it is necessary to use a
hydrodynamic simulation to take into account integrated and
dynamic conditions, as well as to ensure that the existing
system’s data are correctly and appropriately defined in the
model. This study presented a methodological approach to
the preparation of important large-dimensional data in the
setup of a hydrodynamic model to reflect the actual conditions
and achieve more precise analysis results. In this regard, the
high potential use of GIS and its capabilities as well as
geospatial processing and analysis in a GIS environment play
an important role in performing data preparation and quality
improvement. Therefore, the development of a methodological
approach for the preparation of accurate data as the input of the
hydrodynamic models of urban drainage systems, using GIS
capabilities ensures adequate and efficient urban drainage ser-
vices to adapt to the fast-growing conditions in a metropolitan
city.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the colleagues and man-
agers of the R&D and Quality and Management Systems
Departments at Y¨uksel Proje International Co. for their contri-
butions and efforts. The authors would also like to especially
thank the management of Y¨uksel Proje (President and Vice
President) and the Coordinator of the Water and Environment
Department) for their support and encouragement of scientific
and academic research.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. B. Uygun, “Investigation of Stormwater Collection System Problems
in ˙Istanbul,” ˙Istanbul Technical University, Graduate School of Science
Engineering And Technology, November 2019.
[2] EPA, Environmental Protection Agency, ”Reducing Stormwater Costs
through LID Strategies and Practices,” 841-F-07-006, 2007.
[3] G. Ferrier, D. Milan, C. Keat Yew, and R. J. Pope, “Potential of
Retrofitting Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems Using an Integrated
Geographical Information System-Remote Sensing Based Approach,”
Department of Geography, Environment and Earth Sciences, University
of Hull, Hull, HU6 7RX, UK, 2018.
[4] A. Casas, G. Benito, V. R. Thorndycraft, and M. Rico, “The topographic
data source of digital terrain models as a key element in the accuracy
of hydraulic flood modelling,” Earth Surface Processes and Landforms
Volume 31, Issue 4, 2006.
[5] G. Schumann, et al., “Comparison of remotely sensed water stages
from LiDAR, topographic contours and SRTM,”, ISPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, 2008.
[6] M. E. Charlton, A. R. G. Large, and I. C. Fuller, “Application of airborne
LiDAR in River environments: The River Coquet, Northumberland,
UK,”, Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 2003.
[7] CORINE Land Cover maps, European Environment Agency (EEA),
Copenhagen, Denmark, 2018.
[8] Swiss
Society
of
Cartography,
“Cartographic
Generaliza-
tion—Topographic Maps,” Cartographic Publication Series, No 2,
1987.
[9] K. Bieger, et al., ”Introduction to SWAT+, a completely restructured
version of the Soil and Water Assessment Tool.” JAWRA Journal of the
American Water Resources Association, 53(1): pp. 115–130, 2017.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

