Spatial Data Analysis as Decision Support Aimed at the Improvement of 
Agricultural Fertilization Strategies 
 
Pundt, Hardy 
 
     Assmann, Denise  
            Thiel, Enrico  
          Grunert, Michael 
     Pleshkanovska, Roksolana  
        Böttcher, Falk                    Döhler, Johannes                States Agency for 
     Harz University of Applied          German Weather Service            Eißner, Florian            Environment, Agriculture 
Sciences (HUAS)  
 
(DWD)                        Kreuter, Thomas  
      and Geology (LFULG) 
       Wernigerode, Germany                Leipzig, Germany  
              Spott, Oliver  
          Dresden, Germany 
            hpundt@hs-harz.de             Denise.Assmann@dwd.de      SKWPiesteritz (SKWP)           Michael.Grunert@ 
      Cunnersdorf, Germany            smekul.sachsen.de 
   Enrico.Thiel@skwp.de 
 
Abstract - Without fertilization, the sufficient provision of 
crops to feed the world population would not be possible. 
However, fertilization in agriculture also causes negative 
impacts. On the one hand, this concerns the environment e.g., 
by infusion of nitrate into the soil and groundwater. It is a 
challenge to guarantee both, a sufficient fertilization of soils, 
and the minimization of harmful emissions. The project 
“StaPrax-Regio”, aims at an optimization of Nitrogen-(N)-
fertilization strategies. It is well known that the interaction 
between weather, soil and the amount and time of fertilization 
are not independent from each other. Knowledge gaps still 
exist in a more detailed insight into the kind of interaction 
between the components, as well as the influence of specific 
parameters, such as precipitation and temperature, type, pH, 
cation exchange capacity of soils, and type, amount and time of 
fertilization. Therefore, meteorological and edaphic, as well as 
other factors must be taken into account when searching for a 
“good” fertilization practice at a specific site. Geographical 
Information Services (GIS) and Decision Support Systems 
(DSS) are adequate means to support data analysis and 
visualization, and finally the decision-making process on 
suitable fertilization strategies. The paper presents work-in-
progress within the framework of a transdisciplinary research 
project of partners from industry, weather and geological 
services, and science. 
Keywords. Fertilization, agriculture, soil data, weather 
data, GIS, spatial interpolation  
 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Fertilizer nitrogen is mostly produced by applying the 
Haber-Bosch process [1]. Nitrogen (N) in the form of 
nitrate is a common pollutant in soils, surface and ground 
waters [2], [3]. Less than half of the more than 100 million 
tons of fertilizer N currently consumed yearly by 
agriculture is assimilated into the aboveground biomass of 
crops. While some fertilizer N will also be recovered by  
roots, much of the remainder is either leached or lost as 
environmentally harmful gas emissions [4]. Facing these 
facts, the goal of the StaPrax-Regio project is to achieve a 
better plant availability of N-fertilizers on the one hand, 
and to minimize harmful losses of N on the other. These 
goals were followed in other projects as well, however, 
StaPrax-Regio envisages a more comprehensive, data-
driven approach thus integrating different information 
sources to achieve a holistic view on fertilization adapted 
as precise as possible to the local environmental conditions. 
The collaboration of different partners from practice, 
science and administration has been seen as a suitable way 
to achieve a multi-perspective, and therefore more 
sustainable, way to reach optimal fertilization strategies. 
Therefore, an industrial partner, producing N-fertilizers 
based on innovative methods (the consortiums leader), and 
administrations, such as weather and geological services, as 
well as a university, are collaborating within the StaPrax-
Regio project. 
 
Basic aspects and results of the research carried out in 
the first project year are presented, among others, in [5]. 
The main research question, how short-term meteorological 
events, as well as the specific soil conditions in different 
regions have influence on the capability of crop plants to 
absorb N, is still in the center of interest. New fertilizers 
include inhibitors that lead to longer availability of the 
fertilizer in the soil layers where roots of crops grow. In 
such a way they foster a better plant availability. Which 
consequences result from this in view of meteorological 
conditions, specific soil properties and fertilization 
practices? Facing questions like this, the partners work on 
different activities that are presented in an overview in 
Figure 1. The figure presents the steps that have to be gone 
within the project, from data collection and –processing to 
decision supporting maps. In the next section the input data 
sets, coming from different sources, and their analysis and 
visualisation are presented. 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 1. Data from agricultural test sites, meteorological stations and 
further sources have to be integrated to develop decision supporting 
models and tools [6] 
 
The paper describes in the next section the current 
situation. Following, the data and the processing steps are 
explained that were carried out to achieve maps that are 
suitable to support decision making related to fertilization. 
The last section is aimed at mentioning further steps to be 
carried out during the next project year. 
 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Fertilization in agriculture has ever been of large concern. 
Meanwhile, the subject has raised big attention: “(…) as our 
population grows to 10 billion people over the next few 
decades, we'll need even more nitrogen fertilizer. So, we 
find ourselves in a precarious situation: We need nitrogen 
for a healthy and growing population, but we're having a 
devastating effect on the environment by producing and 
using it.” [7]. Much research is done concerning precision 
farming aiming at minimizing the amount of fertilizers used 
in agriculture. However, other attempts are on the side of 
the fertilizers themselves. An example is the stabilization 
with urease and nitrification inhibitors. This should lead to 
higher nitrogen efficiency and, as a follow-up, more 
environmental protection in agriculture. The urease inhibitor 
protects the urea from converting too quickly and also 
against ammonia losses. In addition to preventing N-losses, 
the subsequent nitrification inhibition leads to ammonium 
based plant nutrition, with adequate nitrate dispensation 
being assured at all times [15]. However, the dependence of 
fertilizing with such products from weather and soil 
conditions is obviously an important factor in successful 
fertilization strategies. Therefore, research attempts must 
proceed while taking into account more accurately all 
factors that play a role: meteorological and edaphic 
parameters, the various fertilizer alternatives, as well as 
further criteria [5], [8], [15]. Such a more holistic approach 
has been considered not sufficiently in the past. The purpose 
of the article is to inform about the methods and first results 
created during the still running project StaPrax-Regio. 
 
III. 
PROCESSING DATA, THUS PREPARING THEM FOR 
DECISION SUPPORT 
A. Data acquisition and spatial analysis 
Apart from official websites that provide spatial data, the 
partners Stickstoffwerke Piesteritz (SKWP), German 
Weather Service (DWD), and the States Agency for 
Environment, Agriculture and Geology of Saxony (LfULG) 
collect data at many sites throughout the country. The 
DWD carries out measurements at 67 different sites in all 
relevant landscape types of Germany, whereas SKWP 
collects data from 85 test sites. The States Agency provides 
foremost soil data, as well as data from own test sites. 
In general, this data is point-based. Figure 2 shows an 
example of the results of the usage of different fertilizer 
combinations at one test site. The bars represent the results 
that have been measured at one and the same site while 
using varying quantities of different fertilizers (see 
abscissa) [9]. Such data have to be investigated in 
relationship to, among others, weather-dependent data [10], 
e.g., soil humidity (Figure 3).  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Exemplary, point-related results of fertilizer usage at a 
StaPrax-Regio-test site (Kornertrag = Grain yield; N-Entzug = Nitrogen 
removal) [9] 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Interpolated soil humidity in 10cm depth [10] 
 
For the provision of relevant data, the StaPrax-Regio 
MapServer has been implemented. The MapServer has 
been specifically configured for the StaPrax-Regio project 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

and is based on a QGIS-Web-Client installation. It enables 
to publish GIS projects as OGC-compatible Web Map 
Services (WMS), Web Feature Services (WFS) or Web 
Coverage Services (WCS), and other formats. An 
adaptation of coordinate systems is easily possible and in 
such a way QGIS has been considered as an adequate and 
open-source 
solution 
for 
collecting, 
administering, 
analyzing and visualizing StaPrax-Regio related results. 
QGIS provides additionally functionalities and software 
extensions for spatial interpolation purposes. In such a way, 
the GIS tool includes important services to visualize, but 
foremost to modify the basic datasets and calculate area-
wide layers which again can be overlaid with further 
relevant data. Concerning data quality, it can be stated that 
the positional accuracy is good enough for project 
purposes. The soil data relies on official data sources and 
the weather data are coming from the states weather 
service. All test sites that produce data on different 
fertilization strategies used are working on an approach that 
is acknowledged widely. Statistics based on the data 
applied in StaPrax-Regio are therefore robust and reliable. 
 
B. Interpolation workflow 
Most of the data acquired in StaPrax-Regio is point-
related. The production of area-related information requires 
a suitable interpolation approach. A basic question to be 
answered here is the basic pattern in which the point data is 
provided [11]. Generally, there are three basic patterns in 
which such point data can occur, randomly (a), regularly (b) 
and clustered (c) (Figure 4). 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Possible patterns of point measurements [11] 
 
For StaPrax-Regio, the data occur in a way that might be 
settled between (a) and (c). Distances between points vary 
as well as the number of points at different sites. These are 
spread over the whole country, however, different landscape 
types 
are 
represented through 
the test sites, 
the 
meteorological stations and the soil information. To achieve 
comparable results, an interpolation algorithm such as 
ordinary Kriging seems to be suitable to be used to generate 
area-related information on the various point-measured data. 
As mentioned before, the data used within the project are 
supposed to be reliable and therefore the interpolation 
results seem to be applicable for the overlay of interpolated 
and other spatial layers. Based on this assumption, the 
interpolation process is currently carried out on the usage of 
the software SmartMap, a QGIS extension. It provides, 
among others, the Kriging interpolation method [12]. 
Briefly summarized, the method relies on the semi - 
variogram which quantifies autocorrelation between the 
variance of data pairs and distance. At a certain distance 
autocorrelation becomes independent and this stage 
indicates that there is no longer any spatial relationship 
between the closeness of the data points. This makes 
Kriging to suitable linear, unbiased predictors under mild 
data conditions, thus proving to be a good method to 
interpolate spatial information [13]. Due to the irregular 
network of sampling points, the weather stations as well as 
the StaPrax-Regio test sampling sites (see section III.A and 
Figure 4), Kriging seems to be an adequate method, thus 
excluding 
non-relevant 
measurements, 
and 
having 
significant advantages concerning the given datasets and 
goal settings. Of course there are other interpolation 
approaches. It depends from the further project process if 
these should be tested and compared to the results achieved 
so far. Additionally, questions of isotropy and stationarity 
should be considered more sophisticatedly because edaphic 
and meteorological data might show differences here. 
Figure 5 presents the interpolation workflow as it is 
currently realized [14]. 
  
 
 
Figure 5. Exemplary GIS-based interpolation workflow [14] 
 
C. Inclusion of processed data into decision-making 
procedures 
 
Based on interpolated data, a “classic” GIS-overlay with 
further data layers can be performed which leads to new 
insights into local conditions (Figure 6): 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
Figure 6. Overlay of previously interpolated data on soil humidity and 
precipitation [14] 
 
The integration of the data from test sites, weather and 
edaphic information, including newly generated layers 
resulting from spatial analysis, will lead to spatial patterns 
which can help to improve decision-making on suitable 
fertilization strategies, especially envisaging a better uptake 
of fertilizers through crops under site-specific conditions 
[15]. This should have positive effects for the environment 
due to less emissions into the air, the (ground)water and the 
soil.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The StaPrax-Regio-Mapserver provides basic spatial data 
layers, as well as analysis results, currently mainly based on 
classic methods such as spatial interpolation and overlay. 
However, the web-based system allows to explore the data 
in a multi-contextual view. This comes close to the insight 
that fertilization strategies should not consider only few 
factors, but the interaction between elements such as 
weather events, soil and landscape conditions, type of 
fertilizer and possibly machining technology. The overall 
project goal of such a holistic perspective on fertilization is 
to achieve more sustainable decisions instead of losing 
important information that can possibly, but not necessarily, 
play an important role [9]. 
 
After data collection at the test sites and the achievement 
of first results from analysis, the interpretation of such 
results is on the research agenda. Having defined 
procedures of how to prepare data for further analytical 
steps the project consortium will discuss adequate decision-
making procedures. This requires differentiated thinking 
about the role each component plays and whether the 
various parameters can be handled uniquely or whether 
they have to be weighted in some manner. An efficient 
decision support will only occur when the spatial data 
layers become a helpful means to support farmers, 
agricultural consultants, and other decision makers. They 
should have helpful means to decide on a broad, 
comprehensive, and objective basis on a fertilization 
strategy that takes into account explicitly the edaphic and 
climatic particularities that vary from site to site. The 
definition of decision trees can help here [16]. This is also 
the basis for a DSS that is under development (web-BESyD 
[17]) at one StaPrax-Regio partner. It includes specific 
spatial datasets based on decision trees that are currently 
under critical review within the StaPrax-Regio consortium. 
 
One important result is that defined different amounts of 
fertilizer combinations, including those with inhibitors, 
which were analyzed at all test sites, lead to different crop 
yields. This is due to the different edaphic and 
meteorological situations at the test sites. However, the 
overall goal is to answer the question whether spatial 
patterns 
can 
be 
identified, 
that 
allow 
to 
define 
recommendations, 
at 
best 
standardized 
fertilization 
strategies that are based on the data-driven research as it is 
carried out in StaPrax-Regio. Such strategies, taking into 
account explicitly all relevant components that play a role 
for crop growth and health, should be more environment-
friendly, less expensive and therefore sustainable [5], [15], 
[18]. The first two project years gave important insights 
based on comprehensive spatial data form the test-sites that 
cover different landscapes throughout the country, thus 
enabling the integrated view on the situations. The next 
steps to be carried out will show, if such spatial patterns 
exist and if they deliver a basis to define best practices. 
 
 ACKNOWLEDEGMENTS 
The StaPrax-Regio project is funded under the code 
281DP02(A-D)20 by the Bundesanstalt für Landwirtschaft 
und Ernährung, BLE (State’s Agency of Agriculture and 
Nutrition of Germany). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] P. Patel, The Haber-Bosch Process: What Is It And Why Is The 
Process So Important? https://www.scienceabc.com/pure-
sciences/the-haber-bosch-process-what-is-it-why-is-the-
process-so-important.html, 2019. (accessed 2022-11-07). 
[2] M. Sebilo, B. Mayer, B. Nicolardot, A. Mariotti, Long-term 
fate 
of 
nitrate 
fertilizer 
in 
agricultural 
soils. 
https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1305372110, 
2013. 
(accessed 2022-11-03) 
[3] A. Klinkenberg, The Agricultural Pollution of Europe’s 
Groundwater. 
https://www.fairplanet.org/editors-pick/the 
agricultural-pollution-of-europes-groundwater/, 
2022. 
(accessed 2023-02-26). 
[4] U. Chrobak, The world’s forgotten greenhouse gas. 
https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20210603-nitrous-oxide-
the-worlds-forgotten-greenhouse-gas, 2021. (accessed 2023-
02-18). 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[5] H. Pundt, R. Pleshkanovska, E. Thiel T. Kreuter, F. Eißner, D. 
Assmann, F. Böttcher, M. Grunert, 
Optimization 
of 
Agricultural Fertilization Strategies based on Meteorological 
and 
Edaphic 
parameters: 
Analysis 
of 
Site-Specific 
Geoinformation to Support Decision Making, AGILE 
GIScience Ser., 3, 56, 2022. 
[6] State’s Agency for the Environment, Agriculture and Geology 
of Saxony (LfULG). Internal report, unpublished. 
[7] B. Brady, Nitrogen Fertilizer: Solving This Environmental And 
Humanitarian 
Crisis. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/ 
forbesbusinesscouncil/2022/05/12/nitrogen-fertilizer-solving-
this-environmental-and-humanitarian-crisis/ (accessed 2023-
03-13) 
[8] S. Menegat, A. Ledo, R. Tirado, Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
from Global Production and Use of Nitrogen Synthetic 
Fertilisers in Agriculture. Scientific Reports volume 12, 
No 14490. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-
18773-w, 2022. (accessed 2023-01-14). 
[9] Stickstoffwerke Piesteritz (SKWP). Internal presentation on 
test-sites at StaPrax-Regio Meeting, Leipzig 2022-12-19, 
unpublished. 
[10] German Weather Service (DWD), Soil Humidity-Viewer. 
https://www.dwd.de/DE/fachnutzer/landwirtschaft/appl/bf_vie
w/_node.html (accessed 2023-01-14). 
[11] A. Riha, Ein Vergleich räumlicher Interpolationsmethoden für 
Grundstückspreise im Bauland. University of Salzburg, 
Austria, Masterthesis, 2011, unpublished. 
[12] Spatial Analysis, https://spatialanalysisonline.com/ HTML/ 
index.html?kriging_interpolation.htm (accessed 2022-12-27) 
[13] P. Eguia, E. Granada, J. M. Alonso, E. Arce, A. Saav, 
Weather datasets generated using kriging techniques to 
calibrate building thermal simulations with TRNSYS. Journal 
of Building Engineering, Vol 7, pp 78-91, 2016. 
[14] Harz University of Applied Sciences, Internal presentation of 
StaPrax-Regio Mapserver results at StaPrax-Regio-Meeting, 
Leipzig 2023-12-19, unpublished. 
[15] F. Eißner, E. Thiel, F. Spott, F. Böttcher, D. Assmann, M. 
Grunert, H. Pundt, T. Kreuter, The collaborative project 
StaPrax-Regio – a central building block for location-based 
nitrogen fertilization (original title: Das Verbundprojekt 
StaPrax-Regio – zentraler Baustein für eine standortspezifisch 
optimierte Stickstoffdüngung). VDLUFA-Schriftenreihe 77, S. 
231 – 234, 2021. 
[16] J. Pearl, T. Wardly, Using a Decision Tree to help Make 
Decisions. https://extensionaus.com.au/ youngfarmersnetwork/ 
using-a-decision-tree-to-help-make-decisions/, 2019. (accessed 
2022-11-29). 
[17] LfULG, Further Development, Practical introduction and 
validation web-BESyD (original title: Weiterentwicklung, 
Praxiseinführung 
und 
Modellvalidierung 
web-BESyD). 
https://www.landwirtschaft.sachsen.de/weiterentwicklung-
praxiseinfuehrung-und-modellvalidierung-web-besyd-
43242.html, 2021 (accessed 23-03-2023) 
[18] H. Pundt, Spatial Decision Systems. In: Leal Filho, W., Azul, 
A.M., Brandli, L., Özuyar, P.G., Wall, T. (eds) Climate Action. 
Encyclopedia of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. 
Springer, Cham, pp 837-848. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

