Temporally Transformed Map Animation for Visual Data Analysis 
Salla Multimäki and Paula Ahonen-Rainio 
Dept. of Real Estate, Planning, and Geoinformatics 
Aalto University, School of Engineering 
Finland 
e-mail: salla.multimaki@aalto.fi 
 
 
Abstract— Animated maps are widely used in visualizing the 
temporal aspect of geographical data, even though their 
effectiveness depends on multiple factors and is far from 
obvious. This paper presents one method to complement map 
animations with a transformation that manipulates the 
temporal dimension. This temporal transformation, in which 
events were located equally into a time period, applies the idea 
of spatial transformation, which is familiar from cartography. 
We performed a user test with a transformed animation of two 
different datasets to demonstrate how the transformation 
presents different spatio-temporal relationships. The test 
indicates that the transformed animation can reveal spatio-
temporal patterns which cannot be detected from a traditional 
animation, such as the order of very dense events. The users 
found the transformed animations insightful and useful. For 
complex visual analysis the combination of the transformed 
animation and timeline visualization seems to be the most 
effective.   
Keywords- map animation; temporal transformation; user 
testing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A map animation is a common method for visualizing 
spatio-temporal information. The reason for this is simple: an 
animated map allows spatial information to be presented on a 
map and, at the same time, it naturally uses the temporal 
dimension for presenting changes over time. However, an 
animated map does not automatically result in effective 
comprehension. The comparison between animations and 
static visualization methods has been considered in many 
studies, both in graphics [1] [2] and in cartography [3] [4] 
[5], and the results from these studies show variation in the 
superiority of the methods, depending on the types of tasks 
and datasets.  
Fabrikant et al. [6] point out that well-designed map 
animations are inherently different from well-designed static 
maps and comparison between these two methods is not even 
meaningful. They argue that instead the attention should be 
focused on studying when and why these methods do work. 
Lobben [7] showed that animations are better suited when 
users’ tasks deal with time, and also found some evidence 
that static maps could work better with location-based tasks. 
Simultaneous changes at many discrete locations are difficult 
to perceive from an animation but as a presentation of 
general spatio-temporal patterns and the behaviour as a 
whole an animation can be most valuable [8]. 
It is evident that user control affects the usability of an 
animation and the effectiveness of its comprehension. In 
many cases, it improves users’ performance [9], but at the 
same time, user control may distort the continuity of the 
animation so much that the advantages of the animation are 
lost [8]. Especially if an animation contains long still periods 
and/or dense temporal clusters, the ability to control the 
speed of the animation becomes essential. However, it is 
clear that the user control tools always increase the users’ 
cognitive load and produce a split attention problem [10]. 
These inefficiencies suggest that in order to support the 
interpretation of map animations, we should search for 
methods that overcome the limitations of animations. These 
kinds of methods would be especially required in exploratory 
tasks when making sense of spatio-temporal behaviour. With 
static maps, cartographic transformations such as density 
transformation are used to present a phenomenon from 
different perspectives and to reveal patterns that would 
otherwise stay hidden. This inspired us to study the 
possibility of benefiting from similar transformations of the 
temporal dimension in animated maps. We performed a 
concept testing with interviews with the test users to test the 
effectiveness of temporal transformation in detecting spatio-
temporal patterns.  
The theoretical background and practical details of the 
transformation are explained in the next two sections. After 
that, the test animations, test setting, and interviews, as well 
as the results, are presented. Finally, discussion of the results 
takes place and conclusions are drawn.  
 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
The spatial and temporal dimensions of geographic data 
share commonalities, such as scale and its relation to the 
level of detail of the phenomena that are represented [11]. 
When we present a real-world space on a map, we shrink the 
presentation into a smaller scale and, in most cases, 
explicitly inform the users about the scale. In a map 
animation, real-world time is usually correspondingly scaled 
into a shorter display time. Despite the fact that the temporal 
scale, just like the spatial scale, has a strong influence on the 
observation and understanding of the phenomena, the 
temporal scale is not commonly calculated and expressed 
numerically. Instead, the passing of time is presented as a 
relative location of a pointer on a time slider. 
There are also similarities between the temporal and 
spatial relationships of objects. The temporal topological 
relationships presented by Allen [12] show many similarities 
to spatial data: moments in time can be ordered, and 
temporal objects can be equal to, meet, overlap with, or 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

include each other. However, because of the one-
dimensional nature of time, the temporal order is 
unambiguous and each point object can have only two 
neighbours in time: the one which is the closest before and 
the one after. The only temporal metric relationship is the 
length of time (the duration of an event or an interval 
between two events), corresponding to distance in space. 
The duration, order, and rate of change of the dynamic 
visual variables [13] make it possible to present different 
spatio-temporal datasets meaningfully in an animation. 
Typically, the duration of the scenes is kept constant 
throughout the whole animation, and in animations which 
present change in time, the order of the scenes is 
chronological. The rate of change depends on the sampling 
rate of the real-world phenomenon in the dataset. The 
duration and rate of change together produce the perceived 
speed of the animation. If we want the change in the 
animation to look smooth, the rate of change must be small 
enough and successive scenes must follow each other fast 
enough. If the sampling rate is too low, extra data frames 
should be interpolated between them to give the impression 
of smooth animation. 
The idea of many of the geographic transformations, such 
as generalization and equal density transformation, makes 
sense when they are adapted to the time dimension, while 
some other transformations cannot strictly be applied to the 
time axis because of the one-dimensional nature of time. 
Monmonier [14] gives examples of how to apply spatial 
generalization operators such as displacement, smoothing, 
and exaggeration to the temporal dimension of dynamic 
statistical maps, but his motivation is to avoid incoherent 
flicker and twinkling dots and instead allow the perception of 
salient patterns in dynamic thematic maps. Kraak [15] has 
also experimented with the transformation that he calls “from 
time to geography”, with static presentation. It stretches the 
famous Minard’s Map according to the temporal dimension 
in such a way that the time periods with slow or no 
movement stretch the spatial representation of the trajectory. 
This example differs from so-called travel time cartograms 
since it does not consider any location as a reference point to 
which the travelling times are calculated. Andrienko et al. 
[16] present a time transformation called a “trajectory wall”, 
where the time axis of a space-time cube is modified to 
present the relative order of the events. Therefore, 
trajectories that follow the same route do not overlap with 
each other, but form a wall in which the order of the 
trajectories on the time axis is determined by their starting 
times.  
In this study, we propose the temporal transformation of 
animation in order to present the data from a different 
perspective and with a different temporal emphasis in order 
to support the analysis of spatio-temporal phenomena. Our 
research question was whether this transformation can be 
comprehensible and useful to users. For the study, we 
created transformed map animations of two different datasets 
with different temporal structures. As a result of the 
transformation, the events in a dataset were evenly located in 
time over the whole time period, keeping their order. The 
basis of this transformation is somehow similar to a 
trajectory wall, since it preserves the order of the events, but 
it is implemented with a dynamic display.  We call this 
transformation “equal density transformation” because it 
equalizes the time intervals between consecutive events.  
III. 
EQUAL DENSITY TRANSFORMATION 
Spatially, in equalized density transformation the areas 
of high density of the phenomenon are made bigger and the 
areas of low density become smaller, so that the spatial 
density of the phenomenon becomes constant [17]. This 
transformation is presented in an example in Figure 1. The 
distances between points are equalized and the reference 
grid stretches and shrinks correspondingly. In the temporal 
version of equalized density transformation, the time 
intervals between each two consecutive events are equalized 
in length over the whole time period. Equal density 
transformation is performed by dividing the events evenly 
into the time period of an animation. If the dataset contains 
events that feature duration, their start and end times are 
simply handled as separate objects on the timeline. In this 
transformation, the accurate timestamps of events are lost, 
but the temporal topological relationships remain constant. 
Should there be any events with exactly the same 
timestamp, their mutual order must be determined by some 
other attribute.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Spatial equalized density transformation illustrated with a small 
example dataset.  
Two example sets of events in their original form and 
after the equal density transformation are shown in Figures 
2a and 2b. From them it can be seen that the density of the 
events reflects the degree of the transformation. When the 
events are condensed, their time period is stretched to last 
longer. Consequently, time periods with sparse events are 
“fast-forwarded”. This reduces the user’s temptation to fast-
forward those periods when some potentially important 
information may remain unobserved. 
 
IV. 
USER TEST AND INTERVIEWS 
In this section, we first describe the animated dataset, the 
making of the test animations, and the implementation of the 
test and user interviews. The results from the test and 
interviews are presented in the next section. 
 
A. Test Data and Animations 
The aims of the user test were to find out whether the 
test users prefer the transformed animation or the original, 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

whether they find the transformation useful, and whether 
they really understand the effect of the transformation. 
Therefore we prepared a set of questions that the test users 
were to answer while viewing the animations. The number 
of times they viewed each animation and the additional 
comments they made during the test were recorded. 
The dataset used in this test contained Twitter messages, 
so-called tweets, from the area of Port-au-Prince, Haiti, 
from a four-month period after the earthquake in January 
2010. Twitter was used to search for help and food or water 
supplies and also to find missing persons. A Twitter user 
can allow the exact coordinates of the tweets to be saved 
and shown by the service provider, and all these tweets were 
included in the test dataset. 
For this test, two different datasets were prepared. The 
first dataset covered the four-month period after the 
earthquake, but to keep the size of the dataset reasonable, 
every tenth tweet was selected. In this dataset, most of the 
tweets were strongly compressed into the first days and 
weeks of the time period, and after that the density of the 
tweets decreased remarkably. This dataset is henceforth 
referred to as the “Every 10th” dataset and is shown on a 
timeline in Figure 2a. The other dataset contained the very 
first tweets right after the earthquake. To achieve the same 
number of objects (193 tweets), the dataset was cut to cover 
about an 84-hour period. Because of the problems in 
electricity production in Haiti, only those tweets that were 
sent between 6 am and 6 pm were successfully published. 
This caused strong periodicity in the data. This dataset is 
henceforth referred to as the “First days” dataset and is 
shown in Figure 2b. Both datasets were equal density 
transformed by using Microsoft Excel. In the transformed 
datasets, the time interval between two consecutive events is 
the whole time period divided by the number of events. 
Figure 2c shows the effect of the equal density 
transformation; these two datasets become similar. The 
timestamps are not visible in this timeline, because they 
were artificially modified and did not correspond to the real-
world time. 
Four map animations were made with ArcGIS10; two 
presented the original “Every 10th” and “First days” datasets 
and two presented the equal density transformed datasets. All 
animations were of equal length, 60 seconds, and they each 
contained 193 events. The events were presented on a 
background map with red dots that appeared brightly and 
faded to a less saturated red after that. A screenshot from one 
animation is shown in Figure 3. In addition to the 
animations, the timeline visualizations were presented in the 
test view immediately  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
below the test animations to help the test users to 
comprehend the temporal patterns of the data. 
B. Test Setting 
At the beginning of the test, the main concepts of the 
test, such as pattern and spatio-temporal information, were 
introduced to the user and the user was able to familiarize 
himself/herself with an example of the animations, layout, 
and arrangements of the user interface.  
The test contained two parts. One part presented the 
original and transformed animations of the “First days” 
dataset and the other part the corresponding animations of 
the “Every 10th” dataset. Each test user performed both 
parts, but the order of these parts varied between the users in 
order to avoid the influence of the learning effect. These two 
parts were identical in terms of their layout and 
arrangements.   
In the first phase, the user first had the opportunity to 
view only the original animation as many times as he/she 
wanted, and after that was asked to answer Questions 1.1 
and 1.2 (Table 1). The questions dealt with the overall 
impression of the dataset. Then the user viewed the 
temporally transformed animation and answered the same 
questions. The order of the animations was fixed to this, 
because we wanted to simulate the explorative analysis task 
where the user first gets an overview of the data and then 
uses more complex tools, focusing on more detailed 
analysis.  
In the second phase, the user could use both of these two 
animations to answer three more detailed questions 
(Questions 2.1-2.3 in Table I) about the behavioural patterns 
of the data. Because of the differences in the datasets, the 
questions varied slightly between the two datasets. 
After finishing both parts of the test, the user was 
interviewed. The interview was semi-structured and covered 
the following topics: 
 
Was the temporal transformation as a method easy 
to understand? 
 
What could have made the transformation easier to 
understand? 
 
Did you use the animation, timeline, or still picture 
of the animation to answer the questions? 
 
Was the transformed animation useful when 
answering the questions? Why? 
 
In what tasks was the transformation especially 
useful? 
 
Could this kind of tool be useful in your job? 
 
Figure 2. The top row (a) shows the “Every 10th” dataset visualized on a timeline.  The middle row (b) shows the “First days” dataset visualized 
on a timeline. The scales of the timelines are different. The bottom row (c) shows both datasets after the equal density transformation.  
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Some users had already discussed these topics during the 
test, and in these cases not all the questions were explicitly 
gone through during the interview. 
TABLE I. QUESTIONS IN THE USER TEST. 
Q 
“First days” dataset 
 “Every 10th” dataset 
1.1 
What kind of patterns do you find from the data?  
1.2 
Are there any events which seem not to fit the data or draw your 
attention in some other way? 
2.1 
Where are the first and last 
events of the dataset located? 
In what area are the first ten 
events of the dataset located? 
2.2 
Is there a location on the map 
where there are multiple 
sequential events? Where is it? 
Are there time periods when 
the events are clustered into a 
certain area? 
2.3 
Is there an area on the map 
where the events are clustered 
both spatially and temporally? 
Does the centroid of the 
events move during the 
animation? 
 
The test was completed by nine users. They were 
professional cartographers or geographers with experience of 
temporal datasets. Four of them were female and five male. 
Their ages varied between 28 and 55 years. 
The users did the test on a laptop computer that was 
connected to a data projector. The evaluator observed the 
user’s performance via the data projector, calculating the 
viewing times for each animation. The users could answer 
the test questions either by typing their answers into a 
textbox on the display or verbally to the evaluator, who 
wrote those answers down. The answers in the interviews 
were also written down by the evaluator. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. A screenshot from the transformed animation of the “First Days” 
dataset. The latest event  is seen as a bright red dot in the middle of the map. 
Basemap: Esri 2013. 
C. Analysis of the Material 
From the user test, the following indicators were analyzed: 
1. the number of times the user viewed each 
animation in each task, and whether he/she viewed 
the 
whole animation or the viewing 
was 
discontinued; 
2. the kinds of behaviour patterns the user found from 
the animations and whether these findings were  
appropriate; 
3. whether the user’s impression of the phenomenon 
represented in the dataset differed between the 
original and transformed animations. 
From the users’ comments during the test and their 
answers in the interview, the following factors were 
calculated: 
1. positive and negative comments the users made 
about each animations; 
2. faulty and inaccurate interpretations that the users 
made from the animations; 
3. cases where the user made different interpretations 
from the same dataset on the basis of the two 
animations. 
Because of the small number of test users, no statistical 
significance parameters were calculated from these results. 
 
V. 
RESULTS 
In the test, the users chose to view the transformed 
animation slightly more often than the original animation. 
This trend was particularly clear with Questions 2.1 and 2.2, 
which dealt with so-called elementary lookup tasks [18]. 
With more complex analysis tasks, the users tended to 
interrupt the flow of the original animations by pausing or 
fast-forwarding, while the transformed animations were 
more often viewed in their entirety. This pattern can be seen 
in Table II. The first, bold number in each box marks the 
times when the animation was viewed completely, and the 
second number (in parentheses) marks the times when the 
animation was viewed partially, which means that the user 
paused, fast-forwarded, or interrupted it in some other way 
during the viewing. Every row in the table corresponds to 
one task in the test. 
The differences between the results for the two datasets 
in Question 2.3 are caused by the difference in the 
questions. With the “First Days” dataset, the question 
concerned the whole time period, and therefore the users 
had no choice but to view the animation completely. On the 
contrary, with the “Every 10th” dataset the task was to find a 
spatio-temporal cluster, and the users could stop viewing the 
animation after finding the first one. 
TABLE II. THE VIEWING TIMES OF EACH ANIMATION 
 
Every 10th dataset 
First Days dataset 
original 
temporally 
transf. 
original 
temporally 
transf. 
Q 1.1 and 1.2 
16(2) 
 
16(2) 
 
Q 1.1 and 1.2 
 
15(2) 
 
17(0) 
Q 2.1 
2(10) 
3(14) 
5(6) 
3(12) 
Q 2.2 
4(5) 
9(2) 
6(1) 
11(0) 
Q 2.3 
6(10) 
9(4) 
9(1) 
8(0) 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

When viewing the transformed animation of the “First 
days” dataset, in the first phase of the test six out of the nine 
users mentioned that they perceived a location at which 
several events appeared sequentially. This location can be 
seen as the latest and brightest dot in Figure 3. Later, when 
explicitly asked (Q2.2), the remaining three users also 
perceived it. From the original animation, none of the users 
perceived this kind of behaviour at first, and after the 
question Q2.2, only one user mentioned that he also saw 
that phenomenon in the original animation, “but much more 
weakly than in the transformed animation”. This location 
with sequent events proved to be a police station in the 
centre of Port-au-Prince. Our assumption is that the 
inhabitants of the city went to the police station to seek their 
missing relatives after the earthquake, and the police used 
Twitter to support the search and rescue efforts.  
The users learned to favour the transformed animation 
with some tasks even during this kind of very short test. For 
the questions Q2.1 and Q2.2 the transformed animation was 
used approximately 40% more often than the original, and 
was viewed more often without interruption. With the 
question Q2.3 the preference between the animations varied, 
depending on the dataset, but the transformed animation was 
viewed in its entirety more often.  
In the interviews most of the users had a positive attitude 
towards the transformed animations. They were apparently 
pleased and said that the transformation was “charming” or 
“nicer”. They also mentioned that the transformed 
animation was “better” and “easier to watch”. Two users 
said that the transformed animation was “exhausting” and 
its “continuous info flow was tiring”. However, these two 
users also commented that the transformation was useful in 
some cases. A summary of elements calculated from the 
interviews is shown  in Table III. 
TABLE III. SUMMARY FROM THE INTERVIEWS 
 
Original animation 
Temporally 
transformed 
animation 
More useful (pos.) 
2 
14 
Unpleasant to view 
(neg.) 
1 
2 
Misinterpretations 
 
2 
Different 
interpretations 
8 
 
The users had varying opinions about the applicability of 
the transformation. For some tasks performed in the test, 
some of the users said that the transformed version was 
“essential”, while others said that it did not suit those tasks. 
When asked about the use cases for this kind of 
transformation, the users mentioned several possible 
application areas in addition to elementary lookup tasks 
dealing with time. For example, traffic planning, crowd 
movement analysis, environmental analysis, and oil 
destruction activities were proposed. The users also pointed 
out the possibility of combining the analysis of the temporal 
dimension on the timeline with behavioural analysis of the 
transformed animation.   
From the interviews it became clear that a proper 
temporal legend could have improved the performance; five 
of the nine test users mentioned this when asked about  
development ideas. More specifically, the idea of colouring 
the events according to their timestamp was mentioned by 
several users. Another suggestion was to improve the 
linking between the timeline and the animation; a moving 
pointer should show the flow of time of the transformed 
animation on the timeline of the original data.  
The test results indicate that it is essential to ensure that 
the user understands how the transformation influences the 
animation. In several cases (eight out of the 27 behaviour 
descriptions recorded) the users’ impression about the 
phenomenon varied between the original and transformed 
animations, even though they knew that the animations 
presented the same dataset. Some clear misinterpretations 
appeared; in one case the user grouped the last events of one 
day and the first events of the next day into the same spatio-
temporal cluster despite the fact that there was a 12-hour 
gap. The same user also made a false statement about the 
location of the last event of the dataset. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
The user test shows that the equal density transformation 
of the animation revealed the position of sequential events 
that were not detected from the original animation. We 
believe that this pattern would have remained unnoticed 
without the transformation. Additionally, this pattern was 
found spontaneously; in the majority of cases it arrested the 
attention of the users without any specific search task. This 
is an important feature of the visual analysis tool when it is 
used for data exploration and data mining. 
As the interviews with the users proved, the power of the 
equal density transformation lies in the fact that it can 
reduce the user’s need to interrupt the animation, and 
therefore offers a smooth overall evocation of the 
phenomenon. At the same time it eases the cognitive load on 
the user by offering a continuous, temporally predictable 
change with no congested periods. It emphasizes the order 
of the events and equalizes them in relation to time, thus 
attributing equal significance to all the events. 
The findings indicate that the disadvantage of the 
transformation 
is 
that 
misinterpretations 
of 
the 
transformation are possible or even probable. These 
misinterpretations could be minimized with a temporal 
legend in which the user can always perceive the phase of 
the animation. Furthermore, properly designed colours for 
the events could indicate the degree of the transformation, 
and these colours could be used for linking the timeline and 
the animations.  
The idea of colouring the events according to their 
timestamp also arose repeatedly in the interviews. The users 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

suggested, for example, that the colour of the point-type 
events might change smoothly day by day. This would help 
the user to detect spatio-temporal clusters from the map and 
also communicate about the temporal discontinuities in the 
data.  
However, a disadvantage of the use of colour as a 
temporal legend is that one cannot visualize any attribute 
data by means of colours at the same time. When the events 
are point-type and visualized with small, round objects, 
other ways to present attribute information are limited. 
Therefore, consideration should be given to whether the 
combination of these two variables with the use of colour is 
possible. Brewer [19] proposed a set of colour scheme types 
to be used with bivariate data, but this set does not contain 
the combination of qualitative attribute information and a 
bipolar subordinate variable. The temporal transformation 
can affect the time either by stretching or shrinking it, and 
therefore its visualization should also be bipolar. If the 
degree of temporal transformation is simplified to binary 
data (= slower or faster than the original), then Brewer’s 
“qualitative/binary” combination can be used. In this 
schema, the qualitative data is visualized with different hues 
and the binary data is visualized with the lightness of the 
colour. It must be noted that Brewer’s model is designed for 
choropleth maps, and its applicability to point-type data is 
not obvious. Therefore it is clear that more research is 
needed to test whether discrimination between these two 
variables is possible in a use case similar to the case in this 
study. 
Another possible way to provide the information about 
the speed of the animation is sound. [20] suggests sonic 
input to represent the passing of time. This could also be a 
useful technique with an animation with changing speed, 
since human hearing is relatively sensitive to changes in 
rhythm and pitch. A user test with a sonic legend and a 
larger number of test users is our future research plan. 
The lack of attribute information is a limitation of this 
study. In this study, we tested the concept of equal density 
transformation and therefore wanted to keep the test 
arrangement as simple as possible. It would be possible, for 
example, to classify the tweet messages according to their 
thematic content, and visualize this classification by the use 
of colour.  
Because of the simplification of the test procedure, the 
user control over the animations was also limited. The users 
did not have a chance to adjust the speed of the animation or 
to filter its content. However, we offered the most common 
user control tools; playing, pausing, and the opportunity to 
jump to any moment in the animation. A wider selection of 
control tools would have increased the cognitive load on the 
user and drawn the user’s attention away from the task 
being tested. 
VII. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The human ability to adopt information from temporal 
animation is limited. If the animation runs too fast, is too 
long, or presents too many events simultaneously, a user can 
easily miss some information, and therefore is not able to 
form a full image of the phenomenon being presented. The 
traditional control tools of an animation, such as pausing, 
jumping to a specified scene, or looping, have a limited 
capability to improve this understanding. 
This paper presented a novel method for transforming 
the temporal dimension of map animations by equalizing the 
interval between two consecutive events. The user test 
proved that the transformation can reveal patterns that 
would have been left unnoticed with traditional animation. It 
seems to be understandable for the users and useful for 
spatio-temporal analysis in parallel to an original, non-
transformed animation.  
In exploratory analysis a rich variety of tools that 
complement each other is a necessity. The results from this 
user test and interviews indicate that equal density 
transformation might be an appropriate technique to 
complement a set of such analysis tools.  
REFERENCES 
[1]  
B. Tversky, J. B. Morrison, and M. Betrancourt,  
“Animation: can it facilitate?” International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, vol 57, 2002, pp. 247-262. 
[2]  
D. Archambault, H. C. Purchase, and B. Pinaud,  
“Animation, small multiples, and the effect of mental map 
preservation in dynamic graphs,” IEEE Transactions on 
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 17(4), 2011, pp. 
539-552. 
[3]  
A. Koussoulakou and M.-J. Kraak, “Spatio-temporal maps 
and cartographic communication,” The Cartographic Journal, 
vol. 29(2), 1992, pp. 101-108. 
[4]  
T. S. Slocum, R. S. Sluter, F. C. Kessler, and S. C. Yoder, 
“A qualitative evaluation of MapTime, a program for 
exploring spatiotemporal point data,” Cartographica, vol. 
39(3), 2004, pp. 43-68. 
[5]  
A. Griffin, A. MacEachren, F. Hardisty, E. Steiner, and B. 
Li, “A comparison of animated maps with static small-
multiple maps for visually identifying space-time clusters,” 
Annals of the American Cartographers, vol. 96(4), 2006, pp. 
740-753. 
[6]  
S. I. Fabrikant, S. Rebich-Hespanha, N. Andrienko, G. 
Andrienko, and D. R. Montello, “Novel method to measure 
inference affordance in static small multiple displays 
representing dynamic processes,” The Cartographic Journal, 
vol. 45(3), 2008, pp. 201-215. 
[7]  
A. Lobben, “Influence of data properties on animated maps,” 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers, vol. 
98(3), 2008, pp. 583-603. 
[8]  
M. Harrower and S. Fabrikant, “The role of map animation 
for geographic visualization.” In: M. Dodge, M. McDerby, 
and M. Turner (Eds.), Geographic Visualization, John Wiley 
& Sons, 2008. 
[9]  
Kraak, M.-J., Edsall, R., and MacEachren, A., “Cartographic 
animation and legends for temporal maps: Exploration and or 
interaction.” In: Proceedings of the 18th International 
Cartographic Conference, Stockholm, Sweden, 1997, pp. 
253-260. 
[10]  M. Harrower, “The cognitive limits of animated maps,” 
Cartographica, vol. 42(4), 2007, pp. 349-357. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[11]  G. Andrienko et al., “Space, time, and visual analytics,” 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 
vol. 24 (10), 2010, pp. 1577-1600. 
[12]  J. Allen, “Maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals,” 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 26(11), 1983, pp. 832-
843. 
[13]  D. DiBiase, A. M. McEachren, J. Krygier, and C. Reeves, 
“Animation and the role of map design in scientific 
visualization,” Cartography and Geographic Information 
Systems, vol. 19(4), 1992, pp. 201-214, 265-266. 
[14]  M. Monmonier, “Temporal generalization for dynamic 
maps,” Cartography and Geographic Information Science 
vol. 23 (2), 1996, pp. 96-98. 
[15]  M.-J. Kraak, Mapping Time: Illustrated by Minard's Map of 
Napoleon's Russian Campaign of 1812, ESRI Press, 
California, 2014. 
[16] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, H. Schumann, and C. 
Tominski, “Visualization of trajectory attributes in space-
time cube and trajectory wall”, in M. Buchroitner et al. 
(eds.), Cartography from Pole to Pole, Lecture Notes in 
Geoinformation and Cartography, Springer-Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 157-163. 
[17]  B. FitzGerald, Science in Geography 1: Developments in 
Geographical Method. Oxford University Press, 1974. 
[18]  N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko, Exploratory Analysis of 
Spatial and Temporal Data – A Systematic Approach, 
Springer, Berlin, Germany, 2006.  
[19]  C. A. Brewer, “Guidelines for use of the perceptual 
dimensions of color for mapping and visualization”,  
IS&T/SPIE 1994 International Symposium on Electronic 
Imaging: Science and Technology. International Society for 
Optics and Photonics, 1994. 
[20]  M. Kraak, R. Edsall, and A. M. MacEachren, “Cartographic 
animation and legends for temporal maps: Exploration and or 
interaction”, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
18th 
International 
Cartographic Conference, 1997, pp. 253-260. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

