Comparison Between Drainage Network Extracted From Elevation and Surface 
Models 
 
João Ricardo de Freitas Oliveira, Jussara de Oliveira Ortiz , Sergio Rosim 
Image Processing Division 
National Institute for Space Research - INPE 
São José dos Campos, Brazil 
{joao,  jussara, sergio}@dpi.inpe.br 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a possible procedure to identify 
critical regions extracting drainage networks from surface 
model. Qualitative comparison between drainage network 
extraction 
from 
surface 
and 
elevation 
models, 
both 
representing the relief, was done. This comparison highlights 
the differences between drainages extracted from both models 
and it shows the same critical patterns. For the study area, the 
radar data was obtained from airborne SAR AES-2 
(AeroSensing) with p-band and x-band sensors. Both the 
elevation model (p-band) and the surface model (x-band) have 
2.5m of horizontal resolution. The elevation model represents 
the actual relief of the land surface, while the surface model is 
influenced by the coverage of the Earth's surface. This model 
may show problems in regions with forest, because the canopy 
of trees forms the relief. Deforestation also causes errors in the 
drainage 
representation, 
leading 
to 
spurious 
drainage 
formation. To identify where differences occur, a remote 
sensing image was used. This image was classified to identify 
forest regions and places with deforestation occurrence. The 
drainages were superimposed over the classified image to 
contextualize the critical areas. The remote sensing image was 
obtained from the Resourcesat-1 satellite, also known as IRS-
P6, built by the Indian Space Research Organization, porting 
the LISS 3 camera operating in three spectral bands (0.52-
0.59µm; 
0.62-0.68µm; 
0.77-0.86µm), 
yielding 
23.5m 
of 
horizontal resolution. The Height Above the Nearest Drainage 
(HAND) parameter, a useful terrain descriptor, was used to 
find the critical areas in the surface model. TerraHidro, a 
hydrological modeling system, was used to extract the drainage 
networks. 
Keywords-drainage network; surface model; elevation model. 
I. 
 CONCEPTUALIZATION 
Drainage network is basic information for studies 
involving water resources. As a consequence, drainage 
network extraction must be very precise. Otherwise, the 
results can lead to wrong decisions. To reach this aim two 
factors are important: a good drainage extraction method and 
a good quality Digital Elevation Model (DEM). 
If the drainage extraction method is not adequate, 
unrealistic 
local 
features 
can 
appear 
in 
drainage 
representation. These features cause wrong representation of 
the drainage paths, quantitative errors in path length or 
watershed areas, and other errors. Among the methods to 
extract adequate drainage network, the Priority First Search 
(PFS) method was chosen [1] to extract the drainage network 
with the TerraHidro system. 
In relation to data quality, representing the surface of a 
geographical region, there are two problems to consider: 
spurious pits and surface versus elevation models. 
The spurious pits are created in the generation of the 
DEM, whether from isolines or image pairs, such as radar 
images. The interpolation [2], stereoscopic [3], or 
interferometric [4] processes are responsible to create DEM 
spurious pits. 
The other aspect regards the relief representation data 
type. There are two data types that represent DEM: one is the 
elevation model representing the terrain relief, and the other 
is the surface model, where the altitude is the land cover, for 
example, the canopy of trees in a forest. As this last type of 
data model is much more available, it is desirable to identify 
problems in the generation of drainage networks by using 
this type of data set. 
It is difficult to the user to identify the drainage network 
positioning errors when he has only the surface model. This 
work aims to propose a method to determine the most critical 
error areas. The user can use this information to seek 
auxiliary data to help him in the manual edition task or, at 
least, to realize that the results in those regions can be out of 
acceptable quality range. 
This work also shows the differences in drainage network 
representation when extracted from elevation and surface 
models to highlight the differences between both drainages 
and to show that the bigger differences are situated in the 
most critical areas. To identify the differences, a remote 
sensing image from Resourcesat-1 [5] was classified and 
used to understand the problem areas. 
Section II describes the relief data models. Section III 
describes the study region and used data sets. Section IV 
presents the processing steps adopted. Section V presents the 
discrepancy analysis of the drainage networks. Section VI 
proposes a method to determinate the critical areas and 
makes evaluation of the results obtained. Section VII 
presents the concluding remarks. 
II. 
RELIEF DATA MODELS 
There are two relief data sets to download for free. The 
first is the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM), 
available at the horizontal resolution of 90 meters [6]. The 
SRTM data set was generated from images acquired by radar 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

technology. The other data is the ASTER Global Digital 
Elevation Model (ASTER GDEM) [7] with horizontal 
resolution of 30 meters from optical images. 
Both data sets are surface model representations. As they 
show land cover, the relief is not well represented 
everywhere. In this way, a clearing created anywhere in the 
forest will cause problems in the determination of the 
drainage network. In large areas, tree tops may be a fair and 
acceptable relief representation. Deforestation, many trees 
of different sizes, roads and sudden changing in vegetation 
type, all these introduce errors in the subjacent relief 
information, introducing artifacts in the data, lending to an 
inexact drainage extraction.  
Another problem is related to the generation of surface 
models from texture images. In the SRTM case, texture 
images are converted to surface model by a procedure called 
interferometry that creates flat areas in large water regions 
such as rivers and lakes. In the ASTER case, the images are 
opticals and the procedure for generating the surface model 
is called stereoscopy. Optical images suffer direct 
interference of cloud cover, and where it occurs, the surface 
values are estimated. 
This work shows the drainage networks extracted from 
surface and elevation models for the same region, with radar 
technology. The aim is to point out important differences 
between the drainage networks extracted using both models, 
and to indicate some way to determine the critical regions 
prone to error occurrence, using only the surface model 
data. 
III. 
GEOGRAPHICAL REGION AND USED DATA SETS 
The study area of this work is located in the Brazilian 
Amazon region, (Brazil in green), Pará State (yellow), 
between latitudes s03011’03” and s03003’57”, and longitudes 
w55006’03” and w54054’00” (white rectangle), as shown 
below in Fig. 1. 
For the study area, the radar data was obtained from 
airborne SAR AES-2 (AeroSensing) [8] with two sensors: p-
band and x-band. Both the elevation model (p-band) and the 
surface model (x-band) have 2.5m of horizontal resolution, 
comprising an area of 14km by 22km. Fig. 2 presents both 
models. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Location of the study area. 
 
Figure 2. (a) p-band elevation model; (b) x-band surface model. 
The other data used was a color image composition from 
Resourcesat-1, also known as IRS-P6, built by the Indian 
Space Research Organization, with the LISS 3 camera 
operating in three spectral bands (0.52-0.59µm; 0.62-
0.68µm; 
0.77-0.86µm) 
having 
23.5m 
of 
horizontal 
resolution. These images are from 2012. Fig. 3 shows the 
used color image composition. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Color image composition: band 1 red, band 2 green and band 3 
blue. 
The drainage networks were extracted from both radar 
data and the color image composition was used to verify the 
differences between the two extracted drainages. 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

IV. 
PROCESSING STEPS 
Drainage was extracted using TerraHidro, a distributed 
hydrological system for water resource applications [9]. 
TerraHidro uses a modified PFS method to extract good 
quality drainage networks [10]. This method eliminates all 
pits and finds water flow in flat areas. These are the two 
main problems extracting drainage networks. Fig. 4 presents 
the drainage extraction for elevation and for surface models. 
 
 
Figure 4. (a) drainage network for elevation model; (b) drainage network 
for surface model. 
Characteristics of land cover can help to identify the 
differences between both drainages. The images were 
classified to discriminate areas of water, forest and 
deforestation. This process was executed in the SPRING 
system [11] using an automatic classification method, by 
means of unsupervised classification, using the Isoseg 
algorithm. Unsupervised classification is a method that 
works on segmented areas. It examines a large number of 
unclassified pixels and divides them into a number of 
classes, based on natural groupings present in the segmented 
image. The classification process can be described briefly as 
follows: first, a percentage acceptance threshold is chosen. 
This threshold is used to calculate the maximum 
Mahalanobis distance [12] a region created by the 
segmentation process can be separated from the center of a 
class and still be considered as belonging to that class. It also 
determines the number of class clusters detected by the 
algorithm. Iteratively, the classifier removes all regions with 
a Mahalanobis distance to any class greater than the 
acceptance threshold. The user controls the level of details 
through the acceptance threshold: fewer classes for higher 
threshold levels or more classes for lower threshold levels. 
After testing several values, the threshold value of 95% was 
accepted, which appropriately defined the classes without 
creating redundancy. Fig. 5 shows the classified image. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Classified image with forest in green, water in blue, and 
deforestation in pink. 
As the color image composition has 23.5m of horizontal 
resolution, the drainages must be extracted in the same 
resolution. TerraHidro uses an upscaling methodology that 
converts a high resolution drainage network into a low 
resolution one [13] [14]. In this work, a factor of 9 was used 
to convert the original grid resolution from 2.5m to 22.5m. 
As the factor must be an integer, this value yields the best 
approximation. Fig. 6 shows the drainage networks of the 
elevation and surface models on top of the classified image. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Drainage network for elevation model in orange and drainage 
network for surface model in blue. 
The analysis of the differences between the drainage 
networks will be qualitative, verifying each drainage portion 
regarding to the context of the elevation and surface models. 
V. 
DRAINAGE DISCREPANCY ANALYSYS 
The drainage analysis is based on understanding how the 
drainage changes by using the surface model in place of the 
elevation model. Two elementary errors occur when using 
the surface model regarding to the drainage network in 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

deforestation areas and when the relief is represented by 
canopy of trees. Fig. 7 presents the drainage networks, by 
using the surface model (blue) and by using the elevation 
model (white), with the background derived from the 
classified image, representing in purple the deforestation and 
forest areas in green. 
 
 
Figure 7. Drainage network for the elevation model in white and drainage 
network for the surface model in dark blue. 
The deforestation creates regions of low elevation with 
respect to its neighborhood, which is formed by forest. As 
the elevation is given by the forest (canopy of trees), a path 
of drainage probably will be erroneously created in the 
deforested region. Fig. 8 shows the differences between the 
drainages extracted from elevation and surface models. The 
yellow ellipses highlight some examples showing significant 
differences between both drainage networks. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Consequences of using the surface model to extract the drainage 
network in deforestation areas. 
The other problem regards the canopy of trees 
representing relief. This can causes errors when there are 
lack of uniformity between the relief formed by the canopy 
of the trees and the actual terrain topography. Fig. 9 presents 
some examples of this type of problem. 
 
Figure 9. Consequences of using the surface model to extract the drainage 
network in forest areas. 
 
The yellow ellipses highlight the locations with error 
occurrence. 
VI. 
DETERMINATION AND EVALUATION OF CRITICAL 
AREAS 
It was observed that the surface model data, in many 
cases, varies abruptly in the critical areas, something that is 
not so common to observe in the elevation model data. As 
the HAND (Height Above to the Nearest Drainage) [15] 
terrain descriptor is sensible to drainage changes in regions 
of sudden terrain variations, it was used as a tentative way to 
determine critical drainages areas. 
HAND calculates, for every cell of the relief regular grid, 
the altimetry difference between this cell and the nearest cell 
pertaining to the drainage network, following the local drain 
directions. 
Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 show the resulting DEMs depicting 
the HAND terrain descriptor for the x- and p-band, 
respectively, calculated using the TerraHidro System. The x-
band drainage is shown in green, and the p-band drainage, in 
yellow. Critical areas, where the HAND descriptor shows 
sudden variations in value, are shown inside red ellipses. 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Descriptor HAND for the x-band. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
Figure 11. Descriptor HAND for the p-band. 
The use of the HAND descriptor can help to spot areas 
where the drainage network is less precise and may contain 
errors. It can be useful if an x-band radar data DEM is the 
only data available. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This article presented the drainage networks differences 
when they are extracted from the surface model and from the 
elevation model. Real data was used for both models and two 
situations causing problems, deforestation and forest areas, 
were shown. 
Drainage networks extracted from surface models have 
errors that can significantly impair the quality of the results. 
Not always, however, it can be easily identified. Use of 
classified images, identification of deforestation and forest 
regions, are strategies to make better drainage extraction. 
This work also presents a procedure to determine critical 
areas for extracting drainage network from x-band radar 
images. A limitation of this procedure is that it shows only 
the most critical areas. Other critical areas are not found by 
the suggested procedure. 
This procedure can be useful when there is only an x-
band DEM available, with no additional information. It 
signals potential critical areas, being necessary to have more 
data or information about these areas to correct the extracted 
drainages. In the worst case, when there are no other data, 
the drainage network extracted in these areas is not to be 
trusted. 
This issue is important because large databases of reliefs, 
such as SRTM and ASTER, were created from surface 
models and are worldwide used. 
The development of this work had the financial support 
of FAPESP (Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de 
São Paulo), under process 2014/01254-9. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Jones, “Algorithms for using a DEM for mapping 
catchment areas of stream sediment samples,” Computers & 
Geosciences, vol. 28, 2002, pp. 1051–1060. 
[2] R. Fencík and M. Vajsáblová, "Parameters of interpolation 
methods of creation of digital model of landscape," 9th 
AGILE Conference on Geographic Information Science, 
2006, pp. 374-381. 
[3] Cheng P. and C. Chaapel, "Automatic DEM generation". 
http://www.pcigeomatics.com/pdf/GeoInformatics08_WorldV
iew-1_DEM.pdf [retrieved:  03, 2014] 
[4] Dungchen E., Chunxia Z., and Minsheng L., "Application of 
SAR interferometry on DEM generation of the Grove 
mountains," Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote 
Sensing, vol. 70, 2004, pp. 1145-1149. 
[5] G. Chander, "Overview of the Resourcesat-1 (IRS-P6)". 
http://calval.cr.usgs.gov/documents/IRSP6.pdf  [retrieved:  
03, 2014] 
[6] SRTM - Shuttle Radar Topography Mission of NASA - 
National 
Aeronautics 
and 
Space 
Administration. 
http://www2.jpl.nasa.gov/srtm/ [retrieved:  03, 2014] 
[7] ASTER 
Global 
Digital 
Elevation 
Model 
(GDEM). 
http://www.jspacesystems.or.jp/ersdac/GDEM/E/4.html 
[retrieved:  03, 2014] 
[8] J. Moreira, "Design of an airborne interferometric SAR for 
high precision DEM generation," International Archives of 
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, vol. XXXI, part B2, 
1996, pp. 256-260. 
[9] S. Rosim, J. R. F. Oliveira, A. C. Jardim, L. M. Namikawa, 
and C. D. Rennó, “TerraHidro: A distributed hydrology 
modelling system with high quality drainage extraction,” 
GEOProcessing 2013: The Fifth International Conference on 
Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, 
and Services, 2013, pp. 161-167. 
[10] W. Collischonn, D. C. Buarque, A. R. Paz, C. A. B. Mendes, 
and F. M. Fan, “Impact of pit removal methods on DEM 
derived drainage lines in flat regions”, AWRA 2010 Spring 
Specialty Conference, 2010, pp. 1-6. 
[11] G. Câmara, R. C. M. Souza, U. M. Freitas, J. Garrido, and F. 
M. Ii, “SPRING: integrating remote sensing and GIS by 
object-oriented data modelling,” Computers & Graphics, vol. 
20(3), 1996, pp. 395-403. 
[12] J. A. Richards, Remote Sensing Digital Image Analysis: an 
Introduction, 2nd ed., Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1995. 
[13] S. M. Reed, “Deriving flow directions for coarse-resolution 
(1-4km) gridded hydrologic modeling,” Water Resources 
Research, vol. 39(9), 1238, 2003, pp. 4.1 – 4.11, 
doi:10.1029/2003WR001989 
[14] A. R. Paz, W. Collischonn, and A. L. L. Silveira,” 
Improvements in large-scale drainage networks derived from 
digital elevation models,” Water Resources Research, vol. 42, 
W08502, 2006, pp. 1-7, doi:10.1029/2005WR004544 
[15] C. D. Rennó, A. D. Nobre, L. A. Cuartas, J. V. Soares, M. G. 
Hodnett, J. Tomasella, and M. J. Waterloo, “HAND, a new 
terrain descriptor using SRTM-DEM: mapping terra-firme 
rainforest environments in Amazonia,” Remote Sensing of 
Environment, v.112, 2008, pp. 3469-3481. 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

