Towards a Semantic Interpretation of Satellite Images by Using Spatial Relations
Deﬁned in Geographic Standards
Samuel Andr´es
IRD, UMR Espace-Dev
Montpellier, France
samuel.andres@ird.fr
Christelle Pierkot
IRD, UMR Espace-Dev
Montpellier, France
christelle@pierkot.fr
Damien Arvor
IRD, UMR Espace-Dev
Montpellier, France
damien.arvor@ird.fr
Abstract—To work more efﬁciently, remote sensing appli-
cations need to introduce semantic tools which are able to
express experts knowledge. One important part is about spatio-
temporally which is often used by experts to make their
interpretations. We argue that geographic standards could help
to formalize spatio-temporal expertise. In this paper, we focus
on spatial relations by giving an example on how to ﬁn beaches
by using spatio-temporal ontology.
Keywords-Remote sensing; Semantic interpretation; Geo-
graphic standards; Spatial relations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Usually, to interpret and recognize objects on satellite im-
ages, experts use both remote sensing knowledge (e.g., spec-
tral signature, remote sensing index, etc) which are linked to
physical properties of objects (wavelength, texture, etc), and
ﬁeld knowledge (features properties, spatial relations, etc),
linked to the application domain such as agriculture, ecology
or urban planning. For example, to ﬁnd mangrove in an
image of French Guiana, the expert uses knowledge acquired
from his ﬁeld experience (e.g. mangrove grows in salt water,
between ocean and continent etc) together with knowledge
stemming from remote sensing processes (e.g. NDVI index
for vegetation segments, NDWI to ﬁnd water ). However,
this way of proceeding often brings some problems. Indeed,
because of this knowledge depends on the expert personal
experience, it is diverse and non equivalent. First, two
experts do not have the same interpretation of one image
because they do not use necessarily the same treatments in
the segmentation or classiﬁcation processes. For example,
many indexes exist to classify vegetation (e.g., NDVI, VGI,
etc) and the expert will probably use the one he has the best
knowledge, thus the selected index for this process is not
necessarily the same from one expert to another. Moreover,
the expert often proceeds by trial and error tests before
ﬁnding a suitable solution. Finally, a remote sensing expert
has not necessarily the sufﬁcient knowledge of the ﬁeld to
well interpret the image in a speciﬁc context. Therefore,
the interpretation of the same image often leads to different
results which are not consensual.
We argue that to have more consistent results, it is necessary
to develop new methods which take into account all complex
types of knowledge used in the image interpretation process.
One way to achieve this is to add more semantics in the
interpretation process, by using ontologies which describe
both image and ﬁeld knowledge. Indeed, ontologies are a
way to facilitate knowledge sharing and reuse and can be
formalized with standardized languages as OWL. Thus, they
can serve to structure the semantic interpretation of images.
This paper is structured as follows. First, we introduce
some relevant works in the ﬁeld of image interpretation.
Then, we discuss on how taking into account image and
ﬁeld viewpoints in the formalization process. Section IV is
dedicated to explain why the use of geographic standards can
be of interest in this context and introduces the theoretical
metamodel that we have speciﬁed to take into account this
kind of information in both viewpoints. Section V presents
our ﬁrst experimental results by focusing on management
of spatial relations. Finally, we conclude and give some
perspectives to this work.
II. SOME RELATED WORK IN IMAGE SEMANTICS
Bridging the semantic gap with ontologies is a wide topic
which has been studied by many ways.
Ontologies have been used to improve expressivity for
both manual and automatic image annotation [1], [2]. Nev-
ertheless, the main purpose of ontologies in image interpre-
tation is to formalize a domain knowledge [3], [4], [5]. Some
works mention reasoners and knowledge inference to enrich
image information at different steps of image exploitation
[6], [7], [8].
Some of other research ways use spatial relationships
between objects. For instance we can cite [9] for fuzzy
spatial relationships conceptualization in medical images. In
[10], RCC-8 based spatial relationships are used for image
annotation. At a lower level, [11] uses spatial relationships
for identifying the semantic of urban objects by the way
of a dedicated algorithm. Finally, [6] uses spatial relation-
ships in image interpretation based on reasoning. This work
argues that some academic spatial relationships cannot be
distinguished in digital images because of lack of depth
information.
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

III. IMAGE AND FIELD VIEWPOINTS
In the process of interpretation of satellite images, image
and ﬁeld are two complementary and indivisible view-
points, that represent the same features according to distinct
perspectives. For example, according to respectivly ﬁeld
and image viewpoints, mangrove can be deﬁned by either
biotic or abiotic factors of ecosystems such as leaf type,
salinity environment or by physical characteristics such as
wavelength or texture (cf. Fig. 1).
Figure 1.
Image and ﬁeld viewpoints.
However, to be used widely, matching must be established
between concepts related to the ﬁeld and the image points
of view (e.g. we must recognize that mangrove deﬁned in
the ﬁeld’s point of view apparent to a vegetation segment
in the image perspective). To facilitate these gateways, ﬁrst
of all it is necessary to represent knowledge in a common
formalism.
Ontologies that [12] deﬁned as a formal speciﬁcation of a
shared conceptualization, specify a set of concepts, relations
and properties that are relevant for modeling a domain of
study [13]. To be used in a process, these ontologies must
be formalized in a common language such as the OWL
semantic web standard. Furthermore, OWL standard based
on description logics, allows reasoning on resources, on
the one hand to check the consistency of conceptualized
information, and on the other hand to ﬁnd new knowledge.
Formalize knowledge from two points of view by ontologies
speciﬁed in OWL, will therefore facilitate matching between
the different knowledge and allow inferring new knowledge
that can be used into a semantic interpretation process.
Moreover, in both points of view, spatio-temporal con-
cepts are commonly used to deﬁne features. For example, we
can use spatial relations to deﬁne features relative position
from each other (e.g. Mangrove is located between ocean
and continent in ﬁeld, or vegetal segment is between water
and soil objects in image). Furthermore, geometry can also
be used in both viewpoints to deﬁne shape or location
properties. This consideration also applies with temporal
characteristics. Thus, we also must take into account the
spatio-temporal dimension in the modeling of knowledge.
As a result, we need to formalize three ontologies:
One dedicated to image perspective, another one for ﬁeld
viewpoint and a transversal one to specify spatio-temporal
concepts (cf. Figure 2).
Figure 2.
Matching different viewpoints.
IV. FORMALIZING SPATIO-TEMPORAL CONCEPTS
Because of spatio-temporal concepts exist in both view-
points, it seems to be useful to formalize them into a
framework ontology. Indeed, specifying a framework on-
tology will give a common basis for describing the dif-
ferent viewpoints, thereby helping the implementation of
bridges between the various elements to be described, which,
therefore, leads to reduce this which is usually called the
semantic gap [9]. We also see another advantage which
is to unify deﬁnitions and to reuse concepts that appear
redundantly in different application contexts (e.g. spatial
relationships between objects in land cover mapping or
Amazonian coastal dynamics).
A. Using geographic standards to represent spatio-temporal
knowledge
GIS community has been very active for many years
in terms of modeling spatiotemporal knowledge [14], [15],
[16], [17], [18], [19]. A number of these studies have led to
the speciﬁcation of standards and recommendations from the
OGC (Open Geospatial Consortium) and ISO (International
Organization of Standardization), the two major standard
organisms in terms of geographic Information [20], [21],
and are now widely used by GIS and spatial DBMS. Thus,
it seems interesting to use standards and recognized work to
deﬁne spatio-temporal concepts.
B. Spatio-temporal metamodel
A metamodel for describing spatio-temporal knowledge
using geographic standards has been deﬁned [22]. An
overview of this metamodel is given in Figure 3, where eight
components have been identiﬁed.
The Core package is the central element of the meta-
model. It is used to characterize the geographical feature as
a whole which have a direct or indirect dependency with
the other packages. The SpatialDimensionPackage contains
information about spatial references of the feature such as
shape or location. The TemporalDimensionPackage includes
concepts, which characterize time such as instant or period.
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 3.
Global view of the metamodel.
The Thematic package aim is to describe the other nature
of a feature, such as image characteristics or landscape
properties. The Relation package contains all the required
concepts for describing a relationship between features. It
is specialized into three sub-packages in order to reﬁne
it in terms of Spatial, Temporal and Semantic relations.
The TemporalRelation package includes concepts to deﬁne
temporal relationships between features, such as ”before” or
”four months ago”. The SpatialRelation package includes
concepts to deﬁne spatial relations between features, such
as ”near” or ”50m away”. Finally, the SemanticRelation
package includes all the others relations that can exist
between features such as part of, is a, grow, etc. More details
about each package can be found in [22].
For most concrete aspects of the work, our metamodel
can be instantiated into a framework ontology which import
all ontologies deﬁned by the packages into the metamodel.
C. Focus on spatial relations
As the experiments given in the next section, focuses on
spatial relations, we detail here this package in Figure 4.
Many directions have been taken to deﬁne spatial rela-
tions, and are currently used in the standards [15], [20],
[21], [23], [24]. In our metamodel, we have chosen to
use the types deﬁned in [25] to specify three classes of
spatial relations. Thus, three types of relation have been
deﬁned: topological, projective and metric. Metric relations
are of distances or angles [16]. They can be deﬁned by
measurable methods (e.g. the town is located 5km away from
the beach), cognitive methods (e.g. forest is near river), or
fuzzy methods.Topological relations are about connections
between objects. These relationships are generally deﬁned
by measurable methods (e.g. via the DE9IM matrix [15]),
but can also be expressed by terminologically cognitive
methods (e.g. next to, touches, within). Three approaches
are regularly cited in the literature, namely, the point set
based model of nine intersection by [15] (EhRelation), the
Logic based Model connection calculus regions of [24]
(RCC8Relation), and the Calculus based model of [23]
(CBMRelation). We choose to explicitly deﬁne these three
classes in our metamodel, because they are commonly used
by several communities and they can be easily linked to
each other [26]. Projective relations are described by space
projections such as cardinal relationship (e.g. east of, north
of) [16], or orientation relations of the objects against
each other (e.g. left, down, front) [27]. Finally, we choose
to represent reference systems used with the relation by
an attribute, whose type is deﬁned in [28] (i.e. intrinsic,
extrinsic and deictic).
V. EXPERIMENTS ON SPATIAL RELATIONS
We propose to illustrate relevance of this metamodel
integrating some spatial relationships to satellite image
interpretation by reasoning. Accordingly, we use spatial
relation knowledge by focusing on the RCC8 topological
relationships [24].
Our example concerns a calibrated (in reﬂectance and
temperature) Landsat 5-TM image of the surroundings of
the city of Santarem (in the Brazilian Amazon) from Decem-
ber 7, 2009. In this case, we attempted to detect segments
with different semantics (cf. Figure 5).
Image processing is performed using the free software
Orfeo Toolbox which proposes an implementation of RCC8
spatial relationships. Above all, we ensured the image ob-
jects are meaningful. For this purpose, we produced a so-
called good segmentation [29] based on the preliminary
semantic mapping of pixels of [30].
Once the segmentation done, we begin the ontological im-
age description without paying attention to semantics from
pixel classiﬁcation. In the ontological image description
approach we detailed in [31], ontologies have two purposes.
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 4.
Focus on spatial relations.
Figure 5.
Landsat 5-TM calibrated image extract.
On the one hand, we use ontologies to automatically
describe only low-level image features with a satellite im-
age reference conceptualization [6] (framework ontologies).
Image description is a set of assertions based on the refer-
ence conceptualization, using image concepts, references to
remote sensing processing and spatial relationships.
On the other hand, the reference conceptualization is also
necessary to express a few expert concepts, which is called
remote sensing contextual knowledge [6] (domain ontology).
We began deﬁning concepts like vegetal segment, water seg-
ment and mineral segment using radiometric characteristics
(cf. Figure 6). These deﬁnitions are image-based rather than
based on the ﬁeld point of view.
Concepts like water segment and mineral segment are
deﬁned by intrinsic characteristics which often are spectral
or textural indexes. But some other expert concepts need
extrinsic characteristics like spatial relationships to be de-
ﬁned. For example, we can deﬁne the beach segment concept
from the mineral one, specifying that a beach segment is a
(A)
(B)
Figure 6.
Segments retrieved (in white) by reasoning for two remote
sensing semantics: water (A) and built-up and mineral (B).
mineral segment externally connected to a water segment.
The RCC8 externally connected is an instance member of
the spatial relation ontology.
Finally, image segments are automatically classiﬁed us-
ing a reasoner based on description logics. This allows
producing semantics using reasoning based on intrinsic
and extrinsic characteristics. The Figure 7 illustrates our
approach on the beach segment example, taking topological
spatial relationships into account.
It is not easy to evaluate the results. We proposed in [32]
some confusion matrices to evaluate reasoning on intrinsic
characteristics. This is not an absolute solution because the
result depends on the whole processing, including segmen-
tation step.
We do not propose quantitative evaluation concerning ex-
trinsic characteristics. However, it is possible to qualitatively
compare Figure 5 and Figure 7: the coastline seems to be
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

well detected.
Figure 7.
Segments of beach retrieved (in white) by reasoning, using
spatial relationships.
VI. CONCLUSION
We showed in this article how spatio-temporal conceptu-
alization based on reliable standards can be usefully applied
to remote sensing.
We presented a proposal of spatio-temporal metamodel
and we speciﬁcally focused on spatial relations package. We
partially create models which conform to the metamodel,
using spatial topological relationships for satellite image
description.
Finally, we illustrated our work by preliminary example
about coastline detection. This concerns the image side and
other concrete aspects concerning ﬁeld point of view are in
progress so to include all knowledge areas of remote sensing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work presented in this paper was carried out as part
of the PO FEDER GUYANE 2007-2013 program under
the frame of the CARTAM-SAT project, and of the Eu-
ropean Union’s Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-
2013, SPA.2010.1.1-04: ¨Stimulating the development of
490 GMES services in speciﬁc area¨, under grant agreement
263435, project BIO SOS: BIOdiversity Multi-Source Mon-
itoring System: from Space To Species (http://www.biosos.
eu), coordinated by CNR-ISSIA, Bari-Italy.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Hyvnen, A. Styrman, and S. Saarela, “Ontology-based
image retrieval,” 2002, pp. 15–27.
[2] M. Srikanth, J. Varner, M. Bowden, and D. Moldovan,
“Exploiting ontologies for automatic image annotation,” in
Proceedings of the 28th annual international ACM SIGIR
conference on Research and development in information
retrieval, ser. SIGIR ’05.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2005, pp. 552–558. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/1076034.1076128[accessed:2012-12-21]
[3] V. Mezaris, I. Kompatsiaris, and M. G. Strintzis, “An ontology
approach to object-based image retrieval,” in In Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. on Image Processing (ICIP03), 2003, pp. 511–514.
[4] A. Puissant, N. Durand, D. Sheeren, C. Weber, and P. Ga-
narski, “Urban ontology for semantic interpretation of multi-
source images,” in 2nd Workshop Ontologies for urban
development: conceptual models for practitioners (Urban
Ontologies 2007), Castello del Valentino, Turin, Italy, October
2007.
[5] S. Derivaux, G. Forestier, C. Wemmert, and S. Lefevre,
“Extraction de d´etecteurs d’objets urbains `a partir d’une
ontologie,” in Atelier Extraction de Connaissance `a par-
tir d’Images (ECOI), Journ´ees Francophones Extraction et
Gestion des Connaissances (EGC 2008), Sophia Antipolis,
France, Jan 2008, pp. 71–81.
[6] Z.
Falomir,
E.
Jim´enez-Ruiz,
M.
T.
Escrig,
and
L. Museros, “Describing images using qualitative models
and description logics,” Spatial Cognition & Computation,
vol.
11,
no.
1,
pp.
45–74,
2011.
[Online].
Avail-
able: http://krono.act.uji.es/people/Ernesto/qimage-ontology/
paperJSCC-preprintNov2010.pdf/view[accessed:2012-12-21]
[7] B. Neumann and R. Mller, “On scene interpretation with
description logics,” Image and Vision Computing, vol. 26, pp.
82–101, january 2008.
[8] J.-P. Schober, T. Hermes, and O. Herzog, “Content-based
image retrieval by ontology-based object recognition,” in in
KI-2004 Workshop on Applications of Description Logics,
2004, pp. 61–67.
[9] C. Hudelot, J. Atif, and I. Bloch. (2008) Fuzzy spatial relation
ontology for image interpretation.
[10] N. Maillot and M. Thonnat, “Ontology based complex object
recognition,” Image Vision Comput., vol. 26, no. 1, pp.
102–113, Jan. 2008. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.imavis.2005.07.027[accessed:2012-12-21]
[11] N. Durand, S. Derivaux, G. Forestier, C. Wemmert, P. Ga-
narski, O. Boussad, and A. Puissant, “Ontology-based object
recognition for remote sensing image interpretation,” 19th
IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artiﬁcial In-
telligence, vol. 19, pp. 472 – 479, October 2007.
[12] T. R. Gruber, “Toward principles for the design of ontologies
used for knowledge sharing,” International Journal of human
Computer Studies, vol. 43, pp. 907–928, 1995.
[13] T. Gruber, “Ontology,” in Encyclopedia of Database Systems,
2009, pp. 1963–1965.
[14] J.
F.
Allen,
“Maintaining
knowledge
about
temporal
intervals,” Commun. ACM, vol. 26, pp. 832–843, November
1983. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/182.
358434
[15] M. Egenhofer, “A formal deﬁnition of binary topological re-
lationships,” in 3rd International Conference on Foundations
of Data Organization and Algorithms, 1989, pp. 457–472.
[16] A. U. Frank, I. Campari, and U. Formentini, Eds., Theories
and Methods of Spatio-Temporal Reasoning in Geographic
Space, International Conference GIS Proceedings, ser. Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 639.
Springer, 1992.
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[17] S. Spaccapietra, “Editorial: Spatio-temporal data models and
languages,” GeoInformatica, vol. 5, pp. 5–9, 2001.
[18] L. Sp´ery, C. Claramunt, and T. Libourel, “A spatio-temporal
model for the manipulation of lineage metadata,” GeoInfor-
matica, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 51–70, 2001.
[19] C. Parent, S. Spaccapietra, and E. Zim´anyi, Conceptual
modeling for traditional and spatio-temporal applications -
the MADS approach.
Springer, 2006.
[20] ISO/TC211,
“Iso
geographic
information/geomatics
technical
committees
211,”
1994.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.iso.org/iso/standards development/technical
committees/other bodies/iso technical committee.htm?
commid=54904[accessed:2012-12-21]
[21] OGC/TC,
“Opengis
abstract
speciﬁcation,”
1999.
[On-
line].
Available:
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/
as[accessed:2012-12-21]
[22] C. Pierkot, “A geographic standards based metamodel to
formalize spatio-temporal knowledge in remote sensing ap-
plications,” in 6th International Workshop on Semantic and
Conceptual Issues in GIS (SeCoGIS 2012), 2012.
[23] E. Clementini and P. D. Felice, “A model for representing
topological relationships between complex geometric features
in spatial databases,” Information Sciences, vol. 90, pp. 121–
136, 1996.
[24] A. G. Cohn, B. Bennett, J. Gooday, and N. M. Gotts,
“Qualitative spatial representation and reasoning with the
region connection calculus,” vol. 1.
Hingham, MA, USA:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, October 1997, pp. 275–316.
[25] E. Clementini, “A Conceptual Framework for Modelling
Spatial Relations,” Phd in Computer Sciences, INSA Lyon,
2009.
[26] M. Perry and J. Herring, “Ogc geosparql, a geographic query
language for rdf data,” Open Geospatial Consortium, Tech.
Rep., 2011, oGC candidate standard.
[27] D. Hern´andez, Qualitative Representation of Spatial Knowl-
edge, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer,
1994, vol. 804.
[28] G. Retz-Schmidt, “Various Views on Spatial Prepositions,” AI
Magazine, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 95–105, 1988.
[29] G. Castilla and G. J. Hay, Object-based image analysis:
spatial concepts for knowledge-driven remote sensing appli-
cations.
Springer, 2008, ch. Image objects and geographic
objects, pp. 91–110.
[30] A. Baraldi, V. Puzzolo, P. Blonda, and L. Bruzzone, “Auto-
matic spectral rule-based preliminary mapping of calibrated
landsat tm and etm+ images,” IEEE Transactions on geo-
science and remote sensing, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 2563 – 2586,
september 2006.
[31] S. Andr´es, “G´enie ontologique et raisonneurs : application
aux images satellitaires,” in Actes de la conf´erence Informa-
tique pour les Syst`emes d’Information de D´ecision, Montpel-
lier, France, May 2012, pp. 575–582.
[32] S. Andr´es, D. Arvor, and C. Pierkot, “Towards an ontological
approach for classifying remote sensing images,” in SITIS
2012, 2012.
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

