We Need to Rethink How We Describe and Organize Spatial Information 
Instrumenting and Observing the Community of Users to Improve Data Description and Discovery 
Benjamin Adams and Mark Gahegan 
Centre for eResearch and Dept. of Computer Science 
The University of Auckland 
Auckland, New Zealand 
e-mail: {b.adams,m.gahegan}@auckland.ac.nz 
 
Abstract—In 
Spatial 
Data 
Infrastructure 
or 
Cyber 
Infrastructure, the description of geographic data semantics is 
intended to support data discovery, reuse and integration. In 
the vast majority of cases the producers of these data generate 
descriptions based on particular understandings of what uses 
the data are good for.  This producer-oriented perspective 
means that the descriptions often do not help to answer the 
question of whether a data set is of use for a consumer who 
might want to apply it in a different context.  In this paper, we 
discuss the role geographic information observatories can play 
in providing an infrastructure for observing the context of data 
use by consumers.  These observations of data pragmatics lead 
to operational statistical methods that will support better 
fitness-for-use assessment.  Finally, we highlight some of the 
challenges to building these observatories, and briefly discuss 
strategies to address those challenges. 
Keywords-Data description; data discovery; data reuse; 
geographic 
information 
observatories; 
graphical 
model; 
knowledge representation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The goal of fostering data reuse and semantic integration 
by describing geographic data in a cyberinfrastructure has 
met with limited practical success, despite many years of 
research.  One of the challenges that such efforts face is the 
situated 
nature 
of 
geographic 
knowledge—how 
we 
understand data depends strongly on our own experience and 
expertise, and potentially also the situation within which we 
intend to use it  [7].  Systems that organize information are 
usually designed to support a set of interactions by a 
community of users [8].  But, if the organizational system 
that is used in a cyberinfrastructure does not incorporate a 
model of the user community—and react to what can be 
learned from user interactions with the infrastructure—then 
it will have limited utility.  To date the onus for describing 
data has primarily fallen on the producers of the data, 
whether they are authoritative organizations or individual 
scientists.  This approach means that the descriptions usually 
reflect what the producers value in the data, without 
consideration of whether the data will be fit-for-use by a 
potential consumer of the data.  This is entirely reasonable 
given that the producer cannot possibly anticipate all the 
ways in which their data might be used.  But perhaps we are 
approaching the problem incorrectly in thinking of it this 
way?  To further complicate matters, the heterogeneity of 
geographic data, and the differing goals of its producers has 
lead to data being described in a multitude of incompatible 
ways.  And despite a large number of research papers on 
geospatial semantics—are often not getting any easier to 
reconcile in practice [15].  The result is a confusion of just-so 
data stories, describing what data “means”, but in a manner 
that provides very little help for data consumers to find the 
data that is suitable for their purposes. 
This is not a new critique. Frank [5] identified this 
problem (phrased in terms of data quality) well before the era 
of using semantic web languages to describe geographic 
data. But the critiques of producer-oriented data description 
(see also [3][17]), have not led to improved operational 
approaches for organizing geospatial information, perhaps 
because their strategies are quite abstract in their own way, 
lacking a clear methodology for putting them into practice. 
Current efforts on geo-semantics, in contrast, make 
operationalization of languages (semantics) and reasoning 
paramount, without much consideration of fitness-for-use 
[11].  If, as has been argued, fitness-for-use assessment is 
critical for functional Spatial Data Infrastructure (SDI) (or 
Geo-CyberInfrastructure), then we need practical and 
achievable methods that allow us to understand the context 
of data use from the perspective of the user: that is, in 
contexts that may not have been foreseen by the data 
producers or cyberinfrastructure builders. 
In this paper, we explore how some of the emerging ideas 
from information observatories could be applied in a 
geographical context to provide a practical solution for 
including the consumer in our methods of data description 
[1].  The approach we advocate is not without its own 
challenges (many of them social), but if adopted by the 
community, we believe will lead to statistical methods that 
will allow us to better support fit-for-use data assessment in 
cyberinfrastructure. 
An Information Observatory is infrastructure designed 
for understanding the ecosystem of information that observes 
not just the object of study but also the conceptual structures, 
data, and actors involved in the process of analysis and 
knowledge production, from multiple perspectives. A 
Geographic Information Observatory (GIO) is thus an 
information observatory focused on geographic information 
AND its community of practice.  Building GI observatories 
means building infrastructure that can observe geospatial 
data in the context of its use, within a community.  This is 
quite distinct from traditional approaches to data description 
in cyberinfrastructure, which focus primarily on using 
metadata to describe data formats and the semantics of data 
content: in an information observatory we consider not only 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

data but also tasks and methods performed with the data, the 
domain knowledge of data producers and consumers, 
communities-of-practice, and more; all of these facets 
become first-class observable artifacts (signifiers in the 
semiotic sense) that carry meaning and help to explain or 
contextualize each other.    
We propose that GI Observatories can provide insight 
into the dynamic, geographical scientific process from 
multiple perspectives, from data through tasks and methods 
to communities-of-practice, and that this insight will help us 
build cyberinfrastructure that will better support these 
interactions [1][6].  Or to put it another way, we propose to 
make an empirical science out of cyberinfrastructure 
development.  We want to observe the relationships between 
these different facets of geographic information, because 
these observables are only meaningful when brought into 
relation with other concepts.  And by observing them, we 
can learn from them all kinds of practical insights that can 
help characterize what information is used for, by whom, 
using which methods, for what tasks.  Over time, such 
observations can yield actionable intelligence that may add 
significant value over and above what can be achieved by 
formal semantics. 
In the following section we review related work. In 
Section III we discuss the nexus of knowledge relations that 
are employed in geographic research. Section IV details how 
GI Observatories can be implemented by operationalizing 
the nexus as a graphical model. In Section V we discuss 
some considerations of the role of the community in building 
GI Observatories, and we conclude with a discussion of the 
opportunities and challenges of building these observatories 
going forward. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The Web Observatory is a nascent idea proposed to 
support the notion of doing Web Science. That is, observing 
the web in order to understand how human  activity shapes 
the Web, and how human activity patterns and the Web co-
evolve. Web Observatories have been described as the 
“middle layer for broad data” meaning that, as data 
production has become more distributed and decentralized, 
the ability to perform analyses on these data has remained 
siloed, and the observatory serves to open up that analytic 
framework [19]. To date, the development of web science 
observatories has focused mostly on data collection / mashup 
tools that produce views on ‘big’ web data such as streaming 
social media content [20][21]. Recent work exploring the 
idea of building observatories on top of citizen science 
projects, such as Zooniverse, point to promising applications 
of Web Observatories to the sciences [22]. 
Although there are some superficial similarities between 
Web Observatories and the GI Observatory idea that we are 
proposing with respect to observing human information 
interaction, our focus differs in two important ways. First, 
the Web Observatory is a macro-scale observatory in the 
sense that it is designed to provide analytic infrastructure to 
explore properties of the web and human society, whereas 
the Information Observatory aims to capture observations at 
the granularity of data use and change, by individual 
researchers and within specific scientific communities [23]. 
Second, Web Observatories are primarily described as tools 
for analysis of the Web as a socio-technical system, thus 
there is a very specific subject of analysis, namely the Web. 
As noted, our motivation for building GI Observatories is in 
large 
part 
driven 
by 
a 
desire 
to 
build 
better 
cyberinfrastructure for scientific discovery, and we are 
interested in understanding the universe of information from 
a multitude of perspectives. 
Personalization 
in 
information 
retrieval 
requires 
modeling the background context under which a user 
performs an information-searching task [24][25]. This 
context model can take the form of an explicit user model or 
can be based on other kinds of implicit behavioral feedback, 
such as search history and click-through data [26][27][28]. 
Group level models of personalization are based on the 
notion that similar users will want similar search results [29]. 
Recommender systems built with collaborative filtering 
algorithms fall within this category of personalization [30]. 
Several variables can play a role in creating a user model 
using a relevance feedback framework. For example, the 
temporal scope of the information can be important, so that 
immediate search history might be more relevant than 
longer-term behavior [31]. Beyond search history, measures 
of user interests and activities from heterogeneous sources 
(documents, emails, etc.) can also be useful [32]. In social 
search, the role of the user within a larger community 
becomes an important factor [33]. 
Personalized search based on past behavior has raised 
concern about the potential drawback of creating a filter 
bubble, where potentially relevant information is not shown 
because of the personalization algorithm [34]. The many 
personalization methodologies and algorithms that have been 
developed for information retrieval and web search could 
well be applied to observational data collected by a GI 
Observatory and then be used to develop new ways of 
searching for scientific data. 
III. 
THE NEXUS OF RELATIONS 
Inspired by Alfred North Whitehead’s [18] writings on 
the intricate web of relationships that participates in 
knowledge representation, Gahegan and Pike [7] described a 
nexus of relations that link the many conceptual structures 
used in geographic research.  Their nexus is shown in Figure 
1.  Based on this nexus the Codex system was built to 
capture these relations and make it possible for a user to 
explore resources through any and all of these relations.  In 
practice, however, depending on the content of each of the 
nodes in the nexus and context that is of interest to the user, 
only a small subset of those relations will actually be 
relevant.  What is missing is a way to structure the web of 
relations in a way that facilitates understanding without 
overloading the user with unnecessary information. 
The ovals in Figure 1 represent the conceptual structures 
that the GIScience research community has expended most 
effort on describing, in some cases building metadata 
standards for describing those concepts.  Semantic metadata 
descriptions of geographic data in cyberinfrastructure focus 
on “objective” aspects of geographic data shown as circles in 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
blue.  However, the nodes (purple clouds) might take on very 
different values depending on whether one is a producer or 
consumer of data (the researcher in red).  The purple 
nodes—which are usually not captured—are important to 
assess fitness-for-use. 
For example, we have semantic models of measurement, 
geographic data models, and scientific workflows [4][9][13].  
Furthermore, current GIScience usually has its gaze fixed on 
Geographic Information (as its name suggests), so this is the 
subject around which other concepts are positioned.  
Semiotically, we could say that information (or data) is 
always the interpretant, with other data used to help explain 
it.  But this misses an opportunity to focus on other key 
facets, such as a researcher or a method and to use data to 
help describe them.  Meanwhile, situational knowledge is not 
formally captured (represented by the cloud shapes in Figure 
1), other than in some cases natural language, e.g., in journal 
publications.  Where other facets are captured, it is usually 
referred to as context, but now let’s recognize that it is 
simply a set of observations onto a different set of objects, 
not typically represented in an infrastructure, but could be.   
 
Figure 1.  The nexus of relations between (some of) the conceptual 
structures used in geographic research, adapted from Gahegan & Pike [7].   
 
Arguably, scientists who use these concepts in their work 
are more likely to be able to articulate what they want and 
what is important to them in terms of the conceptual 
structures represented by the cloud shapes—motivations, 
methodologies, theories, etc., rather than using the formal 
description languages for data that have been the target of 
most work on geosemantics.  This in no small part might 
explain why—despite great effort in GIScience to advance 
semantics—semantic technologies are not being used by 
most geo-scientists in their day-to-day research.  It is simply 
not the language that they use to think about and 
communicate their research. 
The model of the nexus is just one example meta-model 
for the kinds of relationships between conceptual knowledge 
used in geographic research.   For example, a sub-graph of 
these relations forms the graphical model of data production 
described by Gahegan and Adams [7].  In that model, each 
node in the nexus (community, task, domain knowledge, and 
data) are described by facets intended to capture the who, 
what, and why of data.  The relations in that model are also 
directed, rather than undirected as in the original nexus meta-
model. 
When building cyberinfrastructure for data re-use, we are 
faced with a two-fold problem: first, whether the 
representation that we choose for each node in the nexus is a 
functionally useful representation (such as an ontology of 
conceptual structures) for scientists engaging in geographic 
knowledge production; and second, whether the meta-model 
describing the relations and directionality between the nodes 
in the nexus is itself useful.  The GI Observatory gives us an 
infrastructure for addressing the first problem by collecting 
data on how conceptual structures relate to one another in 
practice, and then evaluating the information to be gained 
about one facet from a particular description of another facet.  
The second problem is encapsulated in the dynamic nature of 
the GI Observatory and its community-driven mandate—
they are built to serve geo-scientists and the meta-model 
should be flexible and revised as a richer and more accurate 
understanding of the community’s needs emerges.  In this 
sense, Figure 1 is just a place to start, not a final 
recommendation. 
To get us beyond the essentially meaningless result that 
everything is related to everything else, a GI Observatory 
will always need to make a commitment to a given meta-
model in order to observe the nodes in the nexus.  We also 
need to identify where to fix the GI Observatory's 
“telescope” and where to point it.  For example, we cannot 
look at tasks from a fixed perspective without deciding first 
what information artifacts of tasks act as signifiers and then 
describing the object of those signs, whether they be data, 
methods, communities, etc.  Most importantly, many 
different kinds of meta-models and signifiers and objects of 
enquiry can be created and could even co-exist, and the 
choice of those meta-models will depend on what the users 
of the GI Observatory want to use it for.   
IV. 
OPERATIONALIZING THE NEXUS AS A GRAPHICAL 
MODEL 
Relational network representations of knowledge such as 
the one shown in Figure 1 are found in all kinds of 
information systems.   And such graphical models can be 
recast as learning problems that are solved by doing 
statistical inference on networked nodes that represent 
variables that can take on many values [12]. Because mature 
computational patterns have been built for statistical 
inference on graphical models, they are applied to stochastic 
problems in a wide range of fields, including speech 
recognition, natural language processing, statistical physics, 
spatial statistics, and bioinformatics.  The network of 
conceptual structures used in practice and observed through a 
GI Observatory can similarly be modeled as graphical 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

models.  The variables observed can span across data 
(formats, semantics, geometric models), tasks, analytical 
methods, computational workflows and people (researchers, 
communities). 
Graphical webs of relations (Figure 1) can be either 
undirected or directed.  A directed graph (mathematically 
represented as an acyclic graph) is used to model cause-and-
effect relationships, whereas an undirected graph can be used 
when the causal structure is undefined.  The model presented 
in [6] is directed and explicitly represents data production as 
a generative model with variables that describe causal 
relationships between communities that perform tasks with 
domain knowledge, which results in data of some kind.  In 
contrast, the nexus in [7] is undirected, nodes are connected 
but there is no explicit directionality to the connections.  
Both kinds of models can form the backbone of a GI 
Observatory and utilizing the methodologies of statistical 
inference on graphical models (such as Bayesian Belief 
Network Learning or more general Inductive Model 
Discovery) can provide unique insights into the geographic 
information ecosystem [2][14]—and importantly without 
having to choose beforehand which causes what.  
However, in order to access these patterns through data-
driven discovery we need sufficient data, and it is in 
providing access to data about people (both producers and 
consumers of data), methods, workflows, and intention that 
GI Observatories show real promise in improving our geo-
infrastructure.  Several strategies can be employed to observe 
the variables in the nexus of relations.  The lowest hanging 
fruit is to extract pragmatic relationships connecting people, 
ideas and things to datasets from natural language available 
in data repositories and on the web.  Figure 2 shows how 
some of this information is encoded already in abstracts and 
webpages for researchers and investigating organizations.  
The text highlighted in purple in Figure 2 represents 
information that can be extracted from natural language and 
mapped to entities that represent motivations, concepts, 
theories, etc.  In this example the data producer describes 
very specific affordances that the data provides, but we know 
very little about how the consumers of the data have used it 
and whether the entities that the producer highlighted are in 
fact of high informational value to potential consumers. 
V. 
INVOLVING A COMMUNITY OF USERS 
GI Observatories will need to be built to serve the 
scientific community, so scientists should get real value out 
of what we can learn from these Observatories.  Thus, ideally 
we involve geographers and domain scientists in their 
design, building, and re-building [1]. One of the most 
significant challenges to building GI Observatories is that, in 
order to observe many aspects of the scientific process, the 
Observatory will need access to information about what 
researchers do that is usually not readily available.  For 
example, what kind of methods are scientists who are 
working in a specific field of research using with what kinds 
of data?   Here we can learn from recent work by David 
Ribes on what he calls scaling up ethnography: “The object 
of analysis for the ethnographer ... becomes the methods, 
techniques and technologies used by actors to know and 
manage their enterprise.” [16].  The instrumenting of the 
community to better understand data use presents several 
ethnographic challenges.  But the fact that researchers 
increasingly interact with data and methods through 
infrastructures and workflow scripts means that at least some 
of the information we seek is in fact readily available.  We 
simply need to instrument the SDIs to record it. 
A GI Observatory provides the research platform for 
doing scaled up ethnography on not only large-scale 
geospatial cyberinfrastructure projects, such as spatial data 
infrastructures, instantiations of Digital Earth, and smart 
cities; but also the activities of the geographic scientific 
community writ large. 
VI. 
RESULTS AND FINDINGS 
A prototype system for capturing the patterns of 
interaction between a community of users, tasks, methods, 
concepts and datasets has been created.  It uses the notion of 
Description Spaces for: Space and Time, Domain Semantics, 
Processes and Community.  Each space contains a smaller 
number of descriptive attributes.  The Description Spaces 
allow us to compute a compound distance score between any 
pair of items, such as a researcher and a dataset or a method 
and a task.  Over time, any use case that connects such items 
is remembered, effectively that can be used to ‘bring them 
closer’.  Bayesian inference is used on these Description 
Spaces and past histories to predict likelihood values that a 
certain researcher might be interested in a certain dataset or 
method, and so forth: in essence a recommender system but 
drawing from a much richer description of the problem 
domain than is usually found in conventional SDI or GIS.  A 
complete account, with examples, is provided in [6].     
In comparison to current SDI, this new approach simply 
broadens the focus, so everything we now consider as SDI 
still applies, but in addition we must (i) broaden the 
conceptual model used along the lines of the Descriptions 
Spaces describe above and (ii) ‘instrument’ the community 
of users so that we study and learn from what they do, thus it 
represents a much broader focus.  But in return, these 
enhancements offer a more complete picture of how 
communities operate in practice, and we believe that such 
knowledge is extremely valuable, on a par with theory in 
terms of its usefulness to researchers.  As an example: a 
recommendation such as this might be very helpful: “most 
climate change impacts researchers so far have used this 
interpolation method with that kind of dataset when working 
on coastal erosion problems”. 
Of course, these additional insights require additional 
effort to design and build the SDI initially and more research 
is yet needed to find: (i) ways to capture use patterns 
unobtrusively during the research process and (ii) ways to 
insert recommendations and insights back into the research 
process. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Easy discovery, reuse and integration of geospatial data 
have been the predominant motivations for decades of 
research on geosemantics. However, despite concerted effort 
by the GIScience community, a large gap continues to exist 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

between the aspirations of the geosemantics research and 
applied outcomes that are used in the daily work of 
scientists.  This stands in contrast to the very successful 
adoption of other GIScience research (e.g., spatial statistics), 
which 
has 
found 
wide 
adoption 
and 
successful 
implementations in a variety of geographic information 
systems. 
We argue that the reason for this state of affairs is that the 
way working scientists assess the “meaning” and quality of 
geographic data is based on wide variety factors that are not 
currently brought together in a holistic way in our semantic 
technologies.  The situated context of data use comprises 
more that just the “meaning of the data” from the perspective 
of the producer.  It is also who has used it, how they have 
used it, and why they have used it.  All of these properties of 
data use are potentially valuable pieces of information to aid 
discovery, reuse and integration.   
The nexus of relations surrounding geographic data use 
represents a complex system composed of simpler 
interrelated parts—each of these simpler parts is possible to 
observe and measure.  If we build our cyberinfrastructure to 
observe this wider context of data use, then we have an 
opportunity to build systems that can describe data in ways 
that better match how scientists themselves assess the fitness 
of data for their purposes.  In many other fields, graphical 
and probabilistic methods that can learn structure in the face 
of complexity and uncertainty have demonstrated significant 
success in the last decade. We contend that if we are 
successful in instrumenting our community to observe this 
complex network of relations surrounding data use, then we 
too can put these powerful methods of inference to build 
cyberinfrastructure that better works with geoscientists, and 
finally begin to realize the long stated potential of 
geosemantic technologies. 
Additional work is required to refine the Description 
Spaces used so that they are both useful (richly describe the 
problem domain) and easy to use (simple for the user to 
grasp).  Descriptions used must be either easy for a user to 
enter, or easy to learn via use-cases.  We make no claims that 
our current Description Spaces are optimal, merely that they 
are useful.  But others could be more useful.  If such 
Description Spaces are treated as meta-models, it should be 
possible to test different arrangements, to see which offer the 
best balance between usefulness and simplicity.  As noted 
already, additional research is also needed to find ways to 
unobtrusively harvest useful information during the research 
process (for example from workflows) and to then make it 
available to future researchers as recommendations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Adams, M. Gahegan, P. Gupta, and R. Hosking, 
“Geographic 
information 
observatories 
for 
supporting 
science.” In Proceedings of Workshop on Geographic 
Information Observatories, 2014, pages 1-5. 
[2] W. Bridewell, P. Langley, L. Todorovski, and S. Džeroski, 
“Inductive process modeling.” Machine learning, vol. 71, no. 
1, 2008, 1-32. 
[3] R. Devillers, Y. Bédard, R. Jeansoulin, and B. Moulin, 
“Towards spatial data quality information analysis tools for 
experts assessing the fitness for use of spatial data.” 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 
vol. 21, no. 3, 2007, 261-282. 
[4] F. T. Fonseca and M. J. Egenhofer, “Ontology-driven 
geographic information systems.” In Proceedings of the 7th 
ACM international symposium on Advances in geographic 
information systems, 1999, pages 14-19, ACM.  
[5] A. U. Frank, “Metamodels for data quality description.” In M. 
Duckham, E. Pebesma, K. Stewart, A.U. Frank editors, Data 
Quality 
in 
Geographic 
Information-From 
Error 
to 
Uncertainty, 1998, pages 142–158. Springer. 
[6] M. Gahegan and B. Adams, “Re-envisioning data description 
using Peirce’s pragmatics.” In M. Duckham, E. Pebesma, K. 
Stewart, A.U. Frank editors, Geographic Information Science, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8728, 2014, pages 
142–158. Springer. 
[7] M. Gahegan and W. Pike, “A situated knowledge 
representation of geographical information.” Transactions in 
GIS vol. 10, no. 5, 2006, 727–749. 
[8] R. Glushko, “Foundations for Organizing Systems.” The 
Discipline of Organizing, 2013, pages 1-45, MIT Press. 
[9] C. Granell, R. Lemmens, M. Gould, A. Wytzisk, R. de By, 
and P. van Oosterom, “Integrating semantic and syntactic 
descriptions 
to 
chain 
geographic 
services.” Internet 
Computing, IEEE, vol. 10, no. 5, 2006, 42-52. 
[10] K. Janowicz, B. Adams, G. McKenzie, and T. Kauppinen, 
“Towards 
Geographic 
Information 
Observatories.” 
In Proceedings of Workshop on Geographic Information 
Observatories, 2014, pages 1-5. 
[11] K. Janowicz, S. Scheider, and B. Adams, “A geo-semantics 
flyby.” In Reasoning Web. Semantic Technologies for 
Intelligent Data Access, 2013, pages 230-250, Springer. 
[12] M. I. Jordan, “Graphical models.” Statistical Science vol. 19, 
no. 1, 2004, 140–155.  
[13] W. Kuhn, “A functional ontology of observation and 
measurement.” In GeoSpatial Semantics, 2009, pages 26-43, 
Springer.  
[14] W. Lam and F. Bacchus, “Learning Bayesian belief networks: 
An approach based on the MDL principle.” Computational 
intelligence, vol. 10, no. 3, 1994, 269-293. 
[15] C. L. Palmer, M. H. Cragin, P. B. Heidorn and L. C. Smith, 
“Data curation for the long tail of science: The case of 
environmental sciences.” In Third International Digital 
Curation Conference, Washington, DC, 2007, pages 1-5. 
[16] D. Ribes, “Ethnography of scaling, or, how to a fit a national 
research infrastructure in the room.” In Proceedings of the 
17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing, CSCW ’14, 2014, pages 158–170. 
ACM, New York, NY, USA.  
[17] R. Y. Wang and D. M. Strong, “Beyond accuracy: What data 
quality means to data consumers.” Journal of management 
information systems, vol. 12, no. 4, 1996, 5-33. 
[18] A. N. Whitehead, Process and Reality: An Essay in 
Cosmology. New York, Social Science Book Store, 1929. 
[19] T. Tiropanis, W. Hall, J. Hendler, and C. de Larrinaga, “The 
web observatory: A middle layer for broad data.” Big Data, 
vol. 2, no. 3, 2014, 129–133. 
[20] K. McKelvey and F. Menczer, “Design and prototyping of a 
social media observatory.” In Proceedings of the 22nd 
international conference on World Wide Web companion, 
2013, pages 1351–1358. International World Wide Web 
Conferences Steering Committee. 
[21] X. Gao, et al., “Supporting a social media observatory with 
customizable 
index 
structures: 
Architecture 
and 
performance.” In Cloud Computing for Data-Intensive 
Applications, 2014, pages 401–427. Springer.  
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[22] R. Simpson, K. R. Page, and D. De Roure, “Zooniverse: 
observing the world’s largest citizen science platform.” In 
Proceedings of the companion publication of the 23rd 
international conference on World wide web companion, 
2014, pages 1049–1054. International World Wide Web 
Conferences Steering Committee.   
[23] K. O’Hara, N. S. Contractor, W. Hall, J. A. Hendler, and N. 
Shadbolt, “Web science: understanding the emergence of 
macro-level features on the world wide web.” Foundations 
and Trends in Web Science, vol. 4, no. 2-3, 2013, 103–267.    
[24] S. Lawrence, “Context in web search.” IEEE Data Eng.Bull., 
vol. 23, no. 3, 2000, 25–32.  
[25] L. Finkelstein, et al., “Placing search in context: The concept 
revisited.” In Proceedings of  the 10th international 
conference on World Wide Web, pages 406–414. ACM, 
2001. [27]  S. Lawrence. Context in web search. IEEE Data 
Eng. Bull., vol. 23, no. 3, 2000, 25–32. 
[26] D. Kelly and J. Teevan, “Implicit feedback for inferring user 
preference: a bibliography.” In ACM SIGIR Forum, volume 
37, 2003, pages 18–28. ACM.   
[27] T. Joachims, L. Granka, B. Pan, H. Hembrooke, and G. Gay, 
“Accurately interpreting clickthrough data as implicit 
feedback.” In Proceedings of the 28th annual international 
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in 
information retrieval, 2005, pages 154–161. ACM. 
[28] E. Agichtein, E. Brill, and S. Dumais, “Improving web search 
ranking by incorporating user behavior information.” In 
Proceedings of the 29th annual international ACM SIGIR 
conference on Research and development in information 
retrieval, 2006, pages 19–26. ACM.   
[29] Z. Dou, R. Song, and J.-R. Wen, “A large-scale evaluation 
and 
analysis 
of 
personalized 
search 
strategies.” 
In 
Proceedings of the 16th international conference on World 
Wide Web, 2007, pages 581–590. ACM. 
[30] G. 
Adomavicius 
and 
A. 
Tuzhilin, 
“Context-aware 
recommender systems.” In Recommender systems handbook, 
2011, pages 217–253. Springer. 
[31] X. Shen, B. Tan, and C. Zhai, “Implicit user modeling for 
personalized search.” In Proceedings of the 14th ACM 
international conference on Information and knowledge 
management, 2005, pages 824–831. ACM.  
[32] J. Teevan, S. T. Dumais, and E. Horvitz, “Personalizing 
search via automated analysis of interests and activities.” In 
Proceedings of the 28th annual international ACM SIGIR 
conference on Research and development in information 
retrieval, 2005, pages 449–456. ACM.    
[33] D. Carmel, et al., “Personalized social search based on the 
user’s social network.” In Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
conference on Information and knowledge management, 
2009, pages 1227–1236. ACM.   
[34] A. 
Hannak, 
P. 
Sapiezynski, 
A. 
Molavi 
Kakhki, 
Krishnamurthy, D. Lazer, A. Mislove, and Wilson, 
“Measuring personalization of web search.” In Proceedings of 
the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web, 2013, 
pages 527–538. International World Wide Web Conferences 
Steering Committee.  
 
 
 
  
 
Figure 2.  Geographic information observatories study the interactions and connections within a cyber community. We can observe unstructured data 
sources such as researcher websites, scientific articles and abstracts. Instrumenting the research community will allow us to get at deeper relationships. The 
observed relations in the nexus can be mined to discover the purposes for which data are fit. 
 
 
 
Dataset user
Dataset user
Dataset creator
I
Quantitative ecologist
Expertise: study design, applied statistics, remote 
sensing, spatial analysis, and programming.
Background: plant population, community, 
theoretical ecology, 
 specializes in generating 
inference from large and complex datasets
Project experience: forest and wildlife management, 
plant invasions, land cover classiﬁcation, and 
drivers of population dynamics.
Title: Mapped plant community time 
series, 1923-1973
Keywords: sagebrush steppe, plant 
community, demography, species 
interactions, climate, GIS, Idaho
Abstract ... allows analyses of 
demographic processes and intra- and 
interspeciﬁc interactions among 
individual plants. 
doi:10.5063/AA/...
Dataset user
Motivation
Hypotheses
Methodologies
Theories
Concepts
?
?
?
?
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

