Live Cities and Urban Services – A Multi-dimensional Stress Field between 
Technology, Innovation and Society 
 
 
SENSEable 
City Lab 
MIT 
Cambridge, US 
berno@mit.edu 
 
IGF 
University of 
Osnabrück, 
Germany 
Alexander Zipf 
Inst. of Geography 
University of 
Heidelberg, GER 
alexander.zipf@geog. 
uni-heidelberg.de 
Philipp Breuss-
Schneeweis 
Wikitude GmbH 
Salzburg, AUT 
philipp.breuss 
@wikitude.com 
Euro Beinat 
Dept. of Geography 
University of 
Salzburg, AUT 
euro.beinat 
@sbg.ac.at 
Marc Boher 
Urbiotica 
Barcelona, ESP  
marc.boher 
@urbiotica.com 
 
 
Abstract – Contrary to projections, which stated that the wide-
spread distribution of high-speed Internet connections would 
render geographical distance irrelevant, cities have recently 
become the centre of interest in academic research. However, 
especially real-time monitoring of urban processes is widely 
unexplored. We present the concept of a Live City, in which the 
city is regarded as an actuated near real-time control system 
creating a feedback loop between the citizens, environmental 
monitoring systems, the city management and ubiquitous 
information services. Basically, there are four main barriers 
towards the implementation of the Live City: methodological 
issues, technical/technological problems, privacy and legislative 
questions, and quantification of economic opportunities. In this 
paper, we discuss those challenges and point out potential 
future research pathways towards the realisation of a Live City. 
Keywords-live city, pervasive sensor networks, urban 
services, real-time information services. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Projections stated that the wide-spread distribution of 
high-speed Internet connections will render geographical 
distance irrelevant [1], and that cities are not more than mere 
artefacts of the industrial age [2]. As a side effect, cities were 
presumed to drastically decrease in importance as physical 
and social connections, and would play an increasingly 
ancillary role in socio-technical research. 
In reality, the world developed completely differently – 
cities are back in the focus of academic research. Cities in 
their multi-layered complexity in terms of social interactions, 
living space provision, infrastructure development and other 
crucial human factors of everyday life have re-gained 
importance in scientific research. This arises from the fact – 
amongst others – that major developments of scientific and 
technological innovation took place in the urban context 
[3],[4]. 
However in research on urban areas, particularly real-
time monitoring of urban processes and digital services are 
still widely unexplored. These research fields have recently 
received a lot of attention due to the fast rise of inexpensive 
pervasive sensor technologies which made ubiquitous 
sensing feasible and enriches research on cities with 
uncharted up-to-date information layers through connecting 
the physical to the virtual world, as shown in Fig. 1. 
 
Figure 1.  Live City – Connecting Physical and Virtual Worlds. [5] 
One driver towards this vision is the diminishing digital 
divide on a global scale. While the digital divide within 
countries is still strongly affecting the degree of access to 
information and knowledge, the global digital divide is 
decreasing due to the fast rise of ICT markets in China, 
India, South-East Asia, South America and Africa. Mobile 
phone penetration (i.e. “mobile subscribers per 100 
inhabitants”) has been at 76.2% of the world’s population in 
2010. This rate is at 94.1% in the Americas and at 131.5% in 
CIS (Commonwealth of Independent States) [6]. The two 
fastest growing mobile phone markets China and India 
currently face a penetration rate of 64% and 70%. 
This growth builds the basis for the installation of urban 
real-time services. In a recent report on Digital Urban 
Renewal [7], the author states that major demand-side 
drivers for digital urban projects are the increasing focus on 
sustainability and emissions reduction, continued pressure on 
the urban transport infrastructure, and increasing need for 
citizen services, amongst others. On the supply side, several 
drivers have been identified including the evolution of the 
Internet as an underlying framework for services, sensor 
networks, connectivity technologies, and augmented reality. 
However, we are still facing a lack of experience in 
assessing urban dynamics in real time. One reason is that 
continuous monitoring is an enormous challenge, and this is 
particularly true in the urban context, which poses very 
specific challenges. These comprise technological questions, 
but also significant economical, societal and political ones, 
which are rapidly gaining importance. 
Bernd Resch 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Generally speaking, we are experiencing fast progressing 
technology development, which is not only moving ahead 
quickly, but which is moving ahead of society. This 
development can be compared with a stream moving at high 
speed, on which we are paddling to remain on the same spot 
or at least not to drift off too fast. The question, which we 
have to tackle in this regard, is where our goal for the future 
lies: down-stream, somewhere near our current spot, or even 
up-stream? 
In this paper, we try to illustrate possible pathways to 
answering this multi-dimensional question. We incorporate 
societal, technical, political, privacy and economic issues 
into our rationale. We are well aware of shortcomings in 
terms of completeness and technical thoroughness. The 
paper shall be considered a first leap towards a Live City 
‘Installation Guide’. 
This paper is organised as follows: after this introduction 
we illustrate a few examples on existing approaches towards 
Live Cites in Section II before giving a disambiguation of the 
term ‘live’ in Section III. Section IV discusses challenges in 
current research on the Live City and Section V illustrates 
potential future research avenues, before Section VI 
summarises conclusions from the paper. 
II. 
STATE-OF-THE-ART – LIVE CITY IN ACTION 
One of the first implementations of a ‘real-time city’ has 
been done by the MIT SENSEable City Lab [5]. This 
research group has considerably coined the term ‘real-time 
city’, particularly through visualising the city as a real-time 
and pulsating entity. In further research initiatives, the 
SENSEable City Lab investigated human mobility patterns, 
usage of pervasive sensors to assess urban dynamics, event-
based anomaly detection in ICT networks, and correlations 
between ICT usage and socio-cultural developments. 
A new and innovative idea for assessing urban dynamics 
in real time is the concept of Living Labs. According to [8], 
a Living Lab is a real-life experimentation environment 
where users and producers co-create innovations. Living 
Labs are promoted by the European Commission, which 
characterises them as Public-Private-People Partnerships 
(PPPP) for user-driven open innovation. A Living Lab is 
basically composed of four main components: co-creation 
(co-design by users and producers), exploration (discovering 
emerging usages, behaviours and market opportunities), 
experimentation 
(implementing 
live 
scenarios) 
and 
evaluation (assessment of concepts, products and services). 
Also, much research is performed in the area of smart 
cities (in particular in South Korea also the term ‘ubiquitous 
cities’ is popular). For instance, IBM has implemented a 
number of urban services in the course of their ‘Smarter 
Planet’ programme [9]. Research is performed together with 
cities all over the world to implement applications in the 
areas of city management, citizen services, business 
opportunities, transport, water supply, communication and 
energy. The goal is to seize opportunities and build 
sustainable prosperity, by making cities ‘smarter’. 
A sensor-driven approach to ubiquitous urban monitoring 
is presented in [10] and in [11]. The authors present a 
measurement infrastructure for pervasive monitoring 
applications 
using 
ubiquitous 
embedded 
sensing 
technologies with a focus on urban applications. The system 
has been conceived in such a modular way that the base 
platform can be used within a variety of sensor web 
application fields such as environmental monitoring, 
biometric parameter surveillance, critical infrastructure 
protection or energy network observation. Several show 
cases have been implemented and validated in the areas of 
urban air quality monitoring, public health, radiation safety, 
and exposure modelling. 
III. 
A DISAMBIGUATION OF THE TERM ‘LIVE’ 
The term ‘Live City’ originates from the modification of 
the expression ‘Real-time City’ as definitions and usages of 
the latter are vague and vary on a quite broad scale. 
Anthony Townsend presents a very mobile phone centric 
definition of a real-time city by stating that ‘the cellular 
telephone […] will undoubtedly lead to fundamental 
transformations in individuals’ perceptions of self and the 
world, and consequently the way they collectively construct 
that world’ [12]. The author sees the real-time city as a 
potential platform for dedicated advertising and states that 
‘accessibility becomes more important than mobility’. This 
implies that it will be more critical to access urban services 
rather than moving around physically. This in turn means 
that the digital (mobile phone) infrastructure will be more 
important than the physical (transport) infrastructure. 
A possible definition of urban informatics – a term 
closely related the real-time city – is ‘the collection, 
classification, storage, retrieval, and dissemination of 
recorded knowledge of, relating to, characteristic of, or 
constituting a city’ [13]. This definition gives a holistic, but 
rather general view on the term ‘real-time city’, which 
centres around information and knowledge while societal, 
political and privacy aspects remain greatly untouched. 
In these interpretations of the expression ‘real-time’, its 
strict definition has been strongly mitigated. The term ‘real-
time’ originated in the field of computer science, where it 
initially described a process, which is completed ‘without 
any delay’. This broad view was then divided into hard and 
soft real-time demands. Soft real-time basically defines that 
deadlines are important, but the whole system will still 
function correctly if deadlines are occasionally missed. The 
latter is not true for hard real-time systems. Another term to 
express non-rigorous temporal requirements is ‘near real-
time’, which describes a delay introduced into real-time 
applications, e.g. by automated data processing or data 
transmission [14]. Hence, the term accounts for the delay 
between the occurrence of an event and the subsequent use 
of the processed data. 
As these definitions of the term ‘real-time’ have been set 
up for the domain of computer science it is important to 
evaluate and re-define the expression in the context of Live 
Cities. Naturally, strict real-time requirements are a central 
aspect in monitoring applications, whereby these demands 
are highly application-specific and can vary significantly. 
Therefore, they are not a fundamental goal in the field of 
Live Cities, as the term ‘real-time’ is primarily defined by an 
‘exact point in time’, which is the same for all data sources 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

to create a significant measurement outcome. Secondarily, 
the term defines the possibility to start a synchronous 
communication at a certain time, which might often be 
important for geographical monitoring applications, e.g. to 
enable the generation of an exact development graph for 
temporal pollutant dispersion over a defined period of time 
in precise intervals. 
Additionally to the suggestion of assessibility of the 
environment in the ‘now’, the expression ‘Live City’ also 
implies a feedback loop. The term ‘city’ does not only define 
the description of location-aware parameters, but also entails 
the exploration of causal patterns in these data. In the context 
of geo-sensor network and monitoring applications, this in 
turn means that the urban environment is not only analysed 
remotely by examining quasi-static data, but the procedure of 
sensing and processing live data offers the possibility of 
modifying the urban context in an ad-hoc fashion. 
In conclusion, it can be stated that the strict term ‘real-
time’ can be interpreted as ‘at present’ for urban monitoring 
applications. However, these topicality requirements can 
vary depending on the application context. For instance, an 
update on traffic conditions does not have to exceed a delay 
of a couple of minutes when this information is used for 
navigation instructions, whereas a 30 minute update interval 
can well be sufficient for short-term trip planning. 
To account for this non-rigorous requirement, the term 
‘Live City’ seems better suited than ‘Real-time City’. In this 
reflection, ‘near real-time’ appears to be closest to ‘live’, as 
it does not impose rigid deadlines and the expression itself 
suggests dynamic adaptation of a time period according to 
different usage contexts. 
IV. 
CHALLENGES IN CURRENT RESEARCH ON THE LIVE 
CITY 
The urban context poses many challenges to pervasive 
monitoring and sensing systems. Particular issues arise for 
the deployment of near real-time information services in the 
city. These range from physical sensor mounting and other 
technical challenges to societal and privacy implications. 
Furthermore, the sensitive urban political landscape has to be 
accounted for, which might cause unforeseen challenges. 
A. Technological and Technical Issues 
The first essential technological challenge is the 
integration of different data sources owned by governmental 
institutions, public bodies, energy providers and private 
sensor network operators. This problem can potentially be 
tackled with self-contained and well-conceived data 
encapsulation 
standards 
– 
independent 
of 
specific 
applications – and enforced by legal entities, as discussed in 
sub-chapter V.B. However, the adaptation of existing sensors 
to new interoperability standards is costly for data owners 
and network operators in the short term, and so increased 
awareness of the benefits of open standards is required. 
From a technical viewpoint, unresolved research 
questions for ubiquitous urban monitoring infrastructures are 
manifold. These challenges range from finding a uniform 
representation method for measurement values, optimising 
data routing algorithms in multi-hop networks, data fusion, 
and developing optimal data visualisation and presentation 
methods. The latter issue is an essential aspect in real-time 
decision support systems, as different user groups might 
need different views on the underlying information. For 
example, in case of emergency local authorities might want a 
socio-economic picture of the affected areas, while first-
response forces are interested in topography and people’s 
current locations, and the public might want general 
information about the predicted development of a disaster. 
In addition, there are a number of well-known technical 
issues in the establishment of urban monitoring systems 
(energy supply, sensor mote size, robustness, connectivity, 
ad-hoc network connections, reliability, connectivity, self-
healing mechanisms, etc.). These have to be addressed as the 
case arises depending on specific requirements of the end 
application. Thus, they are not part of the presented research. 
B. Various Stakeholders 
Other issues for the installation of a Live City are 
thematic challenges and socio-political concerns, which are 
rapidly gaining importance. The feedback loop depicted in 
Fig. 2 is a key factor in designing urban monitoring systems. 
In practice, various kinds of stakeholders have to be 
considered 
including 
citizens, 
information 
providers, 
research institutions, politicians, the city management, or 
other influential interest groups. This cycle involves all steps 
of the deployment process from planning, deployment, 
customised information provision, and feedback from the 
citizens and other interest groups. [15] 
 
Figure 2.  Feedback Loop Enabling the Live City. 
Another important peculiarity of the urban context is that 
there are large variations within continuous physical 
phenomena over small spatial and temporal scales. For 
instance, due to topographical, physical or radiometric 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

irregularities, pollutant concentration can differ considerably, 
even on opposite sides of the street. This variability tends to 
make individual point measurements less likely to be 
representative of the system as a whole. The consequence of 
this dilemma is an evolving argument for environmental 
regulations based on widespread monitoring data rather than 
mathematical modelling, and this demand is likely to grow. 
C. The Value of Sensing Collective Behaviour vs. Privacy 
Implications 
Although we experience quickly increasing awareness of 
the opportunities of digital mobile communication, the 
question arises how we can engage people to contribute 
actively being ‘human data sources’. This is necessary in 
order to leverage collective information in areas such as 
environmental monitoring, emergency management, traffic 
monitoring, or e-tourism. One example, in which this kind of 
volunteered data was of invaluable importance, were the 
earthquake and the following tsunami in Japan in March 
2011. In this case, the Tweet-o-Meter [16] application has 
been used to find anomalies in Twitter activity. Right after 
the earthquake, people started to post status reports, video 
streams, and conditions of destroyed areas, which could be 
interpreted in near real time as an indicator for an 
extraordinary event. Furthermore, information could be 
semantically extracted from personal comments and posts. 
This development raises the challenge to find the balance 
between providing pervasive real-time information while still 
preserving people’s privacy. Strategies to address this stress 
field are described in sub-section V.C. In addition, it seems 
self-evident that the provided information has to be highly 
accurate, reliable and unambiguous. Thus, quality control 
and error prevention mechanisms including appropriate 
external calibration will be discussed in sub-section V.A. 
In terms of privacy, the claim might arise that we need to 
be aware of our personal and private data before we share 
them. The essential question in this context, however, is how 
we can raise awareness of ways to deal with that matter. 
Terms and conditions of digital services and technology are 
mostly hardly understandable to non tech-experts. Thus, 
more simple and binding ways of communicating this kind 
of information have to be found. 
Finally, some more unpredictable challenges posed by 
the dynamic and volatile physical environment in the city are 
radical weather conditions, malfunctioning hardware, 
restricted connectivity, or even theft and vandalism. 
Moreover, there are a number of seemingly obvious but non-
trivial challenges such as optimal positioning of sensors, 
high spatial and temporal variability of measured parameters 
or rapid changes in the urban structure, which might cause 
considerable bias in the measurements. 
V. 
DISCUSSION: FUTURE RESEARCH AVENUES 
From the challenges described in Section IV we can 
derive a number of essential research questions, which have 
to be tackled in the area of Live Cities. These can be divided 
into methodological aspects, technical and technological 
issues, questions on privacy and legislation, and the 
assessment of economic opportunities. 
A. Methodological Research 
Over the last years prospects were made that ‘data would 
be the new oil’ [17],[18]. It has been stated that – like oil – 
data cannot be used without first being refined. This means 
that raw data is just the basic ingredient for the final product 
of contextual information that can be used to support 
strategic and operational decisions. Thus, a central issue in 
terms of providing real-time information services is the 
analysis of data according to algorithmic requirements, 
representation of information on different scales, context-
supported data processing, and user-tailored information 
provision aligned with the needs of different user groups. 
One way to reach this goal is to ‘sense people’ and their 
immediate surroundings using everyday devices such as 
mobile phones or digital cameras, as proposed by Goodchild 
[19]. These can replace – or at least complement – the 
extensive deployment of specialised city-wide sensor 
networks. The basic trade-off of this people-centric approach 
is between cost efficiency and real-time fidelity. The idea of 
using existing devices to sense the city is crucial, but it 
requires 
more 
research 
on 
sensing 
accuracy, 
data 
accessibility 
and 
privacy, 
location 
precision, 
and 
interoperability in terms of data and exchange formats. 
In terms of geo-data sources, Volunteered Geographic 
Information (VGI) plays a key role in realising the idea of a 
Live City. We are already experiencing an overwhelming 
willingness of citizens to contribute their personal 
observations ranging from opinions posted on Facebook to 
Tweets about local events or commented photo uploads on 
Flickr. As mentioned in Section IV, this kind of collective 
information can potentially have a vital impact on 
operational real-time strategies in areas such as emergency 
management, dynamic traffic control or city management. 
A central issue in VGI is the representativeness of 
volunteered information [19],[20]. We argue that defining or 
deriving consistent semantics in user-generated content 
possibly requires the combination of bottom-up and top-
down 
approaches. 
In 
bottom-up 
approaches, 
user 
communities build their own semantic objects and 
connections between those by using their own personal 
taxonomies. In contrast, top-down approaches – mostly 
academically driven – try to define semantic rules and 
ontological connections in a generic way prior to and 
independently of the end application. Only the combination 
of those using Linked Data concepts (rather than rigid and 
inflexible ontology approaches) can lead to domain-
independent and comprehensive semantic models, which 
are needed to cover the whole breadth of topics, users and 
applications in the Live City. In this regard, semantic search 
will be an essential concept to extract knowledge and 
information from user-generated data. 
An aspect, which is strongly connected to availability of 
data sources, is openness of data. As argued by Jonathan 
Raper [21], quality of decision-support is increasing with the 
quality and the quantity of available data sources. We are 
currently facing a situation that in most cases, too little data 
are available to support well-informed decisions in near real 
time. This brings up the question how data owners such as 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

companies in the environmental sector, energy providers or 
sensor network operators can be animated to open their data 
repositories for public use. 
On the contrary, we might face a vast amount of data 
freely available in the near future, contributed by a variety of 
different data producers. This of course raises the concern of 
trustworthiness of these data. Thus, automated quality 
assurance mechanisms have to be developed for uncertainty 
estimation, 
dynamic 
error 
detection, 
correction 
and 
prevention. In this research area, we are currently seeing 
different approaches including Complex Event Processing 
(CEP) [10] for error detection, standardisation efforts for 
representing uncertainty in sensor data (e.g. Uncertainty 
Markup Language – UncertML) [22], or proprietary profiles 
to define validity ranges for particular observations. Only 
when these questions are solved, reliability and completeness 
of recommendations can be ensured. 
Furthermore, measurements are only available in a quasi-
continuous distribution due to the high spatial and temporal 
variability of ad-hoc data collection. Addressing this issue 
will require complex distribution models and efficient 
resource discovery mechanisms in order to ensure 
adaptability to rapidly changing conditions. 
B. Technical and Technological Research 
Apart from technical sensor network research on energy 
supply, miniaturisation, connectivity, etc., standardisation 
and interoperability are vital prerequisites for establishing 
pervasive and holistic monitoring systems. As current sensor 
networks are mostly built up in proprietary single-purpose 
systems, efforts to develop a uniform communication 
protocol will be needed [23]. One promising approach in this 
field is the Sensor Web Enablement (SWE) initiative [24] by 
the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC). SWE aims to make 
sensors discoverable, accessible and controllable over the 
Internet. SWE currently consists of seven standards and 
interoperability reports, including the Sensor Observation 
Service (SOS) for observation data retrieval, Observations 
and Measurements (O&M) for sensor data encoding, Sensor 
Markup Language (SensorML) for platform description and 
the Sensor Alert Service (SAS) for event-based data 
transmission. 
Furthermore, sensor fusion algorithms are a vital 
prerequisite to combine data stemming from different 
heterogeneous sensor networks. Sensor fusion basically 
stands for the harmonisation of data in terms of units of 
measure, time zones, measurement models and observation 
semantics. To be compliant with the requirements of a ‘Live’ 
City, the fusion process has to happen in near real time.  One 
approach for on-the-fly integration of measurements coming 
from different SOS instances using the free open-source 
server GeoServer (http://geoserver.org) is presented in [25]. 
The system harmonises measurements in real time and 
provides them on the fly via standardised OGC web service 
interfaces such as the Web Feature Service (WFS) and the 
Web Map Service (WMS). Although this implementation is 
still improvable in terms of fusion capabilities, it 
demonstrates a seminal approach towards sensor fusion. 
The geo-analysis of real-time data sources can be 
implemented using the OGC Web Processing Service (WPS) 
in a standardised way. But the WPS architecture is very 
generic in its current version so that the developments of 
further specialised (domain-specific) application profiles are 
necessary as argued in [26] and [27]. The power of using 
WPS for implementing more complex analysis functionality 
for urban models has for instance been shown in [28]. 
Another technological issue is the availability of 
ubiquitous communication media. Today we are used to a 
functioning Internet to transmit information. However, in 
case of emergency, this layer is potentially not available, as 
we experienced for instance during hurricane Katrina in 
2005 in New Orleans. Possible alternate solutions comprise 
long-range ad-hoc networks or a robust communication core 
network, which can withstand harsh external influences such 
as tsunamis, earthquakes, avalanches or even vandalism. 
C. Privacy and Legislation Measures 
A crucial question in the context of Live Cities is how we 
can preserve people’s privacy dealing with ubiquitous 
information and partly personal data. One possible solution 
to address this issue is to make use of new ‘collective 
sensing’ approaches. This methodology tries not to exploit a 
single person’s measurements and data, but analyses 
aggregated anonymised data coming from collective sources, 
such as Twitter, Flickr or the mobile phone network [29]. 
Like this, we can gain a coarse picture of the situation in our 
environment without involving personal details of single 
persons. In case of tracking applications or services, in which 
personal data are involved, people have to have an opt-
in/opt-out possibility. This means that users can decide 
themselves whether they want to use the application – and 
also withdraw their consent – being aware of the type and 
amount of data that is collected and transmitted. 
Another central issue in deploying monitoring systems in 
the city is the personal impact of fine-grained urban sensing, 
as terms like ‘air quality’ or ‘pollutant dispersion’ are only 
surrogates for a much wider and more direct influence on 
people, such as life expectation, respiratory diseases or 
quality of life. This raises the demand of finding the right 
level of information provision. This again can potentially 
entail a dramatic impact in a very wide range of areas like 
health care, the insurance sector, housing markets or urban 
planning and management. 
A central question in this context is: can we actually 
achieve a system, in which transactions are not tracked or 
traced? Thinking about mobile phone calls, credit card 
payments or automated toll collection, each of the underlying 
systems has to have some kind of logging functionality in 
order to file payments and generate automated reports. In 
these cases it is probably just not possible prevent storage – 
at least for a short time. Thus, legal frameworks have to be 
developed on national and global levels. The dominant 
limiting factor in this regard is the varying interpretation of 
‘privacy’ in different parts of the world. For instance, 
privacy can be traded like a good by its owner in the USA, 
whereas it is protected by law in the European Union. This 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

means that supra-national legislation bodies and initiatives 
are called upon to set up appropriate world-wide regulations. 
This also includes the critical question of data 
ownership – who owns the data: the data producers (i.e. the 
citizens or a mobile phone network operator), the institutions 
that host a system to collect data, or the data providers? 
Furthermore, if sensitive data is analysed to produce 
anonymised information layers, who is responsible if 
decisions that are based on this information are wrong due to 
lacking quality of the base data? 
D. Assessing the Economic Value of Live Urban  Services 
Basically, the economic value of Live City services and 
applications can be either defined in concrete revenues or 
as an after effect of improved quality of life. The 
Economist Intelligence Unit’s liveability ranking [30] 
assigns a score for over 30 qualitative and quantitative 
factors across five broad categories: stability, healthcare, 
culture and environment, education, and infrastructure. 
These five categories basically sum up ‘what people want’. 
The technologies that have been developed in the few last 
years, like pervasive sensors to assess urban dynamics and 
especially mobile technologies, offer new opportunities to 
‘tune’ and ‘fine-tune’ urban processes. These processes can 
be transportation related, to monitor and direct traffic in real 
time, optimise parking spaces and navigate to available 
parking, or simply to help people with their daily tasks, 
finding jobs, finding housing, connecting people in spare 
time. Tools that bring the feedback loop directly to people 
make it easy to promote events and give people 
instruments to rate the attractiveness of these happenings. 
Mobile technologies offer great opportunities for young 
start-ups to build GPS-enabled, crowd-sourced, location-
based apps. Just one example is the Wikitude World Browser 
[31], which is tailored to individual needs. Igniting and 
funding a start-up scene can be the starting point for any 
government to build a connected Live City: start-ups create 
jobs and apps, which in turn – if tailored for locals – benefit 
people in the city and improve quality of life. 
The improved economic value of a ‘tuned’ city can be 
enormous. On one hand there can be cost saving advantages, 
for instance in considerable fuel savings if available parking 
spaces are reserved on a first-come-first-served policy and 
the driver is routed to this parking space rather than having 
to circle looking for a parking space. 
On the revenue side Google successfully leverages 
Internet advertisement by matching the search terms people 
enter in the Google search engine with ads. One key to 
generating revenue in the field of Live Cities may be to apply 
what Google did with the Internet to the real world, offering 
information and search services that focus on time, location, 
context and people rather than on simply search terms. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Contrary to projections, which stated that the wide-
spread distribution of high-speed Internet connections would 
render geographical distance irrelevant, cities have recently 
gained importance in academic research. Especially real-time 
monitoring of urban processes enriches research on cities 
with uncharted up-to-date information layers. 
Hence, within this vision of a Live City, the city is not 
only regarded as a geographical area characterised by a 
dense accumulation of people or buildings, but more as a 
multi-layered construct containing multiple dimensions of 
social, technological and physical interconnections. Through 
this viewpoint of urban areas as an actuated multi-
dimensional conglomerate of dynamic processes, the city 
itself can also be seen as a complex near real-time control 
system creating a feedback loop between the citizens, 
environmental monitoring systems, the city management and 
ubiquitous information services. 
In the Live City, the everyday citizen is empowered to 
monitor the environment with sensor-enabled mobile 
devices. This feedback of ‘sensed’ or personally observed 
data, which is then analysed and provided to citizens as 
decision-supporting information, can change people’s 
behaviour in how they use the city and perceive their 
environment by supporting their short-term decisions in near 
real time. This again requires promotion of the user 
sensitisation of information through awareness of limitations. 
Basically, we identified four main barriers towards the 
implementation of the Live City concept: methodological 
issues, 
technical/technological 
problems, 
privacy 
and 
legislative questions, as well as quantification of economic 
opportunities. We discussed these challenges and future 
research avenues in Section IV and V. 
We believe that promoting the Live City concept will 
trigger a profound rethinking process in collaboration and 
cooperation efforts between different authorities. Also, a 
people-centric view of measuring, sharing, and discussing 
urban environments might increase agencies’ and decision 
makers’ understanding of a community’s claims leading to 
proactive democracy in urban decision-making processes. 
In terms of privacy and personal data collection, it is 
evident that everybody has to have the right to decide what 
kind of personal data is collected by whom, and for which 
purposes these data are used. In this context, people have to 
have an opt-out possibility to withdraw their consent to 
personal data collection. One new paradigm to tackle the 
issue of privacy is ‘collective sensing’, which tries not to 
exploit single people’s measurements and data, but analyses 
aggregated anonymised data coming from collective sources 
such as Twitter, Flickr or the mobile phone network. 
As mentioned in the introductory section, we are 
experiencing a fast progressing technology development, 
which is already moving ahead of society. The deciding final 
question can be: If we compare this development with a 
stream moving at high speed, on which we are paddling to 
remain on the same spot or at least not to drift off too fast, 
where does our goal for the future lie: down-stream, 
somewhere near our current spot, or even up-stream? We 
argue that the issues of privacy, data ownership, 
accessibility, integrity and liability have to be tackled 
thoroughly all at once and not separately from each other. In 
the end, legislation bodies are called upon to set the legal 
stage for leveraging Live City technologies, exploit economic 
opportunities, but still preserve citizens’ privacy. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper has originated from the panel discussion ‘The 
Real-time City: Technology – Innovation - Society’ at GI 
Forum and AGIT conferences in July 2011 in Salzburg, 
Austria. The authors would like to thank the audience for 
their valuable contributions to the discussion, which partly 
served as input for this publication. In particular, the authors 
would like to thank Prof. Dr. Manfred Ehlers and Prof. Dr. 
Petra Staufer-Steinocher their fruitful comments. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Cairncross, F. (1997) The Death of Distance: How the 
Communications Revolution Will Change Our Lives. Harvard 
Business School Press, Boston, MA, USA, 1997. 
[2] Gilder, G. and Peters, T. (1995) City vs. Country: The Impact 
of Technology on Location. Forbes ASAP, 155(5), pp. 56-61, 
27 February 1995. 
[3] Dierig, S., Lachmund, J., and Mendelsohn, A. (2000) Science 
and the City. http://vlp.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de, Workshop, Max 
Planck Institute for the History of Science, Berlin, Germany, 
1-3 December 2000. (10 September 2011) 
[4] Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (2007) 
Urban 
Sciences. 
http://www.urbansciences.eu, 
Interdisciplinary Research Programme on Urbanization & 
Urban culture in The Netherlands, 2007. (26 August 2011) 
[5] SENSEable City Laboratory (2009) MIT SENSEable City 
Lab. http://senseable.mit.edu, September 2011. (29 July 2011) 
[6] International Telecommunication Union (2010) Key Global 
Telecom Indicators for the World Telecommunication Service 
Sector. http://www.itu.int, 21 October 2010. (31 August 2011) 
[7] Green, J. (2011) Digital Urban Renewal - Retro-fitting 
Existing Cities with Smart Solutions is the Urban Challenge 
of the 21st Century. http://www.cisco.com, Ovum Report 
OT00037-004, April 2011. (11 September 2011) 
[8] ENoLL (2011) Open Living Labs | The First Step towards a 
new 
Innovation 
System. 
http://www.openlivinglabs.eu, 
September 2011. (11 September 2011) 
[9] IBM (2009) A Vision of Smarter Cities - How Cities Can 
Lead the Way into a Prosperous and Sustainable Future. 
http://www.ibm.com, 
IBM 
Global 
Business 
Services 
Executive Report, 2009. (04 September 2011) 
[10] Resch, B., Lippautz, M. and Mittlboeck, M. (2010) Pervasive 
Monitoring - A Standardised Sensor Web Approach for 
Intelligent Sensing Infrastructures. Sensors - Special Issue 
‘Intelligent Sensors 2010’, 10(12), 2010, pp. 11440-11467. 
[11] Murty, R., Mainland, G., Rose, I., Chowdhury, A., Gosain, 
A., Bers, J., and Welsh, M. (2008) CitySense: A Vision for an 
Urban-Scale Wireless Networking Testbed. 2008 IEEE 
International Conference on Technologies for Homeland 
Security, Waltham, MA, May 2008. 
[12] Townsend, A.M. (2000) Life in the Real-time City: Mobile 
Telephones and Urban Metabolism. Journal of Urban 
Technology. (7)2, pp.85-104, 2000. 
[13] Foth, M. (Ed.) (2009) Handbook of Research on Urban 
Informatics: The Practice and Promise of the Real-Time City. 
ISBN 978-1-60566-152-0, Hershey, PA: Information Science 
Reference, IGI Global.. 
[14] General Services Administration (1996) Federal Standard 
1037C. Telecommunications: Glossary of Telecommunication 
Terms, http://www.its.bldrdoc.gov, 7 August 1996. (11 
September 2011) 
[15] Resch, B., Mittlboeck, M., Lipson, S., Welsh, M., Bers, J., 
Britter, R. and Ratti, C. (2009) Urban Sensing Revisited – 
Common Scents: Towards Standardised Geo-sensor Networks 
for Public Health Monitoring in the City. 11th International 
Conference on Computers in Urban Planning and Urban 
Management - CUPUM2009, Hong Kong, 16-18 June 2009. 
[16] UCL Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis (2011) Tweet-o-
Meter - Giving You an Insight into Twitter Activity from 
Around the World!. http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/tom, 12 
September 2011. (12 September 2011) 
[17] Palmer, M. (2006) Data is the New Oil. http://ana.blogs.com, 
3 November 2006. (12 September 2011) 
[18] Kennedy, 
J. 
(2011) 
Data 
is 
the 
New 
Oil. 
http://www.siliconrepublic.com, 23 June 2011. (29 July 2011) 
[19] Goodchild, M.F. (2007) Citizens as Voluntary Sensors: 
Spatial Data Infrastructure in the World of Web 2.0. 
International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 
vol. 2, pp. 24-32, 2007. 
[20] Craglia, M., Goodchild, M.F., Annoni, A., Camera, G., 
Gould, M., Kuhn, W., Mark, D., Masser, I., Maguire, D., 
Liang, S. and Parsons, E. (2008) Next-Generation Digital 
Earth: A Position Paper from the Vespucci Initiative for the 
Advancement 
of 
Geographic 
Information 
Science. 
International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 
vol. 3, pp. 146-167. 
[21] Raper, J. (2011) Realising the Benefits of Open Geodata: 
Lessons from London's Experience. Keynote at AGIT 2011, 6 
July 2011, Salzburg, Austria. 
[22] Williams, M., Cornford, D., Bastin, L and Pebesma, E. (2008) 
Uncertainty Markup Language (UncertML). OGC Discussion 
Paper 08-122r2, Version 0.6, 8 April 2009. (14 August 2011) 
[23] Resch, B., Blaschke, T. and Mittlboeck, M. (2010) Live 
Geography - Interoperable Geo-Sensor Webs Facilitating the 
Vision of Digital Earth. International Journal on Advances in 
Networks and Services, 3(3&4), 2010, pp. 323-332. 
[24] Botts, M., Percivall, G., Reed, C. and Davidson, J. (Eds.) 
(2007) OGC Sensor Web Enablement: Overview And High 
Level Architecture. http://www.opengeospatial.org, OpenGIS 
White Paper OGC 07-165, Version 3, 28 December 2007. (17 
August 2011) 
[25] Resch, B. (in press) On-the-fly Sensor Fusion for Real-time 
Data Integration. In: Proceedings of the Geoinformatics 2011 
Conference, 28-30 March 2012, Braunschweig, Germany, pp. 
pending. 
[26] Lanig S. and A. Zipf (2010) Proposal for a Web Processing 
Services (WPS) Application Profile for 3D Processing 
Analysis. 2nd International Conference on Advanced 
Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services 
(GEOProcessing 2010), St. Maarten, Netherlands Antilles, 
10-15 February 2010, pp. 117-122. 
[27] Resch, B., Sagl, G., Blaschke, T. and Mittlboeck, M. (2010) 
Distributed Web-processing for Ubiquitous Information 
Services - OGC WPS Critically Revisited. 6th International 
Conference on Geographic Information Science (GIScience 
2010), Zurich, Switzerland, 14-17 September 2010. 
[28] Stollberg, B. & Zipf, A. (2009): Development of a WPS 
Process Chaining Tool and Application in a Disaster 
Management Use Case for Urban Areas.   UDMS 2009. 27th 
Urban Data Management Symposium, Ljubljana , Slovenia. 
[29] Calabrese, F., Di Lorenzo, G., Liu, L., and Ratti, C. (in press) 
Estimating Origin-destination Flows Using Opportunistically 
Collected Mobile Phone Location Data from One Million 
Users in Boston Metropolitan Area. IEEE Pervasive 
Computing, 2011. 
[30] Economist Intelligence Unit (2011) Liveability Ranking and 
Overview 2011. http://www.eiu.com, February 2011. (4 
September 2011) 
[31] Wikitude GmbH (2011) Wikitude World Browser |  Wikitude. 
http://www.wikitude.com, September 2011. (29 August 2011) 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

