Geoprocessing of the Trends of the ENSO Phenomenon, from Peru to the Atlantic 
Ocean in Brazil. 
 
Newton Silva de Lima*, Eriberto Façanha*, Robson Matos Calazães*, Ricardo Figueiredo*, William Dennis 
Quispe*, Aldemir Malveira†, Roseilson Souza do Vale‡ 
 
*Lutheran University Center of Manaus (Geosciences - Mathematics) / †Federal University of Amazonas (Mathematics)/ 
‡Federal University of Western Pará (Geosciences) 
* †Manaus/ ‡Santarém (Brazil) 
(newtonulbra@gmail.com, eribertofacanha@seduc.net, matoscalazaes@gmail.com, rics.fig@gmail.com, 
William.exner@bol.com.br, amoliveira@gmail.com, roseilsondovale@gmail.com) 
 
 
Abstract — This research investigated 39 cities in the 
Amazônia, with the purpose of showing the high temperatures 
of the waters of the Amazon River, using remote sensors 
(Global 
Positioning 
System 
- 
GPS 
and 
Globalnaya 
Navigatsionnaya Sputnikovaya System - GLONASS), besides 
digital weather station and ship navigation, as a contribution 
to the trends of the El Niño phenomenon in the Amazon. It 
collected information on water quality, weather and climate, 
georeferencing of the route and localities during a drought 
period on the Amazon River, from Iquitos in Peru, to the city 
of Macapá in Brazil (Atlantic Ocean) in 2016, all data are 
presented in tables and thematic maps. The results obtained 
with temporal temperature series, compared to satellite images 
of temperature gradients, georeferenced map and water 
quality analysis showed high water temperatures along the 
river during the entire observation period, probably due to the 
prolonged El Niño event in 2014, 15 and 16. 
 
Keywords - GPS; satellite images; Amazon River; warming. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Changes in atmospheric circulation in the tropical zone 
(Walker cell) 
induce changes in rainfall patterns, 
devastating floods, and severe droughts that can drastically 
affect the lives of millions of people [1]. In the mosaic of 
landscapes that is tropical South America, the tendencies for 
rainfall in the Amazon in eastern Brazil, to the northwest of 
Peru are well-defined by long-term hydrological data for the 
Amazon basin that were recorded during the 20th century. 
During this period the tendency for rainfall during the three 
most humid months and for the subsequent superficial 
runoff rate during the three months with the greatest runoff 
for the northeastern region of Brazil demonstrated a slow 
increase over long periods [2].  In 2016 the Amazon River 
Expedition from Peru to Brazil observed tendencies in 
which a prolonged El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), 
event combined with a trend of regional warming increased 
the demand for water from the reservoirs of Brazilian 
hydroelectric plants in the Northeast, Central-West, and 
Southeastern regions of Brazil [3], and caused strong rains 
in the Southern region of Brazil [4].  According to the 
authors of [5] [6] [7], this event was associated with 
warming that was without precedent and an extreme drought 
in the Amazon, compared to other strong ENSO events in 
1982/83 and 1997/98. The typical conditions of drought 
caused by the ENSO were observed and described by [5], as 
occurring only in the eastern Amazon, while in the western 
region of the Amazon there prevailed an uncommon level of 
humidity. For researchers this situation can be attributed to 
the humid-dry dipole at the location of maximum warming 
of the surface of the equatorial central Pacific Ocean. In this 
paper the causes of these changes are analyzed over the last 
two decades, and these include the average Sea Surface 
Temperature (SST) anomalies that are weakened towards 
the west in direction of the central Pacific; this represents an 
indicator that needs more observation [8]. 
Traveling in the Amazon region on the great river that 
crosses the entire northern portion of South America 
without the aid of a GPS or GLONASS would be, without a 
doubt, a difficult task, and could only be possible with the 
use of paper maps and a good, native navigator. The 
scenario since its beginning in the Peruvian Amazon up to 
the mouth of the great river in the Brazilian Amazon is very 
similar in terms of water, climatic variation, vegetation, fish, 
human presence, and atmospheric characteristics. This 
South American mosaic is singular, and these qualities make 
the use of navigation by satellite technology highly 
recommended. The most interesting example from this 
study 
was 
the 
enormous 
gap 
in 
internet 
access 
(approximately 90%), but Google Map, the smartphones and 
the GPS / GLONASS receivers continued to inform the 
ship’s position and route in real time. This facilitated the 
labeling of samples, and the recording of meteorological 
data and georeferenced images taken by the camera at the 
visited sites.  
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we 
present the research site, the path taken in the North of 
South America, the instrumentation and the steps followed 
in the data collection. Section III presents the results, 
through maps, graphs, tables of data, comments and finally 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
Section IV, we conclude this paper in the form of 
contribution of the Present State of the Amazon River to the 
regional warming. 
 
II. MATERIAL AND METHODS 
 
The northern mosaic of South America (Fig. 1) was 
examined in this research expedition. The average depth of 
the channel of the Amazon River was described in 2014 [9], 
(Fig. 2), maintaining or decreasing this condition between 
2014-2017 [10]. In the upper deck of the boat, a digital 
weather station was installed for climate monitoring. 
 
Figure. 1: Image of the mosaic of regions of tropical South America and the 
2016 route of the Amazon River Expedition from Peru to Brazil (solidline), 
and the 2017/18 route (dotted line) (3rd phase, modified route). Source: 
(Adapted from Google Earth, 2016). 
 
The station was free from obstacles that would impede 
accurate 
measurement 
of 
the 
variables 
of 
interest 
(temperature, humidity, pressure, wind speed and direction, 
dew point, and rainfall). The georeferencing was performed 
with a GPS and satellite images to identify the metadata of 
the water points and cities along the route (latitude, 
longitude, altimetry and photography).  
 
 
 
Figure. 2: The main cities of Iquitos (Peru) to Macapá (Brazil). The average 
depth of the river is shown in the dry season. Source: Adapted from Project 
Integrated and Sustainable Management of Cross – Border [9]. 
 
A. Sampling and Chronogram 
 
For monitoring of weather and climate during the 
period of the research, a FLIR E60 thermal imager, Mira 
digital thermometer (LASER) and Minipa MT 360 sensors 
were used. Measurement of ambient air temperature, and 
the temperature at the edge of the river, middle of the 
channel, and at 1.0 m below the river´s surface was done 
using a Digital Weather Station with uninterrupted 
recording (15 days + 15 days) with data collection (ambient 
air temperature, humidity, pressure, wind speed and 
direction, dew point) which were measured every 5 
minutes, and in situ two liter water samples were taken at 
each sampling point along the entire river. Temperature 
values are a composite of 10 in situ readings taken at each 
sampling point. The geographic coordinates of the 
sampling points were taken along with a description of the 
weather (climate) and the time at the moment of collection 
(water), and samples were labeled accordingly, using GPS/ 
GLONASS and satellite images, (Steps 1 and 2 of the 
Amazon River Expedition protocol). 
 
B. Applications and Sensors 
 
We worked with remote sensors (GPS/GLONASS) 
during the journey (Amazon Peruvian and Brazilian, 
Atlantic Ocean-Brazil), with Smartphones for localization 
(Google Map), with or without internet support in the cities 
we could connect in the Amazon River. We manipulate data 
from Aqua-Terra (Modis Sensor - Earth Observing System 
(EOS)) through the Web to understand the current 
conditions]of land and water use, for reference only. 
The instrumentation used was two GPS/GLONASS 
(with 
camera 
and 
image 
software 
with 
digital 
georeferencing), to determine the points and locations 
visited and also to record the route of the entire trip. The 
data were deposited in the thematic maps; a Digital Weather 
Station with GPS/GLONASS, to collect the weather 
conditions of the trip. Camcorder and camera, for 
documentation purposes. Water collection in all localities 
for analysis of the Present State of the Amazon River during 
drought and El Niño prolonged phenomenon, data also 
deposited in thematic maps. In some cities panoramic drone 
flights were performed for documentation purposes. Office 
work was done to createthematic maps (ArcGIS-ESRI) and 
digital image manipulation. With treatment of field 
information. 
Figure 3 shows the time series of temperature that was 
taken at three positions (ambient temperature at the ship –
100 m from the edge of the channel – middle of the channel) 
during the first stage of the expedition (Iquitos/Peru – 
Manaus/Brazil), using the FLIR E60 thermal imager and 
weather station. The image next to the time series shows 
SST in Real Time Global (RTG), High Resolution (HR) and 
was obtained by NOAA/NCEP/NWS by analyzing satellite 
images, ocean floats, sea ice cover, salinity, and conducting 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
  
 
Figure 5. Map of localities in the Amazon River Expedition (PERU-BRAZIL). 
 
 
 
 
 
mathematical modeling in a second-degree polynomial 
series (Branch analysis method) [11].   
. 
Figure. 3: Time series of temperature along the Amazon River during the 
first stage of the Expedition (Iquitos/Peru – Manaus/Brazil), and compared 
to data from the Marine Modeling and Analysis Branch Oper.  H. R. 
(Verification Ensembles) of NOAA/NWS/NCEP/EMC. Source: Amazon 
River Expedition and NOAA, 2016. 
 
 
Figure. 4: Time series of temperature along the Amazon River during the 
2nd stage of the Expedition (Manaus/Brazil – Macapá/Brazil) and 
compared to data from the Marine Modeling and Analysis Branch Oper.  
H. R. (Verification Ensembles) of NOAA/NWS/NCEP/EMC. Source: 
Amazon River Expedition and NOAA, 2016 
 
 
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
 
TABLE I. WATER SAMPLE ANALYSIS – STAGE ONE OF THE 
AMAZON RIVER EXPEDITION (PERU-BRAZIL) JULY,  
2016 
 
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In this section we show the results that were obtained 
with the aid of sensors remotely positioned in a network of 
satellites (GPS, GLONASS and MODIS) that were 
described using a geographic information system (GIS) map 
with thematic layers in tables (water and temperature), 
graphs, and figures, and with correlations with other studies. 
Figure 3 shows the time series of temperature that was 
taken at three positions (ambient temperature at the ship – 
100 m from the edge of the channel – middle of the 
channel) during the first stage of the expedition 
(Iquitos/Peru – Manaus/Brazil), using the FLIR E60 
thermal imager and weather station. The image next to the 
time series shows SST in Real Time Global (RTG), High 
Resolution (HR) and was obtained by NOAA/NCEP/NWS 
by analyzing satellite images, ocean floats, sea ice cover, 
salinity, and conducting mathematical modeling in a 
second-degree polynomial series (Branch analysis method) 
[11]. These results indicate correlation with those obtained 
by the Amazon River Expedition. 
The observations from this study suggest regional 
warming of temperature gradients in the stretch between 
Iquitos-Peru to Manaus-Brazil in July, 2016, (dry season), 
with average ambient temperature at the ship (in the shade) 
of 30.41°C, at the river´s surface (100 m from the edge) of 
27.34°C, and at the middle of the channel of 24.73°C 
(Fig.3). During the 2nd stage of the Expedition (Manaus-
Brazil to Macapá-Brazil) in December 2016, the rainy 
season had already begun and average temperatures were 
slightly reduced, with average ambient temperature at the 
ship of 28.97°C, at the river´s surface (100 m from the 
edge) of 26.06°C, and at the middle of the channel of 
24.04°C. The interval between the first and second stages 
was taken in order to be able to verify the effect of drought 
on the river due to the time necessary for water to flow 
across the large distance from Iquitos-Peru to Macapá-
Brazil (Figs. 3 and 4).  
The analyses of the water samples from both stages of 
the expedition are listed in Tables I (1st stage) and II (2nd 
stage), and these data describe the “actual state” of the 
Amazon River in 2016 during the dry season in the 
Amazon. The effects of this drought were clearly visible 
during the entire voyage along the river from Peru to the 
Atlantic, principally due to the marks left on trees in the 
várzea areas at the river’s edge by the previous high-water 
season. However, the quality of the water from the Amazon 
River at the 39 georeferenced sample points (Fig. 5, Tables 
III and IV) was satisfactory and within the standard for 
potable water for human consumption by communities 
adjacent to the river’s edge from the western portion of the 
basin to the Atlantic, although basic sanitation services are 
a preoccupation for all the communities located at these 39 
sampling points, including for Iquitos (Peru), Manaus, 
Santarém and Macapá (Brazil). 
Figure 5 shows the georeferenced map of the 39 cities of 
the Amazon river expedition from Iquitos in Peru to Macapá 
in Brazil (Table III). The cities from points 41 to 49 are the 
main tributary (Madeira river) on the right downstream of 
the river Amazonas, but it is not the focus of this work. 
Table IV indicates the water quality of the Amazon 
River during the prolonged heating of El Niño in the 
Amazon region in 2016. 
 
TABLE II.  WATER SAMPLE ANALYSIS – STAGE TWO OF THE 
AMAZON RIVER EXPEDITION (PERU-BRAZIL) DEC., 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
TABLE III.  THE 39 CITIES OF THE AMAZON RIVER 
(PERU-BRAZIL) DECEMBER, 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In [12], there is more information about the “actual 
state” of the Amazon River in 2016, not only with respect 
to climatology, but also with respect to the life of people in 
the communities in this region.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE IV.  WATER QUALITY OF THE AMAZON RIVER 
(PERU-BRAZIL) DECEMBER. 2016.  
 
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
The oceans and enormous body of water are the main 
source of thermal inertia in the climate system [13]. In the 
current study, we contribute information on temperatures 
during an El Niño event. With georeferenced sample sites, 
since the Amazon River is an enormous body of water, and 
together with the Amazon forest and the equatorial Atlantic 
and Pacific Oceans models the climate of the South 
American climate.  
The Amazon River, during the dry season of 2016, was 
influenced by a prolonged El Niño climatic tendency (2014, 
2015 and 2016).  With the help of georeferencing, it was 
possible to show the correlation between temperature 
measurements and satellite images throughout the trip from 
the city of Iquitos in Peru to the Brazilian city of Macapá, 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

near the interface of Brazil and the Atlantic Ocean. The sea 
surface temperature stimulated the establishment of an 
increasing temperature gradient in the equatorial region 
along the river, combined with a tendency for regional 
warming during the El Niño event of 2016. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
The authors are grateful to the Lutheran University 
Center of Manaus (Centro   Universitário   Luterano,  
Manaus, (CEULM/ULBRA)) for the help with setting up 
this bi-national research trip, the Brazilian Navy in the 
Amazon (western and eastern regiments) for information 
that helped with navigation, and the Foundation for the 
Support of Research of the State of Amazonas (Fundação 
de Amparo e Pesquisa do Amazonas (FAPEAM)) that 
provided a student scholarship to conduct the water 
analyses. The authors also thank the Max Planck Chemistry 
Institute (Mainz-Germany) for support with the chemical 
analyses, and the Mauá group at INPA in Manaus/Brazil.  
Furthermore, we thank the Secretary of Education and 
Quality of Teaching of the State of Amazonas, that through 
the DEPPE, provided logistical support in sampling areas 
in the State of Amazonas, Brazil and the collaborators 
Eliomar Oliveira, Maurício Benzecry, Abrahão Barros, 
Gilberto Carvalho, and Francisco Santana. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Mohtadi; M. Prange; E. Scfub; T. Jennerjahn. Circulation in 
Southeastern South America and it’s influence from El Niño events. 
Journal of the Meteorological Society of Japan, 80, 21-22. Article 
number: 1015 (2017) doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-00855-3n, Nature 
Communications. 
[2] J. A. Marego; J. Tomasella; C. R. Uvo. Trends in streamflow and 
rainfall in tropical South America, eastern Brazil, and northwestern. 
Journal of Geophysical Research Atmospheres. 103: (D2) 1775-1783 
(1998). 
[3] CCEE – Electric Energy Trading Chamber. 
 https://economia.uol.com.br/noticias/Reuters/2017/09/20  
[4] CPTEC – INPE: Center for Weather Forecasting and Climate Studies 
- 
National 
Institute 
of 
Spacial 
Research: 
(Access 
in: 
http://satelite.cptec.inpe.br/home/index.jsp,  (Access in: 2016, july 
and december). 
[5] J. Jiménez-Muñoz; C. Mattar; J. Barichivich; A.Santamaria-Artigas; 
K. Takahashi; Y. Malhi; J. A. Sobrino; G. Schrier. Record-breaking 
warming and extreme drought in the Amazon rainforest during course 
of El Niño 2015-2016. Scientific Reports. 33130 (2016) doi: 
10.1038/srep33130. 
[6] A. Erfanian; G. Wang; L. Fomenko.  Unprecedented drought over 
tropical South América in 2016:significantly under-predicted by 
tropical SST.  Scientific Reports.  5811(2017) doi:  10.1038/s415998-
017-05373-2. 
[7] G. Poveda; O. J. Mesa. Feedbacks between hydrological processes in 
tropical 
South 
America 
and 
large-scale 
ocean-atmospheric 
phenomena. Journal of Climate. 2690-2702 (1997). 
[8] S. Hu; A. V. Fedorov. Cross-equatorial winds control El Niño 
diversity and change, Nature Climate Change volume 8, pages798–
802 (2018). 
[9] N. Fenzl; N. Filizola. Project Integrated and Sustainable Management 
of Cross - Border Water Resources in the Amazon River Basin, 
Considering the Variability and Climate World. ACT / GEF / UNEP, 
(2014). 
[10] ANA – CPRM - SIPAM: Hydrological Monitoring. National Water 
Agency - Geological Survey of Brazil - Protection System of the 
Amazon. Bulletin no. 18 (2016). (Access in; 
https://www.cprm.gov.br/sace/boletins/Amazonas/20160513_19-
20160513%20-%20191650.pdf) 
[11] NOAA/NCEP/NWS/EMC:  
 ftp://ftpprd.ncep.noaa.gov/pub/data/nccf/com/gfs/prod.  
(Access: July/December,2016/July, 2017). 
[12] N. S. Lima, N. Rio Amazonas – Expedição Fluvial – PERU/ BRASIL. 
ISBN 
978-85-64914-76-6 
(Brazil). 
ISBN 
978-94-92633-00-2 
(Netherlands). 
p94. 
Ebook 
at: 
https://sites.google.com/vew/amazonriverexpedition. 
[13] IPCC. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate 
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis (Stocker, T. F. et al.) 
(Cambridge 
Univ. 
Press, 
Cambridge, 
2013).
 
 
 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

