Bus Coming: A Service for Tracking Buses in Rural 
Areas based on Passenger Locations 
 
Arthur Thompson  
Department of Computing and Information Technology 
University of the West Indies  
St. Augustine, Trinidad 
arthur.thompson.jr@gmail.com  
Wayne Goodridge  
Department of Computing and Information Technology 
University of the West Indies  
St. Augustine, Trinidad 
wayne.goodridge@sta.uwi.edu
 
 
Abstract— The massive influx of programmable smart phones 
with built in Global Positioning System receivers, provides an 
opportunity to make the current public transport bus system 
in Trinidad and Tobago more reliable by providing passengers 
with information that would allow them to make better travel 
decisions. A four part system is developed which captures and 
stores near real time bus location data and provides near real 
time bus location information visually via a web application 
and 
textually 
via 
a 
mobile 
application. 
The 
core 
communication technology behind the system is based on Web 
Services and early results demonstrate that this simple 
approach is very appropriate for rural areas in Trinidad.   
 
Keywords - GPS; smart phones; public transport bus system; 
webservices 
 
Transport in the West Indies is difficult for many, 
especially for those that live in rural areas. Many people 
depend on Government provided buses to get to and from 
their homes daily. This bus service, however, is not reliable. 
Buses are scheduled to run at certain times of day but many 
issues can and usually do account for delays that then 
cascade down to other scheduled times causing predefined 
schedules to be useless. Routes to rural areas are assigned 
few buses and thus if there is a problem with a rural route 
bus, there are not many buses that can pick up the slack. 
Currently, there is no way for an individual in a rural area to 
access the bus transportation options available to him/her at 
any given time. 
 
This lack of information can lead to long waits or worst 
waiting in vain for a bus that never arrives. If passengers 
were provided with near real time information about the 
location and status of buses servicing their areas then these 
issues would be alleviated, improving the passenger's travel 
experience and allowing passengers to make better more 
efficient use of their time. 
 
Over the past two to three years, BlackBerry smart 
phones have been introduced to the West Indies on a large 
scale.  Research In Motion (RIM) [1, 2] the company that 
manufactures BlackBerry smart phones also provides a 
developer platform that allows application developers to 
extend the functionality of the BlackBerry smart phone. 
This platform provides developers with access to build-in 
devices such as Global Positioning System (GPS)[3] 
receivers allowing them to utilize the functionality of these 
built-in devices in the applications that they develop. 
 
The Bus Coming system proposed in this paper uses the 
BlackBerry developer platform with the built-in GPS 
receiver in the BlackBerry smart phone to build a relatively 
cheap bus tracking system. The system will provide 
passengers with near real time bus location and status 
information with respect to the passenger's current location, 
not bus stops as is usually done. This will improve the travel 
experience of passengers in rural areas (where there are few 
bus stops) and allow them to make better and more efficient 
use of their time. 
 
This paper is organized as follows: Section I gives 
motivation for the approach taken for development the Bus 
Tracking system which is based on both GPS mobile 
devices and the mobile cell phone network; Section II 
briefly describes the components of the Bus Coming System 
and how accuracy across multiple platforms is achieved.  
 
I. 
LACK OF BUS TRACKING 
Bus tracking services have recently (within the last 2 
years) been introduced in some metropolitan areas. Chicago 
[4], Washington DC [5] and London [6] are a few cities that 
have implemented some form of advanced bus tracking 
services. These services are usually comprised of a GPS 
equipped fleet of buses and these locations are feed to a 
central server which then makes the locations available to 
different readers, web sites (basic lists or graphical 
representations like map overlays), electronic signs at bus 
stops, SMS for bus locations at particular bus stops and 
even mobile applications for smart phones that gives the 
location of buses on a particular route with respect to bus 
stops. 
 
In the West Indies, however, electronic bus tracking 
systems are not yet available. Territories like Jamaica [7], 
Barbados [8] and Trinidad and Tobago [9] have transport 
authorities who go as far as providing semi-static scheduling 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

via hard copy or rarely updated websites. These schedules 
are seldom exact and thus cannot be relied upon. Especially 
in rural areas, where there is no assistance or information 
available from transport authority about bus availability or 
location thus it is difficult to access bus transport in an 
efficient manner. 
 
In metropolitan cities like Chicago, Washington DC and 
London; buses strictly stop at predefined bus stops, because 
of this the bus tracking systems implemented in these cities 
are focused on bus locations with respect to bus stops. In the 
West Indies, especially in rural areas this approach will not 
work, designated bus stops are few and far between. It 
would not be practical to expect every person living in these 
areas to walk to the stop nearest them, as the nearest one can 
be kilometres away. Due to the scarcity and distance 
between bus stops, buses do not strictly stop at pre-defined 
bus stops, in many cases a bus driver will stop for 
passengers at multiple non bus stop locations along the 
route. The amount of time for the bus to arrive at the next 
stop in these areas is much less useful than the time for the 
bus to arrive at the passenger’s location along the route. 
Therefore, building a bus tracking system based on each 
passenger's current location would be very useful for rural 
areas. 
 
II. 
PROPOSED SOLUTION 
    Internet access is key component of this system, Trinidad 
and Tobago like many other countries in the West Indies is 
seeing consistent positive growth in both fixed and mobile 
internet access. In Trinidad and Tobago, Q1 2011 almost 
50% of households have internet access, with 96% of those 
having broadband access, this is up 11% over the previous 
year. Also 36% of the population of Trinidad and Tobago 
have mobile internet access in Q1 2011 up 9% over the 
previous year. [10] With mobile internet coverage close to 
100% in Trinidad and Tobago and general internet usage 
trending upwards, an internet based solution to the bus 
tracking problem in the West Indies is very feasible. 
 
A system is needed that takes the passenger’s location 
into consideration. In order to give information about the 
bus’s location with respect to the passenger’s location along 
the route, the passenger’s current location along the route is 
required. The passenger’s location along the route would be 
treated in much the same way as a bus stop would be, 
without having to erect an unreasonable number of stops 
along the route. With the passenger’s location along the 
route, the system can tell the passenger the amount of time 
to the next bus or buses with respect the passenger’s current 
location. 
 
GPS capable smart phones  were used to provide near 
real time bus location information by placing a GPS capable 
smart phone on a bus and the phone would submit its 
current GPS location periodically. 
 
A. Reference Points  
Google Maps were used to provide a map with near real 
time bus location overlays. However when the GPS 
locations generated by the mobile devices were plotted 
directly onto the Google Map of Trinidad the results were 
inconsistent. Reference Points were used to help associate 
the GPS locations generated by the mobile devices with 
visually consistent  positions on the Google Map. 
 
Reference Points are positions along each route that 
visually correspond to locations on a Google Map of 
Trinidad. The GPS locations generated by the mobile 
devices are associated with the reference point nearest it. 
This allows the system to be consistent with the points that 
are used to perform calculations like distance to passenger 
and estimations like time to passenger; while still being able 
to display visually consistent locations of buses on a Google 
Map. 
 
Fig. 1  Mobile GPS location associated with Nearest Reference 
Point 
Reference 
points 
provided 
a 
solution 
to 
the 
inconsistencies between mobile generated GPS locations 
and positions on a Google Map. They also provided two 
benefits as a side effect. 
 
1) Easy calculation of distance between different 
positions along a route, since a straight line could 
be drawn from each reference point to the next 
without going off route. This provided a way of 
easily calculating distances along winding routes 
which are common in rural areas. 
 
2) Easily calculate the availability status (coming or 
gone) of a bus with respect to a passenger along the 
route. If a passenger is associated with Ref. Pt. 2 
and a bus is associated with Ref. Pt. 3, since 3 is 
greater than 2 we can let the passenger know that 
that bus has already gone. 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The skills and technology required to produce a system 
that provides both passengers and bus operators with near 
real time bus location information can be built using readily 
available and relatively cheap technology involving 
programmable GPS devices (BlackBerry smart phones in 
this case, however any programmable GPS capable device 
would do, eg: Android, IOS, Symbian devices). The 
availability of fairly cheap programmable GPS enabled 
BlackBerry smart phones makes a bus tracking system 
implementable at a relatively cheap cost and in a relatively 
short period of time with minimal disruption to the current 
bus operations. 
 
 
B. Components of the BusComing System  
 
The proposed Bus Coming system consists of four 
components: 
 
1) 
Bus Coming Web Service  
This is a web service [11] that allows all other parts of 
Bus Coming System to submit information to the server (for 
example the Bus Tracker component submits information to 
this web service) or request information from the server (for 
example the Bus Coming Web and Mobile Views).  
Standardised web services were used to provide the 
ability for multiple platforms to work within and around the 
system without any major changes. The BlackBerry smart 
phones used could easily be replaced by one or more of 
many other web service compliant  GPS capable devices. 
Parts of the Bus Coming Web Service could be made 
public, allowing third party developers to use the data in 
interesting ways. 
 
2) 
Bus Tracker 
This is an application running on a GPS capable 
blackberry, the blackberry is placed on a desired bus to track 
its location. Figure 1, shows the Bus Tracker application 
and the interface where the bus driver selects the bus and 
route. Note that the tracker transmits the bus current 
location of the bus to the server via a web service 
periodically. 
 
Operators did express concern about the bus driver 
having to initiate the tracking along a journey, so 
considerations are being made to have the tracking remotely 
initiated by central operators. 
Fig. 2  Bus Tracker Application 
 
 
Fig. 3  Bus Tracker Sequence Diagram 
 
Bus Coming Tracker must be given some 
information before tracking can begin. Figure 2, shows a 
sequence diagram outlining the steps involved. The user that 
initiates the tracking (the bus driver) would set the bus name 
and route before the bus begins to move. Once the bus name 
and route are set and the bus driver is ready to begin the 
journey, the driver selects the “Start Track” button and then 
tracking begins. Bus Coming Tracker lets the Bus Coming 
Web Service know that it is starting to track by using the 
setBusRoute service, which sets the bus’s current route and 
the time at which tracking has begun. 
Once tracking has been initiated, Bus Coming 
Tracker frequently submits, every five seconds or so, the 
location of the BlackBerry device and thus the location of 
the bus, via its built in GPS receiver to Bus Coming Web 
Service via the busCheckIn service. These frequent 
submissions are used by Bus Coming Web Service to 
provide Bus Coming Web View and Bus Coming Mobile 
View with information about the bus’s location. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

3) 
Bus Coming Web View  
This is a web view of all routes in the system and all 
buses on those routes. Figure 3 shows a Google Map web 
page of this component which is typically used by 
passengers using a home computer or can be used by the 
central control station of the bus service department. This 
web view is interactive and allows the user to view routes of 
interest.  In addition, the site is updated in near real time, 
periodic AJAX[12] calls are made to the web service to get 
new data and update the web view accordingly showing the 
position of buses as received by Bus Tracker. 
 
Fig. 4  Google Map showing Bus Locations 
 
Google provides API access to their Google Maps 
system. Through this API developers can include Google 
Maps in their web applications. Overlays are added onto the 
Google Map to show a map with customized information on 
it, for example reference points along a bus route. Figure 4 
shows a sequence diagram which illustrates how the 
getRefPoints capability of the web service is used by the 
web viewer to retrieve latitude and longitude of each 
reference point along a particular route.   
Using the getBus capability of the Web Service, 
information containing the latitude, longitude and area of 
each bus currently on a particular route is retrieved.  Google 
Maps is then instructed to display the bus. 
 
 
Fig. 5  Bus Coming Web View Sequence Diagram 
 
 
 
4) 
Bus Coming Mobile View  
This is an application running a GPS capable blackberry, 
the application allows the user to select a route and view all 
buses on the route and see whether or not those buses are 
coming towards them or if they have already gone past.  
Figure 5, illustrates that the bus is 20 minutes away from the 
position of the passenger who requested the service. 
From the list of routes the passenger can select the 
route that the passenger is on. Once the route selection has 
taken place Bus Coming Mobile View will get the 
passengers location from the GPS receiver, this location 
along with the ID of the selected route is submitted to Web 
Service using a call to getBusesOnRoute. The Bus Coming 
Web Service then returns a string array containing 
information about all the buses currently servicing the 
selected route. This information is initially displayed to the 
passenger as a button list with the name of the bus and its 
coming or gone status on the button.  If one of the buttons 
representing a bus is selected more detailed information 
about the bus will be presented to the passenger with respect 
to 
the 
passenger’s 
current 
location. 
This 
detailed 
information includes the current area of the bus, the bus’s 
distance away from the passenger, the bus’s current speed, 
the estimated amount of time it will take the bus to get to 
the passenger, the distance of the bus from its final 
destination and the estimated amount of time it will take the 
bus to get to its final destination. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Fig. 6. Mobile View for Passengers 
The location of the passenger that is calculated by 
the device’s GPS receiver and submitted to Bus Coming 
Web Service, is, as with buses, associated with the closest 
reference point along the route. All calculations with respect 
to the user are really taking place with respect to a reference 
point along a selected route. As with buses this is done to 
account for any inaccuracy of the GPS receiver. If a 
passenger lives down a street of the route and uses Bus 
Coming Mobile View, the passenger will get information as 
if the passenger was standing on the route at the top of the 
passenger’s street. 
 
III. 
DISCUSSION 
During development and initial testing only two mobile 
phones were available. The results of this limited testing 
demonstrate that the Bus Coming System was able to meet 
all objectives set out. However, it is desirable that a larger 
scale test be performed. 
Currently, requests are being made to mobile operators to 
supply GPS enabled mobile units to perform larger scale 
testing of the system. Permission has already been granted 
by the local Bus Authority of Trinidad and Tobago to 
perform tests once mobile units are acquired. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
RIM GPS capable BlackBerry smart phone list 2011 
http://us.blackberry.com/smartphones/features/gps.jsp 
[2] 
RIM how to deploy on BlackBerry 2011 
http://devblog.blackberry.com/2010/06/how-can-i-deploy-my-
blackberry-widget/ 
[3] 
Global Positioning System 2011, http://www.gps.gov 
[4] 
Chicago Transit Authority 2011 
http://www.ctabustracker.com/bustime/eta/eta.jsp 
[5] 
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority 2011 
http://www.wmata.com/rider_tools/nextbus/about_nextbus.cfm 
[6] 
Transport For London 2011 
http://www.tfl.gov.uk/corporate/projectsandschemes/11560.aspx 
[7] 
Jamaican Urban Transport Company Limited 
http://www.jutc.com/timetables.php  
[8] 
Barbados Transport Board 2011 
http://www.transportboard.com/schedule.php 
[9] 
Public Transport Service Commission, Trinidad and Tobago 2011 
http://www.ptsc.co.tt/ 
[10] http://www.tatt.org.tt/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=3ORrNw9rKbo%3
D&tabid=120  
[11] World Wide Web Consortium 2011 Web Services 
http://www.w3.org/TR/ws-arch/#whatis 
[12] http://www.w3.org/standards/webdesign/script.html 
 
 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

