Methodology of Chorological and Coherent Conceptual Knowledge Contextualisation:
Approaches for Multi-disciplinary Contexts in Prehistory and Archaeology
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU), Germany;
Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), Germany;
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This paper presents research on a new methodology
of general chorological and coherent conceptual knowledge
contextualisation across disciplines. The presented achievements
and scenarios concentrate on new information science approaches
for multi-disciplinary contexts in prehistory and archaeology,
targeting the use of inherent aspects and creation of new insight,
strategies, and perspectives. The new advanced approach can
be applied to any type of knowledge, e.g., factual, conceptual,
procedural, metacognitive, and structural. The integration of
chorological
knowledge
includes
integration
of
spatial
and
geospatial knowledge and features. Goal of this research are
new facilities for coherent contextualisation in multi-disciplinary
contexts. Here, we are focussing on coherent knowledge in
contexts with prehistory and archaeology disciplines, natural
sciences, and advanced geoscientiﬁc information systems. The
solution also integrates knowledge from satellite data and soil
diversity and respective properties. The knowledge approach
allows a multi-directional utilisation of coherent conceptual
knowledge. Future research concentrates on further continuing
the development of components and application in multi-
disciplinary scenarios of prehistory and archaeology.
Keywords–Prehistory; Natural Sciences; Chorology; Information
Science; Contextualisation; Coherent Conceptual Knowledge.
I.
INTRODUCTION
These days, mostly all Geographic Information Systems
and even more advanced and more complex Geoscientiﬁc
Information Systems (GIS) are –by themselves– not yet taking
multi-disciplinary coherent knowledge and contexts into con-
sideration. From scientiﬁc point of view, it is a questionable
approach to think of and practice a distinct discipline while
considering any other required scientiﬁc discipline being aux-
iliary, which, for further simpliﬁcation, may even be reduced
to ‘data delivery’, ‘technical’, and ‘procedural’ contributions.
Multi-disciplinary scenarios often require to consider a wide
range of contexts with disciplines put to their level. It is the
coherent knowledge of contexts, which is most relevant for
new insight. Therefore, contextualisation should not be done
without considering multi-disciplinary coherency and expert
views from different disciplines put on a par with respective
further scientiﬁc collaboration and support.
Goal of this research are new information science facilities
for a coherent conceptual contextualisation. The result of this
research is a new methodology of general chorological and
coherent conceptual knowledge contextualisation. The new ad-
vanced approach enables a systematical, coherent contextuali-
sation and can be applied with knowledge complements, e.g.,
factual, conceptual, procedural, metacognitive, and structural.
The approach is knowledge-centric, in a way “knowledge-
driven” but explicitly not “development-procedure-driven” or
“software-driven”. From knowledge complements’ point of
view, chorology is for place what chronology is for time. The
integration of chorological knowledge includes integration of
spatial and geospatial knowledge and features. Here, we are fo-
cussing on scenarios of coherent multi-disciplinary knowledge
in context with prehistory and archaeology, natural sciences,
and advanced geoscientiﬁc information system components.
The solution also integrates knowledge from satellite data and
soil diversity with respective properties. Contexts in prehistory
are special in a way that there are no direct historical sources
and respectively no literary reference and documentation.
Contextualisation is therefore a main intrinsic task in pre-
history and protohistory. An approach has to conform with
information science fundaments and universal knowledge and
has to enable an integration of the required components from
methodologies to realisations for knowledge representations of
realia and abstract contexts [1] while many facets of knowl-
edge, including prehistory, need to be continuously acquired
and reviewed [2]. There is no published approach known,
which can be reasonably compared with the implemented and
presented method. Therefore, there was a strong need for an
advanced methodology to contextualise knowledge, e.g., from
practically available knowledge resources. This paper presents
the methodological fundaments for a chorological and coherent
multi-disciplinary contextualisation. The potential for ﬁnding
and integrating multi-disciplinary inherent aspects and creation
of new insight, strategies, and perspectives by development
of components employing coherent conceptual knowledge has
been a major motivation.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section II
presents the method of component integration and the relevant
components in ongoing development. Section III shows the
solution, results of practical implementation and realisation,
which have been realised for prehistory and archaeology
contexts. Section IV demonstrates and discusses the resulting
coherent conceptual knowledge integration. Section V sum-
marises lessons learned, conclusions, and future work.
II.
COMPONENT INTEGRATION AND METHOD
Commonly used tools are not aware of features for con-
textualisation from multi-disciplinary components. Therefore,
advanced individual workﬂows need proper preparation of
components and workﬂow procedures. Preparation requires
methods for deployment of respective knowledge character-
istics and properties. Further, any workﬂow should be created
being aware of the individuality of these characteristics.
Many aspects of knowledge, including meaning, can be
described using knowledge complements supporting a modern
deﬁnition of knowledge and subsequent component instrumen-
tation [3] [4], e.g., considering factual, conceptual, procedural,
metacognitive, and structural knowledge. Especially, concep-
tual knowledge can relate to any of factual, conceptual, pro-
cedural, and structural knowledge. Knowledge complements
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-871-6
GEOProcessing 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

are a means of understanding and targeting new insight,
e.g., enabling advanced contextualisation, integration, analysis,
synthesis, innovation, prospection, and documentation. The
approach can be summarised based on the methodological
fundaments.
•
Selection
and
development
of
a
coherent,
multi-
disciplinary reference implementation. Knowledge com-
plements are addressing reference implementations.
•
Multi-disciplinary knowledge resources and integrated
components are realised with knowledge-centric focus.
•
Contextualisation employing knowledge complements.
•
Analysis, synthesis, documentation can employ refer-
ence implementations for new insight and development.
An approach to the multi-disciplinary nature of this research
requires signiﬁcant developments of coherently integration-
able, fundamental context components especially
•
multi-disciplinary contexts of prehistory and archaeol-
ogy and respective resources,
•
chorological contexts, e.g.,
•
homogeneously consistent high resolution Digital Eleva-
tion Model (DEM) for land and sea bottom, and
•
natural sciences Knowledge Resources (KR), e.g., soil
classiﬁcation resources, standardised soil reference sys-
tems, and parameters.
The following passages give a compact overview of major
component implementations and development integrated with
this research. A more detailed, comprehensive discussion and
examples regarding the fundaments are available with the
research on methodology, contextualisation, and conceptual
knowledge. Relevant pre-existing and ongoing component de-
velopments addressing knowledge with multi-disciplinary KR
have been summarised [5].
a) Conceptual knowledge frameworks: A main reference
implementation developed and used in practice with ongoing
long-term research and applied for KR is the prehistory-
protohistory and archaeology Conceptual Knowledge Ref-
erence Implementation (CKRI), including multi-disciplinary
contexts of natural sciences and humanities [6].
b) Conceptual knowledge base: Conceptual knowledge
base is The Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) [7], a gen-
eral plan for knowledge classiﬁcation, providing an analytico-
synthetic and facetted classiﬁcation, designed for subject de-
scription and indexing of content of information resources
irrespective of the carrier, form, format, and language. UDC-
based references in this publication are taken from the multi-
lingual UDC summary [7] released by the UDC Consortium
under a Creative Commons license [8].
c) Integration of scientiﬁc reference frameworks: The
integration includes relevant scientiﬁc practices, frameworks,
and standards from disciplines and contexts. Geosciences and
soil science are continuously delivering updated state of the
art research and insight, including geodiversity and standardi-
sation [9] [10] as required for contextualisation. A practical
reference implementation for coherent contextualisation of
prehistory-protohistory and archaeology conceptual knowledge
[6] is currently in development within a long-term project
accompanying this research.
d) Formalisation:
All integration components, for all
disciplines, require an explicit and continuous formalisation
[11] process in order to conform with the information science
principles according to the practices in the disciplines.
e) Methodologies and workﬂows integration: Methodolo-
gies for creating and utilising methods include model pro-
cessing, remote sensing, spatial mapping, high information
densities, and visualisation. The respective contextualisation
of prehistoric scenarios should each be done under individ-
ual prehistoric conditions, especially supported by standard
algorithms [12], multi-dimensional criteria, spatial operations,
interpolation geodesic computation [13], triangulation [14],
gradient computation [15], and projection [16].
f) Prehistory Knowledge Resources: In order to over-
come basic shortcomings of public ‘data collections’ the ob-
jects, entities, and respective conceptual knowledge references’
excerpts and examples are taken from The Prehistory and
Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA). PAKA has been in
continuous development for more than three decades [17] and
is released by DIMF [18].
g) Natural Sciences Knowledge Resources: Several co-
herent systems of major natural sciences’ context object groups
from KR realisations have been implemented [5] [7] [19].
h) Inherent representation groups: The methodology can
consider a wide range of representation groups for major
disciplines and context object groups regarding their inherent
representation and common utilisation, e.g., points, polygons,
lines, Digital Elevation Model (DEM) representations, z-value
representations, distance representations, area representations,
raster, vector, binary, and non-binary data.
i) Scientiﬁc context parametrisation: Scientiﬁc context
parametrisation of prehistoric targets can use the overall in-
sights, e.g., from geoscientiﬁc disciplines [20] [21]. A relevant
example is contextualisation with palaeolandscapes [22].
j) Structures and symbolic representation standards: The
deployment of long-term universal structure and data standards
is essential. Relevant examples of sustainable implementations
are NetCDF [23] based standards, including advanced features,
hybrid structure integration, and parallel computing support
(PnetCDF) and generic multi-dimensional table data, universal
source and text based structure and code representations.
Results of the practical implementations and realisations are
presented in the following sections.
III.
RESULTING IMPLEMENTATION AND REALISATION
A means of choice in order to achieve overall efﬁcient
realisations even for complex scenarios, integrating arbitrary
knowledge, is to use the principles of Superordinate Knowl-
edge. The core assembly elements of Superordinate Knowl-
edge are methodology, implementation, and realisation [24].
In the following solution, scenario targets are contexts of
prehistoric cemeteries and burials at the North Sea coast,
in North-Rhine Westphalia, Lower Saxony, and The Nether-
lands. Integration targets are natural sciences and speleological
contexts, caves and cave systems in North-Rhine Westphalia,
Lower Saxony, and The Netherlands, soil diversity, and overall
integration with chorological, symbolical, spatial context repre-
sentations, e.g., place, spatial planning, auxiliary subdivisions
for boundaries and spatial forms and administrative units.
A. Coherent conceptual knowledge implementation
We can select relevant references from the implemented
prehistory-protohistory
and
archaeology
CKRI
[6].
The
methodology allows to address any other references on a co-
herent information science knowledge base, e.g., geoscientiﬁc
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-871-6
GEOProcessing 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

knowledge from natural sciences KR components. Further, the
reference implementation enables to address chorology on the
coherent knowledge base. Universally consistent conceptual
knowledge is based on UDC references for demonstration,
spanning the main tables [25] shown in Table I.
TABLE I. COHERENT CONCEPTUAL KNOWLEDGE DEPLOYED FOR
CONTEXTUALISATION, SELECTED UDC CODE REFERENCES (EXCERPT).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC:0
Science and Knowledge. Organization. Computer Science.
Information. Documentation. Librarianship. Institutions.
Publications
UDC:004
Computer science and technology. Computing.
UDC:1
Philosophy. Psychology
UDC:2
Religion. Theology
UDC:3
Social Sciences
UDC:5
Mathematics. Natural Sciences
UDC:52
Astronomy. Astrophysics. Space research. Geodesy
UDC:53
Physics
UDC:539
Physical nature of matter
UDC:54
Chemistry. Crystallography. Mineralogy
UDC:55
Earth Sciences. Geological sciences
UDC:550.3
Geophysics
UDC:551
General geology. Meteorology. Climatology.
Historical geology. Stratigraphy. Palaeogeography
UDC:551.44
Speleology. Caves. Fissures. Underground waters
UDC:551.46
Physical oceanography. Submarine topography. Ocean ﬂoor
UDC:551.7
Historical geology. Stratigraphy
UDC:551.8
Palaeogeography
UDC:56
Palaeontology
UDC:6
Applied Sciences. Medicine, Technology
UDC:63
Agriculture and related sciences and techniques. Forestry.
Farming. Wildlife exploitation
UDC:631.4
Soil science. Pedology. Soil research
UDC:7
The Arts. Entertainment. Sport
UDC:8
Linguistics. Literature
UDC:9
Geography. Biography. History
UDC:902
Archaeology
UDC:903
Prehistory. Prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
UDC:904
Cultural remains of historical times
UDC (1/9)
Common auxiliaries of place
UDC:(1)
Place and space in general. Localization. Orientation
UDC:(2)
Physiographic designation
UDC:(20)
Ecosphere
UDC:(21)
Surface of the Earth in general. Land areas in particular.
Natural zones and regions
UDC:(23)
Above sea level. Surface relief. Above ground generally.
Mountains
UDC:(24)
Below sea level. Underground. Subterranean
UDC:(25)
Natural ﬂat ground (at, above or below sea level).
The ground in its natural condition, cultivated or inhabited
UDC:(26)
Oceans, seas and interconnections
UDC:(28)
Inland waters
UDC:(3/9)
Individual places of the ancient and modern world
UDC:(3)
Places of the ancient and mediaeval world
UDC:(4/9)
Countries and places of the modern world
UDC:(4)
Europe
UDC:“...”
Common auxiliaries of time.
UDC:“6”
Geological, archaeological and cultural time divisions
UDC:“62”
Cenozoic (Cainozoic). Neozoic (70 MYBP - present)
For this research, major references from both main and
auxiliary tables are highlighted in italics with bluish colour.
B. Multi-disciplinary views: Prehistory and archaeology
Table II shows an excerpt of UDC:903.. . .:2 ritual/burial
object and subgroup examples, and conceptual view groups
[7] for prehistory and protohistory (PAKA, [17] [18]).
TABLE II. PREHISTORY AND PROTOHISTORY RITUAL/BURIAL OBJECT AND
SUBGROUP EXAMPLES, AND CONCEPTUAL VIEW GROUPS [7] (EXCERPT).
Major Object Group
Selected Objects
Conceptual View Group
Ritual places, burials
yes
UDC:903.. . .:2
Cemetery
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Barrow
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
round
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
long
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Cist
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Dolmen
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Tomb
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
chamber
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
court
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
portal
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
rock cut
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
wedge
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Pithos burial
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Cave
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Body ﬁnding
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
Urn
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
. . .
–
UDC:903.. . .:2
For this illustrative object scenario, the excerpt does not
show individual micro-groups. Besides different distributions
and different origins, object context can be referred, e.g.,
artiﬁcial origin and natural origins as well as relevant object
properties, materials, and soil contexts can be considered.
C. Resulting realisation components: Soil diversity
A suitable UDC:631.4. . . base soil reference system for
prehistory and archaeology has been compiled along with this
research. The results are available in Table III.
TABLE III. COMPILATION OF CONCEPTUAL REFERENCE SYSTEM
(UDC:631.4. . .), IMPLEMENTED AND REALISED WRB STANDARD SOIL
TYPE REFERENCE GROUPS AND SOIL TYPE SPECIFICATIONS.
Soil type
Soil type speciﬁcation
Reference group
Name in WRB 2006 / WRB 1998
Acrisol
Haplic / Ferric, Gleyic, Haplic, Humic, Plinthic
Alisol
Plinthic
Albeluvisol
Haplic / Endoeutric, Gleyic, Haplic, Histic, Stagnic,
Umbric
Andosol
Aluandic / Dystric, Humic, Umbric, Mollic, Vitric
Anthrosol
Anthrosol, Plaggic
Arenosol
Albic, Haplic, Protic
Calcisol
Aridic
Chernozem
Calcic, Haplic, Gleyic, Haplic, Luvic
Cambisol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Chromic, Haplic / Dystric,
Haplic / Eutric, Gleyic, Haplic, Mollic, Vertic
Fluvisol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric,
Gleyic, Haplic, Histic, Mollic, Salic, Thionic
Gleysol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric,
Haplic / Haplic, Histic, Humic, Mollic, Thionic
Gypsisol
Haplic / Aridic
Histosol
Histosol, Hemic / Dystric, Hemic / Eutric, – / Fibric,
– / Gelic, – / Sapric
Kastanozem
Calcic, Haplic, Luvic
Leptosol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric,
Haplic / Haplic, Haplic / Humic, Rendzic, Lithic
Luvisol
Albic, Haplic / Arenic, Calcic, Haplic / Chromic,
Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Ferric, Gleyic, Haplic, Vertic
Phaeozem
– / Albic, Haplic / Calcaric, Gleyic, Haplic, Luvic,
Haplic / Sodic
Planosol
Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric, Haplic
Podzol
Haplic / Carbic, Haplic / Entic, Gleyic, Haplic, Leptic,
Placic, Haplic / Rustic, Umbric
Regosol
Haplic / Calcaric, Haplic / Dystric, Haplic / Eutric, Haplic
Solonchak
Gleyic, Haplic, Haplic / Takyric, Mollic
Solonetz
Gleyic, Haplic, Mollic
Umbrisol
Arenic, Gleyic
Vertisol
Haplic / Chromic, Haplic, Haplic / Pellic
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-871-6
GEOProcessing 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

For this research, the reference system is based on standard
soil references and UDC, both enabling a systematic and
coherent approach. Soil diversity groups are relevant for pre-
historical and archaeological objects and contexts. Contextu-
alised soil diversity groups are referenced in a consistent, stan-
dardised way. From this base compilation, a properties based
reference system can be created for further contextualisation,
parametrisation, and processing with the ongoing research
on soil diversity for prehistory and archaeology. Associated
information, e.g., on soil drainage, wetness, pH status, base
saturation, chloride, subsoil organic material, and stiffness can
be found as reference in the World Reference Base (WRB)
for soil resources [26], [27] from the Food and Agriculture
Organisation (FAO), United Nations. In this context, the con-
ceptual references are referring to the respective categories,
e.g., UDC:631.4. . .:903+“4. . .”.
D. Multi-disciplinary integration facets
Table IV shows the reference facets of a respective multi-
disciplinary target contextualisation.
TABLE IV. REFERENCE FACETS OF A MULTI-DISCIPLINARY TARGET
CONTEXTUALISATION, BASED ON CKRI, IMPLEMENTED AND REALISED
USING UDC CODE REFERENCES (EXCERPT).
Code / Sign Ref.
Verbal Description (EN)
Geography. Biography. History
UDC:903.. . .
Prehistory, prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
. . .:2
referring to religion and rituals
. . .,“62. . .”
from Holocene
. . .,(4. . .DENW) . . . in North-Rhine Westphalia, Germany
. . .,(4. . .DENI)
. . . in Lower Saxony, Germany
. . .,(4. . .NL)
. . . in The Netherlands
Earth sciences, geological sciences
UDC:551.44
Speleology, caves, ﬁssures, underground waters
Applied sciences, agriculture in general
UDC:631.4
Soil research data
Geodesy. Photogrammetry
UDC:52. . .,(23)
Remote sensing data, above sea level
UDC:52. . .,(24)
Remote sensing data, below sea level
Contextualisation Place
UDC:(4)
Europe
The contextualisation uses coherent conceptual knowledge
and refers to the chorological references for consequent knowl-
edge integration and symbolic representation.
IV.
RESULTING COHERENT KNOWLEDGE INTEGRATION
Figure 1 shows a generated, resulting coherent conceptual
knowledge integration sketch for the realisation based on the
KR. The sketch considers the major conceptual references
for illustration. Detailed research can further detail on prehis-
toric object groups, characteristics, and properties, topographic
properties, soil properties, and many more. Therefore, the
conceptual sketch view can result in levels of arbitrary num-
bers of different integrations of complements and associated
properties as resulting from the KR, which are discussed in the
following. The result integrates required KR components based
on coherent conceptual knowledge and systematical chorolog-
ical knowledge for multi-disciplinary contexts, e.g., arbitrary
group representations, classiﬁcation based representations, and
geospatial representations.
Knowledge objects and contexts are provided by The Prehis-
tory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA) [17] [18].
The multi-disciplinary coherent contextualisation employs the
base of a new soil system reference development with soil
types (UDC:631.4. . .) of WRB standard, reference contexts,
especially for UDC:903.. . .:2,551.7+“628”.. . ., prehistorical,
protohistorical time spans and artefacts related to religion and
rituals, geology, especially stratigraphy and paleogeography,
quaternary, especially late glacial and Holocene. The integrated
natural sciences KR further provide information on caves in the
respective region. Contextualisation is enabled by the Concep-
tual Knowledge Reference Implementation (CKRI), including
multi-disciplinary contexts of natural sciences and humanities
[6]. The conceptual knowledge base is The Universal Decimal
Classiﬁcation (UDC) [7].
In this illustration plain Digital Chart of the World (DCW)
data are used [28]. The coastline database is the Global Self-
consistent Hierarchical High-resolution Geography (GSHHG)
[29] [30], which was mainly compiled from the World Vector
Shorelines (WVS) [31], the CIA World Data Bank II (WDBII)
[32], and the Atlas of the Cryosphere (AC).
An equal area projection (Eckert IV) is advised due to the
type of discipline knowledge representation. The compilation
uses the World Geodetic System (WGS). The symbolic repre-
sentation of the contextualisation is done via LX Professional
Scientiﬁc Content-Context-Suite (LX PSCC Suite) deploying
the Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) [33] for visualisation.
Concrete details of knowledge complements and compo-
nents have been provided [5]. All basic technical aspects can
be created on that base for individual application scenarios. As
illustrated, the solution is explicitly not a database concept and
the goal is explicitly not just to link different multi-disciplinary
concepts. The solution allows to create individual conceptual
knowledge based algorithms and to integrate with new and
available spatial and temporal processing algorithms. Basic
components and functions are given in the references.
The presented integration approach for chorological and
coherent contextualisation provides a solid base for multi-
disciplinary contexts in prehistory and archaeology. The imple-
mented system of components, continuously in development,
integrates relevant and beneﬁcial methodologies and proper-
ties, especially
•
coherent conceptual knowledge views,
•
multi-disciplinary contextualisation,
•
application approaches for multi-disciplinary contexts in
prehistory and archaeology,
•
allows systematical chorological consideration of knowl-
edge, e.g., arbitrary group representations, classiﬁcation
based representations, geospatial representations,
•
further development and valorisation of resources,
•
integration of multi-disciplinary resources,
•
choice for homogeneity of components,
•
deployment of systematical procedures,
•
effective and efﬁcient integration and analysis,
•
automation of workﬂows and procedures, and
•
provides multi-lingual conceptual knowledge support.
The methodological approach also allows the multi-directional
utilisation: Conceptual knowledge and resulting integration,
e.g., symbolic representation, on the one hand and integra-
tion results delivering references to conceptual knowledge
and new integrated knowledge contexts on the other hand.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-871-6
GEOProcessing 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 1. Resulting coherent conceptual knowledge integration sketch diagram showing knowledge resources for a prehistoric, natural sciences, and spatial
contextualisation for excerpts of prehistoric cemeteries’ and caves’ distributions, remote sensing data, and soil properties with respective knowledge references.
As demonstrated with the integration for this research, be-
sides coherency, general ﬂexibility, robustness, and scalability,
criteria for components employed with implementation and
realisation should be evaluated carefully for being able to
consider solid information science fundaments and knowledge
centricity, beyond plain technical and proprietary features.
Resulting from the methodology, the realisation integrates a
wide range of relevant selection criteria, e.g., in this scenario:
•
Conceptual selection (esp. prehistory, cemetery; natural
sciences, caves).
•
Spatial, mathematical selection.
•
Regional spatial selection.
•
Topographic selection (esp. above sea level).
•
Contextualised selection (esp. with availability of sufﬁ-
cient natural sciences, soil, and other context data).
V.
CONCLUSION
The practical solution for implementation and realisation
of the new knowledge-based methodology showed to enable
coherent conceptual knowledge for contextualisation in prehis-
tory, archaeology, and natural sciences. The more, the approach
enables to integrate multi-disciplinary contexts by a consis-
tent system (editions) and supports multi-lingualism. Multi-
disciplinary scenarios can be considered in multi-fold ways,
e.g., knowledge can be documented, analysed, integrated, and
selected deploying conceptual knowledge. The methodological
approach also allows a multi-directional utilisation. Any KR
result can be considered starting point, intermediate result, and
ﬁnal result, depending on a deﬁned task and workﬂow.
The general methodology provides ﬂexibility for solid in-
formation science based methods and enables a wide range
of beneﬁts for scenarios and implementations, e.g., coherent
multi-disciplinary and multi-lingual documentation and sys-
tematical knowledge based geo-spatial processing, aware of
inherent knowledge spanning arbitrary disciplines. With that,
geospatial scenarios are special cases of chorological contextu-
alisation. Further recommendations from practical experiences
with knowledge complements and component integration are:
•
Add consistent and coherent conceptual knowledge to
objects and entities of your resources and make work-
ﬂows deploy conceptual knowledge.
•
Choose multi-disciplinary resources with homogeneous
properties, e.g., resolution and coverage.
•
Use long-term standards.
•
Practice scientiﬁc state-of-the-art parametrisation of re-
spective knowledge, data, and algorithms.
•
Create context dependent, suitable symbolic representa-
tions and individual methods.
•
Proceed the knowledge-centric integration reasoned and
levelheaded.
Future research concentrates on continuing development of
components for detailed multi-disciplinary application scenar-
ios in prehistory and archaeology and respective chorological
and coherent conceptual knowledge contextualisation.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-871-6
GEOProcessing 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This ongoing research is supported by scientiﬁc organisa-
tions and individuals. We are grateful to the “Knowledge in
Motion” (KiM) long-term project, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches
Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), for par-
tially funding this research, implementation, case studies, and
publication under grants D2018F1P04962, D2019F1P04998,
and D2020F1P05228 and to its senior scientiﬁc members
and members of the permanent commission of the science
council, especially to Dr. Friedrich H¨ulsmann, Gottfried Wil-
helm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB) Hannover, to Dipl.-Biol.
Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, to
Dipl.-Ing. Martin Hofmeister, Hannover, and to Olaf Lau,
Hannover, Germany, for fruitful discussion, inspiration, and
practical multi-disciplinary case studies. We are grateful to
Dipl.-Ing. Hans-G¨unther M¨uller, G¨ottingen, Germany, for pro-
viding specialised, manufactured high end computation and
storage solutions. We are grateful to The Science and High
Performance Supercomputing Centre (SHPSC) for long-term
support. / DIMF-PIID-DF98 007.
REFERENCES
[1]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “From Knowledge and Meaning Towards Knowl-
edge Pattern Matching: Processing and Developing Knowledge Objects
Targeting Geoscientiﬁc Context and Georeferencing,” in Proc. of The
Twelfth Internat. Conf. on Advanced Geographic Information Systems,
Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2020), November 21–25,
2020, Valencia, Spain. XPS Press, Wilmington, Delaware, USA, 2020,
pp. 36–41, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-762-7.
[2]
R. Gleser, Zu den erkenntnistheoretischen Grundlagen der Pr¨ahis-
torischen Arch¨aologie.
Leiden, 2021, 2021, (title in English: On
the Epistemological Fundaments of Prehistorical Archaeology), in: M.
Renger, S.-M. Rothermund, S. Schreiber, and A. Veling (Eds.), Theorie,
Arch¨aologie, Reﬂexion. Kontroversen und Ans¨atze im deutschsprachi-
gen Diskurs, (in print).
[3]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, F. H¨ulsmann, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, P. Skurowski,
and M. Staniszewski, Knowledge and Computing.
Post-Summit Re-
sults, Delegates’ Summit: Best Practice and Deﬁnitions of Knowledge
and Computing, Sept. 23, 2015, The Fifth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and
Inf. in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 13th Int. Conf.
of Num. Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–29, 2015,
Rhodes, Greece, 2015, pp. 1–7, DOI: 10.15488/3409.
[4]
L. W. Anderson and D. R. Krathwohl, Eds., A Taxonomy for Learning,
Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educa-
tional Objectives.
Allyn & Bacon, Boston, MA (Pearson Education
Group), USA, 2001, ISBN: 978-0801319037.
[5]
C.-P.
R¨uckemann,
“Prehistory’s
and
Natural
Sciences’
Multi-
disciplinary Contexts: Contextualisation and Context Integration Based
on Universal Conceptual Knowledge,” in Proceedings of The Eleventh
International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computa-
tion (INFOCOMP 2020), May 30 – June 3, 2021, Valencia, Spain. XPS
Press, Wilmington, Delaware, USA, 2021, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN:
978-1-61208-865-5.
[6]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Information Science Paragon: Allow Knowl-
edge to Prevail, from Prehistory to Future – Approaches to Universality,
Consistency, and Long-term Sustainability,” The International Journal
“Information Models and Analyses” (IJ IMA), vol. 9, no. 2, 2020,
Markov, K. (ed.), ISSN: 1314-6416 (print), (to appear).
[7]
“Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary,” 2012, UDC
Consortium, 2012, Web resource, v. 1.1. The Hague: UDC Consortium
(UDCC Publication No. 088), URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/
php/index.php [accessed: 2021-06-12].
[8]
“Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license,” 2012, URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ [accessed: 2021-06-12],
(ﬁrst release 2009, subsequent update 2012).
[9]
B. M. Das, Advanced Soil Mechanics; Fifth Edition, 5th ed.
CRC
Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, London, New York, 2019,
ISBN: 978-0-8153-7913-3.
[10]
“Land Processed Distributed Active Archive Center,” 2021, LP DAAC,
URL: https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/ [accessed: 2021-06-12].
[11]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, R. Pavani, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, A. Tsitsipas,
L. Schubert, F. H¨ulsmann, O. Lau, and M. Hofmeister, Best Practice
and Deﬁnitions of Formalisation and Formalism. Post-Summit Results,
Delegates’ Summit: The Ninth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf. in
Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 17th Int. Conf. of Num.
Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–28, 2019, Rhodes,
Greece, 2019, DOI: 10.15488/5241.
[12]
W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery, Nu-
merical Recipes in Fortran 90, The Art of Parallel Scientiﬁc Computing.
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
[13]
T. Vincenty, “Direct and inverse solutions of geodesics on the ellipsoid
with application of nested equations,” Surv. Rev., vol. XXII, no. 176,
1975, pp. 88–93.
[14]
R. J. Renka, “Algorithm 772: STRIPACK: Delaunay Triangulation and
Voronoi Diagram on the Surface of a Sphere,” AMC Trans. Math.
Software, vol. 23, no. 3, 1997, pp. 416–434.
[15]
B. K. P. Horn, “Hill-Shading and the Reﬂectance Map,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 69, no. 1, 1981, pp. 14–47.
[16]
A. J. Kent and P. Vujakovic, Eds., The Routledge Handbook of Mapping
and Cartography.
Taylor & Francis Group, London and New York,
2018, ISBN: 978-1-138-83102-5.
[17]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Information Science and Inter-disciplinary Long-
term Strategies – Key to Insight, Consistency, and Sustainabil-
ity: Conceptual Knowledge Reference Methodology Spanning Pre-
history, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and Humanities,” Interna-
tional Tutorial, DataSys Congress 2020, Sept. 27 – Oct. 1, 2020,
Lisbon, Portugal, 2020, URL: http://www.iaria.org/conferences2020/
ProgramINFOCOMP20.html [accessed: 2021-06-12].
[18]
“The Prehistory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA) license,”
2021, (release 2021), Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF): All rights reserved. Rights retain to
the contributing creators.
[19]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Impact of Information Science Accompanied
Structural Information on Computation of Knowledge Pattern Matching
and Processing: A Prehistory, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and
Humanities Conceptual Integration Perspective,” in Proc. of The Tenth
Int, Conf. on Adv. Comm. and Comp. (INFOCOMP 2020), Sept.
27 – Oct. 1, 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, 2020, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN:
978-1-61208-807-5, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=infocomp 2020 1 10 60015 [accessed: 2021-06-12].
[20]
R. Brinkmann, Abriß der Geologie, Bd. 2, Historische Geologie, neube-
arbeitet von Karl Kr¨ommelbein, 12th/13th ed.
Ferdinand Enke Verlag,
Stuttgart, 1986, ISBN: 3-432-80603-5, (title in English: Epitome of
Geology, Vol. 2, Historical Geology).
[21]
P. Woldstedt and K. Duphorn, Norddeutschland und angrenzende Ge-
biete im Eiszeitalter, 3rd ed., 1974, (title in English: Northern Germany
and Adjacent Regions in the Ice Age).
[22]
G. N. Bailey, J. Harff, and D. Sakellariou, Eds., Under the Sea:
Archaeology and Palaeolandscapes of the Continental Shelf, ser. Coastal
Research Library.
Springer International Publishing AG 2017,
2017, vol. 20, ISSN: 2211-0577, ISBN: 978-3-319-53158-8, DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-53160-1.
[23]
“Network
Common
Data
Form
(NetCDF),”
2021,
DOI:
10.5065/D6H70CW6,
URL:
http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/
netcdf/ [accessed: 2021-06-12].
[24]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Principles of Superordinate Knowledge: Separation
of Methodology, Implementation, and Realisation,” in The Eighth
Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf. in Natural and Applied Sciences
(SACINAS), Proceedings of The 16th Int. Conf. of Num. Analysis and
Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 13–18, 2018, Rhodes, Greece, AIP CP,
Vol. 2116.
AIP Press, American Institute of Physics, Melville, New
York, USA, 2019, ISBN: 978-0-7354-1854-7, DOI: 10.1063/1.5114033.
[25]
“UDC Summary Linked Data, Main Tables,” 2020, Universal Decimal
Classiﬁcation (UDC), UDC Consortium, URL: https://udcdata.info/
078887 [accessed: 2021-06-12].
[26]
“World reference base for soil resources,” 1998, World Soil Resources
Report No. 84, ISSS-ISRIC-FAO, Rome.
[27]
“World reference base for soil resources,” 2006, World Soil Resources
Report No. 103, ISSS-ISRIC-FAO, Rome.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-871-6
GEOProcessing 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[28]
P. Wessel, “The Digital Chart of the World for GMT 5 or later,” 2018,
URL: ftp://ftp.soest.hawaii.edu/gmt [accessed: 2021-06-12], URL: http:
//www.soest.hawaii.edu/pwessel/dcw/ [accessed: 2021-06-12].
[29]
P. Wessel, “Global Self-consistent Hierarchical High-resolution Geogra-
phy,” 2016, URL: ftp://ftp.soest.hawaii.edu/gmt [accessed: 2021-06-12],
URL: http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/pwessel/gshhg/ [accessed: 2021-06-
12].
[30]
P. Wessel and W. H. F. Smith, “A global, self-consistent, hierarchical,
high-resolution shoreline database,” J. Geophys. Res., vol. 101, no. B4,
1996, pp. 8741–8743.
[31]
E. A. Soluri and V. A. Woodson, “World Vector Shoreline,” Int.
Hydrograph. Rev., vol. LXVII, no. 1, 1990, pp. 27–35.
[32]
A. J. Gorny, “World Data Bank II General User Guide,” 1977.
[33]
P. Wessel, W. H. F. Smith, R. Scharroo, J. Luis, and F. Wobbe,
“The Generic Mapping Tools (GMT),” 2020, URL: http://www.
generic-mapping-tools.org/ [accessed: 2021-06-12], URL: http://gmt.
soest.hawaii.edu/ [accessed: 2021-06-12].
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-871-6
GEOProcessing 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

