Harmonized Multiresolution Geodata Cube                                                   
for Efficient Raster Data Analysis and Visualization 
Lassi Lehto, Jaakko Kähkönen, Juha Oksanen and Tapani Sarjakoski 
Geoinformatics and Cartography 
Finnish Geospatial Research Institute (FGI) 
National Land Survey of Finland 
Masala, Finland 
email: lassi.lehto@nls.fi, jaakko.kahkonen@nls.fi, juha.oksanen@nls.fi, tapani.sarjakoski@nls.fi 
 
 
Abstract— The Data Cube concept provides a useful metaphor 
for management of raster geodata resources in the cloud. An 
initiative, called GeoCubes Finland, has been launched with the 
aim to facilitate access to geospatial raster data for academic 
research. The work is carried out in the context of a major 
research infrastructure development program in Finland. In the 
ingestion process, data sets are pre-processed into a 
harmonized, multiresolution cloud-based repository and 
brought into a common georeferencing frame, resolution levels, 
encoding format and tiling scheme. A custom Application 
Programming Interface (API) has been developed for flexible 
query, download and analysis of the repository’s content layers. 
Cloud-optimized access to pre-stored resolution levels supports 
efficient interactive visual exploration of analysis results 
computed on-the-fly. 
Keywords-raster data; multi-resolution; harmonisation; cloud 
service; visualization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Geospatial data sets are growing rapidly in number and 
volume. In particular, the volume of raster data sets is 
becoming difficult to manage. The resolution of image sensors 
has steadily improved and new imaging technologies have 
been taken into use. In addition, integrating geospatial raster 
data sets for analysis has become a tedious task, as the data 
sets typically differ in critical parameters like origin, 
resolution, coordinate reference system, encoding, format, etc. 
It important to develop mechanisms that facilitate access to 
relevant data resources. 
The data cube concept has emerged as a solution for 
organizing a repository of harmonized geospatial raster 
datasets [1] [2]. In computer technology, a data cube is a 
multi-dimensional array of values [3]. Those values represent 
certain fact that can be organized along various aspects. For 
instance, results of a vote can be considered along political 
party, voting districts, age or gender of candidates, year of 
election, etc. These aspects correspond to the axes of the 
multi-dimensional array and the values live in cells inside this 
array. 
In the geospatial domain, the data cube approach was first 
used in the Earth Observation (EO) community for organizing 
vast amounts of satellite images [4]. In this application area 
time is a very important dimension, as satellite imagery are 
typically available in extensive time series. The four most 
typical data cube dimensions in an EO application thus are the 
two geospatial coordinate axes, time and the imagery type. 
In the case of a geospatial data cube, the predominant axes 
naturally are latitude, longitude and the possible height. A 
voxel-based approach for organizing truly 3D geodata is also 
possible [5]. The cell value represents the fact about the 
physical environment that the data set happens to describe. 
Thus, content theme can be seen as a predominant axis of a 
geospatial data cube. The most important benefit of 
organizing data sets as a data cube repository is immediate 
availability of the contents for integrated analysis. The 
approach thus aims at fulfilling the goals of the concept 
Analysis Ready Data (ARD) [6]. 
The 
most 
important 
positive 
aspects 
that 
a 
multidimensional data cube approach provides for geospatial 
application can be listed as 
• 
A data cube forms an integrated data repository, 
where harmonized content layers are ready for use 
without troublesome data preparation steps 
• 
Ingested datasets are aligned on pixel level and thus 
can be readily integrated for visualization and 
analysis 
• 
A data cube can be accessed along any of its 
dimensions, allowing for new kinds of knowledge 
retrieval and spatial analysis processes 
• 
A joint data cube repository enables data providers to 
deliver content through a new, easy-to-use channel, 
thus expanding their user base 
• 
The simplicity of raster data processing can be more 
effectively and widely exploited 
• 
By organizing a data cube as a cloud-based service 
with Web-friendly APIs, the potential use scenarios 
can be further widened 
The importance of the data cube concept for geospatial 
application domain is also demonstrated by the fact that the 
Open Geospatial Consortium has initiated standardization 
work on the subject [7]. Another significant development is 
the Open Data Cube (ODC) initiative. ODC is an open source 
software library for organizing vast amounts of satellite 
imagery according to principles of data cube [8]. The software 
includes components for cataloguing and indexing EO 
resources and for ingesting those resources into a harmonized 
and optimized storage format for easy data retrieval. 
Furthermore, the ODC library provides tools for accessing and 
downloading content and for performing analysis operations 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

on it. The ODC community has also developed tools for visual 
exploration and statistical analysis of the data cube contents. 
Concrete national and regional data cube implementations 
based on ODC include the Australian data cube called Digital 
Earth Australia [9], the Swiss Data Cube [10], Columbian 
Cube, Vietnam Open Data Cube, and the Africa Regional 
Data Cube covering Kenya, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Ghana and 
Tanzania [11]. 
ODC can also be applied to data resources other than EO 
data. The examples mentioned in the ODC documentation 
include gridded data sets like elevation models, geophysical 
grids and other interpolated surfaces. However, most of the 
activities around geospatial data cubes focus on satellite image 
processing, in general, and on their time series applications, in 
particular [12]. 
An initiative has been launched in Finland to build a multi-
resolution, cloud service-based geodata cube, called 
GeoCubes Finland, containing some of the most important 
national geodatasets [13]. The contents of the GeoCubes 
include data layers like Digital Elevation Model (DEM), 
administrative areas, land use, surface deposits and various 
attributes of the national forest inventory. The content layers 
are provided by the governmental agencies that collect and 
continuously maintain them. GeoCubes Finland thus differs 
from other geodata-related data cube implementations by not 
focusing on satellite imagery, but rather on other traditional 
geodata sets. The GeoCubes development is being carried out 
in the context of a large research infrastructure development 
program in Finland, called Open Geospatial Information 
Infrastructure for Research (oGIIR) [14]. 
In Section II, the basic principles of the GeoCubes Finland 
are presented. Section III discusses the custom content access 
API of the GeoCubes Finland data repository in more detail. 
In Sections IV and V, some visualization related 
considerations and example applications are discussed. 
Section VI concludes the paper. 
 
II. 
GEOCUBES FINLAND 
A. General 
A particular feature that makes GeoCubes Finland 
different from other geospatial data cube implementations is 
its multi-resolution nature. A set of fixed resolution levels (1, 
2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500 and 1000 m) have been selected 
to store the contained data sets. The resolutions are selected to 
facilitate processing of analysis operations, typically run on 
round resolution values, and to enable easy integration with 
statistical and other auxiliary data sets. Opposite to resolution 
levels typical for web mapping schemas, such as the powers 
of two as in Google Maps, in GeoCubes Finland the resolution 
levels are selected to serve human user. The actually available 
set of resolution levels depend on the original accuracy of the 
source data set. Thus, the finest resolution of most of the 
GeoCubes Finland’s content layers is 10 m. Only some 
national data sets can be reasonably be represented in 1 m 
resolution. These include the most accurate digital elevation 
model and the administrative division data sets. 
Resolution levels could possibly be seen as one dimension 
of a multi-dimensional geodata cube, but each resolution level 
has an individual range for the cube’s coordinate-related axes. 
Therefore, the resolution levels of the cube must actually be 
seen as a set of separate cube instances. Hence, the plural form 
of the cube’s name: GeoCubes Finland. 
In addition to industry-standard access interface to 
coverage data, the Web Coverage Service (WCS) [15], the 
GeoCubes contents can be accessed via direct file URLs and 
through the custom-built GeoCubes API. 
B. Technical Implementation of the Repository 
GeoCubes Finland’s data storage is implemented as a set 
of Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF (COG) files [16] [17]. These 
files are stored on a cloud service platform, organized in 
directories by data provider, data set and the edition of data 
set. The area of the country is divided into tessellation of sixty 
100 km * 100 km sized blocks, each maintained as a separate 
GeoTIFF file to ease processing tasks. The tessellation also 
facilitates parallelization of various processing steps and 
works as a rudimentary spatial index. All the files can always 
be accessed in a straightforward manner via http (HyperText 
Transfer Protocol) by their URLs (Uniform Resource 
Locator). 
A GeoTIFF file arranged according to COG specification 
contains overviews and has its raster content organized as 
tiles. The overviews are ordered in sections from the coarsest 
to the most detailed, followed by the full resolution raster. The 
metadata describing the offset of each section has to be at the 
beginning of the file. With this file structure, a calling COG-
aware client can make use of the http ‘GET Range’ query, 
which enables an indicated subsection of a file to be requested. 
By first requesting the metadata portion, the client can then 
select an appropriate range of bytes to only download the 
needed geospatial area of an appropriate resolution, i.e. 
overview level. This mechanism significantly improves the 
efficiency of raster data retrieval for cloud-service based 
applications. 
The multiple resolutions are implemented in two ways, 
both as internal GeoTIFF overview layers and as individual 
external resolution-specific GeoTIFF files. Internal overviews 
facilitate easy content delivery, as all resolutions are contained 
inside as single file. Separate resolution-specific GeoTIFF 
files in turn enable better control of resolutions for 
computations run in external applications. The overview 
functionality, like most other computing tasks in GeoCubes 
Finland, is implemented using Geospatial Data Abstraction 
Library (GDAL) [18]. 
To collect the individual files as a complete view covering 
the whole country, the so-called Virtual Format mechanism 
(VRT) of GDAL is used [19]. In this approach, an XML-
formatted text file is used to refer to the set of image files that 
constitute the integrated view. As such, a single VRT file can 
for instance refer to all external GeoTIFF overview files on 
certain resolution level, thus facilitating analysis and 
visualization of larger areas. In the same way, a VRT file can 
refer to various resolution-specific files in a certain 
tessellation block, providing a light-weight representation of 
the multi-resolution data set of that block. VRT files can be 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

easily transported across network connections. Because the 
file references are stored as absolute addresses, the VRT file 
can be opened in a third-party application. This approach 
limits downloading of raster content on the spatial area and on 
the resolution level the user actually needs. 
 
III. 
CONTENT ACCESS API 
An API has been developed for exploring, downloading 
and analyzing the GeoCubes Finland contents [20]. The API 
is designed according to the principles of RESTful Web API 
[21], in which the request is defined by the path components 
of the query URL. The API provides requests for querying the 
basic metadata of the repository, querying cell values on a 
given location, downloading content by bounding box, 
polygon or administrative unit and analyzing the content in 
terms of cell value distribution, change detection, etc. The 
analysis operations are run on the server platform, without 
downloading any content to the client side. 
In all content queries, the query can be run on a desired 
resolution level and year. The multi-resolution structure of the 
GeoCubes repository gives to the user a flexible choice on 
speed vs. accuracy of the operation. For instance, an analysis 
procedure under development can be first tested on a coarse 
resolution level, and the real, time-consuming run on the finest 
resolution be carried out only when seemed appropriate. In 
case of analysis based on visual exploration, the resolution 
level, on which the analysis is run, can always be matched 
with the zoom level of the visualization. This way the analysis 
can be run in roughly constant time and the interactivity level 
of the application can be kept stable. 
The general scheme of the access API can be described as 
follows: 
 
 
what to do /  
   on which resolution level /  
      with which content layer /  
         where /  
            when /  
               how 
 
 
As an example, the query for the cell value on a given 
location becomes as: 
 
legend/500/mvmi-paatyyppi/340500,6695000/2009 
 
where mvmi-paatyyppi (in Finnish) is one of the themes 
(forest inventory data) of GeoGubes. 
Another query would request download of a content layer 
inside the given list of municipalities (‘kuntajako’ in Finnish), 
from the given resolution level and year: 
 
clip/100/corine/kuntajako:734,761,834,433,224
,444,927/2000 
 
The resulting data set, requested using the GeoCubes Web 
client, is shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. A CORINE data set downloaded via GeoCubes API using 
administrative units’ boundaries as selection area. 
 
Downloading of a DEM from two blocks in VRT format 
with multiresolution content would go as: 
 
clip/20/km10/blocks:300000,6900000, 
300000,6800000/2018/vrt/mr 
 
An example of an analysis would be change detection 
between CORINE versions 2000 and 2012 in land use type 
fields (‘pellot’ in Finnish) inside the given bounding box: 
 
analyse:changedetect/10/corine:Pellot 
/bbox:225700,6660000,494300,6740000/2000,2012 
 
The result of the above analysis is an image depicting the 
changes in red (removals) and green (additions). 
Another analysis would determine the distribution of cell 
values inside the two indicated counties (‘maakuntajako’ in 
Finnish): 
 
analyse:distribution/500/mvmi-
maaluokka/maakuntajako:04,06/2015 
 
The result is a list of existing cell values together with their 
frequencies. The analysis results visualized in the GeoCubes 
Web client using the D3.js library [22] is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. GeoCubes analysis results showing distribution of data values 
inside the selected area. 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

As an auxiliary data source for analysis purposes, the 
Finnish administrative areas in four different levels are also 
available in vector form in the GeoCubes repository. 
The GeoCubes API has been implemented as a Web 
service using Django Web framework [23], together with 
Python-based service side scripts making an extensive use of 
the Python API of GDAL. In addition to the custom API, the 
most relevant service interfaces standardized by the Open 
Geospatial Consortium are also supported. The main 
components of the GeoCubes Finland platform are shown in 
Figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The main system components of the GeoCubes Finland platform. 
 
IV. 
VISUALIZATION CONSIDERATIONS 
For basic visualization of the content layers, a Web Map 
Tile Service (WMTS) is available on the GeoCubes platform. 
The service makes use of a Web Map Service (WMS) that 
uses a VRT file combining the original GeoTIFF files as its 
source. This arrangement enables both ad hoc visualizations 
through WMS and cache-based static image delivery via 
WMTS. In the case of the WMTS service, the pre-rendered 
tiles are available on the fixed resolution levels of the 
GeoCubes. For best visual presentation, the client should 
apply scale levels that correspond to those resolutions. The 
WMS implementation of GeoCubes platform is based on 
MapServer and the WMTS service on MapProxy. 
Visualization of administrative areas poses a specific 
challenge. Because areas are represented as raster data to 
facilitate analysis with other content layers, boundary lines 
cannot be used to separate an area from the neighboring areas. 
The only way to reliably display the administrative division of 
the country in a legible manner is to ensure that neighboring 
areas are always presented with clearly distinguishable colors. 
The Finnish lowest level administrative division has more 
than 300 municipalities. Thus, to achieve an appropriate data 
set with cell values corresponding to the real municipality 
codes, a raster with 16-bit cell values was created. However, 
for Web browser-based visualization, a 256-colour PNG 
image is required. A custom software module was developed 
that creates random color components for a 256-colour RGB 
color table and applies the colors to municipalities so that the 
three color components of a municipality always differ more 
than 30 units from all of the neighboring areas’ color 
components. The result is a bright and colorful municipality 
map, in which all areas can be reliably distinguished (Figure 
4). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. A municipality map with well distinguishable colors. 
 
Another example of enhanced visualization tested in 
GeoCubes Finland is the locally stretched DEM visualization. 
The terrain of the country is mostly flat, higher elevations 
existing only in the northern Lapland. A consistent, stable 
country-wide DEM visualization thus depicts flat areas with 
very limited color scale, making it impossible to recognize 
subtle height differences. A dynamic visualization module 
was developed for GeoCubes that stretches every individual 
view requested by the client to full color scale. As the 
GeoCubes data repository has multiple resolution levels, the 
visualization processing can be performed efficiently in 
constant time, independently of the presentation scale of the 
client. The two images in Figure 5 depict the difference 
between fixed and dynamic DEM visualization on a 
particularly flat area in the Finnish Ostrobothnia. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. A static DEM visualization compared with a dynamic, locally 
stretched graphic scale. 
 
A 3D example of visualization of GeoCubes’ contents is 
depicted in Figure 6. Here, DEM data is extracted from the 
GeoCubes API around possible crater locations, where a 
meteorite impact is deemed to be behind the peculiar rounded 
land form. The multiresolution contents of the GeoCubes 
repository supports effective 3D visualization of crater areas 
of various sizes. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 6. Possible meteorite impact craters visualized, based on GeoCubes 
DEM. Big scale differences in visualizations are supported by GeoCubes’ 
multiresolution contents. 
V. 
APPLICATION EXAMPLES 
The analysis processes can be effectively run on different 
resolution levels and their results are readily available for 
visual exploration over the whole range of scales supported by 
the geodatacube's resolutions. The GeoCubes API has been 
designed to support access, querying and analysis of the 
geodatacube's contents on the resolution level appropriate for 
the actual use situation. 
A. Field Inspection 
As an example of using GeoCubes API, a field inspection 
of repository cell values has been tested. In this approach, the 
inspector moves around on the terrain and constantly receives 
values of the GeoCubes layer of interest into his cell phone. 
This way, the inspector can compare the environment around 
him with the stored category values, for instance, he can 
determine the correctness of forest type information – and do 
that on all available resolution levels of the repository. 
In the developed pilot implementation, the position of the 
inspector is recorded with an application called Owntracks. 
The location is reported back to a server (Eclipse Mosquitto) 
[24] implementing the ISO-standardized Message Queuing 
Telemetry Transport (MQTT) -protocol. The user is presented 
with a map-based application (Leaflet with Realtime 
extension). When the map application gets notice from the 
MQTT server that the user has moved to a new location, it 
then send a request to the ‘legend’ operation of the GeoCubes 
API together with the location information. As a result, it will 
get cell values from the requested layer on all available 
resolution levels and can compare them with the reality 
around him. The pilot’s architecture is presented in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7. A field inspector accessing GeoCubes cell values using Mosquitto 
server. 
B. Route Finding 
In another analysis example, the GeoCubes DEM layer is 
used for route finding for a forest vehicle that has certain limits 
for movement in steep slopes. DEM data for study area was 
acquired by accessing the GeoCubes API’s ‘clip’ operation 
from within the QGIS application [25]. Then, analysis 
functions available in QGIS were used to compute slope 
values for the area and these were used as the cost surface for 
route finding. Areas too steep for the vehicle were excluded 
from the computation. The case study demonstrates the use of 
the GeoCubes’ content for analysis using tools outside the 
GeoCubes platform. The same analysis could also be run in 
different resolution levels, depending on the needs of the 
application. The resulting route alternatives are depicted in 
Figure 8 using three.js, a 3D JavaScript library [26]. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Route finding in QGIS with DEM from GeoCubes using slope as 
cost surface. White areas denote terrain that has been classified to be too 
steep and is excluded. The red and yellow lines denote found alternative 
routes. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
One of the major obstacles for wider use of geospatial 
raster data sets in different research and analysis scenarios is 
the work required for pre-processing the available data sets. 
This 
often 
involves 
coordinate 
reference 
system 
transformations, resampling procedures, coding system 
translations, integration of map sheet-based data files, etc. To 
facilitate the introduction of geospatial data sets into research 
processes in a multidisciplinary setting, a harmonized, easy-
to-access data storage would be really beneficial. In the 
GeoCubes Finland initiative, this kind of approach has been 
taken. 
A representative set of geospatial data sets with national 
coverage has been ingested into the cloud service-based data 
repository. The pre-processing phase involves operations like 
rasterizing vector-formatted source data sets, resampling of 
source data into the set of standardized GeoCubes resolution 
levels, harmonization of value coding systems between 
different data set editions, encoding of the resulting raster 
content into the common cloud-optimized image format and 
storing it to the cloud repository, both as binary images files 
and as textual VRT representations. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

By storing the raster data sets in multiple resolution levels, 
the GeoCubes repository can support certain use cases very 
efficiently. These include interactive visual exploration of on-
the-fly analysis results and testing of an analysis procedure on 
coarse resolution levels before launching an accurate analysis 
on detailed levels. The result layer of an analysis can be 
configured as a new GeoCubes content layer and thus be run 
dynamically by the calling visualization client. The analysis 
procedure will always select the resolution level closest to the 
visual scale, thus enabling nearly constant processing times to 
be maintained. 
Further work on the GeoCubes Finland platform will focus 
on adding new layers to the repository’s data collection, 
developing modular analysis functions for server-side 
processing, and enhancing the GeoCubes Web client. A QGIS 
plugin module for accessing the GeoCubes API is also going 
to be developed. More user testing will be carried out to gather 
feedback and guidance for further development of the 
platform. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We made use of computing resources provided by the 
Open Geospatial Information Infrastructure for Research 
(oGIIR, urn:nbn:fi:research-infras-2016072513) funded by 
the Academy of Finland, and CSC – The IT Center for Science 
Ltd. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. 
Baumann, 
The 
Datacube 
Manifesto, 
2017.  
http://earthserver.eu/ sites/default/files/upload_by_users/The-
Datacube-Manifesto.pdf [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[2] L. Lehto, J. Kähkönen, J. Oksanen, and T. Sarjakoski. 
GeoCubes Finland - A Unified Approach for Managing Multi-
resolution Raster Geodata in a National Geospatial Research 
Infrastructure. 
In: 
GEOProcessing 
2018, 
the 
Tenth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Geographic 
Information Systems, Applications and Services, March 25-29, 
2018, Rome, Italy. ISBN: 978-1-61208-617-0, pp. 18-22. 
[3] Wikipedia, 
Data 
cube. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Data_cube, 2020 [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[4] A. Lewis et al., “Rapid, high-resolution detection of 
environmental change over continental scales from satellite 
data – the Earth Observation Data Cube”. International 
Journal of Digital Earth, vol. 9 , Iss. 1, 2016, pp. 106-111. 
[5] U. Pyysalo and T. Sarjakoski, ”Voxel approach to landscape 
modelling”. The International Archives of the Photogrammetry 
and Remote Sensing, July 2–11, 2008, Beijing, China, 
XXXVII(B4/1), pp. 563–568. 
[6] G. Giuliani et al. Building an Earth Observations Data Cube: 
lessons learned from the Swiss Data Cube (SDC) on generating 
Analysis Ready Data (ARD), Big Earth Data, 2017, 1:1-2, pp. 
100-117, DOI: 10.1080/20964471.2017.1398903. 
[7] OGC, 
Datacube 
Domain 
Working 
Group 
Charter, 
https://external.opengeospatial.org/twiki_public/pub/Coverag
esDWG/Datacubes/17-071_Datacube-DWG_Charter.pdf, 
2017 [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[8] ODC, 
Open 
Data 
Cube 
Home 
Page, 
https://www.opendatacube.org, 2019 [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[9] A. Lewis et al., “The Australian Geoscience Data Cube – 
Foundations and lessons learned”. Remote Sensing of 
Environment, 
2017, 
ISSN 
0034-4257, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2017.03.015, pp. 276-292. 
[10] Swiss 
Data 
Cube 
(SDC) 
Home 
Page, 
https://www.swissdatacube.org, 2017 [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[11] Africa 
Regional 
Data 
Cube 
Home 
Page, 
http://www.data4sdgs.org/index.php/initiatives/africa-
regional-data-cube, 2016 [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[12] A. Lewis et al., 2016. Rapid, high-resolution detection of 
environmental change over continental scales from satellite 
data - the Earth Observation Data Cube. Int. J. Digital Earth 9 
(1), pp. 106–111. 
[13] L. Lehto, J. Kähkönen, J. Oksanen, and T. Sarjakoski. 
Supporting Wide User-Base in Raster Analysis - GeoCubes 
Finland. The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, 
Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, XLII-4, pp. 
329-334. 
https://doi.org/10.5194/isprs-archives-XLII-4-329-
2018. 
[14] oGIIR, Open Geospatial Information Infrastructure for 
Research Home Page, http://ogiir.fi, 2020 [retrieved: Jan 
2020]. 
[15] OGC, Web Coverage Service. http://www.opengeospatial.org 
/standards/wcs [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[16] GeoTIFF, GeoTIFF home page,  http://trac.osgeo.org/geotiff/, 
2019 [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[17] Cloud 
Optimized 
GeoTIFF 
(COG) 
Home 
Page, 
https://www.cogeo.org, 2019 [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[18] GDAL, Geospatial Data Abstraction Library Home Page, 
http://gdal.org, 2020 [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[19] GDAL, 
Virtual 
File 
Tutorial, 
https://www.gdal.org/gdal_vrttut.html, 2019 [retrieved: Jan 
2020]. 
[20] L. Lehto, J. Kähkönen, J. Oksanen, and T. Sarjakoski, 2019. 
Flexible Access to a Harmonised Multi-resolution Raster 
Geodata Storage in the Cloud. GEOProcessing 2019, the 
Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic 
Information Systems, Applications and Services, Feb 24-28, 
2019, Athens, Greece. ISBN: 978-1-61208-687-3, pp. 26-28. 
[21] RESTful 
API 
Tutorial, 
https://searchmicroservices.techtarget.com/definition/RESTfu
l-API, 2020 [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[22] M. Bostock, 2018. Data-Driven Documents, D3.js Home Page. 
https://d3js.org [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[23] Django Software Foundation, 2018. Django Home Page. 
https://www.djangoproject.com [retrieved: Jan 2020]. 
[24] R. A. Light, "Mosquitto: server and client implementation of 
the MQTT protocol," The Journal of Open Source Software, 
vol. 2, no. 13, May 2017, DOI: 10.21105/joss.00265. 
[25] QGIS Home Page, https://qgis.org/en/site/, 2020 [retrieved: 
Jan 2020]. 
[26] three.js Home Page, https://threejs.org, 2020 [retrieved: Jan 
2020].
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

