A Proposal for Discovering Hotspots
Using 3D Coordinates from Geo-tagged Photographs
Masaharu Hirota
Faculty of Informatics
Okayama University of Science
Okayama-shi, Okayama
Email: hirota@mis.ous.ac.jp
Masaki Endo
Division of Core Manufacturing
Polytechnic University
Kodaira-shi, Tokyo
Email: endou@uitec.ac.jp
Hiroshi Ishikawa
Faculy of System Design
Tokyo Metropolitan University
Hino-shi, Tokyo
Email: ishikawa-hiroshi@tmu.ac.jp
Abstract—A hotspot is an interesting place where many people go
for sightseeing. To extract hotspots, most of the existing research
applies a density-based clustering algorithm, such as Density-
based spatial clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN) with
latitude and longitude as its features. Therefore, the extracted
hotspots are visualized as a two-dimensional space. However,
large areas, landmarks, and buildings may include high hotspots
or multiple hotspots with different altitudes. Therefore, in this
research, we propose extracting hotspots based on altitude in
addition to latitude and longitude and visualize these extracted
hotspots in a three-dimensional space. To use those features, we
apply ST-DBSCAN to extract hotspots and discuss the usefulness
of extracting hotspots using altitude. In addition, as an application
example, we classiﬁed hotspots as shooting spots, observation
spots, areas of interest, among others and visualized the results.
Keywords–area of interest;photograph location;photograph ori-
entation
I.
INTRODUCTION
Owing to the increasing popularity of mobile devices such
as digital cameras and smartphones, numerous photographs
taken by photographers have been uploaded to photo-sharing
web services, such as Flickr [1]. In addition, these digital
devices have been equipped recently with Global Positioning
System (GPS) sensors; thus, many photographs are annotated
with latitude and longitude information. A photographic loca-
tion represented by the latitude and longitude shows the place
where the photographer took a photograph. If many people
take photographs at the same location, this represents an area
of interest to users. Analyzing such areas using photographs
given a photographic location on social media sites is useful
for analyzing geographical characteristics, such as obtaining
information on sightseeing spots that the photographer ﬁnds
interesting.
Many people take photographs of subjects or landscapes
that satisfy their own interests. Subsequently, some of them
upload their photographs to websites. As places from which
many photographs have been taken, these locations might also
be interesting places for other people to visit. As described
in this paper, we deﬁne such places as hotspots. Most of
the existing research for extracting hotspots are based on a
density-based clustering method, such as density-based spatial
clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN) [2] and
mean shift [3]. In addition, those researches that use such
density-based clustering methods use latitude and longitude
as features to extract hotspots and the extracted clusters are
then deﬁned as hotspots. However, clusters obtained by such
a method only using latitude and longitude do not consider
altitude. Therefore, there are some cases wherein multiple
hotspots at different altitudes are extracted as one hotspot. For
example, in a sightseeing spot such as the Eiffel Tower, the
latitude and longitude for the observatory and area around the
building are almost the same, but there are some hotspots with
different altitudes. Even if the altitude is different, because
these latitudes and longitudes are almost equally located, it is
difﬁcult to distinguish between these hotspots.
In this research, when extracting a hotspot, we propose
not only the width of a hotspot represented by the latitude
and the longitude to extract hotspots but also the height of the
hotspot by adding the altitude. In recent years, the metadata
annotated to a photograph captured by smartphones includes
altitude in addition to latitude and longitude. For this reason,
in this research, we extract hotspots taking into consideration
such metadata using the photographs given the information
obtained from Flickr. As DBSCAN and mean shift, which
is commonly used for extracting hotspots, treat the distance
for evaluating the density around the data as one dimension,
we consider those methods inappropriate for clustering with
feature quantities with the metadata. Therefore, in this paper,
we use ST-DBSCAN [4], which was proposed to deal with
time in addition to latitude and longitude. When we apply ST-
DBSCAN, we adopt altitude instead of time to extract hotspots,
thereby considering the height of the hotspot.
In addition, hotspots can be classiﬁed into three types: an
area of interest, a shooting spot, and an observation spot [5][6].
The areas of interest for people are tourist spots (e.g., the
Colosseum or the Statue of Liberty). In such areas, many pho-
tographs have been taken inside the monument or at a nearby
location. Also, when people take a photograph of such an area
of interest, they will take it at a place that is at a distance
from the area of interest. Such places are also extracted as
hotspots and are deﬁned as shooting spots. Observation spots
are hotspots for photographing the surroundings of the hotspot.
In this research, we classify hotspots extracted considering
the altitude in addition to latitude and longitude into three
classes by considering multiple information sources, such as
the direction of photography and we then visualize the results.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents works related to this topic. Section III describes our
proposed method for extracting hotspots based on altitude in
addition to latitude and longitude. Section IV explains several
examples of visualization result. Section V conclude the paper
with a discussion of results and future works.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II.
RELATED WORKS
Some methods have been proposed to extract hotspots from
the many photographs with the photographic location available
on social media sites.
Density-based clustering algorithms, such as DBSCAN [2]
or mean shift [3] can be used to extract hotspots from a dataset
that includes huge numbers of photographs annotated with
photographic location. Crandall et al. presented a method to
extract hotspots using mean shift based on many photographs
annotated with photographic location [7]. Kisilevich et al.
proposed P-DBSCAN, an improved version of DBSCAN,
for the deﬁnition of a reachable point, to extract hotspots
using the density of photographic locations [8]. Ankerst et
al. proposed a clustering method of OPTICS, which is a
variation of DBSCAN used to create a cluster using different
subspaces extracted from various parameters [9]. Sander et
al. proposed GDBSCAN, which extends DBSCAN to enable
the correspondence to both spatial and non-spatial features
[10]. Shi et al. proposed a density-based clustering method
to extract places of interest using spatial information and the
social relationships between users [11].
The previously described research extracts hotspots using
a density-based clustering method, such as DBSCAN based
on latitude and longitude. However, in some cases, actual
hotspots have a concept of height and are distributed in a three-
dimensional space rather than a two-dimensional space. In this
paper, we propose a new approach to extract and visualize
hotspots using ST-DBSCAN by adding altitude.
III.
PROPOSED METHOD
In this section, we describe our proposed method for
extracting hotspots considering the altitude in addition to
latitude and longitude from photographs and classifying the
hotspots into one of three types: area of interest, shooting spot,
and observation spot.
A. Extracting hotspots with altitude
Here, we describe why we adopt ST-DBSCAN to extract
hotspots with altitude in addition to latitude and longitude. In
most of the previous research, DBSCAN has been used for
extracting hotspots. At this time, latitude and longitude are
used as the features for representing the distance between two
points. As we need to consider altitude in this research to
extract hotspots, we infer that DBSCAN is not an appropriate
method in this case. This is because the Eps, which is the
parameter of DBSCAN for evaluating the distance between
two points, is a one-dimensional threshold. As previously
described, there are hotspots with different altitudes but almost
equal latitude and longitude. Therefore, although DBSCAN is
an appropriate method to use latitude and longitude as one
feature for evaluating the distance between two points, it is
not appropriate to add altitude to the feature. As a result, the
altitude should be regarded as a different feature to latitude
and longitude, and we adopt ST-DBSCAN to achieve this.
ST-DBSCAN is one of the improved methods of DBSCAN
that considers time in addition to the spatial feature of latitude
and longitude. ST-DBSCAN has three parameters Eps1, Eps2,
and MinP, where Eps1 is a threshold of distances of spatial
features of two data, Eps2 is a threshold of distances of other
features, and MinP is a threshold of the number of data
included in the cluster. In this research, we apply ST-DBSCAN
with Eps1 as latitude and longitude and Eps2 as altitude.
B. Classiﬁcation of hotspot
In this paper, a hotspot is classiﬁed as an area of interest,
a shooting spot, or an observation spot as shown in Figure 1
using the photograph orientation annotated to the photographs
included in the extracted hotspots. However, in addition to
the latitude and longitude, the number of photographs with
the photograph orientation is miniscule compared with the
photographs with only the latitude and longitude. As a result,
the classiﬁcation of hotspots that have fewer photographs may
be difﬁcult. Therefore, we classify hotspots into four groups:
areas of interest, shooting spots, observation spots, and others.
In this research, we assume that hotspots with less than 10
photographs with photograph orientation as other, and we do
not perform the following processes.
First, we classify a hotspot as a shooting spot or others. In
this case, many photographs are taken with a speciﬁc orienta-
tion. Therefore, we calculate the bias of the photograph orien-
tation based on a frequency distribution related to photograph
orientation. We divided the value of photograph orientation by
10 degrees and counted the number of photographs for each
class. We consider that these hotspots are focused on a speciﬁc
orientation if the top class includes 15% of the photographs
belonging to hotspots.
Next, we classify the remaining hotspots into either an area
of interest or observation spot. This classiﬁcation is based on
the ratio of inward and outward photographs in the hotspot.
Figure 2 shows examples of inward and outward photographs.
In this research, if the photograph orientation and orientation
to the center of gravity of the hotspot are close, we regard the
photograph as an inward photograph; otherwise, we classify it
as an outward photograph.
We set the orientation with the true north given to photo-
graph as 0◦ to θi and the coordinates of the center of gravity
of the hotspot h for the coordinates (xi, yi) of the latitude and
longitude at the shooting position. We calculate the orientation
θd in which (xh, yh) exists using the following equation:
θd = tan−1
cos yi × sin(xh − xi)
cos y1 × sin yh − sin yi × cos yh × cos(xh − xi)
(1)
Next, we classify each photograph in a hotspot as an inward
or outward photograph based on the difference between θd and
θi, as follows:
inward
|θi − θd| < θ
outward
otherwise
(2)
In this study, we set the threshold for classifying inward
photographs and outward photographs as θ = 50. If the number
of photographs classiﬁed as inward photographs in a hotspot
is larger than the number of outward photographs, the hotspot
is classiﬁed as an area of interest; otherwise, it is classiﬁed as
an observation spot.
IV.
EXPERIMENT
A. Dataset
Here, we describe the dataset for the experiment of ex-
tracting hotspots using latitude, longitude, and altitude. Pho-
tographs for experiments were obtained from Flickr. Those
photographs include metadata for latitude, longitude, altitude,
and orientation. We obtained photographs taken during January
1, 2011–May 10, 2016. We use the photographs taken in
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 1. Classiﬁcation of hotspots.
Figure 2. Inward photograph and outward photograph.
the area of Westminster in London. There are some fa-
mous landmarks in this area, such as the Big Ben (latitude:
51.500729; longitude: −0.124625) and the London Eye (lati-
tude: 51.503324; longitude: −0.119543).
To deal with altitude errors, we set the threshold of altitude
and remove photographs having an altitude higher or lower
than the threshold. In this experiment, we set the parameter
based on the height of buildings around the area to be analyzed.
In addition, we removed photographs with an altitude of 0 m
or less.
Furthermore, we excluded photographs in which the lati-
tude, longitude, and altitude all overlap. This might occur as a
result of an incorrect GPS positioning or device conﬁguration.
The point where there is much inappropriate metadata is
excessively evaluated when extracting a hotspot. As a result,
the number of photographs used in this experiment is 13,911.
B. Visualization of hotspots
Figure 3 shows the clustering results by ST-DBSCAN
based on the latitude, longitude, and altitude of photographs.
The parameters used in ST-DBSCAN were Eps1 = 0.0001,
Eps1 = 5, and MinP
= 30, respectively. The number
of extracted clusters in Figure 3 is 35. Each color in this
Figure represents a cluster (the colors are only an easy-to-view
representation to distinguish between clusters).
In Figure 3, some clusters with different altitudes are ex-
tracted from areas with almost the same latitude and longitude.
In particular, several clusters were extracted near an altitude
of 130 m, latitude of 51.504, and longitude of −0.120. This
is because the highest point of the London Eye is 135 m.
Therefore, many people take photographs around there, and
the area was extracted as a hotspot.
Figure 4 is a two-dimensional representation of the clus-
tering result (i.e., the Figure shows that the clusters in Figure
3 map two dimensions without altitude). Some clusters are
displayed overlapping in multiple areas in this Figure. There-
fore, in such areas, points with different altitudes should be
extracted as distinguished hotspots. Naturally, the latitude and
longitude of the photographs taken in such areas are almost
equal. As a result, unless we extract hotspots by considering
the altitude in addition to latitude and longitude, it is difﬁcult
to distinguish between and extract these clusters.
Although it may be possible to distinguish these hotspots
by clustering with only latitude and longitude in some cases,
much time and effort are required to tune parameters of Eps
and MinP in DBSCAN. In addition, when latitude- and
longitude-annotated photographs are used, those metadata in-
clude errors. Therefore, the photographs that should originally
belong to different hotspots may belong to the same hotspots
erroneously. Therefore, in Figures 3 and 4 we show that it is
possible to distinguish between the hotspots in areas of similar
latitude and longitude by considering the altitude even in such
a state.
Next, Figure 5 shows the result of the classiﬁcation of
hotspots. In this Figure, the green point shows a photograph
in a hotspot classiﬁed as an observation spot. In addition,
the red point is a shooting spot and the orange point is an
area of interest. In Figure 5, many observation spots were
extracted. For example, the highest location of the London
Eye is an observation spot. It seems that people are shooting
the periphery from the top of the Ferris wheel. In addition,
there are two chunks of orange points: under the London
Eye and around the Big Ben. These hotspots should probably
be classiﬁed as shooting spots because the hotspots include
photographs of these landmarks. The area around latitude
51.502 and longitude −0.121 is extracted as a shooting spot
as it includes many photographs of the Big Ben. It seems that
other areas are also classiﬁed as shooting spots because they
contain many photographs of landmarks, such as the London
Eye and the Big Ben.
In the above description, we explained the classiﬁcation
results regarding hotspots. At this stage, quantitative analysis
of the classiﬁcation is not done. In these results, there are
some hotspots misclassiﬁed. Therefore, we think the need
for improvement of the method and evaluation for classifying
hotspots in a future study.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have discussed the extraction of hotspots
that can be extracted as one cluster when considering only
latitude and longitude by using latitude and longitude in
addition to the altitude information of a photograph. We used
ST-DBSCAN for extracting hotspots while also considering the
altitude. In addition, we visualized clustering results using ST-
DBSCAN using the metadata of photographs taken in London.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 3. The clustering result in three-dimensional.
Figure 4. The clustering result in two-dimensional.
In addition, we classiﬁed the hotspots as areas of interest,
shooting spots, observation spots, and others and visualized
the results.
As future work, we aim to compare our approach with
density-based clustering methods other than ST-DBSCAN. In
this paper, ST-DBSCAN has been applied only using latitude,
longitude, and altitude as a feature quantity, and it has not
yet been revealed to be superior to other clustering methods,
such as DBSCAN. In addition, we performed classiﬁcation
of hotspots in one of the application examples of hotspots
and have not been evaluated the result yet. Thus, further
improvements in our proposed method is necessary.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
bers 16K00157 and 16K16158, and Tokyo Metropolitan Uni-
versity Grant-in-Aid for Research on Priority Areas ”Research
on social big data.”
REFERENCES
[1]
“Flickr,” 2014, URL: https://www.ﬂickr.com [accessed: 2019-01-11].
[2]
M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based
algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,”
in Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, ser. KDD ’06, 1996, pp. 226–231.
[3]
D. Comaniciu and P. Meer, “Mean shift: a robust approach toward
feature space analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, vol. 24, no. 5, May 2002, pp. 603–619.
[4]
D. Birant and A. Kut, “St-dbscan: An algorithm for clustering spatial-
temporal data,” Data & Knowledge Engineering, vol. 60, no. 1, 2007,
pp. 208 – 221, intelligent Data Mining.
Figure 5. Classiﬁcation result of hotspot.
[5]
M. Shirai, M. Hirota, H. Ishikawa, and S. Yokoyama, “A method of area
of interest and shooting spot detection using geo-tagged photographs,”
in Proceedings of The First ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop
on Computational Models of Place, ser. COMP ’13.
ACM, 2013, pp.
34:34–34:41.
[6]
M. Hirota, M. Shirai, H. Ishikawa, and S. Yokoyama, “Detecting
relations of hotspots using geo-tagged photographs in social media
sites,” in Proceedings of Workshop on Managing and Mining Enriched
Geo-Spatial Data, ser. GeoRich ’14.
ACM, 2014, pp. 7:1–7:6.
[7]
D. J. Crandall, L. Backstrom, D. Huttenlocher, and J. Kleinberg,
“Mapping the world’s photos,” in Proceedings of the 18th International
Conference on World Wide Web, ser. WWW ’09.
ACM, 2009, pp.
761–770.
[8]
S. Kisilevich, F. Mansmann, and D. Keim, “P-dbscan: A density based
clustering algorithm for exploration and analysis of attractive areas
using collections of geo-tagged photos,” in Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference and Exhibition on Computing for Geospatial
Research & Application, ser. COM.Geo ’10.
ACM, 2010, pp. 38:1–
38:4.
[9]
M. Ankerst, M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, and J. Sander, “Optics:
Ordering points to identify the clustering structure,” in Proceedings of
the 1999 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
Data, ser. SIGMOD ’99.
ACM, 1999, pp. 49–60.
[10]
J. Sander, M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, and X. Xu, “Density-based clustering
in spatial databases: The algorithm gdbscan and its applications,” Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 2, no. 2, 1998, pp. 169–194.
[11]
J. Shi, N. Mamoulis, D. Wu, and D. W. Cheung, “Density-based
place clustering in geo-social networks,” in Proceedings of the 2014
ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, ser.
SIGMOD ’14.
ACM, 2014, pp. 99–110.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

