Identifying and Visualizing Older Single-Family House Areas  
for a Sustainable Spatial Planning  
Dominik Visca, Max Hoppe, Kevin Kaminski, Pascal Neis 
Department of Technology 
Mainz University of Applied Sciences 
Mainz, Germany 
emails: dominik.visca@hs-mainz.de, max.hoppe@hs-mainz.de, kevin.kaminski@hs-mainz.de, pascal.neis@hs-mainz.de 
 
 
Abstract— The paper focuses on the challenge of sustainable 
spatial planning in areas with older single-family houses in 
Germany, particularly those constructed between the 1950s 
and late 1970s. Demographic changes, especially in rural areas, 
have resulted in vacancies in these building stocks, making the 
identification of these areas crucial for an effective spatial 
planning. The construction year of buildings can be used to 
identify single-family houses areas, however, obtaining fine-
grained information from official sources is limited. This paper 
presents a method to identify building year classes through the 
combination of various sources and data modelling. The meth-
od offers a practicable approach for both research and spatial 
planning. Thus, this paper reflects trends in the field of Urban 
Geo and Spatial Planning issues, highlighting the value of 
information to be able to analyze social change and corre-
sponding infrastructures on a small-scale level. 
Keywords-sustainable spatial planning; disaggregation; open 
data; demographic changes; single-family houses 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
In Germany, areas with older single-family houses, par-
ticularly those built between the 1950s and late 1970s, pose a 
challenge for a sustainable spatial planning process. Espe-
cially in rural areas, demographic changes are increasingly 
resulting in vacancies in the building stock of single-family 
houses, as transitions from first-time owners to young fami-
lies or new owners are often problematic. Identifying these 
areas is therefore crucial, in order to take spatial planning 
measures.  
The year of construction of a building can be used to 
identify relevant single-family house areas. Information 
pertaining to the construction years of buildings can be ob-
tained from the AAA model - Official Control Point Infor-
mation 
System 
(AFIS, 
Amtliches 
Festpunktinfor-
mationssystem), Official Real Estate Cadastre Information 
System (ALKIS, Amtliches Liegenschaftskatasterinfor-
mationssystem) and the Official Topographic Cartographic 
Information System (ATKIS, Amtliche Topographisch-
Kartographische Informationssystem), which constitutes the 
official geobasic information provided by the Surveying and 
Cadastral Administrations in Germany (Vermessungsämter 
in Deutschland). However, this information is rarely found in 
actual data records. In more recent research work, zoning 
plans that are already available through an INSPIRE Di-
rective (Directive 2007/2/EC) have been used as a makeshift. 
Yet, an analysis of planning regulations and the date of legal 
enforceability is merely an indicator of the construction year 
of residential buildings in a rezoned municipality - in shrink-
ing regions, where vacant buildings often occur, there is 
sometimes a large discrepancy in time between the legally 
effective date of a zoning plan and the actual year of con-
struction of a building. Single-family house areas cannot be 
conclusively identified there. Through the combination of 
various heterogeneous sources, and disaggregation of data, it 
is possible to identify required building year classes.  
In order to analyze transformation processes, and to re-
spond to them with appropriate spatial planning measures, 
data is needed. Since certain data are not provided at all 
scales - in particular, below the municipal level - or are even 
freely available, methods are required to overcome this defi-
cit. Accordingly, this paper focuses on small-scale infor-
mation gaps and methodological considerations that address 
these issues. To this end, existing approaches are taken up in 
order to smartly link aspects of them, resulting in new da-
tasets needed. Thus, this approach provides both, a relevant 
contribution to information gathering and data modelling that 
can be picked up and reflected upon by other researchers 
and, in principle, a practicable method for questions of spa-
tial planning issues and urban geo.  
Before the method and data bases are outlined in Section 
III, Section II introduces into the background and challenges 
regarding sustainable spatial planning processes in the con-
text of demographic changes in single-family house areas. In 
Section IV results are discussed and evaluated. A large-scale 
survey of official building footprints and the years of con-
struction therein over the past 25 years serves this purpose as 
well. The article ends in Section V, with a conclusion and an 
outlook regarding future potentials of the method and data 
presented.   
II. BACKGROUND AND CHALLENGES 
In Germany, it is projected that by 2050, the population 
of individuals over the age of 80 will reach approximately 10 
million, as compared to 6.1 million in 2021. In the same 
year, it is expected that 30 percent of the population will be 
over 65 years [1][2][3]. This demographic development 
poses a significant societal challenge and further accentuates 
the importance of addressing situations of transition or gen-
erational change in older single-family house areas 
[4][5][6][7]. These neighborhoods were initially built with 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the intention of offering sufficient space for families with 
children, and in addition to serve as part of an individual 
retirement security. Subsequently, there are changes caused 
by the life cycle: With the transfer to a suitable accommoda-
tion for elderly people or, at the very latest, when the parents' 
generation dies, there is a change of generation [4][5][6][7]. 
Many of the older single-family properties do not fulfil the 
current demands in terms of living space, room sizes or tech-
nical equipment. For the first-time owners who are not will-
ing to invest, this means both a loss of property value and a 
type of housing that is no longer adequate - as the living 
space, which is often too large, only rarely meets the needs 
of the tenants [4][5][6][7]. As one consequence, the transi-
tion from one generation to the next becomes more difficult, 
especially in rural-peripheral locations and/or in economical-
ly less powerful regions.  
In order to respond with adapted urban planning and spa-
tial planning measures, fine-grained data is needed, based on 
which dynamics at a sub-municipal level can be analyzed, as 
well as construction year data for relevant building stocks. 
For small-scale demographic analyses, georeferenced resi-
dent registration data is increasingly used in Germany but 
due to privacy regulations not within easy reach [8][9].  
Also, the availability of data pertaining to the construc-
tion years of buildings is often limited. Through the process 
of disaggregation and enrichment of data, this limitation can 
be surmounted, as demonstrated, for example, by Weck-
Ponten et al. [10]. In this context, results from the 2011 Cen-
sus, zoning plans, aerial and satellite images are often used. 
For example, Eichhorn & Siedentop [11] refer, in the context 
of estimating inner developments in municipalities in North 
Rhine-Westphalia between 1979 and 2011, to the construc-
tion year information in the 2011 Census data which they 
used in combination with aerial images. For Muckel and 
Ogorek [12], zoning plans have the advantage that, in addi-
tion to the type of use (see for Germany § 30 Baugesetzbuch, 
BauGB), they provide information on the construction year 
of the buildings visible in the map section or in the scope of 
validity through a binding date of legal force. At the same 
time, zoning plans not only offer a legal force date, they also 
can be seen as a historical document. Iosifescu, Tsorlini, 
Hurni [13], as well as Chen et al. [14] point out that vectoriz-
ing content from historical maps with sufficient accuracy for 
basic spatial queries is possible. In this regard, deriving 
building footprints based on aerial images [15], historical 
satellite images [16], and other vector datasets such as 
OpenStreetMap [17] is an area that has been extensively 
researched in recent years. However, this information data-
base is only partly usable for vectorizing zoning plans. 
Herrmann [18] and Kment [19] point out, that due to the 
small scale and the mostly incompletely available types of 
buildings, no predictions about future developments for 
residential areas of the single-family houses can be realized. 
To determine and classify single-family house areas in 
small municipalities by construction year, the 2011 Census 
data serves as a basis from which the dynamics of the build-
ing stock can be derived [20]. To disaggregate the census 
data, zoning plans, that are spatially available according to 
INSPIRE guidelines, are used, which can contain infor-
mation on building construction years. 
III. METHOD AND PROCEDURE 
A. Data Base 
Open data from the 2011 Census [21] serve as the basis 
for the identification and subsequent visualization of single-
family residential areas. Since the German Federal Statistics 
Act (Bundesstatistikgesetz, BStatG) was amended in 2013, 
much of the data collected for the 2011 Census is available 
in aggregated 100m grid cells [22]. One of the characteristics 
collected is the classified year of construction of each resi-
dential building included in a grid cell. Table 1 shows the 
available specifications of the attribute "year of construction" 
in the Census 2011. 
The list shows that the classification of the year of con-
struction has a high temporal resolution, especially from 
1987 onwards. In contrast, the period from the 1950s to the 
1970s is covered by only one class "1949 - 1978". This class 
allows a delimitation of buildings to younger and older 
buildings, but no delimitation by decades within this class. 
The absence of the year 1979 and the additional presence of 
the year 1949 is negligible due to the lack of a nationwide 
available alternative of spatially high-resolution building 
year data. 
TABLE I.  
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE ATTRIBUTE „YEAR OF 
CONSTRUCTION” OF THE 2011 CENSUS [22]. 
Coding in data set 
Feature description 
1 
older than 1919 
2 
1919 – 1948 
3 
1949 – 1978 
4 
1979 – 1986 
5 
1987 – 1990 
6 
1991 – 1995 
7 
1996 – 2000 
8 
2001 – 2004 
9 
2005 – 2008 
10 
2009 onwards 
B. Identification of Single-Family Houses 
Adapting patterns from Pajares, Muñoz Nieto, Meng, 
Wulfhorst [23], and Visca, Hoppe and Neis [24], the con-
struction year classes of the census data are to be disaggre-
gated to residential buildings to get a more accurate level 
than the 100m grid cells provided. In a first step, the identifi-
cation of residential buildings is necessary. For this purpose, 
the building footprints from ALKIS are used. In order to pre-
filter side buildings (e.g., garages or subsequent extensions), 
only those building polygons appear useful that contain at 
least one geo-referenced building address, also taken from 
ALKIS. Subsequently, a filtering for residential buildings 
takes place by a comparison with ALKIS usage types on the 
one hand, and with OpenStreetMap building polygons with 
an "amenity" tag on the other hand, which exclude a corre-
sponding residential building usage. For this purpose, ad-
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

dress and building data per census grid cell are extracted 
from OpenStreetMap (OSM) through the Overpass API of 
Olbricht [25] for blending the results with the official build-
ing footprints. This removes buildings used exclusively for 
commercial, industrial, or agricultural purposes from the 
dataset. 
In order to disaggregate the tabular building year classes 
onto the correct building polygons, information from sec-
ondary data sets is necessary. Here, the legally binding zon-
ing plans of the municipalities are crucial. Regardless of the 
specific scope of a zoning plan, the entire map section of its 
planning framework provides information on the presence of 
buildings at the time of its legal validity date or the specified 
date of the cadastre data used. The absence of a zoning plan 
also provides an indication concerning the building year 
class. A mandatory zoning plan as a planning instrument did 
not come into place until the Federal Building Act (Bun-
desbaugesetz, BBauG) was passed in 1960; developed, but 
not zoned, larger areas must therefore be older [26]. For the 
zoned areas, a systematic evaluation of the building stock 
visible in the zoning plans is necessary. 
C. Vectorization of Zoning Plans 
Usually, the zoning plans provided are only available as 
scanned plan documents in PDF format, and sometimes also 
as a georeferenced raster image tailored to the area of appli-
cation. Depending on the age of the zoning plan, from which 
the data is derived, plans made available in geoportals have 
exportable vector layers. For more recent CAD-based plans, 
this allows the PDF to be imported and the georeferenced 
vector data to be accessed in a geographic information sys-
tem. In case of scans of signed originals or an older zoning 
plan, this option is not available. Thus, it is necessary to 
vectorize the zoning plans in order to match the existence of 
the building polygons present in the latest ALKIS inventory 
with the historical building polygons from ALKIS, the Au-
tomatic 
Real 
Estate 
Map 
(ALK, 
Automatisierte 
Liegenschaftskarte) or the cadastral map via a spatial query. 
The requirement to have building polygons that are as accu-
rate as possible and rectangular is not necessarily required 
for querying whether or not a building exists at two (or 
more) different moments in time. The zoning plans are vec-
torized and assigned a timestamp of the legal date respective-
ly the ALKIS data status.  
D. Comparison of Building Footprints with Zoning Plans 
As a next step, centroids are then to be formed within 
each polygon from the building footprints with (partial) 
residential use filtered at the very beginning. In order to 
identify the earliest presence of a building in a zoning plan, 
and to attach the corresponding timestamp to the building 
polygon, it is iteratively checked in chronological order for 
each zoning plan if the centroids formed are present within a 
polygon of similar area, from a vectorized zoning plan. As 
long as the approximate geometry and location is preserved, 
it is not necessary to map the building footprints as closely as 
possible. By the end of all iterations, every building polygon 
has a date for its earliest occurrence, and its last "non-
occurrence" in a zoning plan, or "no indication" if the build-
ing is not visible in any zoning plan map section. The result-
ing time period corresponds to the time window in which the 
building was built. 
E. Disaggreagation of the Census Data 
The timestamps of the building polygons are then aggre-
gated at a parcel level, always using the oldest building per 
parcel. All adjacent parcels with the same timestamp are then 
to be aggregated to obtain larger areas of the same building 
year references. These areas serve as the primary distribution 
feature for disaggregating the census data. 
Per census grid cell, the actual disaggregation of building 
year classes is performed. For each "year of construction" 
attribute value contained in a grid cell, a three-stage distribu-
tion is performed on all buildings within the grid cell from 
the filtered building polygon dataset. First, all year-of-
construction classes are distributed to those buildings that are 
located in an area of equal year-of-construction references 
appropriate for the year-of-construction class. The most 
specific time frame is to be used (i.e., "younger than 1985 
and older than 2002" is more specific than "older than 
2003"). If the distribution is not final, the relative distance to 
a known historic structure is added as an indicator of a build-
ing's age. Typical points of interest (POIs) in terms of this 
are churches, historic town halls or the market place as an 
indicator for the historic center of a village. Reflecting the 
zoning of settlement expansions, younger buildings tend to 
be further away from the historic village center than older 
ones. If building year classes still cannot be assigned to any 
building, they must be randomly distributed among all other 
buildings in the grid cell. 
F. Identification of Single-Family Houses 
The identification of single-family residential areas fur-
ther necessitates the differentiation of single-family and 
multi-family buildings. For this purpose, the building data 
extracted via the Overpass API are intersected with the 
building polygons according to the procedure of Visca, 
Hoppe and Neis [24] based on the attribute "building type 
(size)" or the floor area and number of stories. Analogous to 
the aggregation of the building year information of the zon-
ing plans to areas of identical building year references, a 
stepwise aggregation of the single-family houses to parcels 
and then a union based on these building year classes to-
wards single-family house areas of identical building year 
classes has to be performed. 
IV. RESULTS & DISCUSSION 
The town of Otterberg (Verbandsgemeinde Otterbach-
Otterberg, Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany) served as a test 
site. The town's settlement area covers approximately 2.20 
km2 and, according to ALKIS, contains 3,369 official build-
ing footprints, from which side buildings and buildings not 
used for residential purposes were filtered to 1,756 building 
footprints. A manual sorting out of properties in the external 
area, among others, was not carried out. The generated data 
set represents the basis for the following analyses.  
In the study area, 22 zoning plans are legally binding and 
published on the Internet (as of July 2022). The dates of legal 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

effect range from 1987 to 2019. A total of 1,081 of the 1,756 
buildings used for residential purposes are covered by at 
least one zoning plan. An additional 45 buildings are outside 
of a zoning plan application area, but are included in the 
visible map section of at least one zoning plan. Thus, infor-
mation for subsequent disaggregation is obtained for 1,126 
buildings. 
The 22 zoning plans were adapted to the map section, 
georeferenced and vectorized. The most significant spatial 
deviations exist for older plans, since their data basis is the 
old cadastral map. Due to the partially poor state of the 
plans, georeferencing proved to be difficult. As a result of 
the changed partitioning of the parcels, the reference points 
for the current cadastre are difficult to find. Furthermore, the 
data basis of the cadastral map also deviates spatially from 
one another within a plan, which makes it necessary to recti-
fy and rotate certain sections. Especially, the old zoning 
plans require a substantial amount of manual preparation. 
The actual vectorization is not satisfactory to the same ex-
tent, given the very heterogeneous design of the zoning 
plans. In particular, zoning plans containing many hatchings 
often generate individual polygons for each hatching gap, 
which have to be generalized again in a post-processing step. 
Figure 1 shows the 605 grey building footprints with a 
year of construction younger than 1987 that do not qualify as 
older single-family residential areas. The 521 red building 
footprints could be in the period being looked for. Often, 
however, the year of construction references are very vague, 
as seen in Table 2. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Years of construction derived from zoning plans, Map Tiles by 
Stamen Design, CC BY 3.0 Data from OpenStreetMap, ODbL. 
The yellow building footprints are 630 buildings in the 
non-zoned town center whose construction years are older 
than 1960. These buildings could have been built in the early 
phase of settlement zoning after 1945. For the most part, 
these are buildings from the historic center of the village, 
which was built before 1919. 
 
 
TABLE II.  
INDICATIONS OF CONSTRUCTION YEARS BASED OF 
ZONING PLANS. 
Construction year information per zoning 
plan 
Number of buil-
dings  
older than 2017 
2 
older than 2015 
12 
older than 2003 
312 
older than 2002 
1 
older than 2001 
112 
older than 2000 
13 
older than 1989 
8 
older than 1987 
58 
 
The disaggregation of the census data reveals that the res-
idential areas of the 1950s to the 1970s have a high degree of 
coverage with the pre-analysis of the zoning plans due to the 
homogeneous settlement structure. Figure 2 shows a new 
zoning area that was planned and built upon after the cutoff 
date of the 2011 census. The white-colored building foot-
prints in the right-hand map section imply that there is no 
information in the census data on a year of construction, 
while the grey building footsprints in the left-hand map sec-
tion originate from the zoning plans and represent the years 
of construction after 1970. At the right, building blocks from 
1949 to 1978 could be identified (red, right). Summations 
within the census data across several attributes are not al-
ways identical with the actual situation. The effects of the 
anonymization procedure can be seen at the top of the image: 
According to the zoning plans, these buildings are older than 
2003 (red, left), but in the 2011 census there is no infor-
mation (white, right) about them. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Comparison of zoning plan evaluation (left) and census 
disaggregation (right), Map Tiles by Stamen Design, CC BY 3.0 Data from 
OpenStreetMap, ODbL. 
In the non-zoned, densely built-up inner area of the his-
toric town center, the method produces only limited and 
unreliable results. For the sample grid cell, the census data 
set provides information on 35 buildings from six building 
year classes - see Figure 3. Due to the missing data from the 
zoning plan analysis and the similar distance between the 
properties and the village center, or POIs such as the church 
(bottom right of the image), only a random distribution is 
possible. Without further information, an allocation of build-
ing year classes by building or parcel is impossible. Nonethe-
less, in terms of the objective of defining single-family house 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

areas, the map section shown can be ruled out as a possible 
match. Although it was possible to disaggregate a section of 
buildings on the left edge of the grid cell (see red area), it 
could hardly be considered an area of single-family houses. 
The yellow building footprints in the right-hand map section 
indicate the expected historic buildings from 1949 and earli-
er. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of insufficient disaggregation (left: zoning plan 
evaluation, right: census disaggregation), Map Tiles by Stamen Design, CC 
BY 3.0 Data from OpenStreetMap, ODbL. 
The analysis clearly shows that the determination of the 
year of construction also requires the identification of each 
individual single-family house. A comparison by building 
type via OpenStreetMap holds little potential for success due 
to the tendency for data incompleteness in rural areas. A 
disaggregation of the building types from the census data set 
is therefore only possible randomised, whereby within the 
relatively homogeneous settlement expansion areas the ag-
gregation level of the 100m zones can also provide sufficient 
accuracy. Neither necessary nor purposeful is the considera-
tion of every single data outlier, whether of the year of con-
struction or the building type. The single-family house areas 
are characterised by a mixture of the building stock through 
redensification or new buildings. Therefore, they must be 
considered in their entirety, regardless of some of the build-
ing stock that does not fit the definition. Figure 4 shows the 
aggregation of larger single-family house areas from the 
1950s to the 1970s for the town of Otterberg. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Identified areas of older single-family houses, Map Tiles by 
Stamen Design, CC BY 3.0 Data from OpenStreetMap, ODbL. 
To validate the results, a dataset of official building foot-
prints from the State Office for Surveying and Geographic 
Information of Rhineland-Palatinate (LVermGeo, Landesamt 
für Vermessung und Geobasisinformation) is used, which 
supplements the construction years of the last approx. 25 
years as part of a large-scale survey procedure. Although it 
cannot be used to identify the single-family housing areas, 
the information is useful as a cross-check to evaluate the 
methodology presented here. For 347 out of the 1,756 offi-
cial building footprints, construction years between 1957 and 
2021 could be added, with only 10 construction years older 
than 1998. About 44% of the building footprints were not 
taken into account by the disaggregation. For the most part, 
these are new buildings built after the 2011 Census cutoff 
date, which are not relevant to the focus of this research 
topic. For 19% of the remaining 56%, the disaggregation 
assigned a building year class that does not correspond to the 
actual building year. On the other hand, the method assigned 
the correct construction year class to the building footprints 
for approx. 81% of all relevant cases.  
V. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
With regard to future improvements of timeliness, depth, 
transferability and general availability of data, it can be con-
cluded that updated building year classes will be available 
with the release of the 2022 Census results. This will allow a 
comparison with the 2011 Census results, revealing possible 
gaps caused by the anonymization process. In addition, a 
finer disaggregation could be performed to allow a more 
accurate identification of relevant single-family areas. For 
future demographic developments, precise information on 
current and prospective zoning is also obligatory. 
Although the data of the real estate cadasters do have the 
advantage that they are subject to an ALKIS modeling regu-
lation that is coordinated to all federal states, there are recog-
nizable differences between the data products due to the 
decentralized management in more than 400 real estate offic-
es. Furthermore, they are not available for free in all federal 
states [27][28]. A broader harmonization and an area-wide 
opening of the data sets would contribute to a better transfer-
ability of the demonstrated method. The data from the 
OpenStreetMap project benefits from continuous updating 
by contributors, which is also reflected in an increasing depth 
and availability of information in rural areas [29]. If incorrect 
or erroneous information is taken into account, an improved 
data reconciliation regarding land use types is potentially 
possible [30]. To obtain additional benefits for the analysis 
of visible building stock in zoning plans, access to plans that 
are no longer legally binding is of help. In reality, however, 
this is difficult to establish because the INSPIRE Directive 
(Directive 2007/2/EC) [31] only requires web-based access 
for zoning plans from December 2013 onwards. Historiza-
tion of older zoning plans would be a desirable feature. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work on this article was done as part of the project 
"Spatial Intelligence for the Integrated Care of Seniors in 
Rural Neighborhoods (RAFVINIERT)", which is funded by 
the Carl Zeiss Foundation in the program "Transfer - Intelli-
gent Solutions for an Aging Society".  
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

REFERENCES 
[1] Statistical Offices of the Federal and State Governments. 
Population 
Projection. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Gesellschaft-
Umwelt/Bevoelkerung/Bevoelkerungsvorausberechnung/_inh
alt.html [retrieved: 02, 2023]. 
[2] Statistical Offices of the Federal and State Governments. 
Population status: Official population of Germany. [Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Gesellschaft-
Umwelt/Bevoelkerung/Bevoelkerungsstand/_inhalt.html 
[retrieved: 02, 2023]. 
[3] E. Richter, Senior Democracy: The Aging of Society and Its 
Consequences for Politics, Berlin, Germany: Suhrkamp 
Verlag. 2020. 
[4] B. Adam et al., "Older single-family house areas in transition 
- An underestimated planning challenge", Situation in North 
Rhine-Westphalia. ARL. 2018. 
[5] T. Köhler and M. Schaffert, "Building Measures in the Face 
of Population Decline", in Challenges for governance 
structures in urban and regional development = Fragen zur 
Steuerung von Stadt- und Regionalentwicklung, pp. 195–208. 
Zürich, 2015. 
[6] C. Krajewski, "What happens to dream houses? - Part 1: 
Dealing with single-family house settlements analyzed using 
the example of Altena and Finnentrop in Southwestphalia", in 
Institute of Geography, University of Münster, (14), Münster, 
2014. 
[7] A. Raab, "Demand-oriented inner development and land 
management 
- 
future 
issues 
in 
urban 
and 
rural 
redevelopment", in Mitteilungen DVW Bayern, 65(4), pp. 
547-563, 2006. 
[8] A. Lindner, "Municipal monitoring. KomMonitor: A digital 
planning tool for urban development", 47(3), pp. 76-87, 2020. 
[9] M. Schonlau, C. Danowski-Buhren, M. Guth, U. Klein and, 
A. Lindner, "Integrated monitoring as a tool for sustainable 
urban development. IS THIS THE REAL WORLD? Perfect 
Smart Cities vs. Real Emotional Cities", in Proceedings of 
REAL CORP 2019, 24th International Conference on Urban 
Development, Regional Planning and Information Society, 
pp. 453-462, 2019. 
[10] S. Weck-Ponten et al., Automated data aggregation for 
integrating a dynamic building simulation into a geographic 
information system. 2018. 
[11] S. Eichhorn and S. Siedentop, "Inside before outside? An 
estimation of inner development in North Rhine-Westphalian 
municipalities, 
1979 
to 
2011", 
Raumforschung 
Und 
Raumordnung | Spatial Research and Planning, 2022. 
[12] S. Muckel and M. Ogorek, Public building law - outlines of 
the law. C.H. Beck, Munich, 2018. 
[13] I. Iosifescu, A. Tsorlini and, L. Hurni, Towards a 
comprehensive methodology for automatic vectorization of 
raster 
historical 
maps. 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.e-
perimetron.org/Vol_11_2/Iosifescu_et_al.pdf [retrieved: 02, 
2023]. 
[14] Y. Chen, et al., "Vectorization of Historical Maps Using Deep 
Edge Filtering and Closed Shape Extraction", in Document 
Analysis and Recognition – Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, Aufl. 12824. Springer, Cham, 2021. 
[15] W. Li et al., "Semantic Segmentation-Based Building 
Footprint Extraction Using Very High-Resolution Satellite 
Images and Multi-Source GIS Data", Remote Sens, 11, 403. 
2019. 
[Online]. 
Available from: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/11/4/403 
[retrieved: 02, 2023].  
[16] M. Wurm, H. Taubenböck, J. Goebel, T. Esch and, G. 
Wagner, "Census of the future? - Earth observation for spatial 
estimation of population distribution", in Standort - Journal 
for Applied Geography 35, pp. 169–175, 2011. 
[17] H. Fan, A. Zipf, Q. Fu and, P. Neis, "Quality assessment for 
building footprints data on OpenStreetMap", International 
Journal of Geographical Information Science 28. S. 700–719. 
2014. 
[18] A. Herrmann, The reduction of land use through urban 
planning law. Legal validity and realization in the social 
system. Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft mbH & Co. KG. Baden-
Baden, 2019. 
[19] M. Kment, Public building law. Volume I Building planning 
law - Series of legal education, 107(7), C.H. Beck, Munich, 
2017. 
[20] M.-I. Ruprecht, "Small-scale settlement analyses for mapping 
changes: The utility of building-spatial data for planning", in 
Spatial Research and Planning, 72, pp. 227-238, 2014. 
[21] Statistical Offices of the Federal and State Governments. 
Results of the 2011 Census for download - extended. [Online]  
Available 
from: 
https://www.zensus2011.de/DE/Home/Aktuelles/Demografisc
heGrunddaten.html [retrieved: 02, 2023]. 
[22] M. Neutze, "Grid-based evaluations of the 2011 census", in 
Stadtforschung und Statistik, pp. 64-67, 2015. 
[23] E. Pajares, R. Muñoz Nieto, L. Meng and, G. Wulfhorst, 
"Population Disaggregation on the Building Level Based on 
Outdated Census Data". ISPRS International Journal of Geo-
Information, 10(10):662, 2021. [Online] Available from:  
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijgi10100662 [retrieved: 02, 2023]. 
[24] D. Visca, M. Hoppe and, P. Neis, "Generating a Pseudo 
Resident Registration Register by Using Open Data", in 
GEOProcessing 
2022: 
The 
Fourteenth 
International 
Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, 
Applications, and Services. Porto, 2022. 
[25] R.M. Olbricht, "Data Retrieval for Small Spatial Regions in 
OpenStreetMap", in J. Jokar Arsanjani, A. Zipf, P. Mooney, 
M. Helbich, Eds. OpenStreetMap in GIScience. Lecture Notes 
in Geoinformation and Cartography, pp. 101-122. 2015. 
[26] H. Schröteler-von Brandt, "History of urban planning", in 
ARL (eds.): Handbook of urban and spatial development, pp. 
805-821. 2018. 
[27] G. Meinel, "The challenge of land monitoring: data sources 
for a land information system and what they can achieve", 
Stadtforschung und Statistik: Zeitschrift des Verbandes 
Deutscher Städtestatistiker, 33(1), pp. 107-114, 2020. 
[28] S. Fina, "Urban Green Spaces Under Pressure: Comparative 
Values for Urban Green Space Provision in German Cities", 
Stadtforschung und Statistik: Zeitschrift des Verbandes 
Deutscher Städtestatistiker, 34(2), pp. 17-23. 2021. 
[29] R. Hecht, C. Kunze and, S. Hahmann, "Measuring 
Completeness of Building Footprints in OpenStreetMap over 
Space and Time", ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf., 2, pp. 1066-1091. 
2013. 
[30] P. Neis and D. Zielstra, "Recent Developments and Future 
Trends in Volunteered Geographic Information Research: The 
Case of OpenStreetMap", Future Internet, 6, pp. 76-
106. 2014. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/6/1/76 
[retrieved: 02, 2023]. 
[31] COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 1089/2010 of 23 
November 2010 Implementing Directive 2007/2/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council as Regards 
Interoperability of Spatial Data Sets and Services. [Online]. 
Available from: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2010/1089 
[retrieved: 
02, 
2023.
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

