3D Visualization and Simulation Module based on Virtual Geographic Environments
for Sea Level Rise on Ponta da Areia Beach - S˜ao Lu´ıs, Maranh˜ao, Brazil
David Silva e Silva∗, Karla Donato Fook†, Andr´e Lu´ıs Silva dos Santos†, H´elder Pereira Borges†,
Denilson da Silva Bezerra‡ and Dario Vieira Conceic¸˜ao§
∗State University of Maranh˜ao
S˜ao Lu´ıs, Maranh˜ao, Brazil
Email: davidsilva.silva@outlook.com
†Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Maranh˜ao
S˜ao Lu´ıs, Maranh˜ao, Brazil
Email: {karladf, andresantos, helder}@ifma.edu.br
‡Ceuma University
S˜ao Lu´ıs, Maranh˜ao, Brazil
Email: denilson ca@yahoo.com.br
§Engineering School of Information and Digital Technologies
Villejuif, Paris, France
Email: dario.vieira@efrei.fr
Abstract—The growing concern about sea level rise leads to the
study of vulnerability to coastal ﬂooding due to extreme events.
Therefore, the need for simulation studies on this topic, including
the ground altimetry, distribution of buildings, environmental,
social and economic impacts, lead to the development of this
work. The Virtual Geographic Environments are proposed as
support systems for speciﬁc studies of simulation and analysis
of geographic phenomena, being then presented as accurate
and signiﬁcant tools for this study. This work proposes the
application of concepts of Virtual Geographic Environments for
the development of a 3D module for visualization and simulation
of sea level rise in Ponta d’Areia region, in S˜ao Lu´ıs, Maranh˜ao.
Keywords–three-dimensional visualization; geoprocessing; sea
level rise.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Sea level rise is a persistent effect related to climate
change and is one of the signiﬁcant events discussed in the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). In terms
of resulting impacts, a 1-meter rise in sea level would result in
the loss of approximately 0.3% of mainland and would affect
approximately 56 million people in 84 developing countries
[1]. In Brazil, there are 395 municipalities located in the coastal
zone where approximately 24% of the native population resides
[2]. In 2000, 12 million people in Brazil lived in low-lying
areas at risk to sea level rise, and forecasts indicate that this
number can reach 18.7 million people in 2060 [3]. Face to
the risks to sea level rise, the need for simulation studies
on the topic, including the ground altimetry, distribution of
buildings, environmental, social and economic impacts, lead
to the development of this work.
Virtual Geographic Environments (VGEs) are a mix of
geographic knowledge, computational technology, virtual re-
ality, and geographic information technologies, which aim to
provide a multidimensional representation similar to the real-
world geographical environment (in representation and scale),
giving users an ability to explore, perform experiments and
simulate phenomena [4], being therefore presented as accurate
and signiﬁcant tools for this study.
Based on the concept of VGEs, this work presents the
development method of a display and simulation module of
sea level rise through a 3D virtual environment (web platform),
based on the four Representative Concentration Pathways
(RCPs) estimatives for 2100 appointed by the IPCC [5].
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the
characterization of the study area, Section III describes the
process of data acquisition, Section IV describes the develop-
ment method, Section V presents the preliminary results, and
Section VI presents the conclusions.
II.
STUDY REGION
The study area is Ponta d’Areia Beach, located in San
Marcos Bay, west of S˜ao Lu´ıs Island, with a lenght of 2.5
km (Fig. 1), from Ponta d’Areia Pontal (29’17 S Latitude and
44o 09’19 W Longitude ) to San Marcos Lighthouse (2o 29
’04 S Latitude S and 44o 08 ’22 W Longitude) [6].
Fig. 1. Study Region.
This area receives the action of semidiurnal tides that can
reach 7 meters in periods of equinoctial spring tides [6], being
a vulnerable region to extreme events mainly related to a set
of erosion actions.
Considering the problem of the coastal areas vulnerability
related to the sea level rise phenomenon, especially the one
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

in Ponta d’Areia area, this work is leaded by the questioning
about the impacts that this phenomenon will produce in the
study area and if the knowledge of these effects will predict
ecologically, socially or economically harmful events.
III.
DATA ACQUISITION
The input data used to generate the 3D terrain model was
the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) satellite image
with 1 arc second spatial resolution (30 meters), provided by
the United States Geological Survey.
In order to estimate the beach range, two World-View 3
satellite images captured from Google Earth, one for high tide
and one for low tide, were used to generate values between
0.1 and 1m. With the tools of the QGIS, three vector ﬁles
(shapeﬁles) were obtained from the images: a point grid with
lat / long coordinates and SRTM pixel altimetry, contour lines,
and a polygon mesh representing the buildings, with exported
data in GeoJson format (Fig. 2).
(a) Estimating Beach Range
(b) Acquiring Point Grid
(c) Acquiring Contours Lines and Buildings Features
Fig. 2. Aquisition of Contour Lines, Building Features and Point Grid.
The data in a GeoJSON ﬁle are organized into “features”
and a feature has ﬁelds such as: “geometry”, which store the
vector structure of geometry and ”properties”, which store
descriptive information related to geometry. The basic types
of geometries used were point, line, and polygon representing
respectively the grid of points, contour lines, and buildings.
IV.
IMPLEMENTATION
The module was developed with Threejs (JavaScript Li-
brary 3D / API for WebGl), trhough which the algorithm reads
the GeoJson ﬁles and transforms them into 3D structures (Fig.
3).
Fig. 3. Flow of Transformation.
For 3D representation of the terrain, the GeoJson dotted
ﬁle was used to create the Digital Elevation Digital Model
(DEM). The contour lines were transformed into a 3DLine
type geometry, and they are used as a feature to display terrain
altimetry in the virtual environment. The polygons representing
the buildings were transformed into models of 3D buildings
(with detail level 1, blocks without roof structures), with each
building having as attribute its elevation in relation to sea level
and its estimated height (Figs. 4, 5 and 6).
Fig. 4. DEM.
Fig. 5. 3D Contour Lines.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Fig. 6. 3D Buildings.
The water body (represented by a ﬂat geometry) increases
with sea level increments. The simulation of sea level rise is
deﬁned by (1) [7].
E = Ca + (Ev × R)
(1)
E is the sea level, Ca is the water body rise at each step, Ev
is the elevation step related to one year, R is the incremental
rate at each elevation step. In this work, 85 elevation steps
(Ev) concerning to 2015 - 2100 period were adopted. The
incremental rate R is deﬁned by the RCP estimate
85
ratio.
For the total land loss estimative, a vertices scan is per-
formed on the DEM at each elevation step using the rule shown
in in Fig. 7, where each vertex represents an area of 30m2.
Fig. 7. Land Loss Identiﬁcation Rule.
In order to identify buildings at risk, a building matrix scan
is performed at each elevation step, using the rule shown in
Fig. 8. When a building at risk is identiﬁed it is marked with
red color (Fig. 9).
Fig. 8. Building Identiﬁcation Rule.
Fig. 9. Module Interface.
The virtual environment is displayed in the web browser
and the menu has controls to display the 3D terrain model,
contour lines, surface satellite image, buildings, water body
elevation animation, as well as total land loss per year.
V.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table I shows the total land loss in the study area for each
PCR estimate appointed by the IPCC.
TABLE I. Total Land Loss.
RCP
Estimate by 2100
Terrain Loss
2.6
0.61m
63.960m2
4.5
0.71m
74.520m2
6.0
0.73m
74.520m2
8.5
0.98m
87.240m2
With the elevation data used (SRTM) any sea level rise
estimated at the IPCC will directly affect residential buildings,
however, in the sites where the elevation reaches 0.98 cm (RCP
8.5), loss of entire beach area was observed (Fig. 10). Conse-
quently, sea breakthrough will intensify the erosion process by
modifying the geomorphology of the region, endangering other
structures such as marina, boardwalks, kiosks, ﬁrst aid stations
and restaurants along the waterfront , directly bringing social
impacts such as loss of leisure area and economic impacts as
potential loss for tourism.
Fig. 10. Sea Level by 2100.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The method developed in this study presents a simpliﬁed
process for the implementation of a visualization and simula-
tion module using GIS data as input. The module automates
data reading in GeoJson format and transforms it into 3D
models, as well as performs the simulation of sea level rise
over the study area. This module is part of a larger project
focused on developing a virtual web environment based on
the concept and proposal of the VGEs, with the aim of
supporting the study of sea level rise phenomenon and its
impacts in the study area. In the future one intends to add: data
storage and retrieval module, improved simulation models of
the phenomenon including erosion and updated altimetry data,
resulting in a web simulation and display tool open to the
public.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank to the Foundation for Support to
Research and Scientiﬁc and Technological Development of
Maranh˜ao (FAPEMA) and to the Federal Institute of Educa-
tion, Science and Technology of Maranh˜ao (IFMA) for their
ﬁnancial support.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

REFERENCES
[1]
S. Dasgupta, B. Laplante, C. Meisner, D. Wheeler and J. Yan, “The
impact of sea level rise on developing countries: a comparative analy-
sis.” World Bank policy research working paper, n. 4136, 2007, DOI:
10.1596/1813-9450-4136.
[2]
T. M. Strohaecker, “Natural Risk Potential.” In: Ademilson Zamboni
& Joao Luiz Nicolodi (org.), Macrodiagnosis of the Brazilian Coastal
and Marine Zone, pp.93-120, Ministry of the Environment, Secretariat of
Climate Change and Environmental Quality. Federal District, Brazil. 2008.
[3]
B. Neumann, A. T. Vafeidis, J. Zimmermann and R. J. Nicholls, “Future
coastal population growth and exposure to sea-level rise and coastal
ﬂooding-a global assessment.” PloS one, vol. 10, n. 3, pp. 1–34, 2015,
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131375.
[4]
H. Lin et. al, “Virtual geographic environments (VGEs): a new generation
of geographic analysis tool.” Earth-Science Reviews, vol. 126, pp. 74–84,
2014, DOI: 10.1016/j.earscirev.2013.08.001.
[5]
P. P. Wong et. al, “Coastal Systems and Low-Lying Areas.” In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global
and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
USA, pp. 361–409, 2014.
[6]
F. P. Correia, L. S. Silva, S. R. Alves, M. N. Gatinho and L. J. B. S. Dias,
“Characterization of the Landscape of the Northern Coastal Zone of the
Island of Maranh˜ao: The Case of Ponta d’Areia Beach.” In: VI National
Symposium on Geomorphology/Regional Conference on Geomorphology,
Goiˆania, pp. 1-10, Brazil, 2006.
[7]
D. da S. Bezerra, “Modeling of Mangrove Dynamics in the Face of Sea
Level Rise.” Doctoral thesis, National Institute for Space Research - INPE,
S˜ao Jos´e dos Campos, Brazil, 2014.
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

