City Energy Management: A Case Study on the Urban Area of Liège in Belgium 
Sigrid Reiter, Véronique Wallemacq 
University of Liège 
Local Environment Management and Analysis (LEMA) 
Liège, Belgium 
e-mail: Sigrid.Reiter@ulg.ac.be, vwallemacq@ulg.ac.be 
 
 
 
Abstract— Within the framework of sustainable development, 
it is important to take into account environmental aspects of 
urban areas related to their energy use. In this research, a 
typology of urban blocks is drawn up for the urban area of 
Liège through the use of GIS tools in order to assess energy 
uses of residential buildings and transport of residents at the 
city scale. For each class of this typology, a representative 
block is selected in order to model energy use at the city scale, 
as well as to consider the possible evolution of the city energy 
consumption and to simulate the effects of some strategies of 
urban renewal. An application study on the residential 
buildings energy consumption part of this typology is given to 
compare different energy management strategies. This case 
study allow to conclude that the European Directive on the 
Energy Performance of Buildings and even more selective 
energy policies on new buildings are not sufficient to widely 
decrease the energy consumption of Liège building stock but 
that renovation of the existing building stock has a much 
larger positive impact on city energy consumption reductions. 
These conclusions put forward the benefits of using urban GIS 
for policymaking and city management. Energy management is 
an important GIS application field. 
Keywords - Urban GIS, energy consumptio, forecast 
scenarios. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In 
the 
actual 
context 
of 
growing 
interests 
in 
environmental issues, reducing energy consumptions in the 
building and the transport sectors (which represent 
respectively 37% and 32% of final energy in the European 
Union) appears as important policy targets. Urban areas are 
supposed to present high potentialities in terms of energy 
reduction. However, existing models often adopt the 
perspective of the individual building as an autonomous 
entity, and neglect the importance of phenomena linked to 
larger scales [1].  
This research focuses on city level energy management. 
In this paper, a typology of urban blocks is drawn up for the 
urban area of Liege (in Belgium) through the use of GIS 
tools in order to assess energy uses at the city scale. This 
typology of urban blocks is organized into two parts: the 
residential buildings energy consumption and the transport 
energy consumption of residents. For each topic of this 
typology, representative blocks are selected in order to 
model the energy use at the city scale, as well as to consider 
the possible evolution of the city energy consumption and to 
simulate the effects of some strategies of urban renewal. An 
application study uses this typology to compare the effects of 
the European Directive on Energy Performance of Buildings 
with even more selective energy policies on new buildings 
and with renovation strategies on the existing building stock 
of the urban area of Liège.  
The structure of this paper is developed in eight sections: 
the introduction, the state of the art and method, the study 
area and chosen criteria, the cartographic work, the typology 
of urban blocks generated, the calculations of the energy 
performance of the city, a discussion on the results and the 
conclusion. 
 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART AND METHOD 
This section describes the most important references on city 
energy management and the methodology used in this 
research. 
 
A. State of the art 
There are a lot of modeling tools to assess energy 
management of a specific building. However, such an 
approach makes it difficult to generalize the results in order 
to determine the best strategies at the urban scale. On the 
other hand, there are two types of modeling methods used to 
predict energy consumption at a large scale (for example, for 
national 
predictions): 
the 
top-down 
and 
bottom-up 
approaches. These methodologies have already been 
described in details [2,3]. The top-down modeling is 
generally used to investigate the inter-relationships between 
the energy and economy sectors. They study the influence of 
economic variables such as income or fuel prices on the 
energy consumption of countries. These models lack details 
on the building stock to be able to quantify the effectiveness 
of some specific energy policy measures on the urban energy 
performance. Bottom-up methods are based on typologies 
and components clustering modeling approach. These 
components can be buildings [4,5], urban blocks or 
neighborhoods [6].  This implies that they need extensive 
databases to support the choice and description of each 
component of their typologies. This is usually done by a 
combination of building physics modeling, empirical data 
(for example from housing surveys), statistics on national or 
7
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

regional data sets and some assumptions about buildings 
performance. The bottom-up method is very useful to assess 
the energy consumption of existing building stocks. 
 
B. The method 
This research uses an Urban GIS in order to develop an 
energy model of the residential building stock of Liège and 
to spatialize its major components. Our approach combines 
global statistics, that are not associated with buildings (top-
down approach), with features related to buildings and urban 
form (bottom-up approach). The evolution of the number of 
buildings in the residential stock is deducted from global 
trends of recent years (top-down approach), while the energy 
consumption of buildings are obtained thanks to empirical 
data and results of buildings energy modeling (bottom-up 
approach). This combined approach provides a set of data as 
accurate as possible. 
 
III. 
STUDY AREA AND CHOSEN CRITERIA 
Our study is focused on the urban area of Liège and more 
specifically on its residential urban blocks. Delimitation of 
city blocks was performed using data from the PICC, that is 
a computer project of continued mapping from the Public 
Service of the Walloon Region of Belgium. These data are 
provided in the form of vector map layers that characterize 
the 
natural 
environment 
(rivers, 
forests), 
the 
built 
environment (buildings) and the infrastructure (roads, 
railways, etc.) at scale 1/1000. The spatial position of these 
objects is known by their position (x, y) and their altitude (z) 
with an accuracy of 25 cm. 
The first part of this research develops a typology of 
Liège’s urban blocks. First, a large number of variables were 
selected to characterize the energy efficiency of city blocks, 
using an extensive literature review on this subject. Then, a 
statistical treatment of these parameters was performed using 
a Principal Component Analysis. This methodology [7,8], 
allows crossing a large number of criteria and grouping them 
according to their similarities. This statistical treatment 
reduced the number of our selected criteria to characterize 
the energy performance of the residential building stock of 
Liège. These are the six chosen criteria: 
• 
Buildings’ date of construction (before 1930, 
from 1931 to 1969, from 1970 to 1985, from 
1985 to 1996, from 1996 to today), depending 
on the types of construction related to Belgian 
regulations. These data are defined across the 
urban blocks from the cadastre. 
• 
Type of buildings (two, three or four frontages). 
Indeed, a terraced house uses less energy than a 
separate house [9]. These data are defined 
across the urban blocks from the cadastre. 
• 
Type of housing (collective or individual). 
These data are defined across the urban blocks 
from the cadastre. 
• 
Urban functions (residential, trade, school or 
socio-cultural facilities, services). Each block 
may contain one to four of these functions. The 
functional mix reduces energy consumption 
associated with shorter distances between the 
different activities’ locations of everyday life. 
• 
Index of energy performance for residents’ 
travels to their work places [10,11]. This index 
is based on statistical data available at the 
census block scale (that is the smallest 
geographical unit in which data are available in 
Belgium). These data come from national 
censuses, carried out every ten years in 
Belgium. Weighted average of the built area of 
each city block has been achieved to adapt these 
data from the census block scale to the scale of 
the city block. 
• 
Potential modal shares for alternatives to the 
car, following [12]. This calculation takes into 
account the daily frequency of trains and buses 
weighted by their type and destination. 
IV. 
CARTOGRAPHIC WORK 
The information in the cadastre has been linked to the file 
map showing the layout of the plots using their cadastral 
number. Then, the spatial relationship between the plots and 
the PICC data was established through the ArcMap function 
“Spatial join”. This helped to know the date of buildings 
construction given on the cadastral maps. 
It is important to note that some plots of the PICC found 
no match in the database of the cadastre. No data will be 
taken into account for the buildings constructed on these 
plots. Note that these differences arise because the data from 
the PICC were developed from aerial rectified photographs 
and the data from the cadastre were developed from digital 
cadastral maps. However, these data can be considered 
acceptable because only 383 buildings could not be taken 
into account, which represents only 0.2% of the residential 
building stock of the urban area of Liège. 
To convert, as consistently as possible, the data known at 
the census block to the scale of the urban block, the data 
associated with each statistical area were distributed in a 
grid, which has a resolution of 10 m wide (see Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1 : Distribution of the data associated with four census blocks to a 
spatial grid of 10m wide. 
 
Then, a weighting is applied according to the surfaces of 
the urban blocks that are related to one or several census 
blocks. For example, in Figure 2, the urban block value will 
8
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

be calculated by adding twice the value of red cells, sixteen 
times the value of green cells, six times the value of yellow 
cells and 9 times the value of orange cells, and dividing the 
sum by 33 (the number of census cells covered by the urban 
block). 
 
 
Figure 2: Wheighting calculation of the urban block (in blue)  data on basis 
of four census blocks data. 
 
However, it should be noted that the transport 
consumption criteria, based on this mapping work, are less 
accurate than the buildings consumption criteria, based on 
the cadastral values, because of the assumption that 
statistical data are evenly distributed in each census block.  
 
V. 
TYPOLOGY OF URBAN BLOCKS 
The typology of urban blocks is organized into two 
topics: residential buildings energy consumption and 
transport energy consumption of residents. For each topic of 
this typology, representative blocks are selected in order to 
model energy use at the city scale, as well as to consider the 
possible evolution of the city energy consumptions and to 
simulate the effects of some strategies of urban renewal. The 
proposed representative blocks were selected by choosing for 
each topic the representative criteria into the list of six 
criteria previously determined and then crossing them at the 
urban block scale. The six criteria that were taken into 
account are buildings date of construction, type of buildings 
(two, three or four frontages), type of housing (collective or 
individual), index of energy performance for residents’ 
travels to their work places, potential modal shares for 
alternatives to the car and mix of urban functions 
(residential, trade, school or socio-cultural facilities, 
services). 
For the first topic “residential buildings energy 
consumption”, the following criteria were selected: buildings 
date of construction , type of buildings (number of frontages) 
and type of housing (collective or individual). After crossing 
these three criteria at the urban block scale, only the main 
classes, that include the largest number of urban blocks were 
selected. So, fourteen types of urban blocks have been 
defined, which represent 97% of the blocks of the urban area 
of Liège. For example, there are 508 blocks built before 
1930, where over 66.6% of the buildings are terraced houses 
and most of them are individual housing; this type of urban 
block corresponds to 12% of the residential building stock of 
Liège (see Figure 3). Another block type is constructed after 
1970, where over 66.6% of the buildings are separate and 
most of them are individual housings; there are 314 urban 
blocks of this type in the urban area of Liège, which 
corresponds to 7% of the residential building stock (see 
Figure 4). Within each of these 14 types, a representative 
block was chosen to allow modeling more accurately the 
energy consumption of buildings. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: One type of urban block that represents 12% of the residential 
building stock of Liège. 
 
 
Figure 4: One type of urban block that represents 7% of the residential 
building stock of Liège. 
 
For the second topic “energy consumption by transport of 
residents”, the following criteria were selected:  the mix of 
urban functions (residential, trade, school or socio-cultural 
facilities, services), the index of energy performance for 
residents’ travels to their work places and the potential 
modal shares for alternatives to the car.  
9
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

After crossing these three criteria at the urban block 
scale, only the main classes, that include more than 0,5% of 
all the urban blocks, were selected. The selection of blocks 
representative of each class of theme 2 is performed 
identically to theme1. 
 
VI. 
MODELING THE ENERGY PERFORMANCE 
The three criteria that are taken into account to achieve 
the energy assessment of the residential housing stock are the 
age of buildings, their number of frontages and the type of 
housing (individual or collective). The energy consumption 
for each type of housing in the Walloon Region (including 
heating, hot water and lighting) are determined on basis of 
empirical values and simulation results. When these values 
are related to each building, it is possible to establish the 
evolution of the energy consumption of the whole urban area 
of Liège since 1850, that is the first date of construction of a 
building identified in the cadastre (see Figure 5). Before 
1931, the dates of buildings construction are aggregated for 
periods lasting from 20 to 25 years, which explains the larger 
width of the bars in the Figure 5. 
The most important actual energy policy measure in the 
EU is the Directive on the Energy Performance of Buildings 
(Directive 2002/91/EC) that came into force in 2002 with 
legislation in member states by 2006 [13]. These policy 
measures focus on energy efficiency when new buildings are 
constructed or when big buildings (larger than 1000m²) 
undergo  a major renovation. However, there might be 
energy efficient measures that are environmental efficient 
and cost effective also on the existing residential building 
stock, on smaller buildings and/or lighter renovation 
processes. Note that in the Danish implementation of the 
EPB directive all existing buildings (including single family 
houses) are covered by the energy efficiency measures when 
they undergo a major renovation [4]. 
It is thus useful to model some forecast scenarios to 
compare the effects of the European Directive on Energy 
Performance of Buildings (EPB directive) with even more 
selective energy policies on new buildings and with 
renovation strategies on the existing building stock. 
The demographic data of the population of our study area 
are known at the census block scale. The simplest hypothesis 
would estimate that the residential building stock changes 
proportionally to the population. However, the number of 
buildings in urban area of Liege during the last eight years 
did not increase as rapidly as the population during those 
years. We have thus established a base curve of the evolution 
of the built stock according to the statistics of its evolution 
between 2000 and 2008. This trend is represented by the 
following equation: 
 
 
       Y = 477,35 ln (x) + 161 348                          (1) 
 
with x = forecast year – 2000 and Y = Number of buildings. 
This curve follows very well the recent trend of 
development of the residential building stock since the 
coefficient of determination calculated from the data 
observed between 2000 and 2008 amounts to 99.7%. 
 
 
Figure 5: Evolution of the energy consumption of the urban area of Liège 
(in GWh/year) since 1850. 
 
 
A. Scenario 1: new buildings following EPB 
In this first scenario, the existing building stock remains 
unchanged, but new buildings are constructed according to 
the actual standard on the energy performance of buildings 
(EPB): the building's energy consumption should not exceed 
115 kWh/m² per year. It is therefore the most likely 
evolution of Liège’s building stock if the energy policies are 
not changed in the future. Following this first scenario, the 
energy consumption for the city of Liège in 2061 is 
estimated at 6067.74 GWh per year. 
 
B. Scenario 2: strengthening of energy policy on new 
buildings  
Considering that 5% of new housing stock will have low 
energy performances (LE: 95 kWh/m² per year), 2% of 
10
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

buildings very low energy performances (VLE: 65 kWh/m² 
per year) and 1% will reach the standard passive house (50 
kWh/m² per year), energy consumption decreases from 679 
MWh for the year 2061 compared to the first scenario, which 
represents a reduction of only 0.01% for a period of fifty 
years. 
Achieving 10% reduction in energy consumption of all 
buildings constructed after 2010 would require that the new 
stock meets the following constructive standards: 63% of 
buildings achieving the EPB standard, 21% of LE buildings, 
10% of VLE buildings and 5% of passive buildings. But on 
the whole building stock, this reduction generates a very 
small decrease in energy consumption (0.06%) compared to 
Scenario 1, corresponding to the actual regulations. 
 
C. Scenario 3: roof insulation of the old building stock 
Following Verbeek and Hens, insulation of the roof is the 
most effective and durable measure for energy performance 
increase of households in Belgium [14].  
A rate of renovation of buildings of 0.6% per year is 
chosen to simulate a realistic policy for roof insulation of the 
existing building stock equal to two thirds of the total rate of 
renovations observed in the Walloon Region on an annual 
basis. It is also assumed that the energy management is 
carried out efficiently: the oldest and least energy efficient 
buildings are the first to be renovated. Renovating the roof 
insulation of this old building stock will be incorporated as a 
reduction of 40% of energy consumption in comparison to 
the initial energy performance of these renovated buildings. 
It appears that the renovation of existing buildings can 
drastically reduce energy consumption across the urban area. 
The total estimated consumption amounts to 5439.27 
GWh/year in 2061, of which 99.5% is attributed to the 
existing stock. The decrease in total energy consumption is 
therefore 10.36% (628.46 GWh/year) compared to 6067.74 
GWh/year for Scenario 1.  
 
D. Scenario 4: renovation of the old building stock 
reaching EPB  
This scenario aims to assess the amount of energy that 
could be saved if the existing building stock was renovated, 
at a rate of 0,6% per year, to meet the current EPB standard 
in Belgium (115 kWh/m² per year), while all the new 
buildings meet the same energy performances. Following 
this scenario 4, the estimated energy consumption for the city 
of Liège reach 5307.20 GWh/year in 2061. It is 760.54 
GWh/year (13%) less compared to scenario 1. 
 
E. Scenario 5 : renovation of all the existing building 
stock  reaching EPB 
The renovation of all the buildings of the residential 
building stock of Liège to the level of the current EPB 
standard in Belgium (115 kWh / m² per year), would result in 
significant reductions in energy consumption of the urban 
area, see Figure.6. Indeed, the global energy consumption 
would drop to 3178.23 GWh/year only, which represents a 
reduction of 47.6% compared to 6067.74 GWh/year  of the 
scenario 1 (where the new buildings reached already the 
standard EPB, but where no renovation was undertaken).  
However, to achieve the complete renovation of the 
existing housing stock by 2060, the rate of renovation of the 
urban area of Liege should increase sharply, to a minimum 
of 1.92% per year, which would require strong policies to 
accelerate and strengthen the process of renovating existing 
buildings. 
 
 
Figure 6: Energy consumption of the urban area of Liège (in GWh/year) 
from 2000 to 2061, following the scenario 5 (blue results) and comparison 
with scenario 1 (black dotted curve). 
 
F. Scenario 6 : all the existing building stock  reaching 
EPB and new buildings reaching the passive standard  
This scenario uses the same renewal policy that the 
previous scenario but it is also assumed that each new 
housing built from 2012 will reach the passive standard (50 
kWh/m² per year). The result of scenario 6 is very close to 
the previous scenario. The total energy of the urban area in 
2061 amounts to 3161.57 GWh/year, which represents only a 
reduction of 0.5% compared to scenario 5. 
 
11
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

VII. 
 DISCUSSION 
The studied scenarios show that the actual city energy 
challenge lies mainly in the renovation of the existing 
building stock. Indeed, the first two scenarios and the small 
difference between scenarios 5 and 6 show that it is not 
possible to ensure a significant reduction in energy 
consumption at the city scale applying only energy policies 
for new buildings, like the standard EPB already in use or by 
enhancing the performance of new buildings to low energy 
level, very low energy level and even to the passive housing 
standard. 
However, scenarios of existing housing stock renewal 
(scenarios 3 to 5) can significantly reduce the overall 
consumption of the urban area of Liege in the following 
proportions: 
• 
10.36 % of energy consumption reduction in 2061 
through the roof insulation of the oldest buildings 
at a renovation rate of 0.6% of the building stock 
per year. 
• 
13 % of energy consumption reduction in 2061 
through a renovation reaching the EPB level of the 
oldest buildings at a renovation rate of 0.6% of the 
building stock per year. 
• 
47.6 % of energy consumption reduction in 2061 
through a renovation reaching the EPB level of all 
the existing residential building stock, which 
corresponds to a renovation rate of 1.92 % per 
year. 
Thus, the National climate change targets in Belgium will 
be impossible without a strategic increase of the existing 
housing stock renovation. 
VIII.  CONCLUSION 
In this research, a typology of urban blocks is drawn up 
for the urban area of Liege through the use of GIS tools in 
order to assess energy uses of residential buildings and 
transport of residents at the city scale. An application study 
on the residential buildings energy consumption part of this 
typology is given to compare different energy management 
strategies. This case study allow to conclude that the 
European Directive on the Energy Performance of Buildings 
and even more selective energy policies on new buildings are 
not sufficient to widely decrease the energy consumption of 
Liège’s building stock but that renovation of the existing 
building stock has a much larger positive impact on city 
energy consumption reductions. This research also proves 
the benefits of using urban GIS for city management and 
policymaking. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been funded by the Special Funds for 
Research of the French Community of Belgium, within the 
University of Liege. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Ratti, N. Baker, and K. Steemers, “Energy consumption 
and urban texture”, Energy and Buildings, vol. 37 (7), 2005, 
pp. 762-776. 
[2] L.G. Swan and V.I. Ugursal, “Modeling of end-use energy 
consumption in the residential sector: a review of modeling 
techniques”. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 
vol. 13, 2009; pp. 1819-1835. 
[3] M. Kavgic, A. Mavrogianni, D. Mumovic, A Summerfield, Z. 
Stevanovic, and M. Djurovic-Petrovic, “A review of bottom-
up building stock models for energy consumption in the 
residential sector”, Building and Environment, vol. 45, 2010, 
pp. 1683-1697.  
[4] H. Tommerup and S. Svendsen, “Energy savings in Danish 
residential building stock”, Energy and Buildings, vol. 38, 
2006, pp. 618-626. 
[5] A. Uihlein and P. Eder, “Policy options towards an energy 
efficient residential building stock in the EU-27”, Energy and 
Buildings, vol. 42, 2010, pp. 791-798. 
[6] Y. Yamaguchi, Y. Shimoda, and M. Mizuno, “Proposal of a 
modeling approach considering urban form of evaluation of 
city level energy management”, Energy and Buildings, vol. 
39, 2007, pp. 580-592. 
[7] L. Lebart, A. Morineau,  and J.-P. Fenelon, Traitement des 
données statistiques – méthodes et programmes,  2d ed., 
Bordas Éd., Paris : Dunod, 1982. 
[8] M. Volle, Analyse des données, 3rd ed.,  Paris: Economica, 
1993. 
[9] A.-F. Marique and S. Reiter, “A method to assess global 
energy requirements of suburban areas at the neighbourhood 
scale”, Proc. IAQVEC 2010 Conference, Syracuse (USA), 
2010. 
[10] K. Boussauw and F. Witlox, “Introducing a commute-energy 
performance index for Flanders”, Transportation Research 
Part A , vol. 43, 2009, pp. 580–591. 
[11] A.F. Marique and S. Reiter, “A method to assess transport 
consumptions in suburban areas”, Proc. PLUREL Conference 
: Managing the Urban Rural Interface, Copenhagen, 2010.  
[12] Y. Cornet, D. Daxhelet, J.-M. Halleux, A.-C. Klinkenberg and 
J.-M. Lambotte, « Cartographie de l’accessibilité par les 
alternatives a la voiture », Conférence Permanente du 
Développement Territorial, Belgium, 2005. 
[13] Directive 2002/91/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 16 December 2002 on the Energy performance of 
buildings, Official Journal of the European Union L 001, 
2003, pp. 65-71. 
[14] G. Verbeek and H. Hens, “Energy savings in retrofitted 
dwellings : economically viable?”; Energy and Buildings, vol. 
37, 2005, pp. 747-754. 
 
 
12
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

