Development of an Acoustic Transceiver for Positioning Systems in Underwater 
Neutrino Telescopes 
Giuseppina Larosaa, Miguel Ardida, Carlos D. Llorensb, Manuel Bou-Caboa,  
Juan A. Martínez-Moraa, Silvia Adrían-Martíneza 
a Institut d’Investigació per a la Gestió Integrada de les Zones Costaneres (IGIC) – Universitat Politècnica de València,  
C/ Paranimf 1, 46730 Gandia, València, SPAIN 
 e-mail: giula@doctor.upv.es 
b E.P.S. Gandia, Universitat Politècnica de València, C/ Paranimf 1, 46730 Gandia, València, SPAIN 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we present the acoustic transceiver 
developed for the positioning system in underwater neutrino 
telescopes. These infrastructures are not completely rigid and 
need a positioning system in order to monitor the position of 
the optical sensors of the telescope which have some degree of 
motion due to sea currents. To have a highly reliable and 
versatile system in the infrastructure, the transceiver has the 
requirements of reduced cost, low power consumption, high 
intensity for emission, low intrinsic noise, arbitrary signals for 
emission and the capacity of acquiring and processing the 
received signal on the board. The solution proposed and 
presented here consists of an acoustic transducer that works in 
the 20-40 kHz region and withstands high pressures (up to 500 
bars). The electronic-board can be configured from shore and 
is able to feed the transducer with arbitrary signals and to 
control the transmitted and received signals with very good 
timing precision. The results of the different tests done on the 
transceiver in the laboratory are described here, as well as the 
change implemented for its integration in the Instrumentation 
Line of ANTARES for the in situ tests. We consider the 
transceiver design is so versatile that it may be used in other 
kinds of marine positioning systems, alone or combined with 
other marine systems, or integrated in different Earth-Sea 
Observatories, where the localization of the sensors is an issue. 
 
 
Keywords-acoustic 
transceiver; 
underwater 
neutrino 
telescopes; calibration; positioning systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The acoustic transceiver presented in the article has been 
developed to be used in the acoustic positioning system of 
the neutrino telescopes in the Mediterranean Sea KM3NeT 
[1], and it is going to be tested on the ANTARES neutrino 
telescope. ANTARES is currently the biggest underwater 
neutrino telescope in the world and in operation in the 
Northern Hemisphere [2−3]. The detector is located in the 
Mediterranean Sea on a marine site 40 km SE offshore from 
the city of Toulon (France), at about 2400 m depth. Its 
construction was completed in May 2008, and now it is 
collecting data, which is analyzed in order to bring insights 
into different scientific problems related not only to 
astroparticles, but also in several fields of Earth-Sea 
Sciences. On the other hand, KM3NeT is a European 
Consortium that aims to design, build and operate a cubic 
kilometre neutrino telescope in the Mediterranean Sea 
[1−4]. The project is now in the Preparatory Phase for the 
Construction funded by the VII Framework Program of the 
European Union.  
Undersea neutrino telescopes have become very 
important tools for the study of the Universe. Moreover, 
these infrastructures are also abyssal multidisciplinary 
observatories 
with 
the 
installation 
of 
specialized 
instrumentation for biology, seismology, gravimetry, 
radioactivity, 
geomagnetism, 
oceanography 
and 
geochemistry offering a unique opportunity to explore the 
properties of a deep Mediterranean Sea site over a period of 
many years. The main elements of a neutrino telescope are 
an array of optical sensors (photomultipliers in glass 
spheres) located in flexible structures deployed in the deep 
sea and maintained vertical with buoys. For KM3NeT, the 
array will cover large volumes, of the order of a cubic 
kilometre, to have adequate sensitivity for the expected 
fluxes of neutrinos in these processes. It is able to detect the 
Cherenkov light from the muons produced by neutrino 
interactions with matter around the detector. The arrival 
times of the light collected by the optical detectors can be 
used to reconstruct the muon trajectory, and consequently 
that of the neutrino. The accuracy of the reconstruction of 
the muon track depends on the precision in measurement of 
light arrival time and on precise knowledge of the positions 
of the optical detectors [5−7]. The positioning system is 
necessary because marine currents may produce inclination 
of the structures, and thus displacement the optical sensors 
of the telescope by several metres from the nominal 
position. Then, the precise knowledge of the relative 
positions of all optical sensors is essential for a good 
operation of the telescope, and must be known with ∼10 cm 
accuracy. On the other hand, the absolute geo-referenced 
positions are needed to point back to astronomical sources. 
In order to know and monitor with precision the relative 
positions of the optical modules an triangulation method is 
applied in the acoustic positioning system constituted of 
receiving hydrophones attached to the structures and of 
emitting transceivers in fixed positions near the sea bottom.       
A considerable effort has been made by the KM3NeT 
Collaboration for the development of such system [8−10]. 
Here, we will present the work done in order to develop, test 
and integrate the solution for the KM3NeT acoustic 
transceiver.  
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The transceiver design is very versatile, and thus, it can 
be easily adapted to other kinds of marine positioning 
systems, alone or combined with other marine systems, or 
integrated in different Earth-Sea Observatories, where the 
localization of the sensors is an issue. Therefore, we think 
that it can be a very useful tool in geo-processing 
applications in marine environment. 
In Section II, the acoustic transceiver is described. The 
laboratory tests performed on it are discussed in Section III. 
Section IV shows the activities for the integration of the 
system in the ANTARES telescope for the in situ tests. 
Finally, the conclusions are presented, as well as the 
different possibilities of the system for being used in other 
marine positioning or localization systems. 
II. 
THE ACOUSTIC TRANSCEIVER  
The Acoustic Positioning System (APS) for the future 
KM3NeT neutrino telescope consists of a series of acoustic 
transceivers distributed on the sea bottom and receivers 
located on the lines near the optical modules. Each of these 
acoustic transceivers is composed of a transducer and one 
electronic board named ‘sound emission board’. Next, we 
will present these two parts of our system. 
 
A. The acoustic sensor 
The acoustic sensor has been selected to attend to the 
specifications needed for the KM3NeT positioning: 
withstand high pressure, good receiving sensitivity and 
transmitting power, nearly omnidirectional, low electronic 
noise, high reliability, and affordable for the units needed in 
a cubic kilometer. Among different options we have 
selected the Free Flooded Ring (FFR) transducers, model 
SX30 manufactured by Sensor Technology Ltd. The FFR 
transducers have geometrical forms such as rings, and then 
the hydrostatic pressure is the same on the inside and the 
outside. This characteristic form reduces the change of the 
properties of piezoelectric ceramic under high hydrostatic 
pressure.  So they are a good solution to the deep 
submergence problem [11]. The SX30 FFRs are efficient 
transducers that provide reasonable power levels over wide 
range of frequencies and deep ocean capability. They work 
in the 20–40 kHz frequency range and have dimensions of 
4.4 cm outer diameter, 2 cm inner diameter, 2.5 cm height.  
They  have unlimited depth for operation (already tested 
up to 440 bars [12])  with  a transmitting and receiving 
voltage response of 133 dB Ref. 1μPa/V at 1m and -193 dB 
Ref. 1V/μPa, respectively. The maximum input power is 
300 W with 2% duty cycle. These transducers are simple 
radiators and have omnidirectional directivity pattern in the 
plan perpendicular to the axis of the ring (plane XY), while 
the directivity in the other planes depends on the length of 
the cylinder (plane XZ), 60º for the SX30 model [13]. The 
cable on the free-flooded rings is 20 AWG, TPE 
(Thermoplastic elastomer) insulated. The cable is affixed 
directly to the ceramic crystal. The whole assembly is then 
directly coated with epoxy resin. Both the epoxy resin and 
the cable are stable in salt water, oils, mild acids and bases.  
The cables are therefore not water blocked (fluid 
penetration into the cable may cause irreversible damage to 
the transducer). For this reason the FFR hydrophones have 
been over-molded with polyurethane material to block water 
and to facilitate its fixing and integration on mechanical 
structures. Figure 1 shows pictures of the FFR transducer 
without and with over-molding.  
 
Figure 1: View of the Free Flooded Ring hydrophone (without and with 
over-molding). 
 
In the next plots (Figures 2 to 5), we present the results 
of the tests carried out in our laboratory to characterize the 
transducers in terms of the transmitting and receiving 
voltage responses as a function of the frequency and as a 
function of the  angle (directivity pattern). For the tests 
omnidirectional 
transducers, 
model 
ITC-1042 
and 
calibrated RESON-TC4014 have been used as reference 
emitter and receiver, respectively. Particularly, Figure 2 
and Figure 3 show the Transmitting Voltage Response and  
the Receiving Voltage Response, respectively, of the FFR 
hydrophones as a function of the frequency (measured in 
the plane XY, that is, in the perpendicular of the axis of the 
transducer); Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the Transmitting 
Voltage Response and the Receiving Voltage Response, 
respectively, of the FFR hydrophones as a function of the 
angle using a 30 kHz tone burst signal (measured in the 
plane XZ, 0º, which corresponds to the direction opposite 
to cables). 
 
B. The Sound Emission Board 
We have developed dedicated electronics, Sound 
Emission Board (SEB), in order to be able to communicate, 
configure the transceiver and control the emission and 
reception. Relative to the emission, it is able to feed the 
signals for positioning and amplify them in order to have 
enough acoustic power so they could be detected from 
acoustic receivers at about 1 km away from the emitter.  
Moreover, it stores the energy and gives enough power 
for the emission and to switch between emission and 
reception modes. The solution adopted is specially adapted 
to the FFR transducers and is able to feed the transducer 
with high amplitude short signals (a few ms) with arbitrary 
waveform. It has as well the capacity of acquiring the 
received signal. The diagram of the board prototype is 
shown in Figure 6. It consists of three parts: the 
communication and control which contains the micro-
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

controller dsPIC (blue part), the emission part constituted by 
the digital amplification plus the transducer impedance 
matching (red part) and the reception part (green part). In 
the reception part a relay controlled by the dsPIC switches 
the mode and feeds the signal from the transducer to the 
receiving board of the positioning system. 
 
Figure 2: Transmitting Voltage Response of the FFR hydrophones. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Receiving Voltage Response of the FFR hydrophones.  
 
The SEB has been designed for low-power consumption 
and it is adapted to the neutrino infrastructure using power 
supplies of 12 V and 5 V with a consumption of 1 mA and 
100 mA respectively, furnished by the electronic of the 
neutrino telescope. To avoid initial high currents, there is a 
current limit of 15 mA when the capacitor starts to charge, 
but few seconds later the current stabilizes at 1 mA. With 
this, a capacitor with a very low equivalent series resistance 
and 22mF of capacity is charged allowing storing the energy 
for the emission. The charge of this capacitor is monitored 
using the input of the ADC of the micro-controller. 
Moreover, the output of the micro-controller is connected 
through 2x Full Mosfet Driver and a MOSFET full bridge; 
this is successively connected at the transformer with a 
frequency and duty cycle programmed through the micro-
controller. The transformer is able to convert the voltage of 
the input signal of 24Vpp to an output signal of about 
500Vpp. 
 
 
Figure 4: Transmitting Voltage Response of the FFR hydrophones. 
 
 
Figure 5: Receiving Voltage Response of the FFR hydrophones. 
 
Besides, concerning the reception part of the board, the 
board has the possibility to directly apply an anti-aliasing 
filter and return the signal to an ADC of the microcontroller.  
This functionality may be very interesting not only in 
the frame of the neutrino telescopes, but also to have the 
receiver implemented in different underwater applications, 
such as affordable sonar systems or echo-sounds. 
 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

2X FULL 
MOSFET BRIDGE
TRANSFORMER 
& Impedance 
Matching
RELAY
TRANSDUCER
MOLEX 6
ACUBOARD
MOLEX 6
dsPIC
33FJ256MC710
M
C
CAPACITOR
22mF
Low Sr
12V / RS232
MOLEX 4
SP233ACT
TRANSCEIVER
LVDS trigger
MOLEX 8
FRAM
FM25H20
 
 
Figure 6:  View and diagram of the Sound Emission Board. 
 
The micro-controller contains the program for the 
emission of the signals and all the parts of control of the 
board. The carry frequency of the emission signal is 400 
kHz and has tested up to 1-1.25MHz. The signal modulation 
is done with Pulse-Width Modulation technique which 
permits the emission of arbitrary intense short signals [14].  
The basic idea of this technique is to modulate the signal 
digitally at a higher frequency using different width of 
pulses and the lower frequency signal is recovered using a 
low-pass filter. In addition, it will have an increase in the 
amplitude of the signal using a full H-Bridge. The 
communication of the board with the PC is established 
through the standard protocol RS232 using an adapter 
SP233 in the board. In order to have very good timing 
synchronization the emission is triggered using a LVDS 
signal.   
In summary, the board, designed for an easy integration 
in neutrino telescope infrastructures, can be configured from 
shore and can emit arbitrary intense short signals or act as 
receiver with very good timing precision (the measured 
latency is 7 µs with a stability better than 1 µs), as shown in 
the joint tests of the INFN-CNRS-UPV acoustic positioning 
system for KM3NeT [15].  
 
III. 
LABORATORY TESTS OF THE TRANSCEIVER  
The transceiver has been tested in the laboratory and it 
has been integrated in the instrumentation line of the 
ANTARES neutrino telescope for the in situ tests. Next, we 
describe briefly the activities and results of these tests.  
The measurement tests in the laboratory have been 
performed firstly in a tank of 87.5 x 113 x 56.5 cm3 with 
fresh-water, and secondly in a pool of 6.3 m length, 3.6 m 
width and 1.5 m depth. We have tested the system using the 
FFR hydrophone over-molded and the SEB. The molding of 
the transducer has been done by McArtney-EurOceanique 
SAS which over-molded completely the back of the 
transducer. Moreover, 10 meters of the cable type 4021 has 
been molded onto free issued hydrophones plus one 
connector type OM2M with its locking sleeves type DLSA-
M/F. The moldings are done in polyurethane, the connector 
body in neoprene and the locking sleeve is in plastic.  
Besides, some changes in the SEB board have been done 
to integrate the system in the ANTARES neutrino telescope 
and to test the system in situ at 2475 m depth. For simplicity 
and limitations in the instrumentation line, it was decided to 
test the transceiver only as emitter, the functionality as 
receiver will be tested in other in situ KM3NeT tests. The 
changes done in the SEB are the following: to eliminate the 
reception part, to adapt the RS232 connection to RS485 
connection and to implement the instructions to select the 
kind of signals to emit matching the procedures of the 
ANTARES DAQ system.  
To test the system we have used the transceiver in 
different emission configurations in combination with 
omnidirectional transducers, models ITC-1042 and a 
calibrated RESON-TC4014, used as emitter and receiver 
respectively. Different signals have been used (tone burst, 
sine sweeps, MLS signals, etc.) to see the performance of the 
transducer under different situations.  
Figure 7 shows the Transmitting Acoustic Power of the 
transceiver as a function of the frequency (measured in the 
plane XY, that is, in the perpendicular of the axis of the 
transducer). The Transmitting Acoustic Power of the 
transceiver as a function of the angle (directivity pattern) 
using a 30 kHz short tone burst signal (measured in the plane 
XZ, 0 º corresponds to the direction opposite to cables) is 
shown in Figure 8.  
 
 
Figure 7: Transmitting Acoustic Power of the transceiver. 
 
If we compare the Receiving and Transmitting Voltage 
Response of the FFR over-molded with the FFR without 
over-molding a loss of ~1-2 dB is observed. Figures 7 and 8 
show that the results for the transmitting acoustic power in 
the 20-50 kHz frequency range is in the 165-173 dB re. 
1μPa@1m range, in agreement with the electronics design 
and the specifications needed. Despite this, acoustic 
transmitting power may be considered low in comparison 
with the ones used in Long Base Line positioning systems, 
which usually reach values of 180 dB re. 1μPa@1m, the use 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

of longer signals in combination with a broadband frequency 
range and signal processing techniques will allow us to 
increase the signal-to-noise ratio, and having an acoustic 
positioning system with about 1 µs accuracy (~ 1.5 mm) over 
distances of about 1 km, using less acoustic power, that is, 
minimizing the acoustic pollution. 
 
 
Figure 8: Transmitting Acoustic Power of the transceiver. 
 
 
 
IV. 
INTEGRATION IN THE ANTARES NEUTRINO TELESCOPE 
The system tested was finally integrated in the active 
anchor of the Instrumentation Line of ANTARES through 
the Laser Container used for timing calibration purposes. In 
fact, a new functionality for the microcontroller was 
implemented (to control the laser emission as well). The 
FFR hydrophone was fixed in the base of the line at 50 cm 
from the standard emitter transducer of the ANTARES 
positioning system with the free area of the hydrophone 
looking upwards. It has been fixed through a support of 
polyethylene designed and produced at the Instituto de 
Física Corpuscular, Valencia (Spain). The SEB was located 
inside a titanium container holding other electronic parts 
and the laser. Figures 9 and 10 show some pictures of the 
final integration of the system in the anchor of the 
Instrumentation 
Line 
of 
ANTARES. 
Finally, 
the 
Instrumentation Line was successfully deployed at 2475 m 
depth on 7th June 2011 at the nominal target position. The 
connection of the Line to the Junction Box will be in 
autumn 2011, when the ROV will be available, and 
afterwards the transceiver will be fully tested in real 
conditions. 
V. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
We have discussed the needs of the acoustic positioning 
system in underwater neutrino telescopes, and presented the 
acoustic transceiver developed at UPV for the positioning 
system of KM3NeT. We have shown the results of the tests 
and measurements done to the FFR hydrophones and to the 
SEB associated, concluding that the transceiver proposed 
can be a good solution with the requirements and accuracy 
needed for such a positioning system. The transceiver, with 
low power consumption, is able to have a transmitting 
power above 170 dB ref. 1μPa@1m that combined with 
signal processing techniques allows to deal with the large 
distances involved in a neutrino telescope. Moreover, the 
changes performed in the transceiver, particularly in the 
SEB, show the capacity to adapt the electronic parts to the 
situation and available conditions. 
 
 
Figure 9: Picture of the anchor of the Instrumentation Line of ANTARES 
with the final integration of the transceiver. 
 
The system has been integrated in the ANTARES 
neutrino telescope and now, we are waiting for the 
connection of the Instrumentation Line to test the transceiver 
in situ.  
Finally, we would like to remark that the acoustic 
system proposed is compatible with the different options for 
the receiver hydrophones proposed for KM3NeT and it is 
versatile, so in addition to the positioning functionality, it 
can be used for acoustic detection of neutrinos studies or for 
bioacoustic monitoring of the sea.  
Moreover, the transceiver (with slight modification) may 
be used in other marine positioning systems, alone or 
combined with other marine systems, or integrated in 
different Earth-Sea Observatories, where the localization of 
the sensors is an issue. In that sense, the experience gained 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

from this research can be of great use for other possible 
applications. 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Views of the FFR hydrophone with the support and of the 
titanium laser container that contains the SEB. 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work has been supported by the Ministerio de 
Ciencia e Innovación (Spanish Government), project 
references FPA2009-13983-C02-02, ACI2009-1067, AIC10-
00583, Consolider-Ingenio Multidark (CSD2009-00064). It 
has 
also 
been 
funded 
by 
Generalitat 
Valenciana, 
Prometeo/2009/26, and the European 7th Framework 
Programme, grant no. 212525. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] The KM3NeT Collaboration, KM3NeT Technical Design 
Report 
(2010) 
ISBN 
978-90-6488-033-9, 
available 
on www.km3net.org. 
[2] M. Ageron et al.(ANTARES Collaboration), ANTARES: the 
first undersea neutrino telescope, Nucl. Instr. And Meth. A, 
vol. 656, 2011, pp. 11-38. 
[3] M. Ardid, ANTARES: An Underwater Network of Sensors 
for Neutrino Astronomy and Deep-Sea Research, Ad Hoc & 
Sensor Wireless Networks, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 21-34. 
[4] C. Bigongiari, The KM3NeT project for a Very Large 
Submarine Neutrino Telescope, Ad Hoc & Sensor Wireless 
Networks, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 119-140. 
[5] J.A. Aguilar et al., Time calibration of the ANTARES 
neutrino telescope, Astropart. Phys. 34 (2011) 539. 
[6] M. Ardid, Positioning system of the ANTARES neutrino 
telescope, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A, vol. 602, 2009, pp. 174-
176. 
[7] S. Toscano et al., Time calibration and positioning for 
KM3NeT, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A, vol. 602, 2009, pp. 183-
186. 
[8] F. Ameli et al., R&D for an innovative acoustic positioning 
system for the KM3NeT neutrino telescope, Nucl. Instr. and 
Meth. A, vol. 626-627, 2011, pp. S211-S213. 
[9] M. Ardid et al., R&D towards the acoustic positioning system 
of KM3NeT, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A, vol. 626-627, 2011, 
pp. S214. 
[10] H. Motz, Position calibration for the future KM3NeT 
detector, , Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A, vol. 623, 2010, pp. 402-
404. 
[11] C.H. Sherman and J.L. Butler, Transducers ad Array for 
Underwater Sound, The Underwater Acoustic Series, 
Springer, 2007. 
[12] M. Ardid et al., A prototype for the acoustic triangulation 
system of the KM3NeT deep sea neutrino telescope, Nucl. 
Instr. and Meth. A, vol. 617, 2010, pp. 459-461. 
[13] http://www.sensortech.ca. 
[14] M. Barr, Introduction to Pulse Width Modulation, Embedded 
Systems Programming 14 No. 10, 2001,p. 103. 
[15] F. Simeone et al., Design and first tests of an acoustic 
positioning and detection system for KM3NeT, Nucl. Instr. 
and Meth. A, vol. 662, 2012, pp. S246-S248. 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

