Analysis of Radio Communication Attenuation Using Geoprocessing Techniques
Mehdi Mekni
Department of Computer Science
Sherbrooke University
Sherbrooke, Canada
mmekni@gmail.com
Bernard Moulin
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Laval University
Quebec, Canada
bernard.moulin@ift.ulaval.ca
Abstract—Multi-Agent Geo-Simulation (MAGS) aims to sim-
ulate phenomena involving a large number of autonomous
situated actors (implemented as software agents) evolving and
interacting within a Virtual representation of the Geographic
Environment (VGE). A radio communication system is a
typical complex dynamic phenomena where transmitter and
receiver antennas are constantly constrained by the physical
environment in which it they are deployed. In the real world,
radio transmissions are subject to propagation effects which
deeply affect the received signals because of geographic and
environmental characteristics (foliage and vegetation, buildings,
mountains and hills, etc.). Using geoprocessing techniques, we
propose an automated approach to build semantically-informed
and geometrically-accurate virtual geographic environments
which uses Geographic Information System (GIS) data and
builds an informed graph-based structure called Informed Vir-
tual Geographic Environment (IVGE). In addition, we propose
a multi-agent prototype to analyze the attenuation effect due
to the radio signal’s traversal between antennas (simulated as
software agents) through terrain shape, vegetation area, and
buildings using a 3D line-of-sight computation technique.
Keywords-Informed Virtual Geographic Environment (IVGE);
Radio Signal Propagation; Line-Of-Sight; Multi-Agent Geo-
Simulation (MAGS).
I. INTRODUCTION
During the last decade, the Multi-Agent Geo-Simulation
(MAGS) approach has attracted a growing interest from
researchers and practitioners to simulate phenomena in
a variety of domains including trafﬁc simulation, crowd
simulation, urban dynamics, and changes of land use and
cover, to name a few [2]. Such approaches are used to
study phenomena (i.e., car trafﬁc, mobile robots, mobile
networks, crowd behaviours, etc.) involving a large number
of simulated actors (implemented as software agents) of
various kinds evolving in, and interacting with, an explicit
description of the geographic environment called Virtual
Geographic Environment (VGE). Nevertheless, simulating
such autonomous situated agents remains a particularly
difﬁcult issue, because it involves several different research
domains: geographic environment modeling, spatial cogni-
tion and reasoning, situation-based behaviours, etc. When
examining situated agents in a VGE, whether for gaming
or simulations purposes, one of the ﬁrst questions that
must be answered is how to represent the world in which
agents navigate [20]. Since a geographic environment may
be complex and large-scale, the creation of a VGE is difﬁcult
and needs large quantities of geometrical data describing
the environment characteristics (terrain elevation, location of
objects and agents, etc.) [16] as well as semantic informa-
tion that qualiﬁes space (buildings, roads, parks, etc.) [17].
Current approaches usually consider the environment as a
monolithic structure, which considerably limits the way that
large-scale, real world geographic environments and agent’s
spatial reasoning capabilities are handled [13].
Rapid advances in wireless communications have made
mobile data applications a high-growth area of development.
So far, most applications only focus on geographic data
collection and access using geographic information systems.
However, many emergency management applications need
such geographic data in order to ensure that ﬁeld workers
and command center operators collaborate under acceptable
operating conditions [7]. Under emergency conditions, emer-
gency systems need to quickly establish an ad hoc, ground-
level network of radio stations mounted on temporary com-
mand centers, vehicles, or temporary masts, interacting with
moving ﬁeld operators using mobile devices [6].
Radio Frequency (RF) communication does have some
limitations that must be considered. The maximum line-of-
sight range between two shoulder-height devices is limited
to 12km considering the curvature of the earth but not
considering refraction of radio waves. The actual range may
be considerably less depending on transmission power and
receiver sensitivity, and the radio signal can be attenuated or
degraded due to obstruction resulting from its interactions
with features on its transmission path. In an urban envi-
ronment, possible obstructions include buildings, trees, and
bridges for example (Figure 1).
The difﬁculty of evaluating an ad hoc radio network with
hundreds of nodes and various levels of mobility operating
in a complex geographic environment (i.e., rugged terrain,
dense foliage, buildings, etc.) motivated us to use our IVGE
model to analyze communication attenuation. In order to
33
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: Radio signal propagation: (a) an obstruction-free propagation; (b) propagation obstructed by vegetation and foliage;
and (c) propagation obstructed by buildings.
analyze the communication attenuation in real geographic
environments, we propose to virtually reproduce the actual
geographic environment using an automated IVGE gener-
ation approach [12] and leverage its enriched description
to precisely compute the radio transmission’s attenuation.
The radio transmission is computed using the line of sight
between two points located in the IVGE.
In this project, our goal is to analyze the radio commu-
nication attenuation in complex, dynamic and large-scale
geographic environments. In order to achieve such a goal,
a geographic environment model should precisely represent
geographic features. It should also integrate several semantic
notions characterising these geographic features. Since we
deal with large-scale geographic environments, it would be
appreciable to have a VGE organized efﬁciently in order
to reduce the spatial computation algorithms such as line-
of-sight algorithms. There is also a need for autonomous
situated agents representing antennas either transmitters or
receivers which are able to communicate using radio signal
propagation in presence of both static and dynamic obstacles
located in the VGE. Static obstacles correspond to areas that
affect radio signal propagation such as walls, fences, trees,
rivers, etc. Static obstacles also include obstructions result-
ing from terrain elevation (mountains, hills, etc.). Dynamic
obstacles correspond to moving or stationary antennas which
may interfere with the radio communication system.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to model
and simulate radio communication networks using multi-
agent systems evolving in and interacting with a virtual
geographic environments. The rest of the paper is organized
as follows: in Section II, we provide a brief overview on
related work in the ﬁeld of environment representation and
analysis of radio communications. Section III presents our
methodology for the creation of informed virtual geographic
environments. Section IV highlights the unique properties
of our IVGE model which easily and efﬁciently enable
spatial reasoning algorithms and geometrical computations
such as line-of-sight computation. Section V details the radio
communication analysis tool. Finally, Section VI concludes
and presents our perspectives.
II. RELATED WORKS
In this section, we provide a brief overview of prior works
related to environment representation, and analysis of radio
communications in virtual environments.
A. Environment Representation
Virtual environments and spatial representations have
been used in several application domains. For example,
Thalmann et al. proposed a virtual scene for virtual hu-
mans representing a part of a city for graphic animation
purposes [5]. Donikian et al. proposed a modelling system
which is able to produce a multi-level data-base of virtual
urban environments devoted to driving simulations [9]. Ali et
al. used a multi-agent geo-simulation approach to simulate
customers’ behaviours in shopping malls [1]. More recently,
Shao et al. proposed a virtual environment representing
the New York City’s Pennsylvania Train Station populated
by autonomous virtual pedestrians in order to simulate the
movement of people [16]. However, since the focus of
these approaches is computer animation and virtual reality,
the virtual environment usually plays the role of a simple
background scene in which agents mainly deal with geo-
metric characteristics. Indeed, the description of the virtual
environment is often limited to the geometric level, though
it should also contain topological and semantic information
for other types of applications. Therefore, most interactions
between agents and the environment are usually simple, only
permitting to plan a path in a 2D or 3D world with respect
to free space and obstacle regions [4].
34
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

B. Analysis of Radio Communications
Signal specialists currently have limited capabilities for
predicting radio performance in complex geographic envi-
ronments that may involve jammers and may have combina-
tions of open terrain and obstructed locations [6]. Foliated
areas, buildings, or terrain may cause obstructions to the
radio line-of-sight path [7]. Therefore, there is a need for
a communication analysis tool that helps ﬁll this void. We
propose to use geoprocessing techniques in order to build a
tool for the analysis of radio communications attenuation in-
volving a geometrically-accurate and semantically-informed
virtual geographic environment model. This tool is an easy
to use, stand-alone, GUI-based application that runs on a PC
and provides a rich set of functionalities to aid the user to
compute the total path loss of a given operational scenario
that is directly coupled to an operational area using reliable
GIS data.
This tool enables the user to plan radio deployments and
determine link connectivity using actual radio parameters,
taking into account the presence of obstacles, while ac-
counting for the excess attenuation due to terrain, foliage
(vegetation), and building obstructions. To compute the total
path loss, our tool uses the following parameters: height
of transmitter antenna (meters), height of receive antenna
(meters), transmitter antenna position (x, y, z), receiver
antenna position (x, y, z), and frequency of operation (GHz).
III. COMPUTATION OF IVGE DATA
In this section, we present our automated approach to
compute the IVGE data directly from vector GIS data.
This approach is based on four stages which are detailed
in this section (Figure 2): input data selection, spatial
decomposition, maps uniﬁcation, and ﬁnally, the generation
of the informed topologic graph.
GIS Input Data Selection: The ﬁrst step of our ap-
proach consists of selecting the different vector data sets
which are used to build the IVGE. The only restriction
concerning these data sets is that they must respect the same
scale. The input data can be organized into two categories.
First, elevation layers contain geographical marks indicating
absolute terrain elevations. As we consider 2.5D IVGE, a
given coordinate cannot have two different elevations, mak-
ing it impossible to represent tunnels for example. Multiple
elevation layers can be speciﬁed, and if this limitation is
respected, the model can merge them automatically. Second,
semantic layers are used to qualify various types of data
in space. Each layer indicates the physical or virtual limits
of a given set of features with identical semantics in the
geographic environment, such as roads or buildings. The
limits can overlap between two layers, and our model is
able to merge the information.
Figure 2: The four stages to obtain an IVGE from
GIS data. All the stages are automatic but the ﬁrst.
Spatial Decomposition: The second step consists of
obtaining an exact spatial decomposition of the input data
into cells. This process is entirely automatic using Delaunay
triangulation, and can be divided into two parts in relation
to the previous phase. First, an elevation map is computed,
corresponding to the triangulation of the elevation layers.
All the elevation points of the layers are injected into
a 2D triangulation, the elevation being considered as an
attribute of each node. This process produces an environ-
ment subdivision composed of connected triangles. Such a
subdivision provides information about coplanar areas: the
elevation of any point inside a triangle can be deduced
by using the elevation of the three original data points to
form a plane. Second, a merged semantics map is computed,
corresponding to a constrained triangulation of the semantic
layers. Indeed, each segment of a semantic layer is injected
as a constraint which keeps track of the original semantic
data by using an additional attribute for each semantic
layer. The obtained map is then a constrained triangulation
merging all input semantics. Each constraint represents as
many semantics as the number of input layers containing it.
Merging Elevation and Semantics Layers: The third
step to obtain our IVGE consists of unifying the two maps
previously obtained. This phase can be depicted as mapping
the 2D merged semantic map onto the 2.5D elevation map
in order to obtain the ﬁnal 2.5D elevated merged semantics
map. First, preprocessing is carried out on the merged
semantics map in order to preserve the elevation precision
inside the uniﬁed map. Indeed, all the points of the elevation
map are injected into the merged semantics triangulation,
creating new triangles. This ﬁrst process can be dropped
if the elevation precision is not important. Then, a second
process elevates the merged semantics map. The elevation
of each merged semantics point P is computed by retrieving
35
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

the corresponding triangle T inside the elevation map, i.e.,
the triangle whose 2D projection contains the coordinates
of P. Once T is obtained, the elevation is simply computed
by projecting P on the plane deﬁned by T using the Z axis.
When P is outside the convex hull of the elevation map then
no triangle can be found and the elevation cannot be directly
deduced. In this case, we use the average height of the points
of the convex hull which are visible from P.
Informed Topologic Graph: The resulting uniﬁed map
now contains all the semantic information of the input layers,
along with the elevation information. This map can be used
as an Informed Topologic Graph (ITG), where each node
corresponds to the map’s triangles, and each arc corresponds
to the adjacency relations between these triangles. Then,
common graph algorithms can be applied to this topological
graph, and graph traversal algorithms in particular. One of
these algorithms retrieves the node, and therefore the trian-
gle, corresponding to given 2D coordinates. Once this node
is obtained, it is possible to extract the data corresponding
to the position, such as the elevation from the 2.5D triangle,
and the semantics from its additional attributes. Several other
algorithms can be applied, such as path planning or graph
abstraction, but they are out of the scope of this paper and
will not be detailed here.
IV. PROPERTIES OF INFORMED VGE
The subdivision of space into convex cells allows us
to preserve the original geometric deﬁnition of the geo-
graphic environment, unlike the grid-based representations
that discretise the environment. Furthermore, the proposed
data reorganization produces triangles that feature good
properties: convexity which facilitates the geometric cal-
culations; support of heterogeneous geometric constraints
(points, segments, polygons); Since each constraint is linked
to its nearest neighbor, it is easy to compute the widths of
the bottlenecks in the virtual geographic environments. The
width computation corresponds to the minimum of borders’
width that are not qualiﬁed as obstacle.
The subdivision of space into convex cells also allows
us to extract an informed topologic graph of the envi-
ronment featuring relatively few nodes compared to grid-
type representations. Additionally, the triangulation is not
dependent on a ﬁxed spatial scale for the environment, but
only on its complexity (number of constrained segments).
It should also be emphasized that curved geometries will
produce a lot of triangles since they are represented by
a large number of constrained segments. However, since
the produced triangulation is represented as a graph, it is
possible to abstract it in order to reduce the number of
elements. All these properties are of interest to address the
issue of line-of-sight computation.
A. Line of Sight’s Computation
The spatial subdivision provides a structure of convex
cells which facilitates and accelerates the calculation of ray
tracing in three dimensions. We deﬁne the radius α using
the following information: the position of the origin p; the
direction vector
→
d ; and the maximum distance considered.
Let Get free(Cell) and Getconstrained(Cell) be two functions
returning respectively the list of free (Sfree) and constrained
(Sconst) borders bounding the convex cell Cell. Let N(Cell,b)
be a function returning the normal vector to the border b
which belongs to the cell Cell and directed towards the
inside of the cell. Finally let us note ℘(β) the 2X2 rotation
matrix of
→
d . The test checking if there is an intersection
between the ray and the border b, which links the vertices
I and J, is performed using the following expression [11]:
Φ∧[θ·(I − p))×θ·(J − p)))] ≤ 0
(1)
Where Φ is detailed in equation 2 and θ in equation 3
Φ = ⃗d ·N(Cell,b) ≤ 0
(2)
θ =
I +J
2
− p

×℘
π
2

(3)
The line of sight computation algorithm proceeds as
follows:
• Step 1: the cell Cell containing the source of the line
of sight vector ⃗
LoS is determined.
• Step 2: an intersection test is performed between
→
LoS
and each border b of Cell.
• Step 3: compute S free(Cell) using Get free(Cell) and
Sconst(Cell) using Getconstrained(Cell).
• Step 4: if no intersection is found with borders from
Sfree(Cell), then
→
LoS must intersect with a border from
Sconst(Cell).
• Step 5: the border b is pushed back to the list of borders
crossed by ⃗
LoS.
• Step 6: the cell Cell is pushed back to the list of cells
crossed by ⃗
LoS.
• Step 7: the cell sharing the border b which intersects
with ⃗
LoS becomes the current cell. Proceed to Step 2.
The line of sight algorithm, due to its low computational
cost, can be extensively used in MAGS involving a large
number of agents evolving in a complex IVGE.
V. ANALYSIS OF RADIO COMMUNICATION
Planning communications links requires the ability to
assess the performance of each link in the presence of a num-
36
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

ber of degrading factors. In addition to the normal free space
signal attenuation loss, other losses reduce the signal level.
These additional losses can be caused by obstructions such
as buildings and vegetation (foliage). Analyzing obstruction
losses can be difﬁcult because of the geometric, topologic,
and semantic characteristics of the geographic environment
and the need for path loss models.
We use our ray-tracing algorithm to determine the path
that a radio signal takes to arrive at the receiver’s posi-
tion from a given transmitter within our 3D IVGE. We
model transmitters and receivers as inﬁnitesimally small
points such that paths are computed precisely and cannot
be duplicated or missed as sometimes could happen in
the approximate approach [15]. Obviously, our ray-tracing
algorithm is more precise and reliable. Our approach com-
putes the total source-to-destination path length and then,
determines whether the vector deﬁned by the source and
destination points (locations in the IVGE) passes through
an obstruction area. Doing so, it is able to compute the
total path loss between transmitter and receiver antennas.
One of three cases may occur: 1) Obstruction-Free Path:
Vector does not penetrate any obstruction; 2) Obstruction
Block Penetration: Vector penetrates one or more foliage
obstruction blocks and/or one or more building obstruction
blocks; and 3) Ground Penetration: Vector penetrates the
ground (earth) once or several times.
Figure 3: Computation of the ray tracing: the radio
signal propagation path (blue), free space (grey),
building (green), and vertices representing the inter-
section locations (light blue).
The computations performed by our tool to quantify the
path attenuation for each of the three cases deﬁned above
are based on the following mathematical models described
in [3].
Plane-Earth Attenuation Model: Let Lp be the path
attenuation using the plane-Earth model (dB):
Lp = 40Log(D)−20Log(Ht)−20Log(Hr)
(4)
where D is the total source-to-destination path length (me-
ters), and Ht and Hr are the heights of the transmitter and
receiver antennae above ground level, respectively (meters).
Free-Space Attenuation Model: Let Lfs be the path
attenuation using the Free-Space model (dB):
Lfs = 32.45+20Log(D)+20Log(f)
(5)
where D is the total source-to-destination path length
(meters) and f is the RF frequency (GHz).
Obstruction Block Penetration Model: Let LB be the
path attenuation term due to propagation through a building
obstruction block (dB) [14]:
LB = K1(0.6)f +K2DB
(6)
where f is the RF frequency (GHz), K1 is a constant used
to map the ﬁrst expression above to building penetration
data reported in [3]. K1 = 35; K2 is a constant to account
for the attenuation (per meter) of the signal within the
building. K2 = 1 (dB/m); and DB is the distance that the
signal propagates through the building (meters).
The ﬁrst term in Equation 6 accounts for the penetration
into and out of the building by the signal and was derived
from data reported in [3] using a regression analysis tech-
nique. The second term in the equation above accounts for
the attenuation through the building and is based on data
reported by Willassen in [19].
Foliage obstruction Attenuation Model: If the pen-
etration is through a foliage obstruction block, the tool
computes an excess path attenuation term called Lf using
the Wiessberger model [18] as follows:
Lf = 1.33 f 0.284.D0.588
f
,14 < D f
(7)
Lf = 0.45 f 0.284.D1.0
f ,
0 ≤ D f ≤ 14m
(8)
where D f
is the distance that the signal propagates
through the foliage obstruction (meters) and f is the RF
frequency (GHz).
The term ’excess attenuation’ refers to the additional
attenuation above the basic transmission loss, for a given
path length, in the absence of foliage. Our analysis approach
applies equations 4 to 8 to calculate the basic transmission
loss for the link. Thus, the total path attenuation for the
obstruction penetration case called Ltotal is calculated as
follows:
Ltotal = max(Lp,Lfs)Def f +sum(Lf )+sum(LB)
(9)
37
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

Figure 4: Simulation of radio communications’ attenuation; yellow lines correspond to obstacle-free line-of-sight radio signal
propagation; red lines correspond to obstructed line-of-sight; (1) represents the transmitter antenna implemented using the
agent paradigm; (2) an example of a plane-earth obstruction; (3) an example of a block-penetration obstruction.
where max(Lp,L fs)De f f means that this term is calculated
at De f f; De f f is the effective path length over which
the Plane-Earth and Free-Space path attenuation model is
applied and is equal to the total path length minus the
sum of the building obstruction block path length segments
or sum(DB); sum(Lf ) is the sum of the excess attenua-
tion terms in dB due to signal propagation through the
foliage obstruction block(s) (dB); and sum(LB) is the sum
of the path attenuation terms due to propagation through
the building obstruction block(s) (dB). Figure 4 illustrates
the agent-based simulation tool that we developed in order
to implement our approach to analyze the radio signal
attenuation in informed virtual geographic environments.
This ﬁgure presents a snapshot of the simulation at time t0
with an agent representing a transmitter antenna and several
agents representing receiver antennae.
VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Using reliable GIS data along with the line of sight
algorithm (ray tracing feature) provided by our IVGE allows
the system to compute the exact locations of intersections
occurring between the radio signal propagation path and the
terrain shape (Figure 4). Our IVGE also allows us to collect
the list of cells crossed by the radio signal propagation path.
In addition, using the semantic information associated with
these cells, we are able to determine which analytical model
to apply in order to precisely compute the path loss.
We have shown a tool that leverages the enriched descrip-
tion of the IVGE and computes the radio signal attenuation
due to buildings, foliage and ﬁeld obstructions. However,
other phenomena can also degrade the radio signal trans-
mission. Examples of such phenomena include transmitter
power, receiver sensitivity, and radio signal’s absorption,
reﬂection, and scattering from interaction with features on
or near its transmission path. These phenomena should
be taken into account when computing the radio signal
attenuation in order to predict anticipated communications
network connectivity and performance data. To this end,
the agent models representing the transmitters and receivers
antennae should be improved in order to take into account
the antenna sensitivity. Moreover, the computation of the
signal propagation should also take into account absorption,
reﬂection and scattering phenomena.
In the future, we propose to extend our tool in order
to integrate an advanced ray-tracing process [10], which
combines both the geometric optics and the geometric theory
of diffraction (GTD). Moreover, we propose to include the
uniform theory of diffraction (UTD) [8] extension to GTD
which removes the inaccuracies close to the incident and
reﬂection boundaries. Since we already carried out in the
ﬁeld measurements of radio signal attenuation within the
metropolitan area of Windsor, Ontario, Canada [6], the next
step is to build the IVGE representing this geographic area
using GIS data and reproduce using our agent-based simula-
tion tool these measurements for validation and calibration
38
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

purposes of our radio signal attenuation model.
To conclude, our geometrically-precise and semantically-
enhanced IVGE enables us to provide wireless network
planners with a tool for the analysis of the communications’
attenuation. In contrast with mathematical models which
only approximate the radio signal attenuation based on a
coarse-grained qualiﬁcation of the geographic environment:
urban, suburban and rural, we compute more precisely the
radio signal propagation path and qualify obstructions in
order to apply the appropriate analytical model.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by the Canadian Network of
Centres of Excellence in Geomatics (GEOIDE), and by
the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
(NSERC) of Canada. M. Mekni beneﬁted from a PhD
scholarship granted by FQRNT (Fonds Québécois de la
Recherche sur la Nature et les Technologies). Authors thank
Dr Phil Graniero, Univ. of Windsor for his advice during
this research.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Ali and B. Moulin. 2D-3D multiagent geosimulation with
knowledge-based agents of customers’ shopping behavior in
a shopping mall. In Spatial Information Theory, pages 445–
458. Elsevier, 2005.
[2] I. Benenson and P. Torrens. Geosimulation: Automata-Based
Modeling of Urban Phenomena. John Wiley and Sons Inc.,
2004.
[3] G. Comparetto, J. Schwartz, N. Schult, and J. Marshall.
A communications analysis tool set that accounts for the
attenuation due to foliage, buildings, and ground effects. In
MILCOM 2003: Proceedings of the Military Communications
Conference, volume 1, pages 1 – 5, Boston, MA, USA,
October 2003.
[4] S. Donikian and S. Paris. Towards embodied and situated
virtual humans. In Motion in Games, pages 51–62, 2008.
[5] N. Farenc, R. Boulic, and D. Thalmann.
An informed
environment dedicated to the simulation of virtual humans
in urban context.
In P. Brunet and R. Scopigno, editors,
Computer Graphics Forum (Eurographics ’99), volume 18(3),
pages 309–318. The Eurographics Association and Blackwell
Publishers, 1999.
[6] P. Graniero.
A spatial analysis of gps availability and
radio data transmission reliability for real-time, wireless gis
updating in urban environments.
Technical report, MEMF
Lab, University of Windsor, Dept. of Earth Sciences, 2004.
[7] P. Graniero and H. Miller.
Real-time, wireless ﬁeld data
acquisition for spatial data infrastructures. In GeoTec Event
2003, Vancouver BC, Canada, March 2003.
[8] R. Kouyouijian and P. .Pathak. A uniform geometric theory
of diffraction for an edge in perfectly conducting surface. In
IEEE, volume 62, pages 1448–1461, 1974.
[9] J.-E. Marvie, J. Perret, and K. Bouatouch. Remote interactive
walkthrough of city models.
In Proceedings of the 11th
Paciﬁc Conference on Computer Graphics and Applications
(PG’03), pages 389–393, Oct. 2003.
[10] R. Matschek.
A geometrical optics and uniform theory
of diffraction based ray tracing optimisation by a genetic
algorithm. Comptes rendus de physique, 6(6):595–603, July
2005.
[11] M. Mekni. Automated Generation of Geometrically-Precise
and Semantically-Informed Virtual Geographic Environments
Populated with Spatially-Reasoning Agents. Dissertation.com,
August 2010.
[12] S. Paris, M. Mekni, and B. Moulin.
Informed virtual
geographic environments: an accurate topological approach.
In The International Conference on Advanced Geographic
Information Systems & Web Services (GEOWS), pages 1 –
6. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2009.
[13] S. Rodriguez, V. Hilaire, S. Galland, and A. Koukam. Holonic
modeling of environments for situated multi-agent systems. In
Environments for Multi-Agent Systems II, pages 18–31. 2006.
[14] J. Schwartz, G. Comparetto, and J. Marshall. The communi-
cations resource planning tool. In Military Communications
Conference, 2003. MILCOM 2003. IEEE, volume 1, pages
227–230, Boston, MA, USA, October 2003.
[15] S. Seidal and T. Rappaport.
Site-speciﬁc propagation pre-
diction for wireless in-building personal communication sys-
tem design.
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
43(4):879–891, 1994.
[16] W. Shao and D. Terzopoulos. Environmental modeling for
autonomous virtual pedestrians. Digital Human Modeling for
Design and Engineering Symposium, 2005.
[17] G. Thomas and S. Donikian. Virtual humans animation in
informed urban environments.
Computer Animation 2000,
pages 112–119, 2000.
[18] M. Weissberger.
An initial critical summary of models
for predicting the attenuation of radio waves by trees.
In
Final Report Electromagnetic Compatibility Analysis Center,
Annapolis, MD., Annapolis, Md, July 1982.
[19] S. Y. Willassen. A method for implementing mobile station
location in GSM. Master’s thesis, Norwegian University of
Techniques and Sciences, 1998.
[20] J. Zhu, J. Gong, H. Lin, W. Li, J. Zhang, and X. Wu. Spatial
analysis services in virtual geographic environment based on
grid technologies.
MIPPR 2005: Geospatial Information,
Data Mining, and Applications, 6045(1):604–615, 2005.
39
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

