Towards Modelling Privacy Risks in Geo-Social Networks
Alia I. Abdelmoty
School of School of Computer Science & Informatics,
Cardiff University, Wales, UK
Email: AbdelmotyAI@cardiff.ac.uk
Abstract—“Social privacy” concerns how individuals manage self-
disclosure, availability, and access to information about them-
selves by other people when using social-driven applications.
To manage social privacy, one needs to understand the level of
threat implied by his information disclosure and be able to relate
it to the scope of visibility granted for this information. This
paper argues that the risk to personal privacy comes from the
implicit information embedded in the relationships between the
different elements of data collected on these networks. A proposal
is made to explicitly represent such relationships and use them to
model the level of threat to personal privacy on these networks.
Exposure of this information will enable users to be aware of
their own data and to make informed decisions on their sharing
behaviour online.
Keywords–Location Privacy; Geo-Social Networks; User Pro-
ﬁles.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The proliferation and affordablity of location tracking-
enabled devices are allowing individuals to accumulate an
increasing amount of personal information, such as their
mobility tracks, geographically tagged photos and events.
Embracing these new location-aware capabilities by social
networks has led to the emergence of Geo-Social Networks
(GeoSNs) that offer their users the ability to geo-reference
their submissions and to share their location with other users.
Subsequently, users can use location identiﬁers to browse
and search for resources. GeoSNs include Location-Enabled
Social Networks (LESNs), for example, Facebook, Twitter,
Instagram and Flickr, where users’ locations are supplementary
identiﬁcation of other primary data sets, and Location-Based
Social Networks (LBSNs), for example, Foursquare and Yelp,
where location is an essential key for providing the service.
In addition to location data that describe the places visited
by users, GeoSNs also records other personal information, such
as user’s friends, reviews and tips, possibly over long periods
of time. User’s historical location information can be related to
contextual and semantic information publicly available online
and can be used to infer personal information and to construct
a comprehensive user proﬁle [1] [2]. Derived information in
such proﬁles can include user activities, interests and mobility
patterns. Users may not be fully aware of what location
information are being collected, how the information are used
and by whom, and hence can fail to appreciate the possible po-
tential risks of disclosing their location information. Methods
of exposing both the explicitly collected and implicitly derived
information from user location are needed to enable users’
awareness, and to allow users to make informed decisions
about sharing their data online.
In this paper, the type of information stored in user proﬁles
on GeoSNs are considered as a folksonomy structure of
user, place and tag entities. A layer of privacy risk levels is
proposed to label the relationships between these entities in the
folksonomy graph, based on the degree of associations between
them. A lot of work has been done recently on exploring
the content of information shared by users on GeoSNs. On
the other hand, a lot of work is ongoing to explore the
privacy threats posed by sharing this information online. In this
paper we combine both lines of research and propose a new
approach to associating the information shared with its possible
privacy risks. By representing the implicit content in the user
proﬁle data, application can help users appreciate the possible
privacy risks associated with their sharing behaviour and thus
allow them to make informed decisions on disclosing their
information. The work presented here is a ﬁrst step towards
building privacy-aware GeoSNs.
An overview of related work is presented in Section II.
In Section III, the geo-folksonomy data model is used to
store the information collected by the GeoSNs. The model
is extended with the proposed privacy levels information. A
framework for a privacy-enabled GeoSN is also presented. In
Section IV, example user proﬁles, deﬁned using the enriched
geo-folksonomy model, are described. Conclusions and an
overview of future work are given in Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK
Signiﬁcant interest is witnessed recently in studying the
value and utility of location information in GeoSNs for the
purpose of user and place proﬁling. Here, we review some
of the methods used for extracting the explicit and implicit
content of the data generated on these networks and some of
the work done on user proﬁling with this information.
Some works utilised publicly available information from
GeoSNs in order to derive or predict users’ location. In [3],
Twitter users’ city-level locations were estimated by exploiting
their tweet contents with which it was possible to predict more
than half of the sample set within 100 miles of their actual
place. Similarly, Pontes et al. [4] examined how much per-
sonal information can be inferred from the publicly available
information of Foursquare users and found the home cities
of more than two-thirds of the sample within 50 kilometres.
Sadilek et al. [5] investigated novel approaches for inferring
users’ location at any given time by knowing the GPS positions
of their friends on Twitter. For almost 84% of users the exact
locations were derived even when setting their location data
as private, where an accuracy of 57% was accomplished by
using information of only two friends.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Sharing location information on GeoSNs can be utilised to
analyse and predict spatiotemporal user behaviour including
their interests, activities, mobility patterns as well as future
movement. Location-Centric Proﬁles (LCPs) are proposed in
[6] that contain aggregated statistics extracted from proﬁles of
users who visited a given location on GeoSNs. These were
provided for the venue owner as a way for monitoring their
business. Vosecky [7] modelled users’ interests shared on mi-
croblogs in relation to their corresponding disclosed locations.
Users’ geographic location from Twitter was extracted from
the locations directly tagged by them or from those mentioned
in their tweets [7]. Users’ geographical regions of interests are
then derived that represent clusters of personal activity.
Rossi and Musolesi [8] proposed and tested three ap-
proaches for identifying users by exploiting their check-in
information on LBSNs, particularly spatiotemporal tracks,
frequency of visit, and users’ social ties. Evaluation results
showed that only a small amount of check-in information was
adequate to identify users with high accuracy, where almost
80% of users were successfully identiﬁed in some datasets.
Zhong et. al. [9] were pioneers in exploiting the predictability
aspect of location check-ins in order to develop location-
to-proﬁle framework that infers demographics of users. In
particular, they derived enriched check-ins’ semantics based on
three main factors, namely, spatiality, temporality and location
knowledge such as customer review sites and social networks.
A series of experiments were carried out on the dataset that
revealed the feasibility of deriving users’ demographics from
their check-in information, where gender and educational back-
ground attributes provided the best outcomes followed by age,
sexual orientation, marital status, blood type and zodiac sign.
More recently, researchers have exploited GeoSNs to explore
the personality aspect by examining the reciprocal relationship
between users and spatiotemporal features. In Chorley et. al.
[10], a study was conducted to understand human behaviour
in terms of examining the relationship between the location
types visited by Foursquare users and their personality. A ﬁve-
factor personality model was proposed and correlations were
observed between the personality traits and Foursquare check-
in attitude.
The above studies show a signiﬁcant potential for deriving
personal information form GeoSNs and the implication of
possible privacy threats to users of these applications. A lot
of work considered methods of user proﬁling with personal
location information collected on GeoSNs, but no works
have yet considered the privacy implications of building such
proﬁles and how to address the threat for the users of these
networks.
III.
THE GEO-FOLKSONOMY MODEL
In this work, we use a folksonomy data model to represent
user-place relationships and derive tag assignments from users’
actions of check-ins and annotation of venues [1]. In particular,
tags are assigned to venues in our data model in two scenarios
as follows.
1) A user’s check-in results in the assignment of place
categories associated with the place as tags annotated by
this user. Thus, a check-in by user u in place r with the
categories (represented as keywords) x, y and z, will be
considered as an assertion of the form (u, r, (x, y, z)).
This in turn will be transformed to a set of triples
{(u, r, x), (u, r, y), (u, r, z)} in the folksonomy.
2) A user’s tip in the place also results in the assignment of
place categories as tags, in addition to the set of keywords
extracted from the tip. Thus, in the above example, a
tip by u in r with the keywords (t1, · · · , tn), will be
considered as an assertion of the form
(u, r, (x, y, z, t1, · · · , tn)), and is in turn transformed to
individual triples between the user, place and tags in the
folksonomy.
The data collected by the GeoSN can be represented as
a geo-folksonomy, which can be deﬁned as a quadruple F :=
(U, T, R, Y ), where U, T, R are ﬁnite sets of instances of users,
tags and places respectively, and Y deﬁnes a relation, the tag
assignment, between these sets, that is, Y ⊆ U × T × R.
A geo-folksonomy can be transformed into a tripartite
undirected graph, which is denoted as folksonomy graph GF.
A geo-Folksonomy Graph GF = (VF, EF) is an undirected
weighted tripartite graph that models a given folksonomy
F, where: VF = U ∪ T ∪ R is the set of nodes, EF =
{{u, t}, {t, r}, {u, r}|(u, t, r) ∈ Y }} is the set of edges, and
a weight w is associated with each edge e ∈ EF.
The weight associated with an edge {u, t}, {t, r} and
{u, r} corresponds to the co-occurrence frequency of the
corresponding nodes within the set of tag assignments Y . For
example, w(t, r) = |{u ∈ U : (u, t, r) ∈ Y }| corresponds to
the number of users that assigned tag t to place r.
A. Privacy-oriented Geo-Folksonomy Model
Here, a possible model is proposed of the levels of privacy
threats with respect to the user geo-proﬁle. Two variables
contribute to the level of threat to user’s privacy on social
networks, namely, the amount and content of the disclosed
information, and the visibility scope of this information. Here,
we focus on the data content and isolate the visibility variable,
i.e. we assume that all data in a user proﬁle is available to
potential adversaries. This is not an unreasonable assumption
given that the application owns all the user data sets it collects.
The scope of visibility can be used to control access to user’s
data in a privacy-oriented system design, which is the subject
of future work.
With respect to data content, the level of risk to personal
privacy can be quantitatively assessed using the amount of data
disclosed by the user; the level of risk is directly proportional
to the amount of data disclosed. The more data stored about
the user’s spatio-temporal history, the more inferences that can
be made in the proﬁle. Data have three explicit dimensions:
spatial, social and temporal. Reasoning with the relationships
between these dimensions can result in the inference of implicit
personal information that the user may not have wished to
disclose. For example, reasoning along the spatio-temporal
dimension can reveal patterns of presence or absence from
places and the degree of attachments to place, etc. An abstract
”trafﬁc-light” model is proposed here to communicate the level
of risk to user’s privacy on GeoSNs. Three levels are deﬁned
as follows.
•
Green: safe to disclose the information,
•
Amber: caution; disclosing the information can result
in moderate privacy implications, and,
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

•
Red: danger; disclosing the information can result in
risky privacy implications.
The levels are mapped to the degree of association computed
between the entities in the geo-folksonomy, namely, between
different entities (user and place, user and tag, place and tag),
as well as between similar entities (a user and other users,
place and other places, and tags). The familiar “trafﬁc light”
metaphor is used to enable a quick and accurate interpretation
of the communicated information to users.
Every edge e in the geo-folksonomy graph is given a
privacy label vc = Green|Amber|Red, that is a function
of the pre-assigned weight on the edge. Thus, for example,
vc(t, r) = f(w(t, r)) and vc(u, r) = f(w(u, r)), etc. Note that
as the weights on the edges are dynamic, the labels used can
also change over time. For example, a label may initially be
green, and then can change to amber or red as the frequency of
the user visits to the place increases. Note also that the function
used for assigning the privacy labels can be more realistically
deﬁned by considering the pattern of association in addition to
the frequency. For example, a periodic tag assignment by the
user is more revealing of the user’s behaviour than a random
assignment for the same frequency.
Figure 1 depicts the overall process of user proﬁle creation.
The process starts with data collection of check-ins and tip
data from the GeoSN, that are then processed to extract users,
places and tags and their associated properties. The modelling
stage includes the deﬁnition of relationships between the three
entities and the computation of weights on the edges of the
folksonomy graph using co-occurence methods. The privacy-
level detection module takes the folksonomy graph as input
and computes the privacy levels for all the edges in the graph.
The enriched folksonomy graph is then used to create the
different user proﬁles. The user similarity module uses the
generated proﬁle to compute similarity vectors for users in the
data set. The privacy notiﬁcation and feedback module uses
the generated privacy levels to present the data to the user
through the user interface.
IV.
PRIVACY-AWARE USER GEO-PROFILES
The geo-folksonomy can be used to represent a user’s
spatial and semantic association with place. A spatial user
proﬁle represents the user’s interest in places, while a tag-based
proﬁle describes his association with concepts associated with
places in the folksonomy model. Similarity between users can
be measured on the basis of their spatial or semantic proﬁles.
Spatial proﬁles gives a measure of user preferences in places,
while semantic proﬁles, on the other hand, is a conceptual
measure of user interests.
A. Basic User Proﬁles
Spatial User Proﬁle
A spatial user proﬁle PR(u) of a user u is deduced from the
set of places that u visited or annotated directly.
PR(u) ={(r, w(u, r))|(u, t, r) ∈ Y,
w(u, r) = |{t ∈ T : (u, t, r) ∈ Y }|}
w(u, r) is the number of tag assignments, where user u
assigned some tag t to place r through the action of checking-
in or annotation. Hence, the weight assigned to a place simply
corresponds to the frequency of the user reference to the place
Figure 1. Framework of the privacy-enabled GeoSNs.
either by checking in or by leaving a tip. We further normalise
the weights so that the sum of the weights assigned to the
places in the spatial proﬁle is equal to 1. We use PR to
explicitly refer to the spatial proﬁle where the sum of all
weights is equal to 1, with
w(u, r) =
|{t∈T :(u,t,r)∈Y }|
n
P
i=1
m
P
j=1
|{ti∈T :(u,ti,rj)∈Y }|, where n and m are the
total number of tags and resources, respectively. More simply,
w(u, r) = N(u,r)
NT (u) , where N(u, r) is the number of tags used
by u for resource r, while NT (u) is the total number of tags
used by u for all places.
Correspondingly, we deﬁne the tag-based proﬁle of a user;
PT (u) as follows.
Semantic User Proﬁle
A semantic user proﬁle PT (u) of a user u is deduced from
the set of tag assignments linked with u.
PT (u) ={(t, w(u, t))|(u, t, r) ∈ Y,
w(u, t) = |{r ∈ R : (u, t, r) ∈ Y }|}
w(u, t) is the number of tag assignments where user u assigned
tag t to some place through the action of checking-in or
annotation.
PT refers to the semantic proﬁle where the sum of all
weights is equal to 1, with w(u, t) = N(u,t)
NR(u), where N(u, t) is
the number of resources annotated by u with t and NR(u) is
the total number of resources annotated by u.
Temporal versions of the proﬁles can be recorded by con-
sidering snapshots of the geo-folksonomy at different points
in time. For example, a basic spatio-temporal proﬁle can be
represented as follows.
A spatiotemporal (ST) user proﬁle PRtc(u) of a user u
is deduced from the set of places that u visited or annotated
directly.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

(PR(u))tc ={(r, w(u, r)tc)|(u, g, r) ∈ Y,
w(u, r)tc = |{gtc ∈ G : (u, g, r) ∈ Y }|
w(u, r)tc is the number of tag assignments in the time slot
tc, where user u assigned some tag g to place r through the
action of checking-in or annotation.
B. User Proﬁle Example
Here an example is given of a sample user proﬁle created
from the experiment data set used in this work. This user
checked in 600 different venues, with associated 400 venue
categories.
Figure 2 shows the spatial proﬁle for this user. The dots in
the ﬁgure represent the weight assigned to place (representing
the edge between the user and the place) in the proﬁle. Weights
are clustered into 4 equally spaced groups and are mapped to
the three noted privacy levels. A simple function for splitting
the range of levels is used in this case. However, more intel-
ligent methods for identifying this function can be envisaged,
particularly when considering the temporal dimension of the
data.
Figure 2. A sample spatial user proﬁle and the corresponding privacy levels.
V.
CONCLUSION
The proliferation of GeoSNs and the large-scale uptake
by users suggest the urgency and importance of studying
privacy implications of personal information collected by these
networks. User proﬁling is a common method used by online
applications to understand users’s behaviour and preferences
for the purpose of improving their quality of service. However,
information implicit in location-based user proﬁles can reveal
personal information about users that can pose real privacy
risks. This paper highlights the importance of raising users’
awareness of the information they share on GeoSNs. A pro-
posal is made to extend user proﬁles by explicit representation
of the level of risk to personal privacy associated with the
information they contain. It is suggested that the level of threat
is directly related to the strength of association between the
data elements contained in these proﬁles and that a simple
model reﬂecting this degree of association will be helpful in
raising the user awareness of privacy implication of location
disclosure. Future work will consider the following:
•
Evaluating the proposed methods using realistic sam-
ple data sets.
•
Exploring different methods of deﬁning the thresholds
for the deﬁned levels of risk, e.g. by considering the
patterns of association, in addition to the frequency.
•
In-depth treatment of the temporal dimension and how
to represent dynamic change of the proposed model.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Mohamed and A. I. Abdelmoty, “Spatio-semantic user proﬁles in
location-based social networks,” International Journal of Data Science
and Analytics, vol. 4, no. 2, 2017, p. 127142.
[2]
F. Alrayes and A. Abdelmoty, “Privacy concerns in location-based social
networks,” in GEOProcessing 2014: The Sixth International Conference
on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Ser-
vices.
IARIA, 2014, pp. 105–114.
[3]
Z. Cheng, J. Caverlee, and K. Lee, “You are where you tweet: a content-
based approach to geo-locating Twitter users,” in Proceedings of the
19th ACM international conference on Information and Knowledge
Management CIKM ’10, 2010, pp. 759–768.
[4]
T. Pontes, M. Vasconcelos, J. Almeida, P. Kumaraguru, and V. Almeida,
“We know where you live?: privacy characterization of foursquare
behavior,” in UbiComp ’12 Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference
on Ubiquitous Computing, 2012, pp. 898–905.
[5]
A. Sadilek, H. Kautz, and J. Bigham, “Finding your friends and
following them to where you are,” in Proceedings of the ﬁfth ACM
international conference on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’12,
2012, pp. 723–732.
[6]
B. Carbunar, M. Rahman, N. Rishe, and J. Ballesteros, “Private lo-
cation centric proﬁles for geosocial networks,” in Proceedings of the
20th International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems.
ACM, 2012, pp. 458–461.
[7]
J. Vosecky, D. Jiang, and W. Ng, “Limosa: A system for geographic
user interest analysis in twitter,” in Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on Extending Database Technology. ACM, 2013, pp. 709–
712.
[8]
L. Rossi and M. Musolesi, “It’s the way you check-in: identifying users
in location-based social networks,” in Proceedings of the second edition
of the ACM conference on Online social networks.
ACM, 2014, pp.
215–226.
[9]
Y. Zhong, N. J. Yuan, W. Zhong, F. Zhang, and X. Xie, “You are
where you go: Inferring demographic attributes from location check-
ins,” in Proceedings of the Eighth ACM International Conference on
Web Search and Data Mining.
ACM, 2015, pp. 295–304.
[10]
M. J. Chorley, G. B. Colombo, S. M. Allen, and R. M. Whitaker,
“Visiting patterns and personality of foursquare users,” in Cloud and
Green Computing (CGC), 2013 Third International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 271–276.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

