Geospatial Content Services in the Digital Government 
CASE: National Data Exchange Layer in the Finnish National Architecture for Digital Services 
 
Lassi Lehto, Pekka Latvala, Tapani Sarjakoski 
Department of Geoinformatics and Cartography 
Finnish Geospatial Research Institute 
National Land Survey of Finland 
Masala, Finland 
e-mail: lassi.lehto@nls.fi, pekka.latvala@nls.fi, 
tapani.sarjakoski@nls.fi 
Jari Reini 
Department of SDI Services 
Finnish Geospatial Research Institute 
National Land Survey of Finland 
Helsinki, Finland 
e-mail: jari.reini@nls.fi
 
 
Abstract—The long tradition of interoperability solutions for 
geospatial services appears as a challenge when new standards 
are taken into use in the general eGovernment development. 
Well-established geospatial service standards have to be 
adapted to the methods applied in public sector digital 
services. Issues related to this new integration challenge are 
discussed in the context of the newly introduced Finnish 
governmental service interoperability solution called National 
Data Exchange Layer. A project was initiated to investigate, 
how existing INSPIRE-compliant content services could be 
connected to this interoperability framework. Results of the 
pilot project indicate that in addition to the increased 
development burden and degraded service performance, there 
are also opportunities for luring new users to spatial data 
resources.  
Keywords-interoperability; eGovernment; data exchange; 
Web Services. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Governments all over Europe are developing digitalized 
online services for their citizens [1]. The services being 
developed cover functionalities like taxation, applying for 
social benefits or a construction permit, seeking employment 
or checking one’s retirement allowance. As more and more 
services are being introduced, it has become obvious that 
some coordination and standardization is definitely needed. 
Governments have initiated programs aiming at development 
of guidelines and policies that would improve the services 
interoperability. Common software modules are developed in 
a coordinated way to be shared among the services. Common 
content vocabularies and data schemas are being introduced 
in various sectors of public administration. Research efforts 
in this area include for instance the work of Dias and Rafael 
[2] to define open interoperability architecture for 
eGovernment services and Park et al. [3] to introduce a 
metadata standard for public Web resources on national 
level. 
In the spatial data domain, standardization activities have 
already a long history. The work of Open Geospatial 
Consortium (OGC) and ISO Technical Committee 211, 
Geographic Information, are widely known and highly 
respected. The recent upsurge of openness, as exemplified in 
open standards, open data and open source software 
movements, has boosted the development of interoperable, 
network-based solutions for applications dealing with 
geospatial content. Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDIs) have 
been taken into use in several European countries. On the 
Pan-European level, initiatives like the INSPIRE Directive 
[4] are promoting the use of commonly agreed principles in 
the development of geospatial services. 
When the new eGovernment services get widely 
deployed and agencies start to apply common, standardized 
approaches in their service development programs, a new 
question arises: how these developments relate to the 
existing, already well-established SDI platforms? Could the 
spatial data community affect the way the new eGovernment 
service standards are written? Is the spatial dimension taken 
into account in the generic online citizen services? If yes, is 
it done following the already defined spatial domain 
standards or do the spatial domain actors just need to adapt 
their existing services to the principles established in the 
eGovernment standardization? These are some of the new 
questions facing geospatial communities in many European 
countries. In this paper, the issue is discussed in the context 
of 
a 
recently 
introduced 
Finnish 
eGovernment 
interoperability framework, called the National Data 
Exchange Layer (NDEL) [5] and a development project with 
a goal to connect existing INSPIRE-compliant geodata 
services to this framework. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes some of the most important eGovernment 
standardization initiatives and their relation to the existing 
SDIs. Section III introduces the Finnish governmental 
program aimed at streamlining the development of digital 
citizen services. Section IV describes a pilot project testing 
the connection between the existing national SDI and the 
new generic approach for service development. As the 
conclusion, Section V details the main lessons learned in the 
pilot project. 
II. 
EGOVERNMENT INTEROPERABILITY INITIATIVES 
The European Interoperability Framework (EIF) is an 
important Pan-European initiative for facilitating the 
eGovernment service provision across country borders [6]. 
The EIF recommendations stress the importance of adopting 
open standards and jointly agreed dictionaries and data 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

structures in the development of public online services. It 
also points out that the focus in the service development 
should be on ensuring security and user-friendliness. The 
traditional Web Services Publish-Find-Bind pattern is 
supported in the EIF specifications, facilitated by a Service 
Registry component. EIF also points out that the cornerstone 
for 
reliable 
eGovernment 
service 
provision 
is 
the 
establishment of mechanisms for signed, certified, encrypted 
and logged data transport over various different networks. 
According 
to 
the 
INSPIRE 
Network 
Services 
Architecture [7], the EIF has similarities with the designed 
INSPIRE service platform. The EIF initiative aims at the 
development of the so-called PEGSs (Pan-European 
eGovernment Services) that are based on interoperable 
national level services. INSPIRE is based on the same kind 
of architectural approach. However, INSPIRE does not focus 
on Publish-Find-Bind pattern, nor does it define anything 
concerning the data transmission mechanisms. According to 
the INSPIRE Network Services Architecture document, 
INSPIRE services must be adapted to the EIF-specified 
communication platform in the long run. 
The latest of the European eGovernment interoperability 
initiatives is the ISA Programme (Interoperability Solutions 
for European Public Administrations) [8]. The main 
objective of the ISA Programme is to improve cross-border 
and cross-sector interoperability of the national eGovernment 
services to create the digital single market for the EU. The 
new ISA2 Programme will run from 2016 to 2020 as a 
follow-up of the original ISA. 
In the context of ISA, there are actions that aim at 
bridging the gap between traditional spatial data community 
standards and the eGovernment interoperability solutions. 
They include projects like ARE3NA (A Reusable INSPIRE 
Reference Platform) [9] and EULF (European Union 
Location Framework) [10]. One of the objectives of the 
ARE3NA project is to facilitate reuse of INSPIRE-specified 
methods for interoperability outside the traditional geospatial 
community. ARE3NA has worked in areas like provision of 
geospatial data resources as Linked Data, and use of 
Persistent Identifiers (PIDs) to ease the use of spatial datasets 
as a location reference platform. The EULF project aims at 
increasing the use of location information in the 
eGovernment services and promoting the use of INSPIRE 
principles in new thematic areas, like transport, marine and 
energy. EULF will also create guidance on how to 
implement location enabled eGovernment services, and 
contribute to the further development of the EIF. 
III. 
FINNISH EGOVERNMENT INTEROPERABILITY 
A. Backround 
The Finnish Government has started a large cross-
sectorial programme, called National Architecture for Digital 
Services, for coordinated development of public sector 
online services [11]. The initiative is divided in four main 
areas of work: 1. Setting up a common data exchange 
mechanism (NDEL), 2. Developing user interfaces to 
government services for citizens, businesses and civil 
servants, 3. Enabling a common solution for secure 
authentication and single-sign-on in digital public services, 
4. Creating a centralized solution for the management of user 
roles and authorization. 
To establish a common data exchange platform for the 
public sector services, the Finnish Government made an 
agreement with its Estonian counterpart on the use of the 
Estonian X-Road platform for the purpose [12]. X-Road has 
been developed since 2001 in Estonia as the national solution 
for public services interoperability. At the moment it is used 
to access more than 2000 services providing access to 170 
different databases. X-Road is used by half of the Estonian 
population, and close to 300 million requests is made over it 
annually.  
B. XRoad Platform 
X-Road is a decentralized communication and data 
transfer platform based on the Web Services processing 
model. The connections over the X-Road platform are 
facilitated by a special software component, called the X-
Road Security Server. These components actually are 
running on a dedicated server hardware that is strictly 
defined, to ensure the highest possible level of security for 
the platform. Information systems always communicate with 
each other via two Security Servers (see Figure 1). 
There is a centralized component in the system that 
maintains the routing information and is responsible for the 
centralized logging of transactions. However, Security 
Servers can operate independently of the Central Server, as 
they maintain a local copy of all the relevant information. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  X-Road Architecture (CA: Certification Authority, TSA: Time 
Stamping Authority, IS: Information System). 
The X-Road platform is based on traditional Web 
Services technologies. The communication is carried out 
using Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) messages [13]. 
The service interfaces are described using Web Services 
Description Language (WSDL) [14].  
C. National Data Exchange Layer 
In Finland, the Estonian X-Road platform has been taken 
into use mostly unmodified. The few Finnish additions 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

include the so-called REST Gateway module, which 
facilitates the connection of traditional HTTP GET service 
interfaces to the X-Road’s SOAP-based messaging platform. 
A software library has also been created to help the 
developers in building X-Road compatible services. The first 
operative version of the National Data Exchange Layer 
(NDEL) was launched in Nov 2015. A beta version of the 
first user application based on NDEL, the user interface for 
the citizen, was published in Dec 2015. As the first service, it 
provides access to the contents of the national Population 
Information System maintained by the Finnish Population 
Register Centre. 
There are some plans to integrate spatial data and 
services to the NDEL and to the citizen’s user interface. The 
first application would be a map user interface that displays 
locations of public sector service points on top of a 
topographic basemap, provided by the national mapping 
agency, National Land Survey of Finland (NLS). The second 
planned application would allow the citizen access to real 
property information from the Land Information System of 
Finland, maintained by the NLS. Reliable authentication of 
the user becomes a necessity in this context as the access will 
be restricted to the user’s own property units. 
IV. 
PILOT PROJECT 
When the decision was made on the base technology to 
be used in the NDEL, it became necessary to test the 
connection between the already well-established National 
SDI and the X-Road platform. Over the recent years, the 
rapid expansion of the Finnish SDI has been mostly driven 
by the implementation efforts related to the INSPIRE 
Directive. Thus, a project was launched to investigate, how 
INSPIRE services, largely based on the OGC-specified 
interoperability standards, could best be connected to the 
NDEL [15]. The one and a half year project is funded by the 
Finnish Prime Minister’s Office and coordinated by the 
Finnish Geospatial Research Institute (FGI). The project 
consortium includes several public sector organizations 
dealing with geospatial data. 
A. Use Case 
A use case scenario was developed, to build the pilot 
service development on a realistic context. The user story 
behind the scenario is a five-member family planning to buy 
or rent a cottage in the Eastern Finland North Karelia area. A 
mobile client application was developed for the iOS platform 
to demonstrate the use case (Figure 2). As a further aid to 
support exploring of the target location, a Differential GNSS 
(Global Navigation Satellite System) service, provided by 
the FGI and enabling sub-meter positioning accuracies, has 
been connected to the client application. 
B. Content Services 
All the organizations participating in the project provided 
a spatial data service to be connected to the pilot via the 
NDEL. The services offer various data sets that might be of 
interest when considering a target cottage and its 
neighborhoods. The services are listed below, ordered by the 
providing organization. 
• 
The National Land Survey of Finland: Topographic 
Basemap (WMS), property information service from 
the Land Information System (WFS) 
• 
Finnish Meteorological Institute: VIIRS (Visible 
Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite) satellite imagery 
(WMS), average temperature from observation 
stations (WFS) 
• 
Finnish Environmental Institute: lake water quality 
(WMS) 
• 
Natural Resources Institute Finland: forest berry 
crop map (WMS) 
• 
Geological Survey of Finland: surficial deposit map 
(WFS) 
 
Figure 2.  A map view from the mobile client application displaying a 
target cottage plot on top of the topographic basemap and the surficial 
deposit map. 
C. Adapter Services 
So-called Adapter Service is a crucial concept in the X-
Road system architecture (see Figure 1). The task of an 
Adapter Service is to mediate between an existing 
information system and the messaging protocols of the X-
Road platform. In the case of the OGC content services, like 
Web Map Service (WMS) and Web Feature Service (WFS), 
this involves unpacking the service request from inside the 
X-Road’s SOAP messaging envelope and, subsequently, 
packing the resulting data set again into this envelope. 
In the case of the POST WFS queries, the task of the 
OGC service Adapter is rather straightforward as both the 
POST queries and the resulting data set, in the default GML 
encoding, are expressed in the XML format. The Adapter 
Service has to simply retrieve the original XML structure 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

from inside the X-Road SOAP message’s XML envelope 
and, on return, embed the XML message back to the SOAP 
envelope. 
The GET type WFS queries involve a bit more 
consideration. There are many different ways to encode the 
original query string to an XML element structure inside the 
SOAP envelope. The two extreme cases are: (1) The whole 
query string is packed inside a single XML element, (2) All 
query parameters are presented as individual strictly typed 
XML elements, possibly with carefully selected value 
enumerations and meaningful default values. 
The corresponding POST-type query is an obvious 
candidate for modeling the XML structure. However, more 
strict schema can be specified for a given concrete service 
end point, thus making transactions more robust. Case (1) is 
easy to develop and fast to process. However, it does not 
reveal the details of the service interface in the WSDL 
service description. Case (2) is more complicated to build, 
but will ease the development of client side applications, as 
the WSDL can be used as the basis for automated code 
generation, and the exposed value enumerations and default 
values contribute to more reliable communications. 
For the WMS service the situation is quite different. As 
only GET queries are widely supported, the model for the 
query encoding must be selected. However, there is no 
obvious candidate for this. One possible solution is to use the 
XML-encoded GetMap query defined in the Styled Layer 
Descriptor (SLD) specification. 
In the case of the WMS result data set, which is normally 
a raster image, the processing task is more involved. Two 
main approaches are available: the image can be encoded 
and embedded inside the SOAP envelope’s internal element 
structure or it can be sent immediately after the envelope, 
using mechanism called SOAP with attachments. For the 
embedded transmission, the image has to be encoded into 
text. The mostly used encoding scheme is Base64. When 
sent as an attachment, the image can be transmitted in binary 
format. 
In the Finnish pilot project, the WFS messaging has so 
far been performed using the simplest possible approach:  
sending the whole query string inside a single XML element. 
In the case of the WMS Adapter Service, the request is sent 
inside a single XML element and the resulting map image as 
a SOAP with Attachments message. 
If an existing OGC-compliant client application is used 
to make the request, an Adapter Service is also needed on the 
client side. In this case the NDEL works as secure, controlled 
data transfer channel, remaining completely hidden from the 
client and the service. This kind of architecture is shown in 
Figure 3. Initial tests carried out in the project show that 
NDEL used in this way incurs certain level of degradation in 
the query performance. In case of WFS, the query is 1.5 
times slower compared with direct request over public 
Internet, whereas for WMS services this figure is 
approximately 2.5. The reason for slower response times is 
the additional processing required to encapsulate the original 
requests and responses into the SOAP envelope and, in case 
of the WMS map response, the process of transforming the 
map image into the Base64 encoding. Performance tests 
were carried out using the Apache JMeter testing tool. 
 
Figure 3.  Service Architecture used in the pilot project. 
D. New APIs 
The service architecture depicted in Figure 3 represents 
the case, in which an OGC-compliant client application is 
used. However, introduction of NDEL actually opens access 
to traditional OGC services for a set of new client 
environments. These can be divided into two categories. 
Firstly, SOAP client code can be automatically generated 
based on the detailed service descriptions expressed in 
WSDL. Secondly, the NDEL concept of Adapter Service can 
be exploited to create a completely new category of service 
interfaces, for instance APIs adapted to the requirements of 
the modern Web applications programming model. These 
two new approaches are added to the service architecture 
model shown in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4.  Service Architecture with two new access approaches added. 
In the pilot project, the first implementations have been 
developed to test a new API for OGC services. This service 
interface is an attempt to provide the easiest possible access 
to both WMS and WFS interfaces. Geocoding functionality 
is embedded into the service interface, so that the client can 
use an address as the indicator of the queried location. The 
request is encoded as a REST query path. Most of the 
traditional query parameters can be left out. The service will 
use reasonable defaults for them. 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

An example of a query to a WFS interface could thus be 
expressed as follows: 
 
http://[service domain]/spatialobject/parcel/Helsinki/Mariankatu/23  
  
In this query all parcel objects are requested from around 
the point into which the given address is geocoded. For all 
other relevant parameters reasonable defaults are used by the 
service. In case the defaults are not appropriate for the client, 
these can be given as further path components in an order 
specified in the API definition. 
In a similar manner, one could request a map image with 
the following query: 
 
http://[service domain]/map/basemap/Helsinki/Mariankatu/23  
 
New user groups can be given access to geospatial data 
resources using easy-to-use APIs like these. In Finland this 
opportunity is opened by the Adapter Service concept 
present in the NDEL platform. Thus, the approach can be 
seen as a positive outcome of the NSDI – eGovernment 
services adaptation challenge. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The Finnish NDEL platform represents an example of the 
new eGovernment services interoperability development 
programs. Connection between the already well-established 
INSPIRE/OGC-compliant NSDI and the new NDEL 
platform has been tested in a pilot project. 
The need to adapt the NSDI services to the general 
eGovernment services interoperability mechanisms can be 
seen as an unnecessary burden. The tests carried out in the 
Finnish pilot project confirm that running a query from an 
OGC-compliant client to an OGC-compliant service via the 
NDEL 
platform 
incurs 
a 
significant 
performance 
degradation. This means from 1.5 to 2.5 times longer query 
times, compared with queries that go directly over open 
Internet. 
However, connecting the NSDI with the eGovernment 
service platform can also open new opportunities. In the case 
of the Finnish NDEL, these include for instance the 
possibility to utilize detailed service descriptions in WSDL 
for automatic code generation. Another positive example is 
the opportunity to lure new users for spatial data sets via new 
easy-to-use APIs that are based on the Adapter Service 
concept, present in the NDEL service architecture. 
The future work of the pilot project include for instance 
more profound testing of detailed WSDL descriptions to 
support automatic code generation, and performance testing 
of alternative methods for encoding binary information into 
NDEL messages. The pilot service will also be connected to 
the national centralized authentication service to enable 
single-sign-on, thus fostering more tight integration with 
other Finnish eGovernment services. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The pilot project described in the paper is funded by the 
Finnish Prime Minister’s Office (contract 1940/71/2014). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. C. J. Palvia and S. S. Sharma, “E-Government and E-
Governance: Definitions/Domain Framework and Status 
around the World”. Foundation of e-Government. ICEG, 
2007. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.iceg.net/2007/books/1/1_369.pdf [accessed: 2016-
01-19]. 
[2] G. P. Dias and J. A. Rafael, “A simple model and a 
distributed architecture for realizing one-stop e-government”. 
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications 6(1), 2007 
pp. 81–90. 
[3] E. G. Park, M. Lamontagne, A. Perez, I Melikhova and G. 
Bartlett, “Running ahead toward interoperable e-government: 
The 
government 
of 
Canada 
metadata 
framework”, 
International Journal of Information Management 29, 2009 
pp. 145–150. 
[4] European Commission, “INSPIRE Directive", 2007. at: 
http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2007:108
:0001:0014:EN:PDF [accessed: 2016-01-07]. 
[5] P. Kartano, “Building Digital Infrastructure, Finnish National 
Architecture for Digital Services”. [Online]. Available from:  
http://www.mamk.fi/instancedata/prime_product_julkaisu/ma
mk/embeds/mamkwwwstructure/23377_2014-11-
19_Palveluvayla_Sotu-seminaari_Mikkeli_en.pdf [accessed: 
2016-01-07]. 
[6] EIF, Home site of European Interoperability Framework for 
pan-European eGovernment services. [Online]. Available 
from: http://ec.europa.eu/idabc/en/document/2319/5644.html 
[accessed: 2016-01-07]. 
[7] INSPIRE Network Services Drafting Team, “INSPIRE 
Network Services Architecture”. [Online]. Available from: 
http://inspire.ec.europa.eu/reports/ImplementingRules/networ
k/D3_5_INSPIRE_NS_Architecture_v3-0.pdf 
[accessed: 
2016-01-07]. 
[8] ISA, Home site of ISA programme. [Online]. Available from: 
http://ec.europa.eu/isa/ [accessed: 2016-01-07]. 
[9] ARE3NA, Home site of ARE3NA. [Online]. Available from:  
http://ec.europa.eu/isa/actions/01-trusted-information-
exchange/1-17action_en.htm [accessed: 2016-01-07]. 
[10] EULF, Home site of European Union Location Framework. 
[Online]. Available from: http://ec.europa.eu/isa/actions/02-
interoperability-architecture/2-13action_en.htm 
[accessed: 
2016-01-07]. 
[11] Ministry of Finance, Home site of the National Architecture 
for 
Digital 
Services. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://vm.fi/en/national-architecture-for-digital-services 
[accessed: 2016-01-07]. 
[12] X-Road, Home site of X-Road. [Online]. Available from: 
https://e-estonia.com/component/x-road/ [accessed: 2016-01-
07]. 
[13] W3C, SOAP Version 1.2 Part 1: Messaging Framework 
(Second 
Edition). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/soap12/ [accessed 2016-01-07]. 
[14] W3C, Web Services Description Language (WSDL) 1.1. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl 
[accessed 2016-01-07]. 
[15] FGI, Geospatial Data Sets in the National Data Exchange 
Layer (project Web site) [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.fgi.fi/fgi/research/research-projects/geospatial-
datasets-national-data-exchange-layer-ptpv [accessed 2016-
01-07].
 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

