Indoor-space Awareness using Descriptive data 
 
Kang-jae Lee 
Department of Geoinformatics 
University of Seoul 
Seoul, South Korea 
kjlee@uos.ac.kr 
Hye-Young Kang 
Department of Geoinformatics 
University of Seoul 
Seoul, South Korea 
hyezero@gmail.com 
Jiyeong Lee 
Department of Geoinformatics 
University of Seoul 
Seoul, South Korea 
jlee@uos.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract— Wide use of locational information has recently 
contributed to many GIS application services in a variety of 
ways, for example, shopping, tourism and transportation. In 
particular, these human behaviors have been widened from 
outdoor into indoor-space due to the appearance of large scale 
and complex buildings. Thus, indoor localization for various 
location based services has been researched in indoor-space 
using wireless LAN, RFID or Bluetooth instead of using GPS. 
However, these positioning technologies require intensive 
computation and have a limitation to retain stable accuracy. 
Thus, in this paper, we introduce Indoor-space Awareness 
Architecture using descriptive data such as names or phone 
numbers from images captured from mobile devices. OCR 
engine is especially applied in the architecture to recognize text 
from the descriptive data. 
Keywords 
- 
Indoor-space 
Awareness; 
Architecture; 
Descriptive data; Optical Character Recognition; Geocoding. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The use of locational information has recently increased 
in web map services and map applications with a variety of 
information. 
As 
spatial 
information, 
the 
locational 
information is a basically used with non-spatial information 
for providing users with useful information such as shopping, 
tourism and transportation information near particular 
locations on the web map. Furthermore, as smart phones 
come into wide use, location-based applications are being 
developed steadily due to built-in GPS. So the locational 
information is used in real time received from GPS satellites. 
As a kind of positioning technology, GPS is the most useful 
system to obtain locational information for outdoor 
environments. However, in the case of indoor space, the GPS 
has a limitation on the accuracy of positioning since GPS 
signals cannot be directly come into buildings without any 
interference on the signals. 
For the indoor positioning, several techniques are applied 
such as Wireless LAN [11, 12], RFID [4], Bluetooth [8] and 
InfraRed [3]. In spite of the application of these wireless 
techniques, awareness of location in indoor-space is 
restricted in the case of no infrastructure such as access point 
and sensors. Also, they have variable localization accuracy 
due to walls and columns. Thus, the alternative methods for 
the indoor localization need to be developed. In order to 
meet the minimum requirements, the alternative methods 
have to be simple to estimate locations and obtain locational 
data using information in indoor-space. So we designed 
Indoor-space Awareness Architecture using descriptive data 
which is readily available from stores, office rooms and 
convention halls in indoor space. So modified geocoding 
method is applied for matching descriptive data with 
locational data. In addition, for recognition and extraction of 
characters or words from the descriptive data, Optical 
Character Recognition (OCR) is applied. The OCR 
technology has grown with template matching and structure 
analysis in the pattern recognition field [13]. The descriptive 
data includes store names of complex shopping malls, room 
numbers of hotels or offices and phone numbers for deriving 
locational information in indoor-space. 
Implementation of this research is conducted on Android 
OS for smart phones. Smart phones are widely used and 
most of them have camera modules which are appropriate for 
capturing images simply and quickly for acquiring 
descriptive data. As a result, an application based on Android 
OS is developed according to the structure of Indoor-space 
Awareness Architecture. Furthermore, a query service based 
on the architecture is implemented using related search terms. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Numerous researches have been carried out regarding 
location awareness and navigation using a variety of data and 
technologies. For this paper, the main issue is how image 
data is handled with locational information using geocoding, 
thus the previous researches on image-based positioning and 
geocoding methods are reviewed. 
Image-based location awareness has been developed with 
geo-tagged image data. The research on the algorithm for 
estimating geographic information from image data was 
conducted using a purely data-driven scene matching 
approach [9]. According to the research, over 6 million GPS-
tagged image data was stored in database and some of them 
were partially used for the evaluation of the method. Images 
for the test were matched with database in accordance with 
color patterns and texture features so as to recognize 
correlation of between the images and geographic locations. 
And the geo-locations of the images were estimated using a 
set of GPS tagged nearest neighbors. Another research on the 
system for managing digital photographs with geographic 
location tags was carried out [14]. The digital photographs 
with locational information include semantic content which 
helps searching and indexing. Furthermore, the research 
proposed many kinds of methods for acquiring location 
metadata. One of them is using digital cameras or mobile 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

phones with built-in GPS chips. So latitude and longitude 
information is stored in the metadata of image. Another 
method is to obtain locational information from descriptive 
text. Most of landscape or scenery image data embedded in 
web pages generally expresses the locations, buildings or 
landmarks with text data. Thus, the descriptive text data is 
used as geographic location tags for the images.  
Generally, geocoding is the process of deriving 
geographic coordinates from geographic data such as 
addresses or postal codes matching it with reference database. 
The geocoding goes through three processes which are 
parsing, matching and locating[10]. Address data is 
converted to standardized format in the parsing process. And 
next the input data is matched with pre-built reference 
database and result records are selected in the matching 
process. Finally, in the locating process, geographic 
coordinates of the locations are extracted from the result 
records. In the processes, various geocoding methods are 
applied and in terms of the methods, the address matching 
technique[7], and the 2D and 3D area-based address 
matching technique[10] have been researched. 
In this research, first of all, we concentrated on the indoor 
environments GPS signal cannot be received accurately. So, 
instead of using GPS, we chose to use descriptive data 
having implicit geographic locations. In other words, the 
descriptive data can be used to derive explicit geographic 
coordinates in a building. Thus, secondly, during this process, 
additional process is required for the extraction of descriptive 
data from images captured by users. So we decided to use 
OCR engine for extracting words and numbers from store 
names, room numbers and phone numbers in convention 
halls and complex malls. 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
In this paper, Indoor-space Awareness Architecture is 
designed as shown in Figure 1.  
Figure 1.  Indoor-space Awareness Architecture. 
Among the whole processes, first, the input module 
extracts text data from descriptive data. Second, the text data 
is classified into several categories such as an phone number, 
room number and store name through the refinement module. 
The text data is parsed to meet the standardized form in order 
to match it with reference database. And then, query 
statements are created by the query generator for searching 
corresponding attributes in database. The query statements 
are transmitted to the network module, and next retrieval and 
extraction of location data using the queries are performed in 
the database retrieval module. The output data is finally 
displayed in the client side in recognizable form such as 
polygon or point on a digital map. 
A. Descriptive Data Input and Refinement 
As a first component shown in left side of Figure 2, the input 
module receives descriptive data such as store names, phone 
numbers or room numbers in complex shopping malls or 
convention halls. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Input and Refinement module of  
Indoor-space Awareness Architecture. 
The camera module captures image data from camera-
equipped mobile devices, and then compresses and stores it 
as image formats. And next, the image data representing 
descriptive data is sent to the next stage, OCR engine. The 
OCR engine extracts text data from the image data through 
several complex processes. OCR is generally divided into 
on-line and off-line character recognition depending on data 
acquisition methods. Among them, off-line character 
recognition is the method that text data is acquired from the 
fixed static shape of the character in printed documents and 
signs using a scanner or camera. So it is applied to this 
research for acquiring text data from images, which represent 
fixed static shape of characters. Off-line character 
recognition generally consists of four steps. Firstly, pre-
processing adjusts the slant of documents and explicitly 
divides 
characters 
from 
background 
for 
increasing 
recognition accuracy. Secondly, segmentation is a process to 
split character strings into many rows, words and characters. 
Thirdly, a process of feature extraction analyzes the pattern 
of each character using various methods and then characters 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

are 
individually 
recognized. 
Lastly, 
post-processing 
increases recognition accuracy taking into account semantic 
information of context. Incorrectly recognized words are 
proofread using dictionary data method[5] or HMM 
method[6]. After the processes of the input module, as a 
result, the text data is extracted. 
As a second stage in the Indoor-space Awareness 
Architecture, text data is classified into a phone number, 
room number or store name in the classification component 
as shown in the right side of Figure 2. The reason for 
necessity of classification is that it allows the text data to be 
refined correctly depending on the content types of 
individual text data. For example, phone numbers consists of 
a combination of numbers and it is at least greater than 
minimum digit numbers including area codes depending on 
many countries without any letters. Afterwards, classified 
text data is adjusted for the standardized structure. And then, 
queries are created by the query generator for searching 
corresponding attributes in database. 
B. Searching and Display 
Generated queries are transmitted from client side to 
server side through the network module as shown in Figure 4. 
The network module connects the client side to the reference 
database of the server side. It accesses the databases and 
sends the queries to the database retrieval module. And then, 
the database retrieval module searches and extracts location 
data using the queries. In this module, the query manager 
checks validation of the queries and decides how to access 
reference database. Next, it is decided that which kind of 
format the location data extracted from reference DB has in 
the formatting component. The output data is finally 
displayed in the client side in recognizable form such as a 
polygon or point on a 3D digital map. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Database Retrieval module and output data of Indoor-space 
Awareness Architecture. 
The reference database schema is designed as shown in 
Figure 4. The ‘Feature’ table contains a set of attributes such 
as an identifier (ID), floor number, room number, 
coordinates and foreign key(R_ID) which refers to the 
identifier(ROOM_ID) of ‘Room’ table. ‘Room’ table 
contains a set of attributes such as a phone number, 
additional number for the same name of stores(ST_ORDER) 
and foreign key for referring to the identifier of 
‘RoomName’ table. ‘RoomName’ table is designed 
including attributes of store names with various languages 
respectively.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Schema of Reference DB. 
Especially, matching process of store names works 
according to the algorithm below. Firstly, a store name snt is 
directly matched with the list of corresponding attribute. If it 
is matched at the first attempt, (x, y, z) coordinates are 
extracted without any additional works. However, if it 
cannot be matched perfectly, it is partially matched and  the 
location data linked to output is extracted. Regardless of the 
partial matching, if the output has candidates or a matched 
attribute data cannot be found, then matching process 
operates manually. 
 
Input: Boolean b; 
Array output; 
Procedure MatchingProcess(Storename snt){ 
output←CALL FullMatching(snt) 
IF (output.length = 1 ) 
CALL Location(output) 
ELSE IF (output.length = 0 ) 
FOR each attribute att from ReferenceDB 
b←CALL IsContain(snt, att) 
IF (b) 
output←att 
END IF 
END FOR 
IF (output.length = 1) 
CALL Location(output) 
ELSE 
CALL ManualMatching(snt) 
END IF-ELSE 
END IF-ELSE 
} 
 
 
 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
Our research is executed based on the Indoor-space 
Awareness Architecture. A building for the research spot is 
COEX, which has a largest underground mall and 
convention centers on the ground. For the implementation of 
the architecture, an application program is developed based 
on the android app using Open source OCR program called 
‘Tesseract’[2][1]. For the actual implementation of the 
research, as a first stage, sample data is stored in the 
reference database. As shown in Figure 5 (a), the name of 
store can be captured as text data using equipped camera in a 
smart phone. And next, the text data is automatically 
matched with the store name from the reference database. 
Then, the current position is represented as a polygon in 3D 
visualization with information about the store. The keypad 
enabling manual matching is supported with auto complete 
text view as shown in (b). For the application of our research, 
we implemented a query service and the result areas are 
represented as distinctively colored polygons like (c). 
 
 
(a) text matching and 3D 
visualization 
 
(b) manual matching 
 
(c) a query using related search terms 
Figure 5.  Indoor-space Awareness with 3D Visualization. 
Correctly recognizable rate of locations using all kinds of 
descriptive data is 94.35%. Specifically, the automatic 
matching rate of English storefront signs is 82.41% using 
108 samples, whereas such matching rate of phone numbers 
is 100% using 10 samples. Although the number of samples 
is too low in the case of phone numbers, it is analyzed that 
the error rate in the case of the storefront signs is caused by 
illumination, various fonts and background color. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This research introduced Indoor-space Awareness 
Architecture using descriptive data for detecting and 
extracting 
locational 
information 
through 
modified 
geocoding method. Among the process, OCR engine is 
especially applied to recognize text data from the descriptive 
data. For further researches, special processes should be 
researched and used in the OCR program for increasing 
recognition rate. For example, adaptive thresholding needs to 
be applied for eliminating the effect resulting from 
illumination. And, for various application of the architecture, 
the research on incorporating 3D network model can be 
possible. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the National Research 
Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea 
government(MEST) (No. 2012-0002348). 
This work was researched by the supporting project to 
educate GIS experts. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Android-OCR. 
https://github.com/rmtheis/android-ocr 
[2] Tesseract open source OCR engine. 
http://code.google.com/p/tesseract-ocr. 
[3] Baus, J., Kruger, A., Wahlster, W. 2002. A Resource-
Adaptive Mobile Navigation System. 2002. International 
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces IUI02. 
[4] Bekkali, A., Sanson, H., and Matsumoto, M. 2007. RFID 
indoor positioning based on probabilistic RFID map and 
kalman filtering. In Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking 
and Communication, 21-27. 
[5] Bokser, M., 1992. Omnifont technologies. Proc. IEEE, vol. 80, 
pp. 1066-1078. 
[6] Chen, M. Y., Kundu A., and Zhou J. 1994. Off-line 
handwritten word recognition using a hidden Markov model 
type stochastic network. IEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine 
Intell., vol. 16, pp. 481-496. 
[7] Drummond, W.J., 1995. Address matching: GIS technology 
for mapping human activity patterns. Journal of the American 
Planning Association, vol. 61, pp. 240-251. 
[8] Feldmann, S., Kyamakya, K., Zapater, A., and Lue, Z. 2003. 
An Indoor Bluetooth-Based Positioning System: Concept, 
Implementation and Experimental Evaluation. In Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Wireless Networks, 109-
113. 
[9] Hays, J., and Efros, A. A. 2008. Im2gps: estimating 
geographic information from a single image. In Proceedings 
of the IEEE Conference Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition. 
[10] Jiyeong Lee, 2009. GIS-based geocoding methods for area-
based addresses and 3D addresses in urban areas. 
Environment and Planning B : Planning and Design, vol. 36, 
pp. 86-106. 
[11] Kaemarungsi, K., and Krishnamurthy, P. 2004. Modeling of 
Indoor Positioning Systems Based on Location Fingerprinting. 
In Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM, vol. 2, 1012-
1022(May 2004). 
[12] Li, B., Salter, J., Dempster A. G., and Rizos, C. 2006. Indoor 
positioning techniques based on wireless LAN. In 1st IEEE 
Int. Conf. on Wireless Broadband & Ultra Wideband 
Communications, Sydney, AUS(Mar. 2006). 
[13] Mori, S., Suen, C. Y., and Yamamoto, K. Sannella, M. J. 
1992. Historical Review of OCR Research and Development. 
In Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 80, no. 7, 1029-1058. 
[14] Toyama, K., Logan, R., and Roseway, A. 2003. Geographic 
Location Tags on Digital Images. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Multimedia, 156-166. 
 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

