Comparative Evaluation of Alternative Addressing Schemes
Konstantin Clemens
Technische Universit¨at Berlin
Service-centric Networking
konstantin.clemens@campus.tu-berlin.de
Abstract—Alternative addressing schemes are developed to be
ﬂexible and user friendly, while at the same time unambiguous
and processable in an automated way. In this paper, four schemes
are compared to WGS84 latitude and longitude coordinates - an
addressing scheme for itself. An experiment with human users
checks how user friendly the various schemes are and what classes
of errors the users make. The results show that comprehensible
and recognizable address elements are contributing towards a
user friendly address scheme.
Keywords–Geocoding; Address Schemes; Geohash; GIS.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, when referencing a location, most often postal
addresses are used. That is because postal addresses are espe-
cially easy to use: A postal address is a compound of entities
such as city, district, or street names. Obviously, addresses
make more sense with more knowledge about the area of
a speciﬁed destination: The destination can be located more
accurately. At the same time, if an address refers to a location
someone has little knowledge about, only the rough area is
identiﬁable. Interestingly, this correlates with the usage pattern
of an address: Users would want to recognize nearby addresses,
while they would not care about the precise location of an
address in a distant and unfamiliar city. Thus, humans can
resolve addresses to a level that that matches their need and
knowledge about the destination. Generally, the ways postal
addresses are put together in various countries are speciﬁed
by multiple organizations [1]. It is a special challenge to
process postal addresses automatically, because in various
countries different, often times not compatible, schemes for
postal addresses are used [2]. Also, different address elements
are reused in different addresses, when, e.g., a city name is also
the name of a street in another city, or when multiple cities
share the same name. Multiple on-line geocoding [3] services
like [4], [5], or [6] resolve postal addresses into their WGS84
coordinates [7]. This process, however, is complex and error-
prone [8], [9].
For that reason, alternative addressing schemes (AAS) are
developed, that strive to provide both: Addresses that are easy
to comprehend and to remember for a human, while also
unambiguous and simple to process for a computer. However,
while postal addresses grew naturally as needed, AAS are
designed by hand. Key differences worth pointing out are:
1)
Instead of points on the globe, postal addresses refer-
ence abstract entities, like groups of buildings, single
houses, or speciﬁc entrances. A postal address of a
house would remain valid, if the house is rebuild so
that the main entrance moves along the street. AAS
reference speciﬁc points or areas on the globe instead,
so that a rebuild house could require a different
alternative address.
2)
AAS reference points or areas on the globe, which
can be empty spaces or even open water. While a
valid postal address can only address existing entities,
perfectly valid AAS can reference any point on earth.
3)
Postal addresses resolve to a variable degree of
accuracy, as it is required. In urban centers, where
many entities are to be addressed in a small area,
multiple postal addresses address every single one
naturally. In some cases additional address elements
are added to, e.g., specify a lot within a mall with
one house number. In rural areas, on the other hand,
postal addresses may refer to areas with groups of
buildings. AAS uniformly resolve to a ﬁxed accuracy
on the entire globe.
4)
Postal addresses are composed from geographic area
names as cities and regions. These areas usually have
existed for a long time. Because of that, their names
are well-known and easy to remember for humans.
Elements of AAS on the other hand are, yet, mostly
opaque for a user.
In this paper, ﬁve AAS are evaluated for their user experi-
ence: One AAS is provided by the service what3words [10].
Three words are used to identify a location. Mapcode [11] is a
service that generates very short Geohash keys. Geo-poet [12]
is another service that encodes Geohashes in rhymes of four
words. Finally, Syllagloble [13] is another Geohash based
system generating human-friendly Geohashes out of syllables.
While the former two services are available and competing on
the market, the latter two systems have been implemented for
this paper solely. WGS84 coordinates can, as the four AAS,
address any point on the globe. These coordinates make an
addressing scheme for themselves. Therefore, WGS84 is used
as the base line addressing scheme.
An experiment has been conducted revealing how well vari-
ous AAS can be remembered for a short time. The experiment
gives insight into the classes of mistakes done when using
AAS. Next, the various schemes are described in detail. In
Section III, the experiment and its outcomes are presented.
Finally, the conclusions are drawn in the last section.
II.
ADDRESSING SCHEMES
As base line, WGS84 is used in this paper. In this scheme
two orthogonal plains meeting in the center of the earth are
deﬁned. Every point on the surface is described by a vector
from the center of the earth to the point. Vectors are speciﬁed
by WGS84 latitude and longitude coordinates, which are the
two angles between the vector to the two plains. These angles
can thereby be arbitrarily precise.
Three AAS evaluated in this paper are based on Geohashes.
Geohashes are keys of Quadtrees [14]. There are various ways
to implement a Quadtree that all share the same basic idea:
Areas or tiles, e.g., squares, rectangles, or even triangles [15],
are split into a ﬁxed number of smaller sub-tiles of the same
shape. This process is repeated, until the desired size of a tile
is reached. Keys of Quadtrees consist of multiple parts. Each
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

TABLE I. EXAMPLES OF LOCATIONS ENCODED WITH VARIOUS SCHEMES
WGS84
what3words
Mapcode
Geo-poet
Syllagloble
Berlin
52.5167,13.4
dramatic
liner
common
VJMMB.60XJ
requesting emanation
entitles demarcation
lay uxri mes ixsi
London
51.50642,-0.12721
crush
activism
proven
VHGQZ.RD3J
debenture consummation
lamented dissertation
lac ekha kam etni
Paris
48.85693,2.3412
national
slope
delved
VHPM9.JZKN
unvarnished usurpation
covalent obfuscation
lac igpi dav avba
Rome
41.90322,12.49565
shoebox
inﬂame
speaker
TJLFF.MR0Y
unfairly inspiration
prepayment conﬂagration
sab isca poc uhvi
next part thereby speciﬁes the next sub-tile to split. Having a
Geohash on-hand (and knowing the way it has been computed),
therefore, speciﬁes the last sub-tile – an area inside the original
space covered by the Quadtree. A Geohash that starts on a tile
spanning the entire world can be used as an addressing scheme,
with one extra property: Common preﬁxes of two Geohashes
imply that the two areas addressed are located close to each
other. Note, however, that differing preﬁxes do not imply that
two areas are far apart.
Geo-poet is an address scheme that uses Geohashes. The
system has been developed for this paper. Geo-poet tries to
create human friendly and easy to remember Geohashes by
using spoken language. Particularly, for every part of the
Geohash, Geo-poet chooses a word from a speciﬁc set. The
words for each part are thereby chosen so that a distich,
i.e., a poem with two lines and four words, is formed. The
corpus of words used in this system are taken from [16].
From this collection of words that are annotated with possible
pronunciations, 289 rhyming and 5929 non-rhyming words
with a speciﬁc metre have been picked. Beginning with the
outer tile covering the entire world, for each word of the
poem, the current tile is split in either 289 or 5929 sub-tiles,
depending on whether the next word should rhyme or not. This
way, Geo-poet is addressing tiles with an inner diagonal not
longer than 26.1m. This maximal distance between two points
on the globe having the same Geo-poet address is reached
along the equator.
A system similar to Geo-poet is Syllagloble. Similar to
Geo-poet, it strives to provide easy-to-use Geohashes and has
been developed for this paper. Instead of words, however,
syllables are used in this addressing scheme. From a corpus
of words, 13666 most common syllables have been picked so
that they are easy to combine. The generated Geohashes are
words that are fourteen characters long and assembled of four
syllables. Thus, beginning with the outer tile, tiles are split four
times enabling Syllagloble to address tiles with a diagonal not
longer than 7.7m using a word that is easy to pronounce.
Mapcode is another system based on Geohashes, so called
Mapcodes that are assembled from letters and numbers. The
goal of this system is to provide Mapcodes that are short and
easy to use. For that, next to global Mapcodes, many regions
are also addressed with regional Mapcodes. Since the starting
tile of the Geohash only need to span a region for regional
Mapcodes, very short Geohashes may be used. E.g., for the
region of Netherlands just four characters are addressing tiles
with ca. 10m diagonal. The back side of regional Mapcodes
is the required context, which is specifying the outer tile of
the Geohash. Therefore, regional Mapcodes are out of scope
for this evaluation. Only global Mapcodes with no need for
context, nine characters, and roughly the accuracy of the
regional tiles were used. However, Mapcode is ﬂexible enough
to provide more accuracy where needed: As with Gohashes in
Quadtrees, longer Mapcodes address smaller tiles.
Another alternative addressing scheme is what3words. Like
Geo-poet it uses words to encode tiles with ca. 4m diagonal
length. However, what3words uses three random words for that
and is not Geohash based. Therefore, unlike in the three pre-
vious systems, common words do not imply that two locations
are close to each other. Also, changing the order of the words
describing one location results in another unrelated location
being addressed. The actual algorithm behind what3words is
not public.
Overall, all AAS seem to be more user friendly than plain
WGS84 coordinates. Also, their accuracy has the same order
of magnitude: Although addressing areas and not points, all
seem suitable to specify a navigation destination for a human
user. Table I presents some locations encoded with each AAS.
Note that Paris and London have a (very short) common preﬁx
in Mapcode and Syllagloble. That means, both cities are in the
same tile addressed by the ﬁrst part of the Geohashes.
III.
EXPERIMENT
The measurement undertaken for this paper is disguised as
a memory quiz and is available at [17]. Not more than six
participants knew the rational before taking the quiz; most of
the participants followed a link advertised on various social
media. Since the quiz is set up as simple as possible, it is
not possible to map answers to speciﬁc participants as they
are not required to identify themselves. The quiz consists of
ﬁve parts, one for each AAS. Each part consists of eight
questions: Eight times a speciﬁc point on the globe is encoded
with the respective scheme and shown to the user for four
seconds. After that, the participant has to pick the previously
presented result from a list of eight possible answers. Besides
the right answer, one incorrect choice within 50m distance
of the correct answer is generated as well as six more distant
options. This way, the experiment not only observes how often
the correct answer is chosen. It also observes how often an
incorrect choice that is close to the right answer is picked
by the user. The quiz is laid out in a way that ensures only
complete participations with answers to all 40 questions are
taken into account. While the quiz is still on-line and collecting
data, this paper only considers the 2600 data points of the ﬁrst
65 participants.
The measurement results are visualized in Figure 1. The
bars for each AAS are split into three parts: A part visualizing
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the portion of the correctly picked answers, a part for those
answers that were not correct, but within 50m of the correct
answer, and a part for incorrect and far-off results given. Note
that to highlight the differences, the bars begin at 80%.
Looking at the correct answers, the AAS can be put into
three groups: With 82.8% hit rate WGS84 is the least remem-
berable scheme. Mapcode and Geo-poet have 92.9% and 91%
correct answers respectively and therefore are clearly more
user friendly. Using what3words 96.5% and using Syllagloble
96.9% of the participants were able to recall the encoded
position correctly.
WGS84
Geo-poet
Mapcode
what3words
Syllagloble
0%
5%
10%
15%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
correct
within 50m
further than 50m
Figure 1. Error types and rates of the various alternative addressing schemes.
A closer look at the splits of the incorrect answers reveals
that these are not evenly spread for the various systems. For
what3words, all incorrectly picked choices were further away
than 50m of the correct answer. Of the other AAS, most
noteworthy 71.1% of incorrectly chosen answers for Geo-poet
were close to the right one. Geo-poet is followed by Mapcode
with 61.1%, WGS84 with 50% and Syllagloble with 43.7%.
All these rates of incorrectly picked answers near the correct
one are extraordinarily high: If the incorrect answers were
picked at random, only 14.3% of them would have been within
50m radius as it is only one of the seven possible incorrect
answers. Note that in total only 18 answers of what3word and
16 answers of Syllagloble encoded addresses were answered
incorrect. These numbers are small enough to not represent
the proper distributions of the incorrect choices.
IV.
CONCLUSION
While still pretty easy to remember in the quiz, WGS84
coordinates are the least human friendly addressing scheme.
This is not surprising, as WGS84 was not designed with the
human use case in mind.
Geohash based AAS beneﬁt from the common preﬁx
property: Users often remembered parts of the address picking
a wrong but similar answer. Wrong choices often become less
critical therefore, as they are not too far off from the actual
location. This effect is also observable with WGS84 latitude
and longitude. While not exactly a Geohash, coordinates with
common preﬁx are closer to each other too.
Interestingly, adding one single word to a scheme seems
to make remembering it much harder: The ratio of incorrect
answers grew from 3.4% with what3words to 8.9% with
Geo-poet. At least partially, this is caused by the words
chosen by what3words and Geo-poet. A look at the words in
Table I strengthens this assumption: The words of what3words
are all shorter. They are therefore easier to remember them
selves. Potentially, Geo-poet can be made more user-friendly
by tweaking the words used to encode a location. Similarly,
carefully choosing the syllables used by Syllagloble, might
ensure that it generates words that are even easier to recall.
A long-term experiment setup could verify how well users
remember various AAS over a longer time frame. Such an
experiment would also reduce the presentation bias. For ex-
ample, in the experiment for this paper the AAS were always
evaluated in the same order, one after the other. Moreover
the choices for Geo-poet were presented using two lines each,
while for every other AAS the choices only used one line. That
made the result list much longer so that a participant was more
likely required to scroll to the right answer. Also, a comparison
to postal addresses needs to be undertaken. Such a comparison
is not fair: As discussed, addresses are not covering the entire
world and have a varying accuracy. Still, AAS need to gain
acceptance over postal addresses if they intend to replace them
in day to day use eventually.
Some of the introduced AAS work with predeﬁned corpora
of possible address elements. Geo-poet and what3words have
speciﬁc sets of words; Syllagloble has deﬁnite syllables avail-
able. This property can be utilized to introduce error correction.
For once, valid possibilities could be suggested as the user
types. Finally, implicit error correction could be incorporated
into the Geohashes. Addresses, misremembered to a certain
extent, could still be resolved correctly this way.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Coetzee, A. Cooper, M. Lind, M. Wells, S. Yurman, E. Wells, N. Grif-
ﬁths, and M. Nicholson, “Towards an international address standard.”
10th International Conference for Spatial Data Infrastructure, 2008.
[2]
K. Clemens, “Automated processing of postal addresses,” in GEO-
Processing 2013, The Fifth International Conference on Advanced
Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services, 2013, pp.
155–160.
[3]
D. Goldberg, J. Wilson, and C. Knoblock, “From text to geographic
coordinates: The current state of geocoding,” URISA-WASHINGTON
DC-, vol. 19, no. 1, 2007, p. 33.
[4]
“Google Developers,” https://developers.google.com, Dec. 2015.
[5]
“Yahoo! BOSS Geo Services,” https://developer.yahoo.com/boss/geo/,
Dec. 2015.
[6]
“Yandex API,” http://api.yandex.com, Dec. 2015.
[7]
Defense Mapping Agency, “Department of defense world geodetic sys-
tem 1984: Its deﬁnition and relationship with local geodetic systems.”
Navtech Seminars & Book and Software Store, Incorporated, 1993.
[8]
K. Clemens, “Geocoding with openstreetmap data,” GEOProcessing
2015, 2015, p. 10.
[9]
C. Davis and F. Fonseca, “Assessing the certainty of locations produced
by an address geocoding system,” Geoinformatica, vol. 11, no. 1, 2007,
pp. 103–129.
[10]
“what3words,” https://map.what3words.com/, Dec. 2015.
[11]
“Mapcode,” http://www.mapcode.com/, Dec. 2015.
[12]
“Geo-poet,” http://geo-poet.appspot.com/, Dec. 2015.
[13]
“Syllagloble,” http://syllagloble.appspot.com/, Dec. 2015.
[14]
H. Samet, “The quadtree and related hierarchical data structures,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 16, no. 2, 1984, pp. 187–260.
[15]
A. Szalay, J. Gray, G. Fekete, P. Kunszt, P. Kukol, and A. Thakar,
“Indexing the sphere with the hierarchical triangular mesh,” Microsoft
Research, Tech. Rep. MSR-TR-2005-123, Sep. 2005.
[16]
Carnegie Mellon University, “The CMU Pronouncing Dictionary,”
http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict, Dec. 2015.
[17]
“Mem-quiz,” http://mem-quiz.appspot.com/, Dec. 2015.
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

