 Detecting Wildfires Using Unmanned Aerial Vehicle with Near Infrared Optical 
Imaging Sensor 
Edwin Magidimisha  
 Optronic Sensor systems, Defence and Security, 
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research 
 Pretoria, Country 
 e-mail: EMagidimisha@csir.co.za 
Seelen Naidoo 
 Optronic Sensor systems, Defence and Security, 
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research 
 Pretoria, Country 
 e-mail: SNaidoo@csir.co.za 
 
Zimbini Faniso-Mnyaka  
 Optronic Sensor systems, Defence and Security, 
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research 
 Pretoria, Country 
 e-mail: ZFaniso@csir.co.za 
Muhammad Nana  
Optronic Sensor systems, Defence and Security, 
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research 
 Pretoria, Country 
mnana@csir.co.za 
 
Abstract— The increasing severity of wildland fires, largely 
driven by the effects of climate change, poses a significant risk 
to both firefighters and ecosystems, while also driving up the 
cost of combating such fires. Therefore, there is a pressing need 
for surveillance systems that can detect and track wildfires at an 
early stage. While traditional methods such as infrared sensors 
on elevated platforms and surveillance from aircraft have been 
proven to work in many areas, they have limitations in terms of 
field of view and cost-effectiveness in covering larger areas. To 
address these challenges, the Council for Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR) in South Africa is developing a 
novel solution for tactical forest firefighting operations. The 
system takes advantage of the near-infrared (NIR) optical 
imaging by detecting wildland vegetation fires in the NIR region 
with cost-effective complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor 
(CMOS) sensors equipped with ultra-narrow band filters. This 
approach uses a ratio algorithm on the captured images from 
two bands to identify pixels with raised intensities that are 
indicative of a fire. The system is designed to be portable, 
smaller in size, and can be mounted on an unmanned aerial 
vehicle to provide real-time support to firefighters. This 
innovative approach has the potential to significantly improve 
the speed and accuracy of fire detection in areas where 
traditional methods are not feasible or effective, such as remote 
or inaccessible locations.  
Keywords-Potassium: 
Near-infrared, 
Unmanned 
Aerial 
Vehicle; Wildfire, K-line, CMOS. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Wildland vegetation fire prevention, detection, monitoring, 
and suppression are key economic and public safety concerns 
in many parts of the world [1]. The global incidence and 
severity of wildfires are expected to rise in response to 
climate change [2, 3, 4]. These wildfire incidents further 
exacerbate climate change due to CO2 and black aerosols 
emission. This serves as a strong motivation for the 
development of optical surveillance systems that can detect 
and monitor wildfires. Classical remote sensing of vegetation 
fires has been through the Planckian emission at the Medium 
Wave Infrared (3-5 µm, MWIR) and the Long Wave Infrared 
(LWIR) band of the electromagnetic spectrum [5,6,7]. The 
Short Wave (1 – 2.5µm, SWIR) infrared band was exploited 
and deployed on AVIRIS platform [8]. However, the IR band 
can be mostly affected by other heat emitting sources which 
could act as false alarms [9]. 
 
With the advancement of imaging sensors and filter 
technologies, there is now increased availability of reliable 
optical commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) products at 
affordable cost. The new sensor technologies such as high-
resolution CCD and CMOS sensors, provide an opportunity 
to enhance wildfire detection, monitoring, and reporting. This 
study presents a compact and cost-effective method of 
detecting wildland fires using near-infrared (NIR) spectral 
line emissions from electronically excited Potassium (K) 
atoms at 766.5 and 769.9 nm, during biomass burning [10,16, 
18, 19]. The Potassium spectral lines can be discriminated 
against any other background by detector systems that are 
less costly than the longer wavelength, actively cooled 
instruments more typically used in EO-based active fire 
studies [11]. Similarly, new airborne sensor platforms, 
particularly small, unmanned aircraft, or drones, are enabling 
new applications for airborne fire sensing [12]. The current 
study integrates the NIR optical payload onto and operates it 
from an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) using remote 
sensing techniques. 
II. BACKGROUND  
In recent years, we have seen great progress in the use of 
unmanned aerial vehicles with advanced software for forest 
fire monitoring, detection, and firefighting. The integration 
of UAVs with remote sensing techniques is aimed at 
providing rapid, mobile, and low-cost powerful solutions for 
various fire tasks [12]. Direct forest fire detection by 
firefighting agencies, as opposed to reports from the public, 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

is typically performed by some combination of fixed 
detection platforms such as watch towers, aerial detection 
patrols, and satellite imagery [11]. However, highly elevated 
platforms are not well suited in area coverage and can result 
into some areas developing fires unnoticed. Although 
aircrafts are considered efficient in firefighting, they are 
expensive to keep airborne for constant monitoring. 
Compared to fixed ground-based wildfire detection systems 
UAVs can provide a broader and more accurate perception of 
the fire from above especially in areas that are inaccessible or 
considered too dangerous for operations by firefighting 
crews. During firefighting, UAVs provide eyes from above 
and can provide important information on the fire 
progression.  
 
A vision-based UAV mounted system for detecting forest 
fires that uses both motion and chroma characteristics of fire 
in the decision rules to improve the reliability and accuracy 
of fire detection was proposed [13]. Sudhakar et al. [14] 
proposed a method for forest fire detection through UAVs 
equipped with an optical and an infrared camera using a LAB 
color model and a motion-based algorithm followed by a 
maximally stable extremal regions (MSERs) extraction 
module. For improved presentation, the extracted forest fire 
detections were joined with landscape information and 
meteorological data. Chen et al. [15] used optical and infrared 
sensors data to train a CNN first for smoke detection and then 
for fire flame detection.   
III. DETECTION PRINCIPLE  
Figure 1 below, illustrates a comprehensive outline of the fire 
detection system. The system incorporates a dual camera to 
capture and record images of burning biomass fire, 
specifically vegetation fires containing the Potassium 
element signature. The captured images are processed using 
the OSS developed algorithm that is applied during the image 
processing stage to analyze the pair of images and establish 
whether a fire has been detected. 
 
Figure 1: Simplified schematic depicting overview of fire detection system. 
A. 
The Potassium element 
Potassium belongs to the alkali metal group and is in the first 
column of the periodic table. It is one of the abundant 
elements in vegetation species [16, 17]. It has a single valence 
electron that present unique narrowband spectral emission 
lines within the visible and near infrared (NIR) wavelength 
range when vegetation biomass is heated to high 
temperatures during the process of flaming combustion [18]. 
The spectral emission of K appears as doublet at 766.5 nm 
and 769.9 nm spectral bands [19].  With the advancements in 
filter design, filters can now detect low-level signals while 
suppressing almost all emissions within the outer band by 
targeting specific elemental emissions from a source 
signature. These advancements in technology open the 
opportunity for the development of compact sensors capable 
of detecting narrow spectral lines and can be advanced to 
compete with other passive sensors operating in other bands. 
In this project, ultra-narrow band imaging is used for the 
detection of K using CMOS detectors. The integration of 
COTS, and ultra-narrow band imaging allows the design of 
compact and less power-hungry systems which can be easily 
integrated on a UAV. 
B. 
Fire detection system 
The NIR fire detection sensor presented in this paper 
comprise of two optical imaging systems placed side-by-side 
with common (identical) field of view. These cameras are 
fitted with ultra-narrow band filters with 1nm bandwidth 
sensitive at 769.9 nm referred to as the K-line band, and 757 
nm referred to as the reference band. The target and reference 
channels are temporally synchronised at the electronic level 
such that pairs of images (one from the target band and the 
other from reference channel) are obtained at the same instant. 
Fires are detected by comparing the NIR channel image to the 
reference channel image. Pixels which are much brighter in 
the target channel relative to the reference channel are 
candidate fire detections.  
 
C. 
Image Processing Algorithm 
The system image processing begins when two images are 
captured, one image with K-emission and the other with the 
background. The images from the two sensors are captured 
simultaneously. The reference image is resampled to be 
aligned with the K-line image pixelwise. This is done by 
feature mapping, using a Lucas-Kanada optical flow 
algorithm [20]. The sections of the individual images that are 
not common in both are then cropped out, leaving two images 
of the exact same scene. 
 
Figure 2: Overview of K-line fire detection principle 
The images are not modified with any image enhancement 
algorithms and are not compressed to preserve the fire front 
K-line signal emissions. The fire detection algorithm is 
applied to the matched cropped K-line and reference images. 
The fire detection is done using the image ratio technique [16, 
21]. A block diagram giving an overview of the algorithm is 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

illustrated in Figure 2. The image ratio technique is simple and 
is implemented as follows: 
a) Compute the ratio image i.e., the K-line image 
divided by the reference image. 
b) Compute the global mean and variance of the ratio 
image. 
c) Compute the pixel variance for each pixel in the ratio 
image. 
d) If the variance of a pixel is greater than the global 
variance multiplied by a user defined sensitivity 
integer value, the pixel gets classified as a fire pixel. 
Otherwise, the pixel is classified as a non-fire pixel. 
IV. METHOD 
The field measurements test was conducted at the Grasslands 
Flying Club in Pretoria West on the 18th of March 2022. The 
purpose of the test was to evaluate the aerial performance of 
the NIR fire detection sensor onboard the UAV. Figure 3 
displays a photograph of the NIR imaging sensor system 
during its lab testing phase. 
 
 
Figure 3: A closer look at the NIR sensor with two CMOS optical sensors 
placed side by side and furnished with ultra-narrow filters. 
 
The UAV Payload used a development (Raspberry Pi4 8GB) 
board to control the capturing of images, communication with 
a ground station, and storage of captured images. The captured 
images were stored on-board a micro-SD card and removed 
after the completion of a sortie. When the memory stick is 
retrieved and the data is retrieved for archival, the data was 
also inspected while the next mission was ongoing. Fire 
detection is performed on a post processing basis by 
automatically analysing the images stored in the memory card.  
The basic NIR sensor payload consists of the following 
components: 
• 
a processor module with storage, 
• 
the K-line camera payload, 
• 
a viewfinder camera, 
• 
a telemetry radio downlink, 
• 
an analogue video downlink, 
• 
high-definition video downlink, 
• 
a power source, and 
• 
wiring harnesses. 
Figure 4 shows the NIR fire detection payload onboard the 
UAV taken during the deployment experiment at the 
Grasslands Flying Club. 
 
 
 
       Figure 4: UAV with NIR sensor payload on the DJI 600 drone during a 
field testing of the sensor. 
 
     Several sorties where carried A deployment to test the new 
NIR payload aboard an airborne UAV The purpose of the test 
was to determine whether the new NIR sensor can detect 
ground wildfires from the air at relatively low altitudes 
(approximately 150m above ground level) and at different 
aspect angles from the fire. The size of the fire on the ground 
was approximately 500cm by 500cm. 
 
The following equipment was used during the test: 
• 
M600 UAV with RONIN gimbal provided and 
piloted by UAV Industries (UAVI), 
• 
UAV NIR payload sensor 
• 
UAV Ground Control Station 
• 
FieldSpec 3 Max Analytical Spectral Device (ASD) 
with spectral range 350-2500nm 
• 
Weather Station 
 
A. 
Atmospheric conditions 
During field measurements, the scenario demands that 
atmospheric computations be made to accommodate the 
atmospheric effects, caused by molecular absorption and 
emission (mainly water and carbon dioxide, as well as 
atmospheric 
scattering 
processes 
by 
aerosols). 
The 
atmospheric modelling codes such as MODTRAN, HITRAN 
and others can be used to simulate the atmospheric 
transmission as described below.                                              
        
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The atmospheric transmission was calculated using the 
HITRAN Radiation Transfer Model (RTM) in the NIR 
region, as shown in Figure 5. The HITRAN data downloaded 
were in vacuum scale and converted to air using the Elden 
equation (NIST). The following parameters were used: 20°C 
air temperature, 101325pa air pressure and 50% humidity 
percentage [17]. The red lines show the Potassium doublet at 
766.48nm and 769.89nm. The 766.48 is absorbed by 
atmospheric Oxygen as it is located at the Oxygen absorption 
line and therefore cannot be detected. The K emission lines 
are within the range of the sequence of the atmospheric 
absorption lines that peak at about762 nm [22]. 
 
 
 
Figure 5: The high spectral resolution Oxygen atmospheric transmittance 
near the wavelength location of the two Potassium emission spectral lines, 
data from HiTRAN (http://hitran.iao.ru).  
 
The positions of the K-lines are indicated by two vertical red 
lines and the deep lines shows the absorption effects arising 
from the atmospheric absorption gases. 
 
B. 
Field UAV measurement 
 
The test consisted of a controlled ground fire using wood and 
dried grass as the fuel. An analytical spectral device was 
setup on the ground close to the fire (approximately 3m) 
which is used to record the spectral signature of the fire as it 
burns. It provides reference spectral data of the fire from the 
ground for checking whether the NIR signature is contained 
within the fire. The range at which the detection tests are 
conducted is approximately 150m from the fire. Two test 
points of interest applicable and sufficient for proving the 
initial success of the fire detection system is highlighted in 
the next section. Figure 6 below gives an illustrative 
overview of the mission profile used during the fire detection 
tests.  
 
 Figure 6: Illustrative overview of flight mission profiles 
V. RESULTS 
     Some of the results from the fire detection tests are 
presented here. These include UAV NIR image sensor data as 
well as spectral data recorded by the ASD on the ground.  
Whenever the NIR image sensor results are shown, they are 
shown in pairs. The left image is a masked image and the 
right-hand side is the target image which has the K-line 
emission signature. The K-line signature is indicated as a red 
overlay after image processing has been applied. The black 
and white target image shows the masking and therefore 
isolating the K-line signature. 
The ASD FieldSpec 3 spectroradiometer data is also presented 
as a pair of images with the left hand side image showing the 
total spectral image of the fire in the 350-2500 nm spectral 
band. The right-hand side shows the zoomed unresolved K-
line doublet. The various colour lines shown in the total 
spectral graph indicate the different spectral graphs of the fire 
at different instances as it burns within a short timeframe (such 
as during a testpoint recording).  The emission spectrum of the 
fire is clearly visible with spectral radiance generally 
increasing with wavelength. 
Various flight profiles were flown as shared below. 
A. Test Point 1:45 Degree Aspect Angle Fire Detection 
The sensor was able to detect fire from an angle (in this 
scenario the angle 45° is used). The images were captured 
while the drone was at 45°  as shown in Figure 6. Figure 7 (a) 
is the masked image of the K-line emission from the fire 
while 7 (b) shows the unmasked image with K-line painted in 
red.  
 
                    (a)                                    (b) 
Figure 7: NIR sensor images during angular (45°) detection of fire 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The NIR signature was fully detected by the ASD spectral 
sensor as it was placed close to the scene of the fire. The ASD 
data is given in Figure 8 below. Multiple ASD spectral 
measurements were taken while the UAV was airborne, as 
shown in Figure 8(a) and 8(b). 
 
     
                        (a)                                             (b) 
           Figure 8: ASD spectral data with NIR zoomed K-line unresolved 
doublet. The figure shows the spectral radiance of the fire within the NIR 
region. 
Figure 8(b) is the zoomed spectra showing the unresolved K-
line doublet due to the low ASD resolution of 3nm. 
B. 
Test Point 2: Flying directly Above the Fire (90° 
aspect angle) 
The sensor was able to detect fire from directly above as 
shown in Figure 9. The figure shows the NIR images as 
detected by the K-line band.  
 
 
                                 
Figure 9: NIR sensor images showing fire detection from directly above 
Data logging was a success on the ASD sensor however, the 
results show that the K-line signature was not strong (figure 
10). This is suspected to be because  the fire was not burning 
strong after adding more wood. 
 
             (a)                                                   (b) 
 
Figure 10: ASD data with NIR doublet extracted (b) unresolved K-line 
doublet. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
 
Small scale fires were captured using a K-line based fire 
detection sensor mounted on an unmanned aerial vehicle 
during a field trial at the Centurion Flying club, Pretoria, 
South Africa. Results present strong evidence of K-line 
signature within the vegetation fires detectable by compact 
CMOS cameras operating within the NIR. The ASD 
measurement confirmed the spectral location of the K alkali 
metal present on the vegetation biomass.  
       This study provides the possibility to perform early fire 
detection of vegetation biomass using low cost NIR sensors 
integrated on unmanned aerial vehicles coupled with 
advanced image processing algorithms. This work is 
recommended as work in progress to develop system that will 
not only detect but geo-locate, monitor fire progression, and 
make evolution estimates of fires in real-time.    
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The Optronic Sensor Systems (OSS) together with all the team 
members involved in this work, owes thanks to the 
Aeronautical Sciences Impact Area at the CSIR for the 
technical assistance provided and to the Department of 
Science and Innovation (DSI) for their financial support and 
funding for enabling this research effort. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Robert S. A., M. Joshua, J. G. Craig, and S. Jennings, Airborne Optical 
and Thermal Remote Sensing for Wildfire Detection and Monitoring, 
2016. 
[2] Liu, Y., J.A. Stanturf, and S.L. Goodrick. Trends in global wildfire 
potential in a changing climate. Forest Ecology and Management, 
259(2010):685–697, 2009. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2009. 
09.002. 
[3] Kelly, R., L. Melissa. C, Philip, E. Higuera, I. Stefanova, B. L. 
Brubaker, and F. Sheng Hu. Recent burning of boreal forests exceeds 
fire regime limits of the past 10,000 years. Proceedings of the National 
Academy 
of 
Sciences, 
110(32):13055–13060, 
2013. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 1305069110. 
[4] Philip E. Dennison, Dar A. Roberts, and Lucy Kammer. Wildfire 
Detection for Retrieving Fire Temperature from Hyperspectral Data. In 
ASPRS 2008 Annual Conference, volume 1, pages 139–146, 2008. 
http: //www.asprs.org/a/publications/proceedings/portland08/0015.pdf 
[5] Robinson, J.M., Fire from space: global fire evaluation using infrared 
remote sensing. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 12, 3-24, 
1991. 
[6] Fuller, D.O., Satellite remote sensing of biomass burning using optical 
and thermal sensors, Progress in Physical Geography, 24, 543-561, 
2000. 
[7] Lentile, L.B., Z.A. Holden, A.M. Smith, M.J. Falkowski, A.T. Hudak, 
P. Morgan, S.A. Lewis, P.E. Gessler, and N.C. Benson, Remote 
sensing techniques to assess active fire characteristics and post fire 
effects, International Journal of Wildland Fire, 15, 319-345, 2006. 
[8] Thomas, P.J., and O.N, Near-infrared forest fire detection concept, 
Applied Optics, 32, 5348-5355, 1993. 
[9] Wang, Z., Modelling Wildland Fire Radiance in Synthetic Remote 
Sensing Scenes, PhD thesis, 2007. 
[10] Magidimisha, E., and D, Griffiths, Remote optical observations of 
actively burning biomass fires using potassium line emission, 
Proceedings of the SPIE, Volume 10036, id. 1003611 6 pp, 2016.  
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[11] Stefania A, J. Martin, b. Wooster, and A. Piscini, Multi-resolution 
spectral analysis of wildfire potassium emission signatures using 
laboratory, airborne and spaceborne remote sensing, Remote Sensing 
of Environment, 115, 1811–1823, 2011.  
[12] Allison, R.S., A, J. M. Johnston, G. Craig, and S. Jennings, Airborne 
Optical and Thermal Remote Sensing for Wildfire Detection and 
Monitoring, Sensors 2016. 
[13] Yuan, C., Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Vision-based Forest Fire Detection in 
Aerial Images for Firefighting Using UAVs, 2015. 
[14] Sudhakar, S. V. Vijayakumar, C.S Kumar, V. Priya, L. Ravi, V. 
Subramaniya swamy, Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) based Forest 
Fire Detection and monitoring for reducing false alarms in forest-fires. 
Comput. Commun, 149, 1–16, 2020. 
[15] Chen, Y., Y. Zhang, J. Xin, Y. Yi, D. Liu, H. Liu, A UAV-based Forest 
Fire Detection Algorithm Using Convolutional Neural Network. In 
Proceedings of the IEEE 37th Chinese Control Conference,Wuhan, 
China, 25–27 July, pp. 10305–10310, 2018. 
[16] Vodacek, A., Kremens, R. L., Fordham, A. J., Vangorden, S. C., Luisi, 
D., Shott, J. R., &Latham, D. J. Remote optical detection of biomass 
burning using a potassium emission signature. International Journal of 
Remote Sensing, 23(3), 721−2726, 2002.  
[17] Nist Atomic Spectral Database. URL.http://Physics.nist.gov, 2001. 
[18] S.Amici, M.J. Wooster, and A. Piscini. Multi-resolution spectral 
analysis of wildfire potassium emission signatures using laboratory, 
airborne and spaceborne remote sensing, 2011.   
[19] Latham, D., 1998, Near-infrared spectral lines in natural !res. 
Proceedings of the III International Conference on Forest Fire 
Research/14th Conference on Fire and Forest Meteorology, 16–20 
November 1998 (Coimbra, Portugal: ADAI), pp. 513–515. 
[20] "OpenCV Tutorial Optical Flow"  docs.opencv.org.  
https://docs.opencv.org/4.5.1/d4/dee/tutorial_optical_flow.html 
(accessed Apr. 4, 2023). 
[21] Ononye, A. E., A. Vodacek, and R. Kremens, Fire temperature retrieval 
using constrained spectral unmixing and emissivity estimation, 
Algorithms and Technologies for Multispectral, Hyperspectral, and 
Ultraspectral Imagery XI 5806, 352 – 360, [doi: 10.1117/12.603440], 
2005. 
[22] Pearse, R.W.B., and A.G. Gaydon, The identification of Molecular 
Spectra (London: Chapman and Hall), 1976. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

