Semi-automatic Oil Spill Detection in Sentinel-1 SAR Images at Brazil’s Coast 
 
Alexandre Corrêa da Silva¹, William Gomes de Branco¹, Dagnaldo Penha Torquato da Silva¹, Lui Txai Calvoso 
Habl¹, Thaise Rachel Sarmento¹ and Mariano Federico Pascual¹ 
¹HEX Informatica Ltda (HEXGIS) 
Brasilia, Brazil 
e-mail: {alexandre.silva, william.branco, dagnaldo.silva, lui.habl, thaise.sarmento, mariano.pascual}@hexgis.com 
 
 
Abstract— This paper reports a methodology proposed on the 
matter of semi-automatic detection of oil spills using Sentinel-1 
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) images to improve the 
capability of management of government agencies for oil spills 
incidents over the seas. This is an initiative to create a semi-
automated system of detection based on free images of 
Sentinel-1 using an intelligent database of samples statistics of 
oils, confirmed by vessels or airplanes and photo-interpreted, 
and oceanographic features that continues improving itself 
over time. The results indicate that both the VV and HH 
polarizations of the Sentinel-1 detected probable oil-spills and 
look-alikes, however, the utility of the Sentinel-1 cross-
polarizations (VH and HV) in oil-spill detection could not be 
discarded. Other parameters will be improved and included in 
this study, as parameters of segmentation, besides process of 
data mining. 
Keywords-semi-automatic; sentinel-1; sar; oil spill; seas 
monitoring. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One of the challenges that the oil and gas industries face 
is the management of oil spills at seas. Brazil has a huge 
coastal zone with over 7,000 kilometers of extension and 
with many activities of offshore oil exploitation, oil 
transportation and a constant high vessels traffic. Monitoring 
constantly such an extensive area with the existing paid 
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) increases substantially the 
costs of any projects in this area, making most of them 
inviable. As a low-cost alternative, the Sentinel-1 Satellite 
radar images are made available by the European Space 
Agency (ESA) free of charge on the Sentinel data hub. 
However, this is a recent technology (launch year 2014 for 
satellite 1-A and 2016 for satellite 1-B), and the revisit time 
is of 12 days for most Brazil’s areas, thus, one of the project 
problems to solve is the shortage of oil spill samples. Other 
difficulties are the needs of a valid compatible database with 
spills and look-alikes for algorithms improvement [8]. 
The SAR monitoring of the oil spills over the oceans had 
proved its efficacy during daytime, nighttime, and any kind 
of weather. In the last decade, a lot of researches on 
automatic and semiautomatic methods of oil spill detections 
have been documented [2][6], and they provided a lot of 
knowledge for the creation of a methodology with the usage 
of Sentinel-1 satellite images. 
The main objective of the proposed methodology is to 
create a semi-automated process capable of helping the 
interpretation of oil spills using Sentinel-1 SAR images as a 
primary input. 
This work is presented in four sections, as follows: 
Section II presents the methodological approach initially 
adopted to solve the problems mentioned in the introduction, 
including information about the studied area, the statistics 
used, the processes applied to the images and the digital 
resources used. Section III presents the preliminary results, 
since this work is under implementation now, and a 
discussion about these results. Section IV exposes the 
conclusions that could be obtained, so far in the research 
process. 
II. 
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH 
This proposal was initially inspired by the methodology 
for automatic oil spills detection in Envisat, Radarsat and 
ERS SAR images, as described in [1] and adapted to work 
with Sentinel-1 images. Most of the adaptations were made 
by: (a) using sensor specific modules; (b) generating the 
wind data from the input image; (c) including combined 
filters before segmentation and; (d) including specialists 
control of classification quality, alerts and warning reports 
through the interface of the system. 
A. General explanation 
The SAR images chosen to work with in this project 
were Sentinel-1A and 1B with the beam mode of 
Interferometric Wide and the polarization VV. After the 
availability of the image on the ESA website, Ground Range 
Detected (GRD) data are downloaded and passed through 
seven preprocessing/processing steps consisting of: (a) Orbit 
corrections and radiometric calibration to sigma naught to 
generate the Normalized Radar Cross Section (NRCS) 
values; (b) The direction of the wind for the image is 
estimated through frequency domain method and the speed is 
estimated through C-band Geophysical Model 5 (CMOD5); 
(c) The image is resampled to 40 meters and then filtered 
with Median Filter followed by a Low-Pass Filter as 
suggested [4] for better results in suppressing the speckle 
noise; (d) The land parts of the images, if there are any, are 
masked and the dark spot segmentation step is applied 
through a process of Adaptive Threshold as described [2]; (e) 
The object resulting of the segmentation has its statistics 
calculated and the more significant samples are chosen to fill 
the samples database in order to improve continually the 
process. (f) The statistics of the new objects area compared 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

with those of the database and through Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) classification returns a percentage to the 
object to be in the class of oil spill; (g) Through a web 
interface the users of different agencies can decide the 
importance of the dark spot visualized, if it is a case of oil 
spill verification or alert, this information also returns to the 
database of samples, helping to improve the classification. 
B. Information About the Statistics 
The statistical analysis was based on researches like [7]; 
however, those which were tested in this work are: 
 
Area of the object in square kilometers. 
 
Length of the border of the object in kilometers. 
 
Perimeter to Area ratio. 
 
Object complexity [10]. 
 
Object mean value. 
 
Object standard deviation. 
 
Object power to mean ratio. 
 
Background mean value. 
 
Background Standard Deviation. 
 
Background power to mean ratio. 
 
Ratio of the power to mean ratios. 
 
Mean contrast. 
 
Max contrast. 
 
Mean contrast ratio. 
 
Standard deviation contrast ratio. 
Also, three additional statistics were added to the 
previous list to complement the attributes of the dark spots 
polygons: 
 
Area in pixels 
 
Minimum value 
 
Mean wind field intensity. 
C. Representation of the processes 
In Figs. 1-4 it is possible to visualize the whole process 
and the decisions associated with the automatic part and the 
user decision part.  
 
Figure 1. Flow diagram of the automated processes of acquisition of the 
proposed semi-automatic oil spill detection.  
 
Figure 2. Flow diagram of automated processes of image qualification of 
the proposed semi-automatic oil spill detection. 
 
 
Figure 3. Flow diagram of decisions to processes or to archive the images 
of the proposed semi-automatic oil spill detection. 
 
 
Figure 4. Flow diagram of the image processing part of the proposed semi-
automatic oil spill detection. 
 
Figure 4 presents the image processing methodology 
based on [8] adding an extra part at the end for the user 
interaction and decision. 
 
 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

D. Development 
All processes are already automated using python scripts 
together with the modules of the open source software and 
extensions: (a) SNAP (Sentinel Application Platform); (b) 
S1TBX (Sentinel-1 Toolbox); (c) QGIS; (d) GDAL 
(Geospatial Data Abstraction Library) and; (e) PostGIS. 
E. SAR Images and Study Area 
One hundred Sentinel-1 images were analyzed, most of 
them over the Campos sedimentary basin, located on the 
coast of the states of Rio de Janeiro and Espírito Santo - 
Brazil, one of the most relevant regions for oil exploitation 
and with a great volume of vessels traffic. Fig. 5 shows the 
location map of Campos basin and the research area. 
 
 
Figure 5. Location map of Campos sedimentary basin. 
 
The Brazilian Institute of Environment and Renewable 
Natural Resources - IBAMA is helping the project with oil 
spills interpretations, reports and verified samples. Two 
groups of samples were created to contribute with different 
weights:  
1) Samples photo-interpreted by speciatlists; 
2) Samples confirmed with flights or other sources. 
Bellow, in Figs. 6-8 are presented some of the samples 
with the respective delimitation generated by the Adaptive 
Threshold segmentation process: 
 
Figure 6. Oil spill in proximity of a platform at Campos Basin. 
 
Figure 7. Oil spill in proximity with a vessel at Campos Basin. 
 
Figure 8. Orphan possible oil spill at Campos Basin. 
 
The statistics of the samples are weighted and then used 
as a data input to the Support Vector Machine Classifier - 
SVC to set scores for each class to each polygon generated 
by the Adaptive Threshold segmentation. The SVC was 
initially chosen for its ability to classify data that is non-
linearly separable. These scores are then used to compose a 
filter to display only the relevant polygons to the users 
interact on the web interface. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
In the scientific research mentioned in [9], it seems that 
using X-band SAR images can provide better results for oil-
spill detection than using L-band or C-band SAR images. 
The Sentinel-1A and Sentinel-1B have C-band SAR sensors. 
Also, it is observed that many researches mention that the 
VV polarization gives better results for interpretation of 
oceanographic features. In this project using the proposed 
methodology we detected probable oil-spills and look-alikes 
in both polarizations VV and HH. 
When the backscatter of the ocean reaches, or stays close 
to the noise floor of a SAR sensor, it may produce a non-
adequate signal with limited interpretation capability 
reducing the utility of that data. In most cases, it is visible a 
stripe pattern in the parts where it stays close to the noise 
floor along the image; that pattern was identified along many 
cross-polarized Sentinel-1 images. The Sentinel-1 noise floor 
in sigma naught is -25dB. 
In Figs. 9-12, it is possible to see the results on a prior stage 
with manual attribute filters, before the SVC, where the 
green features are selected for the interaction with the users 
and the red features are filtered. 
 
 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 9. Classification results at image 0451 on Campos Basin at 2016 
January 29 on an early stage. 
 
 
Figure 10. Graphical representation of visible features, in green, for user 
interaction on the web interface for the image on Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 11. Classification results at image 2D51 on Campos Basin at 
2016 July 20 on an early stage. 
 
 
Figure 12. Graphical representation of visible features, in green, for user 
interaction on the web interface for the image on Figure 11. 
 
The resample to 40 meters described in the methodology 
was adopted after a comparison between the segmentation 
results from the same images with and without resample. 
The comparison results were that the polygons generated had 
different areas, perimeter and shapes; however, the 
comparison between the values extracted from the features 
of the sample groups, the 10 meters and the 40 meters, shows 
that the results were very similar. More studies about these 
results could describe the differences more precisely with 
efficient comparison methodologies, and the impact that 
these differences can cause on the features extraction or on 
the results of the classification. The implementation of this 
resample improved the processing time of the images from 5 
to 6 times and the result is clearer and with more defined 
bounds. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The cross-polarizations (HV and VH) of all the Sentinel-
1 images tested on the ocean areas, could be responding 
close to the noise floor, as the dark spots are not visible or 
recognizable. Thus, the entire research is being conducted 
with co-polarization (HH and VV). However, the utility of 
the Sentinel-1 cross-polarizations in oil-spill detection could 
not be discarded since it would need further researches. 
Using as a reference a table taken from [7] with the 25 
most used features for oil-spill detection, we implemented 
only 15 to achieve the results presented in this paper, and 
the implementation of the other 10 features could be used 
for further implementation of the processes to achieve better 
results. The selection and implementation of the additional 
features is a difficult part, since it is necessary to analyze the 
features that give a better separation between the samples of 
oil and the samples of each type of look-alikes, modifying 
the features set and each weight to be applied. In the current 
work, the 15 features listed on subsection II.B were initially 
selected based on the project contingency, considering: (a) 
the speed of the research; (b) the speed of the 
implementation and; (c) the influence of the feature on the 
results. Since the system was developed to attend a 
governmental necessity to speed up the manual process of 
generating vectors and reports, the speed was an important 
matter. Also, it was based on classification learning through 
samples and user decision. One of the main objectives of the 
project was to reach an operational version as soon as 
possible while the research continues to run in the 
background. 
With the system implemented, the expectations are that 
with the increase of evaluations of the samples, the database 
will become more robust and reliable, with many different 
samples shapes in many different conditions, solving the 
problem of shortage of oil-spill samples. In Figs. 13-14 is 
possible to see the evaluation process in the application. 
 
 
 
 
7% 
93% 
10% 
90% 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 13. Selection of the pre-classified Oil-Spill. 
 
Figure 14. Classification options available for the users. 
 
As seen in the previous figures, the user can select the 
dark regions in the application window or from a list and 
choose a predefined class to classify or reclassify them. The 
application also keeps record of the changes and the person 
who changed it. 
The team is continuing analyzing Sentinel-1 images and 
improving the parameters of segmentation to have the best 
possible delimitation of the samples to extract the statistics. 
More statistical data could be included in the set. Once the 
project 
keeps 
running 
its 
development 
phase, 
the 
characteristics that are on the row to be included are: 
 
First invariant planar moment 
 
Slick width 
 
Distance to coast 
 
Quantity of objects in the proximity 
 
Proximity of big areas 
 
Chorophyll-a information 
 
Sea surface temperature information 
A process of data mining is going to be applied to create 
the best number of classes with a good combination to be 
used in the SVC process. Other classifiers can also be used to 
compare results. Besides oil, the classes could be low wind, 
coastal wind shelter, upwelling, and further classes that 
become more suitable to improve the classification success 
rate. Also, more studies on the interchangeability of 
statistical data from another sensor could be made and an 
integration of the system with other sources of images will 
be on the schedule. 
The main contribution to achieve with this project is to 
reach the best features set to automatically classify the oil-
spills. Another contribution is the creation of a large database 
with the statistical characteristics of oil-spill, oceanographic 
and weather features derived from Sentinel-1 images. 
Specialists will continuously analyze and validate each 
pertinent dark region as the system is implemented. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work described in this paper is part of a UK-Brazil 
cooperative project entitled Oil & Gas Production and 
Operational Efficiency, which is sponsored by the Prosperity 
Fund, through the British Embassy in Brazil. HEX 
Informática Ltda. was responsible for developing the 
project’s component on improving the detection of oil spills 
in Brazilian waters. The project also counts with the 
technical support of the Brazilian Institute of Environment 
and Renewable Natural Resources - IBAMA. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. S. Solberg, S. Dokken, and R. Solberg, "Automatic detection of oil 
spills in Envisat Radarsat and ERS SAR images," Proc. IEEE Symp. 
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS 
2003), 
IEEE 
press, 
2003, 
pp. 
2747-2749 
vol.4, 
doi: 
10.1109/IGARSS.2003.1294572 
[2] A. S. Solberg, C. Brekke, and R. Solberg, "Algorithms for oil spill 
detection in Radarsat and Envisat SAR images," IGARSS 2004. 2004 
IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 
Anchorage, pp. 4909-4912 vol.7, 2004. 
[3] C. C. Wackerman, W. G. Pichel, and P. Clemente-Colon, “Automated 
estimation of wind vectors from SAR,” 12th Conference on 
Interactions of the Sea and Atmosphere, 2003. 
[4] C. Özkan and F. Sunar, “Comparisons of different semi-automated 
techniques for oil-spill detection: A case study in Lebanon,” Proc. 
27th EARSeL Symp. Symposium on GeoInformation in Europe, 
Millpress, 2007, pp. 463-470. 
[5] H. Hersbach, “CMOD5, An Improved Geophysical Model Function 
for ERS C-Band Scatterometry,” Report of the European Centre 
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), 2003. 
[6] K. Topouzelis, V. Karathanassi, P. Pavlakis, and D. Rokos, "Oil spill 
detection: SAR multiscale segmentation and object features 
evaluation," Proc. SPIE Vol. 4880, Remote Sensing of the Ocean and 
Sea Ice 2002, SPIE, 2003, pp. 77-87, doi:10.1117/12.462518; 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.462518 
[7] K. Topouzelis, D. Stathakis, and V. Karathanassi, “Investigation of 
genetic algorithms contribution to feature selection for oil spill 
detection,” International Journal of Remote Sensing, Vol. 30, No. 3, 
March 2009, pp. 611-625, doi: 10.1080/01431160802339456. 
[8] K. Topouzelis and S. Singha, “Oil spill detection: past and future 
trends”, Proc. Living Planet Symposium 2016, SP-740, ESA, May 
2016, pp. 1-4. 
[9] M. Fingas, Oil Spill Science and Technology: Prevention, Response, 
and Clean Up., 1st ed., Burlington, MA: Gulf Professional 
Pub./Elsevier, 2011, pp. 125-132. 
[10] V. Karathanassi, K. Topouzelis, P. Pavlakis, and D. Rokos, “An 
object-oriented methodology to detect oil spills,” International 
Journal of Remote Sensing, March 2006, Vol. 27, No. 23, pp.5235–
5251, doi: 10.1080/01431160600693575. 
 
 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

