An Architecture for Geographic Information Systems on the Web - webGIS 
Mariano Pascaul, Eluzai Alves, Tati de Almeida, 
George Sand de França, Henrique Roig 
Geosciences Institute 
University of Brasilia, UnB 
Brasilia, Brazil 
mariano.pascual@gmail.com 
Maristela Holanda  
Department of Computer Science 
University of Brasilia, UnB  
Brasilia, Brazil 
mholanda@cic.unb.br
 
 
Abstract— Geographic Information Systems for the web 
(webGIS) are being implemented for different purposes. In this 
context, one of the greatest challenges is to integrate different 
sources of geographic data, as well as the visualization of this 
information using maps in an interactive environment. This 
paper presents a proposal for architecture for the webGIS with 
interoperability between different sources of heterogeneous 
data, as well as the visualization of maps in different formats 
with components implemented with Web 2.0 technology. The 
architecture was validated through a case study that 
implemented a webGIS to academic research at the 
Geosciences Institute of the University of Brasilia. 
Keywords-Geographical 
Information 
System; 
webGIS; 
Geographical database; Map Visualization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Geographic data, having been collected, is now available 
in a wide variety of formats. Geographic data is available in 
files, databases or Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 
[1]. A GIS is frequently defined as the combination of a 
database management system, a set of operations for 
exploring data, and a graphic display system that is used for 
geospatial analysis. These GIS analyses have the main 
purpose of supporting decision making and modeling some 
of 
the 
possible 
consequences 
of 
those 
decisions 
[2][8][16][20]. GIS environments are also cartographic tools 
that facilitate building maps and examining the impacts of 
changes to the maps interactively [1][3][5][9][11][12]. 
Currently, GIS on the web (webGIS) is being developed, 
and one challenge in that environment is interoperability 
among heterogeneous databases. For interoperability of the 
data, the web services technology is being used [15]. The 
standard set by the OGC (OpenGIS Consrtium) proposes the 
open service architecture of web GIS to support data-
interoperability. And, it suggests the GML (Geographic 
Markup Language) based on XML to exchange the data 
between the web client and the web GIS [6][7]. REST [22] 
technology is also used to support interoperability with 
geographical databases.  
For the visualization of maps in an interactive way, Web 
2.0 
technology 
is 
being 
applied 
through 
different 
components of RIA (Rich Internet Application). As is 
observed in [10], this technology is being applied for the 
development of web-GIS. Web mapping applications such as 
Google Maps, Google Earth, Microsoft Bing Maps and 
Yahoo Maps are usually considered good examples of Web 
2.0 [15].  
This paper presents an architecture for webGIS based on 
Web 2.0 and interoperability among different geographical 
data. The architecture is based on web services and can be 
used with open or owner map and database servers.  
The content of this paper is divided into the following 
sections: 2 – basic concepts about webGIS are presented; 3 – 
the proposed architecture is defined; 4 – related works, 
which are analyses; 5 – Case Study, where the architecture 
was used to develop the GIS for the Geosciences Institute of 
the University of Brasilia; and finally, 6 – the conclusions. 
. 
II. 
WEBGIS 
Web GIS is any GIS that uses Web technologies. The 
simplest form of webGIS should have at least a server and a 
client, where the server is a Web application server, and the 
client is a Web browser, a desktop application, or a mobile 
application [15][4].  
With regard to the architecture of a webGIS, the 
architecture based on three layers is most commonly used: 
User Interface Layer, Application Server Layer and Database 
Layer [17][19][21]. Some authors considered four layers, 
where the integration layer is added on the architecture 
webGIS, which is based on web services [14]. 
The User Interface layer serves as a graphic user 
interface (GUI) to present the result of spatial data, allowing 
the end users to interact with the backend services 
The Application Server layer communicates with 
multiple data sources via the data integration layer, and 
interacts with end users to analyze and manipulate data 
coming from data provider services 
The Database layer of data provider services, is a set of 
remote data provider services for data sharing. Each data 
provider service offers a set of interfaces through which 
client applications can pull remote data in and manipulate the 
data. 
III. 
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE 
The model proposed (Figure 1) presents an abstract 
architecture for a webGIS. In this model we observe a set of 
classes developed that integrate with one another and servers 
of interoperability, and web services in the treatment and 
insertion of information, as well as in the availability of data 
for the final user. 
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The use of web services and the development of classes 
that read and organize the overlay of data provided with 
servers of owner interactive map or of open software, 
provide a hybrid tool that can use WMS, WCS or REST for 
the presentation of layers on the web in a single RIA 
application utilizing web services. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Abstract Model of the proposed architecture 
 
 
Each component of the abstract architecture is described 
as follow. 
• 
Shapefile Overlay 
Component that enables the opening of shapefile files 
and their attributes, providing the overlay of geometries 
available in .shp files in the web Flex environment, the 
constant attributes in .dbf files are presented in a tabular 
format and related to the correspondent geometry. The 
features that can be viewed are: line, point, or polygon. In 
order to do this simply click on the tool of the folder with the 
zipped file containing minimally formatted .shp, .shx and 
dbf. Files. In case the set of files is projected in a system 
distinct to the map base, the inclusion of the compacted file 
.prj is necessary for the system to complete re-projection. In 
the construction of this component were used methods for 
the reading of attributes of the DBF written in ActionScript 
and also for reading the files in .shp format about the same 
language.  
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

     As it is necessary to open the files in a zipped format a 
unzipping package was used on files also written in 
ActionScript. 
• 
GPX Overlay 
The great quantity of Garmim brand GPS field 
equipment users was an enormous motivator in the 
development of this component, which makes the overlay of 
files downloaded directly from equipment of this type 
possible. All of the waypoints available to track overlays of a 
line where the initial point is presented in green, the path in 
yellow and the end in red are presented.  The attributes given 
to the paths are shown in a floating table. The standard open 
GPX format was considered in the construction of the 
component. 
• 
KML Overlay 
This class provides the opening and comparison of the 
routes generated in Google Map platforms, and also in 
simple files in KML format, the available attributes in the 
referred to file are also presented in splints through floating 
panels. 
• 
Vectorization 
The class that serves vectorization and release in distinct 
database formats such as lines, points and polygons. 
Algorithms for the calculation of the area and perimeter are 
also in this class, if sending to the database is not necessary, 
the user can opt to save the designed features on a local disc. 
This component acts directly linked to the components in 
PHP for recording in database, the Flex interface, responsible 
for the instruments of vectorization accessing through web-
services, routines that insert data in a determined data base 
already established. After the insertion one can, on moving 
or updating the map, visualize the geometry already inserted. 
This is possible because the feature is available as a service 
on the map base, facilitating the availability through ArcGIS 
Server as well as the Geoserver Java. For the case of use 
presented here the Post GIS type data was used directly. 
• 
Graphics 
Tools for which geographic database tables, or simply 
web services about them, can be chosen by way of selection 
boxes, from which one can select numerical attributes and 
vectorize an area on the screen resulting in pizza or bar form 
graphics. These are interesting analytical tools for statistical 
census data, however, with geographic presentation and 
selection. 
• 
Exporting Data 
Totally integrated components or Geoserver Java 
interactive server maps, can be made through this class, with 
the selection and later exportation and download of layers or 
a part of them in diverse formats such as shapefile, csv, pdf, 
XLS, KML, KMZ, JPG, PNG and others. Through this 
component, whatever is selected by the user on the screen, 
with the exception of the shapefile and Google formats, will 
be presented for download with a quadrant. Thinking a step 
ahead, as of yet developed, will be the component that can 
make the clip using the Geoserver server. 
• 
Buffer with Spatial Query 
Tools of bufferization through which complete features 
or a part of their registers can be used to create buffers. After 
the conclusion of this step the user of the class can once 
again select features, however, now to execute special 
queries about the buffer presented on screen. The result 
presented can be saved so that it is not necessary to complete 
the whole process again. Methods for selection of registers 
and services for generating the buffer were used, soon after 
the execution of the consultation and selection of attributes 
of geographic features about which one need obtain 
information, a spatial consultation is done, which outlines the 
occurrences of information inside the areas of buffers 
intersected. 
• 
Google Street View Integration 
A developed component that integrates with the Google 
Street View Platform, so that the information can be 
visualized  in two dimensions, and through which one can 
navigate on maps, in addition to visualizing, in a part of the 
frame, the entire Google Street platform base, which always 
synchronizes the observation points with the street 
navigation. 
• 
Integrated Overlay REST and WMS 
This is the most important component developed, since it 
makes possible the integration of different formats of 
interactive maps hybridizing the framework, through which 
one can make use of standard REST web services available 
through the software ArcGIS Server as well as the Geoserver 
and makes the overlay transparent to the user of standard 
WMS and WFS web services. Actually tasks such as this are 
already available in API 2.x of the ESRI. 
• 
Navigation and Data Tabs 
A component of presentation and formatting grids was 
built aimed at improving the visual aspect of register lists 
extracted from the database. There is a great interaction 
between the navigation and consultation of attributes related 
to the geometry visualized.   
• 
Treatment of Geographic Database 
This component aims at adopting the tool of a set of 
classes capable of treating incoming information from the 
interface that will be sent to the database, and through this 
one can select which type of database will be used and the 
classes will be the interactions necessary for a correct 
treatment of distinct types between the manufacturers of 
SGBDs. Treatment of Geographic Features: set with the 
minimum rules necessary to avoid classical errors at the 
moment of vectorization, such as the creation of polygonal 
ties. Through this, perimeter and area are also calculated and 
different symbologies can be attributed to the design 
features, such as, completing the recording in databases or in 
the text format to be saved in a locale and overlay. These 
classes were developed using PHP language in standard 
MVC and object orientated, and web-services were made 
available, which it was necessary to send the textual and 
geographic information, vectorized on screen by way of the 
Flex interface, and the information of authentication aiming 
at increasing the degree of security of the tool since, these 
components interact directly with the database chosen. 
 
A. Development of the Architrcture 
For the development of the SIG, various program 
languages were chosen, including: Flex, Action Script, PHP , 
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Java Script and Ajax. Java programming language was used 
in the customizations done for the Geoserver software, and 
was the same language in which the software was written. 
In the development of the SIG web interface, the 
standard RIA, the Flex and Action Script was used. The API 
for Flex of ESRI was used as the core of the application. 
Beginning with the basic navigator, diverse components 
were used in the solution. Among them components capable 
of doing the overlay of layers in WMA and WCS format 
provided by software such as Geoserver, turning the 
navigator maps in SIG hybrid, capable of consuming data 
originating in the ArcGIS Server and/or the Geoserver. 
Another point to be considered is the framework developed 
in PHP language, oriented to objects and in standard MVC—
Model View Controller. This server not only does dynamic 
construction of the electronic forms, but also treats data 
stemming from vectorization and, afterward, stores them in 
special extensions available in databases such as PostGIS of 
the PosgreSQL and Spatial of the Oracle. 
Other components, such as the integration of the Google 
platform, with overlay for shapefile, KML and GPX 
bufferizaiton, spatial and graphic queries were developed and 
incorporated in the application.  
One of the advantages presented by the set of 
components developed is not only the creation of the 
components that approximate the web platform of a GIS 
client/server environment, but the concept of classes makes 
the use of technologies with platforms based on free software 
viable, such as, Geoserver or others that generate web 
services in standard OGC, including WMS and WCS 
through the overlay of layers. Other advantages visualized 
were the speed with which the applications were created 
based on the set of codes developed. 
The customization completed in the software Geoserver, 
together with the system customization done on the 
Geoserver software, aims at accelerating the process of 
making web services for maps available so that they can be 
incorporated quicker in the context of the application, 
although it is not necessary to have such a module to make 
use of the Geoserver software together with the system. 
IV. 
RELATED WORK 
The proposal presented in this paper is the architecture of 
webGIS, which has the characteristic of components based 
on web 2.0 for visualization of spatial data. Our proposal has 
a layer of interoperability with free and own mapping server 
and different Geo-DBMS.  
Shunfu 
Hu 
[19] 
presented 
an 
architecture 
for 
development web-based GIS applications. The webGIS was 
based on Microsoft Visual Basic. Microsoft Internet 
Information Server (MIIS) was employed as web Server and 
ESRI MapObjects Internet map Server as map Server. 
Unlike our proposal, the architecture present in [19] is not 
interoperable. 
Boucelma et al. presented [1] a WFS-based mediation 
system for GIS interoperability. The functional architecture 
of the geo- graphic mediation system is mainly composed of 
three layers: a GIS mediator, Web Feature Servers (WFS) 
and data sources. In [1], the integration of query capabilities 
available at the sources and a geographical query language to 
access and manipulate integrated data is addressed. 
Differently, our architecture integrates the data source and 
the components Treatment of Database and Buffer and 
spatial query.  
Majchrzak and More, in [10], cover how Web 2.0 
technologies can be used to develop GIS through interaction 
with users. In [10], the aide volunteers in disaster situations 
is presented, using Google technologies. Our proposal is an 
abstract with different front-end, map server and Geo-
DBMS, which can be used with Google technologies or 
others. 
Zongyao and Yichun proposed, in [14], a service-
oriented architecture for spatial data integration (SOA-SDI) 
of a large number of available spatial data sources that are 
physically sitting at different places, of which the 
development web-based GIS systems were based on SOA-
SDI, allowing client applications to pull in, analyze and 
present spatial data from those available spatial data sources. 
Lu, in [18], defined a GIS platform architecture as a multi-
layer architecture that integrated the web service, Servlet/JSP 
functions and GIS APIs based on the framework of J2EE 
infrastructure. The GIS system can be accessed by many 
different computers in networks with different kinds of 
operating systems. It is a distributed, platform independent 
system architecture. The data are stored and managed with 
EJB. Frehner and Brandli [20] presented the Virtual 
Database that consists of a framework for web-based 
retrieval, analysis, and visualization of spatially related 
environmental data based on the integration of distributed 
data. This architecture is based on web services. The 
proposal presented in [14][18][20] has the interoperability 
properties, however, our proposal supports more geographic 
data formats. 
V. 
CASE STUDY 
The development of a public consulting system of 
academic research built on a GIS (Geographic Information 
Systems) paradigm, composed of an interface of interactive 
maps available on the Internet, using geographic databases, 
servers of interactive maps that generate services on the web 
and the use of languages and technologies of the latest 
generation for the layer of presentation and interaction with 
users. In Figure 2, we present the initial vision of the system. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Initial View of the System 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Various geographic web services are integrated, such as 
wind velocity and direction services of the American NOOA, 
with the rest platform of the ESRI as a mosaic of world 
images and services of maps from diverse Brazilian 
institutions. Thus, many services were in standard WMS and 
WCS, while services in standard REST were integrated 
guaranteeing then, a good degree of interoperability and 
sharing. 
In Figure 3, we see the geographic features presented 
with the richest detail when using zoom tools on the map; at 
this level of zoom, one can see rural properties in salmon 
tones, as orange highlights the human settlements, and 
airstrips, train tracks and the main rivers can also be seen at 
this level. An altimeter base completes the background. The 
features not used as web services were stored in SGBD 
PostgreSQL with PostGIS. 
 
 
Figure 3. Zoom of detailed information of the geography mounted 
 
The transparency of the maps can be altered and diverse 
layers of information of the same geographic area can be 
presented; this is a resource that Flex technology provides, 
which is useful and has great visual impact. In Figure 4, on 
selecting the area of the city of Rio de Janeiro we have the 
system fusing local data with data from web services of other 
institutions, such as: the Pereira Passos Urban Institute of 
Rio de Janeiro and the Brazilian Institute of the Environment 
and Renewable Natural Resources—IBAMA. 
In Figure 5, we see the integration with the Google Street 
View platform. A point of observation was located in front 
of the Metropolitan Cathedral of the city of Rio de Janeiro; 
one can see in the upper part of the screen a higher view of 
the area and in the lower part a 3-D view obtained by the 
Street View platform of the same region and with the same 
direction of the arrow pointed. 
 
 
Figure 4. Zoom of the city of Rio de Janeiro 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Integration Google Street View 
 
Research tools of academic works were developed, and 
through these one can find scientific articles or studies 
completed in the research area. 
Tools such as buffer and spatial queries were 
implemented and integrated; below shows the two operating 
together, according to data presented in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6. Buffer Tool and Spacial Query 
 
Spatial graphic generating tools permit an evaluation of 
areas excessively inventoried for a determined resource or 
the identification of areas in need of particular studies, or 
identification of the needy areas of the given study, as 
presented in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7: Spatial consultancy tools for generating graphics 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
The architecture presented in this paper proposes a tool 
of rapid implantation and availability of geographic data 
through the web, with a set of services made available, which 
can easily integrate data of structured systems such as, 
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

consumption of information originating from diverse data 
sources.  
The architecture proposed responded well to the system 
of application, much as the same being used for the 
development of other webGIS. Recently IBAMA adopted 
the architecture proposed in this work in the implementation 
of webGIS for the monitoring of its field supervision 
operations; through the set of components available, the 
information of operations and navigation of airships and 
roadways, always in a geo-referenced way are presented. 
Similarly, the effect of agents or the quantity of apprehension 
and automations are informed through structured systems 
and presented in a spatial way on the platform.  
The next step is to implement the proposal architecture 
independent of API ESRI. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
O. Boucelma and M. Essid. “A WFS-Based Mediation System for 
GIS Interoperability”. Proc. ACM GIS’02, 2002, pp. 23-28, 
doi:10.1145/585147.585153. 
[2] 
J. Arenas and H. Zambrano. “Web-based GIS Applications for 
Government”. Proc. 3rd ICEGOV International Conference on 
Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance, Nov. 2009, pp. 383-
384. doi:10.1145/1693042.1693125. 
[3] 
M. Ostergren, J. Hemsley, M. Belarde-Lewis and S. Walker. “A 
Vision for Information Visualization in Information Science”. Proc. 
iConference, Fev. 2011, pp. 531-537, doi: 10.1145/1940761.1940834. 
[4] 
T. Bressan. Desenvolvimento e integração de um ambiente SIGWEB 
com ferramentas de software livre. Master Thesis. Federal University 
of Santa Maria Brazil, 2010. 
[5] 
G. Câmara and G. Queiroz. Geographic Database Book. INPE Press. 
2010.  
[6] 
D. Kim and M. Kim. “Web GIS Service Component Based On Open 
Environment”. Proc. IGARSS Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium. 
IEEE 
Press, 
Jun. 
2002 
pp. 
3346-
3348, doi:10.1109/IGARSS.2002.1027178. 
[7] 
OGC. OpenGIS® Geography Markup Language (GML) Encoding 
Standard 2007.  
[8] 
S. Dragiéevié and S. Balram. “A Web GIS collaborative framework 
to structure and manage distributed planning processes”. Journal of 
Geographical Systems, Spring-Verlag, vol. 6, 2004, pp. 133-153, doi: 
10.1007/s10109-004-0130-7. 
[9] 
M. Rhyne. “Visualizing Geospatial Data”. Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH 
2004, doi:10.1145/1103900.1103931. 
[10] A. Majchrzak and P. More. “Emergency! Web. 2.0 the Rescue!“. 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 54, n. 4, April 2011, pp. 125-132, 
doi:10.1145/1924421.1924449.  
[11] A. Longley, F. Goodchild, J. Maguire and J. Rhind. Geographical 
Information Systems and Science. 2nd Edition. John Wiley & Sons, 
2001. 
[12] P. Rigaux, M. Scholl and A. Voisard. Spatial Databases with 
Application to GIS.  Elsevier Science, 2002. 
[13] A. Lbath and F. Pinet. “The Development and Customization of Gis-
Based Applications and web-based GIS Applications with the CASE 
Tool Aigle”. Proc. 8th ACM international symposium on Advances in 
geographic 
information 
systems, 
2000, 
pp. 
194-196, 
doi: 
10.1145/355274.355307. 
[14] S. Zongyao and X. Yichun. “Design of Service-Oriented Architecture 
for Spatial Data Integration and Its Application in Building Web-
based GIS Systems”. Geo-spatial Information Science. vol. 3, n. 1, 
2010, pp. 8-15, doi:10.1007/s11806-010-0163-7. 
[15] P. Fu and J. Sun. Web GIS: Principles and Applications. ESRI Press 
2010. 
[16] R. Wolfgang. “Principles and Application of Geographic Information 
Systems and Internet/Intranet Technology”. Proc. New Information 
Processing Techniques for Military Systemns, pp. 1-10, 2000. 
[17] J. Baumann. “Future of Web GIS: An Interview with Pinde Fu”. 
GeoConnection International Magazine, April 2011. 
[18] X. Lu.  “An Investigation on Service-Oriented Architecture for 
Constructing Distributed Web GIS Application”. Proc. IEEE 
International Conference on Services Computing, pp. 191-197, 2005, 
doi:10.1109/SCC.2005.27. 
[19] H. Shunfu. “Web-Based Multimedia GIS for the analysis and 
visualization of spatial environmental database”. Proc. Symposium on 
Geospatial Theory, Processing and Applications, 2002. 
[20] P. Tigaux, M. Scholl and A. Voisard. Spatial databses: with 
application to GIS. Editora Morgan Kauffman. 2002. 
[21] M. Frehner and M. Brandli. “Virtual database: Spatial analysis in a 
Web-based data management system for distributed ecological data”. 
Environmental Modelling & Software, vol. 21, 2006, pp. 1544-1554, 
doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2006.05.012. 
[22] K. Page, D. Roure and K. Martinez. “REST and Linked Data: a match 
made for domain driven development?”. Proc. I Second International 
Workshop on RESTful, 2011, doi:10.1145/1967428.1967435. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

