Impact of DEM Processing on the Geotechnical Instability Analysis of Waste Heaps in 
Wallonia  
Odile Close 
Faculty of Bioengineering  
UCL, Université Catholique de Louvain 
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium 
e-mail: odile.close@gmail.com  
Nathalie Stéphenne, Christophe Frippiat 
Risques chroniques 
ISSeP, Institut Scientifique de Service Public 
Liège, Belgium 
e-mail: n.stephenne@issep.be, ch.frippiat@issep.be 
 
 
Abstract— This paper evaluates the effects of Digital Elevation 
Model (DEM) processing on the geotechnical instability 
analysis of four waste heaps located in Western Wallonia. For 
this purpose, an infinite slope stability equation has been 
computed on each cell of two DEMs (LiDAR and 
ERRUISSOL, available on the geoportal of Wallonia). By 
processing raw LiDAR data with various interpolation 
techniques and spatial resolutions, we tested their influence on 
the slope stability analysis. In order to better understand the 
real geotechnical stability, several datasets have been used in 
the analysis (field observation, historical aerial photography 
and ortho-photos). Our results show that interpolation 
techniques and spatial resolution affect the DEM quality in 
regard to slope stability analysis. In particular, by removing 
striped 
patterns 
resulting 
from 
data 
acquisition, 
the 
Triangulation 
technique 
facilitates 
stability 
assessment. 
According to our findings, 10 m resolution is sufficient and 
adequate for stability analysis while 1 m resolution 
overestimates the risk of slope failure. 
Keywords: Digital Elevation Model, LiDAR, geotechnical risk, 
geospatial web services, terrain analysis  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A first inventory of Walloon facilities at risk submitted 
to European Union authorities identified geotechnical 
failure as being one of the major risks linked to coal mine 
waste heaps [1]. The inventory responded to the obligation 
imposed on Member States by Directive 2006/21/EC to 
identify the risks related to waste facilities.  
Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) Digital Elevation 
Model (DEM) was used by [2] for the investigation of 
landslides risks. However, these authors identified some 
interpretation issues in the stability results derived from the 
LiDAR DEM provided by the regional authorities on their 
web geoportal [3]. Their study has quantified the risk of 
geotechnical failure by using a geotechnical factor of safety 
computed on a cell basis using the topography of the 
facility. The topography was extracted either from a 
regional-scale DEM with a spatial resolution of 10 m 
(ERRUISSOL model; [4]) or a new DEM dataset using 
LiDAR scanner which has been acquired by the Walloon 
Region. This dataset with 1 m resolution has been averaged 
to 10 m for direct comparison with the ERRUISSOL DEM. 
As the ERRUISSOL DEM leads to underestimation of 
geotechnical instabilities, it is possible through the LiDAR 
DEM to identify new waste heaps at risk.  
LiDAR is a powerful system for producing a DEM on 
account of its ability to collect three-dimensional 
information very effectively over large areas [5]. However, 
there are many ways of processing a DEM that use different 
interpolation techniques and spatial resolution. Several 
authors [6]-[10] have shown that some interpolation 
methods are more appropriate than others in certain 
circumstances, the method chosen thus having the potential 
of affecting the quality of the DEMs produced [11]. For 
example, according to [14] Triangulated Irregular Networks 
(TINs) is the best interpolation algorithm for fluvial 
environment topics and [5] consider that the DEM generated 
by Binning is efficient for analysing the terrain features 
(communication, energy, agriculture, etc.).   
This paper studies technical choices in terms of 
resolution and interpolation methods by processing raw 
LiDAR data rather than provided DEM and analysing their 
potential for the specific topic of landslide risks. Comparing 
processing methods with detailed field knowledge increases 
the applicability of these data in the Walloon decision 
making process.  
The paper is structured as follows.  Section II presents 
the studied area and the context of the study. Section III 
describes the different datasets. Section IV explains the 
methodology used. Finally, Section V presents our 
conclusions.    
II. 
CASE STUDY 
The present study evaluates the slope stability of four 
waste heaps located in western Wallonia (Heribus, 14-17 et 
Siege Social, Crachet 7-12 and Saint-Placide). The study 
area is located in the Borinage Region (Figure 1). In the past 
century, the economy of the Region was based on coal 
exploitation. However, this activity has been closed for a 
long time (the last operating coal mine in Wallonia closed in 
1984). Nowadays, waste heaps and abandoned buildings are 
the only surviving traces of this period.   
According to Directive 2006/21/EC, Member States 
have to establish an inventory of closed mining waste 
facilities potentially posing a serious threat to human health 
or environment. In Wallonia, two main risks associated with 
mining waste deposits have been identified: the risk of 
geotechnical failure and the risk of spontaneous combustion 
[1].  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 1. Location of the waste heaps 
The inventory has been made in a Geographical 
Information System (GIS) using existing datasets provided 
either by European institutions (European Environmental 
Agency, EEA) or regional authorities (Service Public de 
Wallonie, SPW). GIS inputs include topographic data 
(location of settlements, surface waters, terrain, etc.), census 
figures, protected areas, land use/land cover surfaces, 
delineation of groundwater bodies (according to the Water 
Framework Directive), and site data that are specific to the 
waste facilities under consideration (location, contents, 
geometry, etc.). Table 1 illustrates some of the criteria used 
to define the level of risk for each Walloon coal tips. The 
four waste heaps object of this study were all classified in 
category 5, which means that they involve at least one 
specific risk and that there is at least one potential target 
located in the immediate vicinity of the closed waste facility 
referenced on the web site [12]. 
TABLE 1 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FOUR WASTE HEAPS AND 
CLASSIFICATION 
Risk 
Assessment 
criteria  
Heribus 
14-17 et 
Siege Social 
Crachet 7-
12 
Saint-
Placide 
Height > 20 
m  
yes (75.2 m) yes (78.3 m) yes (60.2 
m) 
yes (35.1 
m) 
Slope > 1/12 
no  
no 
no 
no 
Volume > 
70,000 m³ 
yes (5.2 106 
m³) 
yes (4.1 106 
m³) 
yes (3.4 106 
m³) 
yes (1.5 106 
m³) 
Main 
foundation 
slope > 33% 
no  
yes  
yes 
yes 
Materials 
exposed to 
the wind 
no  
no 
no 
no 
Waste 
facility 
uncovered 
no  
no 
no 
no 
Target within 
1 km 
yes 
(watercourse 
and 
population) 
yes 
(population) 
yes 
(population) 
yes 
(population) 
Natura 2000 
site within 1 
km 
yes 
yes 
yes 
no 
Risk 
classification 
5 
5 
5 
5 
III. 
DATA 
The quantitative inventory established to answer the 
Directive permits a pre-selection of the facilities that 
demand further risk analysis. The four heaps selected in this 
paper need this detailed analysis which refers to 
geotechnical modelling, field observations and visual 
interpretation of ancillary data such as orthos-photos and 
historical photos (table 2). These data support the 
understanding of the geotechnical risk but this paper has a 
specific technical focus on the comparison of both DEM 
data sources, LiDAR and ERRUISSOL. 
A. Preliminary information 
The preliminary knowledge about the waste heaps was 
gathered by analyzing ortho-photos and historical aerial 
photography. The ortho-photos are from different periods 
(2006-2007, 2009-2010, 2012-2013) and are available on 
the geoportal of the Walloon Region [13]. The historical 
aerial photographs are provided by the SPW on two dates: 
1954 and 1969.  
TABLE 2 PRELIMINARY AND FIELD INFORMATION OF THE 
FOUR WASTE HEAPS 
B. Field observations 
A field campaign was conducted on the four waste heaps 
to consider the following four aspects: (i) the presence of 
vegetation, (ii) the presence of gully erosion, (iii) traces of 
landslide and (iv) traces of spontaneous combustion. 
Vegetation cover is an important factor to consider when 
studying the susceptibility of slope failure because plant 
roots contribute to maintaining slope stability by increasing 
soil cohesion [15]. The second factor observed, gully 
erosion, is an erosional process whereby drainage lines are 
generated by ephemeral streams. This erosional landform 
may affect the soil stability by increasing the slope gradient 
[16]. The third factor examined, previous landslides, is 
significant because it indicates that the coal tip was not 
stable in the past. The absence of vegetation may indicate 
that a landslide has occurred. Finally, spontaneous 
combustion can lead to soil instability in two ways. Firstly, 
  
Aspects 
Assessment 
Preliminary 
information 
Vegetation 
Ortho-photos analysis (2006-2007, 2009-
2010, 2012-2013) 
(http://geoportail.wallonie.be) 
Erosion 
Ortho-photos analysis (2006-2007, 2009-
2010, 2012-2013), DEM visualisation   
(http://geoportail.wallonie.be) 
Evidence of 
landslide 
Aerial photography (1954, 1969) 
Evidence of 
spontaneous 
combustion 
Literature  
Field 
information 
Vegetation 
Presence of trees, grass 
Erosion 
Presence of gully 
Evidence of 
landslide 
Scarp, absence of vegetation, inclined 
vegetation   
Evidence of 
spontaneous 
combustion 
Presence of burnt coal and fumaroles 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

it may induce the formation of cavities underneath the 
surface and be responsible for the apparition of a 
discontinuity plane between burning coal zones and unburnt 
coal zones that may lead to the occurrence of a landslide 
[17]. Secondly, the surface of a burning waste heap can 
reach a temperature superior to 100°C. These burning zones 
scatter the grass vegetation and prevent the growing of trees 
[18]. 
All the waste heaps examined exhibit evidences of past 
and/or current spontaneous combustion. Fumaroles have 
even been observed on 14-17 et Siege Social. The trace of a 
landslide has been observed in Heribus but was not noticed 
on the other coal tips. Heribus seems to be the most inclined 
to slope failures since it has already undergone two sliding 
events in the past (1992 and 1994) [17] and because of its 
land cover, burning zones and history. All waste heaps, 
except Saint-Placide, show traces of gully erosion. The 
vegetation cover was generally abundant except on the 
zones where spontaneous combustion has been observed 
and the zones on which landslides have occurred (Heribus).  
C. LiDAR data 
The data acquisition was performed between 2013 and 
2014 over the Walloon Region with a Riegl Litemapper 
6800i system. The LiDAR system operated a pulse 
repetition rate of 150 kHz. The flight altitude was between 
1200 and 1500 meters and the point density was about 0.8 
point/m². Point data is post-proceeded by analysing the laser 
time range, the laser scan angle (60°), the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) position and the Inertial 
Measurement Unit (IMU) [19]. LiDAR returns were 
classified as ‘ground’, ’vegetation’, ‘building’, ’water’ and 
‘unclassified’ by the data provider [2]. The coordinate 
system used here was Belgian Lambert 72.   
D. ERRUISSOL data 
The ERRUISSOL data are the result of the integration of 
several datasets: (i) elevation points derived from ortho-
photos interpretation of the Projet Informatique de 
Cartographie Continue (PICC) at a scale of 1/1,000 with a 
distance of 50 m between points, (ii) points from the Digital 
Terrain Model (DTM) based on aerial photos at a scale of 
1/10,000 with a distance of 20 m between points and, (iii) 
Digital Terrain Model (DTM) from local LiDAR flights on 
the watershed with a resolution of 1 point/m². The 
ERRUISSOL DEM has been produced in 2003 [2][4].   
VI. 
METHOD 
This paper addresses technical questions raised by [2] in 
the processing of raw LiDAR data. These authors point out 
that the slope ground surface map of the LiDAR DEM 
present zones with striped patterns that do not appear in the 
ERRUISSOL 
model 
(Figure 
2). 
Image 
1 
shows 
ERRUISSOL data (10 m) and image 2 LiDAR data (1 m). 
Striped patterns appear on the high resolution image. These 
striped patterns indicate a succession of high and low slope. 
Their signification has not been elucidated in previous study 
and deserves our attention. To evaluate the impact of this 
technical issue on geotechnical assessment, the infinite 
slope stability model (section VI A) has been used on the 
basis of several DEM interpolation techniques (section VI 
B). The assessment of the susceptibility of slope failures is 
quantified by using a factor of safety that is computed on 
each pixel of a DEM with ArcGIS ©ESRI.    
 
 
Figure 2 Slope ground surface (degrees) for crachet waste heap.  
A. Infinite slope stability model 
Slope stability analysis is commonplace in soil 
mechanic, 
engineering 
geology 
and 
geomorphology. 
Usually, to express the stability of a slope, a safety factor, F, 
is used. This factor is defined as the ratio of a maximum 
admissible load and the load value actually applied on the 
slope [2]. In this study, we refer to the infinite slope stability 
equation from [20] for dry conditions in the soil, adapted by 
[15]: 
F = tanϕ’ / tanβ                                    (1) 
 
Where ϕ’ is the effective soil friction angle (degrees) 
and β is the slope angle (degrees). The infinite slope model 
relies on the assumptions that the failure plane is mainly 
planar and parallel to the topographic surface and that the 
cohesion of the materials can be neglected [21].  
According to several authors [21] [22], there is no risk of 
slope failure as long as the effective soil friction angle is 
greater than the slope angle value (F > 1). When F = 1, this 
indicates a state of limit equilibrium and when F < 1, this 
indicates a slope failure. Waste heap materials are generally 
composed of shale rock debris from 2 mm to 20 cm. Thus, 
the effective soil friction angle adopted here, following the 
paper of [2], is 35°. The factor of safety has been calculated 
for each pixel of the different DEMs produced.  
B. The interpolation techniques and spatial resolution 
Several factors may affect the quality of a DEM. First, 
are the factors related to the data collection, which mostly 
depend on the technology used and may have an impact on 
Slope degrees 
0-1 
1-3 
3-5 
5-8 
8-11 
11-15 
15-19 
19-24 
24-35 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the DEM’s quality. LiDAR data collection consists of 
several overlapping parallel strips acquired during flight 
plans. Most errors in LiDAR-derived DEM can be attributed 
to systematic and random errors by both laser scanner system 
and the GPS/IMU during data acquisition procedures [22]. 
These errors produce discrepancies in overlapping regions 
between neighboring strips [23]. The striped patterns 
observed on the waste heaps are thus probably related to an 
improper calibration of both systems [24]. Second, the 
density of points can be a source of errors. Indeed, a low-
point density may result in an over-estimation of the height. 
Finally, the interpolation techniques used can influence the 
quality of a DEM [11].  
In this study, we will not investigate collected data nor 
points of density because of missing information about data 
collection. Rather, we will concentrate on evaluating the 
performance of the two main techniques for generating 
DEMs with ArcGIS©ESRI: Binning and Triangulation. 
• 
Binning technique 
The principle of the Binning interpolation technique is to 
examine the elevation values that fall within a cell to 
determine the final value. In case of empty cells, natural 
neighbor works with Voronoi and Delaunay diagrams to 
find the closest point to input points and applies weights to 
them based on proportionate areas to interpolate a value 
[26]. With this technique, the interpolate elevations are 
guaranteed to be within the range of the sample used [27]. 
• 
Triangulation technique 
The Triangulation interpolation method derives the cell 
value with a Triangulated Irregular Networks (TIN) based 
approach. TIN models and DEMs are two different ways of 
representing Earth surface in a digital data structure. 
Whereas DEMs rely on a regular grid surface representing 
the height of the terrain, TINs use irregular gridded models. 
A characteristic underlying the definition of the TIN is that 
it provides more points in rough irregular areas than in flat 
ones. The principle consists in connecting sampling points 
by lines to form triangles of irregular size and shape. The 
triangles are represented by planes, thereby permitting a 
more continuous representation of the terrain surface [28]. 
Moreover, 
TINs 
have 
shown 
their 
reliability 
for 
discontinuous shape (such as ridges) and breaks of slope 
[14], [29]. 
V. 
RESULTS 
A. Integration of several data 
Combination 
of 
field 
observations, 
ortho-photos, 
historical aerial photographs and DEMs support the 
assessment of the slope stability of the four coal tips with 
the example of Heribus (Figure 3).   
The vertical cross-section analysis (G) calculated on the 
1 m LiDAR data processed with Binning technique 
discloses a break of slope illustrated by an arrow. This zone 
is related to the slope failure zone in (D) and (E). This 
instability does not appear on the ERRUISSOL data with 10 
m resolution (F). When looking at the most recent ortho-
photo of 2012-2013 (C), this zone is hidden by vegetation 
but a discontinuous topography can clearly be identified on 
the historical photography (B). The aerial photography from 
1969 permits to discerns the ground heterogeneity, 
imperceptible nowadays due to the presence of dense 
vegetation. 
B. The interpolation techniques and striped patterns 
The factor of safety is calculated on the basis of different 
interpolation techniques and spatial resolutions as illustrated 
for the Saint-Placide waste heap (Figure 4). With a 1 m 
resolution DEM, the striped patterns are present on the 
Binning technique (C) but not on the Triangulation 
technique (B). This discrepancy is due to the fact that 
whereas the Binning techniques interpolates on regularly 
gridded surface, the Triangulation technique interpolates 
elevation values on triangular surfaces of different size. 
Thus, the height differences between the overlapping areas 
resulting from the acquisition of the data are erased by 
means of the elevation value recorded in those triangles. 
Consequently, the problematic height discrepancy may be 
suppressed through the means of elevation values executed 
on an irregular surface. However, both interpolation 
techniques converge when the spatial resolution is 10 m and 
there are no striped patterns (E and F). The factor of safety 
for the ERRUISSOL DEM differs on some spots (D) from 
the other DEMs or field observations. The localisation of 
the instability areas does not coincide spatially on the three 
figures D (ERRUISSOL) in comparison to E and F (LiDAR 
data aggregated to 10 m). The reasons for these disparities 
are linked to the integration of inputs with various 
resolution and precision. However, this dataset was the only 
available for the Walloon inventory [1]. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
This paper studies technical choices in terms of 
resolution and interpolation techniques when processing raw 
LiDAR 
data. 
Two 
interpolation 
techniques 
from 
ArcGIS©ESRI have been tested to analyze their potential 
for the topic of geotechnical instability analysis. This 
method has been applied to four waste heaps located in 
Western Wallonia but could also be applied to other study 
sites in Belgium (Liège, Charleroi and De Kempen 
coalfield) or even in the heavily mined Nord-Pas-de-Calais 
in France.    
The different sources of data are interestingly combined 
in this paper for describing, understanding and quantifying 
the risk of geotechnical failure. Field observations did not 
lead to the conclusion that there is a great risk of landslide 
on the four waste heaps because of the presence of dense 
vegetation and the absence of sliding events in the past. 
However, the factor of safety for LiDAR DEM with 1 m 
resolution presented numerous zones indicating a slope 
failure. Yet, the integration of all data permits a moderation 
of these results. There is no risk to have a serious impact on 
environment and/or human health since all the coal tips are 
covered by vegetation, have remained stable for many years 
and are not located in a residential area. However, should 
the authorities plan to change the affectation of the heap, a 
new risk analysis would be necessary.      
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Computing a factor of safety based on an infinite slope 
stability model assuming a 1 m grid size yields inadequate 
results. The resolution of 1 m does not seem to be consistent 
with the model assumptions. First, it is difficult to consider 
a slope as infinite when a high resolution of 1 m is used. 
Second, neglecting the grain cohesion appears to be 
inappropriate when there is dense vegetation on the waste 
heaps.  
The utilization of raw LiDAR data improves the 
understanding of the impact of processing on the safety 
factor. Indeed, figures 2 and 3 show that different 
processing steps can influence the factor of safety. The 
Triangulation technique has demonstrated its ability to 
remove the striped patterns by establishing triangles which 
average the value of several cells, by contrast with the 
Binning technique, which uses a regular grid to interpolate 
elevation values. Because it smooths the cell value, the 
Triangulation technique is more appropriate to assess the 
slope stability here, but it could be less so under different 
circumstances.  
While both LiDAR and ERRUISSOL data have the 
resolution proposed by the Protocol of the Directive, 
LiDAR 
data 
improve 
the 
stability 
assessment 
by 
comparison with ERRUISSOL. Indeed, whereas the LiDAR 
data have revealed that Heribus presents a risk of slope 
failure, this had not been detected by the ERRUISSOL data. 
Conversely, the ERRUISSOL data have found a risk of 
geotechnical instability where the LiDAR data did not 
discover anything.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study has been done during a three months 
internship in the Institut Scientifique de Service Public 
(ISSeP). This work is related to a research subvention from 
the SPW, DGO3. LiDAR data have been acquired by the 
SPW, General secretariat. We thank the administration for 
providing this dataset and for their support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Frippiat, N. Stephenne, M. Veschkens, and D. Pacyna 
2013. Adaptation of the European Union risk assessment 
protocol for the pre-inventory of Walloon mining waste 
deposits. In: Mine closure 2013, pp. 495-507, edited by M. 
Tibbett, A. B. Fourie, and C. Digby (Australian Centre for 
Geomechnaics, Perth) 642p.  
[2] N. Stephenne, C. Frippiat, M. Veschkens, M. Salmon, and D. 
Pacyna 2014. Use of a Lidar High Resolution Model for Risk 
Stability Analysis. EARSel eProceedings, Special Issue: 34th 
EARSel Symposium, 24-19. 
[3] http://geoportail.wallonie.be/WalOnMap [accessed 2016-04-
03] 
[4] P. Demarcin, A. Degré, A. Smoos and, S. Dautrebande 2009. 
Projet ERRUISSOL, Cartographie numérique des zones à 
risque de ruissellement et d’érosion des sols en Région 
Wallonne. Rapport Final de convention DGO3-FUSAGx 
(Unité 
d’hydrologie 
et 
hydraulique 
agricole, 
Faculté 
universitaire des Sciences agronomiques de Gembloux, 
Gembloux, Belgium) 55p. 
[5] N. Polat, M. Uysal and, A. S. Toprak 2015. An investigation 
of DEM generation process based on LIDAR data filtering, 
decimation, and interpolation methods for an urban area. 
Measurement 75, 50-56.  
[6] D. Weber, and E. Englund 1992. Evaluation and comparison 
of spatial interpolators II. Mathematical Geology 24, 381-391.  
[7] D. Weber, and E. Englund 1994. Evaluation and comparison 
of spatial interpolators II. Mathematical Geology 26, 589-603. 
[8] A. Carrara, G. Bitelli, and R. Carla 1997. Comparison of 
techniques for generating digital terrain models from contours 
lines. International Journal of Geographical Information 
Science 11, 451-473. 
[9] S. M. Robeson 1997. Spherical methods for spatial 
interpolation: review and evaluation. Catrography and 
Geographic Information Systems 24, 3-20. 
[10] G. R. Hancock 2006. The impact of different gridding 
methods on catchment geomorphology and soil erosion over 
long timescale using a landscape evolution model. Earth 
Surface Processes and Landforms 31, 1035-1050. 
[11] V. Chaplot et al. 2006. Accuracy of interpolation techniques 
for the derivation of digital elevation models in relation to 
landform types and data density. Geomorphology 77, 126-
141. 
[12] http://geologie.wallonie.be/soussol/exploitations/ssol_expl_de
chets/ssol_dechets_risques) [accessed 2016-04-03] 
[13] http://geoportail.wallonie.be/WalOnMap/ [accessed 2016-04-
03] 
[14] G. L. Heritage, D. J. Milan, A. R. G. Large, and I. C. Fuller 
2009. Influence of survey strategy and interpolation model on 
DEM quality. Geomorphology 112, 334–344. 
[15] G. B. Chirico, M. Borga, P. Tarolli, R. Rigon, and F. Preti 
2013. Role of vegetation on slope stability under transient 
unsaturated conditions. Four Decades of Progress in 
Monitoring and Modeling of Processes in the Soil-
PlantAtmosphere System: Applications and Challenges. 
Procedia Environmental Sciences 19, 932 – 941.  
[16] J. Poesen, J. Nachtergaele, G. Verstraeten, and C. Valentin 
2003. Gully erosion and environmental change: importance 
and research needs. Catena 50, 91–133. 
[17] A. Monjoie, and C. Schroeder 2001. Instabilités de versants 
de terrils en relation avec l’autocombustion des schistes et 
charbons résiduels. Revue française de géotechnique N°95-
96, 91-102. 
[18] J. Nyssen, and D. Vermeersch 2010. Slope aspect affects 
geomorphic dynamics of coal mining spoil heaps in Belgium. 
Geomorphology 123, 109-121. 
[19] SPW 2014. Rapport de production des données du relief de la 
Wallonie. Jambes, 5p. 
[20] N. Lu, and J. Godt 2008. Infinite slope stability under steady 
unsaturated seepage conditions. Water Resources Ressearch 
44, 1-13.  
[21] M. Mergili, I. Marchesini, M. Rossi, F. Guzzetti, and W. 
Fellin 2014. Spatially distributed three-dimensional slope 
stability modelling in a raster GIS. Geomorphology 206, 178–
195.  
[22] J. A. White, and D. I. Singham 2012. Slope stability 
assessment using stochastic rainfall simulation. International 
Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2012. Procedia 
Computer Science 9, 699 – 706.  
[23] G. Vosselman, and  H. G. Maas 2001. Adjustement and 
filtering of raw laser altimetry data. OEEPE Workshop 
Airborne Laser System and Interferometric SAR forDetailed 
Digital Elevation Models. Vol. 40, 62-72.  
[24] M. Favalli, A. Fornaciai, M. T.  Pareschi 2009. LiDAR strip 
adjustement: Application to volcanic areas. Geomorphology 
111, 123-135.    
[25] A. F. Habib et al. 2008. LiDAR strips adjustement using 
conjuguate linear features in overlapping strips. The 
International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. Vol. XXXVII. Part 
B1. Beijing 2008, 385-390. 
[26] R. Sibson 1981. A brief description of natural neighbour 
interpolation, in:V. Barnet (Ed.), Interpreting Multivariate 
Data, Wiley, Chichester,  21–36. 
[27] P. V. Arun 2013. A comparative analysis of different DEM 
interpolation methods. The Egyptian Journal of Remote 
Sensing and Space Sciences 16, 133-139. 
[28] T. Ali, and A. Mehrabian 2009. A novel computational 
paradigm for creating a Triangular Irregular Network (TIN) 
from LiDAR data. Nonlinear Analysis 71, e624-e629. 
[29] I. D. Moore, R. B. Grayson, A. R. Ladson 1991. Digital 
terrain 
modelling: 
a 
review 
of 
hydrological, 
geomorphological, and biological applications. Hydrological 
Processes 5, 3-30.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Integration of several datasets on the Heribus waste heap with two aerial photographs from 1954 (A) and 1969 (B), ortho-photo from 2012-2013 
(C), a map showing the safety factor based on LiDAR data from natural neighbor Binning techniques with 1 m (D) and 10 m (E), a map displaying the safety 
factor based on ERRUISSOL data with 10 m (F) and a vertical cross-section (G) on a zone delimited on (D). 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 4. Factor of safety on the Saint-Placide waste heap seen on ortho-photo from 2012-2013 (A), calculated on  1m LiDAR data with the Triangulation 
technique (B) on  1m LiDAR data with natural neighbor  Binning technique (C) on 10m on ERRUISSol dataset (D), on 1m LiDAR data aggregated to 10m 
with the Triangulation technique (E) on 1m LiDAR data aggregated to 10m with the natural neighbor Binning technique (F). 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

