Towards Smart Urban Planning through Knowledge Infrastructure  
Robert Laurini 
LIRIS – INSA Lyon, University of Lyon, France, and Knowledge Systems Institute, USA. 
e-mail: Roberto.Laurini@gmail.com
 
Abstract — In companies, the use of the so-called business 
intelligence and knowledge engineering is more and more 
commonly found. By essence, companies are using computer 
tools, which tends to include them in the knowledge society; 
from a mathematical point of view, knowledge representation 
is made through rules and logics. And then comes the question: 
what could be done in this direction for urban planning? The 
big challenge is to deal with urban and environmental features 
which are usually described, stored and manipulated via 
computational geometry and spatial analysis. But those 
disciplines cannot easily be combined with logics. The goal of 
this position paper is to show how knowledge engineering can 
be the foundation of a new type of urban planning, i.e., urban 
planning based on knowledge. Geographic knowledge bunches 
are usually described through geographic objects, relations, 
structures, ontologies, gazetteers, rules and mathematical 
models. After having explained those bunches of knowledge, 
the structure of a geographic inference engine is sketched so to 
renovate urban planning. Then beyond Spatial Data 
Infrastructure, we explain that some geographic knowledge 
infrastructure could be the basis of a new generation of tools 
for urban planning.  
Keywords — Smart City, Territorial Intelligence; Geographic 
Knowledge; Knowledge Infrastructure; Geographic Rules; Smart 
Planning; Geographic Reasoning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In many domains, it is more and more common to speak 
about knowledge and even the expression “knowledge 
society” was coined. Several definitions have been proposed 
to outline this new type of human society. According to a 
2005 UNESCO report [21], “Knowledge societies are about 
capabilities to identify, produce, process, transform, 
disseminate and use information to build and apply 
knowledge for human development. They require an 
empowering social vision that encompasses plurality, 
inclusion, solidarity and participation”. Starting from this 
definition, it could be interesting to examine how knowledge 
can improve not only the management of a city but also 
urban planning at large. The goal of this position paper is to 
give a few directions for renovating urban planning through 
knowledge engineering especially by modeling geographic 
rules. 
Of course, humans are at the center of smart city, but the 
use of knowledge technologies can help amplify human 
reasoning not only by studying alternatives of urban 
development, but also evaluating the consequences in 
various terms, human, societal, financial, etc. When we say 
humans, we do not only mean experts in urban planning but 
also lay-citizens who can influence decisions (public 
participation or participatory democracy). 
 
Smart
Governance
Smart
Energy
Smart
Citizens
Smart
Buildings
Smart
Mobility
Smart
Infrastructure
Smart
Technologies
Smart
Healthcare
Smart
City
 
Figure 1.  
The Smart City components according to Mathew’s 
diamond (2013) [26]. 
 
From practically half a century, information technology 
has profoundly transformed urban planning. Initially, it was 
only for some statistics and mathematical modeling of cities 
[6] and then for map-making. During a few years, the 
expression “computer-assisted cartography” was used, 
emphasizing how computers could help the automatic 
creation of maps. At the end of 70s, it became obvious that 
automatic cartography must be seen differently, and 
geographic or urban data must be stored into databases. Then 
the expression “GIS” was coined for software systems able 
not only to store geographic data, to make maps but also 
integrating tools devoted to spatial analysis. As a 
consequence, urban planning has gradually been renovated 
[14], first by data then by information and now by 
knowledge [17]. 
The paper will by organized as follows; first, several 
definitions will be analyzed in order to sketch smart urban 
planning [7]. Then, we will examine the promises of 
knowledge engineering technologies for renovating urban 
planning. 
II. 
DEFINITIONS REGARDING SMART CITIES AND 
TERRITORIAL INTELLIGENCE 
Many definitions have been proposed to define both 
smart cities and territorial intelligence. They have in 
common the integration of sustainable development. 
About Smart Cities 
Carlo Ratti, director of the MIT Senseable City Lab, 
claims that an intelligent or smart city is technological, 
interconnected, clean, attractive, comforting, efficient, open, 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

collaborative, creative, digital and green. The European 
Union considers six components: economy, mobility, 
environmental, people, living, governance to shape a Smart 
City. This latter definition was extended by Mathew [18] 
illustrated Fig. 1 as a form of a diamond connecting Smart 
Governance, Smart Citizens, Smart Healthcare, Smart 
Energy, Smart Buildings, Smart Technology, Smart 
Infrastructures and Smart Mobility. 
According to [13], “Smart cities are the result of 
knowledge-intensive and creative strategies aiming at 
enhancing the socio-economic, ecological, logistic and 
competitive performance of cities. Such smart cities are 
based on a promising mix of human capital (e.g., skilled 
labor 
force), 
infrastructural 
capital 
(e.g., 
high-tech 
communication facilities), and social capital (e.g., intense 
and open network linkages) and entrepreneurial capital (e.g,. 
creative and risk-taking business activities”. Notice that the 
last definition stresses the importance of knowledge in a 
smart city. For other definitions and analysis, please refer to 
[1] for a very comprehensive review. 
Applica-
tion
I do stop
Context
If the traffic light is red,
I do stop
Meaning
Traffic light of George 
Washington Avenue is red
Raw
data
« Red », 234, 10.34, 
« George Washington »
Data
Information
Knowledge
Wisdom
 
Figure 2.  
Data, information, knowledge and wisdom. 
In order to plan and manage a city, a novel way is 
through knowledge engineering [15] which require the 
design and implementation of a knowledge infrastructure. 
Remember (Fig. 2) that “data” are raw measures, 
“information” concerns data with their meaning and 
“knowledge” an information which can be useful to solve a 
problem. Moreover by applying knowledge, a sort of 
wisdom can be reached. Fig. 3 illustrates the role of this 
knowledge infrastructure in a smart city which is based on a 
physical layer integrating communications, sensors and data.  
Connections
(Open)
Data
Sensors
Human
Intelligence
Machine
Processable
knowledge
Governance, Regulations
Smart City
Knowledge Infrastructure
Physical Layers
 
Figure 3.  
Position of a knowledge infrastructure in a smart city. 
For years, in companies business rules are been a 
common way to encode knowledge. According to Graham 
[9] and Morgan [19], rules (business rules) should be 
considered as first-class citizens in computer science. In 
enterprises, the “craft” of expert know-how is capitalized in a 
computer system in the form of so-called “business rules”. 
These rules can then be explained and implemented in 
applications, such as business intelligence in software 
architectures often named ERP (Enterprise Resource 
Planning). Two forms are common IF-THEN-Fact or IF-
THEN-Action. For instance, let us consider a newly-
designed building. In order to check whether it must comply 
with the local Master Plan, several rules must be followed as 
exemplified Fig. 4. 
Street
2
5
4
3
1
 
Figure 4.  
Example of building-related planning rules. 
In Fig. 4, Rule 1 gives the minimum distance to the road, 
Rule 2, the maximum height of the building, Rule 3 the 
volume of the building, Rule 4 the distance to the end of plot 
and the 5, the distance with neighbors. Here, to be valid 
(accepted according to the meaning of the regulation), the 
building project must comply with this complete set of rules. 
About Territorial Intelligence 
As the concept of "Smart Cities" focuses on cities, "the 
concept of "Territorial Intelligence" has a larger meaning. 
Considering it, also several definitions can be quoted. 
According to [5], "Territorial Intelligence can be compared 
with the territoriality which results from the phenomenon of 
appropriation of resources of a territory; it consists in know-
how transmissions between categories of local actors of 
different cultures." this definition was extended later [8] by 
specifying that territorial intelligence innovations must 
include: (i) use of multidisciplinary knowledge, (ii) dynamic 
vision of territories, (iii) involvement of communities and 
practitioners, 
(iv) 
sharing, 
co-constructing 
and 
(v) 
cooperating and participatory territorial governance. 
For our part, let me propose the following definitions 
[17], "Territorial intelligence can be defined as an 
approach regulating a territory (maybe a city) which is 
planned and managed by the cross-fertilization of human 
collective intelligence and artificial intelligence for its 
sustainable development".  
And now the question is "how artificial intelligence and 
especially knowledge engineering can help not only local 
decision-makers to plan city but also lay citizens to give their 
opinion about the future of their city [15], [17]?" 
Smart Urban Planning 
Smart Urban Planning can be seen as a possible answer. 
Similarly several visions are possible, among others [2] and 
[7], by having all three facets, sustainable development, 
greater involvement of citizens and major use of 
technologies. By examining the difference between the 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

words smart and intelligent, the authors of [7] explain that 
the adjective intelligent seems to imply the capability of 
developing actions in order to solve a problem by using 
methods and information contained into a knowledge base 
whereas the word smart seems to have, apart from the 
cognitive heritage (even if not organized in analytical way), 
also the power of solving the problem “operatively”, 
showing which are the “tools” to be used for the specific 
purpose. Summing up, while the intelligent thinks, works out 
and suggests the models to adopt in order to find a solution, 
the smart shows also the operative way and the devices to 
use. 
Let us examine rapidly an introductory example. In [22], 
an example of rule encoding is given concerning road 
naming in Australia in order to automate the process. Rules 
are defined in the form of ontological vocabularies using 
SWRL. However they have some limitations. For instance in 
one rule, the road length which must be taken into account, is 
given as an attribute, not computed from road coordinates. In 
another, a panoramic view is also given as an attribute, not 
calculated taken terrain morphology into account by 3D 
computational geometry. 
III. 
PROMISES OF GEOGRAPHIC KNOWLEDGE  
As previously told, geographic knowledge must be 
multidisciplinary. One of the ways to represent knowledge is 
by using rules. In planning, the rules have the following 
origins, physical (water, floods, vegetation, landslides, etc.), 
societal (economy, etc.), administrative (laws, decrees, etc.) 
or even from best practices. In addition, other rules can be 
extracted from spatial data mining [17], [18]. 
One of the difficulties is the fact that among the urban 
actors, some have different “logics”. With regard to industry 
creation, an environmentalist or an industrialist may have 
different ideas on the possible implications of this or that 
choice. Similarly, some groups may have different priorities: 
before an empty space, athletes imagine a stadium; pupil’s 
parents a school; and a realtor a building, etc. From a formal 
point of view, these aspects will occur in multi-actor and 
multi-criteria decision support systems. 
Human Collective
Intelligence
Spatial Data
Infrastructure
Machine-processable
Knowledge
Not-formalized
Knowledge
Geographic Knowledge
Infrastructure
Applications
 
Figure 5.  
Geographic Knowledge Infrastructure. 
After the book edited by Kim et al. (1989) [12], in their 
paper, Batty and Yeh (1991) [3] exposed the promises of so-
called expert systems for urban planning. In that period, 
those systems were only built on logics characterized by the 
difficulty to use them and by limited interfaces. Now, 25 
years after, with the evolutions of information technologies, 
artificial intelligence and geovisualization, new approaches 
can be integrated to design new kinds of intelligent systems 
especially devoted to geographic applications and overall 
urban planning. Let us call them geographic inference engine 
which will be able to make reasoning about geographic 
knowledge. Whereas a conventional inference engine is only 
based on logics, such a system must integrate topology, 
computational geometry, statistics and spatial analysis 
because geographic rules necessitate those aspects to be 
modeled. 
Advocacy for Geographic Knowledge Infrastructure  
Based on this background, it is possible to define a 
Geographic Knowledge Infrastructure |17]. From decades, 
governments, national or local, have developed spatial data 
infrastructures. Similarly, it is possible to envision 
geographic knowledge infrastructure (Fig. 5) as bunches of 
knowledge necessary to developed higher level applications, 
those bunches coming either from data mining over the 
spatial data infrastructure or from human collective 
intelligence able to be formalized in a machine-processable 
format. Of course, many bunches cannot be yet formalized. 
Chunks of low level knowledge will be directly detailed 
into chapters dealing with geographic objects and relations 
whereas high level knowledge more studied in the 
geographic rule chapter as a basis for territorial intelligence, 
and smart city planning and governance. 
Requirements for Geographic Knowledge Systems 
In order to get a well-done geographic system, there are 
some requirements to follow: (i) offering a relevant and 
complete representation of reality, (ii) offering a robust and 
accurate representation for any granularity of interest, (iii) 
storing consistent and validated knowledge, (iv) updating 
regularly, 
(v) 
supporting 
geographic 
reasoning, 
(vi) 
representing any shareholder’s logics, (vii) combining GKB 
coming from different sources, and (vii) defining planning 
projects and assessing them. 
Geogra-
phic
Objects
Geographic
Relations
Geographic
Ontology
Geographic
Rules
Physico-
mathema
tical
Models
Gazetteer
Geographic Knowledge Base
Geographic 
Structures
External
Knowledge
 
Figure 6.  
Contents of a geographic knowledge base 
GKS Components 
In consequence, any geographic knowledge base will 
consist of Fig. 6 a set of geographic objects, a set of 
geographic relations, an ontology, a gazetteer, a set of 
geographic structures, a set of physico-mathematical models 
and a set of rules; in addition, external knowledge can also 
be very useful; let us explain those components. For more 
details, please refer to [17]. 
Geographic Objects: Features existing in the real world 
(rivers, roads, parcels, buildings, engineering networks, etc.) 
can be modeled with types, names, attributes and geometric 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

coordinates by points, lines and areas. Often 3D information 
can be taken into account. Often fuzzy sets can be invoked to 
model objects with undefined boundaries, such as mountains 
or deserts. One of the big problems is that the same 
geographic 
object 
can 
have 
different 
geometric 
representations (Fig. 7). 
Traffic
engineer
Street
Street represented
by a graph 
Street represented
by a surface 
Street represented
by two polylines 
Street represented
by a volume
Street
maintenance
engineer
Cadaster
officer
Technical
network
engineer
 
Figure 7.  
Various geometric representations of a street. 
Geographic Relations: Between geographic objects, the 
majority of relations can be defined based to topological 
relations (overlapping, etc.) such as Egenhofer relations [6]. 
But some others can be defined (administrative relations, 
twinning relations, etc.). 
Geographic ontologies: An ontology is a semantic network 
or a graph between concepts. For us, essentially, geographic 
ontologies are organizing geographic types. More and more 
geographic ontologies integrate geographic relations; for 
instance, an example in urban planning integrates 254 
concepts organized into five levels [20]. 
Toponym
Named place
of a feature/object
Other names
Date
Feature type
Feature shape
(geometry)
Feature 
georeferencing
Language
Pronunciation
 
Figure 8.  
Example of structure of a gazetteer after [10]. 
Gazetteers: Initially a gazetteer is a dictionary of 
placenames (toponyms). Since there are complex many-to-
many relationships between names and places, since places 
can change names over time, can change their shape 
(compare Rome in Romulus’ time and now), can absorb 
other places, etc. And the same name can be assigned to 
different places. See Fig.8 for an example of gazetteer’s 
structure [10]. Now gazetteers tend to become databases of 
names with links with ontologies. See [11] for more details 
concerning gazetteers. 
Sets of geographic structures: Two types of structures are 
common, tessellations and networks, which have specific 
relations between their components. A country is divided in 
regions, provinces, etc. which form a tessellation and city 
into quarters. Often hierarchical tessellations must be 
considered. The structure of networks is very common. 
Among them, let mention, road networks, river networks and 
engineering networks such as for electricity, gas, telephone, 
sewerage and for the management of traffic lights. In 
addition, several urban structures can derived from shape 
grammars such as the organization of city blocks, allotments, 
etc.  
Physico-mathematical models: A lot of knowledge 
regarding environmental planning, transportation planning 
and demography is encapsulated into models. It is important 
to use this already-existing knowledge into this novel 
system. In addition, there could be added more sophisticated 
models for multi-criteria decision-making and spatial 
analysis. 
Geographic Rules: As rapidly explained, rules are the key-
element for knowledge management since due to rules, new 
objects can be created, new values can be assigned to 
attributes, new relationships can be set, etc. Moreover, since 
often rules can be applied successively, they can represent a 
sort of chain of causality (A=> B, B => C, etc.). More details 
can be found in [24, 25]. In fact, let us look at some of them: 
 
• 
in the United Kingdom, we drive on the left; 
• 
in Canada, the majority of the population lives along the 
border with the United States; 
• 
each capital city has an international airport nearby; 
• 
between the two capital cities, in general, there are direct 
flights; 
• 
in the Northern Hemisphere, the more you are going to 
the north, the colder (but locally this is not always true); 
• 
the more you climb a mountain, the colder; 
• 
heavy rain upstream, downstream flooding; 
• 
mosques are oriented towards Mecca; 
• 
if a zone is a swamp, it is necessary to prohibit 
construction; 
• 
if there is unemployment, the creation of companies or 
industrial areas must be encouraged; 
• 
if a plot is adjacent to an airport, it is necessary to limit 
the height of buildings; 
• 
it is forbidden to open a new tobacco shop within 500 
meters of an another already existing; 
• 
when you want to install a metro-line under a street, 
please move underground networks to another place; 
• 
a good practice in Mexico is to use a bus to go from 
Puebla to Oaxaca City. 
∀ B ∈PROJECT, ∃ P ∈ GO 
Ω-Type(B) = “Building”, 
Ω-Type(P) = “Parcels”, 
Contains (Geom(P), Geom(B)) : 
Height(B) <10 
˄Street_distance(B, P) > 3 
˄Neighbor_distance(B, P) > 3 
⇒ 
UP-Allowed (B, P) 
Rule 1 
Back to Fig. 5, the following [Rule 1) rule can be written. 
For instance, suppose that the building in project is described 
with BIM (Building Information Management) language 
from which procedures can be applied to compute Height, 
Street_distance and Neighbor_distance. In this rule, GO 
means the set of stored geographic objects with the 
knowledge base, and PROJECT, the set of currents projects. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Ω-Type 
means 
the 
ontological 
type 
and 
Contains 
corresponds to the Egenhofer relation [6]. 
Another example of rule is given in Fig. 9 illustrating the 
case of a city in a country in which a rule stipulates that it is 
forbidden to open a new tobacco shop within less than 500 
meters from another one. In this case, some buffer zones 
around the existing tobacco shop must be defined. And the 
places where it is possible to open a new pharmacy are given 
via a set of geometric operations. 
Tobacconist
Where it is forbidden
to open a  new 
tobacco shop
Where it is authorized
 
Figure 9.  
Example of administrative rule: “it is forbidden to open a 
new tobacco shop within 500 meters from another existing one”. 
This rule can be formalized as follows: 
 
∀ Fi ∈OG, ∃ Z ∈ Terr, 
G-Type(Fi)=Point, G-Type(Z)=Area, 
Ω-Type(Fi) = “Tobacco_Shop”, 
Geom (Fi ) ∈Terr 
⇒ 
Geom(Z)= Terr – Union(Buffer(Fi , 500)) 
Rule 3 
 
In which in addition, Terr is a territory; G-Type is the 
geometric type; Geom the geometry of an object; Union and 
Buffer respectively geometric operations for determining 
union and buffer; and Z, the zone in which it is allowed to 
open a new tobacco shop. 
The rules can have several origins; the more important 
are given by experts and some of them can be extracted from 
spatial data mining under the name of association rules. 
Various categories can be distinguished: (i) Geodetic rules 
relative to North, South, East and West; (ii) Physical 
geography (sun, flood, winds, vegetation, etc.); (iii) Rules 
coming from laws (see building example given Figure 5, or 
such as "in UK, one drives left"); (iv) Rules coming from 
sociology or economy such as "along the edges of sea, the 
greater the distance from the sea, the lower are prices of 
homes", "the more children, the more schools", or "all big 
cities have an international airport"; (v) Rules relative to 
flows (transportation of humans, freight); (vi) Rules coming 
from best practices; (vii) Rules linked to quality control, 
mutation of topological relations due to scales (for instance, 
depending of the scale, a road touches or not a lake); (viii) 
Facing the same situation, some shareholders can have 
different rules; see an example in Rule 4; (ix) Some local 
rules can supersede global rules, for instance when municipal 
level rules different from state rules, Etc. 
 
∀ P ∈ GO, ∀ B ∈PROJECT,  
Ω-Type(P) = “Parcels”, 
P.Landuse = “Vacant”: 
Area(P) > 1000 
Rule 4 
For an 
environmentalist 
⇒ Ω-Type(B) = 
“Recreational_Park” 
For a sportsman 
⇒ Ω-Type(B) = “Stadium” 
For parents of 
pupils 
⇒ Ω-Type(B) = “School” 
For The Chamber 
of Commerce 
⇒ Ω-Type(B) = “Start_up_Facility” 
For a land 
developer 
⇒ Ω-Type(B) = “Residence” 
 
All those geographic rules use the vocabulary of the 
ontology and place names described in the gazetteer and 
sometimes some mathematical models. 
External knowledge: In practically all GIS, only data inside 
the jurisdiction of the entity in charge of planning activities 
are stored. But often “external knowledge” or “extra muros 
knowledge” could be of importance, in contrast with 
“internal knowledge” or “intra muros knowledge”. External 
geographic knowledge means knowledge the location of 
which is outside the jurisdiction: it includes neighboring 
knowledge located at the vicinity of the jurisdiction and 
outside knowledge coming from everywhere else. For 
instance outside knowledge can model experiments and good 
practices in other cities.  
Neighboring knowledge represents knowledge located at 
the vicinity of the jurisdiction, for instance within an out-
buffer. It must include main geographic objects, relationships 
between those objects and the objects located inside the 
jurisdiction and especially cross-border rules if any. 
Especially from technology and urban sociological 
watching, interesting experiments made in other territories or 
cities can be modeled and stored as external good practices. 
Let us call those bunches of knowledge, external outside 
knowledge. However, the primary step will be to analyze the 
semantics of this knowledge and to propose a way or a 
language to be machine-processable, for instance by a 
variant of case-based reasoning.  
Other types of knowledge: In this list, we can add 
documents which can be considered as storing geographic 
information giving in natural language.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION: RESEARCH AGENDA TOWARDS URBAN 
KNOWLEDGE BASES 
The benefit of this novel approach will be to simplify the 
study of consequences and the assessment of urban projects 
by means of rules and inference engines. 
The knowledge society will shape the city of the future. 
Now that the background of a knowledge infrastructure for 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

smart urban planning is sketched, several questions emerge. 
Let us precise some of them. 
The main question is not to create a smart city from 
scratch, but rather to “smartify” a city, i.e., to define a 
methodology to pass from an existing city (whatever is its 
level of development) to a real living smart city. And 
knowledge 
engineering 
and 
infrastructure 
could 
be 
considered as the key issue for this transformation. 
In the previous section, even if a model of knowledge 
infrastructure was argued and presented, some validation 
must be launched by creating operational systems of urban 
planning based on knowledge engineering. Among the key-
problems we have to solve is the discovery of socio-
economic rules. 
The second aspect concerns citizen participation. Since 
each citizen or groups of citizens have different interests, this 
issue has two sides. The first side concerns nimbies who can 
have divergent interests. But there are citizens who are aware 
of global interest; but what is general interest and what could 
be the entity really in charge of global interests? 
Nevertheless from a computing point of view, we need a 
robust model to describe citizen’s opinions, to analyze them 
and to synthetize them. Existing multi-actor multi-criteria 
decision support systems are often very naïve and cannot 
integrate various forms of knowledge. 
Supposing that such a system exists, an important issue is 
to evaluate the efficiency of generated smart urban plans. But 
this is a very long task since the efficiency or limitations can 
often be discovered decades after. 
From the knowledge engineering side, various problems 
must be solved. Among them, let us mention urban and 
environmental 
rule 
encoding, 
robustness 
vis-à-vis 
measurement errors and scaling effects, the combination of 
knowledge coming from different sources, encoded with 
different languages and different levels of trust. Do not 
forget also the integration of external knowledge. And 
finally, we have to give the complete specifications of a 
future geographic inference engine. 
As those research topics will be carried out and 
implemented in robust systems, real experiences of 
knowledge-based smart urban planning will be launched. 
Indeed, in our society, knowledge is THE infrastructure as 
the philosopher Michel Serres recently told. Now, since 
knowledge-based economy is common in businesses, why 
not in local authorities? 
However the main barrier is not technological, but rather 
political: are politicians really ready to empower citizens? 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Albino, Berardi U., and Dangelico R.M (2015) “Smart 
Cities: 
Definitions, 
Dimensions, 
Performance, 
and 
Initiatives”, Journal of Urban Technology, 2015, Vol. 22, No. 
1, 3–21, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10630732.2014.942092. 
[2] L. Anthopoulos and Vakali A. (2012) “Urban Planning and 
Smart Cities: Interrelations and Reciprocities”. In “Future 
Internet Assembly, from Promises to Reality” ed. by Álvarez 
F., et al. LNCS, Springer-Verlag 7281, pp. 178-189, 2012. 
[3] M. Batty M and Yeh T. (1991) “The promise of expert 
systems for urban planning”. In “Computers, Environment 
and Urban Systems”, Volume 15, Issue 3, 1991, pp. 101–108. 
[4] R. Baxter (1976) “Computer and Statistical Techniques for 
Planners”; Methuen Press 1976, 336 pages. 
[5] Y. Bertacchini Y., Rodriguez-Salvador M. and Souari W. 
(2007) “From territorial intelligence to competitive & 
sustainable system Case studies in Mexico & in Gafsa 
University”. Second International Annual “Conference of 
Territorial Intelligence”, Oct 2007, Spain pp. 37-54. 
[6] M. Egenhofer M. and Franzosa R.D. (1991) “Point-set 
topological spatial relations”, Int’l J. of GIS, vol.5, no.2, pp. 
161-174. 
[7] R. Fistola and La Rocca, R.-A. (2013) “Smart city planning: a 
systemic approach”, 6th Knowledge Cities World Summit, 
September 9-12, 2013, Istanbul, Turkey, pp. 520-529. 
[8] J.-J. Girardot and Brunau E. (2010) Territorial Intelligence 
and Innovation for the Socio-Ecological Transition. 9th Int’l 
Conf. of Terr. Intel., ENTI, Nov 2010, Strasbourg, France. 
[9] I. Graham (2006) “Business Rules Management and Service 
Oriented Architecture: A Pattern Language”. London,  Wiley. 
[10] Ž. Jakir, Hećimović, Ž. and Štefan, Z. (2011) “Names 
Ontologies”. In Advances in Cartography. Lecture Notes in 
Geoinformation and Cartography edited by Anne Ruas, Ed.; 
Springer Verlag: Heidelberg, Germany, 2011; pp. 331–349. 
[11] C. Kessler, Janowicz, K., and Bishr, M. (2009) “An Agenda 
For The Next Generation Gazetteer: Geographic Information 
Contribution and Retrieval”. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM 
Int’l Conf. on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, 
New York, NY, USA, 4–6 November 2009; pp. 91–100,  
[12] T.J. Kim, Wiggins, Lyna L., and Wright, J.R. (Eds.) (1989) 
“Expert Systems: Applications to Urban Planning”, Springer-
Verlag, New York. 
[13] K. Kourtit and Nijkamp P. (2012), “Smart Cities in the 
Innovation Age, Innovation: The European Journal of Social 
Science Research 25: 2 (2012), pp. 93–95. 
[14] R. Laurini (2001) “Information Systems for Urban Planning: 
A Hypermedia Cooperative Approach”, Taylor and Francis, 
308 p. February 2001. 
[15] R. Laurini (2014) “A Conceptual Framework for Geographic 
Knowledge Engineering”, Journal of Visual Languages and 
Computing (2014), Volume 25, pp. 2-19,  
[16] R. Laurini, Servigne S., and Favetta F. (2016) “An 
Introduction 
to 
Geographic 
Rule 
Semantics”. 
22nd 
International Conference on Distributed Multimedia Systems, 
DMS 2016, Salerno, Salerno, Italy, November 25-26, 2016, 
Published by Knowledge Systems Institute, ISBN: 1-891706-
40-3, pp. 91-97. 
[17] R. Laurini (2017) “Geographic Knowledge Infrastructure for 
Territorial Intelligence and Smart Cities”. Wiley-ISTE-
Elsevier. To be published in April 2017. 
[18] J. Mathew (2013) “City as a Customer”. Can be downloaded 
from 
http://www.frost.com/c/10046/blog/blog-
display.do?id=2377335. Visited March 4, 2017. 
[19] T. Morgan (2008) “Business Rules and Information Systems: 
Aligning IT with Business Goals”. Addison-Wesley. 384 p. 
[20] J. Teller (2007) “Ontologies for an Improved Communication 
in Urban Development Projects. In “Ontologies for Urban 
Development”, edited by J. Teller, Springer, 2007, pp. 1-14. 
[21] UNESCO (2005) “Towards knowledge societies”. Published 
in 2005 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization, Paris. 
[22] P. Varadharajulu, West G., McMeekin D. Moncrieff S. and 
Arnold 
L. 
(2016), 
“Automating 
Government 
Spatial 
Transactions”. Int’l Conf. GISTAM Conf., Roma, April 2016.  
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

