Improving Spatial Data Supply Chains  
Learnings from the Manufacturing Industry 
 
Lesley Arnold 
Department of Spatial Sciences 
Curtin University, Western Australia 
Cooperative Research Centre for Spatial Information 
Email: lesley.arnold@curtin.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract - Government spatial data holdings are the basis of 
many Geographic Information System applications and users 
have come to depend on this information for reliable evidence-
based decision making.  However, many spatial data supply 
chains, particularly those that span multiple organisations and 
different levels of government, are not effective and users are 
having to make do with out-of-date and incomplete 
information. The manufacturing industry has a long history in 
supply chain analytics and well established models. This paper 
discusses five traits that have generated production efficiencies 
in manufacturing and can be applied to effectively produce 
spatial data that is fit for purpose in the user’s context.  The 
successful supply chain traits are: a) formalized extended 
supply chain strategies; b) information metrics and measures; 
c) closed loops; d) traceability; and e) the ability to effectively 
communicate quality and purpose to end-users.  A supply 
chain framework incorporating these traits is proposed for 
extended networks. 
Keywords-Spatial Data; Supply Chain Management; Strategy; 
Traceability; Fit for Purpose. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Supply Chain Management (SCM) is a field of study that 
has evolved since the 1980’s [1], principally in the 
manufacturing industry.  SCM encompasses the planning 
and management of all activities involved in sourcing and 
procurement, 
conversion, 
and 
logistical 
management 
activities. Importantly, it also includes coordination and 
collaboration with channel partners, which can be suppliers, 
intermediaries, third-party service and technology providers, 
and customers [2].  
Incremental innovations and best practice SCM solutions 
have evolved over time and there are opportunities for the 
spatial sciences to take advantage of these developments to 
address some of the deficiencies in extended (nationwide and 
cross-agency) spatial data supply chains that involve 
multiple suppliers, producers and consumers.  Five areas 
where the spatial industry can improve performance are: 
1) Channel partners collectively adopt a Supply Chain 
Strategy.  The strategy needs to be cognisant of the business 
models of each supply chain participant as well as the end-
user in the extended supply chain. Currently, spatial data 
management often operates in a business vacuum and is not 
tied 
to 
the 
needs 
of 
end-users 
in 
cross-agency 
supply/demand systems.  A supply chain strategy is critical 
to delivering value to the end-user, reducing costs and 
fostering innovation in extended supply chains. 
2) Use of Information Metrics and Measures for 
capacity planning, financial management, just-in-time 
delivery and end-user satisfaction. These metrics and 
measures are implemented within a SCM system to deliver 
on the supply chain strategy.  SCM systems seamlessly 
integrate functions and provide communication between 
organisations participating in the entire spatial data supply 
chain. 
3) Making the most out of Closed Loop Supply Chains 
(information backhauls) as a method for strategically 
sourcing spatial data.  Capturing reverse material flows 
either through process automation or crowdsourcing has 
potential to enable real-time spatial data supply chains. 
4) Formalise 
supply 
chain 
traceability 
through 
regulations and standards to track and control spatial data, 
and ensure products are produced responsibly and to the 
required quality. From a business perspective it is about 
understanding who is using data and how; and from a 
consumer perspective it is about being able to understand 
the risks inherent in data for decision making. 
5) Being able to communicate ‘Fit for Purpose’ to end-
users so they have the knowledge about product suitability.  
The manufacturing industry does this well through easily 
understood rating systems, while, the spatial industry relies 
on a user’s understanding of complex metadata.   
This paper discusses these five manufacturing supply 
characteristics (Sections 3 to 7) in terms of their 
effectiveness and applicability to spatial data supply chains.  
Prior to this, Section 2 presents the functional concepts with 
the objective providing a common understanding of supply 
chain terminology. This is important as one of the limiting 
factors in establishing supply chain theory in the spatial 
domain is the lack of a controlled vocabulary for ontology 
development.  Finally, Section 8 introduces the high-level 
Supply Chain Framework, which adopts the lessons learned 
from the manufacturing industry and is being used to 
generate an ontology to understand the interrelationships 
between supply chain domains. 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II. 
SUPPLY CHAIN FUNDAMENTALS 
The term supply chain stems from the manufacturing 
industry.  It is gaining common usage across the wider 
spatial sector where it is used to describe the flow of raw 
spatial data through to the end-user as a product.  However, 
the supply chain concepts, terminology and theory that are 
ingrained in manufacturing [3], are not entrenched in the 
acquisition and management of spatial information and its 
delivery as a product, particularly in extended supply chains, 
such as cross-agency networks and National Spatial Data 
Infrastructures.   
A simplified network is illustrated in Figure 1 to explain 
the concepts, terms and relationships between organisations 
(supply chain nodes) that need to work in synergy to store, 
process and create component parts of a product that are 
progressively aggregated and combined to deliver a product 
or service to an end-user further along the supply chain. The 
nodes represent locations where value-added operations 
occur and include supplier, producer and distributor nodes, 
as well as mixed nodes.  Arrows represent the linear flow of 
spatial data and customer information.  These are referred to 
as supply chain links.  Flows between the nodes are two-way 
and consist of material flows (data) and information flows 
(customer requirements and product feedback). There are 
typically several supplier and customer tiers (1…n).  These 
tiers are illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  An example of a linear spatial data supply chain that is 
characterised by nodes and links; data flows and information flows.  
Supply chains integrate supply (push production) and 
demand (pull production) management within and across 
organisations. Push production is based on forecast demand 
and pull production is based on actual or consumed demand.   
In the spatial industry, the push approach is a business 
response to anticipated customer demands, long range 
forecasts or forecasting based on previous sales (downloads 
and/or views) and the maturation of the market with respect 
to geospatial understanding.  
In contrast, the pull approach is typically a query driven 
approach.  End-users require knowledge about location to 
answer a question or to visualize patterns and complex 
relationships so that they can make an informed decision. 
This is the subject of rapid spatial analytics.  
This paper focusses on push supply chains, drawing on 
comparisons with the manufacturing industry to reduce 
production costs and attain operational excellence.  
Push supply chains are generally non-linear [4] and there 
are few models that capture the web of multiple networks 
and relationships required to understand spatial data lineage 
from its initial capture through to its transformation and 
delivery as a product or knowledge service further 
downstream.   
The inherent complexity and convoluted nature of digital 
supply chains is highlighted in a recent study into Australian 
geocoded addressing [5]. Geocoded addresses (verified or 
otherwise) are pushed (or dragged) along various pathways 
from one supply chain participant to another (Figure 2).  
While an authoritative ‘primary’ pathway exists for address 
data, many government departments, hospitals, education 
institutions and businesses collect address information 
directly from home occupiers using online forms or over the 
counter. These address data sets may enter the primary 
supply chain at any point where residual value is deemed to 
be recyclable. However, data integration is essentially 
manual and few data sets incorporate verification processes. 
Therefore, time delays and the potential for human error may 
compromise the value of this data to the consumer.   
 
 
Figure 2.  Geocoded Address Supply Chains are non-linear and inherently 
complex [5].  
 
To achieve improvements in productivity, quality and 
timeliness, extended supply chains need to be more 
streamlined.  While, automation of processes is a key 
enabler, so too is understanding the interrelationships 
between participants engaged in supply chain activities and 
their business motivation. 
   
III. 
SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGY 
To achieve a sustainable extended spatial data supply 
chain, the lesson from the manufacturing industry is to 
formulate an overarching supply chain strategy [6] to deliver 
on the goals and vision of all the participants in the business 
of developing nationwide data products. This initially 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

requires an agreed business strategy for the extended supply 
chain [7]. 
The business strategy establishes the overall direction 
that organisations participating in the supply chain 
collectively aspire to. It includes decisions about what 
products and services are to be offered, identifies market 
segments, the timing of product releases and whether 
products are to be sold or made freely available.  
In contrast to the business strategy, the supply chain 
strategy is the mechanism by which organisations formalize 
how they work with supply chain partners (suppliers, 
distributors, customers, and the customers’ customers) to 
deliver on the business strategy [7].   
As a whole, the manufacturing industry is good at 
preparing and implementing comprehensive supply chain 
strategies.  There is a plethora of research in this field; most 
aimed at driving down operational costs and maximizing 
efficiencies.  
In the spatial industry, anecdotal evidence suggests there 
are few formally documented extended supply chain 
strategies.  The supply chain strategies that do exist are 
typically those of individual organisations and their 
customers and are therefore not necessarily relevant to the 
needs of the end consumer of a nationwide data product 
developed downstream.  There is often no business incentive 
to work in the national interest. In the manufacturing 
industry, this silo approach has shown to result in sub-
optimization of the supply chain as a whole and, as a 
consequence supply chain performance suffers and end-user 
needs are not met [8].   
Spatial infrastructures (globally) tend not to be aligned 
with a business strategy and therefore formulating a supply 
chain strategy becomes a difficult task.   Without a business 
strategy, the network of suppliers, producers and distributors 
have no clear direction on the type of product to generate and 
where to focus effort; nor how their intellectual property will 
be protected and what mechanism will be used to measure 
and generate a return on investment. 
National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) strategies 
often serve as the business strategy for governments and are 
a useful starting point for a nationwide spatial data supply 
chain strategy. The NSDI strategy captures the core purpose 
for implementing a NSDI and the aspirations of the nation in 
using spatial technologies for improving and sustaining 
social, economic and environmental development.  Common 
NSDI goals are for spatial information that is: 
 
An accurate nationwide representation of the 
landscape.  
 
Available in a variety of forms and accessible 
through multiple channels. 
 
Used widely in response to emerging business 
opportunities. 
 
Easily integrated with economic, social and 
environmental 
geographies 
for 
evidence-based 
decision making. 
 
Produced efficiently and according to sustainable 
principles. 
 
An enabler for economic growth and social 
wellbeing. 
However, while NSDI strategies exist they are often not 
supported by financial models and capacity plans, nor a clear 
understanding of the market and end-user needs. These 
aspects are required to engage, incentivize and obligate 
supply chain participants.  As a consequence, nationwide 
supply chain strategy often goes unaddressed through lack of 
commitment.   
This happens for two main reasons.  Firstly, its execution 
requires a high degree of organisation and collaboration 
between many suppliers, producers and distributors, and this 
is difficult without a clear business strategy. Secondly; the 
core problem is to balance supplies against demand across 
several nodes and a sound financial investment model is 
required. This is important.  Supply chain participants will 
have various existing business models and different financial 
investment perspectives – their imagery suppliers will expect 
to be paid for services and value-adding activities will need 
to be resourced. As such, the national spatial data supply 
chain needs to comprise an overarching business strategy 
and model that satisfies the business objectives of all 
participants in the extended supply chain and provides the 
goals, measures and value proposal of the national data 
product.   
Currently, national supply chain frameworks suffer 
because participants often have no clear understanding of 
what business model they are contributing to - commercial, 
commercial ‘free’ or public good.  With an agreed business 
model the national supply chain strategy has a blueprint from 
which to operationalize and sustain national product 
objectives. 
IV. 
INFORMATION METRICS AND MEASURES 
SCM systems are embedded in the manufacturing 
industry.  They integrate logistics management and 
manufacturing operations to coordinate processes and 
activities. SCM systems are used to link major business 
functions and workflows within and across organisations into 
a cohesive and high-performing business model.  SCM 
systems use information metrics to drive business success, 
provide information about the performance of the overall 
supply chain and to identify problem areas.   
The spatial industry can draw from this experience.  
Performance measures, targets and quality standards can be 
used to keep track of spatial data investment decisions and 
monitor progress towards achieving business objectives for 
national products.   
A review of literature indicates SCM systems are not 
utilized in the spatial sector, and yet, there are some 
compelling reasons to do so.  The primary benefit is to fulfil 
end-user demands through the most efficient use of 
resources.  SCM systems provide oversight for capacity 
planning, financial management and just-in-time delivery 
through forecasting and production monitoring.  In this way, 
the potential impact caused by a change in operation at one 
supply chain node can be evaluated ahead of time to 
understand possible repercussions along the entire supply 
chain and implications for service delivery [3].  
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Spatial data supply chain metrics that focus on 
performance across the entire supply chain can be used to 
better understand: 
 
Carrying costs: to measure how much it costs to 
store data over a given period of time. 
 
Production Costs: to measure efficiency and provide 
a benchmark for process improvement. 
 
Warehouse turnover: to measure how often and 
which products are sold/downloaded in a given year. 
 
Order Tracking: to monitor the status of requests for 
data and updates and associated turnaround times. 
 
Inventory to sales ratio:  to measures the ratio of in-
stock items, such as imagery, versus the amount of 
data being used/orders being filled. 
 
Product performance: to measure the rate of 
consumer satisfaction i.e. product returns, and 
quality/usability issues. 
 
Units per transaction: to measure the average 
number of units purchased/downloaded to establish a 
baseline with which to compare future targets. 
Measures and metrics for spatial data, both financial and 
non-financial, are generally available from individual 
organisations along the supply chain.  This information is 
usually of an operational and discrete nature and is not an 
indication of the performance of the entire supply chain.  In 
addition, there is usually no interrelationship between the 
strategic measures of success of each supply chain 
participant.   
The majority of manufacturing performance frameworks, 
such as the one proposed by [9], are not suited to spatial data 
supply chains. While SCM systems utilize diagnostics 
software to show exactly where bottlenecks occur in 
manufacturing and where data quality improvement is 
required, the focus is on building physical products with 
large inventories and complex transportation logistics.  A 
new approach is required for the spatial domain that captures 
the value activities at each node, such as integration, 
generalization and level of accessibility. 
Information Management System (IMS) metrics are more 
aligned with spatial data management.  IMS have adopted 
eSupply chains in which supply chain participants are 
interconnected via internet technologies at technical, 
application and business management levels.  Similarly to 
spatial infrastructures, the objective of IMS is to improve the 
effectiveness of decision-makers by getting the right 
information, to the right people, in the right format, at the 
right time [9].  
A study by [10] evaluated six eSupply chain performance 
measures: (a) web-enabled service metric; (b) data reliability 
metric; (c) time and cost metric; (d) e-response metric; (e) 
invoice presentation and payment metric; and (f) e-document 
management 
metric. 
The 
researchers 
surveyed 
120 
companies. Results indicate that while companies believe 
these metrics are important, the challenge was to measure 
them.     
There is an opportunity to re-examine these eSupply 
chain metrics in light of spatial information supply chain 
needs.  In the spatial industry, supply chain metrics are not 
well documented with the exception of spatial data quality 
metrics [11] [12] [13].  However, quality is only one aspect 
of measure for a spatial data supply chain and there is still 
much work to be done in this area.   
V. 
CLOSED LOOP SUPPLY CHAINS 
The manufacturing industry has adopted opportunities for 
backhauling in transport logistics to reduce supply chain 
costs through collaboration and partnership.  Often referred 
to as closed-loop supply chains [14], backhauls additionally 
transport items in the reverse direction from customers 
(usually retailers) to the depot (or warehouse).  An example 
is a supplier of gas canisters.  Full canisters are delivered to 
the customer and empty canisters collected at the same time 
– saving transportation costs and time.   
The concept of backhauls (or reverse material flows) are 
not new to the spatial industry. Crowdsourcing and trusted 
partnerships have potential as viable strategic data sourcing 
solutions for maintainers of large geographic datasets.  They 
have the ability to reduce costs (updates are free), improve 
data currency (updates are timely), and improve the overall 
accuracy of information (updates stem from local 
knowledge).  
Crowdsourcing has not been seriously adopted by 
government mapping agencies where there are concerns 
about integrating data from potentially unreliable sources 
into authoritative data sets. Yet, vendors of navigation 
systems have embraced crowdsourcing to update their 
mapping base. Google Maps goes one step further.  It 
displays crowdsourced traffic conditions along major routes 
by calculating vehicle speeds from the GPS-determined 
locations transmitted from ‘opted in’ mobile phone users. 
Both methods essentially create a closed-loop supply chain.  
There is significant opportunity for innovation in this area 
using volunteered GPS vehicle tracing to record map updates 
and errors. 
Research is the key to increasing the uptake of reverse 
information flows and falls into four areas: 
 
resolving the trust problem [15]; 
 
data harvesting to collect and verify information 
rapidly; 
 
integration of crowdsourced and authoritative data; 
and 
 
community engagement strategies to stimulate 
reverse information flows. 
The efficiency and effectiveness of supply chains can be 
improved by embracing the backhaul concept.  Benefits are 
cost avoidance for data maintenance in the longer term, 
better engagement with end-users and the community, and 
increased potential for product innovations. 
VI. 
SUPPLY CHAIN TRACEABILITY 
Spatial information products are being used to save lives, 
prepare for natural disasters, mitigate environmental damage, 
form legal judgments on land boundaries and make 
significant economic decisions, such as where to locate 
infrastructure, source minerals and direct social services.   
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The importance of this information implies that data 
products 
are 
produced 
using 
scientifically 
proven 
reproducible methods. Yet this is not necessarily the case.  
Currently, there is no legal requirement or standard that 
imposes traceability practices on spatial data products.   
As the spatial industry considers outsourcing parts of the 
spatial data supply chain, consideration needs to be given to 
tracking products and suppliers, using methods that are 
reproducible, and incorporate elements of traceability into 
metadata standards. 
The ease with which data can be copied and transformed 
has made it increasingly difficult to determine the origins of 
a piece of data and therefore, its legitimacy for a particular 
usage.  Supplier and product auditing needs to go beyond 
direct relationships with first-tier suppliers.   
Understanding where data comes from and how it is 
created and by whom is important to: 
 
End-users in determining if data are fit for their 
purpose.  
 
Consumers who want to know if data has been 
produced in an environmentally and socially 
responsible manner. 
 
Decision makers needing to know the risks inherent 
in using particular data and thus their level of 
accountability. 
 
Data producers in identifying the need for product 
recalls and understanding the end-user/consumers of 
their products. 
The drivers for supply chain traceability are similar to 
those encountered in the manufacturing industry. Challenges 
include [16]:  
 
Regulatory pressures and consumer demand for 
responsibly sourced and produced goods and 
services. 
 
Tracking and controlling materials and the processes 
applied on those materials to create finished 
products. 
 
Proactively managing product recalls (or data errors) 
with near real-time corrective actions. 
 
Improving 
customer 
safety 
and 
consumer 
satisfaction when using products. 
 
Managing product quality and reducing costs 
associated with nonconformance. 
However, the spatial industry has no automated and fool 
proof solutions for:  
 
Backward Traceability: tracing back to the data 
source.  
 
Forward Traceability: tracking the end-users of data 
products. 
 
Component Traceability: tracking the component 
parts that makeup the end data product.  
 
Process Traceability: tracing what processes have 
been applied to data in the finished product.   
A. Backward Tracability 
The manufacturing and clothing industry has adopted 
backward traceability as a means of demonstrating a 
company’s corporate social responsibility.  Incidents, such as 
the 2013 Savar building collapse in Bangladesh, where more 
than 1,100 workers died because of unsafe conditions, have 
led to widespread discussions about corporate social 
responsibility across global supply chains. Law makers are 
increasingly legislating that manufacturers disclose where 
raw materials are sourced [17] [18], particularly if sourced 
from war-torn countries where revenue is funding violent 
military groups [19]. 
In the food industry, companies are increasingly sourcing 
directly from farmers or trusted aggregators rather than 
purchasing crops that have passed through several layers of 
collectors. The drivers for this change include concerns 
about 
food 
safety, 
child 
labor 
and 
environmental 
sustainability.  The aviation industry standards require 
traceability to ensure the authenticity of parts, aircraft 
maintenance history and approved supplier identification 
[20].  
From a spatial data industry perspective, CRCSI research 
is examining methodologies to trace data provenance along 
the supply chain and be able to present this knowledge in a 
way that allows end-users to make informed decisions on 
whether the information is suitable for their purpose.  
Currently, there are few models that address spatial data 
provenance from both a detailed metadata and lineage 
perspective.  The CRCSI research is seeking to develop an 
ontology that goes beyond traditional metadata models that 
only capture the who/what/when/why of information.  The 
provenance model will incorporate process knowledge at the 
various stages of a data product’s lifecycle and include 
quality measures [21]. 
B. Forward Traceability 
Forward traceability is mandatory in some industries, 
such as car manufacturing, food and beverage and 
pharmaceuticals.  Forward tracking distribution is necessary 
in case a product has to be recalled.  In 2009 Toyota recalled 
eight car models and put a halt to production, China recalled 
170 tons of melamine-tainted milk powder in 2010 and 
Unilever United States recalled peanut butter due to potential 
salmonella contamination [16].     
Anecdotally, product recall risk is low in the spatial 
sector.  Nonetheless, being able to trace data usage and 
consumers will become more important.  Today, web portals 
are extensively used to distribute spatial data but few sites 
require users to register their details online.  This makes it 
difficult to keep track of who is using data, what their needs 
are in terms of future product design, and how to let them 
know that product updates are available. 
C. Component and Process Traceability 
Radio 
Frequency 
Identification 
(RFID) 
has 
revolutionized component and process traceability. RFID 
technology is embedded in many industries including 
baggage handling, livestock management, toll collection, 
theft prevention systems and automated production systems 
[22].  RFID tags are used to automatically identify and track 
products, materials and parts along the supply chain.  The 
radio-frequency identification (RFID) market is expected to 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

rise from $8.89 billion to $27.31 billion by 2024 (23) based 
on 2014 figures.   
The equivalent of the RFID in the spatial domain is the 
persistent Global Unique Identifier (GUID) or Global ID.  
The Global ID is a unique identification code permanently 
assigned to a piece of data (database record) so that 
information about the data element can be easily retrieved.  
The importance of the Global ID is that it can be used to 
unambiguously track a data element through its lifecycle.   
However, the value of the Global ID has not been fully 
exploited in spatial data supply chains.  Part of the problem 
is that organisations that collect and manage spatial data 
generally only store feature identifiers (ID) that are unique to 
their systems.  This means that when data are integrated from 
more than one provider there is a risk that the ‘system’ 
feature ID will be the same.  While IDs can be reassigned, 
the ability to track data and its lineage along the supply 
chain, is significantly reduced.  Industry needs to consider 
the application of the GUID in terms of supply chain 
efficiency (GUIDs support automatic update propagation) 
and understanding the fit for purpose nature of a data product 
(GUIDs support provenance modelling). 
VII. COMMUNICATING FIT FOR PURPOSE 
Users of spatial information can be faced with a choice of 
multiple datasets, each containing the information required, 
but the question is ‘which one is fit for their purpose?’  
Traditionally, the spatial industry has used descriptive 
metadata to describe datasets – contact information, 
coverage, accuracy and recommended purpose are all 
included in the metadata.  However, similar data sets have 
similar metadata and therefore the choice of which one to use 
becomes difficult.  For example, if an end-user searches for a 
data set containing road information in a particular area, the 
following may be retrieved: 
 
polygonised roads in a cadastral dataset; 
 
highways only, in a road authority dataset; and  
 
a topologically correct road network in a topographic 
dataset.   
Understanding which product is best for their needs 
requires experience or subject matter knowledge. The 
manufacturing industry appreciates that consumers do not 
necessarily have the information to understand whether a 
product will suit their needs or not.  Manufacturers have 
embedded methods in production processes to let the 
consumer know if a product is fit for their purpose.  The 
systems used are based on production standards and their 
compliance with legislation. For example, toy manufacturers 
include age suitability on packaging, food producers include 
nutrition panels and the hotel industry has a ‘star’ quality 
rating system. These methods act as a purchasing guide for 
consumers.  They build an expectation that a product will be 
satisfactory for a given purpose.  For example, television 
codes are a guide to whether or not a program is suitable for 
a given type of audience based on predetermined criteria 
(Figure 3). This approach builds consumer confidence as the 
codes are regulated through a recognised code of practice.  
There are also systems that put the quality ratings in the 
hands of the consumer.  The internet has become well-
entrenched as a vehicle for consumers to rate their 
experience of a product. 
  
 
Figure 3.  Rating System for Television Programs [24].  
The spatial industry does not have a ratings approach for 
data quality and usability, and has traditionally relied on 
consumers’ understanding of spatial metadata as a means of 
interpreting whether a data product is fit for a particular 
purpose or not. However, metadata is often not reliable 
because it is out-of-date and often incomplete.  Interpretation 
is generally only through descriptive metadata that is at best 
a subjective interpretation from the perspective of the data 
custodian. As a result the metadata approach is not user-
friendly as it does not consider the needs of the consumer or 
their viewpoint when determining if a product is suitable. A 
different approach is required.  For example, the food 
labelling industry in Australia is considering including 
‘walking time’ kilojoule ‘burn off’ to help consumers make 
sense of nutrition panels that are difficult to interpret for 
weight loss programs [25].  
Current approaches to providing ‘fit for purpose’ advice 
for consumers of spatial information products and services 
are not adequate. Organisations that move down the fit for 
purpose track will typically address a single business 
objective. In addition, the spatial industry has typically relied 
on self-regulation and many organisations and businesses 
have adopted their own standards rather than a national data 
quality standards approach.   
There are inherent difficulties in establishing criteria that 
can be applied across a single data set due to the varying 
degrees of quality. Data elements are often sourced from 
multiple suppliers and have been subject to different 
processes. 
In moving towards a new approach the spatial industry 
needs to firstly, identify and classify the purposes for which 
spatial information products are used; and secondly, develop 
a set of criteria with which spatial data products can be rated 
so that they can be assigned a fit for purpose code.  Criteria 
would be based on: 
 
Data standards and quantity measures, such as 
currency, completeness, integrity, accuracy. 
 
Origin, including method of capture and equipment 
used. 
 
Lineage, such as the transformation and processing 
methods applied. 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

VIII. SUPPLY CHAIN FRAMEWORK 
A Supply Chain Framework has been developed as a 
guide to formulating supply chain strategy (Figure 4). The 
framework adopts learnings from the manufacturing 
industry: where supply chain strategy is the key mechanism 
by which producers formalize how they work with their 
supply chain partners (suppliers, distributors, customers, and 
the customers’ customers) to deliver on business strategy.  
 
Figure 4.  Spatial Data Supply Chain Framework 
The 
framework 
applies 
to 
individual 
nodes 
(organisations) along the supply chain where value is created 
for first tier consumers.  It also applies to the overarching 
strategy required for extended supply chains.  The aim of the 
latter is for all supply chains participants to cooperate in a 
way that provides value for the end-user. 
The Supply Chain Framework considers the life cycle of 
a data product from its inception as a product idea through to 
its delivery to customers. The framework includes four 
domains; business, customer, production and service 
domains.  
A detailed version of the framework (supply chain 
ecosystem) is currently being used to develop an ontology to 
link supply chain components across extended supply chains 
to create value for the end-user. 
 
A. Business Domain:  
The supply chain strategy delivers on the business 
outcomes required including return on investments and 
business incentives.  These are generally specified in the 
business strategy along with the collective vision, mission 
and goals of the supply chain partners. The supply chain 
strategy also considers the value proposition to the end-user.  
This stems from the collective efforts and activities of the 
supply chain partners.   
B. Customer Domain:  
The supply chain strategy considers the end-user 
requirements, the factors influencing product usage behavior 
and the design criteria that will create the most value for the 
end-user, such as timeliness, content, coverage, semantics 
and accuracy. 
C. Production Domain 
The supply chain strategy coordinates the external forces 
that impact on demand planning, data sourcing complexity 
and the types of transformation processes required to make a 
data product.  A compliance framework is required to 
support interoperability including data and technology 
standards, quality measures and metrics, and custodian roles 
and responsibilities.  Collaboration with supply chain 
partners is a key component to sustaining production in the 
longer term; as are closed loop systems that capture 
additional product value through process integration.  Future 
partnerships between nodes are likely to be characterised by 
digital 
collaborative 
environments 
and 
automated 
information flows.   
D. Service Domain:  
The supply chain strategy focuses on connecting people 
to products and services.  It considers the integration of 
component products from multiple sources to create standard 
offerings as well as tailored solutions.  A policy framework 
is required to manage open access to data products balanced 
with individual privacy, copyright and intellectual property 
considerations.  These aspects are more complex in extended 
supply chain networks.  Communicating product suitability 
will require a rating system that is meaningful in the end-
user’s context.  
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
Spatial Data Supply Chains have evolved over time to 
become complex networks that are difficult to visualise and 
manage. The relationships between suppliers, producers and 
consumers in extended (or national/cross-agency) supply 
chains are difficult to formalise, and understanding the origin 
of a piece of data is often challenging. The ease with which 
data can be copied and transformed by individual supply 
chain participants is creating inherent problems.   
A new approach is required to improve the way spatial 
data products are produced and distributed.  The objective is 
to automate tasks to deliver productivity improvement, cost 
savings, timeliness and improved data quality.  The approach 
is essentially to strengthen the push supply chain model. The 
second viewpoint is to improve the experience of the end-
user by more effectively communicating the purpose for 
which the data product is intended to simplify consumer 
decision-making when faced with multiple data sets to 
choose from.   
Drawing on manufacturing supply chain experiences, it is 
clear that the underpinning issue is to create effective supply 
chain strategies. The supply chain strategy formalizes how 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

supply chain partners (suppliers, distributors and end-users) 
work together to deliver on an agreed vision and business 
goals and provide the incentive to participate and driving 
opportunities for efficiency and innovation  
Supply chain metrics can then be used to drive business 
success, provide information about the performance of the 
overall supply chain and to identify ongoing problem areas.  
As a pre-requisite, having an understanding of existing 
supply chain costs will better direct where process 
improvement is most critical. 
A more strategic approach to data sourcing is an industry 
imperative in driving down costs and increasing end-user 
engagement.  Closed loop supply chains are one such 
mechanism that has potential to deliver efficiencies and 
increase community participation.  Supply traceability 
combined with methods to communicate the ‘fit for purpose’ 
nature of spatial products has the potential to improve the 
experience of consumers when tapping into spatial data 
holdings.  
In many cases, it will be obvious what spatial 
information can be used for. However, consumers are 
becoming far savvier about what spatial information 
products and services are available, and are applying this 
information to increase business acumen.  
The next step in this research is to formulate a supply 
chain ontology to examine the interrelationships between 
business strategy, customer requirements, spatial data 
workflows, metrics and measures, and data access from both 
a supplier and consumer perspective.  The aim is to develop 
best practice extended spatial data supply chain strategies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the Cooperative 
Research Centre for Spatial Information (CRCSI), whose 
activities are funded by the Australian Government’s 
Cooperative Research Centre Programs.  
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Dawei, “Fundamentals of Supply Chain Management, 
[Online]. 
e-Book 
available 
at 
http://www.pdfdrive.net/fundamentals-of-supply-chain-
management-e299250.html, retrieved  March 2016. 
[2] J. Wolfe, “The Nature of Supply Chain Management 
Research: Insights from Content Analysis of International 
Supply Chain Management Literature from 1990 to 2006.,” 
Gabler Edition Wissenschaft, Ed. 1, 2008, pp. 11-12, ISBN 
978-3-8349-0998-5. 
[3] J. Coyle, C. Langley, R. Lovak, and B. Gibson, “Supply 
Chain Management: A Logistics Perspective,” Cengage 
Learning, Business and Economics, Edition 9, pp720. 
[4] H. Min and Z. Gengui, “Supply Chain Modeling: Past Present 
and Future,” in Computers and Industrial Engineering, 
Pergamo, vol 43, pp 231-249. 
[5] CRCSI (2015) Optimising the Supply Chains for Geocoded 
Addressing in Australia, Current State Supply Chains, Final 
Review 
6.0, 
March 
2015, 
[Online] 
Available 
at 
http://www.crcsi.com.au/assets/Resources/Geocoded-
Address-Supply-Chain-Review-Final-V6.0-Final.pdf, 
accessed June 2015. 
[6] A. Karunaratne, L.M. Chi H.S. Min, and S. Sorrooshian, 
“Supply Chain Strategy” in International Journal of 
Innovative Ideas, vol. 12(4), pp 7-7 November 2012. 
[7] H.D. Perez, “Supply Chain Roadmap: Aligning Supply 
Chains with Business Strategy’, ISBN:149420049X, pp. 186, 
2013 
[8] S. Homberg, “A Systems Perspective on Supply Chain 
Measurements”, International Journal of Physical Distribution 
and Logistics Management, vol. 30, Number 10, 2000 pp. 
847-878 
[9] A. Gunasekaran, C. Patel, and E. Tirtiroglu, “Performance 
Measures and Metrics in a Supply Chain Environment”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Operations 
and 
Production 
Management, vol. 21, Issue 1/2, 2008 pp 71-87. 
[10] M. Sambasivan, Z.A.Mohamed, and T. Nandan "Performance 
Measures and Metrics for e‐Supply Chains", Journal of 
Enterprise Information Management, vol. 22 Iss: 3, 2009, 
pp.346 – 360 
[11] J. Xia “Metrics to Measure Open Geospatial Data Quality, in 
Issues in Science and Technology, Winter 2012. [Online] 
Available 
at 
http://www.istl.org/12-winter/article1.html, 
retrieved March 2016. 
[12] H. 
Veregin,“Data 
Quality 
Parameters, 
Geographical 
Information Systems”, Chapt 12, 2009, [Online] Available at 
http://www.geos.ed.ac.uk/~gisteac/gis_book_abridged/files/ch
12.pdf, retrieved February 2015. 
[13] R. Devillers, Y. Bedard, R. Jeansoulin and B. Moulin 
“Towards Spatial Data Quality Information Analysis Tools 
for Experts Assessing the Fitness for Use of Spatial Data”, 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 
vol. 21, Issue 3, pp. 261-282. 
[14] F. Schultmann, M. Zumkeller. and O. Rentz ‘Modeling 
Reverse Logistic Tasks Within Closed-loop Supply Chains: 
An example from the automotive industry”, in European 
Journal of Operational Research, vol. 171, Issue 3, 16 June 
2006, pp. 1033-1050. 
[15] P. Goodhue, H. McNair, F. Reitsma “Trusting Crowdsourced 
Geospatial Semantics” in The Internatiponal Archives of the 
Photgrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information 
Sciences, vol. XL-3/W3, 2015, pp. 25-28. 
[16] G. Hedge ‘Global Traceability: Key Drivers, Challeges and 
Solutions for Today’s Manufacturers”, SAP Insider 2011, 
[Online] 
Available 
at 
http://sapinsider.wispubs.com/Assets/Articles/2011/July/Glob
al-Traceability-Key-Drivers-Challenges-And-Solutions-For-
Todays-Manufacturers, accessed March 2015. 
[17] Australian Government, “Food Standards Code”, 2015 
[Online] 
A 
available 
http://www.foodstandards.gov.au/code/Pages/default.aspx, 
accessed April 2015. 
[18] SAI Platform “Guidelines for Sustainable Agriculture Supply 
Chains of SAI Platform”, 2013 [Online] Available at 
http://www.saiplatformaust.org/media/W1siZiIsIjIwMTQvM
DkvMDkvNHpqN2RodjU0eF9TdXN0YWluYWJpbGl0eV9
HdWlkZWxpbmVzXzEzMTEyMDEzLnBkZiJdXQ/Sustaina
bility%20Guidelines%2013112013.pdf?sha=c64f9015d7f40d
da, accessed March 2015 
[19] M. Stronmer “Conflict Minerals: Yet Another Supply Chain 
Challenge”, Ideas and Insights, 2012 {Online] Available at 
https://www.atkearney.com/paper/-
/asset_publisher/dVxv4Hz2h8bS/content/conflict-minerals-
yet-another-supply-chain-challenge/10192, 
accessed 
April 
2015. 
[20] Civil Aviation Safety Authority “Documents for the Supply of 
Aeronautical Products”, Revised July 2010, [Online] 
Available 
at 
https://www.casa.gov.au/sites/g/files/net351/f/_assets/main/do
wnload/caaps/airworth/42w_1.pdf, accessed April 2015. 
[21] CRCSI “Spatial Infrastructures Research Strategy” 2013 
[Online] 
Available 
at 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

http://www.crcsi.com.au/library/resource/spatial-
infrastructures-research-strategy, accessed June 2015. 
[22] K. Pramatari “RFID-enabled Traceability in the Food Supply 
Chain, Industrial Management and AMP Data Systems”, 
March 
2007, 
[Online] 
Available 
at 
http://www.researchgate.net/profile/Katerina_Pramatari/publi
cation/220672527_RFID-
enabled_traceability_in_the_food_supply_chain/links/0f3175
2e3867dcf59c000000.pdf, accessed April 2015 
[23] R. Das and P. Harrop (2014) "RFID Forecasts, Players and 
Opportunities in 2014-2024". IDTechEx Report 2014, 
[Online] 
Available 
at 
http://www.idtechex.com/research/reports/rfid-forecasts-
players-and-opportunities-2014-2024-000368.asp, 
accessed 
January 2015. 
[24] Australian Government “Australian Classification” [Online] 
Available 
at 
http://www.classification.gov.au/Pages/Home.aspx, accessed 
December 2015. 
[25] Daily Mail Australia “Popular snacks may soon be labelled to 
show how many minutes WALKING will be needed to burn 
off the calories if you eat them”, 2015 [Online] Available at 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3193903/Australian-
food-soon-labelled-minutes-WALKING-needed-burn-
calories.html, accessed August 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

