 Urban Perspectives: A Raster-Based Approach to 3D Generalization of Groups of Buildings
Alexey Noskov  
Mapping and Geo-Information Engineering 
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology 
Haifa, Israel  
e-mail: mail@alexkarta.com 
Yerach Doytsher 
Mapping and Geo-Information Engineering 
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology 
Haifa, Israel 
e-mail: doytsher@technion.ac.il
 
 
Abstract—The suggested method for 3D generalization of 
groups of buildings is based on rasterization of 2D footprints of 
the 3D buildings. The rasterization is processed within 
quarters, which are automatically defined by using Digital 
Elevation Model (DEM), water objects and roads. The 3D 
urban perspective is computed based on separate levels of 
generalization of each quarter as a function of its distance from 
a pre-defined view point.  
Keywords-Generalization; 3D urban model; Groups of 
buildings. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
3D generalization of the urban model is a fast-growing 
topic. The main types of objects in the 3D city model are 
buildings. Nowadays, 3D models are used in many 
disciplines [18]: GPS navigation, desktop and mobile city 
viewers, geo-simulation, architecture, and many others. The 
two common problems which usually arise in any discipline 
are: (1) huge computer resources are required for drawing 
3D models based on the original, non-simplified buildings, 
and (2) 3D models based on the original non-simplified 
buildings are very detailed and often appear unreadable and 
overly complex. To resolve both problems we have to 
generalize the buildings. There are two different tasks in the 
building generalization process: (1) simplification of a single 
building, and (2) generalization of groups of buildings. The 
topic “simplification of a single building” is a widely 
researched topic [2][9][10][20]; we can describe several 
different approaches of generalization, all of them valid. In 
contrast, “generalization of a group of buildings” has been 
treated, so far, on a very limited level. There are several very 
close 
approaches, 
largely 
based 
on 
the 
Delaunay 
Triangulation (DT) [22]. We propose, in concept, another 
approach for the generalization of groups of buildings, based 
on rasterization and vectorization operations, which are 
carried out by sub-dividing the urban neighborhood into 
quarters.  
This paper is structured as follows: the related work is 
considered in section two, the source data are described in 
section three, the raster based algorithms of quarter 
calculations and generalization are considered in sections 
four and five, the results are evaluated in section sixe, and 
finally, in the last section the conclusions are detailed.   
II. 
RELATED WORK 
One of the most holistic approaches for the 3D 
generalization of buildings was described by Xie et al. [22]. 
The main idea supposes that, within a threshold (distance 
from a view point), we will generate objects which contain 
the results of simplification of single buildings, whereas 
outside of the threshold we will generate objects containing 
the results of groupings of buildings and simplification of 
groups of buildings as a single building. An approach of 
“converting 3D generalization tasks into 2D issues via 
buildings footprints” was described in [6]. 
The generalization of 3D building data approach [2], 
based on scale-space theory from image analysis, allows 
simplifying all orthogonal building structures in one single 
process. Another approach [20] considers buildings in terms 
of Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG). In [22], an approach 
was 
proposed 
which 
realized 
3D 
single 
building 
simplification in 5 consecutive steps: building footprint 
correction, special structure removal, roof simplification, 
oblique facade rectification and facade shifting. A very 
interesting approach was proposed in [9] and [10]. In this 
approach, 
geometric 
simplification 
was 
realized 
by 
remodeling the object by means of a process similar to half-
space modeling. Approximating planes are determined from 
the polygonal faces of the original model, which are then 
used as space dividing primitives to create facade and roof 
structures of simpler shapes.  
The second aspect of 3D generalization of an urban 
environment is the generalization of groups of buildings. 3D 
generalization of groups of buildings is mentioned in several 
publications (e.g., [3][5][6][21]). These papers describe 
different 
approaches 
of 
3D 
grouping 
and 
group 
generalization: grouping of building models (using the 
infrastructure network) and replacing them with cell blocks, 
while preserving local landmarks [3]; “express different 
aspects of the aggregation of building models in the form of 
Mixed Integer Programming problems” [5]; and, grouping of 
building models “with a minor height difference and the 
other with a major height difference” [6]. 
2D building generalization algorithms should also be 
considered as being used by researchers for a 3D building 
group 
generalization. 
A 
holistic 
and 
automated 
generalization method based on a pseudo-physical model 
was considered in [8]. An approach based on Delaunay 
triangulation, Graph and Gestalt theory was described by Li 
et al. [16].In the above-mentioned publications, different 
approaches were considered, but we can identify some 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

common ideas which are important for most research in this 
area. 
In most cases it is very useful to generate levels-of-detail 
(LOD); normally, researchers use 3 or 4 LODs ([1], [17] and 
[20]). LODs are widely used in 3D video games, usually for 
detailed objects; more simplified objects are created for 
saving processor load and virtual memory [17]. Usually a 
detailed object has references to several simplified versions 
(at different levels of simplification), so that if the object 
stays near the view point, the most detailed version of the 
object is used, and as the object is located further from the 
view point the more simplified object is used.  
It is very popular to use CityGML standard for 3D urban 
models ([4], [7], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15] and [19]). This 
format supports many useful possibilities, which are very 
important for working with 3D urban models (e.g., LODs, 
topology, semantics etc.).  
III. 
SOURCE DATA  
For implementing and testing our approach, the free 
geodata of the city of Trento, Italy was used. The buildings 
(with individual heights), water objects and land relief 
(DEM) were downloaded from the website of Trento 
Municipality [23]; roads were downloaded from the 
OpenStreetMap website [24]. On the map of Trento (see 
Figure 1) the buildings are depicted as gray areas; the extent 
of the maps in Figure. 2, Figure 3 and Figure 4 are marked 
with a blue square; the extent of the map on Figure 8 as a red 
square, and the view point and view direction of Figure  9 as 
an orange circle and arrow. 
 
Figure 1. Map of Trento. 
IV. 
CALCULATION OF QUARTERS 
Finding a realistic method of simplification is a very 
important issue in generalization. One of the more common 
problems is when buildings are being joined through 
obstacles such as wide roads or rivers. In this case, buildings 
do not have to be joined to each other, and these buildings 
from the two sides of the obstacle, should be merged with 
other, more distant objects, which are, however, located on 
the correct side of the obstacle. To resolve this problem, we 
decided to split the urban space into quarters which are 
divided by the main, significant objects. These objects 
cannot be involved in the generalization itself. 
To calculate quarters, we decided to use the slope of the 
terrain, water objects and roads. In Trento, it was found that 
buildings are positioned only on areas with a slope smaller 
than 30 degrees. Accordingly, areas with slopes greater than 
30 degrees of the terrain were excluded. The main road types 
were used as dividers (excepting negligible roads such as 
'footway', 'pedestrian', 'service' and others). The third class of 
objects for defining the quarters was the water objects. All 
these three classes – slopes, roads and water objects - were 
merged into one raster map with 1 meter resolution (which 
has been found to be adequate for small scale urban 
generalization). For line objects (roads, narrow rivers) we 
used a minimal width for the objects which is equal to 1 
meter (1 pixel). 
The raster map of the merged objects is the base for 
quarter calculating; further processing can be divided into 
several consequent steps.  
The raster transformations for splitting the city into 
quarters have been selected because the standard vector 
approaches (e.g., polygons based on vector roads) have 
several limitations. The source vector road data may contain 
features such as unfinished roads, dead end roads, etc., 
features affecting its topological correctness. Splitting the 
area into quarters based on these data might result in a very 
complex polygonal map, containing artifacts. In contrast, the 
raster transformations approach enables to exclude most of 
the artifacts and the unnecessary bounds and vertices. As the 
width of the narrowest roads is about 2-3 meters, the 
resolution of the raster maps has been defined as 1 meter. 
Accordingly, the quarter map is composed of polygon 
bounds which coincide approximately with the road 
centerlines (±1 meter), as well as not intersecting the 
buildings. 
A. Region growing of base features 
All pixels of the merged objects got the value “1”; empty 
space on the raster map got the “Nil” value. Each group of 
pixels with value “1” has been expanded by adding one pixel 
(1 meter) and the results are depicted in Figure 2.  
B. Inverting of pixel map 
At this step, the values of pixels were inverted (“1” to 
“Nil” and vice versa), which results with many pixel areas 
with the value “1” which are split by “Nil” pixels. 
C. Defining quarter areas having unique values 
To set a unique pixel value to each quarter area, we 
vectorized the raster map. Each vector that defines a 
polygonal object got a unique integer identifier. Polygonal 
objects with areas of less than a pre-defined threshold were 
removed (in our case, an area of a threshold of 600 square 
meters was found to give adequate results). Then the vector 
map was rasterized. For raster values, polygon identifiers 
were used. As a result (see Figure 3), we got a raster map 
with group of pixels (a "quarter") and each group (which is 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

separated by “Nil” pixels from the adjacent group) got a 
unique integer identifier. 
 
 
Figure 2. Non-Nil Pixel Groups which Split the City Space into Quarters. 
 
Figure 3. Inverted Raster Map with Unique Pixel Values. 
  
D. Region growing raster map and final vectorization 
At this stage, the raster map has a lot of empty areas: 
quarters contain empty areas, and spaces between quarters 
are empty. The quarters look too complex and contain too 
many artifacts. To resolve this problem, the non-Nil pixel 
groups were expanded. Consecutive pixels were added to 
each unique pixel area until a non-Nil neighbor pixel or 
threshold is achieved (in our case, 15 pixels/meters out of the 
current pixel group). Then the raster map was vectorized. 
As a result (see Figure 4), we got the final raster map 
which contains continuous groups of pixels, where each 
group has a unique integer identifier. Then, the raster map is 
vectorized into a topologically correct quarter polygons with 
minimum artifacts. The total number of quarters in Trento 
was 1,431. 
V. 
GENERALIZATION 
The fact that, in urban areas, most (if not all) of the 
buildings have orthogonal sides, is the background of our 
raster-based generalization approach. Usually, in adjacent 
areas (quarters in our case), buildings would be spatially 
oriented in the same direction. Therefore, the generalization 
process consists of defining the typical azimuth of buildings' 
sides for each quarter. Once a typical azimuth is known, by 
applying the rasterization process  in this direction, the 
staircase-type appearance of lines, or legs of closed 
polygons, which is very common in the rasterization 
processes, can be eliminated. A non-rotated rasterization 
(parallel to the grid axes) while the buildings are positioned 
in another orientation will result in a staircase-type 
appearance of the bordering lines of the buildings and too 
many unnecessary vertices which will prevent achieving a 
smooth geometry of the generalized objects. 
 
Figure 4. Final Quarters. 
A. Defining the azimuth of buildings' sides  
In urban areas, most of the buildings have orthogonal 
sides; thus, it is possible to define the average spatial 
orientation of the buildings. Within each quarter, the 
azimuths of all the buildings' sides were computed. For each 
building in the quarter, the longest side and its azimuth were 
identified. Then, all the azimuths of the other sides are 
rotated by 90 degrees (clockwise) again and again; and the 
rotated azimuths (and their lengths) were put in one list. The 
list was sorted by lengths, and then lengths with the same 
azimuths (up to a predefined threshold) were averaged. A 
threshold of 1 degree when looking for close buildings' side 
azimuths has been found to give satisfactory results. A 
weighted average of the azimuths of the longest lengths of all 
the buildings within a quarter is used to define the general 
orientation of all the buildings of the quarter. 
B. Rotation and rasterization of the buildings in a quarter 
As mentioned above, and in order to significantly reduce 
the number of vertices of the generalized building and 
achieve a more realistic appearance of these simplified 
objects, the rasterization should be carried out in the spatial 
orientation of the buildings. A rasterization which is spatially 
oriented parallel to the grid axes will define the buildings 
which are not oriented parallel to the grid axes in a staircase-
type appearance of the buildings' sides. Accordingly, all the 
buildings within a quarter were rotated counter-clockwise at 
the angle of the general orientation of all the buildings of the 
quarter. Then, the rotated buildings were rasterized using a 
certain pixel size resolution (as explained in the next 
section). Each pixel with more than half its area covered by 
the original buildings gets the value “1”; otherwise it gets the 
value “Nil”. Figure 5 shows the result of this stage. 
The level of the generalization is a function of the pixel 
size rasterization process - the greater the pixel size, the 
greater the degree of generalization. Accordingly, each 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

quarter has been generalized at several levels of rasterization, 
resulting in several layers of different levels (level-of-detail) 
of generalized buildings for each quarter. Based on the 
original data of Trento, and according to our analyses, we 
found that using pixel size resolutions of 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 
40, 50 and 60 meters produces satisfactory results of a 
continuous and consecutive appearance of the level-of-detail 
of the generalized buildings.  
 
 
Figure 5. The Generalization Process of Buildings in a Quarter: Original 
Buildings (left); Rotated Quarter and the Generalized 10 meter Rasterized 
Buildings in red (middle); Final Result (right). 
 
 
Figure 6. Defining the Degree of Generalization using Buffer Zones:  
Red circles – Borders of Buffer Zones (red) and Quarter Borders (black). 
 
To draw a 3D perspective of the city with the generalized 
buildings, the position of a view point has to be defined. 
Then we built buffer zones around the view point. The buffer 
zones defined the distances (practically, range of distances) 
from the view point to each quarter. Then, we set the degree 
(resolution) of generalization of the buildings for each 
quarter. Figure 6 depicts the degree of generalization for 
each quarter, where the colors indicate the degree of the 
generalization. The relationship between the distances from 
view point, pixel size generalization, and the colors, are 
described in Table I. Finally, we merged all the separate 
generalized layers of all the quarters into one map (see 
Figure 8) for further 3D visualization. The division of 
distances from the view point into a scale of continuous 
intervals was based on several tests, which enabled us to 
draw a realistic and continual 3D model or perspectives. The 
results of a 3D visualization, and comparison of the 3D 
perspectives with the original buildings and with the 
generalized buildings, are presented in “Figure 9”. 
 
TABLE I.  
DISTANCES FROM THE VIEW POINT, RESOLUTIONS OF 
GENERALIZATION, AND COLORS. 
Distances from 
view point, meters 
Resolutions of 
generalization, meters 
Background colors of 
the map in “Figure 6” 
0 - 1000 
original buildings 
 
1000 - 2000 
10 
 
2000 - 3000 
15 
 
3000 - 4000 
20 
 
4000 - 5000 
25 
 
5000 - 6000 
30 
 
6000 - 7000 
40 
 
7000 - 8000 
50 
 
>8000 
60 
 
VI. 
NUMERICAL EVALUATION 
Table II presents the number of geometry primitives and 
the speed of the visualization process as a comparison 
between the original data and generalized data. As we can 
see, there is a significant reduction in visualization speed and 
in the number of polygons and nodes. 
 
TABLE II.  
RESULTS OF THE GENERALIZATION. 
Parameter 
Original building 
layer 
Generalized building 
layer used for 3D 
visualization 
Number of nodes 
114,648 
34,391 
Number of polygons 
46,339 
14,956 
Speed of 3D 
visualization, second 
6.6 
1.2 
 
To evaluate the quality of generalization the mean 
coefficient of building compactness was calculated for each 
resolution of generalization (see Figure 7). The coefficient of 
compactness of a single building is equal to α=P2/(4*π*A), 
where P – perimeter, A – area (α=1 for a circle, α=1.27 for a 
square). 
 
 
Figure 7. Coefficient of Building Compactness: X-axis – Resolution of the 
Generalization, 0 – Original Buildings. 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. The Northern half of Trento with the Original Buildings (left) and with the Generalized Buildings (right):  
Different Levels of Generalization and background Colors are according to Table I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. 3D Perspective with the Original Buildings (left) and with the Generalized Buildings (right). Zoomed Areas are Marked in Red. 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

In Figure 7, we can see that the coefficients of the 
buildings' compactness decreases significantly from 1.71 to 
1.27, which demonstrates the efficiency of the approach. 
The method and the process have been developed by 
using a standard PC (DELL Vostro 3550), 4 processors: 
Intel® Core™ i3-2310M CPU @ 2.10GHz, with 1.8 GB 
Memory. In addition, Ubuntu operating system, GRASS 
GIS, Bash and Python programming languages have been 
used.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The raster-based approach of the method is based on 
standard tools of rasterization, vectorization, region growing, 
and overlaying. The main advantage of the developed 
method is the ability to simplistically and efficiently 
generalize buildings at different levels, achieving variable, 
but continuous, level-of-detail of the buildings as a function 
of the depth of the plotted perspectives. The continuity of the 
generalized product is achieved by subdividing the area of 
the city into quarters, which take into account the significant 
objects affecting the process. As a result, the generalized 3D 
model does not contain unreadable and overly detailed 
separate buildings on the one hand, and is able to merge 
further groups of buildings on the other. At the same time, 
even though the buildings are simplified, the model 
maintains the geographical correctness and specifications of 
the urban area. The developed method helps reduce the time, 
and the required computer resources, for drawing 3D models 
or perspectives of a city or urban areas. 
 The current solution is based on a rigid subdivision of 
the processed area into quarters. This approach of rigid 
quarters limits the maximum level of generalization to the 
minimal quarter size on the one hand, and is unable to take 
into account the density and distribution of the buildings 
during the process on the other hand. Further research will be 
focused on improving the suggested model toward a more 
dynamic and flexible solution. In addition, it is also planned 
to improve the mechanism of defining the heights of the 
generalized objects. While in the suggested approach we set 
a single height to a group of neighbor pixels, it will be more 
precise to define an individual height to each pixel and only 
then classify the pixels into groups, which will enable us to 
achieve a more realistic result.    
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Döllner and H. Buchholz, "Continuous Level-of-detail Modeling of 
Buildings in 3D City Models," in GIS'05 Proceedings of the 13th 
Annual ACM International Workshop on Geographic Information 
Systems, Bremen, Germany, 2005, pp. 173-181. 
[2] A. Forberg, "Generalization of 3D Building Data Based on a Scale-
Space Approach," ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry & Remote 
Sensing, vol. 62, 2007, pp. 104-111. 
[3] T. Glander and J. Döllner, "Abstract Representations for Interactive 
Visualization of Virtual 3D City Models," Computers, Environment 
and Urban Systems, vol. 33, September 2009, pp. 375-387. 
[4] G. Gröger, T. H. Kolbe, and L. Plümer, "City Geographic Markup 
Language," Approved Discussion Paper of the Open Geospatial 
Consortium, 2006. 
[5] R. Guercke, T. Götzelmann, C. Brenner, and M. Sester, "Aggregation 
of LoD 1 Building Models as an Optimization Problem," ISPRS 
Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, vol. 66, 2011, pp. 
209–222. 
[6] S. He, G. Moreau, and J. Martin, "Footprint-Based 3D Generalization 
of Building Groups for Virtual City," GEOProcessing 2012: The 
Fourth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Geographic 
Information Systems, Applications, and Services, Valencia, Spain, 
2012, pp. 177-182. 
[7] U. Isikdag and S. Zlatanova, "Towards Defining a Framework for 
Automatic Generation of Buildings in CityGML Using Building 
Information Models," 3D Geo-Information Sciences Lecture Notes in 
Geoinformation and Cartography, Part II, 2009, pp. 79-96, DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-540-87395-2_6. 
[8] J. Joubran Abu Daoud and Y. Doytsher, "An Automated Cartographic 
Generalization Process: A Pseudo-Physical Model," The International 
Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial 
Information Sciences, vol. XXXVII, part B2, Beijing, 2008, pp. 419-
424. 
[9] M. Kada, "3D Building Generalization Based on Half-Space 
Modeling," Joint ISPRS Workshop on Multiple Representation, 
Hannover, Germany, 2006, pp. 58-64. 
[10] M. Kada, "Automatic Generalisation of 3D Building Models," in 
Proceedings of the Joint International Symposium on Geospatial 
Theory, Processing and Applications, Ottawa, Canada, 2002, pp. 32-
38. 
[11] T. Kolbe, "Representing and Exchanging 3D City Models with 
CityGML," in Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop of 3D 
Geo-information, Seoul, Korea, 2009, pp. 15-30. 
[12] T. Kolbe, C. Nagel, and A. Stadler, “CityGML—OGC Standard for 
Photogrammetry?,” In: Fritsch, D. (Ed.), Photogrammetric Week 
2009, Wichmann Verlag, Heidel-berg, pp. 265–277. 
[13] Kolbe T.H. and Gröger G., "Towards Unified 3D City Models," in 
Schiewe, J., Hahn, M, Madden, M, Sester, M. (Eds.): Challenges in 
Geospatial Analysis, Integration and Visualization II. Proceedings of 
Joint ISPRS Workshop, Stuttgart, Germany, 2003, pp. 41-49.  
[14] T. H. Kolbe and G. Gröger, "Unified Representation of 3D City 
Models," Geoinformation Science Journal, vol. 4(1), 2004. 
[15] T. H. Kolbe, G. Gröger, and K. Plümer, "CityGML – Interoperable 
Access to 3D City Models," in Proceedings of the First International 
Symposium 
on 
Fachbeiträge 
Geo-information 
for 
Disaster 
Management, Delft, Netherlands, 2005, pp 883-899. 
[16] Z. Li, H. Yan, T. Ai and J. Chen "Automated Building Generalization 
based on Urban Morphology and Gestalt Theory," Int. J. 
Geographical Information Science, vol. 18, 2004, pp. 513-534.  
[17] D. Luebke, M. Reddy, J. D. Cohen, A. Varshney, B. Watson, and R. 
Huebner, "Level of Detail for 3D Graphics," The Morgan Kaufmann 
Series in Computer Graphics, Edition 1, 2002. 
[18] N. Shiode, "3D Urban Models: Recent Developments in the Digital 
Modelling 
of 
Urban 
Environments 
in 
Three-Dimensions," 
GeoJournal, vol. 52(3), 2000, pp. 263-269.  
[19] A. Stadler, C. Nagel, G. König, and T. H. Kolbe, "Making 
Interoperability Persistent: A 3D Geo Database Based on CityGML," 
3D Geo-Information Sciences. Lecture Notes in Geoinformation and 
Cartography, Part II, 2009, pp. 175-192. 
[20] F. Thiemann, "Generalization of 3D Building Data," The 
International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and 
Spatial Information Sciences 34 (Part 4), 2002. 
[21] M. Trapp, T. Glander, and H. Buchholz, "3D Generalization Lenses 
for Interactive Focus + Context Visualization of Virtual City 
Models," in Proceedings of the 12th International Conference 
Information Visualization, London, 2008, pp. 356 - 361.  
[22] J. Xie, L. Zhang, and J. Li, "Automatic Simplification and 
Visualization of 3D Urban Building Models," International Journal of 
Applied Earth Observation and Geionformation, vol. 18, 2012, pp. 
222–231. 
[23] http://webapps.comune.trento.it/ambiente/ [retrieved: 12, 2012]. 
[24] http://www.openstreetmap.org/ [retrieved: 12, 2012].  
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

