GeoCubes Finland – A Unified Approach for Managing Multi-resolution Raster 
Geodata in a National Geospatial Research Infrastructure
Lassi Lehto, Jaakko Kähkönen, Juha Oksanen and Tapani Sarjakoski 
Finnish Geospatial Research Institute (FGI) 
National Land Survey of Finland 
Finland 
e-mail: lassi.lehto@nls.fi, jaakko.kahkonen@nls.fi, juha.oksanen@nls.fi, tapani.sarjakoski@nls.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Providers of geospatial data are facing the challenge 
of diverse user needs when delivering their products to different 
user groups. Academic researchers represent a user group with 
quite specific requirements, like good support for analysis and 
high-performance computing. 
A 
national 
infrastructure 
providing both geospatial data and powerful geocomputing 
facilities for research use is being developed in Finland. The part 
of the infrastructure described in this paper focuses on the 
management, storage and efficient delivery of raster-formatted 
geospatial data by applying the concept of datacube. 
Keywords-research infrastructure; raster data; datacube; 
GeoTIFF; GDAL. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
National Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDIs) are mostly 
developed as general-purpose data delivery platforms. The 
main driving force is usually the availability of various data 
sets that providers have initially built for their own use. As 
data sharing principles gain momentum in society, existing 
data sets are being made available without any specific 
adaptation. An example of development aiming at a 
customised, user-oriented SDI is the Finnish Open Geospatial 
Information Infrastructure for Research (oGIIR) initiative [1]. 
The oGIIR is a part of a major national programme developing 
research infrastructures (Finnish Research Infrastructure 
[FIRI]). The building phase of oGIIR is funded by the 
Academy of Finland in the context of Finland’s Roadmap for 
Research Infrastructures [2].  
The oGIIR is an open-access virtual infrastructure 
supporting the broad multidisciplinary scientific research 
community by offering geospatial data services, scalable 
geocomputing services and a knowledge-sharing network. 
The oGIIR is jointly developed by the Finnish Geospatial 
Research Institute (FGI) in the National Land Survey of 
Finland (NLS), the University of Turku, Aalto University, the 
University of Eastern Finland, the Finnish Environment 
Institute (SYKE), the Geological Survey of Finland (GTK), 
the Natural Resources Institute Finland (LUKE) and CSC – 
IT Center for Science (the provider of high-performance 
computing facilities for Finnish universities). The oGIIR will 
make 
the 
Finnish 
geospatial 
research 
infrastructure 
internationally unique in two ways: 1) by providing a strong 
network of cooperation, open access infrastructure and 
researcher knowledge sharing in order to support scientific 
research with geospatial information and 2) by facilitating 
access to high-performance geocomputing resources for 
research organisations. 
An initiative called GeoCubes Finland (hereafter also 
referred to as ‘GeoCubes’) has been launched in the context 
of the oGIIR to develop a cached storage of geospatial data 
for supporting the needs of the Finnish research community. 
GeoCubes is a unified, multi-resolution repository of raster-
formatted geospatial data. The main use case for this data 
storage is a research task involving spatial components and 
requiring geospatial raster source data sets. The substantial 
effort involved in acquiring and combining disparate spatial 
data sets is often seen as a major impediment for wider 
utilization of spatial methods in research. GeoCubes aims at 
facilitating 
spatial 
analysis 
processes 
by 
providing 
interoperable data sets that have been pre-processed for easy 
access and integration. 
GeoCubes Finland contains a representative selection of 
Finnish geospatial data sets with national coverage. The 
contained data sets are transformed into a common two-
dimensional grid and into a unified set of resolution levels. 
Standardised mechanisms are applied for the storage and 
provision of essential metadata. A wide set of access protocols 
are supported for accessing the contents of GeoCubes in order 
to facilitate utilisation in various client applications. In 
particular, mechanisms are provided for easy access to 
GeoCubes data sets from the high-performance geocomputing 
platform of CSC. The GeoCubes Finland platform is currently 
in its early stages of development. Thus, detailed information 
on performance, adaptability for a particular purpose, or user 
acceptance of the platform, is not yet available. 
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section II 
describes the concept of a datacube and its application in the 
geospatial domain. Section III describes the main aspects of 
the GeoCubes Finland data repository. Section IV deals with 
the implementation details of GeoCubes Finland. Section V 
contains discussion and Section VI presents conclusions and 
possible future developments of the platform. 
 
II. 
DATACUBES FOR GEODATA 
In general computing technology, a datacube is 
understood as a multi-dimensional array of data (the term 
OLAP cube is also used; OLAP: Online Analytical 
Processing). The dimensions of a datacube represent the 
points of view from which a certain value (called a measure) 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

is looked at. If a datacube contains more than three 
dimensions, the term hypercube is also used [3]. The concept 
of a datacube has recently raised interest also in the geospatial 
domain. In this context, datacubes are defined as multi-
dimensional arrays containing spatially referenced data. 
Examples of datacubes include one-dimensional arrays of 
geolocated sensor observation time series, two-dimensional 
arrays containing range values of geospatial coverage, three-
dimensional arrays of volumetric data sets (like voxel 
representations of data sets in geoscience) and four-
dimensional arrays representing the time series of volumetric 
data sets [4]. 
In particular, satellite images can be seen as a promising 
application area for datacube-based storage and data 
management [5]. Earth observation (EO) missions have been 
carried out regularly since the sixties, and the images captured 
thus form an extensive time series. This allows for natural 
treatment of EO data as a three-dimensional datacube [6]. 
Open Data Cube (ODC) is a large international initiative 
aimed at improving access to EO imagery through a unified 
pre-processing, harmonisation and indexing procedure [7]. An 
open source Python-based implementation is available to help 
communities in organising and analysing vast amounts of EO 
data and in creating useful end-user applications based on 
those data resources [8]. 
An important example of an operational national-level 
ODC implementation is the Australian Geoscience Data Cube 
(AGDC) [9]. The main three components of the AGDC 
include a) data preparation for improved comparability and 
better time-series analysis, b) a software platform that 
supports better data access and management, and c) the 
provision of a high-performance computing platform for data 
analysis tasks. In the data ingestion process, source imagery is 
processed in order to achieve comparable spatial, spectral and 
quality properties, and then it is tiled and stored as netCDF 
files. The AGDC can also deal with data sets that are only 
indexed and processed into the common form in an on-the-fly 
manner, when needed. 
In standardisation, the concept of a datacube has also been 
raised as a possible organising principle for storing massive 
amounts of raster-formatted geodata. A working group, called 
Datacube Domain Working Group (Datacube.DWG), is 
planned to start working on this topic in the Open Geospatial 
Consortium (OGC) [10]. 
Recently, Baumann has made an attempt to formalise the 
properties of a geospatial datacube in the Datacube Manifesto 
[11]. According to Baumann, geospatial datacubes are 
supposed to express the following properties: a) they must 
support at least one through to four dimensions, b) datacubes 
must treat all axes equally, in particular they must yield good 
performance in selecting subsets along all axes c) datacubes 
must support adaptive partitioning to improve query and 
processing efficiency, d) datacube service implementations 
must 
support 
a 
well-defined 
query 
language 
for 
accomplishing various tasks (like data extraction, filtering, 
processing and integration). 
The most important existing specifications unifying 
datacube access methods include the following OGC 
standards: Coverage Implementation Schema (CIS) [12], Web 
Coverage Service (WCS) [13] and Web Coverage Processing 
Service (WCPS) [14]. 
III. 
GEOCUBES FINLAND’S SPECIFICATIONS 
A. Content 
The 
contents 
of 
GeoCubes 
Finland 
include 
a 
representative selection of spatial data sets maintained by 
governmental research organisations in Finland (like SYKE, 
LUKE and GTK). As reference data, some general-purpose 
data sets provided by the NLS are also included. Data sets are 
organised as individual layers of information with common 
representational properties for easy integration and analysis. 
Examples of data sets to be stored in GeoCubes in the first 
phase include high-resolution elevation models and surface 
models (from the NLS), land-use layers (from the SYKE), soil 
map layers (from the GTK) and national forest inventory 
layers (from the LUKE). 
B. Metadata 
Metadata concerning the data sets stored in GeoCubes 
Finland are provided as a centralised resource. Because of the 
particular nature of the data sets, special attention is put on 
providing descriptive information about the classifications 
applied in raster layers. This information will be made 
available either as Raster Attribute Tables (RATs), as internal 
metadata fields of the raster data file or as online code list files. 
As GeoCubes provides multi-resolution data storage, the 
applied nomenclature in most cases form hierarchical 
classification structures. 
C. Encoding 
The encoding of GeoCubes Finland cell values depends on 
the nature of the data set being represented. Both classified 
data sets (like land use or soil maps) and data sets with 
continuous value ranges (like Digital Elevation Models 
(DEMs) or orthophotos) are included. No-data areas are 
represented as zero-valued cells in classified data sets and by 
a separate mask channel in data sets with continuous value 
ranges. Where practicable, the data capture date is presented 
as a separate time layer. 
D. Grid 
The standardised grid applied in GeoCubes is based on the 
Finnish national Coordinate Reference System (CRS) ETRS-
TM35FIN (EPSG code 3067). This projected CRS is 
compatible with the pan-European ETRS89 system. ETRS-
TM35FIN covers the whole country in one projection zone 
and has the false easting value of 500 000 m on its central 
meridian at 27°E longitude. The origin of the GeoCubes 
Finland’s grid (top-left corner) is located at the coordinate 
point (0, 7800000). The easting value of the origin is selected 
to avoid negative coordinates. The northing coordinate value 
is selected as a round 100 km value, allowing for good 
coverage of the country. 
E. Resolution Levels 
GeoCubes Finland applies the following resolution levels: 
1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500, and 1000 m. The resolution 
levels applicable for a given source data essentially depend on 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the properties, like spatial accuracy, of the data set. Round 
resolution values, rather than the traditionally used exponents 
of two in image pyramids, are selected to facilitate integration 
with external sources (like statistical data sets) and to follow 
the values commonly used in spatial analysis reporting. 
F. Spatial Subdivision 
For easy transfer and processing of the GeoCubes Finland 
data sets, the content is subdivided in 100 km * 100 km blocks 
with a round 100 km origin (top-left corner) coordinate values. 
The territory of Finland can be covered with 60 such blocks 
(see Figure 1). The so-called virtual raster mechanism is used 
to treat the 60 individual files as a one continuous data set. 
 
Figure 1.  The block-wise spatial subdivision of GeoCubes Finland’s data 
storage. 
G. Access Methods 
Several access methods are supported in GeoCubes 
Finland in order to enable smooth usage in various user 
environments. Block-wise raster files are available for easy 
http access. A custom-made download service supports the 
selection of an arbitrary bounding box at a given resolution 
level. The efficient partial downloading of an individual 
block-wise raster file is also supported using an http ‘GET 
range’ request. A Web Coverage Service (WCS) interface is 
available for downloading GeoCubes content, supporting the 
definition of spatial extents both in ground and raster 
coordinates. 
Visualisation of the GeoCubes content is provided via a 
Web Map Service (WMS) instance (MapServer) that can use 
the virtual raster representation of an individual GeoCubes 
data theme as its source data. 
 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
A. Platform 
GeoCubes Finland – like most of the other research 
infrastructure components being developed in the oGIIR 
project – will be running on the high-performance cloud 
computing platform provided by the IT services provider 
CSC. The platform consists of two different computing 
environments: supercluster Taito, which is destined for 
massive parallel computing tasks, and cPouta, a traditional 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) cloud computing platform. 
Large-scale geocomputing tasks will be run on the Taito 
platform, whereas interactive applications and the open data 
access interfaces of GeoCubes will be located in the cPouta 
environment. Data storage will be organised in the CSC’s fast 
storage units. Investigation into the best possible manner to 
share the data storage between Taito and cPouta usage is 
underway. 
B. Processing 
Data sets available in raster form are transformed into the 
standardised grid and into all applicable resolution levels. 
Vector-formatted source data sets are rasterised with selected 
attribute values and added to the raster storage. The needed 
generalisation processes are carried out in order to fill in the 
required resolution levels. If source data sets are available in 
generalised forms, those layers are used as input data. 
C. Storage format 
In the first implementation, GeoCubes Finland data sets 
are stored as GeoTIFF files [15]. Each file covers one block. 
The different resolution levels are maintained as internal 
GeoTIFF overview layers. The internal structure of the 
GeoTIFF file is organised in the so-called cloud-optimised 
form for efficient extraction of the various overview levels 
using standard http transmission mechanisms. The BigTIFF 
mode is used to support vast spatial raster files. Raster content 
is organised into internal 256*256 cell GeoTIFF tiles to 
facilitate the fast extraction of sub-regions. The architecture of 
the initial GeoCubes implementation is illustrated in Figure 2. 
D. Tools 
Processing of GeoCubes Finland data sets is mainly 
performed by the open source spatial data processing platform 
called the Geospatial Data Abstraction Library (GDAL) [16]. 
Automated processes for importing different data sources into 
the GeoCubes are based on the use of GDAL functionalities 
via Python scripting. 
 
 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 2.  The system architecture of GeoCubes Finland and planned data 
access mechanisms. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
 
The development of GeoCubes Finland arose from the 
need to have a unified approach for handling raster geodata in 
a multi-resolution fashion, without direct relation to the 
advancement of datacube approaches in the geospatial domain 
that we reviewed in Section II. Referring to Section III, the 
very central aspects of GeoCubes specifications are the 
following: 
1. It supports handling of raster geodata sets that are 
mutually heterogeneous with respect to their content. 
2. It uses a single coordinate reference system and one 
specified location for the origin of the raster data sets. 
3. It uses multiple resolutions to store and represent 
geodata, like image pyramids are used in remote 
sensing imagery. 
4. It uses unified principles to encode the data in raster 
cells.  
 
Northing and Easting are the only natural dimensions of 
our datacube. Height and time could be considered to be other 
natural dimensions in the datacube. Looking at the datasets 
that are to be primarily used in the oGIIR infrastructure, there 
seems to be little (if any) need for voxel data with height as 
the third dimension. For time to be a natural dimension in a 
datacube, we should have data representing a phenomenon at 
rather regular intervals, thus forming time series data over 
longer periods of time. In our case we have data representing 
current phenomena, or only some snapshots representing the 
phenomenon at certain specified time instances. To 
summarise, on a logical level our way of modelling the data 
is, in many aspects, the traditional layer- and raster-based 
approach. Related to datacubes, GeoCubes Finland seems to 
mainly resemble the AGDC and ODC. However, it is useful 
to analyse how GeoCubes Finland fits with a datacube as 
defined by Baumann in his manifesto [11]. 
First of all, it is rather natural to consider each resolution 
level to form its own datacube. That is why the approach is 
named in the plural form – GeoCubes Finland. Secondly, the 
enumeration of the layers or themes can be considered to form 
the first dimension within each of these datacubes. Thirdly, 
Northing and Easting would form the second and the third 
dimension. GeoCubes Finland’s formalism can be extended to 
handle volumetric and/or time series data by replacing a layer 
with three- or four-dimensional datacubes. Baumann’s 
Datacube Manifesto assumes that the data values within a 
cube are of the same data type. This is not the case in our 
approach; the data type is only constrained to be the same 
within each layer. 
Baumann’s Datacube Manifesto implicitly defines or 
describes a datacube as a database management system and 
data processing environment for multi-dimensional raster 
data. In GeoCubes Finland, on the contrary, the focus is on 
representation (i.e., how the data is modelled and represented 
on a logical level). On the implementation level, GeoCubes 
uses a file-based approach and utilises the features available 
in the GDAL library, for example virtual rasters and 
overviews. As such GeoCubes’ implementation is not 
restricted to GDAL – other realisations may be made using 
any software that suits the purpose. GeoCubes is not a 
processing and analysis environment for geodata; processing 
is assumed to take place in GIS or other software that has the 
capability to process raster geodata. The plan is to use WCS 
as the primary mechanism for accessing selected parts of the 
data. These observations make it evident that all the issues 
related to optimisation and performance will remain highly 
dependent on the specific solutions made in each 
implementation. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
The oGIIR project aims at improving access to geospatial 
data sets and geocomputing resources for academic and 
governmental research organisations. One of the aims of the 
project is to set up a datacube, called GeoCubes Finland, to 
facilitate researchers’ work in cases where spatial data in 
raster form can contribute to the problem resolution.  
GeoCubes Finland is currently in its early development 
phase. The first version of the specification has been 
developed, and the first tests with real data sets are ongoing. 
The future work includes further testing to refine the 
specifications, develop the service modules and user 
interfaces, and better integrate the data storage with high-
performance computing facilities for spatial analysis. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work described in this paper has been carried out in 
the context of the project ‘Open Geospatial Information 
Infrastructure for Research’ (oGIIR, urn:nbn:fi:research-
infras-2016072513), a part of Finland’s Roadmap for 
Research Infrastructures. The project is funded by the 
Academy of Finland, grant number 306536. The computing 
infrastructure used in the work is funded by the Academy of 
Finland through ’Finnish Grid and Cloud Infrastructure’, 
urn:nbn:fi:research-infras-2016072533, 
grant 
number 
283818. 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

REFERENCES 
[1] oGIIR, 
Open 
Geospatial 
Information 
Infrastructure. 
http://ogiir.fi [retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
[2] Academy of Finland, “Finland’s Strategy and Roadmap for 
Research 
Infrastructures 2014-2020”. 
http://www.aka.fi/ 
globalassets/awanhat/documents/firi/tutkimusinfrastruktuurie
n_strategia_ja_tiekartta_2014_en.pdf [retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
[3] Wikipedia, 
Data 
cube. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Data_cube [retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
[4] U. Pyysalo and T. Sarjakoski, ”Voxel approach to landscape 
modelling”. The International Archives of the Photogrammetry 
and Remote Sensing, July 2–11, 2008, Beijing, China, 
XXXVII(B4/1), pp. 563–568 
[5] A. Lewis et al., “Rapid, high-resolution detection of 
environmental change over continental scales from satellite 
data – the Earth Observation Data Cube”. International 
Journal of Digital Earth, Vol. 9 , Iss. 1, 2016, pp: 106-111 
[6] ESA, Earth Observation Datacube. https://eodatacube.eu/ 
[retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
[7] CEOS, Open Data Cube. https://www.opendatacube.org 
[retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
[8] ODC, 
Open 
Data 
Cube 
Source 
Code 
Repository. 
https://github.com/opendatacube [retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
[9] A. Lewis et al., “The Australian Geoscience Data Cube – 
Foundations and lessons learned”. Remote Sensing of 
Environment, 
2017, 
ISSN 
0034-4257, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2017.03.015, pp. 276-292 
[10] OGC, 
Datacube 
Domain 
Working 
Group 
Charter. 
https://external.opengeospatial.org/twiki_public/pub/Coverag
esDWG/Datacubes/17-071_Datacube-DWG_Charter.pdf 
[retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
[11] P. Baumann, The Datacube Manifesto.  http://earthserver.eu/ 
sites/default/files/upload_by_users/The-Datacube-
Manifesto.pdf [retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
[12] OGC, 
Coverage 
Implementation 
Schema. 
http://docs.opengeospatial.org/is/09-146r6/09-146r6.html 
[retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
[13] OGC, Web Coverage Service. http://www.opengeospatial.org 
/standards/wcs [retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
[14] OGC, Web Coverage Processing Service (WCPS) Standard. 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/ wcps [retrieved: 
Jan, 2018] 
[15] GeoTIFF, GeoTIFF home page.  http://trac.osgeo.org/geotiff/ 
[retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
[16] GDAL, Geospatial Data Abstraction Library. http://gdal.org 
[retrieved: Jan, 2018] 
 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

