Spatial Data Supply Chain Provenance Modelling for Next Generation Spatial 
Infrastructures Using Semantic Web Technologies 
 
Muhammad Azeem Sadiq 
Department of Spatial Sciences, Curtin University 
Cooperative Research Center for Spatial Information 
Perth, Australia 
Email: Muhammad.sadiq@postgrad.curtin.edu.au 
 
David McMeekin 
Department of Spatial Sciences, Curtin University 
Cooperative Research Center for Spatial Information 
Perth, Australia 
Email: d.mcmeekin@curtin.edu.au 
 
Lesley Arnold  
Department of Spatial Sciences, Curtin University 
Cooperative Research Center for Spatial Information 
Perth, Australia 
Email: l.arnold@curtin.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract—This research addresses spatial data supply chain 
provenance issues using semantic Web technologies to resolve 
knowledge gaps when disseminating spatial data products. 
Two models from the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) 
and the Open Provenance Group for general data on the Web 
do not satisfy geospatial end-user needs. The Open Geospatial 
Consortium (OGC) has investigated the W3C PROV model for 
spatial datasets. Issues identified are the lack of provenance 
captured at the feature and attribute level, and for time series, 
data set series, representation and presentation interfaces, and 
elements at different levels. In order to answer user queries 
comprehensively, 
a 
geospatial 
provenance 
model 
in 
conjunction with semantic technologies has been identified as a 
potential solution to increase a user’s trust in datasets and 
processes. This is important as raster dataset provenance, time 
series conflation processes and incremental updates have not 
been addressed. This has created a critical gap between 
provenance currency and the believability of geospatial 
datasets.  
Keywords-spatial 
data 
supply 
chain; 
spatuial 
data 
provenance; semantic Web; ontology; trust; processess and 
services. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This research focusses on the needs of next generation 
spatial infrastructures. It explores different aspects of spatial 
infrastructures with a view to improving our understanding 
and management of data provenance along the spatial data 
supply chain, including end-user trust and believability. This 
research aims to produce a geospatial data provenance model 
called GEOPROV. It will investigate and implement 
semantic Web techniques to aid the user in assessing the 
results of comprehensive queries by linking provenance 
features with other information available from spatial 
systems. The objective is to improve the accessibility and 
usability of spatial data for Australia and New Zealand, in 
the first instance, but the techniques created will be generic 
and applicable to global use. 
The main objectives of this research are: (1) detailed 
exploration of the requirements for geospatial provenance 
models; (2) development of a comprehensive spatial data 
supply chain provenance model for spatial information that is 
applicable to all feature types of spatial datasets including 
vector and raster datasets; (3) exploration and development 
of techniques to present provenance information to users for 
their assessment in an understandable form, via geospatial 
interfaces; 
and 
(4) 
exploration, 
development 
and 
enhancement of the proposed model through real case 
studies from relevant industry collaborators. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II describes 
the purpose of work performed; Section III identifies and 
discusses different provenance models and current work on 
provenance. In Section IV, the importance of work is 
followed by a detailed research methodology in Section V. 
In the last section, current findings, open issues and future 
directions are discussed. 
II. 
BACKGROUND  
The Cooperative Research Centre for Spatial Information 
(CRCSI) Program 3, Spatial Infrastructures, seeks to 
improve the organization, access and use of spatial data in 
Australia and New Zealand [1]. The research program has 
embraced advanced Semantic Web Technologies and 
Artificial Intelligence as a means of improving spatial data 
supply chains [1]. 
III. 
CURRENT RESEARCH 
A. Current provenance models 
The Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) and the World 
Wide Web Consortium (W3C) define the provenance of 
spatial data as “information on the place and time of origin 
or derivation or a resource or a record or proof of 
authenticity or of past ownership. The W3C PROV model is 
a generic provenance information standard” [2].  
W3C PROV is a conceptual model for provenance that 
offers an elegant and flexible solution for linking provenance 
information to geospatial elements with the necessary 
semantics. It can be realized in RDF, XML, and text formats, 
giving alternative options for implementing the same model 
suggested by [2]. However, no dedicated geospatial 
provenance model currently exists. The OGC test bed 10 
Cross Community Interoperability (CCI) thread has 
conducted provenance activities and provided guidelines to 
capture provenance information through examining PROV 
for geospatial data. 
 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
Figure 1.  Spatial Data Supply Chain (van der Vlugt., 2012) [4] 
 
B. Contemporary Research 
In a Geospatial Web Service environment, data are often 
disseminated and processed widely and frequently, and often 
in an unpredictable way. This means that it is important to 
have a mechanism for identifying original data sources. 
Geospatial data provenance records the derivation history of 
a geospatial data product in [3]. It is important for evaluating 
the quality of data products, tracing workflows, updating or 
reproducing scientific results, and in evaluating geospatial 
data products’ reliability and quality. As a consequence, 
geospatial data provenance has become a fundamental issue 
in establishing Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDIs). 
The exchange and sharing of geospatial data provenance 
in a distributed information environment requires an 
interoperable model for provenance in [3]. The rationale for 
designing the provenance model in this way is to combine 
the W3C PROV with the ISO 19115 metadata standards. 
This will enrich the model with domain specific details and 
allow domain specific representations to be translated into an 
interoperable form for exchange on the Web. He et al.  in [3] 
argue that fine-grained provenance modelling for geospatial 
data could be achieved by borrowing from existing 
modelling approaches for geospatial data such as feature, 
coverage and observation.  
One representation of a spatial infrastructure is a supply 
chain that involves processes from data collection to 
production. An alignment study of SDSCs proposed the 
model shown in Figure 1 in which a number of stages are 
identified. It shows the variability in data from suppliers and 
products used by consumers. Of importance are the feedback 
loops that are needed for quality assurance and performance 
monitoring [4]. 
An attempt has been made to develop standards for 
provenance tracking in spatial analytical workflows. A 
prototype using spatial weights has been developed by [5] 
for metadata and provenance for spatial analysis. They are 
currently in collaboration with other researchers to refine 
these standards and extend them as a broader set of spatial 
analytical services. In scientific workflows, the most 
valuable service is the automatic capture of sufficient 
provenance data to establish trust and potentially allow other 
researchers to reproduce a result. Scientific workflows have 
emerged as de facto models for researchers to process, 
transform 
and 
analyse 
scientific 
data. 
Workflow 
management systems provide researchers with many 
valuable and time saving features, from cataloguing, 
workflow activities and Web services, to visual authoring 
and monitoring [6].  
 A current CRCSI project is concerned with geocoded 
address optimisation. Each valid address in Australia is 
required to have one or more geocoded locations for 
emergency services, and efficient delivery of mail and other 
services. At a Geocoding Address Workshop (held in 
Canberra, July 2014), stakeholders highlighted the need for 
geospatial provenance for geocoded addressing spatial data 
supply chains. 
As the products are published, managers and scientists 
will have easy access to consistent baseline information of 
Australia to holistically monitor and predict the impact of 
natural 
and 
man-made 
changes 
on 
the 
Australian 
environment. We presumed that temporal Provenance is an 
active research area that has generated complex findings. 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

This is because as the original data source is updated, the 
integrated dataset will also be updated. Similarly, an 
integrated dataset may be updated if a new version of the 
integration algorithm becomes available. 
The integration process is usually re-executed or the 
updates may be done routinely or as required.  To manage 
these scenarios, Harth et al. in [7] have developed different 
approaches to temporal provenance for geospatial data and 
derived integrated spatial products. Changes in spatial 
datasets with time are crucial as well as continuous capturing 
of provenance for each process. 
C. Provenance in spatial infrastructure 
Spatial data provenance is often difficult to trace in a 
spatial infrastructure. Regardless of the application domain, 
data are collected and manipulated by a wide range of users, 
with distinct interests and applications, using their own 
vocabularies, work methodologies, models, and sampling 
needs. We observed that in particular there is a huge effort to 
improve the means and methodologies to capture process 
and disseminate geospatial data. In real life situations, 
provenance information of geospatial data is used to decide 
pre-processing procedures, storage policies and even data 
cleaning strategies, with direct impact on data analysis and 
synthesis policies in [8].  
The next generation of Spatial Infrastructures will need 
the capability to integrate and federate geospatial data that 
are highly heterogeneous. Adams et al. in [9] discuss new 
data that can come with variable, loosely defined, and 
sometimes unknown provenance, semantics and content. 
They further explain that the geospatial datasets that we 
might wish to combine could be highly heterogeneous. They 
will be represented in many forms, will have been generated 
by a variety of producers using different processes and may 
have originally been intended for purposes that are different 
from their present use. The explicit consideration of 
provenance into Spatial Infrastructures is needed because of 
massive datasets and complex functionality involved. Wang 
et al.  in [10] state that Geographical Information Systems 
(GISs) are widely used for manipulating geographically 
referenced data and supporting spatial analysis and 
modelling.  
Gill  in [11] researched intelligent semantic workflows 
for complex computations and data processing at a large 
scale, providing assistance in setting up parameters and data, 
validating workflows created by users, and automating the 
generation of workflows from high-level user guidance. 
Harth et al. in [7] report their experiences with integrating 
geospatial datasets using Linked Data technologies. They 
describe NeoGeo, an integration vocabulary, and an 
integration scenario involving two geospatial datasets.  
Despite 
significant 
advances 
in 
computational 
infrastructure, many environmental scientists are hampered 
by the resource intensive task required to set up their analysis 
process because data comes in daily from their sensors [12]. 
Data preparation is time-consuming: scientists (1) gather 
data from multiple sources and sensors, (2) clean the data,  
(3) normalize it so that data from different sources is 
represented using the same units and formats, and (4) 
integrate it and configure it according to the requirements of 
their models and simulation software.  
D. The semantic Web approach 
Provenance is seen as an important aspect of the Web 
that becomes crucial in Semantic Web research. Research 
described in [13] addresses the many questions raised about 
the Semantic Web in the context of automated applications. 
“Modelling Provenance of DBpedia Resources Using 
Wikipedia Contributions” by Orlandi et al. in [14] presents 
an approach for adding provenance information about the 
statements in DBpedia by connecting these statements to the 
Wikipedia edits they are derived from. This provenance 
information is subsequently exposed as Linked Data using 
several existing provenance ontologies.  
The use of provenance for information is recommended 
by Artz et al. in [15] to support trust decisions, as is the 
automated detection of opinions as distinct from objective 
information.  They provide an overview of existing trust 
research in computer science and the Semantic Web and 
argue that trust has another important role in the Semantic 
Web. 
IV. 
SIGNIFICANCE 
A provenance model is needed for geospatial data as no 
model currently exists. This research will investigate the 
generation of a provenance model, called GEOPROV 
building on the work of the W3C and the Open Provenance 
Group. Based on GEOPROV a comprehensive provenance 
application will be developed which will extract, capture and 
store provenance information in an intelligent way that it can 
be queried semantically. 
V. 
RESEARCH METHODS 
Experts from industry will be engaged as industry 
supervisors to assist with aligning the research with the 
needs and requirements of stakeholders. Workshops have 
been conducted with the land survey commission from the 
Surveying and Spatial Sciences Institute of Western 
Australia and in conjunction with their comments the 
ontology details have been created. During the ontology 
design, trust, quality, lineage, history and authoritative 
attributes of datasets have been considered as the building 
blocks. On the basis of these elements of provenance, 
different decision metrics will be built to rank and further 
analyse datasets for decision making processes. Progress 
review workshops will be conducted quarterly with 
stakeholders. Regular visits will be arranged and close 
working relationships will be maintained. Below are the 
major activities which are on-going: 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
Figure 2.  Land Administration Provenance Ontology Model 
 
A. Use case development 
With the close consultation of stakeholders, use cases 
will be developed and modelled in a comprehensive way to 
provide a common standard for the Australian and New 
Zealand geospatial industry.  
Use cases are being explored with the Public Sector 
Mapping Agency (PSMA), Department of Land, Water and 
Planning (DELWP Victoria), Landgate (WA), as well as 
Land Information New Zealand (LINZ), and Geoscience 
Australia. As a result of this consultation process, the final 
design of GEOPROV will be developed and as a common 
standard. 
Based on final design, GEOPROV tool will be developed 
to extract, store and visualize provenance of spatial datasets 
and will be tested by GIS teams of land administration 
departments across Australia and New Zealand.  
B. Use case 1 
A land administration subdomain provenance ontology 
structure has been developed. During the land administration 
process, data may be collected using several surveying 
techniques and methods. Different types of equipment are 
used and at various levels of sophistication. For example the 
popular Total Stations verses simple handheld GPSs are used 
to capture locations. The use of optical remote sensing 
techniques is also used to obtain location information that is 
produced by different organisations using different accuracy 
and modalities. For example, aerial photography is often a 
combination of many platforms and techniques. The nature 
and requirement of data capture is domain specific. Google 
Street View and Maps are handy sources of information for 
visual ground verification. All these methods, equipment and 
techniques are included in the ontology defined as type, 
resolution, calibrations, orientations, optics, geometry, 
combinations 
and 
principles. 
Capturing 
all 
these 
characteristics is important for determining feature accuracy 
and suitability for further use in the land administration life 
cycle (Figure 2).  
C. Use case 2 
Integrating road network data across State jurisdiction 
level may have result in anomalies due to the different 
standards currently used to collect the datasets. The 
conceptual design process is presented in Figure 3. When a 
linear feature road, river or any utility infrastructure are 
collected by different organisation and using a diverse range 
of standards, tools and methods, they may not be aligned at 
State borders. Automating such processes can provide 
several benefits as compared to the manual process. 
Matching source features with corresponding adjacent 
features quality may be questionable if errors or uncertainties 
will not be audited in post processing as in Figure 4. 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 3.  Edge feature matching  
D. Encoding and mapping GEOPROV 
A modular approach will be investigated initially and 
may be used depending upon the nature of the geospatial 
processes involved. Elements of the provenance model will 
be encoded, relationships will be defined, and geospatial data 
will be mapped. GEOPROV will make use of ontologies and 
rules. These will be explored and developed as part of this 
research. Open source tools such as Protégé, Pellet and 
others will be evaluated for usability.  
W3C PROV ontology classes, properties, and constraints 
will be used to represent and allow the interchange of 
provenance information. Using this ontology, provenance 
records can be encoded in RDF triples. The OGC defined 
geospatial terms will be mapped to GEOPROV in RDF. 
Relationships between features, their geometric and non-
geometric attributes will be defined through the latest version 
of an ontology Web language, namely OWL-2 and RDF. 
E. Engineering Design Experiments 
All use cases will be tested with the developed solution 
combined with a linked data approach. Provenance will be 
linked with other information available in the system to 
make query results more comprehensive. Research will also 
develop a weighted matrix approach to enable a user to 
determine the fitness for purpose of datasets for selected use 
cases. Besides this, the performance of queries will be 
studied as well as issues with storage, redundancy and 
application architectures. Geospatial provenance model 
requirements will be explored and defined and validated 
through stakeholder consultation and use cases investigated. 
There may be different query requirements based on the 
business need of each organization and governance level. 
These requirements will be input for testing provenance 
model effectiveness.  
GEOPROV will be applicable to all feature types of 
spatial datasets including vector and raster datasets. The 
GEOPROV physical geospatial data provenance model will 
be developed in UML and Protégé along with a conceptual 
and functional business model applicable to all feature types 
of spatial datasets and different levels of granularity for 
geometric and non-geometric attributes including vector and 
raster. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Spatial data supply chains (SDSC) for next generation 
spatial infrastructures require extensive investigation to 
address several contemporary issues and challenges that are 
hampering innovation and the use of spatial information 
across industry sectors. SDSCs consist of multiple value 
chains. Each value chain has heterogeneous geo-processes, 
methods, models and workflows that combine to generate, 
modify and consume spatial data as shown in Figure 5.  
The integration and processing of multiple datasets gives 
rise to questions about trust, quality, fitness for purpose, 
currency and the authoritativeness of data.  This is because 
multiple datasets originate from heterogeneous sources, and 
different geo processes have been executed to reach the final 
product. Users have different data requirements and therefore 
knowing how data is collected and at what level of accuracy, 
provides knowledge about what it can be used for leading to 
increased user confidence. With the advent of semantic Web 
technologies, new methods for exploring and understanding 
the provenance of spatial data have become possible. 
However, there are few models that address data provenance 
and none that adequately cater for spatial information 
management and the dissemination of data to users.
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 Edge matching provenance ontology model 
 
A comprehensive provenance model for the spatial 
domain in Australia and New Zealand is an industry 
imperative. Understanding provenance is crucial to capturing 
information 
about 
spatial 
features, 
such 
as 
who/what/when/how/why it has been generated.  This 
information is needed to support well informed and reliable 
evidence-based decision making. In addition, geospatial 
provenance models related to spatial data storage, scalability, 
robustness and query performance are yet to be examined.  
 
Currently, GEOPROV is under development. Use cases 
have been produced. As result of which a Land 
Administration subdomain model in Figure 6 has been 
developed and ontology produced. The sub domain 
provenance model is still to be tested.  
Besides this, a model for temporal and spatial provenance 
at feature and attribute level is under development (Figure 7). 
Ontologies and relationships between classes and subclasses 
have been defined. To achieve feature and instance level 
spatial provenance an edge matching line feature Web 
processing service is being modeled when two or  more line 
features from heterogeneous source aligned and merged 
together to produce as new feature or manipulation of 
existing features. 
 
This may result in the addition of new vertices, and shift 
vectors that may change the position of existing edges. This 
is a typical use case for survey data that is merged to form 
multiple sources to form a single cadastral dataset. The 
question is, what are the best techniques to enable a user to 
query, understand and analyse provenance information to 
determine trust in the data and whether it is fit for purpose? 
For example, a weighted matrix of provenance values may 
be appropriate, similar to hotel star rating. Alternatively, a 
user may want data at a specific accuracy and use other 
provenance information, such as a Web service having 
graphical charts for different levels of accuracy and thus 
trust. One representation can be the retrieval of provenance 
information by selecting a specific feature on the screen by 
querying the triples stored. The model developed will answer 
provenance information at feature and attribute level. For 
example if two features are merged, information will be 
captured and can be retrieved to answer queries about how 
the information was generated in the first instance. It will 
support requests about data, type of source, entities, 
processes, characteristics and agents. 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
 
Figure 5.  Supply chain provenance modeling 
 
 
 
           Use case 1 ontologies and relationships 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
Figure7.  Use case 2 ontologies and relationships 
 
The implementation resulted from this study is a working 
prototype based on Python. This tool will extract metadata in 
XML format, it will extract properties of data sets and save 
them to a text files on physical location. Currently, it is 
extracting and collecting spatial properties of features and 
feature classes, their grouping schemes, data paths, counts, 
location, scale, data frame properties information. The next 
step is to capture spatial data workflow level provenance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. West, “Research Strategy Spatial Infrastructure, (Program 
3)”. 
 
Updated. 
Retrieved: 
March 
 
2016, 
from 
www.crcsi.com.au/Resources/ Research/ P3-final-Research-
Strategy.aspx 
[2] J. Maso, C. G., Y. Gil,  and B. Prob,  “OGC® Testbed 10 
Provenance Engineering Report OGC Public Engineering 
Report” (pp. 1-87): Open Geospatial Consortium. 
[3] L. He, P. Yue, L. Di, M. Zhang, and L. Hu, “Adding 
Geospatial Data Provenance into SDI-A Service-Oriented 
Approach”. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth 
Observations and Remote Sensing. Feburary 2015, vol. 2, pp. 
926-936.   doi: 10.1109/JST ARS.2014. 2340737 
[4] D. McMeekin, and M. Van der Vlugt, “CRC-SI – Alignment 
Study of Spatial Data Supply Chains.  Version 2.0”. 
Retrieved: 
March 
2016, 
from 
http: 
//crcsi.com.au/getattachment/dabdca57-d7e7-4080-97cc-
36db9a89173a/. aspx 
[5] L. Anselin, S. J. Rey, and W. Li,. “Metadata and provenance 
for spatial analysis: the case of spatial weights”. International 
Journal of Geographical Information Science. 15 May 2014, 
pp.1-20. doi: 10.1080/13658816.2014.917313 
[6] R. Barga, et al. “Provenance for Scientific Workflows 
Towards Reproducible Research”. IEEE Data Eng. Bull., 
2010, vol.  33(3), pp. 50-58. 
[7] A. Harth, and Y. Gil, “Geospatial Data Integration with 
Linked Data and Provenance Tracking”. Paper presented at 
the Linking Geospatial Data, London. 2014,  Iss. 54, pp. 1-5. 
[8] J. Malaverri, E. Medeiros, C. B., and R. C. Lamparelli, “A 
provenance approach to assess the quality of geospatial data”. 
Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACM 
Symposium on Applied Computing. 2012, pp. 2043-2049.   
[9] B. Adams, and M. Gahegan, “Emerging data challenges for 
next-generation spatial data infrastructure”. S. Winter and C. 
Rizos (Eds.), Research@Locate’14, Canberra, Australia, Vol. 
1142,  April 7-9, 2014,  pp. 118-129.  Retrieved: Feburary 
2016  from http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1142/paper13.pdf 
[10] S. Wang, A. Padmanabhan, J. D. Myers, W. Tang, and Y. 
Liu,. “Towards provenance-aware geographic information 
systems”. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 16th 
ACM SIGSPATIAL international conference on Advances in 
geographic information systems, Irvine, California. 2008 Nov 
5, pp. 70. 
[11] Y. Gill, “Intelligent Workflow Systems and Provenance-
Aware Software”. Paper presented at the Ames, D.P., Quinn, 
N.W.T., Rizzoli, A.E. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th 
International Congress on Environmental Modelling and 
Software, San Diego, California, USA. 2014, p. 91. 
[12] Y. Gil, et al. “Mind Your Metadata: Exploiting Semantics for 
Configuration, Adaptation, and Provenance in Scientific 
Workflows”. In L. Aroyo, C. Welty, H. Alani, J. Taylor, A. 
Bernstein, L. Kagal, N. Noy and E. Blomqvist (Eds.), The 
Semantic Web – ISWC 2011, Vol. 7032, pp. 65-80.  
[13] Y. Gil, and P. Groth, “Using provenance in the Semantic 
Web”. Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the 
World Wide Web, 31 July 2011,  Vol. 9(2), pp. 147-148. 
[14] F. Orlandi, and  A. Passant, “Modelling provenance of 
DBpedia resources using Wikipedia contributions”. Web 
Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide 
Web, 21 April 2011,  Vol. 9(2), pp. 149-164.  
[15] D. Artz, and Y. Gil, “A survey of trust in computer science 
and the Semantic Web”. Web Semant., 15 March 2007, Vol. 
5(2), pp. 58-71. doi: 10.1016/j.Web sem.2007.03.002  
 
 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

