A Common Land-Use Change Model for Both the Walloon and Flanders Regions in 
Belgium 
 
Benjamin Beaumont, Nathalie Stephenne,               
Eric Hallot 
Remote Sensing & Geodata Cell 
ISSeP 
Liège, Belgium 
email : (b.beaumont, n.stephenne, e.hallot)@issep.be 
Lien Poelmans 
Environmental Modelling Unit 
VITO 
Mol, Belgium 
email : lien.poelmans@vito.be 
Odile Close 
Faculty of Bioengineering 
UCL 
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium 
email : odile.close@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—Floods, urban heat islands, mobility issues and other 
environmental and health risks increase with urban growth. 
For a sustainable planning of their territory, authorities need 
operational decision support tools, which can assess short and 
long-terms impacts of current, intended or optional policies on 
land-use change. This paper considers the application of a 
constrained cellular automata land-use change model within 
both the Walloon and Flanders region in Belgium. Some 
methodological steps needed for this application are discussed. 
A national land-use change model is seen as a key asset for 
sustainable spatial planning. 
Keywords-land-use change; cellular automata; sustainable 
spatial planning; risk assessment. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Walloon region, south of Belgium, has an 
urbanization rate of 17 km² per year [1]. Driven by 
demographic projections of 200,000 more households 
between 2011-2026 [2], a further increase of the impervious 
surfaces is expected. In Wallonia, urban growth occurs 
typically under the form of rural ribbon development. This 
type of development is a major source of fragmentation of 
natural habitats and enhances rural-urban commuting. This, 
in turn, increases health and environmental risks by 
extending pollution sources distribution. Through spatial 
planning policies, the Walloon authorities try to fix a 
threshold at 9 km² per year of extra soil sealing towards 
2040 [3]. Such policies require a holistic and dynamic 
vision of the fast changing urban environment. Current and 
historical land-use/land-cover (LULC) can be assessed with 
existing geodata and satellite images within Geographical 
Information Systems (GIS). Possible future impacts of 
policies can be simulated by means of model-based 
scenarios. Since Wallonia has an extensive catalog of 
geodata for current and historical trends [4], regional policy 
makers and city planners have expressed an interest in 
developing an operational framework for LULC change 
modelling in a project called SmartPop. 
Over the last decades a broad range of LULC models 
have been developed to assist land management. LULC 
models can be static or dynamic, spatial or non-spatial, i.e., 
exploring patterns of change vs. rates of changes, inductive 
or deductive, i.e., with model parameters based on spatial 
correlation vs. explicit description of the process, agent-
based or pattern-based, i.e., emulation of individual decision 
makers vs. inference of underlying behavior for the 
observation of patterns in the LULC [5]. A spatially explicit 
approach is needed to project and explore alternative 
scenarios [6]. Choosing one of these depends on the goals, 
inputs and validation data available and technical skills 
(developers/end-users). The model used in this study is a 
dynamic spatially explicit model based on an inductive 
pattern-based approach. Cellular automata (CA) are 
discrete, abstract computational systems defined by a 
regular grid of cells that are characterized by a finite number 
of states evolving through time according to rules namely 
related to neighboring cells [7]. CA have perhaps been the 
most popular way to model land-use change and spatially-
explicit population density [8]-[11] because (i) they are 
intrinsically dynamic, (ii) they are able to deal with high 
resolutions and thus produce results with a useful amount of 
detail and (iii) they outperform other models in realistically 
modelling land-use change. In CA-based LU models, LU 
change is explained by the current state of a cell as well as 
by the changes within the neighboring cells.  
At European Union level, the MOLAND LULC 
dynamics modelling framework initiated in the early 2000’s 
the use of CA to forecast the sustainable development of 
urban and regional environments [12]. The constrained CA 
LU change model developed by [13] proposes a tool for 
assessing scenarios of LU policies in support of spatial 
planning in Belgium. It has been applied over Flanders at 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

100m resolution [14][15][16] and at the country scale at a 
coarser resolution (300m) [17][18]. In [18], an innovative 
travel time-based variable grid approach with transport 
network scenarios is used. Another approach is proposed by 
[19] where population projections [2] are used to model the 
suitability of constructible lands to host sustainable 
residential functions. The model compares space availability 
versus 
residential 
land 
demand. 
Residential 
land 
developments are prioritized using a multi-criteria GIS 
analysis. 
Walloon administrations are interested in a high 
resolution (≤100m) predictive model of land-use change, for 
smart city monitoring of soil sealing expansion, risk 
assessment and sustainable planning. Such a model is 
currently not available in Wallonia.  
This paper describes the steps in transposing the 
Flanders LU model to Wallonia. A similar approach will be 
applied in both regions since this is interesting for integrated 
planning. Homogenizing risks studies between regions is 
intended since natural hazards are not stopped by regional 
borders. However, model replication from one region to 
another is not straightforward. First of all different 
modelling goals, and geographical and social-economic 
contexts create a need for different parameter sets and 
scenarios. Secondly, availability, limited access, quality or 
semantic differences in existing data induce some model 
adaptations such as calibration, parameters and/or validation 
phases. Finally, knowledge of local and regional LU 
processes is required.  
This paper will focus on the methodological choices and 
decisions taken through the application of the Flanders 
model to the Walloon region. Close collaboration between 
researchers from both regions as well as end-users 
commitment is needed during the process.  
The paper is organized as follows: Section II briefly 
describes the constrained CA land-use change model 
initially developed for Flanders. The methodological steps 
for applying the model to Wallonia are detailed in Section 
III. A synthetic conclusion is proposed under Section IV. 
II. 
LAND-USE CHANGE MODEL 
The constrained CA land-use model is made up of three 
sub-models. These represent spatial dynamics that take place 
at three geographical levels: (1) ‘global’ level, i.e., the entire 
Walloon region, (2) ‘intermediate’ level, i.e., NUTS3 regions 
(Eurostat administrative units level 3, called arrondissements 
in Belgium), and (3) cellular level, i.e., a 100x100m grid 
[14][20]. At the global level, time series based on population 
growth and employment scenarios are needed. These global 
trends constrain the intermediate level, in which a spatial-
interaction model is used to downscale the growth trends to 
the level of the intermediate level. At the local level, a CA-
based model allocates to the grid cells the area needed for 
population and employment growth. This CA model 
simulates the evolving land-use until 2050 for each 
individual cell. The changing LU patterns result from spatial 
interactions that take place between the different land-uses 
within the immediate neighborhood around each cell. 
Besides this, the patterns are also constrained by institutional 
zoning status, physical suitability and transportation 
characteristics.  
III. 
METHODOLOGICAL STEPS 
The application of the constrained CA model to the 
Walloon region implies some particular contextual and 
methodological choices and decisions that are presented in 
this paper. 
A. Modelling goals and outcomes 
Identifying end-users and involving them closely in the 
model development process helps to precisely define the 
goals and outcomes. Surveys, meetings, workshops, etc. are 
various steps needed to create a decision makers group. 
Involvement of policy makers and international experts is 
done by integrating them into the project's steering 
committee or even directly as partners. This project also 
proposes an implementation group including scientists, data 
producers and decision makers from several administrations. 
Regional and local end-users have shown their willingness 
to participate in this group. They are involved in themes 
such as infrastructure (SPW-DGO1), mobility (SPW-
DGO2), natural resources and environment (SPW-DGO3), 
spatial planning and geomatics (SPW-DGO4), health (SPW-
DGO5), air and climate (AWAC), statistics (IWEPS) and 
cities (Liège)  monitoring. 
B. Model inputs 
In Belgium, each region is responsible for its own 
geodata production and management. By consequence, data 
availability and data properties differ in Wallonia and 
Flanders. As an example, an important model input is a 
land-use map for the start year of the model simulation. The 
comparison and semantic adaptation between the existing 
LU maps for Flanders and Wallonia is necessary to define 
the land-use classes that are simulated by the model. A 
survey is currently being carried out to assess the users’ 
satisfaction regarding the existing Walloon LU map, as well 
as the expectation towards the modelled products. This 
survey addresses the number of classes, their precision, the 
update time-step (each year), the coverage (2050) or the 
derived sub products (spatial indicator).  
Facilitated by INSPIRE, geodata access still vary 
between thematic products in both regions. Input data differ 
in terms of content, extent, production date, spatial 
resolution and quality. Simulations further rely on social-
economic data sets to define trends in land-use. Availability 
of historical and projected social-economic data also differs 
between regions. This information is not always produced at 
the same spatial and temporal resolution. For each of these 
inputs dataset, a discussion and a choice are needed.  
Moreover, the regional significance is checked. Some 
geo-criteria may have high impacts on future land-use 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

change in one region, such as harbors in Flanders or slopes 
in Wallonia, while they are less significant in the other one.  
C. Upcoming actions 
During model implementation, additional decisions must 
be taken together with end-users. These include calibrating 
the model and defining future scenario(s), e.g., using 
historical and projected LU or population data, as well as 
assessing model flexibility, i.e., what consequences if new 
data/studies/directive is published. Validation step will be 
discussed in detail, e.g., field work or use of authentic data 
sources such as buildings. Qualitative and quantitative 
assessment of model outputs will be made by comparing 
them to other relevant geodatabases, e.g., PICC, CadMap, 
BelMap, etc. Final choices will be made regarding 
authorities access right to the model and results publication. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Generic and common land-use change models are key 
decision support tools for sustainable spatial planning in the 
whole of Belgium. Involving end-users in the model 
development and application guarantees future valorization 
and use of this model. Land-use change simulation will help 
drawing policies that limit risks caused by further 
urbanization. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Authors would like to thank the Walloon Region and 
IWEPS for providing all relevant data of interests as well as 
ULB, partner of the SmartPop project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Cuvelier, “Land artificialization : inventory in Wallonia,“ 
DEMNA-SPW, Libramont Fair, July 2015. 
[2] J. Charlier, I. Reginster, and M. Debuisson, “Demographic 
projections per municipalities up to 2026 and spatial 
planning : residential space consumption in Wallonia 
estimations exercise using three scenarios,“ IWEPS Working 
Paper 11, March 2013. 
[3] SPW, Regional space development plan – A vision for 
Wallonia. SPW-Editions, 2013. 
[4] SPW, 
WalOnMap, 
URL: 
http://geoportail.wallonie.be/en/home/ressources/geocatalogu
e.html [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[5] J. F. Mas, M. Kolb, M. Paegelow, M. Camacho Olmedo, and 
T. Houet, “Modelling land use / cover changes: a comparison 
of conceptual approaches and softwares,“ Environmnetal 
Modelling and Software, Elsevier, 51, 2014, pp. 94-111. 
[6] N. Stephenne and E. F. Lambin, “A dynamic simulation 
model of land-use changes in Sudano sahelian countries of 
Africa (SALU),“ Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment. 
Volume 85, Issues 1-3, June 2001, pp. 145-161. 
[7] F. Berto and J. Tagliabue, “Cellular Automata”, The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL: 
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2012/entries/cellular-
automata/ [retrieved: March 2016]. 
[8] X. Li and A. Yeh, “Modelling sustainable urban development 
by the integration of constrained cellular automata and GIS,“ 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 14, 
2, 2000, pp.131-152.  
[9] G. Caruso, D. Peeters, J. Cavailhès, and M. Rounsevell, 
“Spatial configurations in a periurban city: a cellular automata-
based microeconomic model,“ Regional Science and Urban 
Economics, 37, 2007, pp. 542-567. 
[10] L. Poelmans and A. Van Rompaey, “Complexity and 
performance of urban expansion models,“ Computers, 
Environment, and Urban Systems, 34, 2010, pp. 17-27. 
[11] E. Koomen and J. Borsboom – van Beurden, Land-Use 
Modelling in Planning Practice. Springer, Heidelberg, volume 
101, 2011. 
[12] C. Lavalle, J. Barredo, N. McCormick, G. Engelen, R. White, 
and I. Uljee, “The MOLAND model for urban and regional 
growth forecast. A tool for the definition of sustainable 
development paths,“ European Commission, JRC, 2004, pp. 
1-22. 
[13] R. White, G. Engelen, and I. Uljee, Modeling Cities and 
Regions as Complex Systems: From Theory to Planning 
Applications. MIT Press,  2015.   
[14] G. Engelen, I. Uljee, J. L. de Kok, L. Van Esch, L. Poelmans, 
and H. van der Kwast, Integrated modelling of land use 
dynamics in support of Spatial Planning and Policy-making. 
VITO, 2011. 
[15] J. L. de Kok, L. Poelmans, G. Engelen, I. Uljee, and L. van 
Esch, “Spatial dynamic visualization of long-term scenarios 
for demographic, social-economic and environmental change 
in Flanders,“ International Environmental Modelling and 
Software Society (iEMSs), July 2012, pp. 1984-1991.  
[16] G. Engelen, C. Lavalle, J. I. Barredo, M. van der Meulen, and 
R. White, “The MOLAND modelling framework for urban 
and regional land use dynamics,“ Springer, chapter Modelling 
Land-Use change, Volume 90, 2007, pp. 297-320. 
[17] R. White, I. Uljee, and G. Engelen, “Integrated modelling of 
population, employment and land-use change with a multiple 
activity-based variable grid cellular automaton,“ International 
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 26, 2012, pp. 
1251-1280. 
[18] T. Crols, R. White, I. Uljee, G. Engelen, L. Poelmans, and F. 
Canters, 2015. “A travel time-based variable grid approach 
for an activity-based cellular automata model,“ International 
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 29:10, 2015, 
pp. 1757-1781. 
[19] Q. Jungers, A. Leclercq, P. Neri, J. Radoux, F. Waldner, and 
P. Defourny, Research note – Towards a sustainable zoning 
plan – General methodology of the model. CPDT, 58, April 
2015. 
[20] R. White and G. Engelen, “Cellular Automata as the Basis of 
Integrated Dynamic Regional Modelling,“ Environment and 
Planning B, 24, 1997, pp.235-246. 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

