Methodology for the Collection and Handling of Geological Data
Rodrigo Ávila Cipullo
UnB – University of Brasília
Institute of Geosciences
Brasilia – DF, Brazil
racshalom@gmail.com
Henrique Llacer Roig
UnB – University of Brasilia
Institute of Geosciences
Brasilia – DF, Brazil
roig@unb.br
Abstract— Universities and other geological information
producers have been suffering the negative effects of a lack of
data organization and standardization. The purpose of this work
is to create a new spatial geology database and to present a new
methodology concept for internal procedures of data acquisition.
This proposal follows the precepts of Spatial Data and vector
Structure (EDGV), which were approved in 2008 by the
National Commission of Cartography (CONCAR), created by
the Brazilian government in order to standardize the structure
of spatial data, facilitating data sharing, interoperability and
rationalization of resources between producers and users of data
and cartographic information. This is an important step for
developing a geological model database that can be embedded in
the context of the National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI/
INDE).
Keywords— geology data; managing data; web services; web
mapping; geotool.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Geoscience is a branch of science that requires the
collection and processing of large databases, especially
regarding spatial and geological phenomena. However, this
development
is 
overdue
for 
improvement 
in 
safe
storage,allowing
a
more secure
use of databases
in
collaborative environments.
Many
steps
are 
being 
taken,
in 
Brazil 
and
internationally,to create an interoperability
culture and
standard of spatial data. In Brazil, the Decree No. 6666, from
2008, 
instituted 
the 
NSDI 
(National 
Spatial 
Data
Infrastructure), which aims at establishing metadata and
interoperability standards for basic cartography in Brazil.
These types of initiatives attempt to carry out the
interoperability of spatial data. In this context, the OGC
(Open Geospatial Consortium) must be highlighted. The
OGC is defined on its own website [9] as a non-
governmental, nonprofit organization, formed by volunteers
from around the world, who intend to establish standards for
spatial data and services.
Despite many efforts to set standards, the amount of
geological information could not match the pace of the
evolution of its standardization, and one of the only projects
with global prominence is the GeoSciML [10]. This project
has the goal of providing a data interoperability architecture
that allows institutions with the most different types of
databases to exchange information without changing their
structures. The GeoSciML is an initiative of major geological
surveys in the world, such as the IUGS [11] and the British
Geological Survey [12].
A.
Objective
The aim of this paper is to offer a new model of spatial
geological databases, a new methodology for geological
project management and the development of a tool that
enables the implementation of the proposed model and
methodologies.
Not every goal will be achieved at this first stage of the
work, and the products presented in this article are:
• A conceptual database model,
•
A 
proposed methodology 
for 
acquisition 
and
management of geological data, and
• Easy use of web application for data visualization.
B.
Structure of the Paper
This paper begins with an abstract and an introduction (I)
that includes this topic. The other content topics are structured
as 
follows:
Proposed 
Architecture
(II),
Proposed
Methodology (III), Data Acquisition (IV), Conclusion and
Future Work (V) and References (VI).
II.
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
The discussion about the ideal architecture for the
provision of GIS has already been discussed by several
authors. Harrower [5] defended that the use of the Internet
would allow new services to GIS. According to Harrower, the
Internet has revolutionized the way we work
with
cartography, featuring some important points that led to this
new paradigm of GIS distribution:
• Ease of availability and distribution of cartographic
products,
• Universal access to map data,
• Significant increase in demand for mapping services,
• Emergence of tools that allow the development of an
"on-demand" application.
244
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Another important concept presented by Harrower [5] is
the “on-demand maps." According to the author, one of the
main benefits of modern GIS is that it allows the user to
manipulate and organize his or her own data, in which case
the maps are not ready and static, but are constructed
according to the needs of the user.
While we consider the globalization of
access to GIS
tools, we must also rethink the concepts of usability of these
tools.
We have a growing public that is hungry for information,
trained in a digital world, but does not necessarily have the
adequate training to properly handle a GIS. The development
of new GIS must consider this problem, during all the process
from architectural definition to manufacturing the final
product layout.
Another way that technology has taken hold of late is with
cell phones and tablets. Increasingly powerful and with
characteristics very similar to computers, these devices enable
the technology to be part of every moment of everyday life.
Considering that a geologist uses several tools in a field
study, it is possible that mobile devices provide the missing
link between the data acquisition and storage/ distribution of
information.
The use of mobile data acquisition not only represents a
huge reduction in operational costs, but mainly simplifies the
publishing process and data interpretation.
According to this work, this type of technology
contributes greatly to the successful implementation of the
new GIS, which allows the technology to spread with greater
speed and makes possible the creation of a technological
culture that is conducive to the advancement of real security
and interoperability of geological information.
All points shown indicate the following architectural
features:
• Centralized storage and web presentation,
• Centralized data processing,
• Acquisition of data using mobile devices.
Figure 1.
Architecture of centralized storage and processing type
Legend: Servidor (Server)
A key to the success of the proposed methodology is to
ensure that data is always available, and ensure that the
database is always updated. For this, the tool uses web servers
and the update will be done directly from mobile devices.
In order to provide this kind of service on the web, we
need some essential tools, which are a web server and a map
database with support for spatial data.
The web server application is responsible for providing a
website or application hosted on one computer to another
within a network, the global network known as the World
Wide Web. The application server used is the Apache Web
Server [14].
Map Server is the software that allows us to publish
geographic data on the web. Through this application, we can
provide a spatial database on the web through a series of
specifications established by the OGC (Open Geospatial
Consortium). Because they are published based in
international open standards, the information can be reached
by a wide variety of web and desktop software.
The application Geoserver [13] maintained by the Open
Planning Project, was chosen in this project to serve the
geological data, as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2.
Basic publishing architecture of spatial data based on open
source software [15].
III.
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
The proposed methodology is based on three steps:

The standard remote data acquisition,

Topologically-consistent database,

Decentralized data management.
A.
Data Acquisition
The data acquisition step represents the most important
stage of the process, and the quality of data acquired
following minimum standards is crucial to the success of the
other steps. Thus, it is important that the data collection tool
triggers a simple and standardized environment, ensuring
flexibility in the collection that results in high quality data.
As shown in Figure 3, all acquired data are stored in a
small SQLite database, exported by the system in CSV format
and then imported by the Web tool.
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

This process will change in the next version of the mobile
tool, when it will automatically synchronize the data with the
server.
Figure 3.
Flow data acquisition methodology. Legend: Início (Start);
Aquisição da dados (Data Acquisition); Consulta (Query); Exportação
(Export); Importação (Import); Validação (Validation).
B.
Database
The second step of the methodology, the spatial database,
was modeled using a methodology known as OMT-G.
The methodology OMT-G (Object Modeling Technique
for Geographic Applications) was designed by Borges [4]
based on one of the most popular models for modeling
conventional databases, the OMT (Object Modeling
Technique), which has the characteristic of representing the
semantic aspects of data using an object-oriented approach.
Thus, the OMT-G model, revised and extended by Borges
[4], presents an object-based model that is also capable of
representing objects and spatial relationships.
In addition to the OMT-G model, other proposals for
modeling spatial data were created and must be remembered,
such as the GeoOOA [1], MADS [2] and UML-GeoFrame
[3].
The OMT-G brings together lots of geographic primitives
proposed by various authors, as well as introduces new
primitives that supply some deficiencies, such as the
representation of multiple views from geographic entities.
The OMT-G model is based on three main concepts: classes,
relationships and spatial relationships [4]. This model works
on the conceptual level as spatial classes featuring both
conventional classes (Figure 8).
Figure 4.
Types of classes and their representations in the OMT-G model.
Borges et al. (2001). Legend: Classe georreferenciada (Spatial Class);
Classe convencional (Conventional Class); Nome da Classe (Class Name);
Atributos (Attributes); Operações (Operations).
Seeking an adequate representation of the types of spatial
objects,
spatial
classes
receive information from
their
geometry type. This information is known in the model as
subclasses. The description of the main subclasses can be
found in Figure 5.
Figure 5.
Georreferenced Classes model and its subclasses. Legend:
Classe georreferenciada (Spatial Class); Nome da Classe (Class Name);
Atributos (Attributes); Operações (Operations).
To generate the geographic database conceptual model, it
was necessary to define some steps in the process of
geological mapping.
The following steps
were also
highlighted:

Field survey (outcrops),

Lamination,

Geochronology,

Geochemistry.
These steps were defined as superclasses of the model.
These super classes do not have a real implementation, serves
only as aggregators towards a better understanding of classes.
Each of the major classes that would be needed to
correctly represent the stage of mapping emerge from the
super classes. These major classes are presented in Table 1.
TABLE I.
MAIN CATEGORIES
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Superclass
Class
Description
Afloramentos
(Outcrops)
Descriptive
data
General data of the outcrop,
such as name and description
Toponymy
Information on the location of
the outcrop that help visually
its correct positioning.
Geographical
location
Information on latitude and
longitude of the outcrop. It
can be understood as
coordinates west and south in
the case of planar coordinates.
Structural
measures
Measures related to tectonic
structures or primary
structures.
Photos
Storing pictures of the
outcrops in question.
Amostras
(Sample)
Samples
Samples related to an outcrop.
Laminação
(lamination)
Lamination
General data such as name of
the blade, which is owned and
outcrop description.
Paragenesis
Data on the composition of
the blade modal.
Photos
Storing pictures of the blade.
Geocronologia
(Geochronology)
Geochronology
Basic information such as
responsible for analysis,
sample origin and age.
Dating method
Method used in the analysis
Geoquímica
(Geochemistry)
Geochemistry
Information on sample origin,
responsible for analysis and
consideration.
Analysis
Types of analysis performed
on the sample
Results
Results of sample analysis.
Load the type of analysis, the
sample, the result, the
laboratory and all
considerations.
The next step is to define all the spatial classes. Each one
of these classes will be implemented in the physical model.
Following are the identified spatial classes.
TABLE II.
SPATIAL CLASSES
Spatial Class
Description
Geometry type
Afloramento
Outcrops
Point
Estruturas
(structures)
Tectonic structures
Linestring
Unidade
Geológica
(Geological
units)
Differential unit of the crust for their
compositional characteristics, age
and physical boundaries
Polygon
Projeto
(Projects)
Representation of the project area.
Polygon
Grupos
(Groups)
Represents the work area of each
work group.
Polygon
Contatos
(Contacts)
Geological contacts
Linestring
Figure 6.
Model class indicating geometry
Legend: Table 1 and Table 2.
From the mapping of classes, a known model diagram
class (Figure 6) was generated. This model was adapted to
allow viewing the spatial types for each class. This adaptation
allows us to clearly differentiate the non-spatial classes from
others and display a preview of the spatial relationships that
are present in the database.
Mainly to create the conceptual model of the geological
database, each of the super classes have worked individually,
especially in the quest for spatial delimitation of its features
and possible relationships with other classes.
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The first analyzed superclass, the spatial class project,
aggregates all the others, functioning as the parent class in the
model. It necessarily contains all other geometric classes of
the database and represents the spatial delimitation of the
mapping project. The class project represents a polygon geo-
object, as already shown in Table 2.
The mapping project is formed from their groups. Groups
are small areas that together, in the end, will aggregate to the
final project area. Thus, all the mapping work is performed
within a group. In practice, all classes are tied to the bank
group, which is in turn aggregated by the project.
C.
Data Management
The third step deals with the proposed availability of data.
A tool able to manage its own projects and data was
developed, allowing the publication of these data in other
systems capable of utilizing WMS services.
1)
Functional Requirements

Access Control

Management of users and permissions

Project Management

Creating projects and groups (subprojects)

Definition 
of 
the 
project 
area 
and
groups
(subprojects)

Outcrop Management

Insert, edit and query outcrops

Insert structural measures

Photos

Insert photo samples

Entering, editing and deleting contacts in the sphere
of geological group (subproject)

Entering, editing and deleting slides related to the
samples

Management Isotope geochemistry samples held in

The system must provide dynamic queries (spatial or
not) and reports.
2)
Non-functional Requirements

User-friendly interface and simplified access to user
data in a project,

Light and simple software to compensate for the
large volume of information.
3)
Business Rules

The user should be able to insert outcrops and
contacts only within the boundaries of the area of
his/her group,

The user should be able to insert outcrops and
contacts visually by map or via a form.
4)
Mapping and Projects Management System
The main product developed, the management system of
mapping projects, is an application that runs in a web
environment and is able to manage since the creation of a new
design until the closing of the geological map.
To expedite the development of this application and
ensure easy maintenance in the code, we used the Zend
framework [6]. The choice of this framework is given for the
following reasons:

This design pattern isolates the application logic
from presentation logic. It allows them to be tested
and/ or modified separately, reducing development
time and enabling better reuse of code;

Object-oriented library that allows easy extension
and reuse of code;

Abstraction of the database, allows
for the
automatation of a common operations database as
well as decrease the impact of changes in the model;

Automating operations AJAX and JSON, facilitating
the task of integrating with the API for manipulating
spatial data OpenLayers [7];

Framework is maintained by the same company
responsible for the PHP language, which makes it
very popular, facilitating future maintenance.
In addition to the framework used in the development of
the PHP application, some other open source APIs were used
in order to improve user navigation. They are the following:
Openlayers [7]: Set of open source tools, available as a
JavaScript API for viewing and manipulating spatial data
based on OGC standards.
JQuery [8]: This is one of the most powerful JavaScript
API today. The main objective of JQuery[8] is to provide a
web browsing experience and practice based on modern
concepts of AJAX (Asynchronous JavaScript and XML)
5)
Restricted Access and Security
To ensure data security and proper control of projects, we
implemented a system of user verification. The user is
identified by his/her e-mail address and password (Figure 11).
Immediately upon entering the system, the user will be
prompted to choose which project to work on. Thus, he/she
can work on any project that is registered.
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 7.
Screen to access the system.
The definition of access permissions, registration of users,
projects and subprojects in the system itself is made by an
admin user. The system allows a user to be registered on
several projects, however, the user must belong to a single
subproject.
Once registered, the data remain in the system. This
means that even if someone has access to a user account and
makes lots of changes in it, or even delete some data, these
data can be retrieved by the system administrator through a
restitution version.
It is important to note that all project data is nested in its
subprojects and always related to a registered user in a
subproject. If you do not have a subproject it should be
created so that the work can be started.
6)
Features
The system is designed in modules, that is, it is possible
that some features are only available to a user according to
his/her
profile. 
Modularity 
also 
facilitates 
system
maintenance and code reuse for other future projects.
The modules developed so far include the major classes of
database:

Outcrops: Responsible for managing user outcrops
in a particular subproject. The basic function is to
list all the outcrops of the user on a given project and
allow him/her to add, modify or delete outcrops.
From the list of outcrops, the user can view all
information related to an outcrop, including its
visualization on the map.
In addition to the basic features of the outcrop,
several sub-modules that add functionality to the
system were developed. They are:

Measurements: Stores all measurements taken
at the outcrop. This module not only allows the
listing and input measures, but measures of
export in text format to be opened in structural
geology software.

Samples:
Relates
physical samples to the
outcrop.

Petrography: Stores blades from the outcrop
samples.

Geochronology: Responsible for keeping the
data for isotopic analysis performed on samples.

Map: Module that aggregates spatial data and allows
viewing and editing data.

Structures: Displays all the structures of the related
group and allows creating and editing new structures
and contacts.

Topology 
and 
closing 
contact:
Validation
responsible for implementing topological rules and
close contacts between groups. Such procedures are
necessary before generating the geometry of
geological units, which are automatically created
through spatial operations.
Figure 8.
Module map showing some cartographic tools
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The application
used
for deploying PostgreSQL is
sufficiently mature and stable to include large databases like
the one here proposed. Its spatial component, PostGIS,
responds very well to spatial analysis, demanding, however,
even more studies and tests on their topological functions in
order to overcome some difficulties that persist.
It was hoped an algorithm that would allow the automatic
generation, at runtime, of geological units. However, none of
the generated algorithms were able to properly turn contacts
into areas and receive individual attributes of geological units
correctly. This feature was only partially implemented and
needs further studies.
Applications developed for the management of geological
data responded positively to the tests in which they were
submitted. However, there are security-related points that
remain to be discussed further, before using these tools on a
large scale.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Kösters, “GIS-Application development with
GeoOOA”. Int. Journal of GIS, 11, 1997
[2]
C. Parent, “Spatio-temporal conceptual models:
data structures + space + time”. In Proc.7th ACM
GIS, Kansas City, 1999.
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[3]
J. L. Filho, A. C. Costa, and C. Iochpe,  “Projeto de
banco de dados geográficos: mapeando esquemas
GeoFrame para o SIG Spring”. In Proc. GEOINFO
– 1st Brazilian Workshop on geoinformatics,
Campinas, 1999.
[4]
K. A. V. Borges, C. D. Davis Jr and A.H.F.
Laender. “OMT-G: an object-oriented data model
for geographic applications”. GeoInformatica, 5,
2001.
[5]
M. Harrower, “A look at the history and future of
animated maps”. In: Cartographica n. 39: 2004. pp.
33-42.
[6]
http://framework.zend.com (retrieved: August,
2011)
[7]
http://openlayers.org (retrieved: November, 2011)
[8]
http://jquery.org (retrieved: December, 2011)
[9]
http://ogc.org (retrieved: December, 2011)
[10] https://eegrid.csiro.au (retrieved: November, 2011)
[11] http://iugs.org (retrieved: November, 2011)
[12] http://bgs.ac.uk (retrieved: November, 2011)
[13] http://geoserver.org (retrieved: December, 2011)
[14] http://apache.org (retrieved: December, 2011)
[15] http://opengeo.org (retrieved: December, 2011)
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

