Starting a Spatially Enabled Society: a Web System 
for Collecting Volunteered Geographic Information in 
the Area of Public Security  
Jarbas Nunes Vidal Filho, Jugurta Lisboa-Filho, Wagner Dias de Souza, Diogo Franklin de Oliveira 
Universidade Federal de Viçosa (UFV) 
Departamento de Informática (DPI) 
Viçosa – Minas Gerais - Brazil 
{jarbas.filho,jugurta}@ufv.br, {wagner.supremo, diogofranklinn}@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— A spatially enabled society provides to citizens, 
businesses and government access to spatial data regardless of 
computing platform. The article describes a collaborative Web 
system to gather geographic information about the area of public 
security and disseminate it at all levels of a society using Web 2.0 
tools. The data generated by the user become another source of 
data for agencies involved in public security to use the 
information in order to try to minimize violence and allow 
citizens to protect themselves from criminality. 
Keywords- Volunteered Geographic Information; Web Systems; 
Google Maps; Public Security. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, the use of geographic information is fundamental 
to sustainable development as well as improvements in the 
making decision process by a particular organization, in which 
the factor "where" is important and precedent to perform an 
action on several sectors, such as public security, health, urban 
planning, deforestation control, agricultural production and 
others. 
The 
economic 
development, 
social 
stability, 
improvement of citizen’s public security, and others can be 
reached by developing products and services that are based on 
geographic information collected by all levels of a society or 
government [1]. 
These actions can be facilitated by the development of a 
spatially enabled society [1]. In this type of society, spatial 
information is regarded as common goods made available to 
citizens and organizations to assist in developing techniques to 
support decision making [1, 2]. A spatially enabled society in 
the context of public security may be useful to bring citizens 
closer to police departments and improve the activities within 
these organizations. Any user may search for a service or 
information, which should always be available and reliable 
access [3]. Moreover, people can voluntarily contribute 
information to help security departments to make decisions 
based on volunteered information. 
For the development of such society, it is necessary the use 
spatial data. These, in turn, need to have a certain degree of 
quality, sufficiently reliable, easily accessible and available in 
real time for use by that society [1]. Based on this 
understanding, Spatial Data Infrastructures (SDI) are being 
developed in many countries as a platform that improves the 
sharing, access and integration of spatial data and services. An 
SDI can also store spatial data and provide services of access to 
data supplied voluntarily. 
In recent years, the amount of spatial data generated by the 
users has grown. Increasingly users are indexing content based 
on their geographic coordinates. With this new paradigm of 
spatial data production, the term Volunteered Geographic 
Information (VGI) has arisen, identified by Goodchild [4] as a 
new phenomenon to describe user-generated information, 
combining elements of Neogeography, Collective Intelligence 
and Web 2.0 [5]. 
It is possible to note an evolution in the treatment and 
production of spatial information. With the popularization of 
the Internet and the emergence of Web tools, it is possible to 
observe a breakthrough in the development of new 
technologies for the production of geographical information 
[4]. Considering that Web 1.0 initially assumed a unidirectional 
role only allowing users to visualize information, Web 2.0 
plays a bidirectional role in which users are able to interact and 
provide information that can be accessed by any user who has 
access to the computer network. 
The purpose of making a society become a spatially 
enabled one is to transform the citizen into a "voluntary human 
sensor" in the Web 2.0 world, providing information and 
reviewing information that has been contributed by other 
voluntary users. According to Georgiadou et al [6], the use of 
"participatory human sensors" can extend the power of action 
of ordinary citizens, improving the ability of citizens to directly 
influence the services performed by a particular organization. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the main related work. Section III presents the 
motivations and objectives of the project and describes the case 
study developed. Section IV describes the methodology used 
and some conclusions are presented in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are many works developed with the use of 
information technology and employing spatial data, applied in 
the area of public security. However, these works are ceasing 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

to be developed in a conventional environment of Geographic 
Information System (GIS) and starting to use Web 2.0 concepts 
and neogeography to produce data from ordinary citizens, i.e. 
without knowledge of specific areas of geosciences. Some 
examples of these projects are listed below. 
The project Wikicrimes [7] main idea is the access to 
information and collaborative mapping of crime in a digital 
map using the Google Maps API. Any user with a mobile 
device or a computer with Internet access can cooperate with 
the system and seek information about a registered crime. This 
work contains functions to automatically validate registered 
crimes, display statistics of them and identify hot points of the 
city, i.e., identify areas of greatest risk, using an algorithm 
based on Kernel Map. 
The project called “Paz tem voz – Mapa do Crime” [8] or 
“Peace has voice - Crime Map” in English is a project 
developed to collect volunteered information from police 
reports that the citizen was a victim or witnessed the fact. The 
system consists of a module of voluntary collaboration, 
functions for visualization of statistical analysis of recorded 
data and identification of homicide profile, such as age, crime 
motivation and weapon used. Moreover, it is also possible to 
make a complaint about theft, burglary and other crimes. The 
system uses the Google Maps API and is designed to meet the 
desires of the people of the state of Paraná, in southern Brazil. 
The project CrimeViz [9], developed at the University of 
Pennsylvania, also uses the Google Maps API to provide 
digital maps of Washington, District of Columbia, United 
States. However, this study differs from others cited above in 
two aspects. Firstly, the CrimeViz is fed by official data of the 
District of Columbia and not by voluntary contributions. 
Secondly, it implements a panel of spatio-temporal analysis by 
day, month or year. This panel can be understood as a box 
containing a button to play, pause and continue. The user 
selects the unit of time (day, month or year) and selects the 
play button. Then, the system will display a color histogram 
representing the number of incidents that were reported and it 
is possible to view on the map a spatio-temporal analysis 
showing the data records in the last days, months or years. 
The works cited above have great contributions to public 
security in combating violence. The work proposed here differs 
by proposing some contributions that are useful for 
approximating the population to police agencies by, for 
example, using concepts of Wiki in VGI data in order to make 
the citizen a reviewer of user-generated content. Another 
example is the development of a forum to discuss the recorded 
data, creating a collective intelligence that can be useful to 
perform validation of data, from the testimony of others or 
serving as collection for more information about a registered 
crime. Furthermore, in order to improve access to and 
dissemination of VGI data, an SDI is used for data storage. 
Finally, the potential of VGI in the area of public security can 
be validated based on some statistical analysis on the VGI data 
in relation to official bases of police agencies. 
III. 
MOSSORÓ SPATIALLY ENABLED: MOTIVATIONS AND 
OBJECTIVES 
The city of Mossoro, located in western Rio Grande do 
Norte state, in Brazilian northeast, is the second most populous 
city in the state and has a large growth related to industries and 
companies that have settled in the city such as Petrobras. In 
recent years the feeling of insecurity in the city has grown 
among citizens. The “Instituto Técnico-Científico de Polícia 
(ITEP)” or Scientific-Technical Institute of Police, an institute 
responsible for statistics from police reports, started to show 
alarming numbers in recent years related to the increase in 
crime in the city. 
According to data from the Sangari Institute [10], the 
number of homicides in Mossoró city has been growing year 
by year. In 2009, 132 homicides were recorded. The number 
rose to 178 homicides in 2010 and to 196 homicides in 2011. 
In 2012, until September, 97 occurrences of homicide had 
already been recorded. Due to this alarming increase, the case 
study of this work is related to Mossoró city. 
The aim of this study is to make the citizen a participatory 
"voluntary human sensor" in a spatially enabled society using 
Web 2.0 tools. Any user who uses a mobile device or a 
computer with Internet access can report problems of insecurity 
or register crimes in which the citizen was the victim or a 
witness. The data generated by the user are stored in a database 
integrated with a SDI, making it easier to search for data by the 
various organizations that have some direct or indirect 
influence in the area of public security and the dissemination of 
data at all levels of society, as well as avoiding efforts by users 
in creating repeated data. The user can record VGI data, 
participate in the forum of a registered data in order to enhance 
the data or provide other relevant information, and use Wiki 
services to review data from voluntary contributions, as it is 
done at the free encyclopedia, Wikipedia. 
IV. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The collaborative systems can be understood as tools that 
support Web 2.0 resources and allow the direct or indirect 
interaction of a particular individual or of collective groups 
with any content available on the Internet [11]. This type of 
system emerged in recent years due to the advances in Web. 
Until recently, the Web was used only to provide information, 
making users only consumers of information. This phase is 
known as Web 1.0. With advances in technology it has become 
possible to interact with content published on the Internet. 
Blogs, Wikipedia, Email and others are examples that allow 
users to interact with content, setting up another phase of the 
Web known as Web 2.0. The system developed in this work 
uses technologies that support Web 2.0 capabilities and other 
tools needed for development, such as: (1) Apache; (2) Google 
Maps API version 3 for map viewing, statistical analysis and 
analysis of the most dangerous areas based on the algorithm of 
Kernel Map; (3) The programming languages Hyper-Text 
Markup Language (HTML), Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), 
Hypertext Preprocessor (PHP), AJAX, jQuery, JavaScript and 
eXtensible Markup Language (XML) 
were used for 
customization of the Google Maps API, development of 
collaboration module, interface and other features; (4)  The 
Database Manager System MySQLServer is used to store 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

users' contributions and PHPMyADMIN is used as database 
configuration assistant. 
The Apache server (or HTTP Apache server) is a free 
software developed by the Apache Software Foundation, and 
aims at processing information on the Web, i.e., it is a server 
responsible for answering Hyper-Text Transfer Protocol 
(HTTP) requests, Web standard protocol [12]. The system is 
available in the domain (www.ide.ufv.br/mossorocrimes) using 
a machine with Internet access as the physical server and the 
Apache as Web server.  
This work used the Google Maps API v3 with support for 
browsers (Internet Explorer, Firefox, Safari, Opera and 
Chrome) and mobile devices with Android and Iphone. This 
API provides several features for viewing 2D and 3D maps, 
geocoding services, best route and others. Features of this API 
are used to perform statistical analysis of VGI data and risk 
analysis, i.e., determining the most dangerous areas in the city. 
To use the API it is necessary to possess a valid license key and 
provided by Google itself. This key is used together with 
JavaScript codes that can be loaded into the system. Google 
provides all documentation for use of the API and the resources 
supplied by it. 
The collaboration module is a service offered by the system 
to collect VGI data. The user can provide textual information 
about an act of violence, insert videos and photos related to the 
registered act and use the forum to discuss the data, providing 
relevant information to help improve the quality of data. This 
module was developed with the programming languages PHP, 
JavaScript, HTML and XML, supplying the user with greater 
interaction to insert, update or criticize a VGI data. 
Data collection is an important part of this work, because 
from them, it is possible to perform statistical analysis of VGI 
data and possibly infer about the potential of the VGI. 
Therefore, it is necessary to create a database allowing the 
authors to hold VGI data instead of them going to the Google 
server. The MySQLServer was used due to it being easy to 
install and use, being free software and having the 
PHPMyADMIN 
assistant that 
facilitates 
the 
creation, 
modification and settings of the database. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
The developed system consists of a prototype to collect 
VGI data and perform statistical analysis of VGI data and by 
geographic region. The software was developed to support 
requests coming from computers (laptop, desktop) and 
smartphones that support Android or Iphone operating systems. 
Fig. 1 shows the system interface that uses only HTML and 
CSS in its development to make viewing very simple in 
devices that have limited screen such as mobile devices.  
The system provides two categories: security and others. At 
the time the user performs collaboration he can tell which 
category and type of occurrence that he will provide. The 
category "other" represents other data that have some 
connection with the area of public security, for example, report 
lack of lighting on a street. Fig. 2 shows statistical analysis on 
the collaborated data by categories and on users who 
cooperated more. Then it is possible to have a control over the 
most active users and filter, in the database, the information of  
these users in order to try to identify whether the user is 
collaborating to help or disturb police activities.  
 
Figure 1. Interface of the system. 
The identification of risk areas is essential when the topic is 
public security. The Google Maps API provides resources to 
implement services for risk analysis based on Kernel Map, 
which is a statistical method of estimation of curves, i.e., is 
plotted on the map using interpolation methods, the intensity of 
a particular phenomenon in the region [13]. The system has a 
button called "heatmap" to enables the function that 
implements the Kernel Map. Moreover, as the user moves the 
map it is possible to view the statistics of VGI data by region. 
Fig. 3 shows the use of Kernel Map in recorded incidents. 
 
Figure 2. Statistical analysis by category and user. 
Because there are few collaboration, it is not possible to 
infer any relevant result on the Kernel map. From the moment 
that there is more collaboration in the system it will be possible 
to see the color intensity by region. 
The collaboration module is responsible for receiving 
contributions from users. To perform a collaboration is 
necessary that the user is "logged in" to the system so it is 
necessary a simple registration. This information is preserved 
and is not available at any time that the user is interacting with 
the system. After accessing the system using the credentials of 
the registration, the user can click in the “collaborate” tab and 
then click on the map to write a collaboration. The user can 
register and send textual information, photo, video or any other 
file. Fig. 4 shows the "infowindow" of collaboration module 
with the tabs to send multimedia files. Mossoró has Streetview 
service. The citizen can use this service to better identify the 
place for registration of the occurrence. 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 3. Risk analysis based on Kernel Map. 
Once the user registers the collaboration by clicking on 
"send collaboration" it is created a forum about the data. To 
interact with the forum, the user must be "logged in" to the 
system. Therefore, any registered user can interact with other 
users and provide extra information that was not addressed in 
the description of the occurrence. This generates a collective 
intelligence about the data, similar to those that exist in 
relevant comments in posts on social networks, whose goal is 
to help in the description of a photo, text, video or other. 
The system also provides access to all data recorded and it 
is possible to follow the updates in real time and analyze all 
data that have contributed to the system. Moreover, it has a 
data filtering service whose goal is to facilitate the viewing of 
specific data such as homicides, thefts and others. These data 
can be filtered and analyzed separately using Kernel analysis. 
 
Figure 4. Infowindow of collaboration module. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
A collaborative Web system is essential for citizens to 
share information that are often available on websites that do 
not have the knowledge of agencies in charge of public 
security. A society enabled with VGI data on public security 
can be useful for companies, citizens and government using 
another database to improve the decision-making process. VGI 
data being used at a local level, which is highly recommended, 
can provide a faster response to security departments than their 
own official data. Therefore, in an emergency situation it is 
possible to get better results in the execution of activities. 
This type of system when ethically used can provide a 
satisfactory database for agencies responsible for security in a 
city and help people to protect themselves from violent places. 
In future work a Wiki module will be developed so that 
citizens can interact in order to improve VGI data quality and 
an SDI that will provide access to all the agencies. So at major 
events in the city, the agencies that are related to public 
security can use a database containing information from other 
sectors and improve their activities in combating violence. To 
validate the VGI data, statistical analysis will be conducted 
comparing the VGI data with official data to assess the impact 
of VGI in security. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This project was partially funded by CNPq, Fapemig, 
CAPES, Funarbe and the Company Sydle. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Rajabifard, “A Spatial Data Infrastructure for a Spatially 
Enabled Government and Society”. In A multi-view Framework 
to Assess Spatial Data Infrastructure. Austrália: Digital Print 
Center, 2008, pp. 11-22. 
[2] H. Mohammdi, A. Colebatch, G. Dawson, and S. Ballingall, 
“Intelligent Speed Assist: Spatially enabling societies”. In Proc. 
of 
GSDI, 
Singapore, 
2010. 
Available 
from: 
<http://www.gsdi.org/gsdiconf/gsdi12/papers/73.pdf>. 
[3] I. Williamson, A. Rajabifard and J. Wallace, “Spatially Enabling 
Government: An Internacional Challenge”. Available from: 
<http://gsditest.opengeospatial.org/gsdiconf/gsdi10/papers/TS2.
3paper.pdf>. Access: 01 September 2012. 
[4] M.F. Goodchild, “Citizens as voluntary sensors: spatial data 
infrastructure in the world of Web 2.0”, International Journal of 
Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, v. 2, pp. 24-32,  January 
2007. 
[5] A. Hudson-Smith, A. Crooks, M. Gibin, R. Milton and M. Batty, 
“NeoGeography and Web 2.0: concepts, tools and applications”, 
Journal of Location Based Services, v. 3, pp. 118-145,  June 
2009. 
[6] Y. Georgiadou, B. Bana, R. Becht, R. Hoppe, J. Ikingura, M. J. 
Kraak, K. Lance, R. Lemmens, J.M. Lungo, M. Mccall, G. 
Miscione, and J. Verplanke, “Sensors, empowerment, and 
accountability: a Digital Earth view from East Africa”, 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, v.4,  
pp. 285-304, July 2011. 
[7] Wikicrimes. Available from: <www.wikicrimes.org>. Access: 
20 September 2012. 
[8] Paz 
tem 
voz 
– 
Mapa 
do 
Crime. 
Available 
from: 
<http://www2.gazetadopovo.com.br/pazsemvozemedo/mapadoc
rime/>. Access: 22 September 2012. (In Portuguese) 
[9] CrimeViz. 
Available 
from: 
<http://www.geovista.psu.edu/CrimeViz/DC/v2/>. Access: 22 
September 2012. 
[10] Instituto 
Sangari. 
Available 
from: 
<http://www.institutosangari.org.br/instituto/>. 
Access: 
25 
September 2012. (In Portuguese) 
[11] V. Furtado, L. Ayres; M. Oliveira, E. Vasconcelos, C. Caminha; 
J. D’Orleans and M. Belchior, “Collective intelligence in law 
enforcement the wikiCrimes system”, Information Sciences, 
v.180,  n.1, pp. 4-17,  January 2010. 
[12] The 
Apache 
Software 
Foundation. 
Available 
from: 
<http://www.apache.org/>. Access: 25 September 2012. 
[13] An 
Introduction 
to 
Kernel 
Methods. 
Available 
from: 
<http://intellisysdev.enm.bris.ac.uk/cig/pubs/2000/svmintro.pdf
>. Access: 04 December 2012. 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

