A Method for Calculating Shape Similarity among Trajectory of Moving Object Based
on Statistical Correlation of Angular Deﬂection Vectors
Alexandre Altair de Melo
Glaucio Scheibel
and Fabiano Baldo
Computer Science Department
Santa Catarina State University (UDESC)
Joinville, Santa Catarina, Brazil
Email: {dcc6am, dcc6gs}@joinville.udesc.br
Email: fabiano.baldo@udesc.br
Fernando Jos´e Braz
Informatic Department
Federal Institute Catarinense (IFC)
Araquari, Santa Catarina, Brazil
Email: fernando.braz@ifc-araquari.edu.br
Abstract—In recent years, mobile electronic devices, spe-
cially smartphones, are gaining more attention in people’s daily
life. These devices provide many features that often process
information gathered by one of their several built-in sensors.
Among them, one of the most popular is the Global Positioning
System (GPS) receiver. This sensor allows the systematic and
chronological collection of location information that represents
the trajectory of the moving object that carries it. Trajectories
are considered valuable sources of information for analysing and
understanding of moving objects’ behavior. There is a consid-
erable number of researches that analyse objects’ trajectories.
Among them, the identiﬁcation of trajectories’ similarity is one
where researches are currently being developed. The similarity
of trajectories may indicate common behaviors inside groups
of individuals that can be useful in various application areas.
However, how to measure the trajectories’ similarity even though
they are in different directions and far from each other? Trying
to solve this problem, this paper proposes a method to calculate
similarity among trajectories applying statistical correlation over
their vectors of angular deﬂections. Preliminary results indicate
that the method can identify similarity in shape among trajec-
tories. However, when their shapes are too complex, it can not
reach suitable results.
Keywords—Moving Objects; Trajectory; Similarity; Correlation
Statistics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the last years, mobile electronic devices have gained
an increasing importance in peoples daily life. Among all the
types of existing mobile devices, smartphones are the most
widespread. Their use is pushed by the amount of functions
that they provide. These features are performed by applications
that often process information collected by one of its several
built-in sensors. Concerning the sensors that they have, one
of the most popular is the Global Positioning System (GPS)
[1]. This sensor allows individuals that carry mobile devices to
record their movement in time. The chronological collection of
location information can represent the trajectory of an object
[2]. Trajectories are considered valuable sources of information
for analysing and understanding the behavior of moving ob-
jects. An increasing volume of trajectories makes it possible to
ﬁnd patterns inside the movement of an individual or group of
individuals. Research areas such as bio-monitoring, logistics,
navigation systems, car and pedestrians trafﬁc planning are
examples of trajectory analysis applications.
Commonly, a trajectory (T) is represented by one id (Tid)
and a set of points composed of x, y and t values, where x and
y are geographic coordinates, and t is a timestamp [3], [4].
Additionally, a trajectory and its points can be enriched with
information like: speed, direction, acceleration, etc. [5], [6]. In
order to gather such information, it is necessary to use other
sensors instead of only GPS. But in the case of smart phones, it
is not a big deal considering its number of embedded sensors.
The moving objects’ trajectories data is a vast source for
data analysis and its analysis can bring direct contribution to
people’s life. There is a considerable number of researches
that analyse objects’ trajectories in order to ﬁnd answers
for phenomena observed into the cities’ environment. Among
them, the identiﬁcation of trajectories’ similarity is one where
researches are currently being developed. Works like those
carried out by [7]-[14] present approaches for identifying
similarity considering some trajectory aspects.
The similarity of trajectories’ shape may indicate common
behaviors inside groups of individuals that can be useful in
various application areas like identifying drivers behaviour,
cargo stolen, dangerous places and so forth.
Each proposed approach presents a speciﬁc set of metrics
to identify similarity among trajectories. However, according
to Pelekis et al. [12], trajectories can be considered similar if
some of the following aspects are true: (i) fully or partially
overlapping in space; (ii) similar shapes in different places;
(iii) same start and/or end position; (iv) partially or fully
synchronous movement behavior; (v) or totally separated in
time, but with similar dynamic behavior (speed, acceleration,
etc.). This work focuses on the aspect (ii) considered by
[12], where the similarity of shape is used as criterion for
deﬁning trajectories similarity. However, shape is just one of
the aspects that must be tackled when dealing with trajectory
similarity as a whole. It must be combined with time and length
characteristics, as well as with extra semantic aspects, when
possible.
In the literature, there is a considerable number of works
that propose different metrics to calculate the shape similarity
among trajectories. Examples include works conducted by [9],
[13] who present solutions to identify the degree of similarity
for sets of nearby trajectories. Another example is the work
of [15], which presents a compendium of distance metrics
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

used to evaluate similarity. Another research [16] proposes a
qualitative trajectory calculus (QTCc), to ﬁnd distances and
directions of trajectories.
Despite their important contribution, none of the related
works address the problem of identifying shape similarity
between trajectories that are far from each other or that
have different moving direction. For example, trajectories
that are in different cities or even in different countries and
from objects moving from West to East and objects moving
from South to North. There are several situations where this
proposal can be useful. The dissemination of diseases could
be represented by a trajectory. In this case, the behaviour of
the similarity trajectories considering the shape of trajectories,
regardless of orientation, could be a very important knowledge
in order to take actions to interrupt the dissemination of the
diseases. Another possible context of the use of similarity,
regardless of orientation, is the observation of behaviour of
a set of individuals of an animal species. The similarity of
trajectories independent of orientation could be an indicator
of an occurrence of a particular event in that group. In this
case, the same event could be identiﬁed in different regions,
regardless of distance and orientation. A damaged ship also is
an example; the movement of a ship in this situation has some
characteristics that could be identiﬁed in other trajectories. In
this case the shape of the trajectory is more important than its
orientation.
Therefore, this paper tackles the following problem: How
to measure the trajectories’ shape similarity even though they
are in different directions and far from each other? Trying to
solve this problem, this paper proposes a method to calculate
the shape similarity among trajectories applying statistical
correlation over their angular deﬂections.
The measurement of geometry angles can be encompassed
into the topography area, where azimuth (AZ) and deﬂection
(DF) angles are considered the basic measures to calculate
segment orientation. Considering that a trajectory is a geometry
formed by several points, after calculating the deﬂection of
each one of its segments, this will result in a sequence of
n − 1 deﬂection angles, where n is the number of points in
the trajectory. Having the sequence of angular deﬂections of
both compared trajectories, it is possible to reduce the problem
of calculating shape similarity of two trajectories by calcu-
lating the statistical correlation coefﬁcient of both deﬂection
sequences. Statistical correlation analysis is a discipline that
aims to measure the coefﬁcient of relationship or association
between two variables [17].
Therefore, this work addresses the hypothesis that it is
possible to identify the shapes similarity between two trajec-
tories calculating the statistical correlation coefﬁcient over the
sequences of segment deﬂection (DFV) from both trajectories.
The paper is structured as follow: Section II reviews the
related work. Section III lists deﬁnitions concepts found in the
literature. Section IV lists the steps of the proposed method.
Section V reports the experiments. Section VI presents the
ﬁndings and results of the experiments. Finally, Section VII
provides a view of future works.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Shape similarity between trajectories is a ﬁeld with many
challenges and several works have proposed solutions to this
problem, as mentioned in section I. In this section, we detail
some approaches found in the literature.
Vlachos et al. [7] propose the longest common subsequence
(LCSS). Its main idea is to match two sequences by allowing
them to stretch, without rearranging the sequence of the
elements, and allowing some elements to be unmatched. This
method has reached great effectiveness in the presence of
noise. However, it does not penalize unmatched sub-sequences,
given no information of how to separate the unmatched sub-
sequences. In addition, its original concept does not consider
the direction, and may fail to separate two trajectories near in
space with very different directional behavior.
Chen et al. [8] propose the Edit Distance on Real Se-
quences (EDR) function. This function is based on the Edit
Distance Function which has been used to quantify the simi-
larity between two strings. Given two strings, the Edit Distance
function calculates the minimum number of insertions, dele-
tions and replacements needed in order for both to become
identical. Like LCSS, this function also assumes that the
trajectories have the same length and sampling rate.
Van de Weghe et al. [16] propose the Qualitative Trajectory
Calculus (QTCc), that is a qualitative approach to represent
two vectors by means of a 4-tuple representing the orienta-
tion of both vectors with respect to each other. The relative
movement of two objects are represented by a four-component
label, where the ﬁrst two components describe the tendency
of distance changing of an object to the current position of
another object, and the other two components describe the
relative orientation of the object movements with respect to
the reference line that connects them. One problem of this
approach is that it does not present a quantitative measure of
similarity. Another point that needs to be considered is the
time consumed caused by calculating the Shape Matrix for
every trajectory to be compared.
Frentzos et al. [9] propose a Dissimilarity Metric (DIS-
SIM). The DISSIM between two trajectories Q and R is
calculated by the integration of their Euclidean Distance over a
deﬁnite time interval when both Q and R are valid. So it takes
into account the time dimension in both trajectories. Moreover,
DISSIM can be used for trajectories with different sampling
rates, because non-recorded points are approximated by linear
interpolation. Its main drawback is the high computation
consumption.
Dodge et al. [10] developed a conceptual and method-
ological framework focused on the analysis of similarities in
dynamic behavior of moving objects. They also proposed to
pre-process the data, resampling the data to a regular time
interval, using linear interpolation of ﬁxed time intervals. It
means that the authors concentrate on tracks, rather than
sample points, and the method is limited to a ﬁxed sampling
period.
Liu and Schneider [11] proposed an approach to cal-
culate the similarity of trajectories that not only considers
the geographical issues, but also the semantic aspects of the
trajectories’ movement. For the geographical part, the authors
consider the following aspects: bearing, distance between
trajectories, center of mass, smaller distance between the initial
and ﬁnal point of the trajectory and angle cosine to ﬁnd sub-
trajectories. The problem is that the method for calculating the
semantic similarity depends on the similarities obtained in the
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

geographical part.
Pelekis et al. [12] deﬁne a method that groups trajectories
using various distance functions such as GenLIP, GenSTLIP
and others. Based on motion properties such as spatial location,
speed, acceleration and direction, the similarity is calculated.
This work use a clustering approach to group trajectories.
Sankararaman et al.[13] present a framework to rate the
trajectories according to their similarities based on distance.
To calculate this similarity, they use the following algorithms:
DTW (Dynamic Time Warping), euclidean distance and direc-
tion of the segment. Their main contribution is to ﬁnd equal
and not equal parts of the trajectories. The authors include
the time as an extra dimension, allowing their model to be
extended to spatio-temporal data.
Xie [14] proposes a metric to calculate the distance called
Edit Distance on Segment (EDS). This metric is used to
check the similarity in sub-trajectories using their segments.
To calculate this similarity metric the authors deﬁne the cost
of a segment-wise transformation, i.e., the cost of changing a
segment to another one. The idea is that given two segments
it is possible to transform them by displacing, stretching and
rotating properly, in order to identify the similarity of sub-
trajectories.
Concerning the reviewed works, it is possible to see that
most of them also assume that the trajectories should have the
same number of points to perform the shape comparison. Also,
some of them replace points as well as estimate approximated
points in order to perform the comparison. Besides that, other
works produce qualitative results, instead of quantitative ones.
Finally, even using bearing and azimuth, none of the reviewed
works identiﬁes shape similarity among trajectories in different
directions and far from one another.
III.
BASIC CONCEPTS AND DEFINITIONS
This section details concepts and deﬁnitions about trajec-
tories, angular measurements and statistical correlation, based
on the following works [17], [18], [19], [20], [21].
A. Trajectories of moving objects
Below, we present the deﬁnitions concerning the trajectory
of moving object.
Deﬁnition 1: A coordinate (c) is a tuple (x, y), where x
is a latitude and y is a longitude. A coordinate deﬁnes a
georeferenced position on the earth surface.
Deﬁnition 2: A point (p) is a tuple (c, t), where c is a
coordinate and t is a time-stamp that represents the time when
the coordinate c has been taken.
Deﬁnition 3: A trajectory (T) is composed of a sequence
of points and can be deﬁned as T = [pi, pi+1, ..., pn], where
pi is the start point, pn is the end point, pi < pi+1 and n is
the number of points.
Deﬁnition 4: A
segment
(S)
is
a
sequence
S
=
[pi, pi+1, pi+2, ..., pf], where pi is the initial point of the
segment, pf is the ﬁnal point of the segment, 0 ≤ pi < pf,
pi < pf ≤ pn and pi < pi+1, n is the number of trajectory
points. It means that S ⊂ T.
B. Angular measurements
Below, we present the deﬁnitions of angular measurements
used in this work.
Deﬁnition 5: Bearing is the angle formed between the
North-South meridian and a line to West or East. It varies
from 0◦ to 90◦. In order to represent the bearing direction, it
is necessary to deﬁne in which quadrant it is placed: North-
West (NW), North-East (NE), South-East (SE), South-West
(SW) [20].
Deﬁnition 6: Azimuth is the angle that begins on North
and turns clockwise until it reaches the desired line. It varies
from 0◦ and 360◦. Instead of bearing, azimuth does not
indicate the direction of the line because this is implicit [20].
The azimuth can be obtained by (1).
AZi = arctan 2

sin ∆λ. cos φi+1
cos φi. sin φi+1 − sin φi. cos φi+1. cos ∆λ

(1)
Where ∆λ = (λi − λi+1), and λ and φ indicate the
longitude and latitude of a point pi, respectively. An az-
imuth vector is a sequence of azimuths such as AZV
=
[AZi, AZi+1, AZi+2, ..., AZj], where 0 < i < j and i < j ≤
n − 1, n is the number of points in the trajectory.
Deﬁnition 7: Deﬂection angle is calculated by the differ-
ence between the azimuths of two consecutive lines. It varies
from 0◦ to ±180◦. It is positive if the azimuth of the ﬁrst line
was greater than the second one and vice-versa [20].
The deﬂection can be obtained by (2).
DFi = (AZi − AZi+1)
(2)
Where AZi represents the azimuth of a point inside the
trajectory and AZi+1 is the azimuth of the subsequent point
in the same trajectory. A deﬂection vector is a sequence of
deﬂections such as DFV = [DFi, DFi+1, DFi+2, ..., DFk],
where 0 < i < k and i < k ≤ j − 1, j is the number of
azimuths in the trajectory.
C. Statistical Correlation Coefﬁcients
Correlation is a bi-variate analysis that measures the sta-
tistical relationships between two variables. The value of the
correlation coefﬁcient may vary between +1 and −1, where 0
indicates no correlation, and +1 and −1 indicate positive and
negative correlation, respectively [17]. Nevertheless, when the
coefﬁcient varies between ±0.10 and ±0.29, it indicates weak
correlation; between ±0.30 and ±0.49, medium correlation;
and between ±0.50 and ±1, strong correlation [21]. Among
the coefﬁcients found in the literature, Pearson (r) [22], Spear-
man (rho) [23] and Kendall (τ) [24] are the most remarkable
ones.
In statistics, p-value (p) represents the probability of a
statistical test be considered valid, instead of random. It deﬁnes
the probability to reject the null hypothesis (H0) [21]. The level
of signiﬁcance is represented by α and it has the following
general rule: if p > α then H0 is accepted, but if p ≤ α then
H0 is rejected.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

IV.
PROPOSED METHOD
As mentioned before, this work assumes that the shape
similarity between two trajectories can be identiﬁed through
the application of statistical correlation coefﬁcient in their
deﬂection vectors. This assumption is based on the idea that
if the trajectories have similar shapes, then they would have
similar deﬂection angles (DF) between their segments.
The method for identifying trajectories with similar shape
is composed of the following steps:
1)
Selecting the reference trajectory: The ﬁrst step
is to select which trajectory (or trajectory segment)
to use as reference for comparing its shape with the
others;
2)
Selecting the set of compared trajectories: After
that, it is necessary to select the set of trajectories (or
trajectories segments) to be used in shape comparison
with the reference one.
3)
Compacting the compared trajectories: As each
selected trajectory (or segment) must have the same
number of points as the reference one, it is necessary
to compact them using a compression algorithm that
maintains a predeﬁned and ﬁxed memory size of
points in the compressed trajectory. Examples of
algorithms that use this approach are Spatiotemporal
Trace (STTrace) [25] and Spatio Quality Simpliﬁca-
tion Heuristic (SQUISH) [26].
4)
Segmenting the trajectories: For computing the
azimuths and deﬂections, every trajectory should be
segmented into segments composed of two points.
So, for each trajectory, an array S = [s1, s2, ..., ss]
of segments will be generated, where 0 < s ≤ n − 1
and n is the number of trajectory points.
5)
Computing azimuths for trajectories segments:
For every trajectories segment we calculate its az-
imuth using (1). The azimuth is used as requirement
to compute the deﬂection that is the main value
used to identify trajectories shape similarity. This
information is stored in an array of j positions, where
j = s and s is the number of trajectory segments.
6)
Computing deﬂection between two consecutive
trajectory segments: After calculating the segments
azimuth it is possible to compute the trajectory seg-
ments deﬂection using (2). In order to decrease their
variance, the values of deﬂection are modularized.
This information is stored in an array of k positions,
where k = j − 1 and j is the number of trajectory
azimuths.
7)
Applying statistical correlation coefﬁcient: Having
the deﬂection vectors it is possible to calculate the
correlation coefﬁcient between the reference trajec-
tory and each one presented in the compare set (two
by two). In this work, we applied the following
correlation methods: Pearson (r) [22] and Spearman
(rho) [23].
V.
EXPERIMENTS
To test the proposed method, we created four scenarios, one
with synthetic data manually made (Figure 1) and three with
real data collected in the city of Joinville - Brazil (Figure 2,
Figure 4 and Figure 6). The collected data were produced by
Costa and Baldo [27] in a work aimed at generating digital
road maps. Three scenarios are used to assess whether the
method can identify trajectories similarity in shape and one is
used to assess whether the method does not identify similarity
when the trajectories are considerably different in shape. This
last scenario was proposed to ensure that the method rejects
the H0.
Based on the literature review, the ideal scenario would
reach -1 or +1 correlation, with a p-value (p) ≤ 0.05, and this
value of p, is a possible value to discard the null hypothesis
(H0), since the chance of the α error is small. However in
these experiments it has been assumed that two trajectories are
considered similar when the correlation coefﬁcient is ≥ 0.30
and the p-value is ≤ 0.10. The values for these parameters are
more ﬂexible, and this is why we consider several scenarios of
different complexity for analysis. Looking at similarity based
on the correlation, the medium values are between ±0.30 and
±0.49 and strong values are between ±0.50 and ±1 [21].
All compared trajectories have the same size and a min-
imum of 10 points. This size has been chosen in order to
produce a valid statistical analysis, because this is a require-
ment for statistical correlation, where the analyzed variables
must be the same size. At last, in order to reach better linear
distribution among the deﬂection values, they were normalized
as follows: T
= [|DF1|, |DF2|..., |DFk|], where k is the
number of trajectory deﬂections.
The ﬁrst experiment, presented in Figure 1, uses data
manually created and tries to depict the ideal case where
two trajectories, even though in different orientation (one
North-South and another West-East) and relatively far from
one another, with similar segment deﬂections should have
high correlation coefﬁcient and thus high similarity using
a statistical correlation approach. As seen in Table I, this
experiment reaches 0.99 of Pearson correlation with 0.01 of p-
value which means that they can be considered equal in shape.
Figure 1. Experiment 1, same shapes and different directions, T1 is the
reference trajectory.
TABLE I. EXPERIMENT RESULTS.
Experiment
Points
Pearson
Spearman
p-value
1
10
0.99
0.83
0.01
2
11
0.38
0.63
0.07
3
32
0.08
0.24
0.19
4
33
-0.03
0.02
0.88
The second experiment presented in Figure 2 has been cre-
ated based on trajectories extracted from the sample presented
in Figure 3. This experiment tries to analyse if the method can
be applicable and reaches high correlation value (similarity)
comparing real trajectories collected by GPS receivers. As can
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

be seen in Table I, this experiment reaches 0.63 of Spearman
correlation with a p-value of 0.07. It means that the trajectories
have relatively high correlation, so it would be said that they
have similar shapes too, as expected.
Figure 2. Experiment 2, same shapes and directions, T1 is the reference
trajectory.
Figure 3. Trajectories collected in downtown.
The third experiment presented in Figure 4 has been created
based on trajectories extracted from the sample presented in
Figure 5. This experiment tries to analyse if the method can
reach high correlation value (similarity) comparing trajectories
with complex shapes as, for instance, a turn of 360◦. As can be
seen in Table I, this experiment reaches only 0.08 of Pearson
and 0.24 of Spearman, correlation with a p-value of 0.19. It
means that not only they do not have correlation, but also that
the H0 can not be rejected, so this result can be considered
aleatory. Analysing this results it is possible to see that the
proposed method can not be applied to identify similarity
to every kind of trajectory’s shape. Depending on the shape
complexity it would not reach the expected result, even with
trajectories that have visually similar shapes.
Figure 4. Experiment 3, same complex shapes and directions, T1 is the
reference trajectory.
The fourth experiment presented in Figure 6 has been cre-
ated based on trajectories extracted from the sample presented
in Figure 3. This experiment tries to analyse if the method
can recognize when two trajectories do not have similarity in
shape. This situation is represented by low correlation (value
near to 0) and high p-value (value near to 1). As can be seen in
Table I, this experiment results in a −0.03 Pearson value and
a 0.02 Spearman value with a p-value of 0.88. It means that
the trajectories do not have correlation among their deﬂection
Figure 5. Trajectories collected in the Joinville Industrial District.
vectors which ensure that they are not similar in shape. Besides
that, as the p-value is high, it is not possible to reject the H0
(null hypothesis), which contribute to ensure their no similarity
in shape.
Figure 6. Experiment 4, different shapes and directions, trajectories T1 is the
reference trajectory.
VI.
RESULT ANALYSIS
Analysing the results showed in Table I, it is possible to see
that the proposed method has potential to identify the similarity
between trajectories. This can be answered by the experiments
1 and 2. However, it can not be applied in every trajectory
shape with suitable results, as presented in experiment 3.
This occurs because the array of trajectory deﬂections does
not follow a linear distribution and this is a requirement for
applying statistical correlation methods.
By nature, statistical correlation methods work with linear
distributed variables. It means that if one variable is increas-
ing the other one should have the same behavior in order
to present high correlation coefﬁcient. Concerning the two
applied correlation methods, Pearson suffers more impact in
its results than Spearman due to the fact that variables do not
have linearity. This can be seen in Table I, experiments 2 and
3, where Spearman reaches high correlation values. This is
explained because Spearman takes into account not only the
variables linear distribution, but also the similarity of values
in the same position in both variables. So, for Spearman even
if the variables are not linearly distributed, if they have similar
values in the same position they can be considered similar.
Although positive results have been obtained using Spear-
man, as this is an ongoing work, it was not decided which one
to elect as the statistical method to be adopted. The next steps
will include a bench of massive tests where it will be decided
which method to adopt as well as which range of correlation
values will be considered enough to ensure similarity in shape
among trajectories.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

VII.
CONCLUSION
Trajectories are considered valuable sources of information
for analysing and understanding of moving objects’ behavior.
Despite the considerable progress concerning the measurement
of trajectories’ shape similarity, the literature does not present
a method able to measure similarity among trajectories in
different directions and/or far from each other.
The main goal of this research is to develop a mechanism
to calculate similarity among trajectories applying statistical
correlation over their vectors of angular deﬂections. Another
objective is to use correlation methods in order to calculate
the level of similarity. Considering the preliminary results it
is possible to afﬁrm that the proposal is able to ﬁnd similarity
trajectories considering the angular deﬂexions. However, the
developed work is not conclusive in order to identify the
more adequated correlation method to analyze those sets of
angular deﬂexions. By using the proposal to analyze complex
shapes the method does not reach suitable results. This can be
explained by the non-linearity of the deﬂections array.
As future work, we plan to start a bench of massive tests
in order to decide which statistical method to adopt (Pearson
or Spearman), as well as which range of correlation values to
consider suitable to ensure similarity in shape among trajec-
tories. A very important point of research is the improvement
of data quality. Actually, current research does not check the
relationship between data dispersion level and accuracy of
the results of similarity. This investigation, considering several
different compression algorithms in order to decrease the data
dispersion, than those mentioned in this article, is an additional
point to execute in the future works.
Furthermore, the presented approach does not consider
other characteristics in order to calculate similarity. However,
this proposal is just a piece of a method to ﬁnd groups
of similar trajectories. The method considers two additional
characteristics: spent time and length of trajectories. Therefore,
the proposal of the future method is to ﬁnd groups of similar
trajectories considering several gradients of shape, duration
and length of the trajectories.
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Giannotti et al., “Unveiling the complexity of human mobility by
querying and mining massive trajectory data,” The VLDB JournalThe
International Journal on Very Large Data Bases, vol. 20, no. 5, 2011,
pp. 695–719.
[2]
S. Mehta, R. Machiraju, and S. Parthasarathy, “Towards object based
trajectory representation and analysis,” OSUCISRC-03/06-TR30, Tech.
Rep., 2006.
[3]
G. Andrienko et al, “Space, time and visual analytics,” International
Journal of Geographical Information Science, vol. 24, no. 10, 2010, pp.
1577–1600.
[4]
E. Frentzos, Y. Theodoridis, and A. N. Papadopoulos, “Spatio-temporal
trajectories,” in Encyclopedia of Database Systems.
Springer, 2009,
pp. 2742–2746.
[5]
C. Parent et al., “Semantic trajectories modeling and analysis,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 45, no. 4, 2013, p. 42.
[6]
V. Bogorny, C. Renso, A. R. Aquino, F. Lucca Siqueira, and L. O.
Alvares, “Constant–a conceptual data model for semantic trajectories
of moving objects,” Transactions in GIS, vol. 18, no. 1, 2014, pp. 66–
88.
[7]
M. Vlachos, G. Kollios, and D. Gunopulos, “Discovering similar
multidimensional trajectories,” in Data Engineering, 2002. Proceedings.
18th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2002, pp. 673–684.
[8]
L. Chen, M. T. ¨Ozsu, and V. Oria, “Robust and fast similarity search for
moving object trajectories,” in Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGMOD
international conference on Management of data.
ACM, 2005, pp.
491–502.
[9]
E. Frentzos, K. Gratsias, and Y. Theodoridis, “Index-based most similar
trajectory search,” in Data Engineering, 2007. ICDE 2007. IEEE 23rd
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 816–825.
[10]
S. Dodge, R. Weibel, and E. Forootan, “Revealing the physics of
movement: Comparing the similarity of movement characteristics of
different types of moving objects,” Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, vol. 33, no. 6, 2009, pp. 419–434.
[11]
H. Liu and M. Schneider, “Similarity measurement of moving object
trajectories,” in Proceedings of the Third ACM SIGSPATIAL Interna-
tional Workshop on GeoStreaming.
ACM, 2012, pp. 19–22.
[12]
N. Pelekis, G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, I. Kopanakis, G. Marketos,
and Y. Theodoridis, “Visually exploring movement data via similarity-
based analysis,” Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, vol. 38,
no. 2, 2012, pp. 343–391.
[13]
S. Sankararaman, P. K. Agarwal, T. Mølhave, and A. P. Boedihardjo,
“Computing similarity between a pair of trajectories,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1303.1585, 2013.
[14]
M. Xie, “Eds: a segment-based distance measure for sub-trajectory sim-
ilarity search,” in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGMOD international
conference on Management of data.
ACM, 2014, pp. 1609–1610.
[15]
K. Toohey and M. Duckham, “Trajectory similarity measures,” SIGSPA-
TIAL Special, vol. 7, no. 1, 2015, pp. 43–50.
[16]
N. Van de Weghe, G. De Tr´e, B. Kuijpers, and P. De Maeyer, “The
double-cross and the generalization concept as a basis for representing
and comparing shapes of polylines,” in On the Move to Meaningful
Internet Systems 2005: OTM 2005 Workshops.
Springer, 2005, pp.
1087–1096.
[17]
P. Y. Chen and P. M. Popovich, Correlation: Parametric and nonpara-
metric measures.
Sage, 2002, no. 137-139.
[18]
F. J. Braz and S. Orlando, “Trajectory data warehouses: Proposal of
design and application to exploit data.” in GeoInfo.
Citeseer, 2007,
pp. 61–72.
[19]
Y. Zheng, L. Zhang, X. Xie, and W.-Y. Ma, “Mining interesting
locations and travel sequences from gps trajectories,” in Proceedings
of the 18th international conference on World wide web.
ACM, 2009,
pp. 791–800.
[20]
B. F. Kavanagh and S. G. Bird, Surveying: Principles and applications.
Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River (NJ), 2000.
[21]
J. Cohen, Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences.
Aca-
demic press, 2013.
[22]
C. Spearman, “Demonstration of formulae for true measurement of
correlation,” The American Journal of Psychology, 1907, pp. 161–169.
[23]
——, “The proof and measurement of association between two things,”
The American journal of psychology, vol. 15, no. 1, 1904, pp. 72–101.
[24]
M. G. Kendall, “A new measure of rank correlation,” Biometrika, 1938,
pp. 81–93.
[25]
M. Potamias, K. Patroumpas, and T. Sellis, “Sampling trajectory streams
with spatiotemporal criteria,” in Scientiﬁc and Statistical Database
Management, 2006. 18th International Conference on, 2006, pp. 275–
284.
[26]
J. Muckell, J.-H. Hwang, V. Patil, C. T. Lawson, F. Ping, and S. S.
Ravi, “Squish: An online approach for gps trajectory compression,”
in Proceedings of the 2Nd International Conference on Computing
for Geospatial Research & Applications, ser. COM.Geo ’11.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 13:1–13:8. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1999320.1999333
[27]
G. H. Costa and F. Baldo, “Generation of road maps from trajectories
collected with smartphone–a method based on genetic algorithm,”
Applied Soft Computing, vol. 37, 2015, pp. 799–808.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

