Spatio-Temporal Clustering of Polygon Objects and per Object Interventions 
Optimizing Remediation of Spatially Dispersed Contaminated Parcels Under an Annual Budget 
Constraint 
Floris Abrams1,3, Lieve Sweeck1, Johan Camps1 
1Belgian Nuclear Research Centre (SCK CEN), 
Mol, Belgium 
e-mail: {Floris.Abrams, Lieve.Sweeck, 
Johan.Camps}@sckcen.be 
Dirk Catrysse2, Jos Van Orshoven2 
2Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (KU Leuven) 
Leuven, Belgium 
e-mail: {Dirk.Cattrysse, Jos.Vanorshoven}@kuleuven.be
 
 
Abstract — Polygons provide a natural representation for 
many types of geospatial objects such as agricultural parcels, 
buildings, and polluted sites. These polygon-based entities form 
the smallest units used in decision making of real-world 
problems. Acting on these dispersed entities could result in a 
heterogeneous and difficult to perform an action plan. 
Clustering of parcels in larger homogeneous actionable units 
can improve feasibility and reduce cost. Therefore, a polygon-
based clustering can be beneficial for environmental disaster 
management, where due to the large impacted area or limited 
availability of labor and financial resources, setting priorities 
of where, how and when to act are indispensable. This paper 
presents a spatio-temporal clustering algorithm under a 
budget constraint to prioritize clusters of parcels for 
intervention in space and time. The proposed algorithm 
returns homogeneous actionable clusters in space and time, 
trading off between effectiveness and feasibility and cost of 
intervention. 
Keywords-Spatio-temporal clustering; Budget constraint; 
Disaster 
management; 
Multi-Attribute 
Decision 
Making; 
MADM. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
When dealing with large natural or man-made disasters 
decision makers are confronted with setting priorities of 
where, how and when to remediate, because of a limited 
availability of labor and financial resources. This priority 
setting is particularly applicable when the impact of actions 
is costly and has long lasting influences. For spatially 
distributed sites with variable characteristics, priority setting 
among the sites and determination of adequate actions are of 
major importance. The effectiveness of related decisions is 
typically conditioned by multiple, and often contradicting 
criteria of economic, social, technical, environmental and 
human health-related nature. These characteristics of the 
decision problem make it suitable for the application of a 
discrete 
Multi-Attribute 
Decision 
Making 
(MADM) 
approach. These MADM approaches typically yield a 
patchwork of sites with different priorities and preferred 
actions. Because, performing these actions on multiple 
adjacent sites at the same time, compared to individual sites, 
is likely to be more feasible and less costly, making 
clustering of these sites interesting. Although clustering of 
pixels is quite common for processing and interpreting 
raster based datasets (e.g., to determine environmental risk 
areas, like landslides [1]), it is more complicated in 
polygon-based data datasets. Nonetheless, polygon objects 
provide a natural representation of real-world geospatial 
entities. Therefore, it can be more interesting to provide 
actionable support to decision making based on polygon-
based representations of real-world problems. In the field of 
afforestation multiple MADM approaches where compared 
to support decision making, when dealing with raster-based 
datasets for prioritizing afforestation sites [2], [3]. 
Furthermore, priorities will be conditioned by the resources 
available at that period, resulting in the need for spreading 
the actions in time. However, because of this time aspect the 
initial decision variables, used for prioritization, change due 
to physical processes in the landscape or due to the decision 
context. For an afforestation context, the BIOLP model was 
developed, to determine how a set of land use types should 
be distributed over space and time in order to optimize the 
multi-dimensional land performance of a region [4]. 
However, the used Integer Programming model based on the 
Balanced Compromise Programming MADM showed the 
risk of obtaining solutions that are excessively fragmented. 
This paper presents a spatio-temporal approach to deal 
with the clustering of spatially scattered polygon-based 
parcels, whereby only a set of actions can be performed per 
year as constrained by annual budgets. The paper explores 
an innovative extension of the classic region growing 
principles, adapted to polygon-based data structures and 
explicitly takes into account the attributes of the polygons to 
find the optimal compromise solution for the whole cluster. 
The algorithm is meant to provide actionable and feasible 
support to decision makers, by proposing a coherent action 
plan in space and time for the affected region. 
The next section provides in depth explanation of the 
spatio-temporal cluster algorithm. In Section III, the 
methodology is illustrated for an agricultural region in 
Belgium, contaminated after a hypothetical accidental 
release of radionuclides from a nuclear power plant. Finally, 
Section IV discusses the algorithms and the case study, then 
Section V draws the conclusions on applicability of the 
algorithm to help improve decision-making. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II. 
SPATIO-TEMPORAL CLUSTERING METHOD 
In the following section, first the initial priority scores 
that are the foundation of the algorithm are explained. 
Second, the temporal aspects of the parcel interventions and 
third, the different steps in the algorithm are explained. 
A. Distance based multi-attribute decision making 
An MADM method considering distance in the feature 
space, named Compromise Programming (CP), was used to 
rank the set of feasible alternatives. For the CP 
methodology, a set of independent, operational and non-
redundant attributes need to be established as criteria. The 
performance criteria used will vary significantly between 
different cases. For each criterion a weight reflecting the 
importance of the criterion is set by the stakeholders [5]. For 
this set of criteria, the CP methodology determines the 
optimal point, a vector of performance attribute values 
corresponding to an alternative with the best observed 
performance on each criterion separately. The ideal point is 
normally 
unfeasible, 
because 
multi-criteria 
decision 
problems involve conflicting criteria. Therefore, CP 
determines a compromise solution by searching for a 
feasible solution that is closest to the ideal point. The 
definition of ‘closeness’ requires the formulation of a 
distance metric (1), where a larger distance equals a less 
optimal alternative [6]. 
 
 
n is the number of criteria under consideration; 
 
 is the relative importance (weight) assigned to 
performance attribute i;  
 
p is a parameter that determines the type of distance 
function, where 2 represents the Euclidian distance; 
 
 is the optimal value for performance criterion i; 
 
is the value of the ith performance criterion 
expressed as a function of the decision variables x; 
 
 is the anti-ideal corresponding to the ith attribute that 
is the “worst” value for this attribute. 
 
Distances based on (1), will be standardized within the 
interval [0-1], where a distance of 0, represents the optimal 
alternative where no compromise is needed, because it 
outperforms all other on all criteria. In contrast, a distance 
of 1 represents an alternative, with the worst score on all 
criteria simultaneously. 
1) Intervention plan of polygon-based parcels  
The first question that needs to be answered is: “Where 
are the sites for which intervention is most urgent 
situated?”. All sites in need for intervention, are identified 
as feasible alternatives. The CP methodology returns a 
distance 
score 
for 
each 
site, 
representing 
the 
priority/urgency of a parcel to be intervened on. From these 
scores a ranking of the parcels from high priority (small 
distance) to low priority (large distance) can be made. For 
the rest of the paper, the scores for the parcels will be 
referred to as Parcel Priority Scores (PPS). 
2) Optimal intervention per parcel 
For each parcel, all the feasible intervention actions for 
that parcel need to be ranked. Once again the ranking of the 
interventions is based on a distance score, computed by the 
CP methodology. For the rest of the paper, the scores 
representing the priority ranking of a remedial action for this 
specific parcel referred to as the Action Priority Score 
(APS). 
B. Temporal dynamics in MADM 
In many decision areas the decision information is 
collected and evaluated at multiple periods overtime. 
However, most MADM methods only focus on the decision 
making problem at a particular period [7]. Therefore, it is 
necessary to use Dynamic Multi-Attribute Decision Making 
(dMADM) to tackle the changes of the alternative attributes 
and weights through time [8]–[10]. For the case of large 
scale interventions on many different sites, the decision 
making becomes dynamic due to limits in economic 
resources or availability of labour forces. Because of these 
limited resources not all sites can be tackled in one period of 
time, resulting in postponed interventions. When actions are 
postponed the initial decision variables may alter and the 
decision problem needs a multi-period MADM. The amount 
of parcels that can be acted on each year depends on the 
annual budget constraint. While performing actions on the 
most urgent polygons first each of the actions comes at a 
cost. For each intervention the cost can be calculated based 
on the cost per unit of area and the size of the parcel. The 
interventions can be done until the total cost of remediation 
would exceed the yearly budget, if the budget is reached the 
remaining parcels are candidates for action in the next 
period. 
 
 
Figure 1. The cluster growing procedure applied on 12 polygon-based 
parcels, with 3 possible actions. Resulting in 2 homogenous clusters. 
C. Spatio-temporal clustering algorithm with budget 
constraint 
To determine spatial coherent clusters of parcels with 
the same intervention action, a spatially explicit clustering 
algorithm is used. The algorithm operates in a similar 
fashion as a region growing algorithm, where it 
consecutively checks if it could add one of the neighboring 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

parcels to the cluster, depending on the similarity between 
their PPS and RPS. The clustering algorithm is iterative and 
consists of three phases: The cluster initialisation, followed 
by the cluster growing procedure and lastly end of growth 
phase. 
1) Cluster initialisation 
To optimally allocate resources, the most urgent sites 
should be treated first. Therefore, the seed parcel is the one 
with the lowest PPS (smallest distance to the optimal point) 
and will be selected as the first parcel in the cluster. 
2) Cluster growing procedure 
After the seed parcel has been determined, the cluster 
growing procedure attempts to find neighbouring parcels, 
which can be added to the seed parcel and later the growing 
cluster. Parcels in a cluster have the same intervention 
action and are acted on simultaneously. Adding more 
parcels to the cluster enlarges the cluster, therefore, creating 
larger actionable units which are preferred from the 
perspective of reducing the complexity and operational cost 
of the intervention. But the addition of candidates with a 
higher PPS or a different optimal APS to the cluster, results 
in lower performance of the cluster, compared to the set of 
individual parcels. It is therefore important to find a 
compromise remediation action between all parcels on the 
cluster level. The procedure is shown graphically in Figure 
1 and pseudo code in Figure 3. 
 
 
a) Determination of the parcel neighbors 
Compared to a raster dataset, where pixels are spatially 
arranged in a systematic way and neighbours are easy to 
define, in a vector data set of spatially distributed polygons 
determining the neighbours is more challenging. To define 
neighbouring polygons, which are not necessarily sharing a 
border but rather separated by boundaries such as roads or a 
small stream, a technique called morphologic tessellation 
(MT) is used. At the core of MT lies the Voronoi 
tessellation (VT), a method of geometric partitioning of the 
2D space, where a planar set of ‘seed points’ generate a 
series of polygons, known as Voronoi polygons (VP). Each 
VP encloses the portion of the plane that is closer to its seed 
than to any other polygon [11]. From the partitioned space, 
the neighbours can be determined by the respected VPs 
sharing borders. An example of the portioning by VPs is 
given in Figure 2. Our clustering algorithm makes use of an 
enclosed tessellation based on the enhanced morphological 
tessellation algorithm (EMT). EMT allows to set limits to 
the expansion of the MT, limiting the allowed distance 
between parcels that can be considered to be neighbours. 
Further, it allows to set break lines (e.g., larger rivers, 
administrative boundaries), which the VPs are not permitted 
to trespass. The VP constructed by the EMT algorithm 
capture the spatial configuration of all parcels, from which 
the neighbouring parcels of each parcel can be determined. 
The EMT algorithm is accessible from an open-source 
python package (http://docs.momepy.org). Fleischmann 
(2019, 2020) provide more information regarding the EMT 
methodology. 
 
 
Figure 3. Pseudo code of the spatio-temporal cluster approach, determining 
the optimal year and remedial clusters. 
 
a) Determining the optimal neighbour 
To determine the candidate parcel for growing the 
cluster, it is necessary to find the parcel and action 
combination to add to the cluster, with the lowest increase in 
composite score. The composite score of the cluster is the 
 
Figure 2. Initial set of distributed parcels (a) and VP computed by the 
EMT, resulting in a partitioned space (b). 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

sum of all PPS scores of the included parcels and their APS 
scores for the optimal action of the cluster. From this 
follows, that adding a parcel to the cluster could change the 
remediation of the whole cluster, resulting in a different 
compromise solution within the cluster. 
This compromise solution is not necessarily the optimal 
solution for all parcels individually, but from the perspective 
of the collective composite score of the cluster. When the 
best parcel is found, it should be checked if it is still similar 
enough to the seed pixel to be added and that the budget 
constraint is not exceeded. If for the candidate parcel none 
of the previous stated thresholds are exceeded, the parcel is 
added to the cluster and the composite score of the cluster is 
adapted to the new situation. The growth will continue by 
the adding the new neighbors and determining the optimal 
one. This procedure is repeated until the end of growth 
phase is reached as described in the next paragraph. 
 
3) End of growth 
a) Similarity threshold 
To determine whether a neighboring parcel can still be 
added to the cluster, the similarity between the cluster seed 
and the candidate parcel their composite scores are checked. 
The difference between both scores cannot exceed the 
predefined similarity threshold. The threshold is defined by 
the user, according to its preference to optimality or ease of 
implementation of the remediation strategy. The reasoning 
behind the threshold is that when the difference between 
seed and candidate is large, resources will be used on less 
urgent parcels or sub optimal interventions will be 
performed. 
b) Budget constraint 
The budget constraint limits the amount of resources that 
can be allocated to intervention in each period. The 
implementation of a budget constraint in the spatial 
clustering algorithm, ensures that the cluster cannot exceed 
the budget for the given period and the clustering is 
therefore halted once the available budget is reached. Once 
the budget will be exceeded, the cluster growing is stopped 
and the polygon’s attributes for the new period are 
determined, then the cluster initialization phase can be 
started for the new period. 
III. 
CASE STUDY 
The results shown in this section are based on a 
hypothetical accidental radioactive release, affecting 157 
polygon-based agricultural parcels in Flanders, Belgium. 
For a budget of 400.000 euro per year a remediation plan 
can be designed, that ensures that all parcels are remediated 
so that after remediation food can be produced in line with 
the legally set contamination limits.  
A. Environmental remediation characterisitcs 
A parcel is defined by its on-site characteristics or 
attributes such as: geographic location, environmental 
characteristics, agricultural practices. These attributes form 
the basis for the decision criteria. For the intervention 5 
remedial actions are determined, all with a different local 
and environmental impact and remediation efficiency. The 
feasibility of the intervention depends on the contamination 
level and the crop type because some remedial actions are 
unsuitable for specific agricultural crops or inadequate to 
reduce the contamination levels below the allowed levels. 
For example, ploughing actions cannot be performed on 
parcels with perennial crops. The criteria to assess remedial 
actions, can vary largely based on the geographical region, 
contamination type, included stakeholders and data 
availability. 
The reason for including the temporal dynamics in this 
case study is the altering of certain decision variables in 
environmental 
contamination 
problems. 
A 
natural 
phenomenon, called natural attenuation, causes the mass, 
toxicity, volume or concentration of contaminants in the soil 
or groundwater to reduce over time. This implies that the 
contamination decreases overtime without interference of 
specific remedial actions. For radioactive contaminations in 
particular, the reduction of the contaminant is even more 
strongly determined by radioactive decay, its half-live. For a 
remedial action to be considered feasible, it should be able 
to reduce the contamination levels below the legally allowed 
limits. From the dynamic character of the contamination 
follows, that after a certain period of time other remedial 
options can become available, which outperform the 
previously selected option. Consequently, the remedial 
actions for each parcel should be revised on a regular basis 
to ensure they are still optimal for this time period.  
 
B. Compromise solution on a per parcel basis 
The PPS of each parcel is shown in Figure 4, parcels 
with a low PPS are identified as urgent to remediate. 
Further, for each specific parcel, the APS for all feasible 
remediation actions is determined. A specific example for a 
pasture parcel is shown in figure 5. It is important to 
acknowledge, that for each parcel, all feasible remedial 
 
Figure 4. Parcel priority score (PPS) for the affected agricultural 
parcels, the smaller the more urgent the remediation. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

actions, possess a RPS score, where a lower score represents 
a more optimal remedial action for that specific parcel. 
 
C. Spatio-temporal cluster for the affected region 
A comparison between the action sites per year with 
similarity threshold = 0 and similarity threshold = 0.25 is 
shown in Figure 6. A similarity threshold of 0, corresponds 
to a situation where no candidate parcel will be good 
enough to add to the cluster, resulting in a remediation plan 
without clusters. For different values of the similarity 
threshold a comparison between the remediation plans can 
be made based on for example: the cost, waste production 
and time needed for remediation. The comparison between 
different similarity thresholds is out of the scope of this 
paper as it relies heavily on characteristics of the 
contamination and remediation actions.  
 
TABLE 1. THE GROWING PROCEDURE OF A CLUSTER FOR 5 ITERATIONS.  
 
 
D. Compromise solutions in the clusters 
To highlight the process of finding a compromise 
between all parcels on the cluster level, five iterations of the 
growing procedure are shown in Table 1. The growing 
procedure determines the optimal remediation action for the 
5 parcels based on a similarity threshold of 0.25. The yellow 
cells show the current parcels in the cluster and the remedial 
action of the cluster is shown based on the subscript 
number. The APS values in bold show the optimal action 
per parcel. From Table 1, it becomes clear that while a 
cluster grows, the optimal remediation for all parcels within 
the cluster changes based on the clusters compromise 
solution. In iteration III, the optimal remediation on the 
cluster level, is the worst performing action for the seed 
parcel (A), and the second best action for B. Nevertheless, 
from the perspective of the cluster action 3 is the best 
compromise solution. 
 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Determining the PPS and APS of a parcel, should be 
done with great care, because it can influence the rest of the 
process. For the purpose of this research, the CP 
methodology 
was 
used 
but other distanced based 
methodologies can replace it. Because of the use of two 
distance-based metrics, PPS and RPS, the composite 
distance score still has a physical meaning (distance to the 
optimal). When other MADM procedures ELECTRE or 
PROMETHEE are used, this should be done carefully to 
make sure both scores are still compatible to sum up. Figure 
6 shows the clusters that are formed based on the budget 
constraint and similarity threshold. Reducing the budget, 
would spread the remediation plan over more years and 
would interact more with the cluster growing mechanisms, 
because of more early stops. If the similarity threshold 
would become bigger, less optimal clusters are allowed and 
the deviation from the optimal situation of the clusters 
would grow. The similarity threshold influences the cluster 
heterogeneity and therefore the compromise solution per 
cluster becomes more important. Because both values for 
PPS and APS range between  0 -1, similarity thresholds can 
range from 0.1 to 0.5. From Table 1, it is clear that more 
heterogeneous parcels in the cluster result in more changes 
(a)
(b)
 
Figure 6. Spatial distribution of the remediated parcels per year 
after spatio-temporal clustering with a similarity threshold of  0 (a) 
and a similarity threshold of 0.25 (b). The colors depict the year of 
remediation per parcel or cluster. 
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
Deep
ploughing
Shallow
ploughing
Skim and burial
ploughing
Topsoil
removal
Potassium
fertilisation
APS score for each remedial action
 
Figure 5. Action Priority Score (APS) for the different candidate 
remedial actions for an agricultural parcel with cereal cultivation. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

in the compromise remedial action throughout the growing 
of the cluster.  
When working with polygon-based datasets, topological 
errors, such as gaps, overlap and sliver polygons occur. 
Relying solely on these topological relationships, can have 
major impacts on determining the neighbors. Our approach is 
not impacted by these errors. The utility of the algorithm was 
shown based on an environmental remediation case study, 
where clusters of remediated parcels would reduce cost and 
effectivity, 
compared 
to 
non-clustered 
approaches. 
Nevertheless, other use cases could benefit from a similar 
approach. For example, when afforesting a large region, not 
all sites can be afforested at the same time. Further, every 
plot has a certain suitability and urgency to be afforested. In 
addition, afforesting connected parcels, with a similar tree 
composition, would severely reduce the cost of planting and 
also improve the ecological connectivity of the landscape. 
Therefore, finding optimal clusters of areas to afforest with 
similar tree compositions could be facilitated with our 
proposed algorithm, for raster datasets this was already done 
[13]. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
With the proposed algorithm, dispersed polygon-based 
parcels can be clustered in space and time for given 
intervention under an annual budget constraint. In addition, 
the utility of the algorithm shows promise for many other 
fields of application. The extension of the region growing 
principles from a raster data set to polygons is a useful 
approach for dealing with real-world problems. Further, 
explicitly taking into account the attributes of all parcels in 
the cluster, during the cluster growing procedure gives rise 
to interesting compromise solutions from a cluster 
perspective. More research on the impact of the similarity 
threshold is needed and future work should also attempt at 
defining the similarity threshold in a way, that can more 
easily be understood by decision makers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by a PhD grant for Floris 
Abrams from the Belgian Nuclear Research Centre (SCK 
CEN). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. K. Nath, A. Sengupta, and A. Srivastava, “Remote 
sensing GIS-based landslide susceptibility & risk 
modeling in Darjeeling–Sikkim Himalaya together with 
FEM-based slope stability analysis of the terrain,” in 
Natural Hazards, vol. 108, no. 3, Springer Netherlands, 
2021, pp. 3271–3304. 
[2] 
R. Estrella, W. Delabastita, A. Wijfels, D. Catrice, and J. 
Van Orshoven, “Comparison of multicriteria decision 
making methods for selection of afforestation sites,” Rev. 
Int. géomatique, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 143–157, 2014. 
[3] 
R. Estrella, W. Delabastita, A. Wijfels, D. Catrice, and J. 
Van Orshoven, “Comparison of multicriteria decision 
making methods for selection of afforestation sites,” Rev. 
Int. géomatique, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 143–157, 2012. 
[4] 
R. Estrella, D. Cattrysse, and J. Van Orshoven, “An 
integer programming model to determine land use 
trajectories for optimizing regionally integrated ecosystem 
services delivery,” Forests, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1–27, 2016. 
[5] 
V. Belton and T. J. Stewart, Multiple criteria decision 
analysis: An integrated approach. 2002. 
[6] 
J. Malczewski and C. Rinner, Multicriteria Decision 
Analysis in Geographic Information Science, no. Massam 
1993. 2015. 
[7] 
Z. Xu, “On multi-period multi-attribute decision making,” 
Knowledge-Based Syst., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 164–171, 2008. 
[8] 
Y. Chen and B. Li, “Dynamic multi-attribute decision 
making model based on triangular intuitionistic fuzzy 
numbers,” Sci. Iran., vol. 18, no. 2 B, pp. 268–274, 2011. 
[9] 
M. Karatas, “Multiattribute Decision Making Using 
Multiperiod Probabilistic Weighted Fuzzy Axiomatic 
Design,” Syst. Eng., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 318–334, 2017. 
[10] 
Q. Dong and Y. Guo, “Multiperiod multiattribute 
decision-making method based on trend incentive 
coefficient,” Int. Trans. Oper. Res., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 
141–152, 2013. 
[11] 
M. Fleischmann, A. Feliciotti, O. Romice, and S. Porta, 
“Morphological tessellation as a way of partitioning 
space: Improving consistency in urban morphology at the 
plot scale,” Comput. Environ. Urban Syst., vol. 80, no. 
May 2019, p. 101441, 2020. 
[12] 
M. 
Fleischmann, 
“momepy: 
Urban 
Morphology 
Measuring Toolkit,” J. Open Source Softw., vol. 4, no. 43, 
p. 1807, 2019. 
[13] 
P. Vanegas, D. Cattrysse, A. Wijffels, and J. Van 
Orshoven, “Finding sites meeting compactness and on- 
and off-site suitability criteria in raster maps,” in 2nd 
International Conference on Advanced Geographic 
Information 
Systems, 
Applications, 
and 
Services, 
GEOProcessing 2010, 2010, pp. 15–20. 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

