On improving data quality and topology
in vector spatial data
Nina Solomakhina∗,†, Thomas Hubauer∗ and Silvio Becher∗
∗ Siemens AG, Munich, Bavaria, 81739, Germany
Email: fname.lname@siemens.com
† ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
Email: fname.lname@epﬂ.ch
Abstract—Data quality is an important issue for a spatial data,
especially for topological relations between geographical features.
Errors and inconsistencies found in Geographical Information
System (GIS) data often misrepresent topological structure of
the dataset and, therefore, geoprocessing and spatial analysis
(e.g., network analysis) do not yield reliable results. The focus of
this paper is to identify and correct topological errors in vector
spatial data, in network data in particular. We present the method
for identifying and correcting dangling line in datasets aiming
to reconstruct incorrect topological relations between lines and
other features. We tested the proposed approach on the real-world
energy network data.
Keywords–spatial data; networks; topology; topology errors
I.
INTRODUCTION
Spatial data is very diverse. It comes in different formats
and types: satellite or aerial photographs, hand drawn or
printed maps, raster or vector graphics ﬁles and other numerous
formats. Before performing further data mining and exploring
procedures, it is necessary to assess whether data is suitable
for their application, e.g., whether satellite and photo images
require noise removal procedures or tables and Geographical
Information System (GIS) ﬁles require duplicate removal pro-
cedures.
Digitized GIS data has two major formats - raster and
vector graphics. Broadly speaking, raster graphics typically
uses a grid of colored pixels to build the image, whereas
vector graphics uses points, lines and simple geometric shapes.
Vector graphics data is quite widespread and is represented by
numerous formats, such as shapeﬁles (one of the most popular
spatial data formats), GML (XML-like grammar developed
by the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC)), KML/KMZ
(extension of XML for spatial data developed by Google)
and others. The prevalence of vector formats for spatial data
can easily be explained by its numerous advantages, including
compatibility with relational databases and possibilities to
easily scale and combine vector layers or update data. For
instance, in comparison with raster data, vector format allows
more efﬁcient encoding of a topology and hence offers more
analysis capabilities for networks, such as roads, rivers, rails
and energy networks.
However, data seldom comes clean and accurate, and this
statement holds for geospatial data as well. It might be inaccu-
rate or outdated, and, as consequence, the topological structure
of vector data can be corrupted leading to incorrect encoding of
geographical features. In this paper, we discuss on topological
errors in vector data and, in particular, on one of the most
frequent problems in the network data: incorrect connections
to line features. Further, we demonstrate and evaluate proposed
methods on a real-world geographical data.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the next
section introduces data quality and topology for vector spatial
data. Overview of related work is provided in Section III. In
Section IV, we propose a method for correcting topological
errors in data and further in Section V we evaluate proposed
method on our use case data. Section VI concludes the paper.
II.
DATA QUALITY AND TOPOLOGY IN GIS VECTOR DATA
In order to keep spatial data as accurate and complete as
possible, a set of general quality criteria was deﬁned [1]. These
criteria are called the elements of spatial data quality:
1) Lineage - the history of the dataset, i.e., how was this data
derived and how was the data transformed and processed;
2) Positional accuracy - a measure of accuracy of absolute
and a relative positions of geographic features in the
dataset;
3) Attribute accuracy - a measure of accuracy of quantitative
and qualitative attributes of geographical features;
4) Completeness - a measure of whether all geographical
features and their attributes were included in the set
and, if otherwise, selection criteria which attributes were
omitted;
5) Logical consistency - compliance with the structure of
data model, absence of apparent contradictions in data;
6) Semantic accuracy - correct encoding of geographical
features, i.e., the difference between geographical features
in a given data set and in reality;
7) Temporal information - validity period for a given data
set, dates of its observation and any updates performed;
Poor-quality data does not conform to one or several
elements of quality. For example, irresponsible documentation
affects lineage and temporal information quality; map trans-
formations and generalizations cause attribute and semantic
inaccuracies. Other typical sources for deﬁciencies in data
quality elements include data collection, data conversions and
transfer between different formats and coordinate systems.
Insufﬁcient data quality is especially critical for vector data
since its topology can be disturbed. A geospatial topology
enforces rules concerning relationships between geospatial
features representing real-world objects. These rules are called
topology rules [2]. They are formulated using spatial predicates
such as Contains, Covers, Disjoint, Intersects,
and others. The geospatial topology determines and preserves
relationships between geographical features. For instance, in
road or telecommunication datasets topology is what makes
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

a set of lines to be a network. It is essential for spatial
data analysis, e.g., for querying or routing. Different types of
topologies are distinguished, depending on the feature classes
presenting in the dataset, for example, the arc-node topology
deﬁnes relations between lines. Similarly, the polygon topol-
ogy determines relations between polygons [3]. According
to the type of the topology and data model requirements
appropriate topology rules are deﬁned. For example, both
buildings and climatic zones can be encoded by multipolygons,
but those representing buildings are allowed to have gaps
between them, whereas multipolygons representing climatic
zones are forbidden to have void areas between them. Errors in
data may lead to violations of these topology rules, incorrect
deﬁnitions of relationships between features, and, therefore,
failure to meet data quality criteria. Such errors are called
topological errors.
As it was mentioned above, vector data is especially suit-
able for networks, such as roads, electricity grids and others.
Similarly, for each network dataset there are corresponding
topology rules deﬁned by a data model, requirements and
further characteristics of data. However, some topological
errors are typical for all kinds of networks, including: dangling
lines, i.e., not precise connection of lines to the other features.
These errors occur quite frequently in network data breaking its
topology and, as one of the consequences, corrupting results
of data analysis. In this paper, we concentrate on dangling
lines and propose techniques for connecting them to the ending
points correctly.
III.
RELATED WORK
There was a lot of research on spatial data quality since
1990s, when the geographic information science took its roots.
Also for vector spatial data there exist various methods of
detection and correction of topological errors.
In general, all features shall be checked for violating de-
ﬁned quality criteria, topology rules or any other restrictions set
by the data model. There are two main possibilities to conduct
spatial data quality assessment and improvement in practice:
using GIS or Computer Aided Design (CAD) software. CAD
platforms provide an environment supplying graphic opera-
tors and algorithms for data processing, such as checking
intersections, creating features, etc. Authors of [4], [5], [6],
[7] and other works present systems that detect and correct
wide range of topological errors operating objects in CAD
environment. Some modules also treat positional inaccuracies
and logical inconsistencies, such as identiﬁer duplications [4],
and semantic inaccuracies, such as self-intersections of features
[7] .
In the ﬁrst place, GIS is a system for storing and displaying
geospatial information. However, present-day GIS software
often offers some analysis functionalities, including checking
validity of the topology in data. GRASS GIS [8], QGIS [9],
ArcGIS [10] and other similar software packages ﬁnd and
ﬁx errors in two- and three-dimensional data. For example,
ArcGIS allows to choose from 28 topology rules and detects
features that violate these rules [11]. It is important to mention
though, that in GIS software checking validity functionality is
often aimed rather for faster rendering and simpliﬁcation then
for an efﬁcient data analysis.
One of the most important concepts underlying topological
error detection and correction is a tolerance gap (also called
Definitely not inside
Possibly not inside
Possibly inside
Definitely inside
Possibly connected
Definitely not connected
Definitely connected
ε
Figure 1. Epsilon-bounded tolerance gaps.
an error band, a search radius, or an epsilon-bounded error
region) which is deﬁned as an area around the feature expanded
by epsilon in all directions from the boundary of the feature
[12]. Its purpose is to access the cartographic error in feature
relations. For example, for each polygon in a dataset with a
polygon-point topology epsilon-bounded tolerance gap allows
to separate surrounding features in four groups (see Figure
1):
(i) deﬁnitely lying inside of the polygon, (ii) possibly
lying inside of the polygon, (iii) possibly not lying inside of
the polygon, (iv) deﬁnitely not lying inside of the polygon.
Similarly, in case of the polygon-line topology, tolerance gap
allows to ﬁnd possibly connected lines (see also Figure 1). The
value of epsilon shall be application dependent and mark out
as many of doubtful features as possible. Tolerance gaps are
widely used for detection and correction of dangling lines, sliv-
ering polygons and other topological errors [12], [3], [13], [5].
Additionally, error bands are used in probabilistic and fuzzy
logic approaches [14], [15], [16] for spatial topology, where
error band is introduced as an uncertainty in the boundary of
features.
However, epsilon-bounded tolerance gaps suggest to con-
nect dangles to the closest feature around. It might be incorrect
choice leading to semantic inaccuracies, in case the object,
encoded by dangling line, is connected to the other object
rather than closest one. Purpose of our work was to correct
numerous dangling features in real-world data and to rebuild
network topology as accurate as possible. Existing systems
mostly use the epsilon-bounded tolerance gap method for
dangling lines and, therefore, produced semantic inaccuracies
in the dataset. In order to avoid these inaccuracies, we propose
a novel method for correcting dangling lines. In this method we
suggest to respect the network structure, distinguish features
that are already connected to the network from the features that
are not yet connected. This method can be especially relevant
for road, utility, telecommunication and other network. We also
introduce error band in our method as an aid for correcting
dangles. In further sections we detail our method for detection
and correction topological errors in vector data.
IV.
DATA QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
Vector data tends to dominate in network and other ap-
plications, where it is important to analyze relations between
features such as connectivity and adjacency. However, it might
not be possible to yield reliable analysis results due to poor
data quality affecting the topological structure of the dataset.
One of the common data quality discrepancies for vector
spatial data are positional inaccuracies of features. Positional
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Department 
Restricted © Siemens AG 2016. All rights reserved 
A 
A 
B 
A 
C 
B 
A 
2
v
2
v
1v
v
v
v
(a)
Page 3 
March 2013 
Department 
Restricted © Siemens AG 2016. All rights reserved 
A 
A 
A 
B 
A 
C 
B 
A 
ε 
ε 
2
v
2
v
1v
v
v
v
v
(b)
Page 5 
March 2013 
Department 
Restricted © Siemens AG 2016. All rights 
A 
A 
ε 
A 
'v
v
v
(c)
Figure 2. Dangling lines: a) undershoot, b) overshoot, c) correcting dangle using a tolerance gap
accuracy shows whether the geographical position of a feature
corresponds to the real-world position of the object it repre-
sents. While constructing the dataset and transforming between
formats and coordinate systems, geographical characteristics of
the feature may be affected. Transformations that lead to po-
sitional inaccuracies might not only comprise transformations
between coordinate systems, but also map generalizations and
transformations of attribute format, e.g., rounding coordinate
values.
As it was mentioned in Section II, there are two types
of positional accuracy: (i) absolute, that deﬁnes an absolute
geographical position of a feature, (ii) relative, that deﬁnes
a position of a feature with respect to the other features.
Dangling lines are an example of a relative positional inac-
curacy. Line is called dangling, if its beginning or ending
point does not agree with any other features. Typically, line
features are encoded as a pair of points, multiline features - as
a sequence of points. The ﬁrst point is called the beginning of
the line and the last point is the ending of the line. However,
for our approach it is not signiﬁcant, whether the beginning
or the ending of a dangling line is not connected properly.
Therefore, throughout the next sections we say endpoint of a
line without specifying whether it is the ﬁrst or the last point
in the sequence of coordinates encoding the line.
Dangling lines are also often called undershoots or over-
shoots indicating on the type of displacement of the feature.
Sometimes this topology error may be cleared by introducing
tolerance gaps. Figures 2a, 2b illustrates examples of an un-
dershoot and an overshoot correspondingly for a line-polygon
topology. Figure 2c illustrates the process of restoring the
connection by introducing a tolerance gap around polygon A,
checking the containment relationship between the tolerance
gap of the polygon and the endpoint of the line v, which allows
to conclude that line v is possibly connected to polygon A, and
ﬁnally building a corrected line v′.
In Figure 3 we schematically illustrate several possible sit-
uations when simply introducing tolerance gaps is not enough.
Positional and relative inaccuracies in different layers may
superpose and lead to a situation similar to the one shown in
Figure 3a, when the endpoint of the conduit is not reached by
the tolerance gap with the deﬁned ε. In this case, we suggest
using a tolerance gap for the endpoint of a line and a stepwise
increment of ε as shown in Figure 4a. However, increment of
ε shall be limited in order not to produce false connections.
Figures 3b and 3c show cases, when the line v2 is possibly
connected to several polygons. We suggest two further actions
to remove the uncertainty:
1) Build a line with the same slope and offset as the
initial line or as the corresponding segment of an initial
multiline. Among all candidates choose the feature that
lies on the line and is the closest to the endpoint of the
dangling line. According to this technique, Figures 3b and
4b shows the connection of the dangle v2 to the polygon
B, since the continuation of a line segment v2 intersects
it.
2) Among all candidates, ﬁlter out those features that are
already connected to other lines. This remark, however,
depends on topology rules speciﬁc to the data, but nev-
ertheless is true for many common types of networks.
According to the technique shown in previous point, in
Figures 3c and 4c polygon A is the endpoint of the dangle.
However, ﬁltering out polygons A and C that are both
connected to other lines, we choose polygon B out of all
candidates.
Page 4 
March 2013 
Department 
Restricted © Siemens AG 201
   
 
A 
C 
B 
A 
2
v
1v
v
C 
B 
A 
2
v
1v
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3. Other possible occurrences of dangling lines.
Page 3 
March 2013 
Department 
Restricted © Siemens AG 2016. All
   
 
A 
A 
C 
B 
A 
ε 
ε 
'
2
v
2
v
1v
v
v
C 
B 
A 
2
v
1v
'
2
v
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4. Correction of dangling lines for cases introduced in Figure 3.
Page 7 
March 2013 
Department 
Restricted © Siemens AG 2016. All rights reserved 
A’ 
B 
A 
v
B 
A 
v
'v
'v
B 
A 
v
'v
''v
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5. Different possibilities of treating dangling line in case it is unclear
to which feature it is connected to.
Candidates for a correct connection of a dangle usually are
determined by an exhaustive search, as in [4] and other works.
However, it might be computationally intensive in case of a
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

large dataset. We suggest to reduce search of the candidates
by a part of a dataset, i.e., analogously with an epsilon value
deﬁning the width of tolerance gaps, we suggest to deﬁne an
Ω value determining a search area around the dangling feature,
i.e., as an envelope around the dangle expanded by Ω in all
directions.
One of the indecisive cases that can not be solved using
technique suggested above is shown in Figure 5a. In this case,
both candidate polygons A and B are not connected to another
lines, equidistant from the dangling line v and do not lie on the
line of the dangle. The best solution in this case is to consult
a domain expert who knows the data and can exactly point out
the correct relationship between features. Otherwise, there are
the following possibilities how to treat this problem: (i) leave
it as it is (see Figure 5a), (ii) connect both polygons (see Figure
5c), (iii) choose (ot guess) which polygon to connect (on
Figure 5a polygon B is chosen), or (iv) merge two polygons
into a new bigger polygon A′ connected to the endpoint (see
Figure 5d).
Each of these methods has its pros and cons. For example,
the methods (ii) and (iii) are suitable if there are few such
cases, but if there are a lot of them, it creates an abundance of
synthetically introduced connections and, as a consequence,
might result in geospatial topology which contains a lot of
semantic and positional inaccuracies, and as a consequence
has nothing to do with real-world topology. The latter method
is not suitable, when these polygons represent different objects
in real world and have completely different characteristics.
The semantic accuracy of the dataset is affected by merging
two polygons into one. On the other hand, ignoring dangling
features might lead to oversimpliﬁcation and logical incon-
sistencies, for example, when we ignore a dangling line that
is supposed to connect buildings to an electricity substation,
and there are no other substations in the network delivering
electricity to consumers. The choice of a particular method
depends on a ﬁeld of application, type of data, task at hand
and quality criteria for a particular dataset.
1: for i = 0 to n do
2:
if ∄f ∈ F s.t. beginning of li ∈ L connected to f and
∄l ∈ L, l ̸= li s.t. beginning of li ∈ L connected to l
then
3:
L′ ← li
4:
else if ∄f ∈ F s.t. ending of li ∈ L connected to f and
∄l ∈ L, l ̸= li s.t. ending of li ∈ L connected to l then
5:
L′ ← li
6:
end if
7: end for
8: for i = 0 to m do
9:
if ∃l ∈ L such that fi ∈ F connected to l then
10:
F ′ ← fi
11:
end if
12: end for
Figure 6. Inspecting lines and features in dataset, building L′, F ′ sets .
We suggest algorithms shown in Figures 6 and 7 summa-
rizing techniques we introduced above. We use the algorithm
in Figure 6 to process all data and to determine spatial
relationships between features. Let {L}n
i=1 be a set of line
features and {F}m
i=1 be a set of point and polygon features.
1: for all l′ ∈ L′ do
2:
for all f ∈ F s.t. f is contained in E(l′, Ω) do
3:
if ending of l′ is contained in e(f, ε) then
4:
F(l′) ← f
5:
end if
6:
end for
7:
if |F(l′)| = 1 then
8:
return connection l′ to f
9:
else if |F(l′)| > 1 and |F(l′) \ F ′| = 1 then
10:
g = F(l′) \ F ′
11:
return connection l′ to g
12:
else if |F(l′)| > 1 then
13:
for all f in F(l′) do
14:
if extension of l′ crosses f and f ̸∈ F ′ then
15:
return connection l′ to f
16:
else if extension of l′ crosses f and |F(l′)\F ′| = ∅
then
17:
return connection l′ to f
18:
else if f ̸∈ F ′ and f is the closest to l′ then
19:
return connection l′ to f
20:
end if
21:
end for
22:
else if F(l′) = ∅ then
23:
repeat
24:
increase ε
25:
until F(l′) ̸= ∅ or ε < threshold
26:
end if
27: end for
Figure 7. Detecting and correcting dangling lines in a vector spatial dataset.
The algorithm builds sets L′ ⊆ L of dangling lines and F ′ ⊆ F
of features having connection to lines. The ﬁrst for loop iterates
over all n line features in the dataset; li denotes the current
line. During the loop the if conditionals on lines 2 and 4 check,
whether there are no feature f from the set of all features F
and no line l from the set of lines L that are connected to a
beginning or to an ending of li. If it is the case for at least one
endpoint of the line li, it is added to a set of dangling lines L′
as shown on lines 3 and 6 of the algorithm. The second for
loop iterates over set F of features and checks whether there
exists line l that is connected to this feature. If yes, feature fi
is added to a set F ′ of connected features. Thus, the set F ′ of
features connected to lines and the set F\F ′ of unconnected
features are built. These two procedures are separated in the
pseudo code in Figure 6 for an easier understanding where do
sets L′ and F ′ come from. However, set F ′ can be built during
the ﬁrst for-loop.
Algorithm listed in Figure 7 performs data cleaning. It
consists of one for loop that iterates over a set L′ of dangling
lines and attempts to connect it to a feature. Firstly, we
introduce values Ω, ε that deﬁnes a size of an envelope
E(l′, Ω) around any dangling line l′ and an epsilon-bounded
tolerance gap e(f, ε) around any feature f. In a nested for
loop we iterate over features from E(l′, Ω) and building a
set F(l′) of features that are possibly connected to dangle l′
using epsilon-bounded tolerance gap method. The cardinality
of the set F(l′) determines the next actions. If F(l′) has only
one element, then a connection between this element and the
endpoint of l′ is restored (see if conditional on lines 7-9). In
case F(l′) is not empty and has more than one member, we
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

TABLE I. Networks size in one of the districts in Geneva canton in
Switzerland
Lines
Points and Polygons
Electricity
524
338
District heating
164
120
Water treatment
821
263
Buildings
-
407
Σ
1509
1128
apply techniques elaborated above. In particular, we use a for
loop on lines 13-21 to search for the nearest feature that is not
the member of the set F ′ and crossed by the extension line
with the same slope and offset as the line l′. If all candidate
features are not the members of the set F ′, we connect l′
to the feature that is the nearest in crossed by the extension
line. Finally, if F(l′) is empty, we increase tolerance value
ε and repeat the search for candidates, unless ε can not be
increased anymore (see if conditional on lines 22-26). Note,
that in Figure 7 we process lines with dangling endings, in
case of dangling beginning of a line procedures are similar.
V.
CASE STUDY: URBAN ENERGY NETWORKS
A. Data cleaning
We applied data cleaning techniques introduced above to
urban energy networks data. In this section, we describe this
data and demonstrate the result of application of geoprocessing
procedures.
The authors of this paper work in the European project
“CI-NERGY” 1, which aims to develop urban decision making
and operational optimization software tools to minimize non-
renewable energy use in cities. In particular, the authors’
expertise lies in the area of analysis of energy networks. Spatial
data plays a crucial role since it provides a topology of the
network, precise geographical positions of network equipment
and consumers as well as connections between them. We
perform routing, breadth-ﬁrst, depth-ﬁrst and other algorithms
on the spatial data. Therefore data of sufﬁcient quality is
especially crucial to gain as precise layout of the network as
possible and to produce meaningful results of analysis. One
of the case studies in the project is the canton of Geneva,
located in the south-western corner of Switzerland. Geneva
energy networks data was provided by SIG Geneva2.
We evaluated our methods on one of the districts in canton
Geneva, Table I provides a short overview of its network size.
The provided spatial data is stored in ESRI shapeﬁle format
and consists of a building layer and network layers, typically
three layers per network. Buildings are represented as polygon
and multipolygon features. Points, polygons and multipolygons
depict installations and other equipment in networks, and
lines and polylines depict conduits and pipes connecting those
installations and buildings. However, the data included some
positional inconsistencies caused by data losses and errors
during conversion from internally used format to commonly
used ESRI shapeﬁles. In particular, it concerned network con-
duits layers representing connection of the buildings and other
objects to networks, which resulted in dangling features, not
precisely connected to networks. Based on this information,
1The CINERGY, Smart cities with sustainable energy systems Marie Curie
Initial Training Network (ITN) project: http://ci-nergy.eu/About.html
2SIG: Swiss supplier of local energy services http://http://www.sig-ge.ch/
TABLE II. Comparison of number of buildings connected to the network
Electricity
DH
Water
Uncleaned data
137
4
37
Proposed technique
139
37
93
Clients in the database
140
37
101
we concluded that positional accuracy of buildings is not
disturbed and dangling features and imprecise connections are
caused by inconsistencies in network conduits spatial data
rather than in building layers. Moreover, different network
layers suffered from different displacement of features. Such,
electricity network was the least affected and in most cases
missing connections could be restored using tolerance gap
technique with ε value not increasing 5-10 meters, whereas
for the water network large ε values were needed in order to
ﬁnd features possibly connected to dangling lines. In dense
districts of the city it resulted in large search sets and a need
to choose which feature to connect.
We implemented data cleaning and graph construction
methods in Java. We aimed to create a module that would
be independent from existing GIS or CAD software and could
detect and process dangles in datasets with line-line, line-point
and line-polygon relationships. We used GeoTools Java library
[22] for manipulation with shapeﬁles and geometries.
Figure 8 illustrates the results of application of data clean-
ing procedures to the real-world data. Electricity lines are
shown as green lines, water pipes - black, district heating pipes
- red. We used QGIS software for visualization of shapeﬁles
[9].
B. Evaluation
Apart from the geospatial data we have also received
aggregated consumption data from our city partners in Geneva.
That allows us to evaluate our approach. We apply path search
algorithm on the networks before and after data cleaning and
compare, which buildings are connected to the network and
which are listed in the client database. Dangling lines result in
the absence of the path between buildings, that are connected
to the network. In Table II we compare results of search of
connected buildings before and after data cleaning. Electricity
grid data had a sufﬁcient quality, being almost completely
connected and containing only a couple of dangling lines.
On the contrary, district heating and water networks had poor
quality and in most cases lines representing pipes did not
connect to the polygons representing buildings. For electricity
and water, method returned a very good result without false
negatives and false positives, connecting correct clients to the
network in the spatial data. In case of the district heating our
procedure resulted in a complete connectedness of the network
and correction of each dangling line. For the water network
unfortunately it was not the case, as it contains multiple
occurrences of a situation shown in Figure 5a. Therefore, out
of 101 building that shall be connected to the water network
only 37 were correctly connected in the initial dataset and 93
were correctly connected using procedures described in this
paper.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we considered data quality in vector data, and,
in particular, data quality inconsistencies corrupting geospatial
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

a)
b)
Figure 8. Correcting dangling features: a) initial data containing not precisely connected features, b) Result of application of cleaning procedures
relations between features. These relations are especially im-
portant for application of spatial analysis algorithms. We con-
sidered one of the most frequent topological error in topologies
of types line-line, line-point and line-polygon and suggested a
method for their correction. This method allowed to restore lost
connections in urban utility network data. Accurate topology
is essential for a network analysis, that we work on using
a graph-based model representing the geospatial topology of
networks. However, as for each data cleaning algorithm, there
is a danger of overcorrecting data and thus ending up with even
worse data quality than before. In future, we are planning to
improve our method taking into account further topology rules,
domain knowledge and other characteristics of the dataset.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank colleagues from SIG Geneva who pro-
vided case study data that greatly assisted our research. More-
over, the ﬁrst author gratefully acknowledges the European
Commission for providing ﬁnancial support during conduct
of research under FP7-PEOPLE-2013 Marie Curie Initial
Training Network CI-NERGY project with Grant Agreement
Number 606851.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. C. Guptill and J. L. Morrison, Elements of spatial data quality.
Elsevier, 2013.
[2]
K.-t. Chang, Introduction to geographic information systems. McGraw-
Hill Higher Education Boston, 2006.
[3]
H. Hansen and L. Grondal, “Methods for cross-referencing, consistency
check and generalisation of spatial data,” SENSOR Project Deliverable
Report 5.1.2, 2006.
[4]
M. Siejka, M. ´Slusarski, and M. Zygmunt, “Correction of topological
errors in geospatial databases,” International Journal of Physical Sci-
ences, vol. 8, no. 12, 2013, pp. 498–507.
[5]
S. S. Maras¸, H. H. Maras¸, B. Aktu˘g, E. E. Maras¸, and F. Yildiz,
“Topological error correction of gis vector data,” International Journal
of the Physical Sciences, vol. 5, no. 5, 2010, pp. 476–583.
[6]
H. Gu, T. R. Chase, D. C. Cheney, D. Johnson et al., “Identifying,
correcting, and avoiding errors in computer-aided design models which
affect interoperability,” Journal of Computing and Information Science
in Engineering, vol. 1, no. 2, 2001, pp. 156–166.
[7]
A. A. Mezentsev and T. Woehler, “Methods and algorithms of auto-
mated cad repair for incremental surface meshing.” in IMR, 1999, pp.
299–309.
[8]
“GRASS: Geographic resources analysis support system,” https://grass.
osgeo.org/, accessed: 2016-02-20.
[9]
“QGIS: A free and open source geographic information system,” http:
//www.qgis.org, accessed: 2016-02-20.
[10]
“ArcGIS: Commercial GIS software application,” https://www.arcgis.
com, accessed: 2016-02-20.
[11]
ArcGIS,
“ArcGIS
geodatabase
topology
rules,”
http://help.arcgis.
com/en/arcgisdesktop/10.0/help/001t/pdf/topology rules poster.pdf, ac-
cessed: 2016-02-20.
[12]
M. Blakemore, “Part 4: Mathematical, algorithmic and data structure is-
sues: Generalisation and error in spatial data bases,” Cartographica: The
International Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization,
vol. 21, no. 2-3, 1984, pp. 131–139.
[13]
G. Klajnˇsek and B. ˇZalik, “Merging polygons with uncertain bound-
aries,” Computers & geosciences, vol. 31, no. 3, 2005, pp. 353–359.
[14]
M. Schneider, “Fuzzy spatial data types for spatial uncertainty man-
agement in databases.” Handbook of research on fuzzy information
processing in databases, vol. 2, 2008, pp. 490–515.
[15]
W. Shi and K. Liu, “A fuzzy topology for computing the interior, bound-
ary, and exterior of spatial objects quantitatively in gis,” Computers &
Geosciences, vol. 33, no. 7, 2007, pp. 898–915.
[16]
X. Tong, T. Sun, J. Fan, M. F. Goodchild, and W. Shi, “A statistical
simulation model for positional error of line features in geographic
information systems (gis),” International Journal of Applied Earth
Observation and Geoinformation, vol. 21, 2013, pp. 136–148.
[17]
M. Neteler and H. Mitasova, Open source GIS: a GRASS GIS approach.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2013, vol. 689.
[18]
A. S. Analyst, “Advanced gis spatial analysis using raster and vector
data,” An ESRI White Paper, ESRI (Environmental Systems Research
Institute), Redlands, USA, 2001.
[19]
“OSRM: routing engine for shortest paths in road networks,” http://
project-osrm.org/, accessed: 2016-02-20.
[20]
“pgRouting: an extension for PostGIS and PostgreSQL providing
geospatial routing functionality,” http://pgrouting.org/, accessed: 2016-
02-20.
[21]
“Flowmap: a software package for analyzing and displaying spatial ﬂow
data,” http://ﬂowmap.geo.uu.nl/, accessed: 2016-02-20.
[22]
“GeoTools: The open source Java GIS toolkit,” http://geotools.org/,
accessed: 2016-02-20.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

