Web Processing Services to Describe Provenance and Geospatial Modelling  
 
Guillem Closa, Joan Masó, Núria Julià, Lluís Pesquer 
Grumets Research Group, CREAF  
g.closa@creaf.uab.cat, joan.maso@uab.cat, 
n.julia@creaf.uab.cat, l.pesquer@creaf.uab.cat 
Edifici C, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
Bellaterra, Catalonia, Spain  
Alaitz Zabala 
Grumets Research Group, Dep de Geografia 
alaitz.zabala@uab.cat 
Edifici B, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
Bellaterra, Catalonia, Spain 
 
Abstract— There are still some gaps regarding the complete 
geospatial provenance description. These gaps prevent the use 
of provenance information for replication and reproducibility 
task. In addition, the lack of automated tools for capturing the 
provenance is an obstacle to a widely generation of provenance 
information. In this sense, we present a tool that captures and 
represents provenance information based on the combined use 
of Web Processing Service (WPS) standard and the ISO 19115 
lineage model. The tool, developed in the frame of the 
MiraMon GIS & RS software, shows a graphical visualization 
of provenance and allow users to edit provenance information 
by adding or deleting process steps or sources to a geospatial 
workflow. The automatic capture of lineage information is a 
step forward in the development of a model constructor tool. It 
will allow reproducing previous process workflows and 
applying them to other similar situations. 
Keywords- Provenance; WPS; Modelling 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Buneman [1] defines provenance information as the 
description of data origins and the processes by which a 
dataset is created. This includes also the description of the 
algorithms used, the processing steps, the inputs and 
outputs, the computing environment where the process runs, 
the organization/person responsible for the product, etc 
[2][3]. In the context of scientific models, data provenance 
records 
the 
workflow 
processing 
steps 
and 
their 
inputs/outputs that contribute to the production of the final 
data products [4]. 
The scientific community is interested in provenance 
information because it provides important information to 
determine the fit for purpose and the reliability of a product. 
In the geospatial domain data provenance plays a significant 
role in data quality and usability assessment [5], among 
others qualities. Moreover, if data provenance information is 
complete and points to real data and metadata, it can be used 
as a source for a workflow replication (with other inputs) or 
for data replication (reproducibility purposes) [2]. 
As a result of web-technology improvements that have 
reduced the data volume, computing steps, and resources 
required by the end-user, geospatial data and geoprocessing 
tools are available as services [6]. More recently, Model as 
a Service (MaaS) approach has been defined [7][8]. In this 
paradigm, where the origin of data has a high level of 
heterogeneity, several authors [9][10] see that provenance 
information is even more important for inspecting and 
verifying quality, usability and reliability of data. 
Although that the importance of provenance in the 
geospatial 
community 
is 
documented, 
its 
complete 
description in geospatial metadata is still scarce [11]. 
Usually, most of the geodata come with some provenance 
information but in many cases only as a simple textual 
description, thus having a negative impact on its automated 
usage [12]. According to Di et al. [5], there are two main 
obstacles that generate this situation: the lack of standards 
that fully describe provenance information models ensuring 
reproducibility, and the lack of automated tools for 
capturing the provenance information. 
To exchange and share geospatial data provenance in a 
distributed information environment, an interoperable model 
for provenance is needed [13]. The geospatial community 
has traditionally used the ISO 19115 [14] and 19115-2 
standards to encode metadata and provenance [15]. 
However, there are still some gaps in the ISO models, such 
as the concrete model initialization, its basic assumptions 
and parameters values. These deficiencies prevent the 
complete description of provenance and blocks it use in 
workflow replication and data reproduction tasks.  
Besides representation, provenance applications also 
need to ensure provenance capture, management and 
retrieval [16]. In addition, automatic tools that capture and 
store provenance as a part of metadata information are 
needed. Most of the work has focused on analysing and 
capturing provenance information that was created during 
execution, rather than on metadata generated before 
execution [17]. However, tools that document provenance 
before and after the execution are needed too. 
In this regard, we have implemented a provenance 
engine tool that automatically captures and represents 
provenance information based on the combined use of Web 
Processing Service (WPS) standard and ISO 19115 lineage 
model. The tool, developed in the framework of the 
MiraMon Geographic Information System (GIS) and 
Remote 
Sensing 
(RS) 
[18], 
presents 
a 
graphical 
visualization of provenance and allow users to edit 
provenance information of a geospatial workflow before and 
after the execution. This automatic acquisition of geospatial 
provenance represents a step forward in the development of 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

a model constructor tool in the context of MiraMon 
software. 
This paper is structured as follows. Section II introduces 
related work, then sections II and III present the use of WPS 
to capture provenance and the developed tool. Following 
section IV introduces the efforts done in generating 
geospatial 
models 
from 
the 
captured 
provenance 
information. Finally, the conclusions are presented in the 
last section. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
When selecting a standard for describing provenance in 
the geospatial domain, some requirements should be taken 
into account [3]. For Di et al. [5] ISO 19115 and ISO 
19115-2 templates are enough to record the complete 
geospatial lineage. Alternatively, He et al. [14] combines 
ISO 19115 with W3C PROV [19] to better describe 
provenance. Others, such as Lopez-Pellicer et al. [20] 
propose to adapt and extend the W3C PROV model to 
geospatial community requirements.  
Beyond the models used to capture and store 
provenance, an effective visualization of provenance is also 
necessary to understand and evaluate data [21]. There are 
different types of visualization proposals [22], namely: 
• Provenance as node-links: data is represented as points 
and processes as lines. [23][24]. 
• Provenance as a radial plots: Brings a visual focus to 
the relationships rather than the relative spatial 
locations [25]. 
• Tree diagrams: This technique displays a tree-form 
diagram starting from the data that is being analysed. 
Most provenance data have hierarchical properties or 
attributes [26][27]. Thus we found this type a suitable 
one to describe provenance. 
When generating a geospatial model from concrete 
executions, a generalization process have to be carried out 
to standardise and reference the common processing 
functions. Yue et al. [28] use three levels of encapsulation to 
reduce the difficulty of sharing and use geo-analysis models 
in the web. Otherwise, Müller [29] proposes a hierarchical 
approach to process definitions with different abstraction 
levels. WPS process profiles [30] are also useful to 
determine which information from the concrete execution 
needs to be added to the model to ensure it reusability. An 
Application Profile is essentially the same as the 
ProcessDescription document obtained in response to a 
DescribeProcess request [31] (Fig. 1). This approach is in 
line with our approach of using the WPS standard to capture 
provenance, consequently we will use DescribeProcess 
documents to generalise models. 
III. 
WPS TO CAPTURE GEOSPATIAL PROVENANCE 
A. DescribeProcess documents to capture Provenance 
The Web Processing Service (WPS) Interface provides 
rules for standardizing inputs and outputs (requests and 
responses) for geospatial processing services [32]. WPS 
instances are exposed via HTTP-GET, HTTP-POST and 
SOAP 
[33] 
Internet 
protocols. 
The 
potential 
of 
geoprocessing applications supported by the WPS allows to 
apply it in a wide range of fields [34]. Its main properties 
are: remotely execution, chain of several processes and 
standardized encodings for data and metadata. WPS is 
applied in many different fields and sectors that need 
geoprocessing applications; in particular it is successfully 
implemented for environmental models [35][36] and in 
combination to other standards: WPS+OpenMI [37], 
WPS+WCS [38], WPS+WFS [39]. WPS has three main 
operations: getCapabilities, describeProcess and Execute.  
The describeProcess is the operation that allow a client 
to request and receive back detailed information about the 
processes that can be run on the service instance, including 
the inputs required, the allowable formats, and the outputs 
that can be produced [32]. The describeProcess response 
documents use the eXtensible Markup Language (XML). 
The information described in the WPS describeProcess 
documents(Fig 1) is the following:  
• Process Description: A description of the process and 
an Identifier. 
• Inputs: 
The 
input 
description, 
the 
dataType 
(ComplexData, BoundingBox, LiteralData), the MIME 
type, an identifier and the name. 
• Outputs: The output description, the dataType 
(ComplexData, BoundingBox, LiteralData), the MIME 
type, an identifier and the name. 
Considering that provenance 
information 
is 
the 
description of processes and sources, describeProcess 
documents could also be used to document provenance 
information. In addition, describeProcess operation can be 
requested in a local environment. This provides a 
magnificent 
opportunity 
to 
capture 
provenance 
automatically in a GIS local instance. In our case, we have 
used the describeProcess documents to describe all the 
MiraMon Applications (App), and capture its provenance 
information when executed. This permits the system to 
reference sources as a complex data, bounding box or 
capture the values of the LiteralData type. 
 
 
Figure 1.  WPS DescribeProcess response UML diagram. The 
DescribeProcess schema is composed by a processDescription tag that 
includes a list of DataInputs and ProcessOutputs. 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

WPS is enough well known for the geospatial 
community, and this allows to jump the interoperability wall. 
More detail about the use WPS describeProcess documents 
in the context of MiraMon GIS & RS software are provided 
in Section III. 
B. Combining WPS and ISO to  describe provenance  
As mentioned, we have detected some limitations in the 
ISO 19115 models that prevents the reproducibility of 
geospatial data using provenance information. In order to 
overcome this issue we propose the combination of the ISO 
provenance schemas (LI_Lineage and LE_ProcesStep) with 
WPS describeProcess documents (Fig. 2) presented in the 
previous section. Combining these two models allows to 
describe provenance as an ordered list of processes with 
ISO, including a WPS description of sources and outputs of 
each process step. 
The ISO 19115 and 19115-2 can be described using the 
eXtensible Markup Language (XML). In fact, the ISO 
19115-3 provides the XML implementation schema for ISO 
19115 and 19115-2 and may be used to describe, validate, 
and exchange geospatial metadata. The lineage models of 
ISO (LI_Lineage and LE_ProcessStep) allow to describe the 
provenance information in three different ways: 
• A list of process steps and a list of sources separately. 
• A list of all the sources used and then add the 
description of all the processes as a child. 
• A list of all the process steps that use some sources. 
Describing provenance with a list of processes that use 
some sources provides the better way to report a complete 
record of provenance [12], because it follows the workflow 
execution. Thus, we use ISO in this way because permits the 
full description of provenance of a workflow as an ordered 
succession of different process steps. ISO model describes 
for each intermediate step the sources used and the outputs 
generated. 
 
 
Figure 2.  ISO 19115 provenance model combined with WPS model. 
 
However, when describing sources, there is no place to 
indicate the data type or the value used (for literal data). In 
this context, to improve the description of the sources and 
the outputs of each step we introduce the use the WPS 
DescribeProcess to capture, among others characteristics, 
the data type and the literal data values. The sources and 
outputs used in each process step of the WPS are connected 
via identifiers to the ISO schemas. 
The combination of ISO provenance schemas with WPS 
permits the automatic description of the algorithms used, the 
processing steps, the execution dates, the data type, the units 
(when necessary) and data values or data location. 
The detected gap (no place to define the data type or the 
value used for literal data) has been introduced as a request 
for the revision of ISO 19115-2 and we are working with the 
editors to extend the standard to include this information. 
IV. 
PROVENANCE ENGINE TOOL 
A. Provenance capturation in the context of GEMM 
MiraMon is a Geographic Information System (GIS) and 
Remote Sensing (RS) software [18]. The main characteristic 
of MiraMon software is that metadata are carefully managed 
and completely integrated with the dataset, which allows, at 
every processing step, to program automatic decisions based 
on quality information from the previous steps in the 
process chain [40]. MiraMon incorporates a Metadata 
Manager (GeMM) to ensure maximum documentation of 
layers. GeMM allows generating, editing and saving 
metadata, including the description of the data model and 
the relations with databases for several hierarchical levels 
(dataset to several dataset series). The metadata information 
is stored in REL format documents, which are the native 
format of MiraMon to document and store metadata 
information. These files store metadata about identification, 
extent, related databases, responsible party, technical 
specification and quality information [41][42]. In addition, 
as a part of quality information, there is also place for 
documenting provenance information. REL documents 
conform to INSPIRE ISO 19115 and FGDC standards and. 
moreover, metadata can be exported to HTML or XML 
(ISO 19139) files. Unlike others purely documentary 
applications, GeMM maintains the dependencies and 
consistency by checking coherence between metadata and 
datasets.  
MiraMon software has more than 90 applications. In 
order to capture provenance information automatically, the 
main task has been the generation, for each App, of a 
DescribeProcess response template that describes the 
process and its allowed input and output data types. In 
addition, we use the optional tag ows:metatada to define  the 
exact syntax and order of the parameters.  
The provenance engine, using the WPS DescribeProcess 
templates, captures provenance of each process carried out 
and stores it in the metadata files as a part of the quality 
information of the dataset. 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The provenance engine is a piece of code that is shared 
by the visual interface of the GeMM and the MiraMon Apps. 
It is encoded as a library of C functions that can be linked to 
each module. Each App uses these functions to read 
metadata of the source datasets, load it, integrate it, and add 
the current App process step in the provenance information 
of the resulting dataset. 
The provenance engine writing function can select 
between two alternatives: a) include all lineage details: 
complete sequence and description of process steps and 
previous data sources; or b) write only the last process step 
and link to the metadata sources. To save space, the generic 
purpose of each process step and its parameters is not stored. 
Instead, only identifiers are recorded. The reading function 
supports the two alternatives described before, being able to 
read the provenance information by following the links to 
previous sources recursively if needed. The graphical 
interface of GeMM requires a more elaborated set of 
functions to enrich the presentation of provenance 
information extracted from a DescribeProcess response 
template.  
This allows the GeMM to capture, concurrently to an 
App 
execution, 
provenance 
information 
using 
the 
DescribeProcess response templates of each App (Fig. 3). 
The system captures the exact parameters and values 
involved in an execution (that can be numbers, text strings, 
or bounding box data) and references to datasets or to data 
services. The system updates metadata information at every 
intermediate step maintaining the dependencies between the 
datasets and metadata files during all the workflow 
execution. The tool keeps track of the dependencies to 
source datasets and can browse to their metadata too. 
B. Provenance editing and visualization 
In complex environments, scientists rely on visualization 
tools to help them understand large amounts of data that are 
generated from experiments [24]. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Provenance Engine uses WPS DescribeProcess documents to 
extract provenance information and then the GeMM interface allows users 
to edit and modify provenance. 
According to Steele et al. [43], there are two categories 
of data visualization Exploratory, designed to support 
researcher who has not certain what is in it; and 
Explanatory, when a researcher is trying to explain the data 
to someone else. This differentiation remits also to the 
contraposition of the “data user needs” in front of “data 
producer needs”, where the user needs more exploratory 
visualization ways, while producers more explanatory. The 
graphical interface of our provenance engine fits for both, 
exploratory and explanatory data visualization approaches. 
The provenance engine presented in this paper helps data 
users to navigate and interpret provenance. The tool 
represents provenance information as a succession of 
processes. Each process has an indented list of all 
parameters used and outputs generated. At the same time, 
some parameters of the workflow are derived by previous 
processes (child process), which have, in a deeper level, its 
own indented list of parameters used, and so on. Thereby, 
the structure of the provenance schema is progressively 
increasing its profundity reminding a hierarchical indented 
form (Fig. 4). From our point of view, this tree-like 
provenance structure is a suitable way to visualise the 
provenance information because can easily represent the 
flow of a specific chain of processes.  
The graphical interface of GeMM allows also editing 
provenance information by adding or deleting child 
processes or child sources to a geospatial workflow. 
Moreover, the algorithm description, the processing steps 
carried out, the execution dates, the responsibility of the 
product and the processes order can be edited and adapted to 
each scenario if necessary. This allows data producers to 
complete the provenance description automatically captured 
during the process or workflow execution. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Tree-like provenance workflow representation in GeMM.  
The example shows processes and sources used in the layer 
(Curve_Number.img) generation.  
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

V. 
GEOSPATIAL MODELLING 
The automatic acquisition of geospatial provenance 
provides the complete recipe of the geospatial data 
generated. This supposes an opportunity to develop a model 
constructor tool in the MiraMon architecture. A model 
constructor allows the reproduction of previous chains of 
processes in different scenarios and applying them to similar 
situations using the provenance captured from previous 
executions. 
Models, as a general representation of a system, are used 
to understand and simulate a geospatial phenomenon. Thus, 
a model have to provide enough information to enable the 
model users to apply it in different scenarios. As pointed in 
section II there are different approaches in order to 
generalize specific workflows. In our case, to document 
models we use the same WPS DescribeProcess templates 
generated to capture provenance. The WPS templates 
provide the necessary information of each App (process 
description, process syntax, algorithm location and 
parameters data type) to allow users to understand each 
individual process that conforms the model. 
The provenance tool (presented in Section III) provides 
the specific order of the process chain and allows browsing 
the data inputs of each intermediate step, if necessary. 
Finally, all captured information can be automatically 
exported as a batch file. The generated batch files points to 
processes and sources used to run workflows. Thus, this 
allows users to easily reproduce a workflow, or replicate it 
with different conditions (scope, data, parameters, algorithm 
options, etc). In addition, the collection of MS-DOS 
command lines permits automatize executions and ease the 
use of loops to process large volumes of data. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Geospatial 
provenance 
facilitates 
geospatial 
data 
evaluation for reuse, and brings us closer to the replication 
of process chains and geospatial modelling. We have 
detected that there still some gaps regarding to the complete 
geospatial provenance description, affecting the provenance 
usefulness. Some gaps detected in the ISO 19115 lineage 
model has been introduced as a request for the revision of 
ISO 19115-2. 
In this paper, we have shown that the combination of 
WPS DescribeProcess documents with ISO model provides 
a more complete provenance description. As a proof of 
concept, we have presented a provenance engine in the 
framework of MiraMon GIS and Remote Sensing software. 
The tool allows automatically capturing provenance 
information and its manually edition if needed. In addition, 
the automatic description of provenance information is a 
step forward in the development of a model constructor tool 
in the context of MiraMon software. 
The near future efforts should point to enhance the 
process chaining and model generation in a distributed 
environment using provenance information. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been conducted within the framework of 
the Geography PhD program of the Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, and was supported by the European Commission 
[grant agreements H2020-641538: ConnectinGEO, H2020-
641762: ECOPotential and H2020-689744: Ground Truth 
2.0], Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness 
[ACAPI 
(CGL2015-69888-P 
MINECO/FEDER)] 
and 
Catalan Government [SGR2014-1491]). 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Buneman, S. Khanna,W and Chiew Tan. Why and Where: 
A Characterization of Data Provenance. In  Database 
Theory—ICDT. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.  pp. 316-330, 
2001. 
[2] L. Di, P. Yue, H. Ramapriyan and R. King. Geoscience Data 
Provenance: An Overview. Geoscience and  Remote Sensing, 
IEEE Transactions on, 51(11). pp. 5065-5072, 2013. 
[3] D. Garijo, Y. Gil and A. Harth. Challenges in Modelling 
Geosaptial Provenance. Proceedings of the Fifth 24 
International Provenance and Annotation Workshop (IPAW), 
Cologne, Germany, June 9-13, 2014. 
[4] A. Chebotko, S. Chang, S. Lu, F. Fotouhi, and Yang, P. 
Scientific workflow provenance querying with security views. 
In Proceedings of the 2008 The Ninth International 
Conference 
on 
Web-Age 
Information 
Management 
(Washington, DC, USA), WAIM ’08, IEEE Computer 
Society, pp. 349–356, 2008. 
[5] L. Di,Y. Shao and L. Kang.Implementation of geospatial data 
provenance in a web service workflow environment with ISO 
19115 and ISO 19115-2 lineage model. Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing, IEEE Transactions on, 51(11). pp 5082-
5089, 2013. 
[6] L. Di and McDonald, K. Next generation data and 
information systems for earth sciences research, in: 10 
Proceedings of the First International Symposium on Digital 
Earth, vol. I. , Science Press, Beijing, 11 China, pp. 92–101, 
1999. 
[7] G. Geller and  W. Turner. The model web: a concept for 
ecological forecasting. In IEEE International Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing Symposium. Pp.  2469-2472, 2007. 
[8] S. Nativi, P. Mazzetti, and G. Geller. Environmental model 
access 
and 
interoperability: 
The 
GEO 
Model 
Web 
initiative. Environmental Modelling & Software, 39. pp. 214-
228, 2013. 
[9] S. Bechhofer, D. De Roure, M. Gamble, C. Goble and I. 
Buchan. Research objects: Towards exchange and reuse of 
digital knowledge.  In, The Future of the Web for 
Collaborative Science, Raleigh, NC, USA. 2010. 
[10] Z. Xu, Y. Wang,Y. Li., F. Ma, F. Zhang and  C. Ye. Sediment 
transport patterns in the eastern Beibu Gulf based on grain-
size multivariate statistics and provenance analysis. Acta 
Oceanologica Sinica, 32(3). pp. 67-78, 2010. 
[11] P. Díaz, et al. Analysis of Quality 19 Metadata in the GEOSS 
Clearinghouse. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Spatial 
Data 
Infrastructures Research, 20 7. pp. 352-377, 2012. 
[12] P. Yue, J. Gong and L. Di. Augmenting geospatial data 
provenance through metadata tracking in 28 geospatial 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

service chaining. Computers & Geosciences, 36(3). pp.  270-
281, 2010.  
[13] L. He, P. Yue, L. Di, M. Zhang and L. Hu. Adding Geospatial 
Data Provenance into SDI—A Service-Oriented Approach. 
Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote 
Sensing, IEEE Journal of, 8(2).pp. 926-936, 2015.  
[14] ISO 
19115-1:2014 
(2014). 
“Geographic 
Information- 
Metadata- Part 1: Fundamentals”. 
[15] J. Masó, G. Closa, Y. Gil and B. Prob. OGC® Testbed 10 
Provenance Engineering Report OGC Public Engineering 
Report (pp. 1-87): Open Geospatial Consortium. 2013.  
[16] S. Miles, et al. The requirements of using provenance in e-
science experiments. Journal of Grid Computing, 5 (1).pp. 1–
25, 2007.  
[17] J. Kim, Y. Gil and V. Ratnakar. Semantic metadata generation 
for large scientific workflows, Proceedings of the 5th 
International Semantic Web Conference, Athens, Georgia, 
USA, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) 4273. 
Springer, Berlin, Germany, pp. 357–370, 2006. 
[18] X. Pons. (2004). MiraMon. Geographical information system 
and remote sensing software. Centre de Recerca Ecològica i 
Aplicacions Forestals (CREAF).  
[19] P. Groth, and L. Moreau. PROV-Overview: An Overview of 
the PROV Family of Documents. Working group note, W3C. 
2013. 
[20] F. Lopez-Pellicer and J. Barrera. D16.1 Call 2: Linked Map 
VGI Provenance Schema. In Linked Map subproject of Planet 
Data. Seventh Framewok Programe, 2014. 
[21] M. Kunde, H. Bergmeyer and A. Schreiber. Provenance and 
annotation of data and processes. In J. Freire, D. Koop, and L. 
Moreau, editors, IPAW ’08, chapter Requirements for a 
Provenance Visualization Component. p.p. 241–252, 2008 
[22] M.Borkin et al. Evaluation of filesystem provenance 
visualization tools. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and 
Computer Graphics, 19(12). pp. 2476-2485, 2013. 
[23] N. Del Rio and P. Da Silva. Probe-it! visualization support for 
provenance. 
In International 
Symposium 
on 
Visual 
Computing. Springer Berlin Heidelberg .pp. 732-741,2007. 
[24] G. Salton, J. Allan, C. Buckley, and A. Singhai. Automatic 
analysis, theme generation, and summarization of machine-
readable texts. Science, 264. pp. 1421–1426, 1994. 
[25] C. Scheidegger, et al. Tackling the provenance challenge one 
layer at a time. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and 
Experience, 20(5). Pp. 473-483, 2008. 
[26] G.Closa and J. Masó. A provenance visualization tool for 
global earth observation system of systems. In EGU General 
Assembly Conference Abstracts (Vol. 15, p. 8266). April, 
2013. 
[27] L. Gou and X. Zhang. Treenetviz: Revealing patterns of 
networks over tree structures. IEEE TVCG, 17(12), December 
2011. 
[28] S. Yue, M. Chen, Y. Wen and G. Lu. Service-oriented model-
encapsulation 
strategy 
for 
sharing 
and 
integrating 
heterogeneous geo-analysis models in an open web 
environment. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote 
Sensing, 114. pp. 258-273, 2016. 
[29] M. Müller. Hierarchical process profiles for interoperable 
geoprocessing functions. In Proceedings of the 16th AGILE 
Conference on Geographic Information Science, Leuven, 
Belgium. 2013. 
[30] OGC® WPS 2.0 Interface Standard. OGC 10-59r2, 2010 14-
065 
[31] WPS 
concepts 
(November, 
2016) 
Retrieved 
from:http://geoprocessing.info/wpsdoc/Concepts 
[32] OGC® WPS 2.0 Interface Standard. OGC 10-59r2, 2010 14-
065 
[33] D. Box et al. Winer, Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) 
1.1, 
W3C 
Note. 
Retrived: 
November, 
2016. 
http://www.w3.org/TR/SOAP 
[34] C. Michaelis and D. Ames. Evaluation and implementation of 
the OGC web processing service for use in client-side 
GIS. Geoinformatica, 13(1). pp. 109-120, 2009.  
[35] A. Castronova, J. Goodall and M. Elag. Models as web 
services using the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) Web 
Processing Service (WPS) standard Environmental Modelling 
and Software Volume 41, pp. 72-83, 2013. 
[36] L. Granell, S. Díaz, N. Schade,J. Ostländer and  J. Huerta. 
Enhancing Integrated Environmental Modelling by Designing 
Resource-Oriented Interfaces. Environmental Modelling & 
Software, 39.pp. 229-246,  2013. 
[37] J. Goodall, B. Robinson and A. Castronova. Modeling water 
resource systems using a service-oriented computing 
paradigm. Environmental Modelling & Software, 26(5). pp. 
573-582, 2011. 
 
[38] G. Yu, P. Zhao, L. Di, A. Chen, M. Deng and Y. Bai. 
BPELPower-A BPEL execution engine for geospatial web 
services Computers and Geosciences Volume 47. pp. 87-101, 
2012. 
[39] X. Meng, Y. Xie and F. Bian. Distributed geospatial analysis 
through web processing service: A case study of earthquake 
disaster assessment Journal of Software Volume 5, Issue 6, 
pp. 671-67, 2010. 
[40] L. Pesquer, J. Masó, G. Moré, X. Pons, J. Peces and E.  
Doménech. Servicio interoperable (WPS) de procesado de 
imágenes Landsat. Teledetección, 37. pp. 51-56, 2012. 
[41] A. Zabala, J.  Masó, L. Bastin and L. Bigali. Increasing 
dataset quality metadata presence: Quality focused metadata 
editor and catalogue queriables. . Inspire Conference. 
Florence, Italy, June 23-27, 2013.  
[42] A. Zabala, J. Masó and  X. Pons. Quality and user feedback 
metadata: theoretical aspects and a practical implementation 
in the MiraMon metadata editor. Inspire Conference. 
Barcelona, Spain, Setember 26-30, 2016.  
[43] J. Steele and N. Iliinsky. Beautiful visualization: looking at 
data through the eyes of experts. "O'Reilly Media, Inc.", 2010. 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

