ClusterWIS 
A Decentralized Forest Information and Management System for the Cluster Forestry and Wood 
 
Jürgen Roßmann, Michael Schluse, Martin Hoppen 
Institute for Man-Machine Interaction 
RWTH Aachen University 
Aachen, Germany 
email: {rossmann,schluse,hoppen}@mmi.rwth-aachen.de 
Gregor Nägele, Tobias Marquardt 
Department Robot Technology 
RIF Institute for Research and Transfer e.V. 
Dortmund, Germany 
email: {gregor.naegele,tobias.marquardt}@rt.rif-ev.de 
Christoph Averdung 
CPA ReDev GmbH 
Siegburg, Germany 
email: averdung@supportgis.de 
Werner Poschenrieder, Fabian Schwaiger 
Chair of Forest Growth and Yield Science 
Technical University of Munich 
Freising, Germany 
email: 
{werner.poschenrieder,fabian.schwaiger}@lrz.tum.de 
 
Abstract—The cluster forestry and wood’s major challenges 
are its structural complexity and heterogeneity, its many 
stakeholders, and its decentralized processes. The aim of the 
ClusterWIS approach is to overcome these challenges. Its core 
idea is the development of a novel forest information system 
based on a decentralized infrastructure integrating new 
planning and consulting methods and interconnecting existing 
decentralized work processes. It provides end-to-end encrypted 
communication to run the various processes and to supply 
them with data while using international standards throughout 
the system and keeping participation requirements low.  
Keywords-forest information system; sustainable feedstock 
management; wood and biomass mobilization; decentralized data 
management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The cluster forestry and wood is the economic sector 
comprising all stakeholders from forest owners to forestal 
service providers and the woodworking industry. Its major 
challenges are its structural complexity and heterogeneity, a 
huge number of stakeholders with often contrary objectives, 
and decentralized processes. In the federal state of North 
Rhine-Westphalia (Germany) alone, 150,000 private forest 
owners own two-thirds of the forest (90% of which own less 
than 5 ha), and many small service providers (for planning, 
tending, logging, etc.) exist [1]. Furthermore, the “production 
plant” forest provides not only wood as its main product 
(used for building, paper or as a fuel) but also serves as a 
long-term CO2 reservoir or as a recreation area. Altogether, 
this renders process optimization far more complex than in 
classical manufacturing industry.  
Thus, for a sustainable feedstock management and an 
efficient wood and biomass mobilization throughout the 
cluster, the increasing demand for wood from sustainably 
cultivated forests need to be aligned with the requirements of 
climate change and resilience, environmental protection and 
society in general. This is the aim of the research project 
ClusterWIS (WIS for German “Waldinformationssystem” – 
Forest Information System). For that purpose, new planning 
and consulting methods need to be introduced and existing 
decentralized work processes need to be refined and 
interconnected.  
Often, centralized approaches are used to resolve this 
structural weakness of the cluster. However, this contradicts 
its highly decentralized organization. Furthermore, many 
conservative forest owners do not accept an obligatory 
centralized data management for reasons of data privacy 
(especially in Germany). For this reason, the foundation of 
the ClusterWIS approach is a novel, decentralized 
infrastructure based on standards for data modeling and data 
exchange. It provides end-to-end encrypted communication 
to run the various processes and to supply them with highly 
topical inventory and process data. To provide for the 
cluster’s 
heterogeneity, 
it 
keeps 
the 
participation 
requirements for third party systems low. Furthermore, 
international standards are used throughout the system like 
Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) Web service standards, 
Geography Markup Language (GML) for data exchange in 
general, ForestGML [2] for nD temporal inventory data, 
ELDAT [3] for timber logistics data, StanForD [4] for forest 
machine data, or papiNet [5] for communication with the 
paper industry. However, the approach is open to other 
formats and standards. 
A ClusterWIS network (Figure 1) comprises applications 
and services as its nodes, connected by means of the secure 
communication infrastructure. In the context of the research 
project, stakeholders will use specialized desktop and mobile 
applications (e.g., for forest information, forest inventory, 
production planning, etc.) or Web applications (e.g., for 
forest owners, service providers, etc.) to access this network. 
Specialized services, e.g., for processing remote sensing data 
or forest growth simulations, perform computationally 
expensive and data intensive tasks for a broad user group 
even on thin clients like mobile devices. Finally, services for 
administrative tasks like communication, cloud storage or 
registration build the network’s backbone. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Communication 
Service
Node & User 
Registry
Web 
Application
Cloud 
Service
Forest Inventory
Desktop App.
Forest Owner
Consultant
Browser
Communication 
Object
Notification
 
Figure 1. A ClusterWIS network consists of service and application nodes. 
For the first time, this decentralized network allows for 
process optimization across the cluster. In the research 
project, eight interdependent reference processes (like forest 
information, 
planning, 
consulting, 
timber 
trade 
and 
production) are analyzed in detail. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II 
presents work related to our own and motivates the 
development of the ClusterWIS approach. Sections III and 
IV give more details on the ClusterWIS infrastructure and its 
communication approach. Sections V and VI introduce the 
ClusterWIS applications (desktop, mobile, Web) and 
specialized services while Section VII gives an overview of 
the reference processes analyzed in the research project. 
Finally, Section VIII concludes this paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
ClusterWIS is built on its project partners’ preliminary 
work. Important results come from the research project series 
Virtual Forest in general, its commercial spin-offs, the 
underlying SupportGIS technology, and the forest growth 
simulator SILVA [26]. ClusterWIS aims at making these 
results available to the whole cluster. Besides summarizing 
this work, this section introduces similar approaches 
developed by others. 
A. The Virtual Forest 
The ClusterWIS approach is built on the methods of the 
“nD Forest Management System Virtual Forest” [6], 
developed in the research project series “Virtual Forest”. It 
provides the necessary technological framework as well as 
the basis for data modeling, management and distribution. 
The idea of the Virtual Forest is a central database that 
manages all forestal data. It provides various applications for 
remote sensing data processing (tree species classification 
[7], stand attributes evaluation [8], or single tree delineation 
and attribution [9]), forest inventory, planning in biological 
and technical production, forest machine simulation for 
training, and support of the logging process.  
The technological basis of the central database is the 
SupportGIS technology [10]. It is widely used for GIS 
related applications, is based on the standards of OGC and 
ISO, and powered by object-relational databases. It 
efficiently manages large amounts of data and supports 
exchange by standard OGC Web services. Furthermore, data 
can be managed in n spatiotemporal dimensions [2], 
allowing to track and analyze forestal data over time. 
The Virtual Forest uses ForestGML [2], a GML-based 
modeling language, to model forestal data on a consistent, 
OGC compliant basis. This facilitates its widespread usage 
and allows for the usage of OGC Web services. 
Central parts of the system are currently implemented in 
two German state enterprises. While the Virtual Forest 
focuses on the usage in such large, homogenous enterprises, 
ClusterWIS aims at making these results available to the 
whole cluster by decentralizing the approach. 
B. Forest Growth Simulator SILVA 
Silviculture today has to consider a wide range of 
ecosystem services (ES) that earlier were considered a by-
product of traditional forestry. Moreover, on the background 
of climate change, forest management has to maintain 
climatic resilience and stability through provision of an 
adequate 
forest 
structure. 
Thus, 
forest 
consulting 
increasingly applies forest simulation models to estimate the 
effect of various silvicultural pathways on productivity, 
quality and further ES [11] [12]. Such ES are carbon 
sequestration, biodiversity, recreation, and groundwater 
recharge. As yet, they typically stand within the focus of 
state forestry. However, private forest stakeholders today 
also advocate to foster the adaptation of such services by 
private forestry based on financial incentives [13]. The forest 
ecosystem model [10] is a preferential tool to take into 
account ES synergies and tradeoffs and to optimize among 
various silvicultural objectives. It enables to compare 
scenarios that adhere to a sensible preselection of 
silvicultural pathways and to direct forest management 
towards the most effective subset of them. Such simulation 
models, as yet, are primarily available for state forestry, as 
state institutions maintain the necessary IT infrastructure.  
The forest growth simulator SILVA provides such a 
simulation model and is already integrated into the 
aforementioned Virtual Forest system. SILVA implements 
the paradigm of a service oriented architecture (SOA). Its 
kernel is an independent application that does not expose any 
specific tasks but rather a wide collection of services that 
may be coupled and assembled to provide specific 
simulations or evaluations. Moreover, it provides its services 
through various types of interfaces, e.g., Simple Object 
Access Protocol (SOAP)-based. Thus, it integrates well into 
a distributed environment as well as a strictly local one. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Within the Virtual Forest project, several scenarios that 
integrate SILVA both locally and as a remote service into the 
larger environment were envisaged and tested. 
C.  Similar Approaches 
Until now, others developed approaches similar to 
ClusterWIS. Some proprietary solutions are available, e.g., 
online platforms like “IHB Holzbörse” for timber trade [14] 
or the “Branchenbuch Wald und Forst” as a business 
directory for consultants [15]. The internet marketplace 
“CoSeDat" offers the possibility to exchange data and 
electronically signed PDF documents [16]. In Finland, UPM 
Paper offers “UPM Customer Online” [17], a digital service 
channel for customers. In summary, these approaches focus 
on specific aspects of the complex process chain, only. 
Hence, a permeability of shared data between the different 
processes is not given. Often, the idea was to develop 
centralized systems such as “virtual enterprises” [18] or the 
“FOCUS-Platform” [19]. As mentioned in the introduction, 
usually, this is not accepted by cluster actors. 
Software solutions like “WaldPlaner” [20] already 
deliver functionality for planning and decision-making 
regarding sustainable forest management, but on their own 
they lack the necessary communication infrastructure and 
integration into larger processes. Approaches like the 
“Scottish Forest and Timber Technologies initiative”, 
supported by enterprises and industry, promote knowledge 
exchange and cooperation between enterprises in the sector 
[21]. They are successfully able to connect regional actors, 
but the know-how remains in small and medium sized 
enterprises of the region. The Web portals “Wald in 
Österreich” [22] in Austria and “WaldSchweiz” [23] in 
Switzerland serve the exchange of information in the sector.      
Thus, existing approaches do not fulfill all the 
requirements of the complex and decentralized cluster 
forestry and wood. This motivates the development of the 
ClusterWIS approach as introduced in Section I.  
III. 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
The cluster’s achievable efficiency is strongly related to 
the way its actors communicate. This requires a framework 
that does not unnecessarily restrict an actor’s professional 
view or its organization’s structure. The ClusterWIS 
infrastructure is based on secure networking of so-called 
ClusterWIS nodes. These nodes can either be applications 
(Section V), specialized Web services (Section VI) or 
services for administrative tasks. 
To use its services and applications, any actor can 
register and participate in the ClusterWIS network. Well-
established methods of IT security are employed to 
guarantee the safety of connections and exchanged data 
between actors, applications and Web services. Client-side 
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) is used for 
authentication and secure connections. It is integrated into a 
public key infrastructure (PKI) that allows for end-to-end 
data encryption. Finally, authorization is based on 
GeoXACML (Geospatial eXtensible Access Control Markup 
Language) providing user rights on data and methods. 
The administration of the ClusterWIS network is reduced 
to few central services: 
 
A node and user registry for all participating actors 
and nodes (applications and Web services) accessed 
via Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP). 
 
A communication service as a mediator between 
sender and receiver of so-called communication 
objects. 
 
A cloud service used to buffer communication 
objects, as a general data storage for the network, 
and as a platform to initialize and run OGC 
compliant Web services (Web Feature Service 
(WFS), Web Map Service (WMS) and Web Map 
Tile Service (WMTS)) on its stored data. 
This 
lean 
infrastructure 
(combined 
with 
its 
communication approach presented in the next section) also 
keeps the participation requirements for third party systems 
low. 
IV. 
COMMUNICATION 
Three basic rules apply to communication within a 
ClusterWIS network: Data and (service) requests are always 
transferred by secure connections and encrypted by the 
public key of the recipient. Furthermore, recipients account 
for conformant data usage inside their domain. Finally, it has 
to be assumed that many communication partners and 
systems are regularly offline (e.g., when being in the forest 
with bad reception). 
A. Communication Object 
The aforementioned communication objects are used to 
transfer data and corresponding requests (Figure 2). The 
structure comprises information on the type of data, the 
sender, the receiver and the tasks the data is intended for. 
Data comprises embedded files, links to files on cloud 
services, metadata describing files, or simple parameters for 
service calls. The complete communication object is realized 
as a ZIP archive containing the XML encoded data structure 
and additional embedded files. These files as well as the 
parts of the communication object in the dashed box are 
encrypted by the receiver’s public key. Thus, only its id, the 
sender and the receiver are visible. 
B. Communication Service 
The transfer of communication objects is operated by the 
communication service. The use of HTTPS and encryption 
of the data ensures that neither unauthorized third parties nor 
the cloud service or the communication service itself get 
access to the data.  
A dispatch method for communication objects is 
specified for every receiving user (or node, as well) within 
the registry. This comprises: 
 
Notification by mail or smartphone push message 
that contains a download link to the communication 
object. 
 
Direct delivery using a SOAP interface of the 
recipient. 
 
Actively pulling the list of new communication 
objects from the communication service. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The communication service provides a SOAP interface to 
send a new communication object and to request a list of 
receivable communication objects. 
encrypted with public key of receiver
AbstractGML
cwis::CommunicationObject
- 
communicationObjectUUID: String
- 
receiverUUID: String
- 
senderUUID: String
AbstractGML
cwis::Request
- 
typeOfRequest: RequestType
- 
typeOfRequestFreeText: String
cwis::FileDescription
- 
comment: String
- 
commentFile: URI
- 
kindOfFile: String
- 
typeOfFile: MimeType
AbstractGML
cwis::
FileLocation
cwis::
IndirectLocation
AbstractGML
cwis::
EncryptedPartOfCommunicationObject
cwis::DirectLocation
- 
pathInFileArchive: String
AbstractGML
cwis::
FileArchive
cwis::
LocationByMetadataFile
- 
metadataFileURI: URI
cwis::CloudLocation
- 
password: String
- 
pathInCloud: String
- 
uriOfCloud: URI
- 
userName: String
AbstractGML
cwis::AbstractParameter
cwis::Parameter
- 
description: String
- 
name: String
- 
type: ParameterType
AbstractGML
cwis::Value
- 
value: String
1
encryptedPart
1
0..*
parameters
«ordered»
1..*
requests
1
0..1
location
1
1
value
1
0..*
fileArchives
 
Figure 2. Structure of the ClusterWIS communication object. 
A communication example is shown in Figure 1. A forest 
owner uses a browser to access the Web application (Section 
V.B) and create a communication object with a request for 
forest inventory. It is encrypted (public key of the consultant) 
and sent to the communication service, which buffers it into 
the cloud service and sends a notification to the recipient 
(consultant). The latter starts its Forest Inventory application 
(Section V.A.2), which asks the communication service for 
new 
communication 
objects 
that 
are 
subsequently 
downloaded from the cloud service. Finally, the consultant 
decrypts the communication object with his private key and 
processes the message. Note that all connections between 
nodes are additionally secured by client-side HTTPS, which 
is also used for authentication. 
C. OPC UA 
The decentralized ClusterWIS approach is similar to 
those approaches subsumed as “Industry 4.0” in the 
manufacturing 
industry. 
Furthermore, 
ClusterWIS 
communication not only takes place between actors but also 
from and to forest machinery. This motivates the integration 
of standard Industry 4.0 protocols into the network. As a 
well-established standard, Open Platform Communications – 
Unified Architecture (OPC UA) [25] is advisable for this 
purpose. Especially, as it provides a decentralized client 
server architecture without the need for central servers, it 
integrates well into the ClusterWIS PKI, it is an open and 
vendor-independent standard, it is robust, and it supports 
participants being temporarily offline. 
Thus, to complement the aforementioned SOAP-based 
approach, ClusterWIS nodes may also be equipped with an 
OPC UA client and server component allowing the exchange 
of communication objects. 
V. 
APPLICATIONS 
An important part of the ClusterWIS approach are the 
user and scenario specific portals the actors can use to access 
the network. These comprise desktop, mobile and Web 
applications. 
A. Desktop and Mobile Applications 
Desktop and mobile end-user applications provide online 
as well as offline access to ClusterWIS features. They can be 
used by actors like forest owners, service providers, or 
contractors to view, gather, modify, and exchange forestal 
data. In the context of the research project, applications are 
based on the Virtual Forest prototypes. They use the 
VEROSIM framework [24] that combines an integrated 
runtime database with subject-specific modules to create 
adapted applications for diverse scenarios. 
Four different applications are being developed and 
refined to meet the requirements of the project’s reference 
processes as described in Section VII: 
1) Forest Information 
The Forest Information application acts as an information 
portal to the data managed by ClusterWIS. Its primary 
functions are visualization, combination and analysis of 
geographic and business data, e.g., orthophotos, satellite 
imagery, Lidar, cadaster, inventory, or regulatory data. This 
data may be available locally via files and databases or 
provided by OGC-compliant Web services (WMS, WMTS, 
WFS) within the ClusterWIS network.  
2) Forest Inventory  
This application supports the forest inventory process. It 
allows a service provider to work with data made available 
by the commissioning forest owner and provides tools to 
record relevant stand attributes and single tree information. 
As this data is typically gathered on-site, the software also 
offers assistance for spatial localization during the process. 
3) Forest Planning  
The Forest Planning application provides a user-friendly 
and efficient interface to forest growth simulation. This 
comprises input parameterization as well as result analysis 
and visualization. The computationally intensive simulation 
itself is sourced out to a service (see Section VI.B). 
4) Technical Production  
This application supports the technical production 
process in its different phases, namely preparation of work 
assignments, assistance of forest workers and machine 
operators with instructions, and practical guidance as well as 
documentation of the harvesting operations and its results. 
B. Web Applications 
Web applications are ideally suited to provide a low-
threshold access to the ClusterWIS network. They do not 
need client-side installation and can be used on both desktop 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

and mobile devices alike. Capacity and performance scaling 
is easy and new features can be provided to users with no 
effort. Finally, Web applications easily support operation in 
secure networks. 
The browser-based GIS SGJ GeoHornet is one example 
of such a Web application that is used in ClusterWIS. It has 
already successfully been employed in the Virtual Forest 
project as well as its commercial spin-offs. Various data 
sources like ForestGML databases or Web services can be 
accessed and embedded. This way, e.g., a registered forest 
owner can get an overview of his or her entire property. 
GeoHornet also provides methods to plot maps and enhance 
these plots with own graphical and textual annotations. It 
can create, send and receive communication objects, e.g., to 
send a request to another actor in the ClusterWIS network. 
GeoHornet can be customized for the user’s demands. 
VI. 
SPECIALIZED SERVICES 
As mentioned in Section I, besides backbone services 
(Sections III-IV), the ClusterWIS network comprises 
specialized services, e.g., to process remote sensing data or 
simulate forest growth. 
A. Remote Sensing Data Processing 
Often, the data necessary for a sustainable feedstock 
management can only be made available using remote 
sensing methods like tree species classification [7], stand 
attributes evaluation [8], or single tree delineation and 
attribution [9]. However, such methods usually need to 
access, process and store vast amounts of raw geo data, 
unfeasible, e.g., for mobile apps. Furthermore, existing 
methods need to be enhanced to easily incorporate 
stakeholders to refine the data with their expert knowledge 
(e.g., provide tree samples to optimize local tree species 
classification results). Thus, a goal of the ClusterWIS project 
is to make these methods available as services to allow the 
usage of suitable hardware on server side and to provide 
service interfaces for user provided calibration data. 
B. Forest Growth Simulation 
Forest growth simulators - beyond scenarios of stand 
development - provide further services that are closely 
connected to a simulator’s core function. Such services are 
virtual tree generation based on stand structure attributes and 
computation of assortments using individual tree data. 
Hence, one relevant task within ClusterWIS is to extend 
existing data formats, such as ForestGML, to comply with 
the time-related data content that is specific to simulation 
models. 
SILVA provides stand development as a result of rule-
based management plans. That way, the simulator may 
provide scenarios that put emphasis on a specific subset of 
ecosystem services or that promote the development of 
specific stand structures and species mixtures. The seamless 
and manifold integration of SILVA [26] into the ClusterWIS 
infrastructure enables to couple to any other service that 
might receive data from the simulator or provide essential 
basic data to it. That objective is particularly important on 
the background of eocsystem service provision. Ecosystem 
services are typically linked by mutual synergies and 
tradeoffs. Therefore, one relevant coupling scenario is the 
linkage between SILVA and vegetation distribution models. 
Such specialized land surface models [12] represent 
processes of vegetation growth, seed dissemination and 
disturbance. Thus, they may provide valuable results about 
the establishment of regeneration trees and individual young 
trees to forest growth simulators. Moreover, as vegetation 
models often use a simplified representation of main stand 
development, 
they 
might 
straightforwardly 
integrate 
individual tree data provided by the growth simulator.  
VII. REFERENCE PROCESSES 
ClusterWIS not only provides an infrastructure, protocols 
and applications. It also specifies processes for a sustainable 
feedstock management realized on this foundation, which 
will be tested and demonstrated in actual forest stands. An 
important aspect of ClusterWIS is that these processes do no 
longer take place in a parallel and unrelated manner but start 
to interact with each other. A selection of practically relevant 
reference processes is considered within the project and 
briefly introduced below:   
A. Forestal data provision 
Sustainable natural resource management requires 
information and planning. For that purpose, up-to-date, 
highly qualitative, and detailed (geo) data is needed. Data is 
usually compiled of various data sources (ForestGML-
structured data, third party spatial base data and business 
specific data). Currently, the comprehensive provision of 
such data to the cluster is an unresolved problem. Thus, this 
process describes the provision within the ClusterWIS 
network.  
B. Forest information 
This process describes an actor’s access to the 
provisioned forestal data of a specific area in the right time at 
the right place, comprising visualization, analysis, and 
editing. 
C. Forest inventory 
Forest inventory is the acquisition and management of 
environmental data in forestry. Thus, the purpose of this 
process is to provide the cluster with always up-to-date, 
detailed and high-quality data. An important aspect in this 
context is to automatically and logically connect different 
data sources and, if applicable, different timestamps (for 
trend analysis) within the nD forest information system. 
D. Planning and consulting 
The comprehensive data provided by the ClusterWIS 
network enables consultants to give forest owners efficient 
and goal-orientated advice on how to manage their forests.  
In particular, they can use simulation tools to demonstrate 
how different management alternatives result in different 
future outcomes. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

E. Timber trade 
The ClusterWIS network opens new ways for getting in 
contact. By providing all relevant information to all actors 
involved in the process, a more efficient communication 
between sellers and buyers can be established. Thus, 
ClusterWIS provides the framework for a more efficient 
timber trade and contributes to a more efficient wood and 
biomass mobilization.  
F. Sustainable Harvesting 
Integrated into the aforementioned processes within the 
ClusterWIS network, the technical production process can 
access a vast number of relevant data. This allows for the 
planning of more sustainable harvesting measures. It 
comprises the (simulated) determination and visualization of 
wood assortments, harvesting costs, accessibility and 
harvesting routes, average skidding distances, as well as 
aspects of nature conservation. Besides planning, this 
process also comprises the execution of planned measures 
and their documentation, where the latter can again be used 
in downstream processes. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The cluster forestry and wood is an important economic 
sector. Yet, its major challenges (structural complexity and 
heterogeneity, 
huge 
number 
of 
stakeholders, 
and 
decentralized processes) are insufficiently addressed in 
current IT solutions. The ClusterWIS approach can resolve 
these problems by providing a decentralized, secure, and lean 
infrastructure for communication and data management. 
Based on this infrastructure, services and applications are 
orchestrated to realize novel, interconnected, and sustainable 
processes for feedstock management among the cluster’s 
actors. 
In the current phase of the ClusterWIS research project, 
the infrastructure and all reference processes are analyzed 
and specified in detail. The next step is the realization and 
implementation of the infrastructure (services, applications, 
etc.) and the execution of a first communication demo 
scenario. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 The research project ClusterWIS is co-financed by 
the European Union and the German federal state of North 
Rhine-Westphalia: European Union - Investing in our Future 
- European Regional Development Fund (EFRE-0800088). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Waldbauernverband NRW e.V. (English: Wood owner association of 
North Rhine-Westphalia), “Waldbauernverband NRW e.V.,” URL: 
http://www.waldbauernverband.de/2016/ [accessed: 2018-03-05]. 
[2] M. Hoppen, M. Schluse, J. Rossmann, and C. Averdung, “A New nD 
Temporal Geodata Management Approach using GML,” in 
GEOProcessing 2015 - The Seventh International Conference on 
Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and 
Services, Lisbon, Portugal, 2015, pp. 110–116. ISBN 978-1-61208-
383-4, Permalink https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article 
&articleid=geoprocessing_2015_6_20_30086 [accessed: 2018-02-02] 
[3] Kuratorium für Waldarbeit und Forsttechnik e.V. (KWF, English: 
German Center for Forest Work and Technology), “ELDAT,” URL: 
http://www.eldatstandard.de [accessed: 2017-12-04]. 
[4] Skogforsk, “StanForD,” URL: http://www.skogforsk.se/english/pro-
jects/stanford [accessed: 2017-12-04]. 
[5] papiNet Europe/NA, “The intelligent choice…..papiNet,” URL: 
http://www.papinet.org [accessed: 2017-12-04]. 
[6] J. Rossmann, M. Hoppen, and A. Buecken, “Semantic World 
Modelling and Data Management in a 4D Forest Simulation and 
Information System,” in ISPRS 8th 3DGeoInfo Conference & WG 
II/2 Workshop, International Archives of the Photogrammetry, 
Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Istanbul, 2013, 
vol. XL-2/W2, pp. 65–72. 
[7] P. Krahwinkler, “Machine learning based classification for semantic 
world modeling : support vector machine based decision tree for 
single tree level forest species mapping,” PhD thesis, RWTH Aachen, 
2013. 
[8] A. Buecken and J. Rossmann, “Mining for the Timber-Volume for a 
State-Wide Forest Information System,” Intl. LiDAR Mapping Forum 
2017, Denver, pp. 1-4, 2017 
[9] A. Buecken and J. Rossmann, “Modelling of Forest Landscapes from 
Remote Sensing LiDAR Data and Aerial Photos,” in Capturing 
Reality - 3D, Laser Scanning and LiDAR Technologies Forum 2015, 
23-25 November, 2015, Salzburg, Austria, pp. 1-6, 2016.  
[10] CPA, 
“CPA 
ReDev 
GmbH,” 
URL: 
http://www.cpa-
redev.de/index.php?lang=e [accessed: 2017-12-04]. 
[11] P. Biber et al., “How Sensitive are Ecosystem Services in European 
Forest Landscapes to Silvicultural Treatment?,” Forests, 6(5), 1666–
1695, 2015. doi: 10.3390/f6051666 
[12] S. Hudjetz et al., “Modeling Wood Encroachment in Abandoned 
Grasslands in the Eifel National Park – Model Description and 
Testing,” 
PLoS 
One 
9:e113827, 
2014. 
doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0113827, 2014. 
[13] I. Prokofieva, “Payments for Ecosystem Services—the Case of 
Forests,” Current Forestry Reports, 2(2), pp. 130–142, 2014. 
doi: 10.1007/s40725-016-0037-9 
[14] Fordaq, “IHB,” URL: http://www.ihb.de [accessed: 2017-12-04]. 
[15] Wald-wird-mobil.de gGmbH, “Branchenbuch Wald und Forst 
(English: 
Yellow 
Pages 
Wood 
and 
Forest,” 
URL: 
http://www.waldhilfe.de [accessed: 2017-12-04]. 
[16] EGGER, “Der Internet-Marktplatz CoSeDat (English: The internet 
marketplace CoSeDat),” URL: http://www.cosedat.com [accessed: 
2017-12-04]. 
[17] The Biofore Company UPM, “UPM Customer Online” URL: 
http://www.upmpaper.com [accessed: 2017-12-04]. 
[18] H. Jacke, “Abschlussbericht zur Pre-Feasibility-Study "Holztransport 
und Logistik / Virtueller Betrieb Forst und Holz NRW (English: Final 
report of the pre feasibility study “wood transport and logistics / 
virtual enterprise forest and wood NRW”)",“ Göttingen, 2001. 
[19] “Vision, 
FOCUS 
- 
The 
Project,“ 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://focusnet.eu/about-focus/project-vision. 
[20] Nordwestdeutsche Forstliche Versuchsanstalt (NW-FVA, English: 
Northwest German Forest Research Institute), “Softwareprogramme 
und Webapplikationen der NW-FVA (English: Software programs 
and web applications of NW-FVA),“ URL: http://www.nw-
fva.de/index.php?id=3 [accessed: 2017-12-04]. 
[21] Scottish Forest & Timber Technologies, “The Scottish Forest and 
Timber 
Technologies 
initiative” 
URL: 
http://www.forestryscotland.com [accessed: 2017-12-04]. 
[22] Wald in Österreich (English: Forest in Austria), “Das Portal zu Wald 
und 
Holz 
(English: 
Portal 
to 
forest 
and 
wood)” 
URL: 
http://www.wald-in-oesterreich.at [accessed: 2017-12-04]. 
[23] WaldSchweiz, Verband der Waldeigentümer (English: Suisse wood 
owner 
association), 
“WaldSchweiz” 
URL: 
http://www.waldschweiz.ch [accessed: 2017-12-04]. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[24] J. Rossmann, M. Schluse, C. Schlette and R. Waspe, “A New 
Approach to 3D Simulation Technology as Enabling Technology for 
eROBOTICS,” in 1st International Simulation Tools Conference & 
EXPO 2013 (SIMEX'2013), 2013, pp. 39-46. 
[25] J. Lange, F. Iwanitz, and T. Burke, “OPC From Data Access to 
Unified Architecture,” 2010. ISBN 978-3-8007-3242-5 
[26] M. Kahn and H. Pretzsch, “Parametrisierung und Validierung des 
Wuchsmodells SILVA 2.2 für Rein- und Mischbestände aus Fichte, 
Tanne, Kiefer, Buche, Eiche und Erle (English: Parameterisation and 
validation of the growth model SILVA 2.2. for pure and mixed stands 
of spruce, fir, pine, beech, oak and alder),“ in Jahrestagung der 
DVFFA Sektion Ertragskunde, Kevelaer , 1998. 
 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

