National Geoinformation System Development in the Republic of Uzbekistan
Muzaffar Djalalov
SUE UNICON.UZ
Ministry for the development of information technologies and communications
Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan
email: m.jalalov@gmail.com
Abstract – Geoinformation systems (GIS) are widely being
implemented all over the world. They are helping in solving
many economic and industrial issues. This paper describes how
a national geoinformation system is being developed in
Uzbekistan, as well as, policies, standards and technologies that
are used to build a nationwide GIS infrastructure. Moreover,
the national GIS concept is being analyzed and we propose
a 5 year development plan based on modern international
demands and trends.
Keywords-GIS; Cadastre; National concept; Standardization.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The National Geographic Information System (NGIS)
creation in Uzbekistan has been carried forward by the
strong will of the Republic of Uzbekistan as a part of the
economic reform to use land and natural resources more
efficiently based on a rapid information technologies (IT)
development
and
application
of
the
information
and
communication technologies (ICT) inside and outside of the
Republic of Uzbekistan. The NGIS shall support the decision
makers of Uzbekistan in different sectors of the government
such
as
territorial
development,
land
administration,
environmental protection, social development, etc.
A.
The rapid development of ICT in the Republic of
Uzbekistan
The wide developments of ICT and computerization have
been a global tendency of the world development for the last
decades. Especially, the rapid development the ICT industry
has been a driving force of the economic development with
job creation and attraction of investment. Also, management
effectiveness can be maximized and cost reduction in
information exchange between market's participants can be
expected by combining IT with production/management
activities.
In the “Program for Computerization and Information-
Communicative Technologies Development for 2002-2010”
[1] and in the resolution of the President of the Republic of
Uzbekistan "On measures for further development of a
national information and communication system of the
Republic of Uzbekistan" [2], the Government of Uzbekistan
emphasized the significance of the economic development
and improvement in the nation's well-being through ICT. In
addition, Uzbekistan agencies are encouraged to attract
foreign loans and grants for this program in the Resolution of
the Cabinet of Ministers in 2002.
B.
Rising necessities for utilization of natural resource
Abundant land and natural resources are important
elements of Uzbekistan. In order to protect and allow
reasonable usage of natural and land resources, the economic
potential of the land must be analyzed. This can be done if
there is enough information of the status and the usage
pattern of the land, including natural resources and their
infrastructures. Thus, the need for the construction of a
national geographic information system is being emphasized.
In line with the public priorities of Uzbekistan, the
project aims to develop and build the NGIS, which is the
most efficient tool of the complex presentation and the
analysis of the information about territorial development of
Uzbekistan.
The NGIS will allow analyzing and valuing in real time
different actual and reliable cartographic and other data in
order to support the decision makers in different spheres:
territorial development, land administration, environmental
protection, social development, etc.
C.
The proven economic and technical effects from
research and studies
By introducing the geographic information technologies
and systems, many research and studies have proven that it
has many benefits over the economic and technology sectors.
Protection and rational use of natural resources also benefit
from similar effects.
Positive financial results of Cadastre services’ activity
provide additional income to the budget at the expense of the
land correction and the other real property taxation.
D.
Achieve the economic reform through IT application
Uzbekistan is seeking a development of the economic
and the national welfare. In order to achieve this, Uzbekistan
government considers ICT industry as a strategic method.
Uzbekistan government particularly emphasizes national
geographic information system creation.
Further, Section II gives the main idea on the GIS project
in Uzbekistan and its directions, Section III describes
components of each subsystem and designations, and Section
IV discusses the target and the architecture of the project.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II.
UNDERSTANDING THE OBJECTIVE
The
NGIS
target
goals are
to
provide the
basic
foundation
and
the
basic
platform
support
of
"E-government" system of Uzbekistan. The implementation
of the NGIS application at the government level including
ministries,
departments
and
local
administration,
will
gradually utilize for "e-government” system.
The NGIS shall be a basic information resource of future
e-government system. The NGIS and its components should
be integrated with other state information of e-government
systems.
The main objective of project is to develop and build the
NGIS of Uzbekistan which collects and manages the data
regarding the rational use as well as natural resources
preservation in order to support timely and transparent the
decision making for balanced socio-economic development
across country and sectors.
The NGIS will increase the level of public authorities’
information awareness and enhance the reasonability of the
administrative the decision-making process.
The objective summary and system description are as
follows, and are followed by the objectives of each project
components:

Establishment of State Satellite Geodetic Network.

Digital Base Map Delivery and DPW Installation.

Implementation of Information Analytical Centers
and Automatic Working Stations.

Development of pilot system for the National
System of Cadastre and Real Property Registration
(NSCRP).

The NGIS Standardization and Master Plan.
III.
THE OBJECTIVES FOR EACH SUB-SYSTEM
The main objective of project is to develop and build the
NGIS of Uzbekistan which collects and manages the data
regarding the rational use as well as natural resources
preservation in order to support timely and transparent the
decision making for balanced socio-economic development
across country and sectors. It will become a basic platform
part of e-government system which Uzbekistan government
plans:
(a)
Public administration: the NGIS will increase the
level of public authorities’ information awareness and
enhance the reasonability of the administrative the decision-
making process.
(b)
Accuracy: New state satellite geodetic network will
create conditions for position prompt fixing of objects with
high accuracy.
(c)
Integration:
Unified
NSCRP
will
provide
an
opportunity to render public services by the interactive
system “one stop shop” [3-4].
(d)
E-government: With the implementation of the
NGIS application at the governmental level, Project aims to
be gradually utilized for E-government system.
(e)
Governmental Authority Users: The actual end
users by Project are the Central Information-Analytic
Centers (IAC), 14 Regional IACs of the NGIS, and Situation
Centers (Emergency) for state and regional governmental
authorities
A.
Establishment of State Satellite Geodetic Network
The general definition of a CORS Network is the
terrestrial infrastructure (equipment and software) designed
to deliver Positioning Service based on the National GNSS
technology. It is intended to cover the whole region of
Uzbekistan with different levels of accuracy.
A new state satellite geodetic network will create
conditions for position prompt fixing of objects with high
accuracy. Also, various public services shall be created.
These services will cover a wide range of applications, not
just for geodesists, but also for public users and end users.
B.
Digital Base Map Delivery and DPW Installation
The digital cartographic basis objectives are quickly and
accurately establishing the basis for the latest digital
cartography for the basis of land management.
The digital cartography map can be used in various
sectors of the government (economy, science, national
defense and etc.) which will increase the business processes
efficiency and improve the quality of public services.
Private sectors, job creation, productivity enhancement
and other various effects can be expected.
C.
Implementation of IAC and AWS
The actual end users by project are IAC, the 14 Regional
IACs of the NGIS, and the Situation Centers (Emergency)
for
the
state
and
regional
governmental
authorities.
Therefore, IAC building objectives and AWS are improving
the efficiency of the administration tasks using the results of
the NGIS for the actual end users of the system.
D.
Development of pilot system for NSCRP
Unified
computer-based
NSCRP
will
provide
an
opportunity to render public services by an interactive
system “one stop shop”. By developing pilot system for
NSCRP, land/real estate information can be realized and
statistical information of land use can be calculated as well.
Policy information on land use development and monitoring
system for land use status, standard, procedure and other
technical element shall be established as well. It is important
to develop one’s own system rather than purchasing a ready
solution (Table 1)
TABLE I.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS BETWEEN PACKAGE- AND
CUSTOM-BUILT SOFTWARE
Parameter
Packaged Software
Custom-built Software
Development
period
Dependent on degree of
customization agreed
upon by vendor and
Purchaser, deployment
may be immediate
8 to 12 months,
including detailed
functional analysis
Degree of
compliance
with required
business
processes and
rules
Depends on software,
average ranges from
50% to 75%
Almost 100%
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Parameter
Packaged Software
Custom-built Software
Total cost of
ownership
Initial license costs may
be high;
Maintenance fees will
depend on the type of
maintenance agreement;
No licenses required;
Development costs
usually lower than the
license costs. If creation
of an IT department is
needed, then the cost can
be higher. Delayed
implementation may lead
to high costs
IPR ownership
Vendor owns source
code, including those
developed during
Purchaser owns source
code
Maintenance
and upgrades
Maintenance and
upgrade is more or less
assured, but subject to
payment of annual
maintenance fees
Maintenance subject to
agreement with
developer or may be
done by Purchaser’s IT
unit, when present;
Upgrades are not usually
available;
Flexibility
Limited to the extent that
the vendor would allow
Highly flexible, as
required by Purchaser
Integration
with other
legacy systems
Limited
Integration parameters
can be included in the
functional specifications
and design of the system
E.
The NGIS Standardization and Master Plan
The
main
benefits
that
can
be
gained
from
the
standardization will be budget waste prevention and synergy
creation.
Standardization means establishing a common
system and enabling a range of different users to share data
or
the
system.
This
will
provide
efficiency
and
interconnectedness between projects and users.
Therefore, the standardization objectives are to define the
standardization
object,
standardization
method,
standardization procedures and standardization organization.
It is necessary to establish what will be standardized, which
method will be used for the standardization, which procedure
will be used for the standard and who will establish and
define standardization.
IV.
UNDERSTANDING OF THE TARGET SYSTEM
Based on the above project work scope, the concept
diagram of the target system is shown in Fig. 1.
Figure 1.
Conceptual Diagram of the Targeted System - Overall
Figure 2.
Conceptual Diagram of the Targeted System - Concrete
The first thing to establish within this project is the NGIS
standardization. The satellite image based digital map can be
produced with the standardized procedures and methods
where it can be used for base map in various GIS
applications. Accurate location information collected from
GNSS CORS and digital map can be combined and
integrated
into
a
central
information
analysis
center.
Integration of all various GIS information can be collected,
classified, refined and analyzed by the user of the Central
IAC to create new contents and services which then results in
service quality improvement of public services and the
application of the digital map within the governmental level
(Fig. 2).
Figure 3.
Characteristics of the project
For
the
successful
project
implementation,
it
is
important to have a clear project understanding. Therefore,
it is important to derive project characteristics based on the
objectives and project background (Fig.3).
V.
EXPECTED RESULTS
Project completion will provide the end users with
convenience in the NGIS service. In addition, the end-user
agencies will benefit from the higher efficiency in their
business management through automation. In particular, the
government will get increased control, management and
monitoring ability by the rational use of the geographical
information provided by the NGIS.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

A.
Scientific the decision-making by the use of centralized
geographic information
The NGIS supports the rational state policy required for
development and land preservation and natural resources
through the view of current status of the nation-wide
geographic
information
and
the
expectations.
Various
methods for geospatial analysis will help the decision-
makers to shape systemic and scientific policies with
visibility and accuracy.
B.
Reduced processing time and efforts in public sector by
the common use of geospatial information
The sharing of gathered information based on the sole
standard will enable the central IAC to oversee the full extent
of data as well as the regional IACs to interact through
interface.
The common use of the geospatial information among
different government agencies enhances synergy in public
sector and will no longer allow government spending for
duplicated
efforts
to
construct
individual
piece
of
information by agency.
C.
The economic effect creation by the introduction of
value-added service
Once gathered, integrated national GIS information will
promote various GIS-applied sectors in the private sector.
Small and medium-sized companies will obtain business
opportunities to get involved in public and private sectors
respectively.
Increased
opportunities
will
generate
technology
development and the accumulation of GIS-related skills and
knowhow in the business.
Value-added jobs new creation will contribute to the
moderation of unemployment problem.
D.
Convenient service for end-users
The digital cartographic base and the 3rd dimension
information regarding land will be provided as the form of
'One-stop Shop' service. The geographical information
inputted in the existing public service for citizens will greatly
improve citizens’ convenience.
The easy access and use of a geographic information will
give individual end-users, private or public, to process the
digital map to be fit for each one's purpose.
REFERENCES
[1]
The Resolution of the Cabinet of Ministry of the Republic of
Uzbekistan
“Program
for
Computerization
and
Information-
Communicative Technologies Development for 2002-2010”. May,
2002, pp.78-90.
[2]
The Resolution of the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan "On
measures for further development of a national information and
communication system of the Republic of Uzbekistan". June, 2013,
p.35.
[3]
The Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan “Geodesy and Cartography”.
April, 1997, pp.105-149
[4]
The Resolution of the Cabinet of Ministry of the Republic of
Uzbekistan “On the establishment and maintenance of a Unified
System of State Cadasters”. February, 2005, pp.1-3.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

