Using GIS for Impact Analysis from Industries 
Installation 
 
Camila Dasso Thomasi, Gerson Alberto Leiria Nunes, Márcio Medeiros Jugueiro, Diana Francisca Adamatti 
Centro de Ciências Computacionais  
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande 
Rio Grande, Brasil 
{camilathomasi, dfrabu, marcio.juguero, dianaada}@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a simulator that analyzes the 
impacts of the pollutants emission of a new industry insertion on 
a specific region (in our studies, at Rio Grande City – Brazil). 
This simulation calculates the pollutants concentration in the 
atmosphere, using CALPUFF non-stationary Gaussian model 
integrated to GIS. The goals are to assist people and responsible 
entities in the evaluation and air quality control. 
Keywords-social simulation; pollutants dispersion; air quality 
control; CALPUFF. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The problems created by excessive emission of pollutants 
are not recent and they had significantly increased due the fast 
industrial growth. An alternative is to take some preventive 
measures by knowing the risk of the installation of a new 
industry on a region. 
Using computational tools is an alternative to predict risks. 
by this way, these tools can create new possibilities for the 
control of air quality, because the simulations are able to 
predict the concentration of pollutants in the atmosphere. 
In this context, the Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 
are emerging as robust tool, helping to organize and to have a 
better understanding about the results, because they have 
methods/objects to view, manipulate, synthesize and edit the 
georeferenced data [1]. 
In Thomasi et al. [2], GIS is used to evaluate the dispersion 
radius of total suspended particles and to analyze the potential 
risk of contamination of coastal ecosystems near to the 
industrial zone in Rio Grande city (Brazil), using the 
stationary model ISC [3]. However, a non-stationary model 
[4] provides a more realistic evaluation because the 
meteorological factors are under flotation most of the time.  
The main goal of this study is to analyze the pollutants 
emission impacts of a new industry insertion in a specific    
region (in our studies, in Rio Grande City – Brazil). We are 
developing a simulation that calculates the pollutants 
concentration in the atmosphere, using the CALPUFF non-
stationary Gaussian model [4] together to GIS [1]. It allows to 
view the damage size in areas near to the industry operations. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the 
basic concepts of air pollution, the dispersion phenomenon 
and the requirements to air quality control. In Section III the 
tools used to implement the simulator are  described. In 
Section IV is shown complete modeling of the simulator and 
the results. Finally, Section V presents the conclusions and 
future works. 
II. 
POLLUTANTS EMISSION IN THE ATMOSPHERE 
A. Atmospheric Pollution 
Chemicals, even toxics, are not necessarily considered 
atmospheric pollutants, because to cause damage they have to 
reach a certain concentration. In this way, an atmospheric 
pollutant is any form of matter, that a given quantity, exceeds 
the limits (defined by a control agency), and it transforms the 
air improper [4] [5]. 
Therefore, the atmospheric pollution occurs when the air 
contaminants injure the well-being and health of people, and it 
cause harm to the environment [5].  
B. The Dispersion  Phenomenon 
The dispersion mechanisms of pollutants in the atmosphere 
are governed by fluctuations in wind fields and turbulence [6]. 
The main meteorological factors that influence the 
atmospheric dispersion phenomenon are wind, temperature, 
high and low pressure and terrain. The meteorological factors 
in the region can contribute in a positive or negative way in 
the mixing of contaminants with clean air. These factors could 
cause a quick or slow dispersion pollutants. 
According to Saraiva and Krusche [7], the main damaging 
weather conditions to the pollutants dispersion in our study 
region are: high pressure associated with light winds, low 
temperature and high humidity. 
C. Air Quality 
The air quality standards are a control strategy used to 
indicate the maximum concentration of pollutants that could 
be issued to preserve the health and well-being of the 
population, flora, fauna and the environment in general [5]. 
The pollutants group responsible for controlling air 
quality, basing to their frequency in the environment, is 
composed of: sulfur dioxide (SO2), particulate matter (PM), 
carbon monoxide (CO), ozone (O3) and nitrogen dioxide 
(NO2). In this work only SO2, CO and NO2 are considered to 
evaluate the emission of air quality..   
Excessive 
exposure 
to 
pollutants 
causes 
damage. 
Therefore, the great importance of the emissions control is to 
preserve the life quality of people and also the environment 
preservation [4]. According to the resolution of CONAMA – 
The Brazilian National Environmental Council [5], there are 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

specific levels of emissions that are allowed, ranging from the 
lowest level of “attention” to the higher level of “emergency”, 
as shown in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
STANDARDS OF AIR POLLUTION BY BRAZILIAN NATIONAL 
ENVIRONMENTAL COUNCIL  (CONAMA). 
 
LEVELS 
Parameters 
ATTENTION 
ALERT 
EMERGENCY 
Sulfer Dioxide - 
SO2  
(µg/m3) - 24h 
≥ 800 
≥ 1.600 
≥ 2.100 
Carbon 
Monoxide  - CO 
(µg/m3) - 8h 
≥ 17.000 
≥ 34.000 
≥ 46.000 
Nitrogen 
Dioxide  - NO2 
(µg/m3) - 1h 
≥ 1.130 
≥ 2.260 
≥ 3.000 
III. 
USED TOOLS 
This section describes the tools used to develop the 
simulator. These tools were chosen because of their 
availability, documentation, generation and manipulation of 
maps interatively. 
A. MATLAB 
The MATLAB [8] is a programming language with several 
libraries that allow us to perform a series of scientific 
calculations, statistics, solution of linear differential equations, 
engineering calculations, etc. Moreover, it has specific 
libraries 
to 
work 
with 
neural 
networks, 
filtering, 
bioinformatics, telecommunications, imaging, digital signal 
processing, automation, GIS and others. 
In this work, to automate the processes of file 
management, data import, creation, manipulation and 
presentation of maps and their respective layers, we have 
chosen the GIS library (called “mapping toolbox”). This 
library was also important to perform post-processing data of 
the CALPUFF  model and results analysis 
B. Mapping Toolbox 
The mapping toolbox [9] is a library of specific functions 
that allow us analyzing geographic data, create and manipulate 
maps. It imports both vector and raster type data. It also has 
support to the most common file formats, such as shapefile, 
GeoTIFF and DEM SDTS.  In addition, it is possible to import 
data from WMS servers (Web Map Service). Thus, the 
developer can customize his application in subsection, side 
view, intersection and other methods. 
The toolbox features allow us to develop customized 
solutions for various geographic problems. Some of these 
features allow that different layers data can be easily 
manipulated and presented in the same map. 
Other features that also deserve attention are those that 
allow you to convert different types of coordinates, facilitating 
the use of data from different sources and to allow you to save 
all creation and manipulation of files that can later be analyzed 
by users of GIS software. 
C. GIS - Geographic Information System 
The GIS (Geographic Information Systems) [1] are 
softwares that manage, view and manipulate geographic data 
computationally. They allow that each set of data can be 
presented in different layers. 
The layers are composed by a set of features of geographic 
objects. These objects have an infinite variety of shapes, but 
they can be represented basically by three different shapes: 
polygons, lines or points. Polygons represent things that have 
limits such as countries, states, cities or lakes. Lines represent 
narrow things such as streets, roads, rivers or railroads. Points 
are used to small things such as buildings, hotels, schools, fire 
hydrants or poles. The union of polygons, lines and points 
generates the vector data. 
Therefore, GIS are used for better understanding the 
patterns, relationships and trends in the data. Many times, 
those information are not obvious to find in databases. 
IV. 
THE PROPOSED SIMULATOR 
This section presents a complete simulator modeling that 
uses a non-stationary model of pollution dispersion. The non-
stationary models can be Eulerian, Lagrangian and Gaussian 
[10]. The Eulerian and Lagrangian models have a high 
computational cost due because they need to solve complex 
equations. It requires parallelization to obtain a satisfactory 
response time. On the other hand, the Gaussian models do 
some simplifications that it allows a faster response, making it 
attractive for real time applications.  
This work uses the CALPUFF non-stationary Gaussian 
model that allows the prediction of risks caused by one or 
more industries in a specific period of time, varying the 
weather conditions in space and time [11]. 
Calpuff 
model 
is 
recommended 
by 
U.S. 
EPA 
(Environment Protection Agency) due to be working with a 
micro-region and it can handle complex three-dimensional 
wind fields. It is easy to setup and run for point sources with 
multiple parameters. 
The Gaussian models do not have accuracy when we use a 
complex topography or emissions near the ground. In our 
experiments, these factors are not relevant because the 
simulated region has a flat terrain and their emission sources 
have a certain distance from the ground. The work aims to 
develop a tool to help the community and responsible entities 
in decision-making, visualization and evaluation of possible 
risks caused by the emission of pollutants from industries, 
without the concerned of accuracy. 
The proposed simulator integrates the Gaussian CALPUFF 
model to MATLAB in order to automate their execution. The 
Matlab Mapping Toolbox saves and presents the output data in 
a vector layers and it can be manipulated in GIS softwares. 
 
A. The Modelling of Proposed Simulator 
In this stage of the project, the goal of the simulator is to 
predict what will be the risks in a specific region by the 
pollutants emission caused by the insertion of one or more 
industries. The result of the simulation is a layer with 
georeferenced points containing the concentration of certain 
pollutants. 
The 
simulator 
calculates 
the 
pollutants 
concentration resulting from one or more emissions. 
The simulator is divided in two modules: CALPUFF 
model execution and maps’ manipulation. According to the 
flow diagram, shown in Figure 1, the basic inputs to start the 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

simulation are: the shape file containing the map of the 
interesting region and the output shape file names. The 
simulation returns the files with georeferenced points.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Data Flow Diagram to use the CALPUFF  non-
stationary Gaussian model. 
In the CALPUFF model execution stage, all the settings 
and procedures for their execution are made and these steps 
are explained in greater details later. The output of this module 
has two georeferenced matrices containing latitude, longitude 
and pollutants concentration in the points. These matrices will 
be the inputs of the next step (maps manipulation) and they 
have the function of read, write, manipulate and present the 
vector files. Three structures are created, one for each 
pollutant to control the air quality: SO2 (sulfur dioxide), CO 
(carbon monoxide) and NO2 (nitrogen dioxide), containing the 
attributes shown in Table II. The elements of these structures 
are filled with the input values. After this procedure, three 
layers are created, one for each pollutant, which are the 
simulator output files. 
TABLE II.  STRUCTURE OF THE POINTS 
Attribute 
Type 
Description 
Geometry 
string 
Geometry of the point; 
BoundingBox 
[2x2 double] 
Extreme of the point; 
X 
[1xN double] 
X coordenates set in the point; 
Y 
[1xN double] 
Y coordenates set in the point; 
POLLUTION 
double 
Calculted pollution level  by 
Gaussian model; 
LOCAL_X 
double 
X coordinate of the location of 
the center point; 
LOCAL_Y 
double 
Y coordinate of the location of 
the center point; 
 
The last step of the simulation is to present the results, as 
shown in the Figure 2. The pollutants shape file is 
superimposed on the map of the interesting region, providing a 
better interface to analyze the results. In this map, the colored 
points refer to calculated concentration degree of the model. 
The Figure 3 is showing the value of the concentration 
pollution of each pollutant in µg/m3. 
 
Figure 2.  Results presentation. 
B. Propagation Model of Pollution 
The chosen model for the pollutants propagation in the 
atmosphere is the CALPUFF non-stationary Gaussian model. 
It is a puff Gaussian model used to simulate continuous puffs 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

of pollutants emitted by a source to receivers according to the 
wind flow in the environment [12]. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Georeferenced bidimensional arrays. 
The plume, in these models, is represented by a set of 
discrete puffs of polluting material [6], as shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Representation of the plume in CALPUFF model 
The puffs mass is dispersed according to a Gaussian 
distribution. The transport is made according to the trajectory 
of its mass center and the local wind vector speed [6]. 
The wind changes every hour, changing also the puffs path 
to the wind flow. While the puff is transported in the air, its 
pollutant concentration decreases. If the puff finds out other 
receptor, a new pollutant material is increased to it [12]. 
The Equation (1) is the basic equation to provide the 
contribution of a puff on a receiver [4]. To discover the total 
concentration of a receiver, it is necessary to add the 
concentration of neighborhood puffs of a particular receiver. 
 
(1) 
where C is the ground-level concentration (g/m3), Q is the 
pollutant mass (g) in the puff, 
x is the standard deviation (m) 
of the Gaussian distribution in the along-wind direction,           
y is the standard deviation (m) of the Gaussian distribution in 
the cross-wind direction, 
z is the standard deviation (m) of 
the Gaussian distribution in the vertical direction, da is the 
distance (m) from the puff center to the   receptor in the along-
wind direction, dc is the distance (m) from the puff center to 
the receptor in the cross-wind direction, g is the vertical term 
(m) of the Gaussian equation, [2]. 
C. Related works 
 
In this subsection, we present some works that use 
CALPUFF in different domains. In Zhou et al. [13] is 
calculated the fraction of particulate matter emitted by power 
plants, using the CALPUFF model to estimate the risks for 
which the population is submitted to be exposed to these 
pollutants. MESOPUFF II method is used for simulation of 
chemical transformations. The dry deposition is modeled to 
gases and particles and the wet deposition for liquid 
precipitation. The internal plume increases are calculated as a 
function of some effects, as vertical wind shear and floating 
feather. 
Levy et al. [14] make the assessment of emissions by 
power plants. It uses the NOAA'S RCU2 model to generate 
climatological data, spatial and temporal inputs to the 
CALMET grid. Simulation results compare the emission 
sources, in order to find the most polluted. 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

In Barsotti et al. [15], the CALMET is used to generate 
three-dimensional fields (wind and temperature) and two-
dimensional (friction velocity, Obukhov length, atmospheric 
boundary layer height and so on). This work presents a 
CALPUFF based model called VOL-CALPUFF to simulate 
the launch, the transport and the volcanic ashes deposition. 
D. CALPUFF Model Execution 
The CALPUFF model execution in the simulator is 
responsible for setting up all files and parameters needed to 
run the model. With this analysis, is possible to observe the 
entire operation of the system. 
Initially, the terrain configurations are made based in a file 
that has the x and y coordinates of all terrain and elevation. To 
obtain these information is necessary to run the TERREL. 
TERREL is a preprocessor to create the terrain elevation 
data from multiple databases to a grid specified by the user 
[4]. This preprocessor has a control file where the scanned 
files are assigned. According to the flow diagram in Figure 5, 
the first thing is to obtain the terrain and topography grid, 
using files available in WebLakes [16].  The next step is to 
configure these files as input to the control file terrel.INP. 
Once that is done you can run the module runTerrel. This 
preprocessor provides as output a formatted file containing the 
coordinates in UTM X, Y and Z (elevation of the land). 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Steps of CALPUFF model execution 
After obtaining the characteristics of the terrain, the next 
module is responsible for the configuration of the control file 
of the CALPUFF model. In this module, two files are needed 
as input: the terrain file (terrel.dat) and the region weather 
setting file (input.dat). The terrain file is provided from the 
preprocessor TERREL and the region weather file is a 
formatted file containing: day, month and year of data,  
simulation hours (1-24 hours), wind direction in degrees, air 
temperature (° C), Pasquill stability class [4] and the planetary 
boundary layer height (m). With these inputs and the 
configured control file calpuff.INP, it is possible to run the 
execution module of the CALPUFF (runCalpuff). This module 
generates its output as a binary file (conc.dat) that contains an 
average grid of pollutants concentrations, which were 
simulated in a period of time. 
To calculate the concentrations, the conc.dat file must be 
executed in CALPOST postprocessor [4]. For that, firstly, the 
calpost.INP configuration module should be setted with the 
runCallpuff. After it, the runCalpost should  be executed to the 
number of species issued. In this work, we have issued three 
species: SO2, CO and NO2. As output files are provided 
cpst_so2.LST, cpst_co.LST cpst_no2.LST and these files 
provide the concentration values in each grid point. 
The last step is the creation of the georeferenced matrices 
that have the concentrations and converted UTM coordinates 
to latitude and longitude coordinates for each gridded point. 
E. Simulation Scenario 
We have chosen the industrial zone in Rio Grande city, in 
southern Brazil, to evaluate the model. The city has a large 
number of industries which emit a large quantity of pollutants 
in the atmosphere. 
The simulator allows the user customizes the industry 
features to be inserted, according to their emission profile. The 
following features can be modified according to the desired 
simulation scenario: latitude and longitude, elevation, height 
and diameter of the stack, speed and temperature of the 
pollutant output and emission rates of pollutant source. 
In our tests, the industry is located at latitude 52.1045S and 
longitude 32.1167 W. In Figure 6 are shown the neighborhood 
map of the Rio Grande city, highlighting the industrial zone. 
This region has the following characteristics:  void elevation, 
because it is situated at sea level;  30 meters of stack height; 5 
meters of stack diameter; output speed 5m/s; output 
temperature 195.3°C; and the following emission rates:  7.4 de 
SO2, 44.39 de CO e 88.78 de NO2,  all in g/s. 
The meteorological data in the simulator are: wind 
direction and speed, air temperature, and Pasquill stability 
class [4]. All these data were captured by the meteorological 
station at Universidade Federal do Rio Grande (FURG). 
The used data correspond to a period of 24 hours in a day, 
with a propitious situation for pollutant dispersion, because   
these data present low pressure, light winds and medium 
temperatures. 
F. Results Analysis 
 
According to the scenarios described earlier, this section 
will analyze the consequences from emissions of the 
pollutants SO2, NO2 and CO in accordance with current 
legislation [4].  
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The chosen model (CALPUFF) provides the greatest 
values of pollutants concentration in a specific period. The  
highest values are compared with the data in Table I, that 
presents tolerable limits defined by law in Brazil, CONAMA 
[5]. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Industrial zone and industry location 
The Figures 2 and 3 present the results of pollutants 
concentration to the SO2 emissions (in 24 hours), the CO 
emissions (8 hours) and NO2 emissions (1 hour). 
According to the simulated results, the concentration of 
CO reached 28.019 mg/m³, the SO2 reached 4.8623 mg/m³ and  
NO2 reached 40.8490 mg/m³. Basing in Table I data, these 
values do not indicate a problem, because they do not even 
reach the lower limit (attention level). However, this is a 
hypothetical simulation in order to test the applicability of the 
proposed tool, because we had simulated just 24 hours and 
considered a single emission source. In real situations, the 
industrial interesting region has many industries with more 
than one source operating in continuous periods of time. 
Moreover, the effects of air pollution are cumulative. In this 
way, we believe that a simulation with a long period and many 
emission sources will create an attention level (or a worse 
situation). 
Although the related work presented in subsection C helps 
in calculating the concentration of pollutants, both use the 
CALPUFF associated with complex weather forecasting 
models that have high computational cost. 
Our results offer an estimate that is not so accurate due to 
the CALPUFF simplifications, but it allows application's real-
time execution. 
Furthermore, this paper presents graphic results that can be 
easily understood. The application allows saving the results 
generated in vectorial files. The application helps people and 
responsible entities in risk's evaluation using GIS software. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
This paper presented a simulator that use the CALPUFF 
non-stationary Gaussian model integrated with GIS. The idea 
is to analyze the air quality when new industries are inserted in 
a specific region.  
As showed in section IV, the CALPUFF model is very 
complex to execute, but it presents complete data about 
pollutant dispersion.  
Historically, the Rio Grande city (Brazil) has problems 
with air pollution and few works explore this scenario.  The 
second reason to choose this region is because we live here 
and we believe that computational tools could help a better 
understanding about environmental problems and improve the 
people lives. 
Our initial tests, using a hypothetical situation, just help to 
analyze how the CALPUFF model processes the data.  As 
further work, we will execute the model for a long period 
(probably two years) and many emission sources (more than 
twenty). This new scenario will present a more realistic 
situation, and more comparisons will be done.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
We thank FAPERGS (Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do 
Estado do Rio Grande do Sul – Brasil) for funding research 
and development. Grant Number 10/0049-7.  
This is a multidisciplinar project. Therefore, we will like 
thank you the Dr. Jonas Carvalho, to help in the understanding 
of CALPUFF model and the initial data of the meteorological 
station of  Rio Grande.   
REFERENCES                                                                    
[1] 
Câmara, G., Casanova, M.A., Hemerly, A., Medeiros, C.M.B. and 
Magalhães, G., “Anatomia de Sistemas de Informação Geográfica”, 
Curitiba, Editora SAGRES, p. 205, 1997.  
[2] 
Thomasi, C. D., Nunes, G., Tolego, R., Jugueiro, M., Teixeira, P., 
Adamatti, D. F. and Tagliani, C., ”Um sistema para previsão de 
impactos gerados pela instalação de indústrias e sua influência sobre 
ecossistemas costeiros no extremo sul do Brasil”, In: III WCAMA 2011, 
pp. 1455-1464 Natal / RN, 2011. 
[3] 
EPA - Environmental Protection Agency, ”User´s guide for the 
industrial source complex (ISC3), dispersion models volume II – 
Description of model algorithms”, p. 128, 1995. 
[4] 
Scire, J.S., Strimaitis D.G. and Yamartino, R.J. “A user’s guide for the 
CALPUFF dispersion Model (Version 5)”, Earth Tech. Inc. 196 Baker 
Avenue, Concord  MA 01742,  p. 521, 2000. 
[5] 
Conselho Nacional de Meio Ambiente (CONAMA), “Resolução N.º 
003”, Brazil, 28/Jun/1990. 
[6] 
Moraes, M. R., “Ferramenta para a Previsão de Vento e Dispersão de 
Poluentes na Micro-escala Atmosférica”, PhD. Thesis, Universidade 
Federal de Santa Catarina, UFSC, p. 166, Brasil, 2004. 
[7] 
Saraiva, L. B. and Krusche, N., “Condições Atmosféricas Favoráveis à 
concentração de Poluentes em Rio Grande, RS”, resumos do II 
Congresso em física da camada limite planetária e modelagem de 
processos de dispersão. Santa Maria, RS. v.1. p.14. 2001. 
[8] 
MathWorks, “MATLAB - Introduction and Key Features”, available: 
www.mathworks.com/products/matlab/description1.html accessed in: 28 
Nov. 2011. 
[9] 
MathWorks, “Mapping Toolbox Introduction and Key Features”, 
Available: 
www.mathworks.com/products/mapping/description1.html 
accessed in: 28 Nov. 2011. 
[10] Vilhena M. T.,Carvalho J. C. and Moreira D. M., “Tópicos em 
turbulência e modelagem da dispersão de poluentes na camada limite 
planetária”, Porto Alegre, Editora da UFRGS, p. 260, 2005. 
[11] Vallero D. A. “Fundamentals of air pollution”, Civil and Environmental 
Engineering Department Pratt School of Engineering Duke University 
Durham, North Carolina, p. 967, 2008. 
[12] EPA – United States Environmental Protection Agency, “A Comparison 
of  CALPUFF with ISC3”, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, EPA-454/R-98-020, p. 50, december 
1998. 
[13] Zhou  Y., Levy J.I., Hammitt  J.K. and Evans J.S., “Estimating 
population exposure to power plant emissions using CALPUFF: a case 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

study in Beijing, China”, Atmospheric Environment,  37, pp. 815–826,  
2003. 
[14] Levy, J.I., Spengler, J.D., Hlinka, D., Sullivan, D. and Moon, D., “Using 
CALPUFF to evaluate the impacts of power plant emissions in Illinois: 
model sensitivity and implications”, Atmospheric Environment 36, pp. 
1063–1075, 2002. 
[15] Barsotti, S., A. Neri, and J. S. Scire, "The VOL-CALPUFF Model for 
Atmospheric Ash 1 Dispersal: I. Approach and Physical Formulation", 
Istituto Nazionale di Geoﬁsica e Vulcanologia, Journal of Geophysical 
Research, Pisa, Italy, p. 113, 2008. 
[16] Lakes Environmental Software. Available: http://www.weblakes.com, 
acessed in: 28 Nov. 2011. 
 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

