BIM/GIS-based Data Integration Framework for Facility Management
Tae-Wook Kang†, Seung-Hwa Park‡ and Chang-Hee Hong*
ICT Convergence & Integration Research Institute
Korea Institute of Construction Technology
Seoul, South Korea
e-mail: laputa99999@gmail.com, {parkseunghwa, chhong}@kict.re.kr
† 1st Author, ‡ 2nd Author, * Corresponding Author
Abstract— In this study, we propose a software architecture for
the effective integration of building information modeling
(BIM) into a geographic information system (GIS)-based
facilities management (FM) system related to smart city
service. This requires the acquisition of data from various
sources followed by the transformation of this data into an
appropriate format. The integration and representation of
heterogeneous data in a GIS are very important for use cases
involving both BIM and GIS data, such as in the management
of municipal facilities. We propose a BIM/GIS-based Data
Integration
Framework
(DI)
that
separates
geometrical
information from that related to the relevant properties. For a
GIS based facility management, the property information is
extracted from BIM models and transformed using the ETL
(extract, transform, and load) concept. In consideration of the
viewpoint
of
geometry,
the
surface
model
for
several
representations in the GIS, we designed BG (BIM/GIS)-DI,
developed a prototype, and verified the results through
interviews. The results show that BG-DI and BIM/GIS
integration has benefits such as reusability and extensibility.
Keywords-BIM; GIS; FM; integration; surface model; BG-
DI
I.
INTRODUCTION
The integration of data through geographic information
system (GIS)-based building information modeling (BIM)
has recently emerged as an important area of research related
to developing smart city services. Several studies have
investigated the benefits of the effective integration of BIM
and GIS [1][2].
This integration process generally involves the extraction
and transformation of information required by each domain
in a single project. GIS and BIM are similar in that both are
used to model spatial information — the former is used for
outdoor modeling and the latter for indoor modeling —and
have common use cases, such as location-based municipal
facilities information queries and management, etc. In order
to implement some use cases based on BIM and GIS,
effective interoperability between GIS and BIM should be
supported by an appropriate platform.
To
facilitate
information
interoperability
in
the
construction sector, the buildingSMART, which is the
worldwide authority driving transformation of the built
environment
through
creation
&
adoption
of
open,
international standards, has developed and standardized the
Industry
Foundation
Classes
(IFC)
data
model
in
a
significant effort to accommodate industry requirements. IFC
is an integrated model schema that describes construction
information. It uses an object-oriented method to integrate
information required by the relevant stakeholders in a
project.
Even
though
the
IFC
based
information
model
integration was researched using various methods, there
were practical issues in solving the integration problem. For
example, during information exchange among heterogeneous
systems, which means more than two different software, or
commercial modeling software using IFCs, some loss or
change of information has been reported [3]. Furthermore, a
related study has pointed out various issues associated with
the integration of BIM and GIS [4].
In particular, a facilities management system that has
accumulated data over a long period tends to lack IFC
compatibility and fails to support the creation of an IFC
model. In general, the formats that a facility management
(FM) system supports for import and export are text,
spreadsheet, and relational database file, and the data in these
are heterogeneous [5]. Managing a BIM-based facility
initially requires the integration of heterogeneous data with a
BIM object. By integrating GIS and BIM, the BIM model
including the facility management data can be utilized
effectively based on GIS data. The manual integration of
heterogeneous data can incur a substantial cost and cause
incorrect data
entries, thus
hindering
correct decision
making.
For these reasons, integration among heterogeneous
datasets related to FM, and the BIM and GIS models should
be automated. Moreover, the data integration process should
be adjustable according to the use case at hand, and each
phase of integration should be testable.
This study approaches problems related to BIM-based
data integration from a practical perspective. To integrate
heterogeneous data, such as BIM, GIS, and FM data, we
propose a method to map FM data from BIM to GIS by
using a BIM/GIS-based information Extract, Transform, and
Load (BG-DI) method. To verify the effectiveness of the
proposed the architecture, we developed a prototype system
and conducted interviews with experts.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we present the research objective of this study. Section III
describes
other
conventional
approaches
from
related
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

literature. In Section IV, we describe our BG data integration
framework and, in Section V, we discuss some case studies.
We conclude in Section VI.
II.
RESEARCH OBJECTIVE
Our
purpose
in
this
study
is
to
propose
BG-DI
architecture for the effective integration of BIM, GIS, and
FM data. We design BG-DI workflow in order to define each
phase to map BIM objects to GIS objects in a CityGML
model after integrating external, heterogeneous data into the
attributes of the BIM object. For BIM object shaping, LODs
are obtained through an LOD extraction algorithm and
mapped to the LOD of the relevant GIS object. Accordingly,
we also propose an architecture that effectively integrates the
properties and shapes of the BIM object into GIS and
displays them, as this is required by the user.
In this study, we design the ETL concept for the
proposed BG-DI architecture to effectively integrate BIM,
GIS, and FM data, and provide object mapping that
transforms the BIM model —IFC —into the GIS model,
CityGML. BG-DI includes heterogeneous data extraction,
data
integration
with
the
BIM
object,
a
workflow
transforming the BIM object to the GIS object, and mapping
rules.
To test the usefulness of the proposed architecture, we
implement simple facility management use cases. We
extracted and processed information stored in the BIM
facility management database of the Korea Institute of
Construction Technology to check the information using the
GIS through the BIM model. The model uploaded to the GIS
is a surface-based model that simplifies the BIM model,
which has a large capacity, and contains information of a
degree of detail between LOD1 and LOD2. We can upload
the BIM model to an additional viewer in order to check
details beyond LOD3. When a facility object included in the
BIM model is selected, the FM information can be viewed.
Through this architecture, the information required according
to each use-case perspective is defined, processed, and
extracted through BG-DI. Thus, heterogeneous systems are
cost-effectively interrelated to form a data warehouse that
can be utilized for information mining. BG-DI provides
various data sources and facilitates function expansion. The
object geometry information of BIM can be quickly
visualized by the simplified surface model.
III.
CONVENTIONAL APPROACHES
Hijazi et al [6] proposed a mapping methodology to
extract utility information through CityGML application
domain extensions. The integration of BIM into GIS was
considered in a study on GeoBIM to extend GIS data using
CityGML and an open source-based BIM server [7].
Sebastian et al. proposed a method that expands BIM
using
an
application
domain
extension
to
support
interoperability between BIM and a GIS in relation to a
bridge construction plan [8]. Furthermore, in order to
implement a GIS-based use case, such as land selection or
fire management in the construction industry, Isikdag et al.
proposed a method to integrate BIM information into GIS
[9]. The relevant study developed a persistent schema-level
model view schema in order to convert IFC data into an
Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI) schema. It
also proposed a method that converts this data into transient
temporary object model data, integrates them with a GIS
geographic data model, and saves the final data in ESRI’s
shape file and geodatabase structures [10][11]. Expert
interviews were used to confirm the results of this study in
terms of quality according to ISO 9126-1.
Moreover, a few researchers attempted to solve problems
arising from the difference between BIM and GIS schemas
by developing a new common schema. This unified building
model
(UBM)
analyzed
IFC
and
CityGML
schema
structures and proposed a new schema [12][13].
BIM data can be converted into another schema model
depending on its structure. Such conversion is considered a
mapping-based process that, in general, consists of several
mapping conditions and rules.
In relation to this approach, Nour partially utilized a
model in order to use IFC in a cooperative team work
environment
[14].
He
pointed
out
that
schema-based
modeling tools, such as Standard for the Exchange of
Product Model Data (STEP) tools and Express Data
Management (EDM), are complex and inconvenient for the
user.
LaPierre and Cote [15] proposed another approach to
integrate data that considers a web service-based solution for
city data management using CityGML, Web Feature Service
(WFS), and
3D Viewer. Döllner and
Hagedorn [16]
researched the integration of city information from GIS,
computer-aided design (CAD), and BIM using a web service
supported by the Onuma system, and Akinci et al. [17]
proposed an ontology structure and a navigation method to
resolve the CAD and GIS use cases.
A Spatial Data Warehouse (SDW) is a system that adds a
3D model of the required information from the use-case
perspective to the existing data warehouse system. SDW has
long been studied in the field of GIS. It supports analysis and
decision making by storing non-volatile data that have
integrative and temporal properties according to the relevant
topic-centered spatial and non-spatial information regarding
properties [18]. SDWs are constructed based on spatial data
extracted from heterogeneous systems, such as a GIS and
asset management systems. BIM also focuses on the re-
utilization of object information over a certain space and can
be
effectively
utilized
from
the
perspective
of
BIM
interoperability. An SDW can be created and renewed in a
topic-oriented manner through ETL.
For data managed using FM, ETL supports effective
extraction, transformation, and
loading processes from
heterogeneous systems. Even if numeric data are the same at
the time of loading, they can have a different meaning or
representation depending on the perspective of the project
stakeholder or the user.
During the construction of a data warehouse (DW), it is
important to load only the required information by extracting
source data from the heterogeneous database management
system (DBMS) or the software used by the relevant
project’s stakeholders. The extracted data may include
geometrical spatial data, as well as non-spatial data, such as
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

properties. From the BIM perspective, spatial data extracted
and loaded through an ETL process should have a structure
that assists the data analysis requirement with respect to the
DW [19].
A recent study by Gökçe and Gökçe on ETL for
buildings centered on a case study of the energy management
system used to perform extraction, transformation, and data
loading
[20].
They
showed
that
a
single
integration
information model is not suitable for an environment where
each project stakeholder uses a different database. They
proposed an architecture where building information was
extracted from data sources and sensor data, including multi-
dimensional data, to avoid the above-mentioned problem.
Information was extracted using a wireless sensor network or
CAD and was managed in the DW.
As described above, SDWs are the focus of most DW-
and ETL-related studies. Few studies have considered data
integration in conjunction with a GIS.
Of the aforementioned studies on heterogeneous data
integration, the service- and system-based approaches may
be more effective than others in terms of system performance,
but are disadvantageous because the programming code for
system development can limit the element mapping process,
in which heterogeneous data are integrated, of the relevant
models.
These
approaches
hinder
the
flexibility
and
extendibility of a system, and require extensively specialized
problem-solving methods.
IV.
BG-DATA INTEGRATION FRAMEWORK
A.
Overview for semantic data integration between
Figure 1. Data Integration Process between IFC and CityGML
For data integration between heterogeneous data models,
mapping rules appropriate for a use-case are needed. Further,
if an element is missing when mapping from the data source
to the target information model, an algorithm that generates
the necessary element using the data source needs to be
executed prior to executing the mapping rules. Figure 1
shows such a process.
B.
Data Integration Framework Design
The BG-DI architecture should consider the scalability
and flexibility of the data integration method in order to
support interoperability. Taking this into consideration, the
architecture for supporting BIM/GIS-based FM is designed
as shown in Figure 2. The BIM/GIS middleware consists of
an IFC converter to represent GIS model, which is suggested,
BG-DI to extract the external data related to FM. Following
its extraction from the heterogeneous system, such as the
excel file, external data is stored in the DW DB. The DW
storage phase normalizes heterogeneous data in the form of a
table. Following this, the datasets stored in each table of the
DW are connected to the BIM object of IFC. To link the
BIM object and external data, such as maintenance records
stored in the excel file, the Primary Key (PK), such as the
Globally Unique Identifier (GUID), is used as the primary
key in the data schema of our database. The BIM objects are
mapped in the form of CityGML to be represented in GIS
format. Moreover, for prompt visualization, building facility
objects in the GIS are converted to a lightweight surface
format. The facility objects are represented as LOD1, LOD2,
etc., in GIS, and the shape of an object at a high level, such
as LOD4, is verified through a separate viewer.
Figure 2. BG-Data Integration Workflow
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

C.
BG-DI workflow and data mapping rule set
If connecting heterogeneous facility data and the BIM
object, and representing the data and object in the GIS are
not automated, the data modelers and FM staff need to
perform additional tasks for data integration and manual
conversion. Such manual tasks can cause side effects,
including data entry errors, and the integrity of the integrated
data can be compromised, thus generating unproductive
results. Therefore, if possible, the workflow where the
elements between set of heterogeneous data models are
mapped needs to be automated, and a standard method is
needed to verify the integrity of the data during mapping. A
BG-DI workflow is defined to standardize such data
integration. The BG-DI workflow is applied using the ETL
concept and, as shown in Figure 3, mapping the elements of
the data model between two heterogeneous systems is
completely automated.
The definition of the BG-DI workflow consists of the
following elements:
1. Extraction: Heterogeneous datasets are extracted and
stored in the form of a relational database. The necessary
data from the perspective of each use case are extracted; the
data structure is similar to a star schema, which is built in the
DW. The relationship of the table of each dataset forming the
schema should be set around the PK, as with the object
GUID, in order to connect it to the BIM object.
2. Transform: This process comprises two steps:
1) D2B_Binding: The dataset is integrated by linking it to
the relevant BIM object. The dataset is extracted from the
table stored in the DW during the extraction phase. The
parameter for setting the PK needed for the data source
stored in the DW and binding is defined as the “DataRecord”
element. The parameter is used to bind the BIM object and
the dataset of the DW through the PK field, which is
designated
in
the
“Object”
element.
The
“category”
parameter is used to distinguish the attribute categories, and
any
name
that
is
designated
here
is
saved
as
“(“+“categoryname”
+
“)”
+
“attributename”
during
CityGML’s attribute mapping.
2) B2G_MappingRuleset: The mapping rules are defined
to semantically map the integrated BIM object to the GIS
object. The mapping rules are classified into “Object,” which
is an object attribute mapping rule, and “Geometry,” which
is a shape mapping rule. Mapping a shape requires the
execution of a separate algorithm to generate the LODs.
Thus, an algorithm implementation module can be set to the
“algorithm” parameter. The mapping source is designated as
“source” and the mapping target as “destination.”
3. Load: The format mapped to a GIS object is
represented in CityGML and, for effective visualization of
the actual building facility objects when they are loaded in
the GIS, data integration post-processing may be needed.
That is, the data can be converted to a lightweight format
optimized for visualization. Such post-processing requires an
additional algorithm.
Figure 3. BG-Data Integration Workflow
BG-DI defines a mapping rule table for semantic
mapping from the BIM model to the GIS model. The
mapping tables are classified into two types, attribute
mapping and shape mapping, and is defined. Attribute
mapping is defined by naming the source and target object,
where the attribute tag “TYPE” is used to store the type of
the source object in the corresponding target object because
1:1 mapping is difficult. For shape mapping, the LOD
unavailable in the BIM model needs to be obtained through
an LOD generation algorithm and then properly mapped to
the LOD of an object, as shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4. BG-Data Integration Workflow
V.
CASE STUDY
We developed a prototype system by utilizing the
BIM/GIS-based FM software architecture described in
Section 4. The databases, which were integrated with the
current system for information interoperability, were Excel-
based structures constructed for the BIM-based FM of the
main building at the Korea Institute of Construction
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Technology (KICT), and the BIM objects were modeled
using the Revit software. The databases were constructed
according
to
existing
managed
documents.
Thus,
its
maintenance history was managed through documents and
drawings.
Many
items
of
information
were
hence
unavailable because of illegible handwriting. Furthermore, it
was difficult to obtain maintenance history data in terms of
BIM objects. Therefore, the facility maintenance historical
data was constructed on the basis of space.
The FM database for KICT was constructed in only two
months. Therefore, it was primarily divided into structural
data and maintenance history data for the space, and was
managed in Excel files. The classification code system for
the facility object information was defined according to the
construction information classification system published in
2006 by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, and Transport
(Table 1).
TABLE I. FACILITY DATA ITEM (KICT).
This table was extracted from the excel file and included
space, floor, wall, and ceiling management information
developed to manage KICT building and facilities
The FM data were extracted, transformed, and loaded
into the DW by the ETL process, and each property was
represented from the user’s perspective. From the viewpoint
of geometrical representation performance, the Surface
Model format was about 13.6 times faster than IFC format in
terms of the data loading time for sample data with
643,279,768 vertices. Figure 5 shows our prototype system.
Figure 5. Prototype System for BIM/GIS-based FM software
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed a BG-DI architecture for the
effective integration of data from heterogeneous systems of
BIM, GIS, and FM.
From the practical viewpoint of data integration, data
were divided according to their geometry and property
information, allowing the problem of GIS- and BIM-based
information
interoperability
to
be
addressed.
Property
information was extracted and transformed to obtain the
required information from a use-case perspective by utilizing
BG-DI.
Applying
BG-DI,
we
designed
an
effective
architecture for the support of information interoperability
between heterogeneous BIM, GIS, and FM systems, and
developed a prototype that implemented FM use cases. Thus,
we verified the effective integration of the required data from
the project stakeholder’s perspective.
In future work, we intend to analyze the spatial data of a
topic on the basis of the proposed architecture, and study the
effect on datasets using linkage analysis between the
previously analyzed spatial data and other spatial data. We
also intend to obtain query information required for decision
making through data mining based on BIM.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by a grant from the Strategic
Research Project (Development of BIM/GIS Interoperability
Open-Platform 2015) funded by the Korea Institute of
Construction Technology.
No
Item
Description
1
Information
classification code
Space classification based on facility
and configured as two-digit numbers
2
Actual space name
Actual space name
3
Space ID
Revit’s zone object ID
4
Manager
Name of manager
5
Space number
To
manage
room
space,
facility
managers are assigned this additional
number
6
Space
modification
history information
Maintenance history information, such
as space modified date, space area,
space perimeter, space volume, space
ceiling
height,
and
the
number
of
occupants
7
Floor
maintenance
history information
Maintenance history information, such
as space floor finish, partial repair,
repair rate, total repair, and final repair
date
8
Wall
maintenance
history information
Maintenance history information, such
as space wall finish, partial repair, repair
rate, total repair, and final repair date
9
Ceiling maintenance
history information
Maintenance history information, such
as space ceiling finish, partial repair,
repair rate, total repair, and final repair
date
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

REFERENCES
[1]
W. Wu, X. Yang, and Q. Fan, GIS-BIM Based Virtual Facility
Energy Assessment (VFEA)–Framework, Development and
Use Case of California State University, Fresno. In Computing
in Civil and Building Engineering, pp. 339-346, 2014.
[2]
I. Hijazi, M. Ehlers, S. Zlatanova, and U. Isikdag, IFC to
CityGML Transformation Framework for Geo-analysis: A
Water Utility Network Case, in 3D GeoInfo, Proceedings of
the 4th International Workshop on 3D Geo-Information,
Ghent: Ghent University, pp. 123-127, 2009.
[3]
J. I. Lim et al., IFC Test between Commercial 3D CAD
Application using IFC,
Korea Institute of
Construction
Engineering and Management 9, pp. 85-94, 2008.
[4]
R. E. Meouche, M. Rezoug, and I. Hijazi, Integrating and
Managing BIM in GIS, Software Review, in Proceedings of
the International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. XL-2/W2, pp.
31-34, 2013.
[5]
S. H. Park, “openBIM-based Operation and Management of
Architectural Design Information according to LOI (Level of
Information) for Integrated Design Process.” Ph.D. diss.,
Kyung Hee University, 2015
[6]
I. Hijazi, M. Ehlers, S. Zlatanova, and T. Becker, Initial
Investigations for Modeling Interior Utilities within 3D Geo-
context:
Transforming
IFC-Interior
Utility
to
CityGML/UtilityNetworkADE,
Advances
in
3D
Geo-
Information Sciences, pp. 95-113, 2011.
[7]
R. D. Laat and L. V. Berlo, Integration of BIM and GIS: The
Development of the CityGML GeoBIM Extension, Advances
in 3D Geo-Information Sciences, pp. 211-225, 2010.
[8]
R. Sebastian, M. Böhms, and P. van den Helm, BIM and GIS
for Low-Disturbance Construction, in Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference on Construction Applications of
Virtual Reality, 2013.
[9]
U. Isikdag, J. Underwood, and G. Aouad, An Investigation
into the Applicability of Building Information Models in
Geospatial Environment in Support of Site Selection and Fire
Response
Management
Processes,
Advanced
engineering
informatics 22, no. 4, pp. 504-519, 2008.
[10] R. Pickard, ArcView Shape Files: A Read/Write OCX, Help
File.
[Online].
Available
from:
http://arcscripts.esri.com/details.asp?dbid=11810/ 2015.12.21.
[11] M. Zeiler, Modelling Our World: The ESRI Guide to
Geodatabase Design, ESRI Press, Redlands, CA, US, 2001.
[12] M. El-Mekawy, A. Östman, and I. Hijazi, An Evaluation of
IFC-CityGML
Unidirectional
Conversion,
International
Journal of Advanced Computer Science & Applications 3, no.
5, pp. 159-171, 2012.
[13] M. El-Mekawy, Integrating BIM and GIS for 3D City
Modeling, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), 2010.
[14] M. Nour, Manipulating IFC Sub-models in Collaborative
Teamwork Environments, in Proceedings of the 24th CIB W-
78 Conference on Information Technology in Construction,
pp. 111-117, 2007.
[15] A. Lapierre and P. Cote, Using Open Web Services for City
Data Management: A Test Bed Resulting from an OGC
Initiative for Offering Standard CAD/GIS/BIM Services, City
and Regional Data Management, pp. 381-391, 2007.
[16] J. Döllner and B. Hagedorn, Integrating City GIS, CAD, and
BIM Data by Service based Virtual 3D City Models, City and
Regional Data Management, pp. 629-635, 2007.
[17] B. Akinci, H. Karimi, A. Pradhan, C. C. Wu, and G. Fichtl,
CAD
and
GIS
Interoperability
through
Semantic
Web
Services, CAD and GIS Integration, ITcon Vol. 13, pp. 39-55,
2008.
[18] S.
Chaudhuri
and
U.
Dayal,
An
Overview
of
Data
Warehousing and OLAP Technology, in Proceedings of ACM
International Conference on Management of Data, ACM
SIGMOD 26, pp. 65-74, 1997.
[19] K. Krivoruchko, C. A. Golway, and A. Zhigimont, Statistical
Tools for Regional Data Analysis using GIS, in Proceedings of
the ACM International Symposium on Advances in GIS, pp.
41-48, 2003.
[20] H. U. Gökçe and K. U. Gökçe, Multi-Dimensional Monitoring,
Analysis and Optimization System for Energy Efficient
Building Operations, in Proceedings of ECPPM 2012, 2012,
pp. 139-144.J. I. Lim et al., IFC Test between Commercial 3D
CAD Application using IFC, Korea Institute of Construction
Engineering and Management 9, pp. 85-94, 2008.
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

