Specifying the Engineering Viewpoint of ICA’s Formal Model in a Corporate 
Spatial Data Infrastructure 
 
Rubens Moraes Torres, Jugurta Lisboa-Filho 
Departamento de Informática 
Universidade Federal de Viçosa 
Viçosa, MG, Brazil 
e-mail: rubens.torres@ufv.br, jugurta@ufv.br 
Italo Lopes Oliveira  
Departamento de Informática e Estatística  
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina 
Florianópolis – SC - Brazil 
e-mail: italo.oliveira@posgrad.ufsc.br
Carlos Alberto Moura, Alexander Gonçalves da Silva 
Companhia Energética de Minas Gerais (Cemig) 
Belo Horizonte – MG – Brazil 
e-mail: camoura@cemig.com.br, ags@cemig.com.br 
 
 
Abstract— The International Cartographic Association (ICA) 
proposed 
a 
formal 
model 
to 
describe 
Spatial 
Data 
Infrastructure 
(SDI) 
regardless 
of 
technologies 
or 
implementations using the Reference Model of Open 
Distributed Processing (RM-ODP) framework. The framework 
consists of five viewpoints. ICA’s model specified the 
Enterprise, Computational, and Information viewpoints, but 
not the Engineering and Technology viewpoints. The 
Companhia Energética de Minas Gerais (Cemig) has 
developed an SDI, called SDI-Cemig, aiming to facilitate the 
discovery, sharing, and use of geospatial data among 
employees and consumers. This paper presents a specification 
of the SDI-Cemig components using the Engineering viewpoint 
based on ICA’s formal model. 
Keywords- ICA Model; SDI; RM-ODP;  Engineering 
Viewpoint. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Users access a Spatial Data Infrastructure (SDI) aiming 
to recover and carry out operations on geospatial data for 
spatial-temporal analyses and to use decision-making 
support mechanisms in those systems [1]. The growth in SDI 
creation and use derives from the increase in geospatial data 
available. Currently, geospatial data are generated daily by 
people using devices (e.g., cameras, tablets, smartphones), 
web systems, sensors (e.g., Global Positioning System 
trackers and cameras), and by initiatives of businesses and 
corporations to map data on Earth’s surface [2]. According to 
Harvey et al. [3], SDIs improve the sharing and use of 
geospatial data and services, which helps different users of a 
given community.  
The Companhia Energética de Minas Gerais (Minas 
Gerais Power Company - Cemig), a corporation comprising 
over 200 companies, is developing SDI-Cemig in order to 
help its employees and clients share and discover geospatial 
data. The research & development project called “Geoportal 
Cemig – SDI-Based Corporate GIS” is funded by a 
partnership between Cemig and the Fundação de Amparo à 
Pesquisa do Estado de Minas Gerais (Research Support 
Foundation of the State of Minas Gerais - Fapemig). One of 
the goals of this project consists in creating a method to 
develop corporate SDIs. 
The International Cartographic Association (ICA) has 
proposed a model to describe SDIs by specifying three of the 
five viewpoints of the Reference Model for Open Distributed 
Processing (RM-ODP), namely the Enterprise, Information, 
and Computational viewpoints [4]. The other viewpoints of 
the RM-ODP framework, i.e., Engineering and Technology, 
were not described in the ICA’s model.  
The ICA’s formal model for SDI was later extended by 
other researchers to describe more properly the actors and 
policies in the SDI [5]-[9]. According to Oliveira et al. [7], 
the ICA’s formal model can be adapted to describe corporate 
SDIs, with the open possibility of creating the Engineering 
and Technology viewpoints.   
This study presents the specification of the Engineering 
viewpoint for SDI-Cemig, based on the adapted formal SDI 
model by the ICA. The paper is structured as follows. The 
Section II details, briefly, studies that specify SDI through 
the use of the RM-ODP. Section III describes the ICA’s 
formal SDI model. Section IV presents the specification of 
the Engineering viewpoint for SDI-Cemig. Section V 
discusses the results presented in this study and Section VI 
reports final considerations and possible future works. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Several studies have used the RM-ODP to specify an SDI 
[10]-[13]. The research in [10] specifies only the 
stakeholders of the Namibian SDI using as model the actors 
specified in [4]. The proposal in [11] aims to improve the 
urban planning and management through the use of an SDI. 
The authors specify the RM-ODP Information viewpoint of 
an SDI, considering the inherent requirements of the urban 
planning. The remaining viewpoints of the RM-ODP are not 
specified. The framework developed in [12] specifies 
semantic SDI (SSDI) using the RM-ODP. Only the 
Enterprise, Information and Computation viewpoints are 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

detailed. At last, [13], as [4], proposes a reference model for 
the marine SDI of Germany (MDI-DE) using the RM-ODP. 
However, in [13], only the Enterprise viewpoint is presented.  
Differently from the studies cited in this section, our 
study presents the specification of the Engineering viewpoint 
from an SDI that, at the best of knowledge, has not been 
detailed in the SDI literature. Moreover, our specification is 
based on a formal model which, with exception of [10], is 
not presented in the studies detailed. 
III. 
ICA’S FORMAL MODEL FOR SDI SPECIFICATION 
The RM-ODP framework results from a partnership 
among the International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), 
and the Telecommunication Standardization Sector [14]. It 
consists of a framework to specify heterogeneous distributed 
systems, 
enabling 
the 
distribution, 
interoperability, 
portability, platform independence, and technology [15]. 
In Hjelmager et al. [4], the ICA proposed the use of the 
RM-ODP model as a reference to design and create an SDI. 
Its use allows modeling actors, policies [4], data semantics, 
objects, and features [6] required for an SDI. One advantage 
of using the model is the great independence of technology 
and implementation [4]. For example, two companies may 
use the same modeling to implement their respective SDIs 
while using different sets of technologies with no need to 
change the modeling. 
RM-ODP comprises five viewpoints, where each 
represents an architectural viewpoint of the system [16]. The 
viewpoints do not show isolated parts of a system, but rather 
describe a different viewpoint of the same system. By using 
viewpoints, the model is specified as five smaller models, 
with each viewpoint accounting for specific relevant issues 
[14][17]. Fig. 1 illustrates a diagram representing those five 
viewpoints. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Viewpoints of the RM-ODP framework [4]. 
According to Linington et al. [17], the Enterprise 
viewpoint defines the scope and policies of the system, 
where the system requirements are defined. The Information 
viewpoint works with information semantics and its 
processing, describing the structures and types of data used. 
The Computational viewpoint defines a distribution by 
functionally breaking down the system into objects that 
interact in interfaces. It describes the features provided by 
the system and objects are built based on its features. The 
Engineering viewpoint is built based on the mechanisms and 
features required, supporting interactions distributed among 
the objects that make up the system. It describes the 
distribution of processing and communication among its 
several objects. The Technology viewpoint is related to the 
needs of the system regarding technology, describing the 
technologies 
required 
for 
processing, 
features, 
and 
information visualization. 
This study approaches only the Engineering viewpoint of 
SDI-Cemig. The detailed definitions of the Enterprise, 
Information, and Computational viewpoints can be found in 
[8][9]. The Technology viewpoint is beyond the scope of this 
study and shall be specified in future works. 
A. Engineering Viewpoint 
The Engineering viewpoint aims to identify and specify 
interactions among distributed objects, focusing on their 
communication, 
organization, 
and 
distribution. 
It 
comprehends the distribution of compounds and the 
connections among them, besides defining common roles to 
support the distribution of components [18].  
One advantage of using the Engineering viewpoint is 
creating a neutral and independent model not bound to 
specific technologies. That provides freedom in the choice of 
available and preferred technologies in an organization 
wishing to implement a given project. Along with the idea of 
a neutral model, a certain technology may be more easily 
replaced in case the organization decides to change it for 
private internal reasons [19]. 
Below, there are some components that are part of the 
Engineering viewpoint, according to [17], which were used 
to model SDI-Cemig in Section IV.  
Basic Engineering Object (BEO) corresponds to the 
smallest representation when specifying the modeling.  It is a 
special type of object in the Engineering viewpoint that 
represents 
a 
computational 
object 
defined 
in 
the 
Computational viewpoint that may also represent an actor, 
human or not, in the system. BEOs represent abstractions of 
elements that make up the system.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Viewpoints of the RM-ODP framework [4]. 
Fig. 2 illustrates the organization of objects in the 
Engineering viewpoint. A hierarchy can be seen among 
objects in the viewpoint. For example, within a Node there 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

are Capsules, within a Capsule there are Clusters, and within 
a Cluster there are BEOs. 
A cluster consists in a collection of BEOs grouped into 
similar functions and having lifecycles in the system [18]. A 
capsule represents a unit independent of processing or 
storage that is able to support an object collection. They are 
isolated from each other so as to ensure a capsule does not 
directly interfere with another. The node represents a 
physical 
or 
virtual 
object 
capable 
of 
processing, 
communication, and storage. It may represent a computer, 
the assembly of several devices that together determine a 
unit, a virtual machine in a computer, as long as the element 
has the capabilities mentioned above. They also have a high 
degree of isolation [17]. 
The structure of components in the Engineering 
viewpoint is split into components isolated from the capsule 
element. Therefore, mechanisms must be used in the 
communication among elements in distant structures. To that 
end, a communication channel structure is employed [19]. 
 
Figure 3.  Overall organization of Engineering objects in SDI-Cemig. 
Communication 
channels 
represent 
a 
transparent 
communication infrastructure, which allows objects in the 
Engineering viewpoint to interact, and are commonly used in 
the communication among BEOs of different nodes. A 
channel often does not need to be specified in detail since 
they are implemented at a lower level and the goal of the 
channel is to represent a communication among elements 
[17]. 
IV. 
ENGINEERING VIEWPOINT OF THE SDI-CEMIG 
As described in Section I, Cemig seeks to develop an 
SDI, called SDI-Cemig, to help its employees and clients 
discover, share, and use geospatial data and services. This 
Section describes the Engineering viewpoint of SDI-Cemig. 
The Technology viewpoint is beyond the scope of this study, 
thus, it will not be detailed, while the Enterprise, 
Information, and Computational viewpoints of SDI-Cemig 
have already been described in [8][9]. 
The modeling of SDI-Cemig used ICA’s adapted formal 
model for SDI. In order to create and name the elements, the 
examples provided by [17] when detailing the Engineering 
viewpoint were used as reference. The notation used terms 
that had meaning closer to their functionality. Names begin 
with a capital letter and the next words are never separated 
with spaces, also beginning with a capital letter. Since some 
components would have similar or even the same names, 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

prefixes and suffixes were used in the nomenclature to 
differentiate their functionalities.  
The overall organization of the specification of the 
Engineering viewpoint for SDI-Cemig is shown in Fig. 3. 
That figure represents the elements of the viewpoint grouped 
according to the functionalities of their objects. The overall 
organization represents a global view of the components of 
the Engineering viewpoint and is organized into two 
divisions: ObjectsDistribution and NV_Objects. 
The division NV_Objects groups objects represent the 
basic elements, represented by BEOs, which are grouped 
into packages of similar functions. The objects were grouped 
into four packages:  HumanBEOs, ApplicationBEOs, 
PresentationBEOs, and DataBEO. 
The package HumanBEOs includes the actors that take 
part in the application, defined as: User, Supplier, 
OperationalBody, 
and 
Cataloguer. 
In 
the 
package 
PresentationBEOs, the BEOs represent the interfaces for the 
actors included in the package HumanBEOs. In its 
nomenclature, the prefix GUI2 (graphical user interface to) is 
added to the corresponding name in the package 
HumanBEOs. Therefore, the components of the package 
PresentationBEOs 
were 
described 
as: 
GUI2User; 
GUI2Supplier; 
GUI2OperationalBody; 
and 
GUI2Cataloguer.  
The package ApplicationBEOs represents the features 
actors in SDI-Cemig may use in its functioning and 
administration. They represent three roles found by [9] that 
are required for the functioning of SDI-Cemig. The suffix 
Ops (Operations) is added to its nomenclature in each of its 
components. 
The 
components 
created 
were: 
PortraitSDICemigOps; 
DataSDICemigOps; 
and 
CataloguerSDICemigOps. 
Finally, the package DataBEOs has BEOs related to 
information of the database. The package has components 
with roles in data storage and management. The suffix 
DataMgr (Data manager) was adopted in its nomenclature.  
One way of improving the performance of information 
processing is to use object replication in a seamless way 
[16]. It can be seen that some elements have the number zero 
after the DataMgr suffix. This number indicates that the 
component is a replication of the component of analogous 
name and its goal is to reach better performance in the use of 
the application. The following objects of the DataBEO 
package were duplicated: ManagementMetadataDataMgr, 
ManagementVectorialDataMgr, and ManagementMatricial-
DataMgr. 
It 
can 
be 
seen 
that 
the 
component 
ManagementCatalogDataMgr was not replicated since it is a 
component with catalog functionality and does not deal with 
large information volumes. 
The 
second 
division, 
ObjectsDistribution, 
has 
components that represent the logical distribution and 
communication. It is made up of two packages: Nodes and 
Channels. The package Nodes represents a set of Node 
elements defined for the system, whose definition can be 
found in Subsection 3.A. For SDI-Cemig, four Nodes were 
defined: 
UserPresentation; 
AdministrationPresentation; 
CoreCemig; and ManagementDataCluster0. 
The package Channels used the suffix Chl (Channel) in 
its nomenclature. The package aims to perform the 
communication of the components since the Nodes are 
isolated and need a means to communicate. The following 
channels 
were 
defined: 
PortraitSDICemigChl; 
DataSDICemigChl; 
CataloguerSDICemigChl; 
and 
StockSDICemigChlDistribution of Engineering Objects of 
SDI-Cemig.  
According to Becerra et al. [19], the Engineering 
viewpoint specifies a communication infrastructure that must 
support the distribution of objects of the Computational 
viewpoint with no regard for the choice of technologies to 
implement it. Fig. 4 presents a version of the distribution of 
compounds of the Engineering viewpoint in SDI-Cemig 
grouped according to their interactions with other 
computational objects and packages grouping them. 
According to Linington et al. [17] Engineering objects 
represent in an abstract way the distribution and organization 
of the system, enabling a technology-independent modeling. 
The administration of Engineering objects in SDI-Cemig 
were grouped into five groups: HumanBEOs, representing 
actors specified in the Enterprise [8] and Computational [9] 
viewpoints, namely: UserPresentation - represents the 
interfaces 
used 
by 
the 
actor 
User; 
AdministrationPresentation - represents the interfaces among 
the actors that manage the system; ManagementDataCluster 
- represents performance functionalities with the use of data 
replication; and CoreCemig - represents the system’s 
processing 
core. 
CoreCemig 
is 
subdivided 
into 
ApplicationCluster - responsible for the system’s features, 
ManagementCatalogCluster - responsible for a catalog of 
information 
available 
in 
the 
application, 
and 
ManagementDataCluster - responsible for the storage of data 
in the system.  
The Engineering objects of the group HumanBEOs 
represent objects defined in the Enterprise viewpoint, each 
with its own access interface. Each client of the system has 
its own presentation layer with an analogous name. For 
instance, for the object Supplier of SDI-Cemig, there is an 
object in the presentation with the name GUI2Supplier. 
The communication among the objects in the clusters 
UserPresentation, 
AdministrationPresenttion, 
and 
ApplicationCluster, the latter representing the system 
features, is performed through channels since they are in 
different Nodes. As shown in Fig. 4, there are three 
communication channels among the presentation clusters and 
feature cluster. PortraitSDICemigOps, DataSDICemigOps, 
and CataloguerSDICemigOps. 
The channels are responsible for the communication 
between the presentation and feature layers contained in the 
application cluster. The link of each component to a given 
object and its required interfaces is based on the 
Computational viewpoint created by Oliveira et al. [9]. 
  
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 4.  Engineering viewpoint of SDI-Cemig. 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The channel PortraitSDICemigChl is responsible for 
performing 
the 
communication 
targeted 
at 
PortraitSDICemigOps. It fulfills requests coming from 
GUI2User and GUI2OperationalBody for map visualization 
and comprises the following interfaces: GetMap_WMS, 
GetFeatureinfo_WMS, and GetCapabilities_WMS. 
The 
channel 
DataSDICemigChl 
performs 
the 
communication to DataSDICemigOps serving the interfaces 
GUI2User, GUI2OperationalBody, and GUI2Supplier. It 
plays a role in transmitting geographic information. 
Interfaces 
included: 
GetPropertyValue_WFS, 
DescribeCoverage_WCS, 
GetCoverage_WCS, 
GetFeature_WFS-G, 
DescribeFeatureType_WFS, 
DescribeFeatureType_WFS-G, 
GetCapabilities_*, 
and 
Transaction_*. The channel CatalogSDICemigChl fulfills 
the 
requests 
of 
GUI2User, 
GUI2OperationalBody, 
GUI2Supplier, and GUI2Cataloguer. The channel fulfills 
requests related to the SDI catalog. It serves the interfaces 
GetRecords_CS, GetRecordbyID_CS, GetCapabilities_CS, 
GetRecords_CS, Transaction_CS, and Harvest_CS. 
V. 
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 
ICA’s model brings together a set of basic concepts that 
an SDI requires to work. The creation of the Engineering 
viewpoint for SDI-Cemig is a continuation and extension of 
the studies by Oliveira et al. [8][9] on the specification of the 
Enterprise, Information, and Computational viewpoints for a 
corporate SDI.  As in the cited studies, the Engineering 
viewpoint described in the present study meets the basic 
requirements (e.g., enabling the discovery, recovery, sharing 
of geospatial data) of an SDI. 
The Engineering viewpoint comprises structurally 
isolated nodes, i.e., nodes that work independently. 
Therefore, a failure in one component does not directly lead 
to a failure in another component. In case of a component 
being restructured, the others do not need to be adapted, 
since the communication is performed through channels and 
the new structure only needs to use the same communication 
structure of existing channels. Regarding the components, 
the system may receive new features through the creation of 
new objects and communication channels. 
According to Oliveira et al. [9], the model applied in the 
specification of the SDI-Cemig can be used to build others 
corporate SDIs. It is observed that the SDI-Cemig has a 
restriction in the proposed specification, that is, it does not 
have geoprocessing services for a production of new 
geospatial data. 
The viewpoint proposed in this work constitutes a 
continuation of this specification, maintaining the proposal 
for widespread use. The specification is proposed in such 
way that the new corporate SDIs implementations fit with 
the above-mentioned restriction. If there is the need to 
include new geoprocessing services or modifying existing 
one in the SDI, the model allows the expansion of 
functionality in the specification through the creation of new 
components.  
This study, together with [8] and [9], present, at the best 
of our knowledge, the most complete specification of an SDI 
existing in the literature, approaching 4 of 5 of the RM-ODP 
viewpoints.  Furthermore, our case study is based on a 
corporate SDI, whose kind is not sufficiently discussed in the 
literature. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTUREWORK 
By specifying the fourth viewpoint of the ICA’s model, 
SDI-Cemig now has four viewpoints specified: Enterprise; 
Information; Computational; and Engineering. Since the 
RM-ODP framework comprises five viewpoints, only the 
Technology viewpoint still has to be specified, which, as the 
Engineering viewpoint, is not approached by ICA’s SDI 
formal model. It must meet the requirements of the 
viewpoints already created and the company’s technological 
availability. 
The specification of the Engineering viewpoint for SDI-
Cemig suggests that a similar specification may be used in 
other corporate SDIs, particularly of companies in the power 
sector. In case changes are required, the construction of the 
specification in modules enables the required adaptation to 
include new features. The specification of SDI-Cemig using 
ICA’s adapted SDI formal model may help researchers and 
designers who wish to model SDIs based on the ICA’s 
model even if they comprise a different SDI level.  
Intended future works include specifying the Technology 
viewpoint of SDI-Cemig while checking it fits the 
viewpoints already created.  After its specification, the 
specification will contemplate the five viewpoints of the 
RM-ODP model. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research project was partially funded by Fapemig 
and CAPES, along with Cemig. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Jhummarwala, M. D. Potdar, and P. Chauhan, “Parallel 
and distributed gis for processing geo-data: An overview”, 
International Journal of Computer Applications, v. 106, n. 16, 
pp. 9–16, 2014. 
[2] J. Carpenter and J. Snell, “Future trends in geospatial 
information management: The five to ten year vision”. UN-
GGIM, pp. 11–16, 2013. 
[3] F. Harvey, A. Iwaniak, S. Coetzee, and A. Cooper, “SDI past, 
present and future: a review and status assessment”, Spatially 
Enabling Government, Industry and Citizens, 2012. 
[4] J. Hjelmager et al.,“An Initial Formal model for Spatial Data 
Infrastructure”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Geographic 
Information Science, v. 22, n. 11-12, pp. 1295-1309, 2008. 
[5] R. Béjar, M. A. Latre, J. Nogueras-Iso, P. R. Muro-Medrano, 
and F. J. Zarazaga-Soria, “An RM-ODP enterprise view for 
spatial 
data 
infrastructures”, 
Computer 
Standards 
& 
Interfaces, v. 34, pp. 263-272, 2012. 
[6] A. Cooper et al.,“A Spatial Data Infrastructure Model from 
the Computational Viewpoint”, International Journal of 
Geographical Information Science, v. 27, n. 6, pp. 1133-1151, 
2013. 
[7] I. L. Oliveira and J. Lisboa-Filho, “A Spatial Data 
Infrastructure Review – Sorting the Actors and Policies from 
Enterprise Viewpoint, Proceedings of the 17th International 
Conference on Enterprise Information Systems”, vol. 17, pp. 
287-294, 2014. 
[8] I. L. Oliveira, J. Lisboa-Filho, C. A. Moura and A. G. Silva, 
“Especifying the Enterprise and Information Viewpoints for a 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Corporate Spatial Data Infrastructure using ICA’s Formal 
Model”,  In: 18th International Conference on Enterprise 
Information Systems, 2016, Rome. Proceedings of the 18th 
International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems, 
2016. 
[9] I. L. Oliveira, J. Lisboa-Filho, C. A. Moura, and A. G. Silva, 
“Specifying the Computation Viewpoints for a Corporate 
Spatial Data Infrastructure Using ICA's Formal Model”, 
International Conference on Computational Science and Its 
Applications, Springer International Publishing, 2016. 
[10] K. M. Sinvula, S. Coetzee, A. K. Cooper, E. Nangolo, W. 
Owusu-Banahene, V. Rautenbach and M. Hipondoka, “A 
Contextual ICA Stakeholder Model Approach for the 
Namibian Spatial Data Infrastructure (NamSDI)”, In 
Cartography from Pole to Pole, pp. 381-394, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2014. 
[11] F. M. Qureshi, A. Rajabifard and H. Olfat, “Facilitating urban 
planning and management at local level through the 
development of SDI (case study of Lahore-Pakistan)”, 2009. 
[12] T. D. Fernández and J. L. C. Fernández, “Towards semantic 
spatial data infrastructures: a framework for sustainable 
development”, In Proc. GSDI 10th Conference, 2008. 
[13] C. Rüh, P. Korduan and R. Bill, “Development of the 
reference model for the marine spatial data infrastructure 
Germany (MDI-DE)”, EnviroInfo 2011: Innovations in 
Sharing Environmental Observations and Information, 419-
425, 2011. 
[14] K. Raymond, “Reference Model for Open Distributed 
Processing (RM-ODP): Introduction”, Open Distributed 
Processing, pp. 3-14, 1998. 
[15] K. Farooqui, L. Logrippo, and J. De Meer, “The ISO 
Reference Model for Open Distributed Processing: an 
introduction”, Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, v. 27, 
n. 8, pp. 1215-1229, 1995. 
[16] C. Egyhazy, and R. Mukherji, “Interoperability Architecture 
Using RM-ODP”, Communications of ACM, vol.47, n. 2, 
2004. 
[17] P. F. Linington, Z. Milosevic, A. Tanaka, and A. Vallecilo, 
“Building Enterprise Systems with ODP: An Introduction to 
Open Distributed Processing”, CRC Press, 2011. 
[18] J. R. Putman, “Architecting with RM-ODP”, Prentice Hall, 
New Jersey, 2000. 
[19] J. L. R. Becerra, E. Garcia-Jr, N. Tanomaru, D. N. Moraes et 
al. (2003) “Arquitetura de um Middleware Corporativo na 
Companhia de Transmissão de Energia Elétrica Paulista”, 
Polytechnic School USP, São Paulo, 2003. 
 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

