 
Specification for a Shared Conceptual Layer in GIS 
 
 
Enguerran Grandchamp 
Département Mathématiques et Informatique 
LAMIA, Université des Antilles et de la Guyane 
Pointe-à-Pitre, Guadeloupe France 
e-mail: egrandch@univ-ag.fr 
 
 
Abstract - During the last decade, GIS have suffered of the 
lack of structured information and semantic definition of the 
data. The numerous origins of the data and the spatial 
localization of the object inferred many inconsistencies among 
them. Indeed, the way to collect data and the level of sampling 
of the boundary differ from one application to another and 
from one expert to another. This leads to different 
representations of the same reality and different models of 
semantically identical objects or boundaries. To allow the 
matching of the objects, or parts of the objects, when 
combining different information layers we introduced a 
conceptual layer which described a scene with concepts and 
spatial relationships based on the definition of an ontology. 
This layer allows detecting and solving conflicts between the 
common boundaries of two objects. We present in this paper 
the specification and the way to build and use the ontology. 
 
Keywords - GIS; Information Fusion; Ontology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, geographic information invades our life with 
more and more applications (navigation, localization, 
survey, security, etc for tourism, energy, environment, urban 
deployment, etc.). This growing of applications requires 
more and more data collected by different ways and 
different peoples leading to a great heterogeneity. 
Geographic database are not well structured and 
consistent because of the numerous and non experts 
producers of information.  Indeed, there are so many 
information layers and terminologies as people that produce 
them. 
Moreover, the way to collect the data could be very 
different from high technologic tools (GPS receptors) to 
visual lecture on a map. Depending on the application, the 
expert needs few descriptions of the objects geometry or on 
contrary detailed ones. 
All these considerations lead to different representations 
of the same reality with different accuracy (localization, 
description, etc.). This is particularly the case for natural or 
semi-natural limits such as forest, agriculture, etc. which are 
not well defined or localized (in contrast to buildings for 
example). The main problem is that most of the 
representations do not coincide; but we could not say that 
one is worst or better than the others. This is just an 
arbitrary choice of the vertices to sample the objects.  
 
If the impact of such differences is not a problem for a 
thematic exploitation, there is a consequently propagation of 
errors when dealing with multi thematic problematic. 
Indeed, the main drawback of this heterogeneity is that 
the power of the spatial analysis is reached when combining 
different thematic layers (agriculture and environment, 
roads and emergency, rainfall and population, etc.) and due 
to localization mistakes this combination leads to 
inconsistent information. Applications like the ones 
presented in [13] and [14] suffer from these localizations 
errors.  
 
   In order to avoid mistakes, we decide to refer to a 
conceptual view of the scene which describes the objects in 
terms of spatial relationships, geometry and semantic.  
   This view is an ideal representation of the scene and is 
based on the definition of an ontology and spatial relations. 
An ontology is considered as being a set of concepts and 
relation between them. It gives semantic information to the 
scene. 
Section 2 presents related works on spatial ontologies, 
ontology integration in GIS and localization errors 
correction. Section 3 explains the way to build the ontology. 
Section 4 deals with the conceptual layer. Section 5 explains 
the way to use the conceptual layer to solve conflicts and 
then Section 6 gives the conclusions and perspectives of this 
study. 
 
13
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

II. 
RELATED WORKS 
We present here related works concerning ontology 
integration in GIS and spatial object localization correction. 
As Fonseca et al. [7][8] and later Cruz et al. in 2005 [5], 
defined an ontology driven GIS, there isn’t any operational 
framework for an ontology integration in GIS. 
The association between spatial data and ontology is done 
with external tools such as SPIRIT [18] or GeoSVM [7]. 
The first step in integrating ontologies in GIS is to define 
ontologies on spatial data. The main objective of these 
ontologies is to represent concepts linked to a specific 
expert domain (biology, geology, tourism, urgency, etc.) 
and also spatial relationships between them [25]. Many 
authors ([7], [8], [16], [23]) propose specific ontologies 
which differs from the used terms and features to describe 
the concepts. Indeed, depending on the application and 
domain some concepts could be described by different ways 
and with different levels of detail as if they are semantically 
identical. 
The choice of the most adapted ontology for an 
application is not easy. 
 
The second step is to introduce ontologies in GIS. Many 
authors introduce them in different ways.  
Viegas et al. [24] and Baglioni et al. [2] create an 
intermediate semantic layer between the user and the 
geodatabase in order to facilitate the user’s queries. 
In [6], [10] and [11] the spatial ontology is used to 
facilitate object classification. 
 
Concerning the correction of localization errors of spatial 
objects, to the best of our knowledge, the only approach to 
solve the problem of corresponding points between different 
information layers is expressed in [26] and uses buffer area 
to fuse vertices. This approach has two main drawbacks: the 
process is applied over all vertices (i) without distinction 
between semantically different ones (ii) without integrating 
spatial relationships.  
III. 
ONTOLOGY BUILDING 
There are many ways to build a geographic ontology. 
Many different ontologies had been defined in the literature, 
each one done for a specific application. 
We have to choose among them the most appropriate ones. 
The first thing to do is to extract the Intersection Knowledge 
between these ontologies in order to have a common and 
recognized basis. After that, we select the Augmenting 
knowledge linked to a specific domain or expert [12]. To 
compare these ontologies and detect similarities we have to 
define metrics ([9], [19], [21]).  
Figure 1. extracted from [12] summarizes the notion of 
Intersection and Augmenting Knowledge. 
 
 
Figure 1. Ontologies intersection ([12]) 
 
We built the ontology by joining different independent 
ontologies compared to more general ontologies using 
similar or synonym terms ([17], [20], [24]) with the 
following criterion: (i) recognized ontology or commonly 
used one, (ii) built with a complete hierarchical object 
model, (iii) written with OWL (Ontology Web Language). 
In particular, we use SWEET (Semantic Web for Earth and 
Environmental Terminologies) ontology. 
The ontology is introduced in the GIS using annotations 
in the data and in the metadata [22]. 
    
There is also automatic process to produce the ontology 
from the geographic data themselves [1], but the restricted 
area of interest and the numerous experts domains limits the 
advantage and efficiency of such a method and we prefer a 
manual building based on metrics evaluation. 
IV. 
THE CONCEPUTAL LAYER 
The process presented in this article is summarized in 
figure 2. Objects A and B come from different layers and 
represent different kind of objects or not. Depending on the 
application we decide to trust the boundary of object A (the 
case illustrated) or B. Decision criterions could be (i) the 
scale sampling of the objects (ii) the distance in the 
semantic space between the belonging class of A and B and 
the application (i.e. we prefer to trust river boundaries in an 
application concerning water). In the illustrated example, 
the boundary between A and B must be the same in the 
conceptual layer (example: A and B are to related 
agricultural fields). 
 
Figure 2. Process 
14
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

But the boundaries are not the same in the two layers 
(Area C appears between objects A and B). We decide to 
conserve the boundary of object A because it is the most 
reliable one in the context of the application. 
Because they will always have different ways to model 
the same object, we do not have to adopt a unique 
representation. 
As 
an 
example, 
depending 
on 
the 
observation scale, a building could be seen as a point, a 
square, or a more detailed polygon. Depending on the 
expert, the focus will be done on environment objects or 
urban ones. So we prefer adding semantic information 
concerning the data and the instances in order to have a 
common reference to compare the different view of the 
same data. 
 
But nowadays, there isn’t any way to define a vertex or a 
boundary as being an external resource or reference. As an 
example, if in a soil occupation layer we want to refer to a 
river defined in a hydrology layer we couldn’t do it in a 
simple and normalized way. We can only do it during the 
layer creation step if we define an object as being the 
intersection or union of others object taken from sources 
layers. But as soon as the layer is created there is no link 
kept between layers and objects. So if we update the sources 
layers, changes are not propagated to the built layer. 
To solve this problem we propose a common conceptual 
layer which regroups an ontology, representing the concepts 
of the scene, and the spatial relationships (topology) 
between concepts and instances. 
 
A. Ontology 
The ontology regroups the concepts present in the scene. 
We have to link these concepts with each object in the 
information layer in order to specify that an object is an 
instance of one or several concepts. To do so, we add a 
descriptive field in the table of the information layer which 
refer to concepts in the ontology and give information such 
as is instance of. 
 
B. Spatial Relation 
The proposed conceptual layer is a kind of extension in 
the GIS environment of the spatial relation hierarchy 
proposed in [4]. 
The authors of [4] define three levels for the 
representation of spatial relationships: the geometric level, 
the computer level and the user level. The geometric level is 
an abstract representation of the relations that we can 
consider to be exact (we use this level for the conceptual 
layer). The computer level takes into account the object 
reality and is a spatial relationships and geometric view of 
the information layer. If object geometry or relationships are 
altered in the information layer, this level will also be 
altered. We will compute this level directly from the data by 
analyzing the spatial relation between objects in order to 
qualify and quantify the relations. The user level is a 
restricted view of the information linked to the domain of 
the user and won’t be used in the scope of this framework. 
At the geometric level, we characterize: (i) the relations 
between the concepts of the ontology (more a qualification 
than a quantification).  For example, the concept private 
house could be considered as being linked to the concept 
road. (ii) the relations between the instances of the concept 
(more a quantification than a qualification). For example, 
house n°123, touch, road n°12. 
To characterize the spatial relations, Egenhofer [27] defines 
topological relations with intersection and overlapping 
(based on 4 or 9 intersection). These relations take into 
account: 
1. The relative position which are strict (touch, 
intersects, etc.) or vagueness (close to, etc.). They 
could be binary (on the left, far from, etc.) or 
ternary (between [3]), and rarely quaternary 
(neighborhood). 
2. The proportion (partially, completely, etc.) which 
are also vagueness. 
3. Uncertainty: perhaps, certainly. 
Some of these relations imply dependences between 
objects [15]. As an example Objects A and B are around C 
doesn’t implies constraints between A and B but in the 
formulation Objects A and B are on both sides of C implies 
a dependences between the location of A and B.  
Among all these characterizations of the spatial 
relationships, the strict relative position such as touch, 
intersect, within or disjoined are useful to solve conflicts. 
Other relations such as close to or perhaps don’t give 
enough information to solve conflicts. 
V. 
SOLVING CONFLICTS 
Now let us look at the way to use the conceptual layer to 
solve conflicts between different representations of the same 
topological elements (objects or boundaries). 
Firstly, it’s easy to compute the computer level. We only 
have to describe each spatial relation between objects of the 
scene. Secondly, it’s easy to compare the computer level 
with the geometric level and to localize the conflicts (as an 
example Object A intersects Object B in the computer level 
and Object A touches Object B in the geometric level). This 
could be done with the concepts or instances. Because most 
of the objects are localized with a relative good accuracy, 
conflicts between the two levels will not concerned relations 
such as far from instead of close to. Most of the conflicts 
will be generated by close objects having touching or 
merged boundaries in the geometry level and intersected 
one in the computer level. 
Thirdly, we have to solve conflicts leading to unwanted 
intersections when combining layers. The aim is not to 
15
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

change the representation of the objects and to modify the 
layers but only to intervene during the combination (union 
or intersection) of the layers. So we built the results of the 
combination by considering the geometry level and by 
choosing a unique representation for the objects concerned 
by the conflict. The choice is done by considering the 
domain and accuracy of each layer. The priority is given to 
the layer close to the domain of the expert using the GIS or 
to the more accurate one. Indeed, as explained earlier in this 
paper, the same object or boundary could be described at 
different scales leading to matching problems. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper present the specifications for a conceptual 
layer shared between information layers in a GIS. The main 
objective of this layer is to propose an intermediate step to 
solve the matching problem of two corresponding objects or 
boundaries during the combination of different information 
layers. Indeed, if two vertices representing the same 
topological or semantic objects don’t match, the union or 
intersection of the layers will lead to inexistent objects. 
By referring to the conceptual layer, which regroups both 
concepts and spatial relationships, we will fuse the two 
different representations of the same object and choose a 
unique representation according to the application. 
    At present, the proposed framework is only at the 
specification step, but every technological ways to 
implement it have been studied and the implementation has 
already started and will be presented in a future paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Fonseca, M. A. Rodríguez, and S. Levashkin, “Building geospatial 
ontologies from geographical databases”, In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on GeoSpatial Semantics (GeoS 2007), 
Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4853, pp. 195–209, 
Berlin, 2007 
[2] M. Baglioni et al., “Ontology-supported Querying of Geographical 
Databases”, In Transactions in GIS, vol. 12, issue s1, pp. 31–44, 
december 2008 
[3] I. Bloch et al., “Modeling the spatial relation between for objects with 
very different spatial extensions”, In Proceedings of Reconnaissance 
des Formes et Intelligence Artificielle (RFIA'06), Tours, France, 
Janvier 2006 
[4] E. Clementini and R. Laurini, "Un cadre conceptuel pour modéliser 
les relations spatiales", In Revue des Nouvelles Technologies de 
l’Information (RNTI, vol. 14, pp. 1-18, novembre 2008 
[5] I. Cruz, W. Sunna, and K. Ayloo, “Concept-level matching of 
geospatial ontologies”, In Proceedings of GISPlanet, Lisbon, 
Portugal, 2005 
[6] S. Derivaux, G. Forestier, C. Wemmert et S.Lefèvre, "Extraction de 
détecteurs d’objets urbains à partir d’une ontologie", In proceedings 
of Extraction et Gestion de Connaissances (EGC), vol. 2, pp. 71-81, 
Sophia, 2008 
[7] F. Fonseca, M. Egenhofer, P. Agouris, and G. Câmara, “Using 
ontologies for integrated geographic information systems”, In 
Transactions in GIS, vol. 6, pp. 231–57, 2002 
[8] F. Fonseca, J. Martin, and A. Rodríguez, “From geo to eco-
ontologies”, In Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Geographic Information Science, pp. 93–107, Boulder, Colorado, 
2002 
[9] F. Fonseca, G. Camara, and A. M. Monteiro, “A framework for 
measuring the interoperability of geo-ontologies”, In Spatial 
Cognition and Computation, vol. 6, pp. 309–31, 2006 
[10] G. Forestier, S. Derivaux, C. Wemmert et P. Gançarski, 
"Interprétation d’images basée sur une approche évolutive guidée par 
une ontologie", In proceedings of Extraction et Gestion de 
Connaissances (EGC), vol. 2, pp. 469-474, Sophia, 2008 
[11] G. Forestier, S. Derivaux, C. Wemmert et P. Gançarski, “An 
Evolutionary Approach for Ontology Driven Image Interpretation”, In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Applications of 
Evolutionary Computation (Evo'08), Springer, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Sciences, vol. 4974, pp 295--304, Italy, 2008  
[12] M. Gahegan et al., “A Platform for Visualizing and Experimenting 
with Measures of Semantic Similarity”, In Ontologies and Concept 
Maps, Transactions in GIS, vol. 12 issue 6, pp. 713-732, 2008 
[13] E. Grandchamp, “GIS information layer selection directed by remote 
sensing for ecological unit delineation”, In IGARSS, 2009 
[14] E. Grandchamp, “Raster-vector cooperation algorithm for GIS 
Application to ecological units delineation”, In GeoProcessing, 2010 
[15] H. W. Guesgen and J. Albrecht, “Imprecise reasoning in geographic 
information systems”, In Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol. 113, pp. 121-
131, 2000 
[16] L. Gutierrez, “WP 9: Case study eGovernment D9.9 GIS ontology, 
“http://dip.semanticweb.org/documents/D9-3-improved-
eGovernment.pdf “, last access : 17/01/2011, 2006 
[17] C. Hudelot, J. Atif, and I. Bloch, "Ontologie de relations spatiales 
floues pour le raisonnement spatial dans les images", In proceedings 
of Représentation et Raisonnement sur le Temps et l’Image (RTE), 
2006  
[18] Jones C. B. et al., “Spatial Information Retrieval and Geographical 
Ontologies: An Overview of the SPIRIT project”, In Special Interest 
Group on Information Retrieval (SIGIR), ACM Press, pp.387 – 388, 
Finland, 2002 
[19] M. Kavouras, M. Kokla, and E. Tomai, “Comparing categories 
among geographic ontologies”, In Computers and Geosciences, vol 
31, pp 145–54, 2005 
[20] N. E. Maillot and M. Thonnat, “Ontology based complex object 
recognition”, In Image and Vision Computing, vol 26, pp 102–113, 
2008 
[21] M. A. Rodriguez and M. Egenhofer, “Determining semantic 
similarity among entity classes from different ontologies”, In IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 15, pp. 442– 
56, 2003 
[22] N. Schuurman et al.,”Ontology-Based Metadata”, In Transactions in 
GIS, vol. 10, pp. 709–726, 2006 
[23] B. Smith, ”Ontology and information systems”, http://www.loa-
cnr.it/Papers/FOIS98.pdf, last access : 17/01/2011, 2001 
[24] R. Viegas and V. Soares,  “Querying  a  Geographic  Database  using  
an  Ontology-Based Methodology”,  In Brazilian  Symposium  on  
GeoInformatics (GEOINFO  2006), pp. 165-170, Brazil 2006 
[25] N. Wiegand et al., “A Task-Based Ontology Approach to Automate 
Geospatial Data Retrieval”, In Transactions in GIS, vol. 11, issue 3, 
pp. 355–376, 2007 
[26] P. A. Zandbergen, “Positional Accuracy of Spatial Data: Non-Normal 
Distributions and a Critique of the National standard for Spatial Data 
Accuracy”, In Transactions in GIS, vol. 12, issue 1, pp. 103–130, 
2008 
[27] M. Egenhofer and R. D. Franzosa, “Point-Set Topological Spatial 
Relations”, In International Journal of Geographical Information 
Systems, vol. 5(2), pp. 161-174, 1991 
 
16
GEOProcessing 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-118-2

