Generation of Land Cover Maps  
Using High-Resolution Multispectral Aerial Cameras 
 
Joachim Höhle 
Aalborg University, Department of Planning 
Aalborg, Denmark 
jh@land.aau.dk 
 
 
Abstract─The generation of land cover maps has new advanced 
tools at its disposal. Besides new aerial cameras also new 
advanced processing tools are available. Elevations can be 
derived from images with high density and high positional 
accuracy. The combination of multispectral high-resolution 
imagery and high-density elevations for the automatic 
generation of land cover maps is discussed by means of a 
practical example. Imagery of a new aerial camera is used 
together with advanced software for generation of digital 
elevation models and for derivation of vegetation maps. These 
two products are the input for classification of land cover. A 
high degree of automation can be achieved. The obtained 
results of a practical example are checked with reference 
values derived from ortho-images in natural colour and from 
colour images using stereo-vision. An error matrix is applied in 
the evaluation of the results. The classification had an overall 
accuracy of 79%. Suggestions for the improvements in the 
applied methodology are made. The potential of land cover 
maps lies in updating of topographic databases, quality control 
of maps, studies of town development, and other geo-spatial 
domain applications. The automatic generation of land cover 
maps is also a trend in future mapping. 
Keywords-land cover map; classification; assessment; 
multispectral camera; map revision. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Automated classification of aerial images has to be able 
to distinguish between objects on the ground and objects 
above ground. It is difficult to distinguish between buildings 
and parking lots or trees and grass. Land cover maps can be 
generated with a higher semantic accuracy when information 
on elevations is available. The updating of topographic 
databases will profit from such an approach. Of special 
interest are the built-up areas where most of the changes 
occur and where the actuality of the map data is very much 
in demand. Usually, high-resolution images are used for the 
generation of topographic databases. Aerial cameras have 
improved considerably in the last 10 years. The new 
generation of aerial cameras has features which will make 
the generation of land cover maps easier and more reliable. 
The processing tools have improved too. Besides the 
professional (expensive) software tools nowadays open 
source software tools (freeware) are available. All the 
necessary tools have to be tested whether they fulfil the 
requirements of the practice. It is the goal of this contribution 
to use imagery of a new aerial camera and to produce land 
cover maps. In contrast to traditional approaches (where only 
intensity values of images are used) elevations will be used 
in addition. Three-dimensional point clouds are generated 
from high-resolution images with a very high density and 
positional accuracy. Furthermore, the multispectral images of 
the camera allow an automated classification of vegetation 
and other features. This approach for generating land cover 
maps has the potential for a fully automated processing. The 
land cover maps can be the base for updating of topographic 
databases and for several other geo-spatial domain 
applications.  
The accuracy of classification has to be assessed. From 
the gained experiences recommendations for the generation 
of land cover maps and the revision of topographic databases 
will be given. The paper starts with some general remarks on 
the revision of map databases. The new generation of aerial 
cameras and processing tools is presented afterwards. A 
practical example of a land cover map generation is then 
carried out using up-to-date software tools including some 
own developments. The results are assessed by means of 
statistical methods. A conclusion is drawn and possible 
future work is outlined. 
II. 
GENERAL REMARKS ON THE REVISION OF MAP 
DATABASES 
The revision of topographic databases requires detection 
of changes and errors. From the obtained results a decision 
has to be taken, in which way the renewal of the map 
database is to be carried out. It may be a completely new 
mapping, but mostly, an updating and correction of the 
existing information is carried out. This is done locally and 
in relatively small areas. It depends what type of data have to 
be revised. There are topographic databases in 2D and 3D. 
Sometimes only the important objects are updated, for 
example, buildings, roads, and trees. The process of updating 
should be an automatic process. This is at least the goal of 
today’s map makers because stereo-plotting by operators is 
an expensive undertaking. Therefore, such work is often 
outsourced. In the past, a lot of efforts have been done to 
automate the detection of changes. Progress has been 
achieved using a semi-automated process. The automatically 
found changes will guide the operator to map new objects 
and to delete the obsolete ones. This may save some time for 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the operator, but the semi-automated process is not without 
costs, delays, and logistic problems. In order to automate 
also the mapping of the changes in 3D, the generation of a 
land cover map and of a digital elevation model (DEM) will 
be a first step. The automatic generation of land cover maps 
in 2D applies classification. The classification techniques use 
several attributes like spectral signature, texture, shape, etc. 
Also elevation has been taken as an attribute. If only 
elevations are used in classification, it is difficult to separate 
vegetated ground from parking lots and roads. The combined 
use of images and elevations is therefore a much better 
approach for the generation of land cover maps in 2D and 
3D. The use of different data sources requires that all data 
are in the same reference system and that they have a good 
positional accuracy. Furthermore, all of the new data should 
be acquired simultaneously. Such conditions cannot always 
be fulfilled in practice. In addition, there are economic 
constraints that updating of topographic databases has to be 
carried out at low costs and in short time intervals.  
In the past several studies have been carried out in the 
revision of maps, for example in [1]. In a project of the 
European Spatial Data Research (EuroSDR) different 
approaches were investigated [2]. Some research groups only 
used images, others used elevations only. The combination 
of images and elevations has also been suggested. Reference 
[3] used ortho-images of different times in order to derive 
areas of change. Reference [4] detected residential land use 
of buildings from lidar and aerial photographs through 
object-oriented classification. The event of a new generation 
of digital aerial cameras and of new processing software has 
changed the situation. It is therefore a goal of this paper to 
apply these new tools and to generate land cover maps 
automatically. The impact of such maps for the updating of 
topographic and other databases will also be discussed. Up-
to-date data are the prerequisite in all geo-spatial domain 
applications. Land cover maps are often used for studies in 
town development. The changes in areas of buildings, traffic 
and vegetation over several years are studied in [5]. In that 
investigation the land cover maps are derived from vector 
maps and low-resolution satellite images. The applied 
classification of the images used intensity values only. The 
additional use of elevations of high density (as in this 
investigation) should result in more reliable results. 
III. 
NEW DIGITAL AERIAL CAMERAS 
With the appearance of new advanced digital aerial 
cameras the generation of land cover maps has new tools at 
its disposal. There are different types and models of aerial 
cameras; only three of the new cameras will be discussed in 
the following: the Hexagon/Intergraph DMCII 250, the 
Microsoft 
UltraCam 
Eagle, 
and 
the 
Hexagon/Leica 
Geosystems RCD30 camera. Details of the cameras are 
described in recent publications [6] [7] [8]. All three are 
frame cameras, and they can produce images of high 
resolution and high geometric quality. They are designed for 
mapping tasks. The produced images have different features; 
the major ones are listed in Table I. There is a considerable 
difference in the format of the output image. The RCD30 is a  
TABLE I.  
FEATURES OF THREE NEW DIGITAL AERIAL CAMERAS. 
Features 
UC 
Eagle 
DMCII 
250 
RCD30 
 pixel size                                          [µm] 
5.2 
5.6 
6.0 
 focal length                                     [mm] 
80 
112 
50, 80 
 image size(in flight direction)          [pel] 
                                                         [mm] 
13 080 
68.0 
14 656 
82.1 
6708 
40.2 
 image size(across flight direction)   [pel] 
                                                         [mm]  
20010 
104.1 
17216 
96.4 
8956 
53.7 
 number of pixels per image             [MP] 
262 
252 
60 
 
medium-format camera; the other two cameras are 
considered as large-format cameras. A larger format requires 
less flying in order to cover an area to be mapped assuming 
that the images of all cameras have the same ground 
sampling distance (GSD). The necessary length of the flight 
is an economic factor, and large-format cameras have an 
advantage in projects covering large areas. All three cameras 
can produce black&white, colour and false-colour images 
simultaneously. Newly designed lenses match the resolution 
of the sensor(s) and enable high image quality. The cameras 
are calibrated, and the obtained calibration data are used to 
correct the images in geometry and radiometry. Additional 
sensors for position (GNSS) and attitude (IMU) can be 
supplemented and will support accurate georeferencing of 
the imagery. 
Because the RCD30 images will be used in the following 
practical example some more details have to be mentioned. 
The colour images are produced from one CCD with Bayer 
filters. The infra-red band is imaged by a second CCD of the 
same high resolution (pixel size=6 µm x 6 µm). Image 
motion is compensated mechanically in two axes. 
The output images are corrected for distortion, light-fall 
off of the lens and non-uniformity for dark signals. Two 
different lenses can be used without the need of re-
calibration. In order to obtain images with GSD=0.05 m they 
have to be taken from 417 m above ground with a 50 mm 
lens. One frame will cover 0.15 km2 on the ground. A gyro-
stabilized mount can be used which will prevent big tilts of 
the imagery.  
The potential of the mentioned new cameras with respect 
to automatically derived elevations has been investigated in 
[9]. 
IV. 
PROCESSING TOOLS 
The generation of land cover maps from images requires 
various software tools. They reach from general image 
processing to dedicated software for photogrammetry, 
remotes sensing and GIS. One of the problems to overcome 
is the big amount of data. The work with small units may be 
necessary. One 64-bit computer with 8 Gb RAM (as it was at 
disposal in this investigation) is not an optimal processor. 
More computer power is necessary to solve the task for large 
areas. The many different tools are expensive if they have to 
be acquired from software vendors. Some software was 
available as freeware and open source. Such tools were 
preferred for this task. Some programming has been carried 
out using R-language, which is also available as open source.  
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

V. 
PRACTICAL EXAMPLE 
A practical example has been carried out in order to 
evaluate the proposed approach. A residential area in 
Switzerland with buildings, roads, paved paths, parking lots 
as well as trees, hedges and grassland was photographed. 
The size of the area is about one hectare. Errors and changes 
in topographic objects should be discovered. Of special 
interest are the errors and changes in the man-made objects. 
A. Outline of the methodology 
The land cover map to be produced should comprise the 
following classes: ‘buildings’, ‘trees&hedges’, ‘grass’, 
‘roads&parking lots’. These objects have certain attributes 
which will be used in the classification process. The used 
attributes are elevation and vegetation, which can 
automatically be derived from images. False colour images 
allow a separation of the image content in vegetated and 
non-vegetated 
areas 
using 
the 
Normalized 
Density 
Vegetation Index (NDVI). True colour images are used to 
derive a very dense 3D point cloud by means of matching 
corresponding image parts. The very dense point cloud has 
to be transformed into a Digital Surface Model (DSM). 
Filtering and editing will generate a Digital Terrain Model 
(DTM). The difference between the DSM and the DTM is 
the normalized Digital Surface Model (nDSM). NDVI data 
and nDSM data have to be in the same reference system. 
The DTM is also used for the production of a false colour 
ortho-image which is further processed to a NDVI map 
containing two classes (vegetation, non-vegetation). NDVI 
and nDSM information is then used to produce a land cover 
map. Fig. 1 depicts the steps in the production of the land 
cover map. Details of the classification process are also 
presented in a flowchart (cf. Fig. 2). Separation into ground 
and above ground or vegetated and non-vegetated areas is 
realized by specifying thresholds. At the position of the 
DSM points the NDVI attributes (vegetated or non-
vegetated) are assigned. The classification of all DSM 
points with their attributes (ground, above ground, 
vegetated, non-vegetated) is then carried out and the result 
is plotted using different colours for the selected classes 
(‘buildings’,’trees&hedges’,‘grass’,’roads&parking lots’). 
B. Data 
The used RCD30 imagery includes four bands (red, 
green, blue, near infrared) from which colour and false-
colour images can be composed. Each image has about 6.4 
Megabyte (Mb). The images were taken with a GSD of about 
5cm. The images are geo-referenced and data of the 
geometric calibration (camera constant, pixel size) have been 
provided. As reference data a colour ortho-image has been 
generated. Furthermore, a map of building footprints was 
produced by digitizing from a stereo-pair of colour images.  
C. Applied tools 
For the generation of a 3D point cloud the Match-T 
program, version 5.4, of the Trimble/Inpho Company could 
be used [10]. Filtering of the data has been carried out
 
 
Figure 1.  Steps in the production of a land cover map. 
automatically using filters of the professional program 
“DTMaster”, version 5.4. Some manual editing was 
necessary and has been carried out by the same program. The 
orthoimages in false colours have been produced by Inpho’s 
”OrthoMaster” program. The difference between the two 
elevation models (nDSM) has been calculated by a program 
produced in C-language. The generation of the land cover 
map was carried out by an R-program. Input was the nDSM 
and the NDVI map. The NDVI map was generated by the 
open source software LEOWorks, version 4.0 [11]. The 
produced land cover map was graphically improved by 
means of the Quantum GIS program, version 1.7.4, which is 
an open source Geographic Information System [12]. The 
assessment of the land cover map used the DTMaster 
program which enabled dynamic positioning to derived 
sample data. 
D. Results 
The calculation of the 3D point cloud revealed a 
theoretical height accuracy of σZ = 0.16 m. The absolute 
accuracy of the DSM was determined by means of a few 
check points and resulted in RMSEZ = 0.22 m. The obtained 
nDSM had a relatively high density (up to 16 points/m2). Its 
accuracy is estimated with RMSEZ ≈ 0.3m. The NDVI map 
had two levels which were separated by a threshold of NDVI 
> 0.1. The threshold for separating low and tall vegetation or 
non-vegetated objects was selected with 1.0 m. The result of 
the classification using these two inputs is depicted in Fig. 3. 
The four classes are plotted by different colours and symbols 
and can be well separated from each other. This land cover 
map is georeferenced and can therefore be overlaid by a map 
of the building footprints (cf. right part of Fig. 4). The land 
cover map is based on the numerical output of the 
classification. Besides the spatial coordinates (Easting, 
Northing, elevation (ZDSM)), the difference in  
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
Figure 2.  Classification flowchart. 
 
Figure 3.  Result of classification. Legend: Red dots (‘buildings’), brown 
dots (‘roads&parking lots’), bright green dots (‘grass’), dark green dots 
(‘trees&hedges’). 
elevation (dZ) between the DSM and DTM  and the type of 
the point (class) are contained in the listing (cf. Table II). 
The list represents a “classified point cloud” and can be used 
for other purposes than mapping as well.  
E. Checking of the classification accuracy 
The classification can be checked visually. Fig. 4 depicts 
the input data together with the result. The overlay of 
TABLE II.  
EXAMPLE OF A “CLASSIFIED POINT CLOUD”. 
                     Easting     Northing   Z     dZ     class 
537129.2  5228938.6  486.5  0.2  “grass" 
537129.2  5228938.7  488.5  2.3  "trees&hedges" 
537144.5  5228987.4  486.4  0.0  “roads&parking lots" 
537128.0  5228938.3  490.8  4.2  "building" 
 
building footprints with the land cover map shows pretty 
good agreement. The buildings and the trees are well 
separated. The shaded DSM and the land cover map display 
even small changes in elevations. For example, hedges can 
clearly be recognized in the land cover map.  
Errors in the separation between grass land and paths can 
be noticed in the shadows of houses. A few differences in the 
buildings can also be recognized. The manual mapping of 
the buildings used some generalizations with the result that 
balconies and extensions are missing. This is evident in the 
overlay of building outlines onto the land cover map. 
The numerical assessment of the result can be done by 
means of reference values. These are derived by manual 
interpretation of a reference. For each class a number of 
DSM-points are randomly selected and compared with the 
reference. The accuracy of the classification is derived by 
applying an error matrix as suggested in [13]. The achieved 
classification accuracy is derived overall and for each class. 
It is distinguished between producer’s and user’s accuracy.  
As reference, the colour ortho-image, which is based on 
the DTM, is chosen first. The classification has been verified 
at 91 randomly selected samples per class, altogether at 364 
positions respectively. The sum of reference values in each 
class is listed as rows of the error matrix (cf. Table III). For 
example, at 91 sample positions of the class ‘buildings’ 43 
were identified as ‘buildings’, 31 as ‘roads & parking lots’, 5 
as ‘trees&hedges’ and 12 as ‘grass’ by means of a manual 
determination of the reference.  
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  False colour ortho-image, shaded DSM and land cover map with overlay of building outlines. 
TABLE III.  
ERROR MATRIX OF THE DERIVED LAND COVER MAP BY 
EVALUATION OF TRUE COLOUR ORTHO IMAGES. 
 
The overall accuracy of the classification is 68%. Of 
interest are the results for each class. The producer’s 
accuracy for each class is 98% (‘buildings’), 64% (‘roads & 
parking lots’), 78% (‘trees&hedges’), and 57% (‘grass’). The 
user’s accuracy of ‘buildings’ is 47%, of ‘roads&parking 
lots’ 86%, of ‘trees&hedges’ 55%, and of ‘grass’ 85%.  
More accurate reference values can be obtained by means 
of stereovision using true colour images. The results are 
given in Table IV. The classification has been calculated 
again. The overall accuracy is 79%. The producer’s accuracy 
for each class is 94% (‘buildings’), 85% (‘roads&parking 
lots’), 60% (‘trees&hedges’), and 63% (‘grass’). The user’s 
accuracy of ‘buildings’ is 70%, of ‘roads&parking lots’ 92%, 
of ‘trees&hedges’ 59%, and of ‘grass’ 94%.  
For the evaluation of the result the Kappa analysis is 
applied. Furthermore, the variance of Kappa (K) and the 
significance of the error matrix (Z statistic) are calculated by 
means of formulae published in [13]. The results are 
presented in Table V.  
 
TABLE IV.  
ERROR MATRIX OF THE DERIVED LAND COVER MAP BY 
EVALUATION UNDER STEREO VISION OF TRUE COLOUR IMAGES. 
 
 
TABLE V.  
ERROR MATRIX AND RESULT OF KAPPA ANALYSIS. 
Error matrix 
 
Variance 
Z statistic 
analysis #1 (ortho)  
0.58 
0.00100 
18.2 
analysis #2 (stereo) 
0.71 
0.00116 
20.7 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
The achieved overall accuracy derived from the 364 or 
260 samples is 68% and 79% respectively. The user’s 
accuracy is more important than the accuracy of the producer 
and will therefore be discussed further. The classification of 
buildings with 47% is poor when the evaluation is done by 
means of the true colour ortho-image. Much better is the 
result for ‘roads&parking lots’ and ‘grass’ (86% and 85% 
respectively). The class ‘trees&hedges’ is correct by 55%. 
When evaluation is done by means of colour images under 
stereovision (which requires the Z-coordinate of the sampled 
data) ‘buildings’ are classified with 70% which is a much 
better result. The classification of ‘roads&parking lots’ is 
achieved with even 92%. According to [14] the Kappa 
values (0.58 and 0.71) represent a moderate agreement 
between the classification and the reference data. The 
derived variances are small; the Z-statistic–value is far above 
1.96 which represents a 95% confidence level. This means 
that the applied classification is significantly better than 
random. The comparison of the analysis #1 with analysis #2 
shows about the same result for the Z-statistics (18.2 and 
20.7). A statistical test indicated that the difference between 
the two Kappa values is significant. The results may be 
further improved by applying a bigger threshold than 1m in 
elevation or by additional steps in the elevations in order to 
separate more classes, for example shrubs, hedges, walls, etc. 
Also corrections for shadows and displacements of elevated 
objects in standard ortho-images could be considered. That 
means that true ortho-images instead of standard ortho-
images could be used. Economic considerations will decide 
this question. The use of true ortho-images needs digital 
building models (DBMs), which are not generally available. 
The production of accurate DBMs is pretty expensive. The 
applied evaluation by means of stereovision is very useful.  
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Σ 
1 buildings 
43 
31 
5 
12 
91 
2 roads&parking lots 
0 
78 
1 
12 
91 
3 trees&hedges  
1 
6 
50 
34 
91 
4 grass 
0 
6 
8 
77 
91 
Σ 
44 
121 
64 
135 
364 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Σ 
1 buildings 
64 
12 
15 
0 
91 
2 roads&parking lots 
1 
84 
3 
3 
91 
3 trees&hedges  
3 
1 
27 
15 
46 
4 grass 
0 
2 
0 
30 
32 
Σ 
68 
99 
45 
48 
260 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

VII. EVALUATION 
In this paper elevation data of high density have been 
derived from aerial images. The applied high-resolution 
multispectral images also enabled an automatic classification 
of vegetation. By means of a combined use of elevation and 
vegetation data a land cover map could be produced with a 
high degree of automation. Such a map is the graphical 
output of a “classified point cloud” of high density. In the 
example the attributes of the point cloud were the spatial 
coordinates 
(Easting, 
Northing, 
and 
elevation), 
the 
normalized height and four classes (grass, roads and parking 
lots, trees and hedges, and buildings). The “classified point 
cloud” may have more classes when an extended 
classification algorithm will be used. For example, steps in 
the normalized height can differentiate various types of 
vegetation. In addition, water areas can automatically be 
extracted from the near-infrared channel of the multispectral 
imagery. 
Decisive for good results of land cover maps is the 
quality of the applied imagery. A measure for the image 
quality is the so-called Point Spread Function (PSF). It is 
derived from edges within the image. The width of the PSF 
is considered as ‘scale factor of the effective pixel size’ [15]. 
This factor has been derived for one of the applied images 
with k=1.27 (average between centre and edge of the image). 
Such a value is close to values found for large-format aerial 
cameras [15]. In addition, the so-called Photo Response Non 
Uniformity should be checked. In tests of the applied 
imagery it was found that the intensity values were nearly the 
same in the centre and the edge of the image. This means 
that the classification of vegetation using NDVI has had 
prerequisites for good results. This could be confirmed by 
checking the vegetation map where only 6.4% errors were 
found. All of these investigations revealed good results for 
the applied imagery. The use of a medium-format digital 
camera (which is considerably less expensive than a large-
format camera) is also a novel approach for the generation of 
land cover maps. 
Digital Terrain Models, Digital Surface Models, as well 
as original 3 D points clouds may already exist for large 
areas. The generation of land cover maps may use such 
elevation data of existing databases. However, a quality 
control should be carried out whether the data are “fit for 
purpose”. High density, high positional accuracy, and 
completeness of the elevation data are prerequisites of the 
presented approach. Many other data in existing databases 
may be useful for the generation of land cover maps. The 
extraction of various data from existing databases and 
combining with new imagery is one of the big challenges in 
GIS technologies. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Land cover maps are a mapping product which has many 
applications. They can be used for the updating of 
topographic databases and for the quality control of 
topographic databases. Other applications are establishing of 
tree cadastres in municipalities and general studies in town 
development. The new tools like advanced aerial cameras 
and processing software packages make the automatic 
generation of land cover maps easier and more accurate. 
Especially, the use of elevations yields better results in the 
classification. The quality control by means of stereo-
observations has to be used in order to receive reliable 
reference values. The described approach for the generation 
of land cover maps can be further improved by using 
information of existing databases. The number of classes can 
then be increased. Such an approach should be applied for 
large areas and comprise different types of urban areas. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The author thanks Hexagon/Leica Geosystems for 
providing image data. Trimble/Inpho and K. Jacobsen, 
Leibniz University Hannover, are thanked for loaning of 
software. M. Höhle supported the author in programming. B. 
Nørskov is thanked for improving the English language. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. P. Olsen, “Maintenance of digital topographical map databases—
change detection,” PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 
Lyngby, 2004, 122p. 
[2] N. Champion, “Detection of unregistered buildings for updating 2D 
databases,” EuroSDR Official Publication, no. 56, 2009, pp. 7-54. 
[3] A.A. Nielsen and B. P. Olsen, “Change detection for semi-automatic 
map database updating,” National Survey and Cadastre, Denmark, 
technical report series number 09, 2010, 24 p. 
[4] X. Meng, N., Currit, L. Wang, and X. Yang, “Detect residential 
buildings from lidar and aerial photographs through object-oriented 
land-use classification”, Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote 
Sensing, vol. 78, no. 1, 2012, pp. 35-44. 
[5] L. Halounova, K. Veprek, and M. Rehak, “Geographic information 
systems models of 40-year spatial development of towns in the Czech 
Republic”, Proc. GEOProcessing, 2011, pp. 75-80.  
[6] K. Jacobsen and K. Neumann, “Property of the large-format digital 
aerail camera DMC II”, Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial 
Inf. Sci., XXXIX-B1, 2012, pp. 21-25. 
[7] M. Gruber, M. Ponticelli, R. Ladstädter, and A. Wiechert, “UltraCam 
Eagle, details and insight”, Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 
Spatial Inf. Sci., XXXIX-B1, 2012, pp.15-19. 
[8] R. Wagner, “The Leica RCD30 medium-format camera: imaging 
revolution,” Proc. Photogrammetric Week ’11, Wichmann Verlag, 
2011, pp. 89-95. 
[9] J. Höhle, “On the potential of new digital aerial cameras for DEM 
generation,”The Photogrammetric Journal of Finland, vol. 22, no. 2, 
2011, pp. 27-36. 
[10] T. Heuchel, A. Köstli, C. Lemaire, and D. Wild, “Towards a next 
level of quality DSM/DTM extraction with Match-T,” Proc. 
Photogrammetric Week ’11, 2011, Wichmann Verlag, pp. 197-202. 
[11] ASRC, “LEOWorks, version 4.0,” 2011. http://leoworks.asrc.ro 
(accessed 23.07.2012)  
[12] QGIS, “User Guide of Quantum GIS program, version 1.7.0,” 207 p., 
2011.  
http://download.osgeo.org/qgis/doc/manual/qgis1.7.0_user_guide_en.
pdf (accessed 21.07.2012) 
[13] R. G. Congalton and K. Green, “Assessing the accuracy of remotely 
sensed data,” CRC Press, 183p., 2009, ISBN 978-1-4200-5512-2.  
[14] J.Landis and G. Koch, “The measurement of observer agreement for 
categorical data”, Biometrics, vol. 33, 1977, pp. 159-174. 
[15] K. Jacobsen, “Tells the number of pixels the truth?-Effective 
resolution of largesize digital frame cameras”, Proc. ASPRS Annual 
Conference, Portland, Oregon, 2008, 7p. 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

