Development of a System Prototype for Insurance Rate Information Based on 
Natural Disaster Risk
 
Jihun Kang, Insu Lee, and Jung Ok Kim 
Spatial Information Research Institute 
Korea Cadastral Survey Corporation 
Seoul, Korea 
{kangdaejang, les05, jungok}@lx.or.kr 
 
 
Abstract—In Korea, a research has been conducted on 
individual insurance rates for natural disasters. However, 
there is no system yet for managing comprehensive disaster 
insurance rate data or for representing an insurance rate map. 
In this study, a system for preparing Natural Disaster 
Insurance rate maps is proposed to transparently operate and 
activate the natural disaster insurance. Then, the availability of 
the insurance rate management is confirmed to develop a 
prototype system based on the aforementioned architecture. 
Keywords-Insurance rate; insurance rate system; natural 
disaster; disaster map; open source. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Over the last decade, Korea’s financial damage from 
natural disasters has reached 8.3293 trillion won. Such 
damage has been caused mainly by floods due to heavy rains 
(51.6%), typhoons (26.3%), heavy snowfall (20.2%), and 
wind/gale (1.9%) [1]. For the victims to effectively recover 
from property losses in all kinds of storm and flood damages, 
Korea developed a Natural Disaster Insurance and has been 
operating it since 2008 [2]. 
Natural Disaster Insurance, which is controlled by the 
National Emergency Management Agency and is sold and 
operated by private insurance companies, charges a single 
rate across all regions [3]. To investigate the viability of this 
single-rate issue, a study on the application of individual 
insurance rates by region is ongoing. Also, in 2014, a Natural 
Disaster Insurance Rate Map was produced based on a study 
in Ulsan, South Korea.  
Since 
individual 
insurance 
rates 
are 
calculated 
considering the risks (caused by typhoons, flooding, and 
snowfall) of the concerned area all together, they can be 
complex and variable. Because the Natural Disaster 
Insurance Scheme should be fair and reliable, it must be 
managed using a system. In this study, to verify the need for 
such a system, a web-based system prototype for the 
Insurance Rate information management was developed. 
Moreover, the availability of the system was confirmed by 
overlaying various spatial data on the insurance rate map and 
suggesting a system construction plan.  
II. 
INSURANCE RATE INFORMATION SYSTEM PROTOTYPE 
A web-based prototype system for a Natural Disaster 
Insurance rate information service was developed. The 
architecture of the system design is shown in Figure 1. The 
design of the architecture based on open-source software can 
be advantageous in cost and ease of use. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Software architecture of the prototype system 
 
The Client tier consists of the web browser for displaying 
the information, Openlayers as the 2D Geographic 
Information System (GIS) engine, and Quantum GIS for 
managing the natural disaster risk data (insurance rate map) 
and the map-based data such as Digital Elevation Model 
(DEM) and the digital map. Although Quantum GIS is not 
directly related to the web-based prototype system, it is 
needed for the modification of the data such as for the 
projection transformation. The Server tier consists of Tomcat 
[5] for processing web applications, Geoserver for servicing 
geospatial data, and PostGIS (included in the PostgreSQL 
[6]) for managing the spatial and non-spatial databases. The 
Data tier consists of the insurance rate map based on natural 
disasters, the base map using the maps Application 
Programming Interface (API), and the seamless /cadastral 
map of Korea. 
The insurance rate map is formed in the SHP data format, 
with the data coming from Ulsan, Korea. The base maps 
used were Open Street Map as the vector map, and VWorld 
Map as the aerial image map. VWorld Map is a map 
manufactured under the sponsorship of the Ministry of Land, 
Transport, and Maritime Affairs, which provides high-
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

resolution aerial images in Korea. The seamless cadastral 
map is also formed in the SHP (ESRI shpapefile) data format 
and uses data from the same region as that for the insurance 
rate map. For the maps to be overlapped in between, ITRF 
2000 Datum [7] and TM projection [8] was used. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Main interface for the Insurance Rate Map service 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Geolink 
 
The main interface of the prototype system is presented 
in Figure 2. This system can operate the general functions of 
map systems such as zoom, move, measurement tools, 
property view, and print. The system can also overlay a 
natural disaster map on a cadastral map for a nested view. In 
this case, the location of the nesting area is difficult to 
confirm, so Geo-link is implemented using Openlayers [9], 
as shown in Figure 3. Geo-link is a technology for splitting a 
browser window into two, with the locations of each half-
window related to each other. Each layer of the respective 
domain can be individually controlled.  
III. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Through the web-based Natural Disaster Insurance 
information system prototype, the necessity of the insurance 
rate map service was assured. Also, the effective 
visualization of the insurance rate information was studied 
through overlay of spatial information. If the system is put in 
service, it will be able to operate a fair insurance scheme. 
Although this prototype system is limited to providing 
premium rate information, in the near future through 
research, the National Insurance Rate Map is expected to be 
produced, which is based on Storm Risk Map, Flood Risk 
Map, and Snow Risk Map. To the extent of the production, a 
managing system to make them integrated is also needed. 
This management system will be used to predict and reduce 
natural disaster risks.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by a grant for the ‘Development 
of an Insurance Rate Map Based on National Disaster Risk’ 
(NEMA-NH-2013-62) from the Natural Hazard Mitigation 
Research Group of the National Emergency Management 
Agency of Korea. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. H. Nam, Korea Disaster Annual Report 2013, National 
Emergency Management Agency, pp. 580-582, 2013. 
[2] National Disaster Information Center (http://www.safekorea. 
go.kr/dmtd/main/SdiwMain.jsp?q_menuid=M_NST_SVC_08), 
accessed 10 October 2014. 
[3] J. S. Lee, I. S. Lee, J. H. Kang, and S. H. Yeon, GIS Technique 
for Analysis of Storm and Flood Insurance Premium Rates, 
Korean Society of Hazard Mitigation, pp. 271-350, 2014 
[4] FIRM (http://www.fema.gov/floodplain-management/ flood-
insurance-rate-map-firm), accessed 10 October 2014. 
[5] Tomcat (http://tomcat.apache.org/), accessed 10 October 2014. 
[6] PostgreSQL (http://www.postgresql.org/), accessed 10 October 
2014. 
[7] C. Boucher, Z. Altamimi, P. Sillard, and M. Feissel-Vernier, 
IERS Technical Note, IERS ITRS Centre, No. 31, 2004 
[8] Transverse Mercator projection (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Transverse_Mercator_projection), accessed 10 October 2014. 
[9] Openlayers (http://openlayers.org/), accessed 10 October 2014. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

