Schema Transformation as a Tool for Data Reuse in Web Service Environment 
Lassi Lehto 
Department of Geoinformatics and Cartography 
Finnish Geodetic Institute 
Masala, Finland 
lassi.lehto@fgi.fi
Abstract—The requirement to support the increased demand 
for geospatial data resources in several application fields, on 
various technical platforms and in diverse cultural contexts 
creates a big challenge for data providers. Reusing the same 
data set in different environments by employing content trans-
formation processes is proposed as a solution. In this paper 
online schema transformation is evaluated as a tool for sup-
porting data reuse in Web Service-based data delivery archi-
tecture. The case implementation is developed in the context of 
a major EU-project helping the National Mapping and Cadas-
tral Agencies to achieve INSPIRE-compliance. 
Keywords-schema transformation; data reuse; Web process-
ing; Web Services; ESDI 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Background and motivation 
One of the most important benefits gained by the intro-
duction of Web Services as the means for delivering digital 
geographic information is the increased use of the data. The 
extensive national geodata resources can potentially support 
many different applications and be used in various technical 
and cultural contexts, both on national level and abroad. 
Consequently, data providers are faced with increased need 
for producing ad hoc extracts from their databases and sup-
port a number of individual user preferences in the process. 
The diverse requirements concerning data encodings, sche-
mas, coordinate reference systems and spatial representations 
are becoming a great challenge for data providers. 
The number of use cases for network-accessible digital 
geodata has multiplied and the data sets are finding usage in 
many exotic applications and at the same time are in the core 
of many vital processes of society [1]. Significant additional 
requirements are set by the need for international co-
operation and the subsequent need for data harmonisation, 
for instance in the context of the European cooperation [2]. 
Seamless provision of basic geospatial information is a 
necessity in the increasingly integrated Europe. Especially 
the challenges related to the protection of environment em-
phasise the need for providing access to geospatial informa-
tion consistently across the European borders. The long his-
tory of national independence in Europe has contributed to 
the fact that each Member State (MS) of the European Union 
(EU) applies rather individual approaches as it regards col-
lection, organisation and maintenance of geographic infor-
mation. The challenge of integrating these heterogeneous 
sources of information as a reliable and consistent informa-
tion service has been tackled in various Pan-European pro-
jects and initiatives, aimed at supporting the development of 
the European Spatial Data Infrastructure (ESDI). 
The ESDI is currently under very active development. 
Various research programmes of the European Commission 
(EC) have included actions aimed at building components 
for this infrastructure. One of the most important drivers in 
this development is the INSPIRE (Infrastructure for Spatial 
Information in Europe) initiative [3]. The INSPIRE process 
is initiated by the EC as a European Directive and aims at 
seamless Pan-European spatial data provision in support of 
the protection of the environment [4]. 
A fundamental principle of the INSPIRE process is to 
build the European level geospatial content services on top 
of the existing National SDIs (NSDI), without explicitly re-
quiring changes on the Member State data sets. The diversity 
of the solutions adopted by the European NSDIs makes this 
approach particularly challenging. One proposed answer to 
this challenge is to aim at data consistency through transfor-
mations on service level [5][6]. 
B. Related work 
Various standard development activities have focused on 
the topic of schema transformation. These include the work 
of the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) on the concept of 
Translating Web Feature Service [7] and the results of the 
ORCHESTRA project as the specification for service type 
called schema mapping service [8]. The recent examples of 
the schema transformation-related standardisation include 
the INSPIRE specification for the generic Transformation 
Service, published as EC Regulation [9] and the related tech-
nical guidance on Schema Transformation Network Service 
[10]. 
The HUMBOLDT project has worked extensively on de-
veloping mechanisms for schema transformation. The results 
of this work include a specification for a Web Service called 
Conceptual Schema Transformer and the development of an 
interactive 
schema 
mapping 
tool 
called 
HALE 
(HUMBOLDT Alignment Editor) [11]. 
The problem of schema transformation in the European-
wide spatial data provision framework has been studied by 
Friis-Christensen et al. [12]. Donaubauer et al. describes a 
mechanism for supporting schema transformations as an 
extension to the OGC Web Feature Service (WFS), called 
model-driven WFS (mdWFS) [13]. Curtis and Müller de-
scribe a categorisation of atomic schema transformation 
components in the context of relational database to Extensi-
ble Markup Language (XML) translations [14]. 
 
17
Copyright (c) The Government of Finland, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Recent work related to schema transformation issues in-
clude the paper of Wiemann et al. on schema transformation 
as a component in the SDI development [15] and the work of 
Foerster et al. on combining schema transformation with 
another process, model generalisation, in a Web processing 
work flow [16]. 
C. Structure of the paper 
The work described in this paper has been carried out in 
the context of a major EU-funded development project 
ESDIN (European Spatial Data Infrastructure Network), 
aimed at helping the National Mapping and Cadastral Agen-
cies (NMCAs) to attain compliance with INSPIRE regula-
tions [17]. 
In Chapter II the concept of schema transformation is 
elaborated and some further background information given. 
In Chapter III the alternative architectures for schema trans-
formation in the Web Service environment are described. 
The Chapter IV focuses on the results achieved in the im-
plementation of the approach in the context of a major EU 
development project. The paper ends with a conclusion in 
Chapter V. 
II. 
SCHEMA TRANSFORMATION CONCEPTS 
A. Transformation Categories 
Content transformations dealing with geospatial data can 
be considered in various levels of abstraction [18]. Trans-
formations that only consider pure syntactic harmonisation 
of content have a well-established tradition and are routinely 
performed in the existing and upcoming SDIs. Typical ex-
amples of these transformations include the use of Geogra-
phy Markup Language (GML) as the data encoding standard 
and the internal processes of the Web Feature Service (WFS) 
implementations that transform data content from the inter-
nal representation of the used data store to the GML-encoded 
output. Integration of two heterogeneous data stores becomes 
thus technically possible, but as semantic differences are not 
considered, the combined data set becomes practically use-
less. 
More advanced transformations take into account the se-
mantics of the source data and aim at matching semantically 
equal or close-to-equal data items to each other. The result-
ing combined data set is internally consistent and can be ac-
cessed using a single semantic framework. In a more ad-
vanced approach the semantic correspondence between the 
data items can be indicated in a more flexible way, facilitat-
ing the use of semantic similarity as a measure for control-
ling the data matching process. Ontologies are sometimes 
used as a tool for managing flexible semantics-aware trans-
formations [19]. 
The transformation might focus predominantly on re-
structuring the data content and applying new naming (typi-
cally in a different language) to the constructs that encom-
pass individual data items. This kind of data transformation 
is called schema transformation, as the most typical scenario 
for this process is transforming spatial data set from one 
schema (for instance a national model) to another (for in-
stance a common European level model). The transformation 
is expected to maintain the semantics of the data content as 
far as possible. 
Due to the special nature of geospatial data, various geo-
metric transformations are essential. An advanced schema 
transformation may involve geometric operations as a com-
ponent. These might involve change of the type of the geo-
metric primitive used to depict the position of a spatial ob-
ject, for instance transforming a small polygon to a point or 
an elongated polygon to a linear primitive. 
B. Schema Mapping 
An essential part of the transformation process is the es-
tablishment of the mapping between data items in the source 
schema and the corresponding items in the target schema. 
This mapping can be defined either on the abstract, concep-
tual level or on a concrete, implementation-dependent 
schema level. Some research papers recommend the use of 
schema mapping on conceptual level [20]. The benefits that 
this approach yields can be listed as follows: 
• 
The person defining the mapping does not need to be 
knowledgeable on the implementation level details 
• 
The same mapping, done on the conceptual level, 
can be subsequently implemented in various techni-
cal frameworks 
• 
The mapping made on conceptual level can be ex-
pected to remain valid for longer period of time 
when compared with a mapping based on rather fast-
changing technology solutions 
The weaknesses of this approach include: 
• 
A separate processing step is required to make the 
conceptual mapping usable in a concrete implemen-
tation environment, often requiring manual interven-
tion 
• 
There is no widely adopted mechanism available for 
recording the conceptual level schema mapping 
The technologies proposed as the method for encoding 
schema mapping on conceptual level include the OMG (Ob-
ject Management Group) standard for model transformation 
MOF 2.0 Query/View/Transformation [21] and Ontology 
Mapping Language (OML). For instance the Geo Ontology 
Mapping Language (GOML) specified in the HUMBOLDT 
project is based on OML [22]. 
III. 
ARCHITECTURAL CONSIDERATIONS 
There are three different approaches for organizing the 
schema transformation in relation to the Web service-based 
data delivery workflow. 
Firstly, the transformation can be carried out as a com-
pletely offline pre-processing step, typically performed while 
transferring a data set from the original data store to a service 
database. This approach is most appropriate in cases when 
the difference between the native schema and the output 
schema is so significant that the transformation requires long 
processing time or even manual interventions. In some cases 
the original data store might be organized in suboptimal way 
from the efficient service-based content delivery point of 
view, thus making the use of a separate service database a 
necessity. This is often also justified from the security con-
18
Copyright (c) The Government of Finland, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

cerns’ point of view. However, in some cases it might be 
possible to maintain the transformed data content inside the 
same database management system with the source data set, 
for instance by applying mechanisms like database views 
and triggers. 
Secondly, the transformation can be organized as an 
online process carried out during the interactive request-
response dialogue in the Web Service environment. In this 
approach the transformation is part of the data delivery 
workflow and has to be performed as an on-the-fly process. 
The transformation is carried out only on a subset of the data 
content, retrieved from the database on the basis of the query 
sentence of the data request. Being a real-time process the 
on-the-fly transformation must be straightforward enough to 
be performed as a fully automatic step in a synchronous 
transaction. 
In some cases the right solution would be to combine the 
two above-mentioned approaches. A separate transformation 
process is carried out while transferring data from the pro-
duction environment to the delivery database, accessible by 
the online services. This transformation is performed as a 
pre-processing step outside of the online service environ-
ment. In addition to this major batch-oriented transformation, 
the system might still make use of the on-the-fly transforma-
tion approach by also including transformation functionality 
into the online delivery process. This latter transformation 
will take care of all the remaining modifications that are still 
needed to make the delivered data set fully compliant with 
the target schema. The various approaches for including a 
transformation into the data delivery workflow are depicted 
in the Fig. 1. 
In an operational service-oriented spatial data delivery 
environment schema transformation can be organised in 
various different ways. In the following the main approaches 
are explained, together with a brief analysis of their strengths 
and weaknesses. The framework has been initially defined in 
the context of the service development work of the ESDIN 
project [23]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Transformation alternatives. The bold arrows depict offline 
processes. TS: Transformation Service. 
A. Database-Centric 
On database level simple on-the-fly transformations 
could be configured as database views. However, in most 
cases they will not be able to provide the functionality re-
quired for achieving full compliancy with the target schema. 
In the offline approach various data schemas are main-
tained inside a single database. Mechanisms available for the 
transformation include database views, materialized views 
and tables that are updated by triggers on the source data 
tables. The transformations might be configured as a set of 
database scripts (e.g., PL/PGSQL scripts) and can be per-
formed as an integral part of updates to the source data 
(change propagation). 
B.  Service Database-Oriented 
In this approach the data provider decides to set up a 
separate service database containing data in the target 
schema. This arrangement can be motivated by the fact that 
the existing data maintenance platform does not support ef-
fective enough data retrieval mechanisms, or does not allow 
connection with the selected content access service imple-
mentation. Security-related concerns might also be the decid-
ing factor. 
The transformation from the source schema to the deliv-
ery schema is carried out as part of the batch process that 
transmits data content from the source database to the service 
database. This process can be based for instance on SQL 
scripts. Even several separate service databases could be set 
up, each of them potentially providing content for different 
services and supporting different schemas. The batch process 
carrying out the data transmission can be run periodically or 
it might be triggered for instance by the updates on the 
source data tables. 
C. Download Service Internal 
One approach for transformations in the currently exist-
ing software solutions is to apply transformations as an in-
ternal function of the content access service itself. As an ex-
ample some of the currently available Web Feature Service 
(WFS) implementations support Coordinate Reference Sys-
tem (CRS) transformations as an integral part of the data 
access transaction. In a similar way, some WFS products 
support configurable schema transformation functions to be 
introduced to the data delivery process, so that the data items 
of the internal database schema can be mapped to a desired 
output schema. The WFS implementations that support more 
extensive transformations are called Translating WFS serv-
ers or Transforming WFS servers [24]. 
D. Middleware Approaches 
If the transformation is performed somewhere between 
the source data service and the client application, the ap-
proach can be taken as an example of a middleware solution. 
In this case the transformation gets the input from the data 
service and provides the transformed data set as an output to 
be consumed by the user application. Two concrete ap-
proaches can be identified for this alternative: a cascading-
transforming data service and a dedicated transformation 
service. 
19
Copyright (c) The Government of Finland, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

1) Cascading-Transforming Data Service 
The concept of cascading services is recognised as a so-
lution for content integration in the geospatial services de-
velopment community. In this approach a service node 
works as a client for another service and provides the content 
of that service as part of its offerings to the real client appli-
cations. This way a single WFS node can provide access to 
resources of various individual WFS services as cascaded 
content, together with the resources it might be serving from 
its local data stores. As part of the cascading functionality 
the WFS can also perform schema transformations. 
2) Transformation Service 
The transformation could also be performed by a dedi-
cated transformation service. In this approach the transfor-
mation service is connected to the source data service for 
input data and provides the transformed data as an output 
data set to be consumed by the user application. Unlike in the 
case of the cascading-transforming data service, the trans-
formation service does not expose itself to the calling appli-
cations as content access service, but as a geospatial process-
ing service, enabling the transformation process to be con-
figured by calling applications. 
E. Portal-Centric 
The predominant role of the portal in an SDI is to inte-
grate distributed services into a single access point. As such 
a portal is good candidate for also performing other process-
ing tasks, like data transformations. A portal might contain 
such transforming process as an internal function or rely for 
the transformation on an outside resource like a transforma-
tion service. 
IV. 
CASE IMPLEMENTATION 
The ESDIN (European Spatial Data Infrastructure Net-
work) project was a Best Practice Network project in the EU 
eContentplus framework program [17]. The main goal of the 
ESDIN project was to help the European National Mapping 
and Cadastral Agencies (NMCAs) in their efforts to fulfil the 
requirements set by the INSPIRE process. The project Con-
sortium membership included NMCAs from 11 different 
European countries and it was coordinated by Euro-
Geographics [25]. The ESDIN project was finished in March 
2011. 
As one of its main goals the project focused on a coordi-
nated establishment of INSPIRE-compliant Download Ser-
vices. The services are built according to the service category 
‘Direct Access Download Service’, thus implementing the 
OGC Web Feature Service (WFS) interface. The output data 
are provided in INSPIRE schemas, encoded in GML version 
3.2.1 according to the requirements set in INSPIRE. 
One of the primary areas of investigation in the project 
was to find out, how schema transformations from the na-
tional data models to the INSPIRE schemas could be carried 
out. This included tests both on off-line and on-the-fly trans-
formation approaches. In the final stage, roughly half of the 
developed services follow at least partially the on-the-fly 
schema transformation approach, whereas the other half rely 
on offline processes [26]. 
 
Figure 2.  ESDIN countries providing content for the Download Services. 
Acronyms refer to the NMCA of the country. 
As the main result of the service development efforts of 
the project, roughly 50 data sets are now available as 
INSPIRE-compliant Download Services. The offering cover 
five different data themes from the INSPIRE Annex I and 
has either complete national coverage or is restricted to se-
lected cross-border test areas. The countries providing con-
tent for the ESDIN services are depicted in Fig. 2. 
In the ESDIN context the proposed approach for schema 
mapping is to apply an SQL-like pseudo code for the pur-
pose. The proposal includes a method for recording the map-
ping in a spreadsheet [27]. 
In the ESDIN project the NMCAs tested various different 
approaches for schema transformation. The architectural 
alternatives tested in the project are depicted with numbers 
1-4 in the Fig. 3. The four cases are briefly described in the 
following. 
 
 
Figure 3.  The four transformation architecture alternatives used in the 
ESDIN project. Numbers refer to cases explained below. 
20
Copyright (c) The Government of Finland, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Case 1. On-the-fly transformation by database views. In 
this approach database views are created to transform some 
aspects of the data to conform to INSPIRE requirements. 
This approach was implemented by one NMCA. 
Case 2. Offline transformation. The process steps in-
clude: extract data from the production database, transform it 
to INSPIRE compliant form, upload it to the service data-
base. 
This 
approach 
follows 
the 
general 
Ex-
tract/Transform/Load (ETL) processing model. The trans-
formation tools used include database scripting, XSLT 
scripting and commercial tools like FME [28][29]. This 
method was tested by eight NMCAs. 
Case 3. Internal on-the-fly transformation carried out by 
Download Service. In this approach the used Download Ser-
vice implementation provides support for schema transfor-
mations. These can be configured for instance by annotated 
XML Schema files, XSLT declarations, or by implementa-
tion-specific mechanisms. The tools used include deegree 
and XtraServer [30][31]. This transformation approach was 
implemented by eight NMCAs. 
Case 4. On-the-fly transformation carried out by a cas-
cading-transforming Download Service node. In this alterna-
tive the original Download Service provides data in local 
schema. This service is accessed by another Download Ser-
vice that uses the first service as its data source. During the 
data request the cascading-transforming Download Service 
carries out schema transformations, typically both on query 
and data streams. This approach was tested by two NMCAs. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The experiences gained in the ESDIN service develop-
ment suggest that many of the transformation types required 
for INSPIRE compliancy are too complicated or time con-
suming for the on-the-fly processing approach. Roughly half 
(12) of the developed services (22) are (at least partially) 
based on on-the-fly transformation principles. Only eight 
services are based on pure on-the-fly transformation ap-
proach. As a result it can be concluded that on-the-fly trans-
formations did not take as central a role in the project as ini-
tially expected. On the other hand, the combined approach, 
in which both offline and on-the-fly transformations are used 
together, seems to be rather promising [26]. The final service 
configuration of the ESDIN project is illustrated in Fig. 4. 
A database level solution was raised during the project 
experiments as a new kind of alternative for content trans-
formations. The concrete implementations developed in the 
project are based on the use of database views and thus rep-
resent on-the-fly approach on schema transformation on the 
database level. 
The experience gained in the ESDIN project suggests 
that various different approaches for content transformation 
can be adopted with successful results. It seems that general 
recommendation cannot be given on any single transforma-
tion method, as the best approach always depends on local 
conditions. One of the most important deciding factors is, 
how far the national schema is from the related INSPIRE 
schema. The bigger the difference, the less probable it is that 
on-the-fly solutions would yield acceptable results. 
 
Figure 4.  Final service configuration of the ESDIN project. Acronyms 
below the country names indicate the INSPIRE themes supported. Themes 
starting with ‘X’ denote schemas developed in the project as extensions to 
the INSPIRE schemas. 
A standardised way to describe the schema transforma-
tion is a useful tool for communication among the individu-
als involved in the schema mapping process. The mecha-
nisms proposed by the ESDIN project have been found to be 
helpful in this respect. 
The number of transformation steps has to be kept to 
minimum, because each transformation process must be first 
developed, and further on maintained too. Every transforma-
tion also potentially introduces a certain amount of error or 
information loss to the process. 
In most of the cases the off-line approach for schema 
transformation seems to provide best results. On-the-fly 
methods can be applied for fine-tuning minor schema nu-
ances or in cases where the differences between the local 
schema and the corresponding INSPIRE schema are minor. 
The most prominent advantage in using the on-the-fly ap-
proach is the direct connection to up-to-date content. 
The main disadvantage in the offline transformation 
method is the need to have a separate service database and 
the inherent problem of keeping it up-to-date. On the other 
hand, this approach also supports easy fusion of the data with 
other source data sets. Security concerns can also be better 
taken care of. 
The task of setting up an INSPIRE-compliant Download 
Service is not straightforward. Reasonable amount of re-
sources have to be invested in the process. The main issue to 
resolve is the transformation of content stored in the national 
schema to be compliant with INSPIRE schemas. This was 
successfully tackled in the ESDIN project with solutions 
developed for both offline and on-the-fly approaches. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The ESDIN project was funded by European Commis-
sion in the Framework Programme eContentplus (grant 
agreement number ECP-2007-GEO-317008). 
21
Copyright (c) The Government of Finland, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Friis-Christensen et al., "Building service oriented applica-
tion on top of a spatial data infrastructure – A forest fire as-
sessment example," Proc. AGILE International Conference on 
Geographic Information Science, 2006, Visegrad, pp. 119–
127, Hungary. 
[2] L. Lehto, "Real-time content transformations in the European 
spatial data infrastructure," Proc. International Cartographic 
Conference, Nov 15-21, 2009, Santiago, Chile, CD-ROM. 
[3] JRC, 
Web 
site 
of 
the 
INSPIRE 
process, 
http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu <retrieved: 11, 2011> 
[4] EC, 
DIRECTIVE 
2007/2/EC 
OF 
THE 
EUROPEAN 
PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 14 March 2007 
establishing an Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the 
European Community (INSPIRE), at: http://eur-lex. eu-
ropa.eu/JOHtml.do?uri=OJ:L:2007:108:SOM:EN:HTML <re-
trieved: 11, 2011> 
[5] L. Lehto, "Schema transformation as a Web service, Proc. 
Nordic GIS Conference, Helsinki, Oct 2-4, 2006, pp. 39-44. 
[6] L. Lehto, "Schema translations in a web service-based SDI," 
Proc. AGILE International Conference on Geographic Infor-
mation Science, 'The European Information Society: Leading 
the way with geo-information', May 8-11, 2007, Aalborg, 
Denmark.. 
[7] Y. Bishr and K. Buehler, “GOS Transportation Portal, Im-
plementation Architecture and Lessons Learned,” Internal 
OGC Interoperability Program Report. 
[8] M. Lutz, "Specification of the schema mapping service," OA 
services specifications, Orchestra project, Deliverable D3.4.3, 
Joint Research Centre of the EU Commission. 
[9] EC, “Commission Regulation (EU) No 1088/2010 of 23 No-
vember 2010, amending Commission Regulation (EC) No 
976/2009 as regards download services and transformation 
services,” at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/ LexUriS-
erv.do?uri=CONSLEG:2009R0976:20101228:EN:PDF 
<re-
trieved: 11, 2011> 
[10] INSPIRE, “Technical Guidance for the INSPIRE Schema 
Transformation 
Network 
Service,” 
at: 
http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/Network_Services/J
RC_INSPIRE-TransformService_TG_v3-0.pdf 
<retrieved: 
11, 2011> 
[11] T. Reitz, M. de Vries, and D Fitzner, “Conceptual Schema 
Specification 
and 
Mapping”, 
Deliverable 
A7.0-D3, 
HUMBOLDT 
project, 
at: 
http://www.esdi-
humboldt.eu/press/public_deliverables.html <retrieved: 11, 
2011> 
[12] A. Friis-Christensen, S. Schade, and S. Peedell, “Approaches 
to solve schema heterogeneity at the European level,” Proc. 
EC-GI & GIS Workshop, Alghero, Sardinia, Jun 29 – Jul 1, 
2005. 
[13] A. Donaubauer, F. Straub, and M. Schilcher, "mdWFS: a 
concept of webenabling semantic transformation," Proc. 
AGILE International Conference on Geographic Information 
Science, May 8-11, 2007, Aalborg, Denmark. 
[14] E. Curtis and H. Müller, “Schema translation in practice,” 
Snowflake 
Software 
White 
Paper, 
at: 
http://www.snowflakesoftware.co.uk/news/papers.htm 
<re-
trieved: 11, 2011> 
[15] S. Wiemann et al., "Web services for spatial data transforma-
tion and exchanges in SDI: a prototypical implementation of 
the LPIS quality assurance test bed services," International 
Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructure Research, unpublished. 
[16] T. Foerster, L. Lehto, T. Sarjakoski, L. T. Sarjakoski, and J. 
Stoter, 2010. "Map generalization and schema transformation 
of geospatial data combined in a web service context,"  Com-
puters, Environment and Urban Systems, 34(1): 79-88, at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2009.06.003. <re-
trieved: 11, 2011> 
[17] ESDIN, European Spatial Data Infrastructure Network, pro-
ject Web site, at: http://www.esdin.eu <retrieved: 11, 2011> 
[18] L. Lehto, "Real-Time Content Transformations in a Web 
Service-Based Delivery Architecture for Geographic Informa-
tion," Doctoral dissertation, Helsinki University of Technol-
ogy. Publications of the Finnish Geodetic Institute, N:o 138, 
2007, Kirkkonummi, 51 p. + 99 p. 
[19] F. Fonseca, G. Câmara, and A. M. Monteiro, "A Framework 
for Measuring the Interoperability of Geo-Ontologies," Spa-
tial Cognition & Computation, Vol. 6, No. 4, 2006. 
[20] H. R. Gnägi, A. Morf, and P. Staub, "Semantic Interoperabil-
ity through the Definition of Conceptual Model Transforma-
tions," Proc. AGILE Conference on Geographic Information 
Science, 2006, Visegrád. 
[21] OMG, 
Meta 
Object 
Facility 
(MOF) 
Query/View/Transformation 
specification 
(QVT) 
http://www.omg.org/ spec/QVT/ <retrieved: 11, 2011> 
[22] HUMBOLDT, Web site of the Humboldt project, at 
http://www.esdi-humboldt.eu/home.html 
<retrieved: 
11, 
2011> 
[23] L. Lehto (ed.), "Best practice for content transformations 
enabling INSPIRE-compliant data delivery," Deliverable 
11.1, Public report, ESDIN project, European Spatial Data In-
frastructure Network, Oct 9, 2009, ECP-2007-GEO-317008, 
44 p. 
[24] E. Curtis, "Schema Translation and Semantics in Data Inter-
operability," 
Snowflake 
Software 
White 
Paper, 
at: 
http://www.snowflakesoftware.co.uk/news/papers.htm 
<re-
trieved: 11, 2011> 
[25] EuroGeographics, Association of National Mapping, Land 
Registry 
and 
Cadastral 
Agencies, 
Web 
site 
at: 
http://www.eurogeographics.org <retrieved: 11, 2011> 
[26] L. Lehto (ed.), "Recommendations for operational deploy-
ment of services," Deliverable 11.5, Public report, ESDIN, 
European Spatial Data Infrastructure Network, Feb 28, 2011, 
ECP-2007-GEO-317008, 67 p. 
[27] L. Lehto and F. Nissen, "Schema transformations in the Euro-
pean spatial data infrastructure," Proc. INSPIRE Conference, 
22-25 June, 2010, Krakow, Poland. Poster. 
[28] W3C, Extensible Stylesheet Language Transformations 
(XSLT), at: http://www.w3.org/TR/1999/REC-xslt-19991116 
<retrieved: 11, 2011> 
[29] Safe 
Software, 
The 
FME 
Techonology, 
at: 
http://www.safe.com/fme/fme-technology/ 
<retrieved: 
11, 
2011> 
[30] deegree, the web site of the deegree community, at: 
http://www.deegree.org <retrieved: 11, 2011> 
[31] interactive instruments, XtraServer product information (in 
German 
language), 
at: 
http://www.interactive-
instruments.de/index.php?id=xtraserver&L=1 <retrieved: 11, 
2011> 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) The Government of Finland, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

