Integrating GIS Visualization Tools for Ecosystem Management 
 
Keith L. Lee, David Stotts 
Department of Computer Science 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA 
{lee,stotts}@cs.unc.edu 
Jennifer A. Moore Myers, Emrys Treasure, Robert L. 
Herring, Steve G. McNulty 
USDA Forest Service, Southern Research Station 
Eastern Forest Environmental Threat Assessment Center 
Raleigh, NC, USA 
{jamyers, eatreasu,rlherrin,steve_mcnulty}@ncsu.edu
 
Abstract—This paper presents a targeted view into the current 
development stage of the 3.X version of TACCIMO, a web-
based application delivering climate change science to the 
forest management and planning community. The interactive 
TACCIMO GIS Viewer delivers custom visualizations and 
reports combining climate change projections with peer-
reviewed literature and planning language.  We present our 
work integrating externally hosted, heterogeneous data sources 
into the TACCIMO GIS Viewer, including our efforts to 
accommodate minimal changes to existing source code, along 
with advanced geospatial analysis methods using integrated 
climate change data. Our real world case studies demonstrate 
the contexts motivating our work for users assessing, 
managing, and monitoring forest resources within the 
conterminous United States. 
Keywords-ecosystem management; forestry; Geographic 
Information Systems; geospatial map service; web service; 
climate change. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Climate change science plays an important role in forest 
planning and management [1]. Land managers pose 
seemingly straight-forward questions, e.g., “what tree species 
do we need to plant,” whose answers depend on a myriad of 
parameters including climate change science. Scientists and 
researchers develop tools used by land managers and 
policymakers to improve their understanding of climate 
change and its impact on forests, rangelands, and urban areas 
[2]. Land managers and policymakers then use this 
information in developing policies and management 
techniques to sustain and improve ecosystems of interest 
[3][4]. 
Given 
the 
ever-increasing 
volume 
of 
scientific 
knowledge and tools regarding climate change and forest 
ecosystems, their quantity and rate of increase places a 
burden on our partners and users attempting to efficiently 
consume and utilize this information. The Template for 
Assessing Climate Change Impacts and Management 
Options (TACCIMO) was created to address this need for a 
standardized, credible, and concise science delivery tool 
relevant to forest planning and management [5]. As a 
collaborative effort of the Eastern and Western Forest 
Environmental Threat Assessment Centers (EFETAC and 
WFETAC), along with the Southern (R8) and Pacific 
Southwest (R5) Regional Forest Planning units of the USDA 
Forest Service, TACCIMO provides an interactive resource 
for consuming the combination of climate change science 
and related peer-reviewed literature and land management 
planning options. 
The work highlighted here focuses on TACCIMO’s 
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Viewer, a web-based 
geospatial user interface that allows users to explore climate 
change science model visualizations within the conterminous 
United States. The GIS Viewer addresses the demand from 
research and industry partners for a tool that combines 
geospatial visualization and summarization. 
In this current release, the 3.X version aims to move 
away from custom-built point-solutions specific to individual 
needs towards a widely usable integration of geospatial 
applications. This move from a data repository toward 
support and guidance includes integration of multiple 
external hosted data sources into the TACCIMO framework, 
particularly the TACCIMO GIS Viewer. One of the main 
changes to the updated TACCIMO GIS Viewer is integrating 
externally hosted data while minimizing development costs 
by minimizing changes to existing source code. We also 
present examples of advanced geospatial analysis methods 
that leverage this integrated approach and support our goal of 
providing support, guidance, and unique data interpretations 
for new and existing partnerships. 
This paper is structured as follows: Section two, related 
work; Section three, architecture and design; Section four, 
data integration and spatial analysis paradigms; Section five, 
case studies; and Section six, conclusion and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are a wide range of frameworks and techniques for 
integrating applications, some of which are specific to their 
domain or a particular technology, while others are 
generalizable. We present a few as follows. 
Service-oriented architectures (SOA) and their associated 
web services facilitate communication between separate, 
independent components and specify the protocols governing 
these communications; this in-turn allows for integration and 
interoperability of stand-alone applications over the web. 
Many frameworks and techniques build upon these concepts. 
SOAP [6] and representational state transfer (REST) [7] are 
two widely-known and widely-utilized technologies towards 
these ends, which are in turn used in other techniques and 
architectures. We too adapt REST in our communications. 
Creating software federations is another approach to the 
ever 
persistent 
software 
integration 
problem. 
Some 
122
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
approaches look at Commercial-Off-the-Shelf components 
[8] for design and integration. Aspect-oriented programming 
or AOP [9][10] is used in several federation building 
concepts. 
AOP separates structures which cross-cut 
programming abstractions. One approach [11] uses AOP to 
refactor middleware systems, while another [12] uses AOP 
as the middleware itself. In techniques applicable to many 
domains, AOP is used as an exchange for manipulating and 
processing data between federation components [13]. Our 
work uses AOP concepts without use of an AOP library. 
Tuple-spaces [14][15][16], a generative communication 
technique coordinating indirect communication between 
programs, is used in conjunction with several techniques. 
XMLSpaces [17] is an extensible markup language (XML) 
focused middleware solution extending IBM’s TSpaces 
implementation [18]. The communication aspects approach 
[19] uses AOP to uncouple communication and computation, 
combined with tuple-spaces for communication between 
aspects. We adapt the communication aspects approach for 
use in an environment sans AOP. 
There are approaches specific to GIS and geospatial 
analysis domains, such as the webGIS model [20], which 
uses 
web 
2.0 
services 
to 
integrate 
heterogeneous 
geospatial/geographic databases. Sahina [21] and Aydin [22] 
amongst others look at GIS-centric usage of SOA and web-
services for sharing data between GIS applications. Our 
approach focuses on interoperability without an overarching 
architecture. 
III. 
ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM DESIGN 
The architecture and system designs descriptions for the 
TACCIMO GIS Viewer and the associated independent 
geospatial applications present a high-level view into their 
underlying structures. 
A. TACCIMO Architecture and Design 
TACCIMO’s overall system architecture for the hosting 
and technology stack utilizes a multi-tiered system. Content 
for peer-reviewed literature and planning data are accessed 
through relational database queries managed by Microsoft 
SQL Server. Internally hosted geospatial data is managed 
using Esri ArcGIS Server 10. Development for the 
TACCIMO web application hosted on the web server was 
done in Visual Studio. The front-end for the TACCIMO GIS 
Viewer was built in Flash Builder 4.6 using the Adobe® 
Flex 4® SDK. The Esri ArcGIS API for Flex is used to 
access both internally and externally hosted ArcGIS Server 
resources. Figure 1 gives an overview of the architecture as 
used within TACCIMO. 
B. Climate Wizard 
Climate Wizard [23], created in partnership between The 
Nature Conservancy, the University of Washington, and the 
University of Southern Mississippi, is a web-based tool [24] 
providing analyses and geospatial representations of 
projected global climate change throughout the world in the 
form of maps, graphs, and tables. It includes temperature and 
precipitation measurement changes over a historic and two 
future time periods, using 16 general circulation models 
(GCMs) and seven GCM ensembles run against three 
greenhouse-gas emission scenarios. Climate Wizard provides 
these averages and change in averages for annual, monthly, 
and seasonal time frames. 
This ‘big data’ application uses ArcGIS Server REST 
web-services for geospatial data, with underlying data values 
served through the Amazon Web Services ‘on the cloud.’ 
While Climate Wizard provides global climate change 
predictions, we focused on those for the conterminous 
United States. 
C. California MC1 
MAPSS-CENTURY 1 (MC1), created in partnership 
between Oregon State, Colorado State, and the USDA Forest 
Service Pacific Northwest Region (R6), provides a dynamic 
global vegetation model (DGVM) based on the interaction 
between the MAPSS biogeography model, the CENTURY 
biogeochemistry model, and a dynamic fire disturbance 
model [25][26][27]. California MC1 presents the MC1-based 
predictions for California. The geospatial maps delivered by 
the California MC1 model are split between the ‘MC1 
Inputs’ for climate change predictions and ‘MC1 Outputs’ 
for vegetation and other associated change predictions. 
The parameters used for MC1 Inputs are similar to those 
used in Climate Wizard: two general circulation models run 
against two greenhouse-gas emission scenarios, measuring 
average temperature and precipitation for annual and 
seasonal time frames for one historic and four future time 
periods. For MC1 Outputs, we use the same two GCMs run 
against the same two emission scenarios for the same historic 
and future time periods, but only the annual time frame is 
used. Instead of measuring temperature and precipitation, 
vegetation and other climate change indicators are used. 
These geospatial maps are accessed using ArcGIS Server 
REST web-services. 
D. Climate Change Atlas 
The Climate Change Atlas, created by the Northern 
Research Station of the USDA Forest Service, documents the 
Figure 1.  TACCIMO Architecture 
123
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

current and potential habitat distribution shifts for tree and 
bird 
species 
throughout 
the 
eastern 
United 
States 
[28][29][30]. The Tree Atlas, a subset of the Climate Change 
Atlas, delivers the current and possible future distribution for 
134 tree species and their underlying environmental 
predictors using a habitat prediction model (DISTRIB), a 
colonization likelihood model (SHIFT), and outside factors 
model (MODFACs). 
Habitat suitability is given as importance factor, a 
measure of relative abundance accounting for tree basal area 
and the number of stems [31]. The Climate Change Atlas 
database [32] uses three GCMs and an ensemble average, 
each run against two greenhouse-gas emission scenarios. 
Each tree species has a separate model reliability factor. 
While the original source data is hosted externally, ArcGIS 
web services are hosted internally. 
IV. 
SOFTWARE PROGRAMMING PARADIGMS 
As part of the integration of Climate Wizard, California 
MC1, and the Climate Change Atlas into the TACCIMO GIS 
Viewer, we had to address several technical and practical 
needs: integrating external resources, minimizing changes to 
existing data, and developing analysis methods using the 
integrated external data that provide support and guidance to 
partners and other interested users. 
A. Data Integration: Adapted Communication Aspects 
The task of moving from internally hosted resources to 
leveraging data from our collaborative partners was 
restricted by the limited time and resources of our small 
development team. The communication aspects technique 
appeared promising, as it uses aspect-oriented programming 
and tuple-space modules to connect separate programs into a 
combined software federation. With Adobe Flex as our 
programming language for the GIS Viewer front-end, the 
AOP libraries we explored were not ready for production 
level use. 
AS3Commons AOP, built on AS3Commons Bytecode 
[33], was an inactive project using older AS3Commons 
libraries that make it incompatible with our Flex 4 project. It 
was based on the Loom project [34], commonly cited as the 
foundation for most AOP endeavors in Flex. Flapper [35], an 
alternative Flex AOP library based on the Parsley application 
framework for Flex [36], also had compatibility issues due to 
development inactivity. The Swiz Framework [37] was 
another option for AOP within Flex that uses inversion of 
control and other AOP relevant techniques. Its 2.0 version 
was slated to include many AOP features we needed, but 
development of 2.0 was halted and the project donated to 
Apache Flex in summer 2013 [38], eliminating another 
option from our list. 
Since there were no freely available production-ready 
AOP libraries for Flex, we looked into bringing the 
foundational concepts of communication aspects into the 
GIS Viewer sans AOP. We needed something requiring the 
effort of one primary developer, ruling out more exhaustive 
options such as switching languages. In communication 
aspects, communication and computation are separated using 
AOP. We achieve a similar separation adapting the ArcGIS 
Server REST web-services with the observer design pattern 
[39]; internal communication between components is 
through the design pattern, while communication between 
the internal TACCIMO components and data hosted on 
ArcGIS uses REST. 
B. Spatial Analysis: Tree Atlas Summarization 
Another thrust of our development changes for the 
TACCIMO GIS Viewer is developing methods integrating 
the external data from our partner applications to provide 
unique data analysis. Here, we explore one of the techniques 
using a new partner, the Tree Atlas within the Climate 
Change Atlas. 
There are currently distributions for 134 tree species in 
Tree Atlas; we use the distributions provided across nine 
climate change model scenarios: three GCMs (Hadley CM3, 
PCM, and GFDL) and the average of the three GCMs, with 
all four of these run against two emission scenarios (A1FI 
and B1), plus the current historical baseline. These 
combinations make it difficult to synthesize. There is also 
data in tabular format, but when a user selects a geographic 
area of interest, these tables often include entries for species 
not within the area of interest. Inter-species comparisons are 
limited to two tree species within the selected scenario, even 
though several dozen trees may exist within the area of 
interest across the scenarios. The data are there but are not 
easily consumable for the non-specialist. 
Our real-world driven geospatial analysis method is to 
develop a tool within the TACCIMO GIS Viewer that will, 
for a user-selected area of interest, create a non-standard 
visualization comparing all tree species within the area 
across all nine climate change model scenarios. The original 
data are arranged by species, yielding 134 data layer tables. 
We transposed the data matrix into nine data layer tables, 
allowing for faster data selection and querying through 
placement in an ArcGIS Server. 
Once the user selects the custom area of interest, it is 
checked for size constraints. The underlying selectable area 
of interest map is broken down into polygonal cells; if the 
initial user selected area of interest falls below the constraint 
threshold, we retrieve the map points bounding each polygon 
cell in the selected area and run a nearest neighbor search. 
Those neighboring map points are added to the area of 
interest. We use this technique to grow the area of interest 
until it passes the size constraint. 
After passing the size constraint check, each climate 
change model scenario is fetched and queried using REST 
web-services, bounded by the area of interest. We calculate 
the adjusted importance value for each species. Since Tree 
Atlas returns the importance value for each species 
respective to its entire range of habitability, we average that 
value over the selected area of interest. An adjusted 
importance factor of 100 would indicate a monotypic forest 
stand within the selected area of interest for the climate 
change scenario. After all scenarios are completed, each 
species is summed across all climate change scenarios, and 
those with zero occurrences across all scenarios are pruned. 
Finally, the species for the current historic climate change 
scenario are sorted by relative importance from highest to 
124
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

lowest; the eight other scenarios then use the same ordering 
for their tree species. 
V. 
CASE STUDIES 
We show several case studies using two national forests 
(Francis Marion National Forest and Yosemite National 
Forest) of interest to our research and industry partners, 
highlighting the integration of the Climate Wizard, 
California MC1, and Climate Change Atlas external data 
sources into the TACCIMO GIS Viewer, plus the utility of 
our advanced geospatial analysis technique created for the 
Climate Change Tree Atlas. 
A. TACCIMO GIS Viewer Usage Overview 
The TACCIMO GIS Viewer is organized around 
customized themes. There are themes for various case 
studies requested by our collaborators and partners, in 
addition to the new themes for California MC1 and the 
Climate Change Atlas. Each theme provides parameters for 
users to select which geospatial maps to display in the 
visualization, along with identification and other spatial 
analysis tools. Users can also generate a climate change 
report linking the visualization with peer-reviewed literature 
and planning language. 
B. Climate Wizard 
The Climate Wizard integration is available across all 
themes in the GIS Viewer, as the climate change scenarios it 
provides are not specific to a particular region or case study. 
Our parameterization yields 9,384 future climate change 
scenario permutations: 16 GCMs and seven GCM 
ensembles, run against three greenhouse-gas emission 
scenarios (A2, A1B, B1), for 17 time frames (12 months, 
four seasons, and annual) in three temporal dimensions 
(future time periods), for the average and changes in average  
temperature and precipitation. The current historic time 
period gives 68 permutations, as the GCM and greenhouse-
gas emission scenarios do not apply in its case. 
Figure 2 shows the change in average annual temperature 
using the ensemble average GCM and the low (B1) emission 
scenario projected for the mid-21st century time period at 
Yosemite, and Figure 6 shows the same climate change 
projection for Francis Marion. Both show an increase in the 
mean temperature of approximately four degrees Fahrenheit. 
C. California MC1: Yosemite 
The California MC1 integration is available through the 
California MC1 theme. There is a further split of the 
geospatial visualization layering: MC1 Inputs for climate 
change predictions and MC1 Outputs for vegetation and 
other associated change predictions. 
MC1 Inputs parameterization yields 160 future climate 
change scenario permutations: two GCMs (GFDL and PCM) 
run against two greenhouse-gas emission scenarios (A2 and 
B1), for five time frames (four seasons and annual) in four 
temporal dimensions, for the average temperature and 
precipitation. The current historic time period gives 40 
permutations, as the GCM and greenhouse-gas emission 
scenarios do not apply in its case.  
The MC1 Inputs parameterization yields 320 future 
climate change scenario permutations: the two GCMs run 
against two greenhouse-gas emission scenarios for five time 
frames in four temporal dimensions are all identical to those 
in MC1 Inputs. They measure four climate change 
indicators: biomass consumed by fire, stream flow depth, 
maximum snow precipitation, and vegetation habitat 
classifications. The current historic time period gives 80 
permutations. 
Here, we look at Yosemite National Forest in California. 
Figure 3 shows the MC1 Input projected change in average 
annual temperature using the GFDL GCM run against the B1 
low emissions scenario projected for the mid-21st century. 
This is matched with the MC1 Output projected change in 
maximum snow precipitation for the same climate change 
scenario in Figure 4 and the MC1 Output historic maximum 
snow precipitation in Figure 5. Under this low emissions 
scenario, users noticed the projected climate impact is a 
decrease over time in snow along the western slopes of the 
Sierra Nevada mountain chain in Yosemite National Forest, 
correlating with the projected temperature increase for the 
same area in Figure 3. 
Having these external climate change science tools 
gathered in a shared user interface allows decision makers to 
visually note the projected changes and impacts, and make 
comparisons. Users can now simultaneously view changes 
and impacts, gaining insight into interactions between 
indicators across a large array of climate change scenario 
configurations. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Yosemite projected change in average annual temperature using 
GCM average ensemble and low B1 emissions in Climate Wizard 
 
Figure 3.  Yosemite projected change in average annual temperature using 
GFDL and low B1 emissions in California MC1 Inputs 
125
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 4.  Yosemite projected change in maximum annual snow 
precipitation using GFDL and low B1 emissions in California MC1 Ouputs 
 
Figure 5.  Yosemite current historic maximum annual snow precipitation 
in California MC1 Outputs 
 
D. Climate Change Tree Atlas: Francis Marion 
The Climate Change Tree Atlas integration is available 
using the Climate Change Atlas theme. Along with the 
visualization of suitable habitats for each of the 134 tree 
species, there is a tool for selecting an area of interest and 
generating a non-standard visualization summarizing the 
relative abundance of each tree species. 
Our Tree Atlas parameterization yields three scenarios 
for each tree species: current historic, average GCM for the 
A1FI (high emissions) scenario, and average GCM for the 
B1 (low emissions) scenario. We do not use any of the 
temporal dimensions for the GCMs. The Climate Change 
Tree Atlas summarization tool allows the user to select an 
area of interest, and then calculates and generates a chart 
showing the relative importance of each tree species. It uses 
all nine climate change scenarios available through Tree 
Atlas: the Hadley CM3, PCM, and GFDL GCMs, plus the 
average GCM run against the A1FI and B1 emissions 
scenarios, along with the current historic baseline scenario. 
Here, we look at Francis Marion National Forest along 
the coast of South Carolina. We used the GIS Viewer to 
explore scenarios using Pinus taeda or loblolly pine, the 
dominant tree species for that area [40]. Comparing the 
GCM average run against the B1 low greenhouse-gas 
emissions scenario in Figure 7 with the historic in Figure 8, 
users noted a decrease in relative habitability dominance for 
the tree species. Users then asked several questions: “is 
loblolly pine still the dominant species with regards to 
habitat in future scenarios, how much does it decrease 
relative to the other species, and does it decrease enough so 
that another surpasses it with respect to habitat suitability?” 
The charts in Figure 9 and 10 generated by the Tree Atlas 
advanced geospatial analysis summarization tool allowed 
users to quickly look further into these questions without 
having to manually search each of the 130+ other tree 
species across the various climate change scenarios. In 
Figure 10, users hovered their mouse over the data point for 
the GCM average run against B1 of loblolly pine, showing 
its adjusted importance value at around 15.53. Users noted 
the spike for Pinus elliottii or slash pine in the same GCM 
average run against B1, with its adjusted importance value at 
approximately 10.98. Forest, land management, and other 
experts 
then 
use 
this 
information 
towards 
further 
investigation. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The current development stage of the TACCIMO GIS 
Viewer allows for integrating externally hosted geospatial 
data sources with peer-reviewed literature and planning 
language. Internally, this integration was managed by a 
combination of aspect-oriented programming-like observer 
patterns, with external communications centered on ArcGIS 
REST web-services. These integrations allowed policy 
developers and land managers to conveniently investigate 
multiple climate change science resources using interactive 
visualizations 
for 
a 
wide 
range 
of 
permutations 
parameterized using GCMs, greenhouse-gas emission 
scenarios, temporal dimensions, time frames, and climate 
change measurement indicators. We then used the integrated 
data to create a new, non-standard, advanced geospatial 
analysis. These techniques aid our roles in providing support 
and guidance to our users, who in turn use this to assess, 
manage, and monitor forest resources. Small numbers of 
users are responsible for a large amount of land, meaning 
large land management impact. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Francis Marion projected change in average annual temperature 
using GCM average ensemble and low B1 emissions in Climate Wizard 
126
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 7.  Francis Marion projected change in relative importance of 
loblolly pine using GCM average for B1 emissions in Tree Atlas 
 
Figure 8.  Francis Marion current historic relative importance of loblolly 
pine in Tree Atlas 
 
Figure 9.  Francis Marion advanced geospatial analysis chart highlighting 
relative importance of loblolly pine in GCM average for B1 emissions 
 
Figure 10.  Francis Marion advanced geospatial analysis chart highlighting 
relative importance of slash pine in GCM average for B1 emissions 
 
Future work can be explored on several fronts. From the 
external data integration front, additional content sources, 
such as the Climate Change Bird Atlas, are under 
consideration. Another area is exploring updates to the 
climate report generation process. For geospatial tool 
analysis, the area of interest selection process could be fine-
tuned. Domain experts have suggested several ideas, such as 
adding or removing individual cells, automatically pruning 
cells based on ecoregion boundaries, and selecting species of 
interest for summarization charts. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors give their thanks to Chris Zganjar and Evan 
Girvetz from The Nature Conservancy, plus George T. Raber 
from the University of Southern Mississippi, for their help 
and support in integrating Climate Wizard into the GIS 
Viewer. We thank John Cobb from NC State University for 
his extensive and diligent work on the Tree Atlas advanced 
geospatial analysis tool. We thank John Kim and Charlie 
Schrader from the USDA Forest Service for their help and 
support in integrating the California MC1 services. We also 
thank Louis Iverson, Anantha Prasad, Matt Peters, and Steve 
Matthews from the USDA Forest Service for their input and 
feedback during the Climate Change Tree Atlas integration 
process. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. W. Malmsheimer et al., “Forest management solutions for 
mitigating climate change in the U.S.,” Journal of Forestry 
106, 2008, pp. 115-171. 
[2] Climate Change Resource Center: Tools for Land Managers, 
www.fs.fed.us/ccrc/tools/, accessed: 2014-01-06. 
[3] C. Swanston and M. Janowiak, eds., “Forest adaptation 
resources: Climate change tools and approaches for land 
managers,” US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Northern Research Station, Newtown Square, PA, Gen. Tech. 
Rep. NRS-87, 2012. 
[4] D. L. Peterson et al, “Responding to climate change in 
national forests: a guidebook for developing adaptation 
options,” US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Pacific Northwest Research Station, Portland, OR, Gen. Tech. 
Rep. PNW-GTR-855, 2011. 
[5] L. Jennings, E. Treasure, J. Moore Myers, and S. McNulty, 
“The Template for Assessing Climate Change Impacts and 
Management 
Options 
(TACCIMO): 
Science 
at 
your 
fingertips,” Poster presented at 2012 Fall Meeting, American 
Geophysical Union (AGU), San Francisco, CA, Dec. 2012. 
[6] M. Gudgin et al, “SOAP Version 1.2 Part 1: Messaging 
framework (Second Edition)”, W3C Recommendation, April 
27, 2007, www.w3.org/TR/soap12/, accessed: 2014-01-06. 
[7] R. T. Fielding and R. N. Taylor, “Principled Design of the 
Modern Web Architecture,” ACM Transactions on Internet 
Technology 2 (2), May 2002, pp. 115-150. 
127
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[8] J. Estublier, H. Verjus, and P.-Y. Cunin, “Designing and 
building software federations,” Proc. 1st Conference on 
Component 
Based 
Software 
Engineering 
(CBSE-
EUROMICRO 2001), Warsaw, Poland, Sept. 2001, pp. 121-
129. 
[9] G. Kiczales et al., “Aspect-oriented programming,” Proc. 11th 
European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming 
(ECOOP 1997), pp. 220-242, doi: 10.1007/BFb0053381 
[10] C. V. Lopes, “AOP: a historical perspective,” Proc. Aspect-
Oriented Software Development, R.Filman et al (eds.), 2004. 
[11] C. Zhang and H.-A. Jacobsen, “Quantifying aspects in 
middleware platforms,” Proc. 2nd International Conference 
on Aspect Oreinted Software Development (AOSD 2003), 
Boston, MA, Mar. 2003, pp. 130-139. 
[12] A. Colyer and A. Clement, “Large-scale AOSD for 
middleware,” Proc. 3rd International Conference on Aspect-
Oriented Software Development (AOSD 2004), Lancaster, 
UK, 2004, pp. 56-65. 
[13] D. Stotts, K. L. Lee, and I. Rusyn, “Supporting computational 
systems science: genomic analysis tool federations using 
aspects and AOP,” Proc. 4th ISBRA, Atlanta, GA, May 2008, 
pp. 457-469, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-79450-9_43. 
[14] D. Gelernter, “Generative communication in Linda,” ACM 
Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 7(1), 
1985, pp. 80-112. 
[15] S. Ahuja, N. Carriero, and D. Gelernter, “Linda and friends,” 
Computer 19 (8), 1986, pp. 26-34. 
[16] N. 
Carriero, 
D. 
Gelernter, 
“Linda 
in 
context,” 
Communications of the ACM 32 (4), 1989, pp. 444-458, doi: 
10.1145/63334.63337. 
[17] R. 
Tolksdorf, 
F. 
Liebsch, 
and 
D. 
M. 
Nguyen, 
“XMLSpaces.NET: and extensible tuplespace as XML 
middleare,” Proc. 2nd International Workshop on .NET 
Technologies. 2004. 
[18] P. Wyckoff, S. W. McLaughry, T. J. Lehman, and D. A. Ford, 
“TPSaces,” IBM Systems Journal 37 (3), 1998, pp.454. 
[19] K. L. Lee and D. Stotts, "Composition of bioinformatics 
model federations using communication aspects," Proc. IEEE 
International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine, 
Philadelphia, 
PA, 
Oct. 
2012, 
doi:10.1109/BIBM.2012.6392621 
[20] M. Pascaul, E. Alves, H. Roig, T. de Almeida, G. S. de 
Franca, and M. Holanda, “An architecture for geographic 
information systems on the web – webGIS,” Proc. 4th 
International Conference on Advanced Geograpic Information 
Systems, Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2012), 
Valencia, Spain, 2012, pp. 209-214. 
[21] K. 
Sahina 
and 
M. 
U. 
Gumusayb,“Service 
oriented 
architecture (SOA) based web services for geographic 
information systems,” Proc. 21st ISPRS Congress, Beijing, 
China, pp. 625-630. 
[22] G. Aydin, “Service Oriented Architecture for Geographic 
Information Systems Supporting Real Time Data Grids”, Ph. 
D. Dissertation, Department of Computer Science, Indiana 
University, 2007. 
[23] E. H. Girvetz, C. Zganjar, G. T. Raber, E. P. Maurer, P. 
Kareiva, and J. J. Lawler, “Applied climate-change analysis: 
The Climate Wizard tool,” PLoS ONE 4 (12), Anna Traveset, 
Ed., Dec. 2009, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0008320. 
[24] ClimateWizard, www.ClimateWizard.org, accessed: 2014-01-
06. 
[25] J. M. Lenihan, C. Daly, D. Bachelet, and R. P. Neilson, 
“Simulating broad-scale fire severity in a dynamic global 
vegetation model,” Northwest Science 72 (2), 1998, pp. 91-
103. 
[26] C. Daly, D. Bachelet, J. M. Lenihan, R. P. Neilson, W. 
Parton, and D. Ojima, “Dynamic simulation of tree-grass 
interactions 
for 
global 
change 
studies,” 
Ecological 
Application 10 (2), 2000, pp. 449-469. 
[27] D. Bachelet, J. M. Lenihan, C. Daly, R. P. Neilson, D. S. 
Ojima, and W. J. Parton, “MC1. A dynamic vegetation model 
for estimating the distribution of vegetation and associated 
ecosystem fluxes of carbon, nutrients and water,” General 
Technial Report PNW-GTR-508, Corvalis, OR, USDA Forest 
Service, 2001. 
[28] A. M. Prasad, L. R. Iverson, S. Matthews, and M. Peters, “A 
Climate Change Atlas for 134 Forest Tree Species of the 
Eastern United States [database],” Northern Research Station, 
USDA Forest Service, Delaware, Ohio, 2007-ongoing, 
www.nrs.fs.fed.us/atlas/tree, accessed: 2014-01-06. 
[29] L. R. Iverson, A. M. Prasad, S. N. Matthews, and M. Peters, 
“Estimating potential habitat for 134 eastern US tree species 
under 
six 
climate 
scenarios,” 
Forest 
Ecology 
and 
Management 254, 2008, pp. 390-406. 
[30] A. M. Prasad, L. R. Iverson, S. Matthew, and M. Peters, 
“Atlases of tree and bird species habitats for current and 
future climates,” Ecological Restoration 27, 2009, pp 260-
263. 
[31] S. G. McNulty et al., “Application of linked regional scale 
growth, biogeography, and economic models for southeastern 
United States pine forests,” World Resource Review 12 (2), 
pp 298-320, 2000. 
[32] Climate Change Atlas, www.fs.fed.us/nrs/datlas/, accessed: 
2014-01-06. 
[33] AS3Commons 
Bytecode, 
www.as3commons.org/as3-
commons-bytecode/, accessed: 2014-01-06. 
[34] Loom, code.google.com/p/loom-as3/, accessed: 2014-01-06. 
[35] Flapper, code.google.com/p/flapper-as3/, accessed: 2014-01-
06. 
[36] Parsley Framework, www.spicefactory.org/parsley/, accessed: 
2014-01-06. 
[37] Swiz Framework, swizframework.jira.com/wiki/, accessed: 
2014-01-06. 
[38] Apache 
Flex 
ready 
for 
Swiz 
donation, 
groups.google.com/d/topic/swiz-framework/XUMHxelq_-4, 
accessed: 2014-01-06. 
[39] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, “Design 
patterns: elements of reusable object-oriented software,” 
Addison-Wesley, 1995,. ISBN 0-201-63361-2. 
[40] Francis Marion Land and Resource Management Plan, 
www.fs.usda.gov/goto/scnfs/fmplan, accessed: 2014-01-06. 
 
128
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2014. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

