XGIS Flex: A Free and Open Source Framework for the Development of the 
Geographic Information Systems on the Web 
 
Mariano F. Pascaul, George Sand 
L. Araújo 
Geosciences Institute  
University of Brasilia 
Camp. Darcy Ribeiro –DF– Brazil 
{mariano, georgesand}@unb.br 
 
Maristela Holanda 
Depart. of Computer Science 
University of Brasília 
Camp. Darcy Ribeiro –DF– Brazil 
mholanda@unb.br 
 
Edson E. Sano  
Inst. of the Environment and 
Renewable Natural Resources 
SCEN trecho 2 Ed.Sede – DF – Brazil 
sano@ibama.gov
Abstract—Geographic Information Systems on the web (web 
GIS) are currently implemented for different purposes. This 
paper presents a framework to develop web GIS with free and 
open source software, for interoperability between different 
sources of heterogeneous data, as well as the visualization of 
maps in different formats with components implemented with 
a Web 2.0 concept. We present two case studies that 
implemented a web GIS to Japan International Cooperation 
Agency – JICA together with the Secretary of Planning and 
Modernization of Public Management by  the Government of 
the State of Tocantins – Seplan-TO and a web GIS for the 
Brazilian Institute of the Environment and Renewable Natural 
Resources – IBAMA. 
Keywords-GIS; web; Flex; open source 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
A Geographic Information System (GIS) is frequently 
defined as the combination of a database management 
system, a set of operations for exploring data, and a graphic 
display system that is used for geospatial analysis. These GIS 
analyses have the main purpose of supporting decision 
making and modeling some of the possible consequences of 
those decisions [2][4][7][27][30]. GIS environments are also 
cartographic tools that facilitate creating maps and 
examining the impact of changes to the maps interactively 
[14] [17][21][26][27]. 
GIS on the web (web GIS) is currently being developed, 
and one challenge in that environment is interoperability 
among heterogeneous databases. For interoperability of the 
data, web services technology is being used [10]. The 
standard set by the Open GIS Consortium (OGC) proposes 
open service architecture of web GIS to support data-
interoperability. And, it suggests the use of Geographic 
Markup Language (GML) based on XML to exchange the 
data between the web client and the web GIS [13][16]. The 
REST 
[22] 
technology 
is 
also 
used 
to 
support 
interoperability with geographical databases.  
For the visualization of maps in an interactive way, Web 
2.0 
technology 
is 
being applied through different 
components of Rich Internet Application (RIA) [35]. As is 
observed in [15], this technology is being applied in the 
development of web GIS. Web mapping applications such as 
Google Maps, Google Earth, Microsoft Bing Maps and 
Yahoo Maps are usually considered good examples of Web 
2.0 [10].  
In this environment, the free and open source software 
FOSS community has developed solutions for GIS 
implementation, database management systems with free 
spatial extension and high performing map servers. One of 
the elements that facilitated the distribution and use of these 
free tools was the standard defined for interoperability 
between data and the applications used for the development 
of a GIS [6] [29]. 
This paper presents XGIS Flex — a framework to 
develop web GIS with free and open source software, with 
interoperability between different sources of heterogeneous 
data, as well as the visualization of maps in different formats 
whose components are implemented with a Web 2.0 concept. 
This framework was used to implement two case studies 
presented in this paper. 
The content of this paper is divided into the following 
sections: 2 – basic concepts about web GIS are presented; 3 
– the XGIS Flex framework is defined; 4 – Related Works, 
analyses; 5 – Case Study, where the architecture was used to 
develop the GIS for the Japan International Cooperation 
Agency – JICA in partnership with the Secretary of Planning 
and Modernization 
of 
Public 
Management 
by 
the 
Government of the State of Tocantins – Seplan-TO and of 
the Brazilian Institute for the Environment and Renewable 
Resources – Ibama; and finally, 6 – Conclusions. 
II. GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM ON THE WEB 
Geographic Information System on the Web is any GIS 
that uses web technologies. The simplest form of web GIS 
should have at least a server and a client, where the server is 
a Web application server, and the client is a web browser, a 
desktop application, or a mobile application [5][10].  
The architecture of a web GIS is most commonly based 
on the use of three layers: User Interface Layer, Application 
Server Layer and Database Layer [3][9][28]. Some authors 
considered four layers, where the integration layer is added 
on the web GIS architecture, which is based on web services 
[32]. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The User Interface layer serves as a graphic user 
interface (GUI) to present the result of spatial data, allowing 
the end users to interact with the backend services. The 
Application Server layer communicates with multiple data 
sources via the data integration layer, and interacts with end 
users to analyze and manipulate data coming from data 
provider services. The Database layer of data provider 
services is a set of remote data provider services for data 
sharing. Each data provider service offers a set of interfaces 
through which client applications can pull remote data in and 
manipulate the data. 
III. XGIS FLEX FRAMEWORK 
The XGIS framework was developed to be a free and 
open source option for the platforms developed in Flex. The 
XGIS enables the navigator for use in RIA and high 
performance Web 2.0 concept environments. There is 
interaction with OGC standard web services, such as WMS, 
WFS, WFS-T e WCS, REST, as well as files such as GPX, 
KML, SHP and other formats including JSON and GeoRSS. 
With XGIS, it is possible to visualize data from different 
web services. It is not aim of the XGIS to offer web services. 
Besides visualization, the XGIS has some functionality, such 
as, extract data from many formats, measure distances, area 
and several graphics.   In the next section, each one of these 
functions is shown through the components. 
The XGIS is strongly linked and integrated to the Map 
Server Geoserver (Java), which is a high performance 
interactive map server as presented in [25], having 
interoperability of the open source with multiple connectors 
for the sources of data such as PostGIS, Oracle, SQL Server, 
DB2, SDE, shapefiles and others. With this framework it is 
also possible to visualize data coming from other map 
servers, such as ArcGIS Server or MapServer and fuse 
services, such as, Microsoft Bing, OpenStreet Maps (OSM), 
Yahoo Maps and others. 
A. XGIS Flex Framework Components  
The XGIS Framework has various components. These 
components were developed based on the architecture 
presented in [23]. Figure 1 presents the components, where 
the XGIS framework components are represented by strong 
lines, and dashed lines are presented for the software used in 
the web GIS environment. Each one of the components of 
the framework is described below. 
The GPX, KML and Shapefile Overlay Component 
enables the opening of shapefile files and their attributes, 
providing the overlay of geometries available in .shp files in 
the web Flex environment. The constant attributes in .dbf 
files are presented in a tabular format and related to the 
correspondent geometry. The features that can be viewed 
are: line, point, or polygon. If the set of files is projected in a 
system distinct to the map base, the inclusion of the 
compacted file .prj is necessary for the system to complete 
re-projection. This component reaches a large quantity of 
Garmim brand GPS field equipment users and, therefore, this 
was strongly recommended in the development of this 
component, which makes the overlay of files downloaded 
directly from equipment of this type possible. All of the 
waypoints available to track overlays of a line are presented, 
in which the initial point is presented in green, the path in 
yellow and the end in red.  The attributes given to the paths 
are shown in a floating table. The KML Overlay is a 
component that provides the opening and comparison of the 
routes generated in Google Map platforms, and also in 
simple files in KML format; the available attributes in the 
file referenced are also presented in splints through floating 
panels. 
The 
Vectorization 
component 
class 
serves 
the 
vectorization and release in distinct database formats, such as 
lines, points and polygons. Algorithms for the calculation of 
the area and perimeter are also used in the class; the user can 
opt to save the designed features on a local disc in JSON 
format or directly in the database. When drawing, it is 
possible to add or edit new vertexes and exclude former ones 
or all polygons, lines or points drawn. 
The Export Data Component is totally integrated with 
Geoserver Java map server. Through this component, it is 
also possible to make the selection and later export and 
download layers or a part of them in diverse formats such as 
shapefile, csv, pdf, xls, kml, kmz, jpg, png. 
The Navigation and Data Tabs Component is a 
presentation component, in which formatting grids were built 
with the aim of improving the visual aspect of register lists 
extracted from the database. There is frequent interaction 
between the navigation and consultation of attributes related 
to the geometry visualized. 
The Treatment of Geographic Database Component aims 
at adopting the tool of a set of classes capable of treating 
incoming information from the interface, which will be sent 
to the database.  With this tool one can select which type of 
database will be used and the classes will be the interactions 
necessary for a correct treatment of distinct types between 
the manufacturers of DBMSs. Treatment of geographic 
features is a set with the minimum rules necessary to avoid 
classical errors at the moment of vectorization, such as the 
creation of polygonal ties. 
The Charts are tools for which geographic database 
tables, or simply web services about them, can be chosen by 
way of selection boxes, from which one can select numerical 
attributes and vectorize an area on the screen resulting in 
charts. These are interesting analytical tools for statistical 
data, however with geographic presentation and selection. 
Taking advantage of the available functionality in the SDK 
Flex, the following types of graphics were used: lines, 
columns, bars, pizza, candlestick and areas.  
Media Overlay is the component responsible for the 
overlaying of videos, photography and documents over 
maps, for the most part, representing a strong Web 2.0 
concept. For the development of this component, it was 
necessary to map and treat the types of media data available 
in the main DBMSs on the market so that the consultation 
and overlaying of these on the maps become possible. 
 
B. XGIS to Develop web GIS 
The XGIS framework was designed to be user friendly. If 
the user of the XGIS is not a software developer, he or she 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

will still be able to customize an application easily and 
quickly, needing only to edit XML extension files. With the 
configuration files in XML one can define which map 
services can be used, in which tables it will be possible to 
edit data, titles and subtitles of the system, logotypes or 
brands, 
data 
subtitle, 
symbols, 
and 
the 
individual 
configuration of each component developed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 – Components of the XGIS. 
Figure 2 lists a piece of the code of the XML file of the 
configuration of layers to be shown on the spatial interface 
with tags already configured. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 – XGIS Configuration File. 
Besides being able to quickly implement an interface of 
interactive maps, another feature of the framework is in the 
engine of web service for the interaction between the web 
forms projected in the Flex environment and different types 
of databases. The engine was built in PHP language and 
treats connections with the SGBDs MySQL, PostgreSQL, 
SQLite, Oracle and SQL Server and its spatial extensions, 
thus, it is possible to have a programming language for 
developing new components that interact with textual and 
geographic data. In case the user of the Framework does not 
want to use the PHP motor incorporated, he can use 
whichever programming language he wants to Interact with 
the maps: C#, Java, Phyton, among others. The tools just 
need access to the data via web-services that can be easily 
available in other languages.  
The layer of data presentation always exhibits a 
standardized layout, as shown in Figure 3, making the use of 
the application easier. This characteristic is possible because 
the components that were developed in Flex using 
ActionScript follow the MVC—Model, Vision and Control 
model [36]. The developer has only to design the form using 
a graphic environment and make it available to the web 
service corresponding to the database tables he or she wishes 
to interact with using and extending the set of codes 
developed. It does not matter which DBMS the user uses, it’s 
merely necessary to alter the data that pertains to the 
connection, such as user, password, IP address and type of 
DBMS to be connected. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 – XGIS Standard Layout. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE XGIS FRAMEWORK 
Some free and open source libraries were used for the 
development of the XGIS components. The highlighted 
libraries described below are among the libraries used. 
The SDK Flex [1] has a set of components available, 
including: buttons, list boxes, tree-views, data grids, text 
control objects, layout containers, graphic components, 
animations, status applications, modal dialogue boxes, 
among others. The Openscales libraries [18] were also 
widely used and an extension of the majority of the classes 
of the library, as well as the creation of new components and 
classes. 
Other 
sources 
and 
free 
components 
written 
in 
ActionScript were used and organized within the XGIS 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

framework, such as, file reading components of extension 
shp, shx and dbfs and, of the watermark insertion in the 
application [31].  
The PHP components manage the entrance of vectoral 
data that are sent by web interface such as lines, point, 
polygons and projection systems. Textual data are also 
controlled, making not only the presentation of information 
over maps easier, but also the insertion, alteration, exclusion 
and consultation of the same directly from the data base. 
IV. RELATED WORKS 
Different tools for aiding in the development of web GIS 
with free and open source software are found in the literature 
and there are proprietary tools with closed sources. Some of 
these tools are presented as follows. 
The ESRI makes an API for Flex [8] available for 
developing web GIS with web 2.0 characteristics, however, 
it is a proprietary closed source framework. A negative point 
is the strong linkage existing between the ESRI framework 
and map services originating from ArcGIS Server servers, 
also proprietary and costly to implement. 
Google has an environment available for development in 
Flex, Google Maps API for Flex [12], however, it is also 
proprietary. The great advantage of this environment is the 
popularity of its base maps, which have excellent quality 
since Google invests heavily in the acquisition of 
cartographic bases, and the service provides very high 
performance as well. The negative points are the low 
quantity of available functions, presenting itself more as a 
compiled library to be incorporated to another Flex 
application and its proprietary source is unalterable. 
The i3Geo [24] is a web software based on a set of other 
free software, mainly Mapserver. The main focus is the 
availability of geographic data and a set of tools for 
navigation, analysis management, on demand map sharing, 
and management. It is strongly linked to MapServer, free 
standard web services management software OGC, but from 
the first generation not high performing nor created for 
editing geographic data via web, as is Geoserver. 
Four libraries are considered free frameworks for web 
GIS development written in JavaScript: OpenLayers [19], 
GeoExt [11], OpenScale [18] and MapFish [20].  Each one 
of these is described as follows. 
OpenLayers is a JavaScript library accessed as API, 
however, with an open source and one that currently presents 
as a library used mainly for the support and inclusion of 
maps on web pages, this is because of its versatility, able to 
adapt to diverse languages and modern web browsers. 
Another advantage is in the capacity of mash-ups between 
sources such as Google Maps, MsBingMaps, Yahoo Maps, 
OSM and others. 
GeoExt presents itself as a JavaScritp Toolkit for Rich 
Web Mapping Applications that is basically an OpenLayers 
library, but with resources that raise the level of the 
applications developed, making them closer to a desktop 
application, while still in a web environment. It is a recent 
project, still in its first versions. 
Openscales is a framework written in ActionScript 3 with 
an LGPL license type. Its libraries are widely used in our 
solution, but are limited to support the navigation maps. 
Classes used in the framework presented in this paper have 
been extended, the engine optimized and many additional 
components were created. 
MapFish is a framework to be developed from the web 
applications written in Phyton. These new classes present 
functionality for the construction of applications of the web 
mapping type.  MapFish makes a Java Script toolbook 
available composed of Openlayers, GeoExt and ExtIS. 
Unlike the libraries listed above, the XGIS is a full 
framework for developing web GIS since it interacts 
manipulating textual and spatial data from different DBMSs, 
besides dealing with the rendering of maps and pictures, and 
interacts as a tool Web 2.0 RIA with photos, georeferenced 
video and documents. The main idea of XGIS is the 
possibility of accelerating the development of GIS 
applications for web environments that are easily integrated 
and do not require programming knowledge to implement, 
and always maintain a good visual presentation.  
V. CASE STUDY 
The XGIS framework was used in different GIS, as we 
can see in [33][34], among others. In this article we present 
two systems that we consider the most complete in terms of 
use of framework functions, described as follows.  
 
Description  
The 
Framework 
was 
recently 
tested 
in 
the 
implementation of the two web GIS. The first,  the JICA - 
Japan International Cooperation Agency, together with the 
Secretary of Planning and Modernization of Public 
Management of the Government of the State of Tocantins –
Seplan—TO in the implementation of the Monitoring 
System of the Ecological Corridor of the Jalapão Region. 
The second one was implemented at the Brazilian Institute 
for the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources –
Ibama making a new interface of maps from SisCom -- 
Shared System available, of which, among others, is 
responsible for the availability of information in embargoed 
areas.   
Specifically, in the case of the application of the 
Framework for JICA and the Government of the State of 
Tocantins, the set of components facilitated the integration of 
data from different sources. Both institutions dispute spatial 
data basically in file format, the majority being shapefiles, 
satellite images in TIF and geographic data in Oracle 
database with spatial extensions. Nonetheless, the creation of 
a geographic database with data already validated using 
PostgreSQL with spatial PostGIS was decided upon. 
In this case, the entire application was customized and 
implemented in one day, having been necessary the creation 
of the web map services from the distinct sources of data 
using Geoserver and, later carry out the appointments within 
the application using the extension files XML. Other files 
from the same extension were also configured, aiming at 
altering the logotypes, brand names, title, and subtitle of the 
application, addresses of services and dynamic captions, 
among others. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Evaluation  
Figures 4 and 5 show two screens taken from the 
navigation of the application implemented. Figure 4 shows 
the web GIS with vectoral data only and some of their listed 
layers dynamically charged by a Geoserver server. The 
components, “Navigations and Data Tabs”, “Layers” and 
“Menus” are instanced together to the central motor of map 
navigation. 
Figure 5 shows the result of a query in a vectoral 
database overlayed on the matrix data; they are basically 
images from the Alos satellite, Avnir sensor and images 
from the Microsoft Bing catalogue. The “Layers” component 
was used executing methods such as GetFeatureInfo for 
retrieving data regarding the layer selected, also it is possible 
to carry out queries using this same component by way of 
geographic selections, by simply selecting the area on the 
screen over which one you wish to research and 
automatically the parameters are passed on by queries to the 
interactive map servers.  
The result of the queries will always be a grid when the 
result obtained is greater or equal to two registers. In the 
Ibama case study, differently from the application 
implemented for the Jica with geographic extension of just 
one State, the application used the total extension of the 
country. The tools for generating graphics were activated and 
configured aimed at turning the application into a support 
system for making decisions in terms of the information 
related to the deforestation and embargoed areas. 
Figure 6 shows a screen of the system implemented in 
the Center for Remote Sensing of the Institute at the moment 
of consulting georeferenced photography and videos. In this 
consultation, the components “Navigation and Data Tabs”,  
“Treatment of Geographic DataBase”, “Charts”, “Layers” 
and “Media Overlay” are active over the navigation motor. 
 
 
 
Figure 4 – Basic Navigation.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figura 5 –Raster Navigation and Spatial Query. 
 
 
Figura 6 – Ibama Interface with Video Interaction/ Image. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Architecture presented in this paper proposes a tool of 
rapid implementation and availability of web GIS, with a set 
of services made available that can easily integrate data of 
structured systems, such as consumption of information 
originating from diverse data sources. Textual and vectoral 
data can be easily manipulated, making not only query 
possible, but also the insertion, alteration and deletion of 
information directly in different types of market SGBDs. 
The visualization of different media, such as videos, 
photography, documents and tables originating from map 
databases was one of the examples of Web 2.0 architecture 
functioning that impressed users because of its high 
performance.  
The next steps include the development and integration 
of a 3-D environment, to be written using SDK Flex and 
OpenGI, to the Framework map environment, as well as, 
integration with social network tools, also using ActionScript 
and integration with mosaics and 360º photography and 
panoramas obtained through Gigapan robots. For the test 
phase in the 3-D environment data originating from laser 
profiling 
will 
be done 
through the 
collection 
of 
aerophotogrammatical material in Brasilia in 2010. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Adobe, SDK Flex http://www.adobe.com/devnet/flex/flex-
sdk-download-all.html, [accessed 2012-10-20]. 
[2] J. Arenas and H. Zambrano. Web-based GIS Applications for 
Government. In Proceedings of the 3rd ICEGOV International 
Conference on Theory and practice of electronic governance, 
Bogota, Colombia, 2009. 
[3] J. Baumann. Future of Web GIS: An Interview with Pinde Fu. 
GeoConnection International Magazine, April, 2011. 
[4] O. Boucelma and M. Essid. A WFS-Based Mediation System 
for GIS Interoperability. ACM GIS’02, November 8–9, 2002, 
McLean, pp. 23-28, 2002. 
[5] T. Bressan. Desenvolvimento e integração de um ambiente 
SIGWEB com ferramentas de software livre. Master Thesis. 
Federal University of Santa Maria Brazil, 2010. 
[6] G. Câmara, L. Vinhas and C. Souza. Free and Open Source 
GIS: Will There Ever Be a Geo-Linux? Geospatial Free and 
Open Source Software in the 21st Century. LNGC, pp. 229-
245, 2012 
[7] S. Dragiéevié and S. Balram. A Web GIS collaborative 
framework to structure and manage distributed planning 
processes. Journal of Geographical Systems. Spring-Verlag 6, 
pp. 133-153, 2004  
[8] ESRI, 
ArcGIS 
API 
for 
Flex 
http://help.arcgis.com/en/webapi/flex/, [accessed 2012-06-
10]. 
[9] M. Frehner and M. Brandli. Virtual database: Spatial analysis 
in a Web-based data management system for distributed 
ecological data. Environmental Modelling & Software 21,  
pp. 1544-1554, 2006. 
[10] P. Fu and J. Sun. Web GIS: Principles and Applications. ESRI 
Press, 2010 
[11] GeoExt. JavaScript Toolkit for Rich Web Mapping 
Applications. http://geoext.org/, [accessed 2012-10-20]. 
[12] Google. 
Maps 
API 
for 
Flash 
https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/ 
[accessed 2012-10-20]. 
[13] D. Kim and M. Kim. Web GIS Service Component Based On 
Open Environment. In Proceedings of IGARSS Geoscience 
and Remote Sensing Symposium. IEEE, pp. 3346-3348, 2002. 
[14] A. Longley, F. Goodchild, J. Maguire and J. Rhind. 
Geographical Information Systems and Science. 2nd Edition. 
John Wiley & Sons, 2005. 
[15] A. Majchrzak and P. More. Emergency! Web. 2.0 the Rescue! 
. Communications of the ACM, vol. 54, n. 4, pp. 125-132, 
2011. 
[16] OGC. OpenGIS® Geography Markup Language (GML) 
Encoding Standard, 2007. 
[17] H. Olivera and M. Holanda. A GIS Web with Integration of 
Sheet and Soil Databases of the Brazilian Cerrado. 2012. In: 
7ª Conferência Ibérica de Sistemas e Tecnologias de 
Informação - CISTI, Madri. Lisboa: AISTI, pp. 735-740, 
2012. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[18] Openscales, http://openscales.org/, [accessed 2012-10-20].. 
[19] OSGeo. Open Source Geospatial Foundation. OpenLayers: 
Free Maps for the Web. http://openlayers.org/, [accessed 
2012-10-20]. 
[20] OSGeo. Open Source Geospatial Foundation. Mapfish. 
http://mapfish.org/, 2012a 
[21] M. Ostergren, J. Hemsley, M. Belarde-Lewis and S. Walker. 
A Vision for Information Visualization in Information 
Science. iConference, Seatle, USA, pp. 531-537, 2011.  
[22] K. Page, D. Roure and K. Martinez. REST and Linked Data: a 
match made for domain driven development? In: Proceedings 
of the Second International Workshop on RESTful WS-
REST; Hyderabad, India, pp. 22-25, 2011. 
[23] M. Pascual, E. Alves, G. França, H. Roig, T. Almeida, and M. 
Holanda. An Architecture for Geographic Information 
Systems on the Web - WebGIS. In: GEOProcessing, The 
Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic 
Information Systems, Applications, and Services, Valencia, 
pp. 209-214, 2012. 
[24] PSPB. Portal do Software Público Brasileiro. I3GEO 
http://www.softwarepublico.gov.br/ver-
comunidade?community_id=1444332, [accessed 2012-10-
20]. 
[25] S. Rao and S. Vinay. Choosing the right GIS framework for 
an informed Enterprise Web GIS Solution. 13 Annual 
International Conference and Exhibition on Geospatial 
Information technology and Applications, India, pp. 19-21, 
2010 
[26] M. Rhyne. Visualizing Geospatial Data.. In Proceedings of  
ACM SIGGRAPH GRAPH International Conference on 
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, 2004 
[27] P. Rigaux, M. Scholl and A. Voisard. Spatial Databases with 
Application to GIS.  Elsevier Science, 2002. 
[28] H. Shunfu.Web-Based Multimedia GIS for the analysis and 
visualization 
of 
spatial 
environmental 
database. 
In 
Proceedings of Symposium on Geospatial Theory, Processing 
and Applications, 2002. 
[29] S. Steiniger and A. Hunter. Free and Open Source GIS 
Software for Building a Spatial Data Infrastructure. Springer, 
2012.  
[30] R. Wolfgang. Principles and Application of Geographic 
Information Systems and Internet/Intranet Technology. In 
Proceedings New Information Processing Techniques for 
Miitary Systemns. Istanbul, Turkey, 2000. 
[31] Vanrijkom 
http://code.google.com/p/vanrijkom-flashlibs/, 
[accessed 2012-10-20]. 
[32] S. Zongyao and X. Yichun. Design of Service-Oriented 
Architecture for Spatial Data Integration and Its Application 
in Building Web-based GIS Systems. Geo-spatial Information 
Science, 2010. 
[33] E. Santana, D. Siqueira and M. Holanda. EcoGIS: Sistema de 
Informação Geográfica para visualização de Dados do 
Ecossistema do Cerrado Brasileiro. In Proceedings IV 
GeoNordeste Simpósio Regional de  Geoprocessamento e 
Sensoriamento Remoto, Brazil, pp. 843-848, 2012. 
[34] H. Olivera and M. Holanda. A GIS Web with integration of 
sheet and soil databases of the Brazilian Cerrado. In 
Proceedings Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI) 
7th Iberian Conference on CISTI 2012, Madri, pp. 1-6, 2012. 
[35] A. Bozzon, S. Comai and G. Carughi.Conceptual modeling 
and code generation for rich internet applications. In 
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Web 
Engineering, pp. 353–360, 2006. 
[36] S. William and C. Chadima. ActionScript 3 Design Patterns 
excerpt: Factory method and MVC. 2007. 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

