A Novel Health Monitoring System using Patient
Trajectory Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities
Shayma Alkobaisi
Faculty of Information Technology
United Arab Emirates University
Al Ain, UAE
Email: shayma.alkobaisi@uaeu.ac.ae
Wan D. Bae
Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science
University of Wisconsin-Stout
Menomonie, WI, USA
Email: baew@uwstout.edu
Sada Narayanappa
Global Navigation Services
Jeppesen, A Boeing Company
Denver, CO, USA
Email: sada.narayanappa@jeppesen.com
Cheng C. Liu
Engineering and Technology Department
University of Wisconsin-Stout
Menomonie, WI, USA
Email: liuc@uwstout.edu
Abstract—Continued advances and cost reduction in mobile
devices such as smart phones made them widely used in our daily-
life practices such as en route navigation and vehicle tracking.
Health applications utilizing these battery-powered devices con-
tinue to grow, and so does the demand for effective modeling and
analysis tools to support data collected by these devices. Health
monitoring applications in particular became very popular these
days. However, researchers must overcome many challenges, such
as data acquisition, data scales and data uncertainty, in order
to develop such applications. In this paper, we propose a novel
health monitoring system that can interact with the patient and
analyze the patient’s moving trajectories combined with data of
environmental conditions. We present a system architecture, and
discuss ideas and challenges in developing the health monitoring
system for asthma patients. This system can provide a better
understanding of the effect of environmental factors on triggering
health attacks and hence support individual-based health care.
Index Terms—health monitoring, uncertain trajectories, envi-
ronmental factors, asthma, road networks
I. INTRODUCTION
Relations between negative health effects like asthma and
lung cancer and elevated levels of the environmental factors,
such as air pollution, tobacco smoke and humidity, have been
detected in several large scale exposure studies [8]. Thus,
public health care and service systems often require the ability
to track, monitor, and analyze patients’ trajectories and their
relationships with several environmental factors in order to
derive conclusions that will help in preventing and treating
diseases. Health applications dealing with large volume of
continuously moving data objects, such as humans and ve-
hicles continue to grow. However, these applications present
signiﬁcant challenges in terms of data size, data scales, com-
plex structures and relationships, uncertainty, and space and
time constraints. Tracking moving objects has been a hot issue
recently due to the large number of applications that depend
heavily on it. However, individual monitoring of exposure to
environmental conditions did not follow the same pace despite
its great impact on public health; the general effect on earth
has more been the concern. Limited research has been done on
techniques for retrieving, storing and analyzing real-time data
of patients along with the environmental conditions patients
are exposed to.
The main objective of this research is to improve public
health care through proposing ideas and directions to develop
an effective and efﬁcient real-time health monitoring system
that can report potential health threats (e.g., asthma attacks)
associated with environmental conditions, support individual’s
long-term health care management, reduce the cost, effort and
time spent in traditional health visits to hospitals, and provide
intelligent information that might be useful for improving
public health care plans and strategies. Although we are
targeting asthma in this paper as it is well known that asthma
is highly affected by surrounding environmental conditions
[2], [13], our proposed system can be used in improving the
general well-being as well as targeting other diseases that are
affected by the environment.
This paper focuses on the two main components in develop-
ing our proposed system that takes into account the correlation
between the time and location of a patient and the level
and time of exposure to negative environmental factors; these
are patient trajectory tracking and environmental exposure
measurement. The ﬁrst component can be obtained by location
tracking devices such as the GPS. The second component not
only includes air pollution level but also other measurements,
such as humidity and temperature levels, that can be normal to
healthy people but not to asthma patients. Finally, we discuss
challenges and opportunities to develop the proposed system
and conclude the paper.
II. MOTIVATION
A. Health and the Environment
According to the World Health Organization, asthma is now
a serious public health problem with over 100 million sufferers
worldwide. It continues to be one of the major causes of
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

hospitalization of children in many countries. The number of
reported adults and children diagnosed with Asthma in the
U.S. in 2009 was 17.5 million and 7.1 million, respectively
[17], [6]. Moreover, the number of visits (to physician ofﬁces,
hospital outpatient and emergency departments) with asthma
as primary diagnosis in 2007 was 17.0 million in the U.S. only
[19]. In the same year, the number of discharges with asthma
as ﬁrst-listed diagnosis was 456,000 with an average length
of stay being 3.4 days [14]. Although scientiﬁc advances have
led to effective medical interventions to prevent morbidity of
the disease, the burden in prevalence, mortality and health care
use remains high.
Research has identiﬁed several factors associated with the
development of asthma, such as exposure to trafﬁc exhaust
fumes, tobacco smoke, pesticides and changes in the weather,
but none have proven to be the causative agent [2]. Rather
the development is a combination of underlying susceptibility
with environmental exposures [2], [13]. In addition, these
environmental factors associated with asthma have been mea-
sured on a general basis, i.e., they are based on summarized
data collected in large scale areas (e.g., city), and not based
on individual exposure which would more accurately reﬂect
the exposure to such factors at a speciﬁc location and time.
Moreover, asthma triggers vary and can be very different from
one patient to another. Thus, individual-based measurement
of exposure is needed to be able to develop more accurate
conclusions on causes of asthma attacks.
B. Health Monitoring
There exist some powerful health monitoring systems in
this advanced era of information technology. These systems
range from smart homes [9] that consist of several intelligent
devices built in homes which are able to monitor and provide
help to elderly and disabled people, to very tiny sensor chips
that can be implanted in the body of patients to provide
continuous monitoring of blood pressure, sugar level and other
measurements [7], [21]. These types of health monitoring
systems are very useful but limited to some conditions. For
example, smart homes are useful for patients who spend most
of their time at home (e.g., elderly). On the other hand,
implanted sensor chips are able of continuously monitoring
patients regardless of their locations. However, they are limited
by high cost, patients’ willingness for a device implant and
patients’ health condition. In addition, health monitoring may
not work for some diseases using these sensors since the
development of their attacks may not be measured by sensors.
In the case of asthma, for example, it is not enough to depend
on physical measurement of implanted sensors as many other
factors play a role in triggering an attack. For example, it can
be a result of environmental factors as stated earlier.
III. ASTHMA MONITORING SYSTEM
This section proposes a health monitoring system that can
track the trajectories of an asthma patient in a geographic
region and various environmental factors associated with that
region, and analyze these data along with the patient health
level (peak ﬂow level, for example). The system will be
able to retrieve individual patient’s location data and several
environmental resource data through mobile phones or sensors.
Integration of these spatio-temporal data can support the
calculation of the patient’s exposure to certain levels of the en-
vironmental conditions. Using statistical analysis and efﬁcient
data mining algorithms to retrieve intelligence information
from relations between the patient’s locations within time and
various environmental conditions, the system can identify the
potential asthma attack and provide useful information to the
patient that may prevent asthma attacks. The main advantages
of the proposed system can be summarized as follows: (1)
Continuous monitoring and early attack detection, (2) Data
analysis on individual-level to provide risk alerts, (3) Long
term treatment based on spatio-temporal data analysis, and
(4) Reducing time, effort and cost spent on emergency visits
to hospitals and clinics.
A. Architecture Overview
The context and overall architecture of the proposed system
are illustrated in Fig. 1. The system consists of data acquisition
to acquire data and data integration from different sources to
provide user and environment proﬁles. The internal reference
data consist of maps, road networks, etc.
The system enables collecting data from users by various
sources. For example, the user’s mobile device connected to
the GPS is a good source of user location and trajectory.
In addition, the user’s interaction with social networks or
communication via mobile phone (phone number tied to
business) etc., are possible data collection methods. The com-
munication via mobile and sensor networks will provide other
information of the user such as the current health condition
of the user (e.g., users post that they are feeling difﬁculty in
breathing or chest wheezing). These unstructured data can be
used to predict the environmental conditions such as trafﬁc,
congestion, smoke level, etc. Environmental data, such as air
pollution, tobacco smoke, temperature and humidity, can be
obtained from standard sensors. Moreover, the user proﬁle tied
to user mobile devices provides intimate proﬁle of the user.
Based on the input, area of interest, reference data trajectory
and trend analysis, the system computes the interesting output
based on the rules conﬁgured in the system. The system
will provide the output to external systems such as health
awareness broadcast systems, public safety systems, pollution
control systems, etc. Several rules of ﬁltering and inference
provide speciﬁc conﬁgurations to change the system’s behavior
without having to change the entire system. Speciﬁcations on
data acquisition and data analysis parts of the system will be
discussed further in the opportunities section.
B. Challenges
A number of challenges exist in developing an online health
analytical infrastructure that matches the proposed health
monitoring system. The main challenge is the large scale
of the proposed system; It requires major public participa-
tion/outreach efforts in order to (a) obtain active participation
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
User/Environment  Data Collection  Via Mobile Device
SYSTEM
Environment Data Collection 
External Interfaces
Data Acquisition / Analysis
Data Acquisition
Radio Tower
GPS
User Input
Synthesize Structured 
Unstructured Data
Rules Engine
REFERENCE DATA
Internal Reference Data 
(Maps, Routes, etc.)
User 
Movements
Environment
Trajectory +Trend Analyzer
Inference Engine 
Predictions and statistical analyzer
User Health Profile
Health Awareness 
Broadcast System
Health Awareness 
Broadcast System
Health Awareness 
Broadcast System
Public Security/
Safety System
Health Awareness 
Broadcast System
Pollution Control 
System
Health Awareness 
Broadcast System
Health Condition
Health Awareness 
Broadcast System
Medical Profile
Health Awareness 
Broadcast System
Insurance 
Information
Visualization
Fig. 1.
A health monitoring system using patient trajectory and environmental factors
of the users and (b) limit data distortions. The ﬁrst can
be addressed by providing a high quality human-machine
interface to the system with user friendly options to interact
with the system. In addition, patients need to be educated about
the advantages of such a system and its potential role in saving
their lives. The second challenge necessitates providing a lot of
training to overcome the expected highly biased data collected.
Methods of data training and testing exist and will be tested
in the future phases of this project.
Many other technical challenges exist, we only list major
ones here:
• Continuous tracking of data with limited resources (e.g.,
sensor cover radius, mobile device life time, etc.).
• Measuring environmental conditions with a ﬁne scale.
• Accounting for uncertainties because of errors in device
measurement and data sampling.
• Integrating different representations of spatio-temporal
datasets (e.g., environmental data and trajectories).
• Capturing individual exposure to a certain environmental
condition.
• Designing novel spatial join and search algorithms, and
accessing methods to improve query performance.
• Developing visualization tools that can be used for data
analysis.
• Developing data mining tools that are useful in making
conclusions about integrated data
• Protecting and securing medical data of patients.
C. Opportunities
In this section, we discuss available opportunities as well
as speciﬁcations about potential solutions to some of the
raised challenges that are of high concern to us at this
stage of our work. Two main data sources are required for
our proposed system; measuring environmental factors using
sensors and calculating the location/time of the patient using
his/her trajectory data obtained by the GPS. The goal is
to ﬁnd some rules that will help in identifying meaningful
relationship among these datasets that would be useful in
measuring the effect of environmental conditions on the health
of asthma patients. To achieve this goal, a geostatistical model
of spatial autocorrelation need to be developed that would
capture the correlation between a patient’s trajectory dataset
and the environmental factor datasets.
Improvement in technology has been greatly witnessed
recently. For example, the development of sensors as well as
GPS devices has more and more improved in terms of the
miniaturization of the sensing/tracking devices and in terms of
the battery life time. In addition, there is a great improvement
in the wireless communication including Bluetooth, WiFi and
3G. Different wireless technologies address different system
requirements such as coverage; the wireless infrastructure of
the system should allow the use of diverse wireless and sensor
devices in order to provide a complete support of the system’s
requirements.
Researchers have very recently proposed algorithms and
models that allow the tracking of moving objects without
consuming a lot of the tracking device’s energy by adapting
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

APPLICATIONS
C++ Layer
Applica!on
APPLICATION FRAMEWORK
Java Na!ve Interface
Sensor Interfaces
LIBRARIES
Input Systems
LINUX KERNEL
I2C Driver
HARDWARE
Sensor Drivers
I2C Bus
I2C Bus
Sensor Hardware
Abstract Layers
Temperature, 
Humidity and 
other sensors
(a) Android sensor network
(b) Sensing devices
Fig. 2.
Android sensor system architecture
to the movement and other parameters of the moving object
[11]. The experimental results showed that their proposed
system helped in acquiring trajectories of moving objects, yet
consuming less battery energy of the tracking device.
D. SpatialGPSLogger: A Data Acquisition System
We now present our ongoing work towards the development
of the presented system. We propose a location based data
acquisition system called SpatialGPSLogger that uses the
GPS on a smartphone device. Environmental data such as
air pollution and tobacco smoke cannot be obtained by the
smart phone device without proper wireless sensors. Most
smart phone systems do not allow users to modify the internal
structure and interface sensors. Therefore, a more ﬂexible
system than a smart phone is required to continue our study to
collect environmental data. The embedded system and sensors
as shown in Fig. 2 are used to implement our SpatialGP-
SLogger. The embedded system runs on an ARM processor
and Android operating system and is capable of interfacing
various types of sensors through its serial ports. We use this
system to interface sensors to retrieve temperature, humidity,
and biological signals of patients.
In our approach, SpatialGPSLogger selects a set of sensor
data, which retrieves individual’s location data through a
mobile phone connection to GPS. We plan to port sensor
drivers to the embedded system under the Android platform
and create applications through the use of Linux kernel to re-
trieve temperature, humidity, orientation, accelerometer, light,
magnetic ﬁeld, proximity of patients, etc. The platform allows
programmers to access raw data from the sensors through
the Android sensor network to the application layer on the
Android system as depicted in Fig. 2 (a). The application
communicates with C++ layer through sensor Java native
interfaces. The input system is a Linux framework for all
sensors data that deﬁnes a standard set of events and it also
interfaces to user space through Java native interface. I2C
is a two wire serial interface connection for sensor data to
be accessible under Linux kernel. Fig. 2 (b) summarizes the
sensing devices that are used to retrieve environmental data.
IV. RELATED WORK
The progress in technology has inspired many to make
use of it in monitoring environmental pollution. The authors
in [18] used nanotechnology to develop an air pollution
monitoring system. The system provides real-time interpolated
maps of air quality using GIS which analyzes and displays
data collected by “solid state gas sensors”. As more signs
show the negative effect of bad quality of the environment on
health, more sources of assessing environment condition are
developed such as “EnviroFlash” [3] which can notify patients
about up to date air quality.
With the rapid development in sensor networks, location
tracking devices and mobile networks, health care has made
a great progress in utilizing these technologies in order to
advance Telemedicine [16] applications as well as eHealth [10]
services. Through these services, “virtual visits” of patients to
doctors became possible. Some patients are now able to skip
actual “face to face” visits with doctors for simple tasks like
blood pressure and sugar level measurement assessment. In
addition, commercial “emergency alert” systems made use of
advances in technology to provide immediate help to patients
with severe diseases such as heart problems and diabetes
which might tackle patients as sudden attacks. An example
is the “Invisible Bracelet” (iB) [1] which is supported by
the American Ambulance Association that uses the mobile
network technology to get immediate help.
Both environmental conditions and locations of moving
objects are spatio-temporal data that are uncertain in nature.
For example, the concentrate of a speciﬁc air pollutant vary
from one region to another and from a given time to another
and depends on the accuracy of sensors. Also, a GPS device
may report a location of a moving object 2-5 meters away
from the actual location. Authors in [12] discussed the spatio-
temporal modelling of individual exposure to air pollution
using data integration. They presented a case study example
that uses a deterministic air quality model and a GPS to
analyze collected data over an hour period.
Different technologies are available for located-based data
acquisition but they are device dependent. Still data collection
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

relies on manual process and this hinders the analysis of
individual trajectories and their relationships with environmen-
tal conditions. Hence an integration of different technologies
is critical for an efﬁcient and automated data acquisition of
moving objects.
A patient’s trajectory is represented as spatio-temporal data
[20] and can be deﬁned as space-time paths of a moving
object constrained to road networks. Due to computation and
database limitations and limited battery life of mobile devices,
trajectories are modeled as discrete points that represent loca-
tions in time. This representation results in uncertainty in the
location values recorded in the database of the moving object
[4], [23]. Existing methods do not provide effective modeling
for uncertainty of moving trajectories to support different types
of queries to improve query processing.
An environmental condition (e.g., humidity-30%) is also a
spatio-temporal measurement that can be modeled as a raster
grid for discrete time stamps. Each cell in the grid represents
the average value of the environmental factor at a given time
for the area. This average value is associated with positional
and temporal uncertainties because of the approximations
and interpolations used in modeling [12]. These uncertainties
in value and position can be characterized based on their
probability distribution functions [15].
Data mining on moving objects is a process of extracting
useful and interesting information from large sets of spatio-
temporal datasets. Existing data mining techniques do not
adequately ﬁt the nature of moving objects that continuously
change their properties in time and the complex relationships
between them. Therefore ﬂexible and scalable data mining
tools are crucial in order to ﬁnd accurate and sufﬁcient infor-
mation of moving objects’ patterns, behaviors and trends. The
integration (spatial joins) [5] between the environmental grid
representation and the trajectory representation of a moving
object will provide information about the exposure measure-
ment of a patient to environmental factors. This linkage of
data from different sources leads to ecological inference that
has been classiﬁed as a special case of the change of support
problem [22].
V. CONCLUSION
Health monitoring systems can be thought of as a natu-
ral extension to advances in health services and technology
including mobile and sensor networks. Their main objective
is to analyze real-time data collected from patients and other
sources in order to provide individual-based care to patients.
Such a system, if developed successfully, promises to reduce
the cost, effort and time put in traditional health visits to
hospitals.
In this paper, we proposed a health monitoring system that
analyzes spatio-temporal data collected from patients. The
system analyzes the effect of various environmental factors,
such as humidity level, on the health of patients. The proposed
health monitoring system gathers time/location data from
patients through location aware devices such as GPS, and
collects environmental data through sensors. Then, the system
analyzes the data using a spatio-temporal integration model
to derive conclusions that will help prevent or treat patients.
Several intermediate tools are used such as data mining tools
and visualization tools. Main challenges and opportunities in
developing such a system were discussed.
REFERENCES
[1] https://store.invisiblebracelet.org/home, Aug. 2011.
[2] http://www.cdc.gov/asthma, Aug. 2011.
[3] http://www.enviroﬂash.info, Aug. 2011.
[4] S. Alkobaisi, P. Vojtechovsk, W. Bae, S. Kim, and S. Leutenegger.
The truncated tornado in tmbb: A spatiotemporal uncertainty model for
moving objects. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on
Database and Expert Systems Applications, pages 33–40, 2008.
[5] W. D. Bae, P. Vojtechovsk, S. Alkobaisi, and S. L. nd S.H. Kim. An
interactive framework for raster data spatial joins. In Proceedings of
the 15th ACM International Symposium on Advances in Geographic
Information Systems, pages 19–26, 2007.
[6] B. Bloom, R. Cohen, and G. Freeman. Summary health statistics for
u.s. children: National health interview survey, 2009. National Center
for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat, 10(247), 2010.
[7] O. Boric-Lubeke and V. Lubecke. Wireless house calls: using communi-
cations technology for health care and monitoring. Microwave Magazine,
IEEE, 3(3):43–48, 2002.
[8] B. Brunekreef and S. T. Holgate. Air pollution and health. The Lancet,
360:1233–1242, 2002.
[9] M. Chan, D. Est`eve, C. Escriba, and E. Campo. A review of smart
homes–present state and future challenges.
Computer methods and
programs in biomedicine, 91:55–81, 2008.
[10] G. Eysenbach. What is e-health? Journal of Medical Internet Research,
3(2):e20, 2001.
[11] S. Fang and R. Zimmermann. EnAcq: Energy-efﬁcient GPS Trajectory
Data Acquisition Based on Improved Map Matching. In ACM SIGSPA-
TIAL GIS 2011, pages 221–230, 2011.
[12] L. E. Gerharz and E. Pebesma. Accounting for uncertainties and change
of support in spatio-temporal modelling of individual exposure to air
pollution. In geoENV 2010, pages 13–15, 2010.
[13] M. I. Gilmour, M. S. Jaakkola, S. J. London, A. E. Nel, and C. A. Rogers.
How exposure to environmental tobacco, smoke, outdoor air pollutants,
and increased pollen burdens inﬂuences the incidence of asthma. Environ
Health Prospect, 114(4):627–633, 2006.
[14] M. J. Hall, C. J. DeFrances, S. N. Williams, A. Golosinskiy, and
A. Schwartzman. National hospital discharge survey: 2007 summary.
National Health Statistics Report, (29), 2010.
[15] G. B. M. Heuvelink, J. D. Brown, and E. E. Loon.
A probabilistic
framework for representing and simulating uncertain environmental
variables. International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
21(5):497–513, 2007.
[16] M. M. Maheu and A. Allen.
http://www.telehealth.net/glossary.html,
Aug. 2011.
[17] J. Pleis, B. Ward, and J. Lucas. Summary health statistics for u.s. adults:
National health interview survey, 2009.
National Center for Health
Statistics. Vital Health Stat, 10(249), 2010.
[18] O. Pummakarnchana, N. Tripathi, and J. Dutta. Air pollution monitoring
and gis modeling: a new use of nanotechnology based solid state gas
sensors. Science and Technology of Advanced Materials, 6:251–255,
2005.
[19] S. Schappert and E. Rechtsteiner. Embulatory medical care utilization
estimates for 2007. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health
Stat, 13(169), 2011.
[20] G. Trajcevski, O. Wolfson, F. Zhang, and S. Chamberlain. The geometry
of uncertainty in moving object databases.
In proceedings of Int.
Conference on Extending Database Technology, pages 233–250, 2002.
[21] U. Varshney.
Pervasive healthcare and wireless health monitoring.
Mobile Networks and Applications, 12:113–127, 2007.
[22] L. J. Young and C. A. Gotway.
Linking spatial data from different
sources: the effects of change of support.
Stochastic Environmental
Research and Risk Assessment, 21(5):589–600, 2007.
[23] K. Zheng, G. Trajcevski, X. Zhou, and P. Scheuermann. Probabilistic
range queries for uncertain trajectories on road networks. In Proceedings
of the 14th International Conference on Extending Database Technology,
pages 283–294, 2011.
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

