An Implementation of the OGC’s WFS Gazetteer Service Application Profile 
CASE: The EuroGeoNames Central Service Renewal
Lassi Lehto, Pekka Latvala and Jaakko Kähkönen 
Department of Geoinformatics and Cartography 
Finnish Geodetic Institute 
Masala, Finland 
lassi.lehto@fgi.fi, pekka.latvala@fgi.fi, jaakko.kahkonen@fgi.fi
Abstract—Gazetteer Service is a Web Service that provides 
access to geographical names data sets. The service interface 
has been recently specified by the Open Geospatial Consortium 
(OGC) as an Application Profile (AP) of the well-known Web 
Feature Service (WFS). The service interface was implemented 
in the context of the EuroGeoNames Central Service renewal 
project. This work represents one of the first real-life imple-
mentations of the specification and serves as a test of its 
adaptability in the European multi-lingual environment. The 
experiences are encouraging. 
Keywords-Gazetteer Service; geographical names; geocod-
ing; Web Services. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. EuroGeoNames data set 
The EuroGeoNames (EGN) data set has been originally 
put together in a major EU-project [1]. The main players of 
the project consortium included for instance the National 
Mapping and Cadastral Agencies (NMCA) of Germany, 
Austria and Slovenia and the European NMCAs’ co-
operation body EuroGeographics. In the initial inventory 
phases altogether 28 European countries took actively part in 
the project providing information on their place names data 
sets. In the end the number of countries officially committed 
to grant access to their national source data sets fell to a bit 
lower figure of 15. Still, this number of countries provides a 
significant share of the European geographical names con-
tent [2]. The current EGN data coverage is presented in Fig-
ure 1. 
The main guiding principles of the EGN project include 
support for multilingual place names. A special emphasis has 
been put on the collection of a separate exonym database that 
contains names of certain important European geographical 
features in up to 17 different languages. The name sources of 
the EGN service are regarded as the most authoritative in 
Europe, as they are maintained by the official national agen-
cies. 
B. EuroGeoNames service architecture 
The service architecture used in the provision of the EGN 
content is based on a distributed model, in which each par-
ticipating NMCA sets up and maintains a national EGN 
service instance. The centralised EGN service updates it 
combined geographical names data base from these local 
nodes. The communication between the local service nodes 
and the centralised service is based on the Open Geospatial 
Consortium’s (OGC) plain Web Feature Service (WFS) 
access interface specification. The service architecture was 
initially seen as a hierarchy of cascading WFS nodes, but 
was eventually modified for performance reasons to include 
a centralised European level cache. The EGN Central Ser-
vice has been operated the German NMCA, contracted by 
the EuroGeographics [3]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The current EGN coverage. 
EuroGeographics has contracted the Finnish Geodetic In-
stitute (FGI) to develop a renewed solution for EGN Central 
Service [7]. The main results gained so far in the still ongo-
ing project are described in the following chapters. Motiva-
tion for the work is described in Chapter II. In Chapter III the 
standardization process of the Gazetteer Service interface is 
reviewed. Chapter IV focuses on the renewal of the EGN 
data model and the setup of the new Cloud Service-based 
EGN Central Service. Chapter V discusses in more detail the 
service interfaces used and explains the challenges encoun-
tered while implementing the WFS Gazetteer AP. Chapter 
VI contains the outlook detailing some plans for future work 
on the EGN data set and the service infrastructure. Finally, 
conclusions are drawn in Chapter VII. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II. 
MOTIVATION 
The existing EGN Central Service implementation has 
been found to be outdated and in need of a renewal. The 
main problems with the existing Central Service are related 
to its highly complex database structure that is difficult to 
understand and hard to manage. Because of the complicated 
data structures, the data update procedures are difficult to 
execute. This has occasionally resulted in data corruption in 
the Central Service database, because of a fault in the update 
operation. In addition, the Service’s output schema is consid-
ered to be too heavy for applications that operate in the Web 
Service environment. These difficulties have led into situa-
tion where it is difficult to convince new European countries 
to join the EGN service, partly because of the very demand-
ing data structures present in the current national EGN data-
bases. Also the use of the data set has been limited by the 
overly complex data structures and the too complicated ac-
cess interface. 
The renewed implementation of the EGN Central Service 
tries to alleviate the problems identified with the earlier EGN 
implementation. The main changes in the new Central Ser-
vice are: adoption of a simplified data model and new input 
and output schemas, a Cloud-service based implementation 
architecture and the provision of new Web-friendly service 
interfaces. 
III. 
GAZETTEER SERVICE 
The OGC has been working on the service interface 
specification for a Gazetteer service for several years. Al-
ready in 2001 a Discussion Paper was published on the topic 
with a title: “Gazetteer Service Draft Candidate Implementa-
tion Specification” [4]. In 2006 an official OGC Specifica-
tion was published describing the Gazetteer Service as a 
profile of the WFS service interface, denoted by the acronym 
WFS-G. Already in this early version of the specification the 
applied information model was based on the work of the ISO 
TC211 on spatial referencing by geographic identifiers that 
has been published as an ISO international standard 19112 in 
2003[5]. The latest revision of the Gazetteer Service specifi-
cation has been released by the OGC as an Application Pro-
file (AP) of the WFS in Feb 2012 [6]. 
According to the ISO 19112 data model a gazetteer is 
comprised of a set of location instances that are of a specific 
location type and are referenced by one or more geographical 
identifiers, i.e. place names. This basic principle of taking 
place as the basic concept and attaching potentially several 
individual names to a single place is in the core of the ISO 
Gazetteer model and subsequently one of the main chal-
lenges in the original EGN data model and database schema 
development. 
The Gazetteer Service access interface is based on the 
WFS standard with a few adjustments that specify, how one 
can conclude that a certain WFS actually is a Gazetteer Ser-
vice. The AP makes it easier to access place names data from 
a Gazetteer Service by explicitly defining the data model in 
which the place names data is to be delivered. 
IV. 
EUROGEONAMES DATA MODEL 
The original EGN data model was developed in course of 
a large EU-project. Due to some design principles it grew 
overly complex. This was caused partly by tight adherence to 
a standardized way of handling multilingualism and partly 
because of an all-encompassing information model; a typical 
result of a team work in large project consortiums. 
The database schema of the renewed EGN Central Ser-
vice is based on the abstract ISO 19112 schema that has been 
fine-tuned and made concrete in the OGC’s Gazetteer Ser-
vice AP Best Practice document. The same ISO 19112 
schema is also used as the main data input and output 
schema in the renewed service. The fact that the same 
schema is used internally in the service and also for its input 
and output ensures the best possible query performance and 
easy data maintenance. 
The original EGN database structure was very compli-
cated with many interdependencies among the database 
tables. As a result of the redesign and simplification the 
number of database tables was reduced from 22 to 6. Al-
though a significant number of data items have been 
dropped, the remaining content seems to satisfy most of the 
typical query requirements encountered in gazetteer-related 
applications. 
The database structure is built around the two main con-
cepts present already in the original ISO 19112 abstract 
model: a location (si_location_instance) that can be 
referenced with potentially several geographical names  
(alternative_geographic_identifier). 
Although 
simple, this fundamental relationship makes the data struc-
ture to go beyond what is supported by the Simple Features 
data model in OGC specifications. These two object types 
form the core of the database, stored in two big database 
tables. In addition the database contains a table for storing 
location type information (si_location_type) and an-
other table for the general information relating to the whole 
gazetteer data set (si_gazetteer). Two auxiliary tables are 
needed for linking the gazetteer table to location type table 
(gazetteer_location_type) and for linking the location 
types to an URL, from which the corresponding type classi-
fication 
information 
can 
be 
retrieved 
(loca-
tion_type_link). 
Multilingualism has been in the core of the EGN devel-
opment since the beginning. There are three different levels 
in the support for different languages in the EGN service: 1. 
Exonyms are included into the data set for the most impor-
tant European geographical features, 2. The most important 
attributes related to the place names are available in all major 
European languages, 3. The user interface of the EGN refer-
ence application is multilingual. 
In the renewed EGN Central Service solution the lan-
guage support has been simplified and streamlined. The 
exonym data set was integrated to the newly structured data-
base unchanged. However, the original structure closely 
reflecting the ISO-standardized PT_Free_Text model was 
replaced by much simpler mechanism of maintaining lan-
guage information inside the si_location_type table. 
Some multilingual data items were removed because of the 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

simplified data model. On the service interface level the 
INSPIRE-standardized mechanism involving a dedicated 
LANGUAGE-parameter is taken into use. Location type infor-
mation is encoded into the corresponding XML-element of 
the output schema in the requested language. In addition, the 
response message contains a URL-reference from which the 
client application can retrieve a full description of the loca-
tion type, again in the originally requested language. 
LANGUAGE-parameter does not affect the treatment of the 
exonyms-related content. 
User interface development for the renewed EGN Central 
Service is currently ongoing. 
V. 
SERVICE ARCHITECTURE 
The renewed EGN Central Service is built according to 
the OGC WFS Gazetteer Service AP. It is based on the re-
cently published OGC’s Best Practice paper on the subject 
[2]. The national EGN Services are still hosted by the 
NMCAs of the EGN data provider countries for storing the 
geographical names data on the national level. The EGN 
Central Service is now maintained by the FGI as a Cloud 
Service instance and it contains the combined geographical 
names data that are collected from the national EGN Ser-
vices. The Central Service is implemented as the OGC Gaz-
etteer Service node and uses the deegree software platform 
as the WFS implementation and the PostgreSQL database 
with its spatial PostGIS extension as the database platform. 
The initial data upload from the national services is per-
formed by retrieving the full datasets from the national EGN 
Services and replacing completely the corresponding data in 
the Central Service database. 
Architecturally the renewed EGN implementation con-
sists of the original national EGN service nodes, the new 
centralized EGN production database and the Cloud Service-
based EGN Central Service that contains its own service 
database. Clients can connect to the service via various dif-
ferent access interfaces on the application layer. The EGN 
service architecture is thus built according to a four-layer 
model, see Figure 2. 
The national EGN Services and the original EGN schema 
that they support are left untouched and their data contents 
are integrated to the new centralized production database that 
is maintained by the EGN Operator. The corresponding 
production database is kept as a separate data store, on which 
periodic updates are run by a semiautomatic process from the 
national EGN Services. The update process is carried out 
incrementally via monitoring software that queries the WFS 
interfaces of the national EGN Services for any updated or 
added data, transforms such data into the OGC Gazetteer 
Service AP schema and uploads the update into the produc-
tion database. 
The EGN Central Service is established as a Cloud Ser-
vice-based OGC Gazetteer Service instance that provides 
access to the EGN content that is stored in the service data-
base (EGN Cache). The service database is updated periodi-
cally by copying the production database to the Cloud. Be-
fore the update process is executed, quality checks are done 
to make sure the correctness and internal consistency of the 
production database. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The new Cloud service-based EGN service architecture. The 
EGN Central DB maintained by the EGN Operator is periodically copied to 
the Cloud Service platform, from which various different client applica-
tions are supported. 
VI. 
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS 
In future, the EGN Central Service is foreseen to work 
also as an integrated source for European-wide provision of 
INSPIRE Geographical Names (GN) data, retrieving its data 
content from the national INSPIRE GN Download Services. 
The GN data can be updated to the EGN Central Service 
through a similar update procedure that is used with the local 
EGN nodes; by first transforming the data from the INSPIRE 
GN schema into the OGC Gazetteer Service AP schema and 
then updating the transformed data into the production data-
base. The output will be similarly configured to support 
INSPIRE GN schema through an internal schema transfor-
mation process. 
Initial tests on running the GN to EGN schema mapping 
seem promising. Most of the current simplified EGN schema 
can be filled in from the GN data. For update purposes it is 
critical that the values for the lifecycle –related attributes 
(beginLifespanVersion, endLifespanVersion) are 
available. Matching the rather coarse location type classifica-
tion of the INSPIRE GN schema to the much more detailed 
EGN classification will be a challenging task. 
The main access interface to the EGN Central Service is 
the interface as defined in the OGC Gazetteer Service AP. 
Visualisation of the EGN data can be accessed via a Web 
Map Service (WMS) interface. The EGN Central Service 
will be expanded also with other access interfaces. The prob-
able 
candidates 
include 
JavaScript 
Object 
Notation 
(JSON)/JavaScript Application Programming Interfaces 
(APIs) and Keyhole Markup Language (KML) encodings. 
In Figure 3 a simple client application accessing the re-
newed EGN service is shown. This application is connected 
to the service both through the Web Map Service (WMS) for 
the visual map display of place names, and the WFS Gazet-
teer Service AP interface for the results of the query. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 3.  A simple visualisation, querying and geocoding UI for access-
ing the EGN Central Service. The map shows EGN content displayed on 
top of the Google Maps satellite image backdrop. An exonym query and its 
results are also shown. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
The initial experiences gained from the EGN Central 
Service renewal suggest that the OGC Gazetteer Service AP 
is good candidate for a standardized access to geographical 
names data content. The adopted approach of using the WFS 
interface as a basis for accessing geographical names content 
seems to be well-justified. The basic geocoding functionality 
is readily supported and at the same time all the available 
additional attribute information related to the place names 
can be accessed through the same interface. 
The adopted ISO 19112-based information model seems 
to satisfy all the data requirements deemed as critical in the 
pre-project data simplification analysis done by the EGN 
Project Board. Name status attributes were relatively easy to 
map from the classification applied in the original EGN data 
to the value spaces adopted in the Gazetteer Service AP. The 
location type classification of the original EGN data set was 
used as such. A significant simplification was achieved in the 
database structure by reducing the number of database tables 
from 22 to 6. 
It is seen as promising solution for the future EGN up-
date process that the national INSPIRE GN Download Ser-
vices could be used as the data source. The schema mapping 
from the INSPIRE GN schema was tested and it seems fea-
sible. EGN Central Service can be also seen as a promising 
solution for the provision of the integrated INSPIRE GN data 
services with full European coverage. 
Multilingualism can be supported by applying the 
INSPIRE-introduced LANGUAGE-parameter. This enables 
much more elegant and efficient way for supporting different 
languages than the originally applied approach of returning 
data in all available languages and letting the client to sort 
out the desired one. Additional information on the location 
type is available in the requested language by following a 
URL-link present in the response and referring back to the 
service. 
Experiences gained in the process of deploying EGN 
Central Service on the cloud service platform have been 
entirely positive. The service has run uninterrupted for the 
whole test period and it is easy to make it adapt to a varying 
level of user demand. 
The work on the EGN Central Service renewal continues. 
New access interfaces are being developed for the EGN 
Central Service. These are expected to improve the accessi-
bility of the service and further increase its use in various 
application areas. The data harmonisation continues with the 
help of new guidelines to be developed. Coverage of the data 
set is expected to expand, partly helped by the new simpler 
data model, partly due to the use of the upcoming INSPIRE 
GN services. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The EuroGeoNames renewal project has been funded by 
the EuroGeographics Aisbl. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] P-G. Zaccheddu, “EuroGeoNames (EGN) – developing a 
European geographical names infrastructure and services,” 
Proc. INSPIRE Conference, Jun 23-25, 2008, Maribor, Slove-
nia, CD-ROM. 
[2] P-G. Zaccheddu and D. Overton, “EuroGeoNames (EGN) – 
Implementing a sustainable European gazetteer service,” 
UNGEGN Working Paper No 38, 2011, at: http:// 
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/geoinfo/UNGEGN/docs/26th-gegn-
docs/WP/WP38_EGN_item%209_UNGEGN26.pdf 
[ac-
cessed: 2012-12-17] 
[3] EGN Central Service, at http://www.eurogeonames.eu [ac-
cessed: 2012-12-17] 
[4] R. Atkinsson [ed.], “Gazetteer Service Draft Candidate Im-
plementation 
Specification”, 
at: 
http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=1041 
[ac-
cessed: 2012-12-17] 
[5] ISO TC211,”ISO 19112:2003 Geographic Information – 
Spatial 
referencing 
by 
geographic 
identifiers,” 
at: 
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue_tc/catalogue_det
ail.htm?csnumber=26017&commid=54904 [accessed: 2012-
12-17] 
[6] J. Harrison and P. Vretanos [eds.], “Gazetteer Service – Ap-
plication 
Profile 
of 
the 
Web 
Feature 
Service”,                    
OGC 
Best 
Practice, 
2012, 
at: 
http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=46964 [ac-
cessed: 2012-12-17] 
[7] P. Latvala, L. Lehto, J. Kähkönen, A. Jakobsson and S. Urba-
nas, “Renewal of EuroGeonames Central Service,” Proceed-
ing of the INSPIRE Conference 23-27 June, 2012, Istanbul, 
Turkey at: http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/events/conferences/ 
inspire_2012/index.cfm 
[accessed: 
2012-12-17]
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

