Geographic Decision Making in Urban Management
A SOLAP Tool for the Analysis and the Management of Public Lighting in the City of Oran
Ahmed Saidi
Université Oran 1 Ahmed Benbella
Centre des Techniques Spatiales Arzew
Oran, Algeria
email: ha_saidi@yahoo.fr
Abdellah Mebrek
Centre des Techniques Spatiales
Arzew Oran, Algeria,
email: mebrek_abdellah@hotmail.com
Mohamed Fayçal Khelfi
Université Oran 1 Ahmed Benbella
Oran, Algeria
email: mf_khelfi@yahoo.fr
AbdelhakTrache
Centre de Développement de Satellites
Oran, Algeria
email: trache_a@yahoo.fr
Abstract— Approaches to business intelligence provide data
mining techniques offering a new vision in multidimensional
information analysis. This is particularly true when it comes to
information with spatial reference. The procedures leading to
the creation of Data Warehouses (DW) are inefficient when it
comes to integrating the spatial dimension. Indeed, deriving a
Spatial Data Warehouse (SDW) suggests the use of methods
able to process complex geographical information, taking
several aspects into account. If the archive character of the
data is relatively easy to identify for each aspect, it is not
obvious to detect this criterion in a global view of the
geographic entity. We present in this paper an experiment
showing a Geo-Decisional methodology of SDW construction,
integrated in the functionalities of a Geographic Information
System (GIS), to have a general procedure providing an
information database and the specific tools to initiate spatial
Data
mining
operations.
An
experimentation
of
this
methodology to manage public lighting in the city of Oran is
presented.
Keywords - Data Warehouse; Data mining; SOLAP; GIS.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Any activity on a territory generates data and information
with spatial reference. The abundance of information on the
space that we occupy shows the great interest various actors
of territorial administration have on geographic information.
New information technology has produced an exponential
increase of data and information in almost all organizations.
This has led to an improvement in management and better
accuracy in the decisions made. In the field of economic
activity,
data
processing
proposes
decision
making
approaches (Business Intelligence - BI) able to analyze non-
volatile archived data over a fixed time period. Emanating
from business intelligence, this approach is intelligent and
produces particular inductions, unsuspected and undetected
by traditional methods. Properties, trends and findings not
revealed by classical approaches are updated and contribute
greatly to making a more judicious decision. These tools are
structured
around
the
DW
concept.
They
allow
an
exploratory search of data (Data mining). However, when
the geographic information is concerned, these approaches
are helpless and sometimes not well adapted.
Geographic information, the base of any characterization
of territory, is complex and has multidimensional aspects in
its
definition.
The
geometric
and
topological
aspect
expresses metric characteristics like localization, shape,
surface, and also all spatial relations between objects. It is
coupled
with
attributive
aspects
describing
intrinsic
information of its theme. This duality in definition of
geographic information is not taken into account by these
new approaches. The GIS are excellent tools to characterize
information with spatial reference. They offer a range of
solutions to manage geographic information and to make
deterministic spatial analysis. However, these systems do not
make a spatio-temporal and oriented-subject analysis of the
archived data. That represents the predominant constraint
over their ability to provide an analysis using data mining.
Our study aims to present a methodology by enriching
and adapting DW and Data mining approaches in the spatial
context for the management of public lighting in the city of
Oran. A Spatial On Line Analytical Processing (SOLAP) is
developed. The specificity of this tool is dictated by the
complexity of geographical information and especially its
diversity. It is unrealistic at current state of research to claim
to
develop
universal
tools
SDW
or
SOLAP.
Each
geographical theme is specific. Hydrology, agriculture,
transport, waste management or public lighting are not
treated in the same manner. Objects have different geometric
and topological aspects. For this reason, the few SOLAP
experiments identified in the world are all specific and target
a defined theme. The application we have developed here is
integrated into the GIS environment to allow visualization
and mapping of the results.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II.
THE PROBLEM OF THE SPATIAL ANALYSIS
A.
DW and Spatial DW:
A DW is a derivation of existing data structures such as
databases to produce a structure containing archived data not
subject to change.
Bill Inmon [7], considered as the founding father of DW,
defines them as follows: "A Data Warehouse is a collection
of subject-oriented, integrated, not volatile, historical and
organized data for decision-making." (Figure 1)
This definition assumes that data is stored in its most
elementary level for basic and flexible use, making it easy
and fast to analyze the information.
Accessing and processing the DW data are done by using
a set of tools called Data Warehousing (Figure 2). In Data
Warehousing, data is modeled as a data-cube, when the
number of data does not exceed three dimensions. Each
dimension is represented by one table. If the cube exceeds
three dimensions, it is called hyper-cube.
By integrating the spatial dimension, Spatial DW is
defined (SDW).
It is recognized that analytical processes do not use the
full potential of data when they do not integrate the spatial
component. However, this spatial dimension is mostly
present in territory information defining, location, address,
postal code, GPS location, region or country, position,
territorial reference, etc.
It is currently estimated that 80% of data stored in
corporate databases have spatial reference [5]. Sometimes,
the spatial component comes in several elements in addition
to position, like a shape, an orientation and a size. Simple
visualization of spatial components allows providing first
understanding of phenomenon in relation to its space (Figure
3). So, the simple fact of displaying spatial data gives an idea
of their location in territory, their extent, their distribution
(concentrated, dispersed, grouped, random, regular, etc.).
This visualization action makes it possible to discover
information not available by traditional OLAP tools.
B.
Data mining – OLAP - SOLAP:
The set of methods requiring analysis using DW is
grouped into the concept called OLAP [6]. It opposes to
transactional analytical approaches offered by DBMS tools.
If we are interested in the spatial component of information,
we are in the presence of a Spatial OLAP approach (Figure
4). Distinction between the two concepts is fundamental. The
introduction of spatial component as dimension in analysis
requires a method combining a geometric approach with a
more classical, literal and attributive process in relation to
the reference theme.
Any spatial Data mining is dependent on the existence of
updated, stable and coherent SDW. This results from need to
process space data in order to extract knowledge by
exploratory means (Statistical, excavation, visualization,
etc.).
Figure 1. Data Warehouse
Figure 4. Type of Spatial Analysis
Figure 3. Spatial distribution of phenomenon
Figure 2. Manipulating tools of DW: The DWing
Concentrated
Random
Regular
follow the geometry of
territory element
GIS
Geospatial
Not
Geospatial
Not Aggregated Aggregated
Not Aggregated Aggregated
Geospatial
Not
Geospatial
SOLAP
DBMS
OLAP
Information
Type
Aggregation Level
Aggregation Level
Information
Type
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

SOLAP application is presented as "A type of software
that allows fast and easy navigation in spatial databases and
offers several levels of granularity of information, several
themes, several epochs and several modes of synchronized or
non-synchronized display: Maps, charts and diagrams "[3].
A SOLAP technology suggests new decision support
functions, not available in traditional GIS tools or OLAP
tools. This technology allows cartographic visualization of
data, cartographic navigation on the map itself or in symbols
displayed on the map, according to different types of drilling.
In SOLAP technology, the creation of the results maps is
dynamic, unlike some OLAP visualization software (e.g.,
Cognos Visualizer) where each spatial navigation operation
(e.g., drilling) has to be predefined in application and
associated with a map. This limitation of OLAP makes it
more complex to update geometric data, by distributing
information on several maps. The SOLAP tool manages
adequately the mapping rules for analysis results on maps
[4].
According to its definition, SOLAP does not require an
expert person for its use. The user can create a multitude of
different maps by some clicks. In presentation of results,
SOLAP uses same semiological rules (e.g., color, frame,
contour) for all displays. This makes it possible to have a
visual
synchronization
between
various
modes
of
presentation and to have homogeneous panorama. Graphical
semiology used for various types of display (i.e. tables,
graphs and maps) remains synchronized during drilling or
other operations, preserving perceptual continuity, necessary
for discovery of correlations [9].
Three possible architectures exist for a SOLAP tool [1]
(Figure 5).

Predominant OLAP: This kind of solution proposes all
features of an OLAP tool. It is implicit that such
solution uses capacities of OLAP server. On the other
hand this solution will integrate few functions of GIS,
generally the functions of displaying, cartographic
navigation and selection of geometric elements.
The
functions of space analysis, space synchronization, etc.,
are not available. Sometimes some minimal functions of
space drilling can be offered and then make it possible
to develop interesting SOLAP applications.

Predominant GIS: OLAP server can be simulated inside
a relational database by means of star model.
When
volumes of data are relatively low, this solution can be
very advantageous.
The requests can be adapted
according to the needs of a particular project. For
example, this action can be done while avoiding
calculating, some non-significant aggregations or while
making it possible to join tables implied in the requests
in a way more flexible than OLAP servers allow it
usually. On the other hand, this solution must include, in
database, elements making it possible realization of
OLAP operations such as drilling and the reassembly.
The predominant GIS solutions offer all the features of
GIS functions, but only one small subset of OLAP tool.
This solution couples relational database simulating
OLAP server with a GIS software or any tool for
visualization of space data.
The graphic interface for
user and functions of semantic and spatial drilling must
be programmed.

Hybrid or Mixed Solution: This type of solution,
integrate GIS functionalities and OLAP tools with the
same proportions. It could be described as a centric-
geospatial application, where spatial reference of objects
is used constantly in the exploration and analysis of
data. This type of solution is useful when the application
must be integrated in Geomatic environment with a high
data flow. It offers an OLAP server and a GIS tool.
Then, it is possible to develop an OLAP extension to
integrate in the GIS software. A SOLAP technology
allows to group or to enrich both functionalities OLAP
and GIS. The graphical interface provides the user with
both spatial and semantic drilling functions, spatial
analysis functions, mapping functions and so on. Tools
of map navigation allow you to drill into maps
according a synchronized manner with other types of
displays (e.g. tables and diagrams).
Finally, SOLAP applications must be distinguished from
SOLAP technologies. A SOLAP technology is a generic
technology specially built to offer basic or more advanced
SOLAP functions without the need of programming. A
SOLAP application is a business application that provides
the user with a number of SOLAP features and can be
constructed with SOLAP technology or with combinations of
non-SOLAP technologies (eg. GIS and OLAP and a self-
programing code, or with other technologies) [2].
Our work is the development of a SOLAP application
named "public lighting" integrated into GIS environment
with software ArcGis in the city of Oran.
III.
THE PROBLEM OF PUBLIC LIGHTING IN ORAN
A.
Current situation of public lighting in Oran :
Oran is defined as a medium-sized city of Mediterranean
territory (Figure 6). It is located in north-west of Algeria, and
is considered the second largest city of the country. It has a
Figure 5. Architectures of SOLAP Solutions
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

population of 1.5 million. It is spread over an area of about
105 km² and incorporates a set of buildings combining
several architectural types ranging from Arabic-Moorish to
Haussmannian and Modern.
Public lighting for city of Oran is a common problem and
at center of many economic, social and political stakes.
There is today a strong expectation, expressed by the
populations in terms of urban lighting. These challenges of
urban lighting especially security of properties and people,
security of movement, valorization of city and economic
development are well understood by elected officials and
their citizens. A well illuminated city will be more pleasant
to live in, more attractive to its visitors and more marked in
its
night
identity.
Today,
the
image
and
the
living
environment are essential conditions of attractive business
for the city.
B.
The statistics of public lighting in ORAN :
Oran has a significant public lighting network. It consists
of:

more than 42,000 luminaires,

more than 3,600 switch cabinets,

more than 916 control stations,

Beyond 1,956 Km of cable,
Several companies, public and private, manage the
network of lighting. The main operator remains ERMESSO
which governs more than 60% of network of territory of
Oran, and all control on the town of Oran. This operator has
recently introduced mapping and modern technological tools
in network management (GIS, GPS, etc.).
Frequent breakdowns are announced on the network
generating a growing dissatisfaction of the population
because of the deficiency of lighting generated by these
incidents.
The potential causes of these incidents are not always
identified. Operators in charge of management of network
operate according to a policy of event-driven maintenance.
Indeed, the teams of maintenance, they have the role of
mitigating incidents which have occurred on the territory
following
the
request
of security
services,
communal
services or of citizens. The only actions undertaken in this
situation is replacement of defective devices (lamp, lighting,
cupboard, cable, etc.). This situation is one of the main
causes which motivate us to implement a SOLAP application
to analyze the network, to diagnose nonobvious causes of
incidents and to decide on a policy of adequate maintenance.
C. Elaborating the SDW "Public lighting Oran":
The SDW is generated from an existing database at
ERMESSO. It is a collection of geographic data organized in
specific system (GIS), dealing with public lighting on
territory of city of Oran. The different components of the
Database are layers of information structured around the
territory and reference entities relating to the topic of study.
The main ones are:

Luminaires: A set of lighting post with their
technical characteristics.

Cabinets: The energy distribution cabinets to which
the luminaires are connected,

Lines : Connection Cables between the luminaires
and the Cabinets,

Road Network: The streets of Oran organized in
categories, type, flow, road surface type, etc.

Administrative Division: The different boundaries
identifying territory of municipalities, urban areas
and neighborhoods.

A satellite image (SPOT 6) with resolution of 1,5
meters, taken in March 2015.
D. Different components of the SDW:
All referred entities in the database of the GIS will be
represented in our SDW. However, light versions of entities
will be produced to achieve efficient and coherent SDW. The
problem lies in the choice of the entities components,
candidate for the SDW. We target in our approach, the
relevance, simplicity and stability of the information for the
elements making up the SDW. The elaborated procedure
aims precisely discrimination of the fields of objects and to
keep only those that meet these criteria.

Stability:
The SDW concentrates stable and nonvolatile data. This
supposes data which undergo the least possible updates and
modifications. The measurement of stability is ensured by
installation of a flag for each entity in GIS database, and
counting the number of updates with date of the last update
over one given period (3 months, 6 months, or a year). A
standardized classification is operated on the entities to
calculate rate of update. The rate of update reflects for us the
variability of information and its temporal stability. Consider
the case of the entity distribution cabinet (Figure 7).
Figure 6. The City of Oran
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Fields, like daily consumption, agent code and electric
charge are volatile entities when variability is daily. They
cannot claim to integrate the SDW.
Below, we present the procedure for the calculation of
functional stability.
With the execution of this operation, we will have
eligible information and other non-eligible ones to join the
SDW. For the user, non-eligible fields will not be displayed.
He will have leisure to choose among eligible components
those which he decides to put in SDW.

Spatial Relevance:
The objective of this property is to identify among all the
information eligible for the SDW, those that will be relevant
for future spatial analysis. It is a very complex operation.
Indeed, the component that does not influence a phenomenon
today; can be preponderant in its variability in the future. It is
developed to determine the potential correlations existing
between objects. Generally it is the result of analysis that can
lead to suspect the effect of component on the phenomenon.
Our approach focuses initially only on the spatial relations.
The
spatial
junctions
like
crossing
type,
connection,
proximity and inclusion are detected and their significant
advent is assessed. If the relationship is robust, then the
entity is judged able to integrate with SDW.
This procedure is dynamic in our choice. Inclusion or
exclusion in SDW is not fixed. The user is given the
opportunity to reintegrate into the SDW a component that
may fail in the Relevance procedure. This is generally
observed when execution of SOLAP does not lead to
significant results.

Space Coherence:
We understand by space coherence an expression of the
reality
compared
to
its
space
modeling.
It
means
determination
geometrical
and
semantic
and
spatial
constraints of objects. If an object is regarded as a zone, we
must make sure that it is well represented by a closed
polygon generating a surface, a boundary, an interior and an
outside. For a linear object, it will not contain a priori surface
but only one length, as well as the point object which will
not derive other information except its position.
Procedure Spatial Relevance
Objects = {Set of the stable objects}
Begin
For each entity Ei  Objects
Do
Compute spatial relationship in Objects
If  relation robuste
Then
Accept for SDW
Endif
End
End
Procedure Stability
Begin
Fmj [] : intger Variable = number of update
Tmj[] : Normalized rate of update
Candidate : logical variable
/* Calculation the number of update
For each coverage of entity
do
For each entity Ei of the coverage in
the period time
do
If Update
then
Fmj[Ei]=Fmj[Ei]
+1
Stamp the date
Endif
End
End
/* Calculation of the stability of the update rate
For each coverage of information do
For each entity Ei of the referenced coverage
do Calculate Tmj[Ei]
if Tmj[Ei] < critical value
then Candidate = "true" /* field eéligible for
SDW
Else
Candidate ="false" /*
Non
éligible,
à
exclure
Endif
End
Figure 7. Energy Distribution cabinets
High rate of update. Ineligible
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

E.
SDW Generating:
The procedures established above make it possible to
purify the data coming from database and to keep only those
that will feed the SDW. Since we have opted for a GIS-
predominant solution, we will assimilate the SDW to a
particular geodatabase that will be injected into GIS tool.
F. SOLAP Operations: Definition:
There is a panoply of OLAP operations allowing Data
mining. We can gather them in two groups [10]:
1. Operators of drilling:
 Aggregation (or Roll-Up): this operation concerns
calculation for one or more dimensions. It makes it
possible to climb in hierarchies by incorporating
measurements.
 To drill (or Roll-down or drill-Down): drill-down is
operation of zoom down. It makes it possible to
obtain information on a level of finer detail by
disaggregating measurements.
2. Slice operators:
 Slicing: A slice is a section or a subset of a
multidimensional array. It allows you to focus on a
particular area of event.
 Dicing: dice is the selection of certain values of
dimension. It makes it possible to restrict dimension
of the hypercube.
 Rotating: this operation makes it possible to change
orientation of the cube, for example by inter-changing
rows and columns of result.
In case of SOLAP, these same operations will require, in
addition
to
informational
search,
a
cartographic
representation showing the result. It is the transcription of
this action into the GIS functionality that determines the
specificity of the SOLAP tool.
IV.
EXPERIMENTATION
A. Data mining and diagnosis of publicl lighting:
A first aggregation operation shows that the mapping of
the number of incidents per district over a period of one
quarter, displays a certain disparity between certain districts
deemed stable and others very disturbed. The districts "Hai
Hamri" and "Hai Ghoualem" are considered to be very
degraded (over 80 incidents). The maintenance budgets are
precisely calculated on incident thresholds and distributed
equitably between districts of the same class (Figure 8).
At the executing of our application SOLAP, we can see
that in the "Hai Hamri" district, only two cabinets are
problematic with a high frequency of incidents (Figure 9)
[8]. The other cabinets are relatively stable. Conversely,
district "Hai Ghoualem" is degraded. The majority of its
distribution cabinets have frequent incidents (Figure 10).
Procedure Space Coherence
Objects = {Set of stable and relevant objects}
Begin
For each Object Oi  Objetcs
do /* Geometric and topologic constraint
Case : point
Verift (position)
Case : linear
Verify (Length, non-overlap)
Case : surface
Verify (surface, non-degenerative)
End
End
End
Figure 8. Mapping the districts by incidents number
Figure 9. Situation of cabinet of district Hai Hamri
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

This shows that classification of districts, performed by
usual functionalities of GIS is erroneous, and suffers from
inaccuracy in actual diagnosis of the state of the lighting.
This observation cannot be detected by classical tools of
spatial analysis. The advantage of SOLAP is that it can
navigate through archived data in several dimensions and
views, to arrive at non-obvious findings by deterministic
analysis.
B.
Synthesis:
Visualization of the results of Data mining of public
lighting showed the limits of diagnoses already stopped by
the company in charge of the network. The exploitation of
observations carried out by operations of SOLAP tool makes
it possible to contribute effectively to a precise and rational
management of network and especially to refine and better
specify the different decisions.
V.
CONCLUSION
The contribution of spatial Data mining like a technique,
like a discipline and especially like a methodology, confers a
better apprehension of phenomena having an anchoring on
territory. Deductive inductions resulting from their procedure
often inform about states and trends, unsuspected and not
detected by usual techniques of space analysis, too restrictive
and too deterministic.
The SOLAP approach developed in this experiment
highlighted a true and capital knowledge for effective
management of a lighting network. The notable fact is that
this tool is quickly adopted by the persons responsible for
management of public lighting, due to the fact that it does
not require any special prerequisites for its use or significant
training.
With
the
contribution
of
other
information
characterizing the territory, the SDW can produce an
informational base even more useful for the Data mining
process.
IV.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Bédard, S. Larrivée, M. J. Proulx, P. Y. Caron, F. Létourneau,
"Geospatial
Datawarehousing:
Positionnement
technologique
et
stratégique," Rapport préparé pour le Centre de recherche de la défense
de Valcartier, Université Laval, 79 pp. 1997. [ in English: Geospatial
Datawarehousing: Technological and strategic positioning". Report for
the Research center of Defense of Valcartier, Laval University]
[2] Y. Bedard, S. Rivest, M. J. Proulx, "Spatial On-Line Analytical
Processing (SOLAP): Concepts, Architectures and Solutions from a
Geomatics Engineering Perspective", Robert Wrembel & Christian
Koncilia (ed(s)), Data Warehouses and OLAP : Concepts, Architectures
and Solutions,Chap.13, IBM Press-Idea Group, 2007.
[3] Y. Bédard, 2010, "Le géodécisionnel: origine, évolution, état de l’art,
enjeux, R&D", École Nationale Supérieure des Mines de Paris– Centre
de recherche sur les Risques et les Crises [in English: “The
Geodecisonal: origin, evolution, state of the art, stakes, Research &
Development", National School of Mines of Paris, Research Center on
Risks and Crisis], Sophia-Antipolis, France, Octobre 2010.
[4] S. Bimonte, M. Bertolotto, J. Gensel, O. Boussaid, "Spatial OLAP and
Map Generalization: Model and Algebra.", IJDWM, 2012 .
[5] C. Franklin, "An Introduction to Geographic Information Systems:
Linking Maps to Databases", Database, April 1992, pp. 13-21.
[6] J. Han, M. Kamber, "Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques", Morgan
Kaufmann Publisher, Inc, 2001.
[7] W. H.
Inmon, "Building the Data Warehouse", Jon Wiley and Sons
Editions, ISBN: 0471569607, 1st edition 1992.
[8] C. T. Lu, X. Tan, S. Chawla, S. Shekhar, R. R. Vatsavai, "MapCub: A
visualisation tool for spatial Data Warehouses", Geographic Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, London: Taylor and Francis, 2000.
[9] "Le Géodécisionnel, Les SIG au service du géodécisionnel". Projet
Bibliographique dans le cadre du Mastère ASIG, Ecole Nationale des
Sciences Géodésiques. [in English: "The GeoDecisional, GIS to serve
geodecisional", Bibliographic Project as part of the Master ASIG,
National School of Geodesic Science]. France 2008.
[10] M. D. Van Damme, "Entrepôts de données dans le domaine spatial pour
l’inventaire forestier", Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers Cnam
– Région Centre. Centre d’Enseignement Principal d’Orléans. ["Spatial
datawarehouse for forest inventory", Thesis for a diploma of Cnam
engineer degree. Central Region. Center of Main education of Orleans].
Sept. 2010.
Figure 10. Situation cabinet of Hai Ghoualem
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

