A Semantic Analysis of Moving Objects Using as a
Case Study Maritime Voyages from Eighteenth and
Nineteenth Centuries
Helbert Arenas, Benjamin Harbelot, Christophe Cruz
Department of Informatics
University of Burgundy
Dijon, France 21078
helbert.arenas@checksem.fr
benjamin.harbelot@checksem.fr
christophe.cruz@u-bourgogne.fr
Abstract—In this paper, we present a spatial model designed to
extract knowledge from the tracks of moving objects. The model
uses a perdurantism approach, implemented using Semantic Web
technologies. In order to show the capabilities of the model,
we employ it to handle a large dataset composed of historic
maritime records. By using Semantic Web tools, we are able
to implement rules and identify user deﬁned patterns. Although
there are limitations due to currently available tools, our results
are promising.
Keywords–spatial modeling; moving objects; semantics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The two main philosophical theories for the representation
of objects evolving along time are: endurantism and perdu-
rantism. The ﬁrst one, endurantism, considers objects as three
dimensional entities that exist wholly at any given point of
their life. On the other hand, perdurantism, also known as the
four dimensional view, considers that entities have temporal
parts, timeslices [1]. Each timeslice is a partial representation
of the object, valid only for a speciﬁc period or point of time.
A complete representation of the object along time is the result
of aggregating all its timeslices. From a designer point of
view, the perdurantism approach offers advantages over the
endurantism one, by allowing richer representations of real
world phenomena [2].
Most of current Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
tools use a snapshot approach to study spatial systems. With
this type of tools, it is difﬁcult to analyse dynamic phenomena
with spatial-temporal dimensions. An alternative to traditional
data management approaches is the Semantic Web. This is
a set of standards that enable sharing data and semantics of
the data on the web. Using Semantic Web related technolo-
gies, it is possible to develop data models called ontologies
speciﬁcally designed for reasoning and inference with software
mechanisms. Ontologies allow for any given domain, the
representation of relevant high level concepts as well as their
properties and the relationships between concepts and entities.
In this research, we use Semantic Web technologies to develop
the “continuum model”, an ontology that allows us to represent
diverse dynamic entities and analyse their relationships along
time. Traditionally, ontologies are static in the sense that the
information represented in them does not change in time or
space. However, previous research such as [1] [3] [4] and
[5] aim to ﬁll this gap, by developing ontologies that use a
perdurantism approach to handle dynamic entities. The focus
of [4] and [5] is on evolving entities represented in space as
areas. In this paper, we propose an extension of the previous
research, changing the focus to moving entities. In this paper,
we use historical maritime records as a test bed. In Section
II, we identify other works in this ﬁeld. Section III provides a
description of the dataset we use. We describe our model and
how we implement it in Section IV. Finally, in Section V, we
present our conclusions and indicate our future research in this
ﬁeld.
II.
RELATED RESEARCH
Currently, new datasets containing large amounts of track-
ing data are becoming available. These datasets contain the
recorded position of a travel entity while it moves in space. In
order to extract knowledge from this information, a new set
of tools and algorithms are being developed in the research
world. In Parent et al., 2013, the authors present a survey
on current approaches and techniques for the deﬁnition of
semantic trajectories within the ﬁeld of data mining. This
paper describes techniques to create trajectories from raw data,
to add semantics to the trajectories and to extract knowledge
[6].
A raw trajectory comprises the record of the position of
a moving entity, during a time interval, in which this en-
tity moves for some meaningful purpose. In some domains,
the identiﬁcation of the begin and end of the trajectory is
evident, while in others this might require some domain
speciﬁc criteria. The positions and intervals allow us to identify
possible stops along the trajectory. Additional information can
be obtained by linking the trajectory to external datasources.
For instance, comparing the track record of a person with a
set of places of interest of a city, could tell us what places has
the person visited [6].
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

By analyzing the trajectory, it is possible to identify stops
and elements on the route. Then, we can add annotations
creating in this way a semantic trajectory. An analysis of the
trajectory can also lead to the identiﬁcation of a particular
behaviour of the moving entity. For instance, by analyzing the
elements on the route of a tracked person, we could distinguish
a tourist from a pizza delivery service [6].
An implementation of the previously described concepts is
presented in Spaccapietra et al., 2008 [7]. Here, the authors
implement their approach with a relational Database Manage-
ment System (DBMS), using as a case study data from the
annual migrations of white storks (Ciconia ciconia).
An approach that puts more focus on Description Logics
(DL) based tools is presented in Yan et al., 2008. Here, the
authors propose the use of three different ontologies to address
the study of moving entities. The ﬁrst one is caled Geometric
Trajectory Ontology. This ontology deﬁnes the basic concepts
for the spatio-temporal deﬁnition of the trajectory. Using the
elements deﬁned in this ontology, we can specify temporal
points, areas, lines etc. The second one is called Geography
ontology. In this ontology, the authors describe natural and
artiﬁcial features of interest for the speciﬁc domain. Finally,
the third one is called Application Domain Ontology. In this
ontology, the authors deﬁne higher level concepts for speciﬁc
domains. In Yan et al., 2008, the authors test their ideas
using data from cars equipped with GPS devices. The data
is loaded into a commercial relational DBMS with support for
ontological data [8].
In Yan et al., 2011, the authors introduce the Semantic Mid-
dleware for Trajectories (SeMiTri). This software is designed
to create annotations by analyzing the geometric properties
of the trajectory and linking it to background geographic and
application speciﬁc data. The proposed system has three parts:
1) Trajectory computation layer, here the raw GPS data is
cleaned, raw trajectories are identiﬁed and each trajectory
is divided into trajectory episodes. 2) Semantic annotation
layer, to link the trajectory to areas it crosses, road networks.
It also estimates probabilities of association between stops
and geographic features using a Markov model algorithm. 3)
Semantic trajectory analytics layer, here are the components
of the system that compute statistics, and store obtained
information. An additional component is the Web Interface,
designed to allow the user to deﬁne queries and visualize
results [9].
An example of a perdurantism approach for spatial dy-
namics is presented in Harbelot, Arenas & Cruz, 2013b. In
this research, the authors introduce the continuum model, a
methodology that can successfully represent the changes of
entities in space and property values along time [5]. However,
this approach focuses on entities represented as areas, making
the approach not well suited for moving entities represented as
points. In this paper, we further deﬁne the continuum model
to represent traveling entities. In the next sections, we will
describe the datasets and the model we propose.
III.
DATASETS
In this paper, we present a methodology to model spatial
moving objects using a Semantic Web approach. Our moving
Figure 1.
CLIWOC dataset, points represent logbook records.
objects are ships from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
whose positions have been recorded in logbooks. Between
2001 and 2003 the European Union funded the project: Cli-
matological Database for the World’s Oceans (CLIWOC). A
product of this project is the digitized version of logbooks of
pre 1854 voyages of English, Spanish, Dutch and French ships
[10][11].
The CLIWOC datasets became available online in 2003
[12]. The dataset contains 280280 records. Each record on the
logbooks contains the position of the ship, as well as meteo-
rological observations (temperature, wind speed, atmospheric
pressure, etc.). Figure 1 depicts a map with the recorded
logbook observations. Due to technological limitations, some
of the positions recorded might have spatial errors, as can be
noted by observing the positions recorded within land masses.
The creators of CLIWOC processed more than 3000 log-
books that represent more than 5000 voyages through world’s
oceans. Entries in the logbooks were done at noon. For each
entry, the ofﬁcer in charge registered the observed climatic
conditions at the time. The CLIWOC dataset allows scientists
to study weather patterns in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. By analyzing the records, it is possible to infer the
evolution of phenomena such as the Nino Southern Oscillation
or the North Atlantic Oscillation. Surprisingly, the dataset rep-
resent less than 10% of data available from original documents
[12].
The climatic measurements in the logbooks were taken using
archaic methodologies. For instance, in the case of the wind
force, the measurements were recorded using old terms no
longer in use. It is therefore necessary to translate them to
modern units for study purposes. This problem was solved by
the CLIWOC team with a dictionary that allows the translation
from each archaic language vocabulary into Beaufort scale
terms [12].
The CLIWOC dataset has been previously used to study
climatic patterns. However, as noted by [13], the dataset can
be used to other ﬁelds. For instance, it is possible to study the
spread of technology. Maritime chronometers were popular on
ships of the East Indian Company before they became common
on Royal Navy vessels. With better location techniques, sailors
were able to modify their routes and take advantage of more
favourable wind patterns, which meant a modiﬁcation on the
routes. Using the logbooks, it is also possible to study the
evolution of the crew health at ships of different countries,
along time. From the end of XVIII century, improvements in
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 2.
A)The Continuum model as introduced in [5]. B) Modiﬁed version
of the Continuum model adapted for moving objects.
ventilation, diet and hygiene reduced the amount of diseases in
maritime travels. Health information was recorded in logbooks
of all the countries in the study, allowing scientist to make
comparable studies. Another possible research topic is the
inﬂuence of seasonal weather patterns on travels. For instance,
British and Dutch ships were strongly affected by seasonal
weather patterns when travelling to the Indian Ocean. Because
of this, it was very unusual to see ships of these nationalities
sailing in the South Atlantic around November and December
[13].
In order to enhance the knowledge we can extract from the
CLIWOC dataset, we created a Geography Ontology following
the approach suggested by [8]. The geographic entities in this
ontology are the seas and oceans of the world. We obtained this
information from a high resolution dataset introduced in [14].
The creators of this dataset based their work on the document
S-23, titled Limits of Oceans and Seas published by the
International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) in 1953 [15].
The vector dataset, although based on an ofﬁcial document, it
is not an ofﬁcial document itself. The vector dataset has a very
high resolution coastline that is not necessary in our research.
In order to facilitate our spatial operations, we simpliﬁed it
using GeoTools.
IV.
PROPOSED MODEL
In Harbelot et al., 2013a and Harbelot et al., 2013b [4] [5],
the authors introduced the continuum model, an approach well
suited to represent dynamic entities represented spatially as
areas. Figure 2A depicts the continuum model as described in
[5]. This model follows a perdurantism approach. It creates
multiple ephemeral representations (timeslices) to depict a
dynamic entity. Each timeslice is valid for a determined time
interval. A timeslice has four components: 1) An identity,
linking it to the object it represent. 2) A set of properties
with alphanumeric values, representing different characteristics
of the object. 3) A time component that indicates the valid
period of time for the timeslice and 4) A geometric component,
the ephemeral spatial representation of the entity. The model
creates a new timeslice everytime there is a change in the
geomety, the identity or in the alphanumeric properties. It is
then possible to establish a ﬁliation relationships between a
newly created timeslice and the one that originated it.
The continuum model needs to be modiﬁed in order to
deal with tracking information of travelling entities. Figure
2B depicts our upgraded version of the continuum model. In
the new model, we have the moving objects as instances of
the class Feature. We split the movements of the objects into
Trajectories, which are semantic units with a deﬁned start and
end spatio-temporal points. The Trajectory itself is composed
of a set of timeslices, with the same components as in the
original version of the continuum model.
Following the approach suggested by [8] we developed a
Geographic Ontology composed of GeographicFeatures. This
ontology allows us to extract new knowledge from the tracking
information.
A. Model Speciﬁcation
In our model, we deﬁne the following concepts:
•
Temporal Points We can think of the temporal domain
as a linear structure T composed of a set of temporal
points P. The components of P follow a strict order <,
which forces all points between two temporal points t1
and t2 to be ordered [16].
P ⊑ ⊤
(1)
•
Geometries A set of coordinates that deﬁne points, lines,
curves, surfaces and polygons.
G ⊑ ⊤
(2)
•
Spatial Objects This class represents any entity with
geometric representation.
O ≡ ∃hasGeometry.G
(3)
•
Spatio-Temporal Point We use this class to deﬁne points
with a spatial and temporal representations.
T P ≡ ∃hasGeometry.G ⊓ ∃hasTime.P
(4)
•
Moving Features This class is used to represent entities
that change their positions along time.
MF ⊑ O
(5)
The movement of the feature is divided into semantical
units called trajectories.
MF ≡ ∃hasTrajectory.T R
(6)
•
Trajectories This class is used to represent semantical
units of movement, with a deﬁned start and end spatio-
temporal points.
T R ≡∃hasTimeSlice.T S ⊓ ∃isTrajectoryOf.MF
⊓ ∃hasStart.T P ⊓ ∃hasEnd.T P
(7)
•
TimeSlice This class is used to depict a partial represen-
tation of a moving entity. Each timeslice has a deﬁned
geometric and temporal representations. It also has an
identity component that links it to a speciﬁc trajectory
and a set of alphanumeric properties (T S) that represent
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

diverse characteristics of the entity at the speciﬁc point
of time deﬁned by its temporal dimension.
T S ≡∃hasGeometry.G ⊓ ∃hasTime.P
⊓ ∃T S ⊓ ∃isTimeSliceOf.T R
(8)
•
Geographic Entity Following the approach suggested by
[8], we implement a external ontology, composed of
geographical entities GE. By combining the track of
moving objects with these external geographic entities,
we can improve the knowledge extraction. In our test
study, we use a seas and oceans dataset based on
a document published by International Hydrographic
Organization (IHO) in 1953 [14].
GE ⊑ O
(9)
Then,
we
can
create
individuals
for
each
of
the
classes/concepts. For instance, T S(ts) indicates that ts is an
individual of type timeslice ((TS)). Following the deﬁnition of
the class TS, we know that the individual ts has a geometric
component tsg which is an instance of the class G, then G(tsg).
The temporal dimension of ts is represented by tst, which is an
instance of the class Temporal Points (P(tst)). The individual
ts is linked to a trajectory (tstr), and through the trajectory to a
speciﬁc individual of the type Feature , and in this way it has
a deﬁned identity. We represent the alphanumeric properties
that describe the characteristics of the timeslice ts1 as ts1ts.
Using the temporal and identity components of the times-
lices, it is possible to identify a sequence, and in this way
establish a ﬁliation relationship between two timeslices. For
the relationship to exist, both timeslices must belong to the
same trajectory, and there should no exist other timeslice of
the same trajectory occurring in between.
after(ts1t, ts2t)
∧¬∃(ts ∈ T S)|(ts1t < tst < ts2t) ∧ (ts1tr = ts2tr = tstr)
→ hasFiliation(ts1, ts2)
(10)
Then, we can compare timeslices that hold ﬁliation relation-
ships. For instance, we can calculate the speed of the moving
entity for the interval deﬁned between them as the following:
speed(ts1, ts2) ≡
 distance(ts1g, ts2g)
timeDiff(ts1t, ts2t)

|hasFiliation(ts1, ts2)
(11)
Using the ﬁliation relationships and the speed calculation,
we can identify episodes with unusual behaviours. For in-
stance, a very low speed between two timeslices might suggest
a stop. On the other hand, an unusually high speed might
suggest errors in the geometric component of one of the
timeslices, requiring further attention by the researcher. To
identify unusually high speeds, we can calculate the statistics
of the speeds of a trajectory.
Figure 3.
Classes and properties deﬁned to model the CLIWOC dataset using
the Continuum model
(speed(ts1, ts2) − mean(trspeed)) > λ(σ(trspeed))
∧(hasFiliation(ts1, ts2))
→ suspiciousFiliation(ts1, ts2)
(12)
Where tr is a given trajectory, mean(trspeed) depicts the
average speed of the trajectory tr. The standard deviation of
speed values is represented by σ(trspeed), while λ represents
a scalar value, by default 3.
We can later identify speciﬁc timeslices with geometries that
require further attention by the researcher.
∃suspiciousFiliation(ts1, ts)
∧∃suspiciousFiliation(ts, ts2)
→ suspiciousTimeSlice(ts)
(13)
A suspicious timeslice only indicates that the speed required
to reach this point is unusually high. However, it does not prove
that the position of the timeslice is incorrect.
We can extract knowledge by establishing spatial relation-
ships between trajectories with an external geographic entities
∃ts|hasTimeSlice(tr, ts) ∧ (Intersect(geog, tsg))
∨(Within(geog, tsg)) ∨ (DistanceWithin(geog, tsg, d)))
→ hasSpatialRelation(tr, geo)
(14)
where ts is a timeslice (TS(ts)), tr is a trajectory (T R(tr))
and geo is an geographic entity (GE(geo)).
Figure 3 depicts a detailed representation of the continuum
model with the CLIWOC dataset. The classes are represented
as ellipses, while the values for the various properties are
represented as squares.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

TABLE I.
SUMMARY OF THE ENTITIES UPLOADED INTO THE
TRIPLESTORE
Count
Ontology
Class
Description
280280
T S
Records from logbooks, each record is represented as a timeslice
and has a 0 dimensional spatial representation (point). Each
timeslice has a link to a trajectory. Each timeslice has also
climatic observations and a date entry property.
5198
T R
Voyages, as identiﬁed in the original CLIWOC dataset. Each
voyage has a departure and end spatio-temporal point. Each
voyage is linked to the ship it corresponds.
1261
MF
Ships, are the moving features in the ontology. Each ship has
the properties : hasShipName, hasNationality, hasCompany and
hasShipType. In some cases, the value property was not available
on the dataset.
105
GE
Oceans/Seas, represented as polygons. The dataset covers the
whole world. It required a simpliﬁcation process before being
uploaded. We simpliﬁed the coastlines and removed the islands.
B. Implementation of the model using the CLIWOC dataset
The knowledge in the Semantic Web is represented using
standards such as the Resource Description Framework (RDF)
[17] and Web Ontology Language (OWL) [18], while the
traditional ontology query language is the Protocol and RDF
Query Language (SPARQL) [19]. It is possible to query spatial
information stored in an ontology, using GeoSPARQL [20].
This is a set of standards from the Open Geospatial Consortium
(OGC). In our research, we decided to implement our model
and store it in a Parliament triplestore. We opted for Parliament
due to its support for GeoSPARQL. In order to upload the
datasets to the triplestore, we developed a program in Java
using the Jena and GeoTools libraries. Table I contains a
summary of the entities uploaded to the triplestore.
Due to performance reasons, we opted to perform certain
operations outside the triplestore, using a Java application
instead. For instance, the CLIWOC dataset uses geographic
coordinates, therefore distance calculation is not a trivial task.
We decided to perform this operation with Java, because we
could have better control over the results. It was also possible
to test different formulas and make performance comparisons.
Once the data was uploaded into the triplestore, it was pos-
sible to identify the ﬁliation relationship as deﬁned in equation
10. The following query is a SPARQL translation of equation
10. It detects the ﬁliation relationships between timeslices
corresponding to the trajectory abc : trajectory 5198.
INSERT
{?tsParent abc:hasFiliation ?tsChild.}
WHERE {
abc:trajectory_5198 abc:hasTimeSlice ?tsParent.
abc:trajectory_5198 abc:hasTimeSlice ?tsChild.
?tsParent abc:hasDate ?ParentDate.
?tsChild abc:hasDate ?ChildDate.
NOT EXISTS{
abc:trajectory_5198 abc:hasTimeSlice ?tsX.
?tsX abc:hasDate ?XDate.
FILTER
((?ParentDate <?XDate) &&
(?XDate <?ChildDate))}
FILTER
((?tsParent!=?tsChild) &&
(?ParentDate<?ChildDate))}
According to [13], British and Dutch vessels on route to the
Indian Ocean were affected by seasonal wind patterns. Because
of this, vessels of these nationalities were not seen in the
Southern Atlantic in the months of November and December.
Using the model we can identify these unusual voyages of
British ships as:
GE(geo), T R(tr), T S(ts)
|(geoname = ‘SouthAtlantic′)∧
(∃ts|hasTimeSlice(tr, ts))
∧(Within(tsg, geog))
∧(hasMonth(tst, ‘November′)∨
hasMonth(tst, ‘December′))
→ UnusualTrajectory(tr)
(15)
Equation 15 can be translated in SPARQL as:
INSERT
{?t a abc:UnusualTrajectory}}
WHERE {
?t a abc:Trajectory.
?m a abc:MovingFeature.
?m abc:hasShipNationality "British".
?m abc:hasTrajectory ?t.
?t abc:hasTimeSlice ?ts.
?ts abc:hasDate ?tDate.
?tDate xsd:Month(?tDate)
?ts geo:hasGeometry ?tsGeo.
?tsGeo geo:AsWKT ?tsWKT.
?g a abc:GeographicFeature.
?g abc:hasGeographicName "South Atlantic".
?g geo:hasGeometry ?gGeo.
?gGeo geo:AsWKT ?gWKT.
FILTER((geof:sfIntersects(?gWKT,?tsWKT))&&
((str(month(?tsDate))="11")||
(str(month(?tsDate))="12")))}
The result of this query allows us to identify trajectories of
ships of British nationality that in the opinion of an expert on
the ﬁeld, follow an unusual trajectory pattern [13].
By using an ontology, we are able to easily identify speciﬁc
patterns on the data, enabling scientist to better understand
large datasets containing records of moving entities.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present an approach to analyse historical
maritime records. Our approach allows the knowledge discov-
ery in large datasets, enabling scientist to identify patterns that
might be hidden due to the large size of the dataset.
Our starting point is very basic raw data, from which we
produce more sophisticated constructions that allow a better
understanding of the events depicted in the dataset.
Currently, we use a state of the art triplestore as our data
repository, which gives us several advantages: 1) We can
maintain formal deﬁned relationships between objects. 2) It
allows us ﬂexibility, we can easily deﬁne new properties and
relations between entities and concepts, and 3) It allows us to
operate in large datasets in triple format.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

At the moment, we use Parliament, a triplestore that supports
GeoSPARQL, allowing us to perform spatial analysis without
additional software. GeoSPARQL is an OGC standard that
comprises a set of functions that extend SPARQL. Thanks
to using OGC standards, our approach can be deployed in
alternative OGC compliant environments.
We plan to continue our research in the ﬁeld of semantic
modelling of dynamic entities. An interesting ﬁeld of research
is the deﬁnition of semantic rules. At the moment, there are
two submissions to the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
[21] that aim to work in this ﬁeld: SPARQL Inference Notation
(SPIN) [22] and Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) [23].
However, none of them is yet an ofﬁcial W3C standard. In the
future, we plan to explore the rule deﬁnition option, sticking
to accepted standards, securing in this way the extensibility of
our work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by: 1) Conseil r´egional de
Bourgogne. 2) Direction G´en´erale de l’Armement, see:
http://www.defense.gouv.fr/dga/.
REFERENCES
[1]
C.
Welty
and
R.
Fikes,
“A
reusable
ontology
for
ﬂuents
in
owl,” in Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Formal Ontology
in Information Systems: Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference
(FOIS
2006).
Amsterdam,
The
Netherlands,
The
Netherlands: IOS Press, 2006, pp. 226–236. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1566079.1566106
[2]
M. M. Al-Debei, M. M. al Asswad, S. de Cesare, and M. Lycett,
“Conceptual modelling and the quality of ontologies: Endurantism vs.
perdurantism,” International Journal of Database Management Systems
IJDMS, vol. 4, no. 3, 2012.
[3]
M. OConnor and A. Das, “A method for representing and querying
temporal information in owl,” in Biomedical Engineering Systems
and Technologies, ser. Communications in Computer and Information
Science,
A.
Fred,
J.
Filipe,
and
H.
Gamboa,
Eds.
Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 127, pp. 97–110. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-18472-7 8
[4]
B. Harbelot, H. Arenas, and C. Cruz, “A semantic model to
query spatialtemporal data,” in Information Fusion and Geographic
Information
Systems
(IF
AND
GIS
2013),
ser.
Lecture
Notes
in Geoinformation and Cartography, V. Popovich, C. Claramunt,
M. Schrenk, and K. Korolenko, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2014, pp. 75–89. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-31833-7 5
[5]
——, “Continuum: A Spatiotemporal Data Model to Represent and
Qualify Filiation Relationships,” November 2013, paper presented at the
Fourth ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on GeoStreaming
(IWGS) 2013, Orlando, Florida, USA.
[6]
C. Parent, S. Spaccapietra, C. Renso, G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko,
V. Bogorny, M. L. Damiani, A. Gkoulalas-Divanis, J. Macedo,
N. Pelekis, Y. Theodoridis, and Z. Yan, “Semantic trajectories
modeling
and
analysis,”
ACM
Computing
Surveys,
vol.
45,
no.
4,
Aug.
2013,
pp.
42:1–42:32.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2501654.2501656
[7]
S. Spaccapietra, C. Parent, M. L. Damiani, J. A. de Macedo, F. Porto,
and C. Vangenot, “A conceptual view on trajectories,” Data Knowledge
Engineering, vol. 65, no. 1, Apr. 2008, pp. 126–146. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.datak.2007.10.008
[8]
Z. Yan, J. Macedo, C. Parent, and S. Spaccapietra, “Trajectory
ontologies
and
queries,”
Transactions
in
GIS,
vol.
12,
2008,
pp.
75–91.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
9671.2008.01137.x
[9]
Z. Yan, D. Chakraborty, C. Parent, S. Spaccapietra, and K. Aberer,
“SeMiTri: A framework for semantic annotation of heterogeneous
trajectories,” in Proceedings of the 14th International Conference
on Extending Database Technology, ser. EDBT/ICDT ’11.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 259–270. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1951365.1951398
[10]
R. Garcia Herrera, D. Wheeler, G. Konnen, F. Koek, P. Jones, and M. R.
Prieto, “CLIWOC ﬁnal report, UE contract EVK2-CT-2000-00090,”
2004.
[11]
R. Garcia-Herrera, G. Knnen, D. Wheeler, M. Prieto, P. Jones, and
F. Koek, “CLIWOC: A Climatological Database for the World’s
Oceans,” Climatic Change, vol. 73, no. 1-2, 2005, pp. 1–12. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-005-6952-6
[12]
R. Garcia-Herrera, G. P. Knnen, D. A. Wheeler, M. R. Prieto,
P.
D.
Jones,
and
F.
B.
Koek,
“Ship
logbooks
help
analyze
pre-instrumental climate,” Eos, Transactions American Geophysical
Union, vol. 87, no. 18, 2006, pp. 173–180. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2006EO180002
[13]
C. Wilkinson, “The non-climatic research potential of ships’ logbooks
and journals,” Climatic Change, vol. 73, no. 1-2, 2005, pp. 155–167.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-005-6947-3
[14]
D. Fourcy and O. Lorvelec, “A new digital map of limits of oceans
and seas consistent with high-resolution global shorelines,” Journal of
Coastal Research, vol. 29, no. 2, 2013, pp. 471–477.
[15]
I. H. Organization, “Limits of Oceans and Seas,” 1953. [Online].
Available: hdl:10013/epic.37175
[16]
A. Artale and E. Franconi, “A Temporal Description Logic for
Reasoning About Actions and Plans,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research, vol. 9, no. 1, Aug. 1998, pp. 463–506. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1622797.1622809
[17]
R.
W.
Group,
“RDF
primer,”
World
Wide
Web
Consortium
(W3C),
2014,
accessed
on
March
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-rdf-primer-20040210/
[18]
O.
W.
Group,
“OWL
Web
Ontology
Language,”
World
Wide
Web Consortium (W3C), 2004, accessed on March 2014. [Online].
Available: http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-owl-guide-20040210/
[19]
S. W. Group, “SPARQL Query Language for RDF,” World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C), 2008, accessed on March 2014. [Online].
Available: http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/
[20]
OGC,
“OGC
GeoSPARQL
-
A
Geographic
Query
Language
for
RDF
Data,”
Open
Geospatial
Consortium
(OGC),
2012,
accessed
on
March
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/geosparql#overview
[21]
W3C, “World Wide Web Consortium institutional website,” World
Wide Web Consortium (W3C), 2014, accessed on March 2014.
[Online]. Available: http://www.w3.org
[22]
H. Knublauch, J. Hendler, and K. Idehen, “SPIN - overview and
motivation,” World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), 2011, accessed on
March 2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.w3.org/Submission/spin-
overview/
[23]
I. Horrocks, P. F. Patel-Schneider, H. Boley, S. Tabet, B. Grosof,
and
M.
Dean,
“SWRL
-
A
Semantic
Web
Rule
Language
Combining OWL and RuleML,” World Wide Web Consortium
(W3C),
2004,
accessed
on
March
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL/
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

