Data Concretization States as Metadata of Parameterized Regional Futures
in a WebSDSS Development Context
Rico Vogel and Marco Neubert and Axel Sauer
Leibniz Institute of Ecological Urban and Regional Development (IOER)
Dresden, Germany
Email: {r.vogel, m.neubert, a.sauer}@ioer.de
Abstract—The development of a web-based spatial decision sup-
port system (WebSDSS) aims at the transfer of knowledge that
arises from the operationalization of a scenario approach that
focuses on so-called ’parameterized regional futures’ (PRFs).
Because the operationalization of the PRF approach is an ongoing
process, a gap exists between data required and currently
available. To overcome this gap and to allow speciﬁc software
testing, test data sets can substitute expected PRF data. Based on
the nature of spatial and non-spatial data and its role in different
WebSDSS development phases, this article proposes an approach
to distinguish concretization states as metadata of original PRF
data and test data counterparts. This contribution accordingly
addresses topics like modeling or managing spatial data, geo-
spatial domain applications, and digital cartography.
Keywords–Software development; WebSDSS development; Meta-
data information; Data concretization states; Test data; Parameter-
ized regional futures; Scenario approach.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Currently, a web-based spatial decision support system
(WebSDSS), characterized by Rinner [1] for example, is being
developed by Vogel [2] and the related research group. This
tool aims at enabling the immediate transfer of knowledge,
which arises from the operationalization of a scenario ap-
proach of Schanze and Sauer [3] that focuses on so called
’parameterized regional futures’ (PRFs, see also [4]). This
software accordingly provides steered access to the complex
pool of spatial and non-spatial PRF data by using web-
based geographical information system (WebGIS) technology,
which facilitates thematical, temporal, and spatial selection,
preparation, and presentation of such data via the Internet.
Within a PRF, a future is the core component composed
of one speciﬁc scenario and one speciﬁc strategic alternative.
A scenario consists of a set of projections derived from a
narrative storyline addressing climate change, demographic
change, technological change, economic change, as well as
land-use change (e.g., increasing temperatures, aging society).
A strategic alternative comprises different intervention options
that are single and partly site-speciﬁc measures [4]. Building
a dike or improving ﬂood resilience of buildings are examples
for such options. Both, projections and intervention options
are deﬁned by further sub components. A formalization of the
PRF approach capturing the component hierarchy has been
prepared by [5].
In the case it serves as the leaf of the PRF hierarchy, each
sub-component is commonly expected to be represented by
a spatial data set, which may be derived according to [6].
Dependent on the number of futures to be operationalized, a
  
www.ioer.de 
Rico Vogel | 13.02.2013 | Vortragsreihe der DGfK Dresden | 3 
Requirements 
analysis 
Coarse design 
Fine design 
Implementation 
Test & 
Integration 
Methodenschritte des iterativ-inkrementellen 
Entwicklungsprozesses 
Figure 1. Iterative incremental development and method steps (modiﬁed
according to [2]).
number of slightly varying data sets is expected for each theme
(leaf sub-component). In the case of the PRFs, about a dozen
of futures are operationalized [3].
This article proposes an approach to distinguish concretiza-
tion states of original PRF data and types of test data. First,
the role of spatial and non-spatial data in the WebSDSS
development process is explained (Section II). Rainardi [7]
(pp. 477–489) emphasize the importance of test data in data
warehouse development, and [8] exempliﬁes its value in con-
formance testing in the context of standardization. Afterwards,
the nature of PRF data and associated test data is captured in
Section III. Relevant data concretization states are identiﬁed
in Section IV. Test data of such states can support different
phases of WebSDSS development (e.g., [9], p. 299). Therefore,
in user tests, data concretization states are important metadata
information provided by web services like Web Mapping
Services (WMSs). Finally, Section V concludes this article.
II.
WEBSDSS DEVELOPMENT AND DATA AVAILABILITY
The WebSDSS development intended by Vogel [2] follows
an iterative-incremental approach. According to Kleuker [11]
(pp. 30 f.) in particular the requirements analysis, coarse de-
sign, ﬁne design, implementation, as well as test & integration
phases may be distinguished. As shown in Figure 1, these
phases are repeated; and, according to Rumbaugh, Jacobson,
and Booch [12] (p. 319), each iteration results with an ex-
ecutable system that can be executed, tested, and debugged.
Nevertheless, each of the phases may have certain requirements
with regard to the availability of PRF data. While some like
coarse design may be proceeded based on simple theoretical
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Object view
Class view
PRF::ActionAlternativ e
PRF::Future
- 
futureId:  long
- 
acronym:  char
- 
descriptor:  char
PRF::Scenario
actionAlternative1 :
ActionAlternativ e
(from PRF)
actionAlternative2 :
ActionAlternativ e
(from PRF)
future1 :Future
::Future
- 
futureId:  long = 1
- 
acronym:  char = acronym1_Future
- 
descriptor:  char = descriptor1_Future
(from PRF)
future2 :Future
::Future
- 
futureId:  long = 2
- 
acronym:  char = acronym2_Future
- 
descriptor:  char = descriptor2_Future
(from PRF)
scenario1 :Scenario
(from PRF)
future3 :Future
::Future
- 
futureId:  long = 3
- 
acronym:  char = acronym3_Future
- 
descriptor:  char = descriptor3_Future
(from PRF)
scenario2 :Scenario
(from PRF)
*
1
*
1
Figure 2. Concept of the Future component (Class view) and instances of the abstract data conretization state (Object view) used by software developers in
early iterations of (conventional) software development (inspired by [10]).
examples, others like test & integration may require original
data sets or at least such that approximate them.
Since PRF operationalization is an ongoing process that
captures recent (e.g., [13] contributes to the ’Integrated Re-
gional Climate Adaptation Programme for the Model Region
Dresden’, REGKLAM, research project) and current research
(e.g., [6] contributes to the ’Vulnerability Study Saxony’
(VusS) and to the ’Cross-Process Analysis of Vulnerabilities
and Risks of Urban Regions with Respect to Climatic Fac-
tors and their Changes – Conceptualisation and Modelling’
(RegioRisk) research projects), the complete set of multi-
dimensional data (e.g., [14]) is not yet available for all PRFs
to be operationalized. Rather, certain PRF aspects have already
been analysed (e.g., [13]) or are work in progress (e.g., [6]).
Besides the intended database of PRF data, for the
WebSDSS development there are several reasons to build up
a test database (see Figure 2). For example, in early iterations
simple use case examples are sufﬁcient, while during test
& integration, test data are required that at least embraces
a sub area by a selection of PRF themes. Further data sets
improve later iterations to design and test the system behavior
for extreme data values, which are not expected from causal
PRF operationalization (e.g., increasing average temperatures
by 20 K in 5 years).
To ﬁll the gap between the availability of real PRF data and
test data (see Figure 3), an approach needs to be developed that
takes into account the data requirements for each development
phase as well as the opportunities to provide sufﬁcient phase-
related test data. Therefore, in a ﬁrst step, important criteria
have to be derived that enable the differentiation of (test) data
requirements. Afterwards, valid data concretization states are
suggested that seem most important in the context of PRF-
speciﬁc WebSDSS development.
III.
CAPTURING THE NATURE OF PRF DATA AND
ASSOCIATED TEST DATA
From a development viewpoint, this section exempliﬁes the
excerpt of important criteria, which enable the capturing of
the nature of PRF data. These ﬁndings will be used to discuss
proposed categories of futures in the next section. To capture
the criteria, social, spatial, development, and scientiﬁc scopes
  
  
www.ioer.de 
Rico Vogel | 13.02.2013 | Vortragsreihe der DGfK Dresden | 1 
WebSDSS development process 
PRF data availability and gap to test data 
Desired PRF 
data availability 
Probable PRF  
data availability 
Probable PRF test 
data availability 
Amount of PRF data 
Figure 3. Schema of gaps between desired and probable availability of PRF
data in WebSDSS development and supporting role of test data.
were differentiated. These metadata may be the source for
characterizing different data concretization states.
From a social perspective, the main addressees of certain
PRF data are distinguished. Practitioners and planners may
be typical addressees of real PRF data. In contrast, test data
are applicable in discussions during requirements analysis
including further stakeholders such as the scientists, which
developed the PRF approach (i.e., [3]).
Taking the spatial dimension into account leads to a
distinction of spatial and non-spatial aspects of PRF data.
Furthermore, the scale of a pilot region compared with the
whole study region is differentiated. In particular, selecting
micro, meso, or macro levels inﬂuences the amount of data
that has to be processed during the test & integration phase
for example.
During the technical WebSDSS development, it may be of
importance to which extent the data sets cover the study area
or if the data sets have limited spatial coverage (complete,
incomplete). Additionally, data protection is an important issue.
High, moderate, low, as well as zero protection levels can be
distinguished.
Finally, scientiﬁc aspects can be taken into consideration.
In particular, the scientiﬁc origin is of importance. For PRFs,
the projects REGKLAM, VusS, and RegioRisk are itemized
leading to regklam, vuss, and regiorisk identiﬁers. The data
source can be differentiated in terms of scientiﬁc products
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

such as internal documents (report), publications (article,
proceeding) or data sets (dataset, map).
IV.
DATA CONCRETIZATION STATES
Based on the criteria identiﬁed in Section III, certain
concretization states for data sets of the PRF approach are
determined, which have importance for the WebSDSS devel-
opment. Against the backdrop of the characterization of PRF
data and test data in the previous section, four different data
concretization states can be distinguished: abstract, arbitrary,
mockup, as well as genuine (see Figure 4). These can shortly
be described as follows:
•
Abstract data sets are used to outline concepts of
components and relationships among components in
a simple manner. Often, simple characters are used to
mark objects (e.g., by a, b, A, B) or such characters
are combined with the type name of an object, for
example aTown and bTown are used to distinguish two
towns. In certain development phases, abstract data
may be sufﬁcient; in particular in ﬁne design realized
by a software developer simple examples are needed.
In contrast, test & integration involving local and
regional planners and scientists will be impractical if
use case examples are merely based on abstract data.
•
Arbitrary data sets are likewise valuable especially if
spatial data is required in early development phases.
Comparable with ’lorem ipsum’ text used in typogra-
phy, arbitrary data sets may be used as placeholders,
for example to test map components by consuming
map services. Data of this concretization state will
primarily be helpful for the software developer. The
current prototypical implementation [16], for example,
simply associates accessed ArcGIS representational
state transfer (REST) services, also used by Strode
[17], to certain PRF component instances, which itself
are merely of abstract state (e.g., sub-components of
a scenarioC and a strategicAlternativeB).
•
Unlike data of the previous concretization states,
mockup data sets approximate (e.g., Benenson and
Torrens [18], p. 16) or even consider the conditions
of the study region. Although, they are still ﬁc-
tional, mockup (or dummy/ synthetic) data sets are
designed to approximate genuine ones (comparable
with ’potemkin villages’), since they are often the
result of the same or similar models like used for
the genuine PRF data. Accordingly, mockup data are
assumed to be close to reality which therefore enable
nearly-realistic software test & integration, involving
stakeholders such as local and regional planners.
Furthermore, mockup data sets may be created (e.g.,
simulated according to [18]) to offer (extreme) data
values that are not expected to appear within genuine
data sets.
•
Finally, genuine data sets are the intended results
gathered from the realization of the PRF approach.
From the development point of view, data of this
concretization state is valuable in each of the develop-
ment phases. But in the subsequent production phase,
merely genuine data sets are valid to build up the
WebSDSS data component.
V.
CONCLUSION
The article demonstrated an approach for capturing data
concretization states of PRF data. Within WebSDSS develop-
ment, these states are inﬂuencing each phase. For example,
during implementation and associated unit testing by a devel-
oper, the state of PRF data, consumed by a web service may
be registered by a logging mechanism. Of equal importance is
the fact that such metadata information should be visualized
by a graphical user interface (GUI) during test & integration
to inform involved planners and other stakeholders about the
concretization states of the data displayed.
Therefore, it is highly recommended to mark the data sets
by their concretization state. Especially with a huge amount
of data, this marking allows for the fast investigation of the
required degree of replacement of test data by genuine one.
Table I summarizes concretization states of PRF data, which
at least have to be available in early software development
iterations (x) or even in the production phase. Data sets may
be swapped in the course of time, for example, by replacement
with more concrete ones (o). To ease the access on such
state information, metadata extensions or proﬁles according
to [19] may be appropriate. To avoid misinterpretation of data
content, induced by lacked information of the states of data
consumed, especially in the case of mockup data, it is strongly
recommended to automatically add the data concretization
state information during data set production, or during the
creation of related web services to the data and web service
metadata.
TABLE I. DATA CONCRETIZATION STATES IN WEBSDSS DEVELOPMENT
AND PRODUCTION (X – MINIMUM REQUIREMENT / O – AIMED
SUBSTITUTIONS IN SUBSEQUENT ITERATIONS).
Development phase
abstract
arbitrary
mockup
genuine
Requirements analysis
x
o
o
o
Coarse design
x
o
o
o
Fine design
x
o
o
o
Implementation
x
o
o
Test & integration
x
o
Production
x
Nevertheless, considering aggregates on upper concretiza-
tion levels requires more speciﬁc distinctions among ag-
gregates, because the concretization states of an aggregate
depends on the ones of its sub components. In upcoming
work, the presented approach will be reﬁned and adapted for
such aggregates. In this context, the taxonomy deﬁned by the
domain model of [5] may be used to identify the aggregates
and its members. As already mentioned, each future references
exactly one scenario and one strategic alternative. Accord-
ingly, its concretization state results from those of both sub
components. For example, while a scenarioC might be marked
with the arbitrary state, the state of a strategicAlternativeB is
of type mockup. For such cases, intermediate operationalization
states are currently under development. Vogel [20] proposes
appropriate alternatives such as abstract prevailed, arbitrary
prevailed, as well as mockup prevailed.
The concept presented in this article, is also applicable
to data of further scenario approaches. Beyond the scope
of WebSDSS development, it can also improve conventional
(non-spatial) software development. Even in ofﬂine develop-
ment like spatial analysis, data concretization states can be
attached to metadata of geoprocessing workﬂow results, for
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

  
www.ioer.de 
Rico Vogel | 13.02.2013 | Vortragsreihe der DGfK Dresden | 1 
Dresden 
(arbitrary) 
Dresden 
(mockup) 
Dresden 
(genuine) 
administrativeUnitA 
(abstract) 
no 
geometry 
e.g. “Cospudener See” 
(enlarged ATKIS  
DLM 250 lake feature) 
 
e.g. ATKIS DLM 250 
feature 
e.g. Coarse digitalization  
of a map representation 
Type level 
Instance level 
Origin level 
Geometry level 
Figure 4. Data concretization states at the example of possible instances of an AdministrativeUnit feature type according to INSPIRE [15].
example to improve interpretation of exchanged data by project
members.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research described in this paper emerged from de-
velopments in the ’Design, Technologies and Usability of
web-based Spatial Decision Support Systems for regional
assessment of climate change impacts and adaptation – for
the Model Region of Dresden’ (ZENON; sCENarios ONline),
a research project funded by the Leibniz Institute of Ecological
Urban and Regional Development (IOER), Dresden, Germany.
Furthermore, the authors thank colleague Robert Hecht and
several anonymous reviewers for their advice and time.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Rinner, “Web-based Spatial Decision Support: Status and Research
Directions,”
Journal
of
Geographic
Information
and
Decision
Analysis (GIDA), vol. 7, no. 1, 2003, pp. 14–31, URL: http:
//www.ryerson.ca/∼crinner/pubs/Rinner published GIDA-01-2003.pdf
[accessed: 2015.01.08].
[2]
R. Vogel, “ZENON – Entwicklung eines WebSDSS zur Absch¨atzung
der Folgen des Klimawandels und des gesellschaftlichen Wandels
[ZENON – Development of a WebSDSS for assessment of impacts
of climate change and societal change],” in Angewandte Geoinfor-
matik 2013: Beitr¨age zum 25. AGIT-Symposium Salzburg, J. Strobl,
T. Blaschke, G. Griesebner, and B. Zagel, Eds.
Berlin, Offenbach:
AGIT Salzburg, 2013, pp. 227–232, URL: http://gispoint.de/ﬁleadmin/
user upload/paper gis open/537533082.pdf [accessed: 2015.01.08].
[3]
J. Schanze and A. Sauer, “Dokumentation des fragestellungs- und ge-
bietsspeziﬁschen Szenarioansatzes [Documentation of the topic-related
and region-speciﬁc scenario approach],” Leibniz-Institut f¨ur ¨okologische
Raumentwicklung, Dresden, REGKLAM Ergebnisbericht, Produkt 2.4a,
Version: 1, Status: Konzept, unpublished, 2011.
[4]
J. Schanze, J. Tr¨umper, C. Burmeister, D. Pavlik, and I. Kruhlov,
“A methodology for dealing with regional change in integrated water
resources management,” Environmental Earth Sciences, vol. 65, 2012,
pp. 1405–1414.
[5]
R. Vogel, A. Sauer, and J. Schanze, “Object-Oriented Domain Mod-
eling of a Regional Climate Change Scenario Approach as a Central
WebSDSS Development Artifact,” N. N., in preparation.
[6]
M. Neubert and R. Vogel, “Integrierte r¨aumliche Schadensanalysen
zum Aufbau der Datenhaltungskomponente eines webbasierten Ent-
scheidungsunterst¨utzungssystems [Integrated spatial damage analysis
for establishing the database component of a web-based decision
support system],” in Angewandte Geoinformatik 2014: Beitr¨age zum
26. AGIT-Symposium Salzburg, J. Strobl, T. Blaschke, G. Grieseb-
ner, and B. Zagel, Eds.
Berlin, Offenbach: AGIT Salzburg, 2014,
pp. 375–380, URL: http://gispoint.de/ﬁleadmin/user upload/paper gis
open/537543055.pdf [accessed: 2015.01.08].
[7]
V. Rainardi, Building a Data Warehouse With Examples in SQL Server.
Berkeley: Apress, 2008.
[8]
OGC, “OpenGIS R
⃝ Implementation Speciﬁcation for Geographic infor-
mation – Simple feature access – Part 2: SQL option,” Open Geospatial
Consortium, OpenGIS R
⃝ Implementation Speciﬁcation OGC 06-104r4,
Version 1.2.1, 2010, URL: http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/sfs
[accessed: 2015.01.08].
[9]
D. Haywood, Domain-Driven Design: Using Naked Objects.
Raleigh,
Dallas: The Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2009.
[10]
R. Vogel, “Testanwendung eines technologieintegrierenden WebSDSS-
Prototyps – Dokumentation des 2. Tests [Test application of a techno-
logy integrating prototype of a WebSDSS – Documentation of the 2nd
test],” ZENON AP5 project report, unpublished, 2014.
[11]
S. Kleuker, Grundkurs Software-Engineering mit UML: Der pragmati-
sche Weg zu erfolgreichen Softwareprojekten [Basic course software
engineering with UML. The pragmatic way to successful software
projects], 2nd ed., ser. Studium.
Wiesbaden: Vieweg + Teubner, 2011.
[12]
J. Rumbaugh, I. Jacobson, and G. Booch, The Uniﬁed Modeling Lan-
guage Reference Manual.
Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley,
1999.
[13]
O.
Kretschmer,
“GIS-basierte
Projektionen
der
Sied-
lungsﬂ¨achenentwicklung mittels multikriterieller Bewertungsfaktoren
und zellul¨arem Automatenmodell DINAMICA [GIS-based projections
of residential area dynamics with multi-criteria evaluation factors and
the cellular automata model DINAMICA],” Diploma thesis, IOER
Dresden and Philipps-Universit¨at Marburg, unpublished, 2012.
[14]
A. Yeung and G. Hall, Spatial Database Systems: Design, Imple-
mentation and Project Management, ser. The GeoJournal Library 87.
Dordrecht: Springer-Verlag, 2007.
[15]
INSPIRE,
“Inspire
data
speciﬁcation
on
administrative
units
–
guidelines,”
INSPIRE
Thematic
Working
Group
Administrative
units,
Data
Speciﬁcation
D2.8.I.4,
2009-09-07
2009,
URL:
http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/Data Speciﬁcations/
INSPIRE DataSpeciﬁcation AU v3.0.pdf [accessed: 2015.01.08].
[16]
R. Vogel, “Prototypische Technologieintegration f¨ur ein WebSDSS
zur Folgenabsch¨atzung des Klimawandels und des regionalen Wandels
[Prototypical Technology Integration for a WebSDSS for Assessment of
Impacts of Climate Change and Regional Change],” FB R-Kolloquium,
presentation, 2012.08.08, IOER Dresden, 2012.
[17]
G. Strode, “The GIS Behind iMapInvasives: The ”Open Source Sand-
wich”,” in Online Maps with APIs and WebServices, ser. Lecture
Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography, M. Peterson, Ed.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer, 2012, ch. 6, pp. 73–90.
[18]
I. Benenson and P. M. Torrens, Geosimulation: Automata-based Mod-
elling of Urban Phenomena.
Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex:
John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[19]
ISO 19115, “Geographic information – Metadata,” International Orga-
nization for Standardization, ISO 19115:2005-05, 2005.
[20]
R. Vogel, “Zuk¨unftedaten im Kontext der Entwicklung eines WebSDSS
zur Analyse von Szenarien des Klimawandels und des regionalen Wan-
dels [Future data in the context of the development of a WebSDSS for
analysing scenarios of climate change and societal change],” ZENON
AP4 & AP5 project report, unpublished, 2014.
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

