 1 
e-Report Generator Supporting Communications and Fieldwork: A Practical Case 
of Electrical Network Expansion Projects 
 
Emerson Castaneda-Sanabria 
, Miguel-Ángel Manso-Callejo 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid 
Madrid, Spain 
emecas@ieee.org, m.manso@upm.es 
Francisco-Javier Moreno-Marimbaldo 
Department of the Environment  
Red Eléctrica de España (REE) 
Madrid, Spain 
fmoreno@ree.es 
Federico-Vladimir Gutiérrez-Corea 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid 
Madrid, Spain 
fv.gutierrez@upm.es 
 
 
Abstract— In this piece of work we present a simple way to 
incorporate Geographical Information System tools that have 
been developed using open source software in order to help the 
different processes in the expansion of the electrical network. 
This is accomplished by developing a novel fieldwork tool that 
provides the user with automatically generated enriched e-
reports that include information about every one of the 
involved private real estates in a specific project. These reports 
are an eco-friendly alternative to paper format, and can be 
accessed by clients using any kind of personal device with a 
minimal set of technical requirements.  
Keywords - Geoprocessing, Assets and Rights Report (ARR), 
Government and public GIS, Geo-modeling.   
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Electric power supply is essential for the functioning of 
society since it plays a prominent role in maintaining the 
standard of living [1]. Electric power is the engine of 
growth of any developing country, so no major economic 
activity can be sustained without adequate and reliable 
power [2]. For this reason the electric power transport and 
distribution is considered a public utility service.  
The Spanish Electrical Network (REE) is the owner of 
the entire high voltage electric energy transport network in 
the Spanish territory; it is responsible for its expansion, 
maintenance and management. The high voltage electric 
lines located on the territory induce different affections on 
public and private property land. These affections may be of 
different types of occupation or easement and should be 
thoroughly identified on the pertinent documentation to be 
included into the execution project of these types of 
infrastructures. Every project is endorsed, approved and 
processed according to the responsible body corresponding 
to every particular case; 400 kV installations should be 
processed according to the requirements of the State 
Administration; 220 kV installations are handled complying 
with the requirements of the involved regional governments.  
This fact implies that the way the projects are presented are 
not homogeneous since requirements are variable in the 
Communities and are continuously evolving. This changing 
situation concerning the requested documentation compels 
the REE to handle the project data in a structured, 
standardized way, integrating new processes within 
consolidated workflow.  
The project information is handled as a whole and in the 
case of possible affections on real estate, lists are generated 
with the cadastral data of every plot and the result of the 
calculation of affections due to the new electrical 
installations. In Spain these lists are affected Assets and 
Rights Reports (ARR) for landowners. Due to the current 
high demand, the creation of ARR has been turned into an 
evolving process with the aim of reaching the goals defined 
by the strategic plans of the Ministry of Industry, Tourism 
and Trade. These ARR always go hand in hand with a set of 
plans containing the pertinent cadastral cartography and the 
information about the new installation where geographic 
information 
about 
affections 
is 
incorporated. 
The 
association ARR – set of plans becomes an indivisible unit 
needed for understanding of the new situation that will take 
place after building and commissioning of the new 
installation. From the point of view of the technical drafting 
of the project, its deliverables, and the competent 
Administration in the handling of each project, that 
information is sufficient for the understanding of the 
project. However, the data of affections should be made 
known through the public information, so that according to 
the law the owners of the affected assets have knowledge of 
the future situation and are able to plead as they see fit.   
GIS technologies have an invaluable number of 
applications in most of the areas related to human 
development. The electricity market is one of the candidates 
highly likely to be improved by adopting GIS technologies. 
Some interesting examples of applications of GIS 
technologies in the electricity market are: a mobile 
computing system for repairing and patrolling of electrical 
power facilities as described in [3], a decision support 
system based on spatial information of land resources [4], 
and the development and application of GIS in power 
marketing and expansion [5]. 
This paper introduces a simple way to incorporate GIS 
open source tools in order to assist different processes in 
electrical infrastructure projects. Some of the processes that 
are targeted in this work are the group of activities derived 
from an expansion of electrical networks.  
Our contribution can be summarized as a fieldwork tool 
that supports technical aspects during the development of 
negotiation process activities. It provides a clear and human 
understandable preview of future affections that will be 
produced because of an expansion of the electrical network. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 2 
It also offers a global graphical vision of the susceptible 
elements included in the project.  This vision can be 
distributed using a tool that allows getting enriched 
automatically generated reports. Economic, statistical, and 
geometric information about each individual part of the 
project can be included with any kind of useful data and 
descriptors.  
On one hand, the automatically generated reports can be 
taken on as an official communication tool that involves 
REE, parcels owners, public administration organisms and 
the citizens. On the other hand, a remarkable purpose is to 
reduce the impact on natural resources (paper) by focusing 
on the adoption of e-information policy to expand 
information society. These kind of e-reporting tools are 
easily developed with open source resources on an 
inexpensive hardware infrastructure, which can be accessed 
by clients using almost any kind of personal device with a 
minimal set of technical requirements. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
section II provides a complete definition of the issue and its 
solutions. A review of the pertinent literature is presented in 
Section III.. Section IV presents the proposed methodology 
followed by the technical aspect of our proposal. The 
obtained results are discussed in section V. Finally, section 
VI includes conclusions and future development.  
II. DEFINITION OF ISSUE 
The issue is the need for a graphical representation of the 
future affections that will be brought about by the expansion 
of the electrical network. The purpose is for involved 
citizens, government, and the electrical network company to 
be offered as an available digital system supporting official 
communications (e-reports) able to incorporate economic, 
statistical, geometric information, or any kind of useful data 
about the expansion projects. We provide a system to give a 
solution to the lack of this type of communication so far. 
Public utility administrative recognition implies a number 
of obligations which include the formal legal notification to 
the owners of the affected assets. The government gets 
closer to citizens by showing a growing concern for the 
difficulties of the plots owners affected  in understanding 
the technical information, especially old age citizens for 
whom cadastral codes and interpretation of maps is a 
problem. The legal notification to owners of the affected 
plots is carried out through publication on the Official State 
Gazette in every case. The projects depending on the State 
government are published on the Official State Gazette 
(BOE), Official Province Gazette (BOP) and on two of the 
most widely read newspapers. The projects whose 
competence rests with the regional government are 
published on the Official Autonomous Community Gazette, 
the Official Province Gazette and two of the most widely 
read newspapers. Thus the owners of the affected plots will 
learn about the new situation that will take place in their 
properties.  
Pari passu the Local government has opened a new way 
of communication with the owners consisting of sending 
them specific information about the affections of the new 
installation on their assets. This information should be 
generated by the REE and this in turn could bring about 
important delays in the preparation of the project and in the 
terms established with the different players of the process.  
The solution to this new requirement should be 
integrated into the consolidated workflow, generating a new 
result using the available data. To that effect, we have 
designed two types of tools. The first one enabling 
visualisation of the project‟s geographic information using 
maps publishing standards (WMS-OGC) [6]. The second 
type of tool carries out automatically the necessary tasks to 
generate the individualized report of the affections of the 
plots involved in every project. The generation of the 
reports comprises the creation of a main page made up of a 
map with the geographic information of the surveyed plot as 
well as a page for each one of the possible affections. 
The manual procedure for generation of these documents 
comprises different manual processes as follows: (1) 
Generation of PDF page with a quantitative summary and 
an ancillary graphic of the affections of the new installation 
on the surveyed plot followed by the generation of another 
PDF page for each type of affection sustained by the plot. 
The time consumed by the generation of all the pages 
making up a single document varies as a function of the 
number of affections sustained by the studied plot. (2) 
Generation of PDF document by putting together all the 
pages corresponding to the same plot that have been 
generated in the previous process.  The average time for the 
generation of a final PDF document is 860 seconds (14 
minutes). The average time consumed in the automated 
procedure is 5 seconds. Therefore a considerable reduction 
in the terms of execution of this task is achieved.  
The new procedure put in place not only influences 
execution times but it also has a bearing upon the 
homogeneity of the generated information and its reliability 
and accessibility. It is of consequence to indicate that it is 
about a Web application developed with open source 
software; these facts multiply the possibilities of document 
generation cutting down the costs derived from software 
licences. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
The topics covered in this section are: GIS technology 
applications in the electricity market, main principles of 
electrical network expansion, tools and methodologies for 
official communications (e-participation and e-government), 
and reduction of impact on natural resources. 
A. GIS technology applications in the electricity market 
Shin et al. [3] present the development of a mobile 
computing system for repair and patrol of electric power 
facilities.  Shin gives special importance to the integration 
of a GIS database system with a distribution mobile repair 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 3 
work based mobile computing in order to contribute to 
modernisation of mobile repair work by implementing a 
system that can track the location of repair vehicles moving 
all along, so as to dispatch the vehicles to the failed place 
quickly. There are three main components of Shin's system: 
the mobile repair server, the terminal for vehicles (Mobile 
Data Terminal) a PDA device with GPS-based services and 
the wireless communication network. 
A second application is a decision support system based 
on spatial information of land resources [4]. In this 
application, Xu et al. highlight the technical support 
provided by the spatial information technology to the spatial 
decision support system. They claim the importance of 
obtaining quickly and accurately the use of land resources 
and its real-time monitoring by using GIS powerful 
management and spatial analysis function with the purpose 
of setting up and honing the whole monitoring system, 
comprehending land market trends and providing a basis for 
the government to timely adjust relevant policies. 
  Finally, the subject of development and GIS application 
on power marketing and its expansion are described in [5]; 
the authors state that this application of GIS should not only 
realise the effect of visual display, quick inquiry, and data 
management and update of power facilities and circuits, but 
should also be connected to other existing system and 
graphic data. They stress improvement of the working 
efficiency of the system, avoiding repeated investment and 
saving resources and operating costs. 
From the 3 pieces of work above highlighted, we have 
identified some concepts and elements to be taken into 
account in our proposal: (1) the mobile computing 
component with the adoption of a modular architecture 
based on layers, with clearly identified functionalities, (2) 
the ability to support fast and accurate decision making 
based on GIS, spatial systems and new technologies, even in 
real time scenarios, and (3) the interconnection of GIS 
applications not only focusing on the display screen, quick 
reference, management and updating tasks of facilities and 
circuits, but also for a strategic investment planning focused 
on saving costs and resources and working efficiency. 
B. The main principles of electrical network expansion 
An interesting reference about one of the topics related 
to our work that takes into account the principles of 
electrical network expansion after a long-term period of 
planning expansion of the Unified Energy System in Russia 
is [7]. In that piece of work Voropai starts from the 
principles of essential updating of electrical network 
expansion carrying on to a full description of how the 
requirements for expansion of the Main Electrical Network 
(MEN) and development of new technologies for power 
production, transmission and consumption affect the 
principles of the MEN formation. Furthermore the author 
includes information about the structure of electrical 
network expansion planning problems. 
In this paper we highlight the principles related to 
planning and required tools for modelling every single stage 
of the expansion planning process, namely: Uncertainty 
Planning: in order to decrease the uncertainty of future 
conditions of the MEN expansion, it is necessary to develop 
a technology for planning and monitoring this expansion 
and the adjustment of its planning. Stages of Expansion 
Planning Problems: a general structure of the MEN 
expansion planning problems includes three stages: 
generation of the MEN expansion options, analysis of their 
operating conditions, and selection of the best option. The 
functionality of our system contributes to improve these 
planning 
and 
modelling 
processes 
by 
giving 
a 
comprehensive description of the involved areas.  
C. Tools and methodologies for official communications 
In this section, the concepts of e-participation using GIS 
and e-Government tools are analysed in order to provide a 
context about the adoption of methodologies and tools to 
implement official communications. Our proposal is being 
presented as an innovative case study regarding the 
electrical network expansion projects, involving citizen 
participation in responsibilities of REE, as well as national 
and regional government authorities. 
The term e-participation [8][9][10] is referred to the use 
of information and communication technologies to broaden 
and deepen political participation by enabling citizens to 
connect with one another and with their elected 
representatives. This definition includes all stakeholders in 
democratic decision-making processes and not only citizen-
related 
top-down 
government 
initiatives. 
Thus 
e-
participation can be viewed as part of e-democracy, where 
e-democracy means the use of ICT by governments in 
general, by elected officials, media, political parties and 
interest groups, civil society organisations, international 
governmental organisations, or citizens/voters within any of 
the political processes of states/regions, nations and local 
and global communities. 
On the other hand, the term e-government [8][11][12] is 
referred to digital interaction between a government and 
citizens (G2C), government and businesses (G2B), and 
between 
government 
agencies 
(G2G). 
This 
digital 
interaction consists of governance, business process re-
engineering (BPR), and e-citizens at all levels of 
government 
(city, 
state/province, 
national, 
and 
international). Essentially, the term e-Government,Digital 
Government, refers to „How government utilises IT, ICT 
and other telecommunication technologies to enhance the 
efficiency and effectiveness in the public sector‟. 
A study involving an evaluation of GIS tools and e-
participation is [13]. In this piece of work, Loukis et al. 
performed a systematic evaluation of an e-participation 
platform based on GIS tools. The evaluation methodology 
was based on the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) 
[14]. It was worked out and adapted to this specific types of 
information system taking into account the specific 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 4 
objectives and capabilities of this platform. The main 
evaluation dimensions were usage, ease of use, functional 
usefulness, 
political 
usefulness 
and 
importance 
of 
discussion topic; each of them was analysed into a number 
of sub-dimensions. Using this methodology five pilot 
applications of this platform in „real-life‟ situations and 
problems were evaluated with both quantitative and 
qualitative techniques. Finally, the work concludes that the 
use of GIS tools can provide significant value in the area of 
e-participation, which however depends on a number of 
context factors such as citizens‟ computer literacy and 
familiarisation, trust in the political system, interest of the 
sponsoring public authorities, appropriate promotion, 
importance of the topic under discussion, and quantity and 
quality of reference information appended on the digital 
maps by public authorities. 
One additional reference related to the improvement of 
Web content delivery in e-government application is [15]. 
This piece of work focuses on creating a Web platform for 
accessing, processing and delivering statistical data in an 
effective way. The platform consists of a set of integrated 
tools specified in the organisation, validation, maintenance 
and safe delivery of statistical information resources on the 
Web. The idea is the enhancement of a system providing 
direct 
dissemination 
functionalities 
to 
authorized 
international users. Datasets are tested and validated on the 
national level, then they will be stored in the Transmission 
System Database, from which it can be downloaded by 
Eurostat [16]. The work presents all motivations and 
technology background for the implementations and it also 
includes a full case study with the consideration of the 
implementations. Finally, it concludes that the statistics, 
production, and dissemination process are improved 
because the validation verifications take place at an earlier 
stage as it is performed by the National Statistical Institute 
itself whereas the transmission is performed by Eurostat. 
D. Reduction of impact on natural resources 
The topic about the reduction of impact on natural 
resources is mainly handled from two perspectives. One of 
them is based on the reduction/replacement of paper use, 
focusing on the adoption of an e-information policy. An 
additional benefit and motivation for the adoption of our 
proposal is that these e-information tools are easily 
developed with open source software on a low-cost 
hardware infrastructure that can be accessed by customers 
with almost any personal device with a minimum set of 
technical requirements. 
A second perspective is related to the adoption of a 
ubiquitous e-custom service such as the system described in 
[17]. Razmerita and Bjorn-Andersen address the strategic 
goals for future custom systems such as simplified paperless 
trade 
procedures, 
the 
advantages 
of 
using 
novel 
technologies and the inclusion of an innovative e-custom 
system architecture. The main technologies for innovative 
trade procedures considered by the authors are the Web 
Services (WS), Services Oriented Architectures (SOA) and 
The Tamper Resistant Embedded Controller (TREC). These 
technologies are directly involved in our proposal, as 
described in the following section.  
On the other hand, adopting the redesign of 
administrative 
procedures 
for 
international 
trade 
is 
presented by focusing on the ITAIDE Project (Information 
Technology for Adoption and Intelligent Design for e-
Government, www.itade.org) which has two objectives: 
reducing 
the 
administrative 
costs 
implied 
in 
the 
international trade transactions while increasing security and 
controlling trade procedures. Our work is the first approach 
to the redesign of administrative procedures to make them 
more efficient and useful. This affirmation is based on the 
solicitations for the adoption of our tool received from 
regional government authorities, in order to notify all people 
possibly affected by electrical network expansion projects 
and during field work. 
IV.  DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSAL 
This section presents the proposed methodology and the 
technical aspect of our proposal including details about 
system architecture, inputs, procedures, outputs, and web 
user interface. 
A. System Architecture 
Fig. 1 shows the proposed solution for the implemented 
architecture; an prototype has been developed by using an 
incremental methodology.The main parts of this architecture 
and a brief description of the architecture are as follows: (1) 
Web Server: it is responsible for publishing the WebApp on 
the Internet. This server can redirect the requests to the 
application server or provide the service as a web container. 
(2) GeoDatabase: it is the repository that stores the entire 
spatial information related to the expansion project. (3) Data 
Services: data services are required to provide additional 
alphanumerical information and to establish additional 
connections to other database or GeoDatabase. (4) Map 
Server: it provides the service of maps using the OGC 
standard Web Map Server (WMS). (5) Web Reporting 
Application: it is responsible for handling the clients' 
requests and for generating the e-reports that integrate 
spatial and alphanumerical information, through interaction 
between Data Services and Map Server. It is the core of our 
proposal 
making 
geoprocessing 
tasks 
to 
integrate 
alphanumerical and spatial information and incorporating 
novel technologies and standards for web development and 
GIS. (7) Clients: users of the Web Reporting Application 
such as  mobile devices, PCs, or any device with minimum 
requirements to establish connection with the Web 
Reporting Application and to handle answers as e-reports. 
B. Inputs 
The inputs for the process of generation of e-reports are 
the Data Tables and the 16 Layers (both are contained in the 
GeoDatabase Fig. 2.). One of the layers represents the real 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 5 
estates involved in each electrical installation project (Base 
Layer); this information is generally obtained from the 
Cadastre. The rest of the layers represent the 15 affections 
(Affection Layers), which come from studies for every new 
electrical installation project to take decisions and to 
estimate the information by affections. 
The number of affections that may influence the real 
estates is 15: aerial trace (superficial electrical cable 
generally suspended between pylons); underground trace 
(part of the electrical cable is buried); flight (safety area 
represented by the possible maximum movement  of the 
electrical cable due to the influence of wind with a velocity 
of 120 Km/h perpendicular to the axis of the electrical line); 
tube (representing the vertical projection of the cables on 
the ground with wind of 0 Km/h); felling (area that should 
be felled around the trace for safety purposes); permanent 
occupation area (area occupied by the pylons); permanent 
underground occupation (surface the underground power 
line will occupy permanently); temporary occupation area 
(needed area for the building of the electricity pylons and 
other 
materials); 
temporary 
underground 
occupation 
(needed occupied surface for underground electric wiring); 
splicing chamber (area occupied permanently by concrete 
boxes 
where 
cable 
splicing 
is 
carried 
out); 
telecommunication boxes (surface permanently occupied by 
the boxes used for telecommunication equipment associated 
to underground cable for remote manoeuvring of the line); 
landmarks (surface occupied  by concrete posts in place to 
indicate on the surface the underground channelling of 
electrical cables); accesses (easement needed for access 
from 
the 
electrical 
installations 
for 
building 
and 
maintenance); auxiliary 1 and auxiliary 2 (two generic 
affections available in the future if needed). 
C. Procedures 
In a previous stage, information for a new expansion 
project has been SDI standard-complying and the data have 
been converted to the interchange Geography Markup 
Language (GML) format [18]. Once the data have been 
submitted, using transactional operations to the server which 
implements the WFS-T, the GeoDatabase is ready to serve 
as data source from the input layers and data tables. The 
layers may be queried in a standard way through the Map 
server by using the WMS and WFS services to get spatial 
information, and data tables through the Data Services 
which provide the alphanumerical information. 
The core of our geoprocessing consists of the integration 
of both kinds of data sources in order to get a single and 
portable document format through a real time procedure. On 
one hand, the procedure identifies, builds, and executes all 
needed requests to the map server to obtain the graphical 
information subset. The identification part defines which 
layers are involved in map construction, the building part 
integrates the different elements related with bounding box, 
styles, colours, labels, scale, and the executing part is 
related to the control of process to request every single 
petition and manage these graphic temporal results for its 
future integration into an e-report. On the other hand, the 
procedure identifies and recovers through the Data Services 
all the alphanumerical required information to enrich every 
single e-report. Finally, the process join both kinds of data 
to build an e-report by filling templates previously 
structured and designed. This same geoprocessing used to 
get a single e-report is executed in an iterative way to get all 
the e-reports of a specific project. 
D. Outputs 
Fig. 3 shows the e-report of a project of electrical 
network expansion that includes the ARR of a particular 
rural area affected by permanent occupation, power lines 
passing across and deforestation. In this case the e-report is 
made up of 6 pages; in our system this kind of e-report 
could contain up to 16 pages.  
The first page shows an outline of the zones of every 
potential impact on the area susceptible to affection by the 
expansion project. The next 5 pages detail each one of the 
areas of real estate that could be affected and the way the 
affections would be distributed into and around the 
property. This particular example includes 5 kinds of 
affection: a. accesses, b. flight, c. felling, d. permanent 
occupation area, and d. splicing chamber. In addition, other 
output of the tool is a zip file that contains all e-reports 
related to a specific expansion project in case that the PDF 
massive generation option has been used. 
 
 
Figure. 1.  Proposed Architecture  
 
 
Figure 2.   Inputs, Procedures, and Outputs involved in the geoprocessing 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 6 
 
Figure 3.  e-Report of  affected assets and rights 
  
E. Web User Interface 
A Web User Interface is developed using broadly 
extended Web technologies (HTML and Ajax with the 
Apache Click API); the system works to assure that almost 
any mobile device interacts with the Web Applications 
handling the answers as e-reports  (usually PDF). 
A Web interface can be appreciated in Fig. 4. It includes 
part of the main menu and shows auto-complete option that 
allows the user to search for an individual real estate stored 
in the spatial database. If the user gets a valid record it will 
be displayed showing its graphical and alphanumerical 
information before it generates the e-report.  Subsequently 
the e-report may or may not be requested by the user. Tool 
includes the option to generate all the e-reports as part of an 
expansion project and to select the project code and see the 
list of all the affected plots. 
Fig. 5 shows the last confirmation before starting the 
process of generation of all e-reports in a project. Included 
is a checking box option to exclude all the real estates that 
are part of the project but will not be affected. The project 
shown in Fig. 5 is made up of 1101 realties with the 
possibility to exclude 858. 
 
 
Figure 4.   Web user interface searching properties 
 
 
Figure 5.   Web user interface before e-report generation for a full project 
 
In this example the generation of 255 e-reports has taken 
approximately 24 minutes and a total of 1478 images have 
been generated to produce 255 PDF files (a total size of 80 
Mb); that means 1478 successful requests from the Web 
Reporting Application to the Map server using WMS and 
255 requests from the Web Reporting Application to the 
Data Services to make the geoprocessing tasks to integrate 
alphanumerical and spatial information. 
V. RESULTS 
After many iterations of the prototype we have got 
relevant functionalities about e-reporting that allows us 
integrating in a single document all the necessary 
information for every vulnerable real estate to be affected 
during the electrical network expansion project.   
During the first iterations of the project some 
inconveniences occurred related to the time needed to get 
the output as an e-report in PDF format. They were cleared 
up by incorporating a new manner of creating the output 
that allows handling the process on a low level and at the 
same time supporting characteristics to produce all the        
e-reports associated to a specific project on a large scale; the 
technologies taken on for that solution were JasperReports 
API, data services implemented with Apache Cayenne API, 
and an image generator using WMS requests to the Map 
Server (Geoserver). 
The adoption of all these technologies results in a 
scalable architecture that can be strengthened with new 
elements whenever the prototype requires to incorporate any 
new functionality or be improved in order to go on to a new 
stage. 
It should be taken into account as a relevant advantage 
that every one of these technologies can be manipulated as a 
plug-in which, depending on its performance, can be kept as 
a part of the proposed architecture or be replaced with a 
better element. We want highlight that all the technologies 
incorporated into the prototype stick to the philosophy of 
open source development and are under GNU general public 
licences. 
Fig. 6 shows a comparison of the times needed for the 
manual and automated procedures for e-report generation; 
the automated method is approximately 175 times faster 
than the manual method.  The manual method is able to 
generate 1000 e-reports in 14000 minutes (around 10 days)  
while automated method would need just 80 minutes. 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 7 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Times needed by traditional and automated methods 
  
As said above, the average time consumed in the 
automated procedure is 5 seconds per e-report. An 
important reduction in the terms of execution of this task is 
achieved. The new procedure influences not only execution 
times but also has a bearing upon the homogeneity of the 
generated information and its reliability and accessibility.  
VI.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The results obtained reflect a favourable situation for all 
parts involved. On one hand REE incorporates new 
automated processes into the consolidated procedures 
providing greater and better information for interested users 
without warning about delays in the committed terms. On 
the other hand, the Government satisfies its need to ensure 
that the rights and obligations of a public utility of an 
installation are respected, and finally the owners of the 
affected assets will have a specific, detailed knowledge of 
the affections the new installations will generate on their 
real estates.    
The new procedure put in place not only influences the 
execution times but also bears on the homogeneity and 
reliability of the generated information, and since we are 
dealing with a Web application, accessible from any point 
with Internet connection, the possibilities of documentation 
generation are multiplied and the software licence costs are 
reduced. 
As future work we have planned the incorporation of a 
security mechanism similar to the one described in [17]. We 
have taken a step toward the implementation of an e-custom 
system with characteristics that respond to the new 
requirements of REE and users. We expect the model to be 
adopted as an official communication tool that should be 
recognized by government authorities and any additional 
social player participating in or being affected by the 
expansion project. 
Along this line the first requests from the different 
regional government are being formalised to implement the 
tool during the process of notification to people affected by 
the network expansion project and by the necessary field 
work; thereby a second stage is anticipated for continuation 
of further development of the tool. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T.Ramachandra, V.George, K.Vamsee, and G.Purnima, 
Decision support system for regional electricity planning. 
Energy Education Science and Technology, 17(1): 2006 
pp.17-25. 
[2] A. Kumar , S.D. Bhatnagar, and P.K. Saxena Integrated 
multimedia based intelligent group decision support system 
for electrical power network. AJIS (Australasian Journal of 
Information Systems). 9(2). May. 2002. 
[3] J. Shin, B. Yi, J. Song, J. Kang, J. Lee, and S. Cho, “A 
Development of the Mobile Computing System for Repair 
and Patrol of Electric Power Facilities,” in Fourth Annual 
ACIS International Conference on Computer and Information 
Science, 2005 pp. 622–627. 
[4] S. Xu, P. Yan, and X. Wang, “Application research of land 
resources decision support system based on spatial 
information,” in 2010 18th International Conference on 
Geoinformatics, 2010 pp. 1-5. 
[5] X. Du, L. Wang, and A. Sun, “The development and 
application of GIS on power marketing and expansion,” in 
Information Science and Engineering (ICISE), 2010 2nd 
International Conference on, pp. 4143 -4146, 2010. 
[6] Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. (OGC), "OpenGIS Web 
Map Server Implementation Specification" OGC 06-042, 
Mar. 2006, pp. 1-85 
[7] N.Voropai, “Main Principles of Electrical Network Expansion 
in a Market Environment of Russia,” in 2006 International 
Conference on Power System Technology, pp. 1-6, 2006. 
[8] Wikipedia contributors, Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/ (accessed September 16, 2011). 
[9] MOMENTUM.  Project to monitor the existing and on 
coming eParticipation projects co-funded by European 
Commission, http://www.ep-momentum.eu/ 
[10] PEP-NET. European network of all stakeholders active in the 
field of eParticipation. http://pep-net.eu/ 
[11] eGovernment at W3C: Better Government Through Better 
Use of the Web. http://www.w3.org/egov 
[12] Open Directory Project: Government Computerization 
Section.http://www.dmoz.org/Society/Issues/Science_and_Te
chnology/Computers/Government_Computerization/  
[13] E. Loukis, A. Xenakis, R. Peters, and Y. Charalabidis, “Using 
GIS tools to support e_participation - a systematic 
evaluation,” in 2nd IFIP WG 8.5 international conference on 
Electronic participation,  2010 pp.  197–210. 
[14] R. J. Holden and B. Karsh, “The Technology Acceptance 
Model: Its past and its future in health care,” Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 43(1), Feb. 2010. pp. 159-172. 
[15] K.Markellos, M. Katsis, and S. Sirmakessis, “Improving Web 
Content Delivery in eGoverment Applications,” in Tools and 
Applications with Artificial Intelligence, 2009, pp. 181-197. 
[16] Eurostat: Detailed statistics on the EU and candidate 
countries. http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu 
[17] L. Razmerita and N. Bjorn-Andersen, “Towards Ubiquitous 
e-Custom 
Services,” in 
IEEE/WIC/ACM 
International 
Conference on Web Intelligence, pp. 833–837, 2007. 
[18] International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization 
(ISO), 
"Geographic information - Geography Markup Language 
(GML)," ISO 19136:2007, Dec.2010. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

