Terrestrial Laser Scanner High Station to Control the Quality of DEM Data 
 
Juan F. Reinoso-Gordo 
Dept. Expresión Gráfica Arquitectónica y en la Ingeniería 
University of Granada, Spain 
Email: jreinoso@ugr.es 
 
 
Francisco J. Ariza-López, Antonio Mozas-Calvache, 
José L. García-Balboa,  J. Ruiz-Lendínez 
Dept. Ingeniería Cartográfica, Geodésica y Fotogrametría 
University of Jaén, Spain 
Email: fjariza@ujaen.es, antmozas@ujaen.es, 
jlbalboa@ujaen.es, lendinez@ujaen.es  
 
 
Abstract— Currently many Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) 
are derived from surveys obtained by LiDAR flights. The 
quality of both products is usually assessed using control point-
based techniques. Although it seems that this way of reporting 
quality is not fully adequate because the superficial nature of 
both the DEMs and the area covered by the LiDAR survey. 
For this last reason (the superficial nature of the objects to be 
controlled), 
according 
to 
the 
ideas 
contribution 
in 
Geoprocessing we propose to control the quality of the DEMs 
and LiDAR flights by means of a Terrestrial Laser Scanner 
(TLS) located on a pole at 6 or 7 m from the ground. We 
propose a configuration of 4 scan stations registered in a single 
point cloud and georeferenced, so that its accuracy is greater 
than the product that is intended to be controlled. 
Keywords- LiDAR; DEMs; quality; terrestrial scanner laser; 
georreference; accuracy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
It is very important to know the Light Detection And 
Ranging (LiDAR) surveys quality and the DEMs derived 
from them. These two types of geospatial data are the basis 
to develop a large number of products in sciences, such as 
Civil Engineering, the Environment, Hydrology, Geology, 
etc. But in order to derive quality products, such as drainage 
networks, flood zones, slope maps, etc. it is necessary to 
know the quality of the original data (LiDAR and DEMs). 
And to report the quality of LiDAR and DEMs it is 
necessary to carry out expensive quality controls [1]. 
Traditionally, quality assessment has been based on control 
points, as for example shown in [2], where conventional 
parameters are used (Root Mean Square Error RMSE), μ, σ, 
Normalized Median Absolute Deviation (NMAD), etc.), [4]. 
Many of these parameters assume normality in the data 
distribution, which is not usually true. This point-centered 
approach allows for numerous positional control methods 
[5], one of the most recent being the one proposed in [2], 
although on many occasions it requires the point to be 
controlled to be well identified. Additionally, if it is intended 
to evaluate the quality of a DEM, which has a superficial 
nature, it seems more appropriate that its positional accuracy 
be evaluated and controlled by a sample whose elements are 
also superficial. For this reason, in this study we propose to 
use patches to study the quality of both LiDAR and DEMs 
data. This approach is novel, since we have not found 
anything similar in the reviews we have carried out [6] on 
the study of the quality of both LiDAR or DEMs data. To 
test the application of this methodology, we propose to use 
an existing LiDAR flight that is controlled by a survey with 
TLS stationed on a pole at 6 and 7 m from ground. This 
greater height of the TLS setup tries to get a greater 
perpendicularity between the incident rays and the ground 
and consequently a lower precision dilution. 
The advantage from the above proposal compared to the 
traditional control points approach is that the patch includes 
more information than only one point, and the corresponding 
point cloud is able to derive different statistics that can be 
used in simulation parametric models. 
In section II it is explained the method and material used 
in this research from the LiDAR product to the reference 
captured data. In section III the results are shown and some 
comments about the method proposed and linked to accuracy 
are included. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHOD 
As a product to be controlled, an existing LiDAR flight 
will be used, which we will call (Mpro). This model was an 
experimental LiDAR flight with a density of 14 points per 
square meter as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. LiDAR sample for the Mpro 
 
The Reference Model (Mref) Figure 2 will be obtained 
by means of a Leica TLS (BLK360) whose distance 
measurement accuracy is 6 mm according to its 
specifications. The BLK360 will be mounted on a pole 6 or 7 
meters high and stabilized by a tripod that can be extended 
up to 4.5m. Usually it will not be necessary to use the tripod 
maximum extension; only in windy situations that can cause 
the pole to flex will the tripod extend to its maximum length. 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 2. Mref from the TLS stations registration 
 
The scanner was placed on the pole in an inverted 
position so that no shadow areas were created due to the 
scanner base, to get that setting an arm adapted to the pole 
was used to hold the scanner Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3. BLK36 scanner mounted on pole in tripod 
 
It is intended to take an area with such an extension that 
it allows to extract a square surface of 50x50 m; those 
dimensions will be the patch size that will be used to control 
both the LiDAR point cloud and its derived DEM. To get the 
patch, 4 scan stations are used divided in two groups. A 
group is composed of 2 scans where the vertical axis of the 
pole remains fixed while the position of the second scan in 
the group is achieved by turning the pole 180º on its own 
axis. In Figure 4 2 yellow pyramids are shown at one end of 
the line: the pyramids represent the 2 scan stations 
corresponding to group 1. At the other end of the line, the 2 
scans of group 2 will be located. 
 
Figure 4. Scan stations from the same group (yellow pyramids) 
 
The 4 scans were georeferenced and registered using the 
Cyclone Register 360 software, which required the 
coordinates of several targets, obtained through GNSS RTK 
in differential mode connected to the server through Ntrip. 
The Figure 5 shows the targets distribution and the errors 
obtained after registering. 
 
 
Figure 5. Registration using target coordinates 
 
III. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 
After filtering the registered point cloud we get the Mref 
that could be compared to the Mpro in order to compute the 
Mpro quality. As shown in Figure 6, the set error in every 
registration is smaller than 0.03 m and the RSME for target 
points is smaller than 0.04 m (Mref). Because the RSME for 
the Mpro is 0.15 m, according to the LiDAR flight 
specifications, the registered and filtered Mref is suitable for 
controlling the Mpro LiDAR quality. 
 
Figure 6. Mref and Mpro both LiDAR and derived DEMs 
 
 
Our proposal, also include controlling the DEM quality 
starting from the Mpro and Mref point cloud. Before 
computing the DEMpro quality it is necessary determine a 
method to pass from Mpro and Mref to DEMpro and 
DEMref. We propose a bilinear interpolation to derive both 
DEMs with a cell size of 0.1 m. 
The quality control can be performed from two point of 
view (altimetric and planimetric). The altimetric quality can 
be analyzed through the cumulative error distribution 
function and the planimetric one can be addressed by 
contours as proposed in [7]. 
The data used in this study was the experimental LiDAR 
flight from the area of Navarra in Spain (10391 km2) and the 
futures plans are to extend the methodology to Andalusia in 
Spain (87599 km2). 
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Y. Bühler, M. Marty, C. Ginzler, High resolution DEM 
generation in high-alpine terrain using airborne Remote 
Sensing techniques. Trans. in GID, vol. 16(5), pp. 635-647, 
2012.  
[2] ASPRS, ASPRS Positional Accuracy Standards for Digital 
Geospatial Data, PE&RS, 2015. 
[3] P. Zandbergen, Positional Accuracy of Spatial Data: Non-
Normal Distributions and a Critique of the National Standard 
for Spatial Data Accuracy. Transactions in GIS, 12(1), pp. 
103–130, 2008. 
[4] D. Maune, Digital elevation model technologies and 
applications. The DEM user’s manual. ASPRS, 2007 
[5] F. J. Ariza and A. D. Atkinson, Analysis of some Positional 
Accuracy 
Assessment 
Methodologies. 
Surveying 
Engineering, 134(2), pp. 45-54, 2008. 
[6] J. L. Mesa-Mingorance and F. J. Ariza-López, Accuracy 
Assessment of Digital Elevation Models (DEMs): A Critical 
Review of Practices of the Past Three Decades. Remote 
Sensing, 12(16), pp. 1-27, 2020. 
[7] J. F. Reinoso, An algorithm for automatically computing the 
horizontal shift between homologous contours from DTMs. 
ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, vol. 
66 (3), pp. 272-286, 2011 
 
 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

