A GIS-based Spatial Analysis of Health care Facilities in Yola, Nigeria 
 
Abdurrahman Belel Ismaila 
Department of Geodetic & Geographic Information 
Technologies 
Middle East Technical University 
Ankara, Turkey 
belelismaila@yahoo.com 
Nurünnisa Usul 
Department of Civil Engineering 
Middle East Technical University 
Ankara, Turkey 
nurusul@metu.edu.tr
 
 
Abstract—In recent years, health care provision policies in 
Nigeria have addressed distribution and spatial equity 
questions at a gross or regional level, but have neglected to 
address the distribution of health care facilities within cities. 
This paper explores the potential use of GIS for modeling the 
spatial distribution and accessibility of the health care delivery 
system in Yola. Several digital and non-digital data sets were 
collected and transformed into GIS data. Spatial analysis tools, 
including 
symbols, 
overlay 
operations, Kernel 
Density 
Estimations (KDE), buffer operations, and a raster calculator 
were used for the analysis. All identified public and private 
facilities were classified as primary, secondary, or tertiary. The 
majority of these facilities were concentrated in Jimeta. The 
study also produced the three following accessibility models: (i) 
the distance to the health facility, (ii) the health facility-to-
population ratios, and (iii) the physician-to-population ratios. 
Based on this analysis, it was concluded that a gross 
inadequacy exists in terms of health care facilities and 
physicians. Thus, these results identify the need for urgent 
improvements in the Yola health care delivery system, 
including the construction of new facilities, upgrades for 
existing facilities, increased physician employment, and the 
adoption of GIS technology by Yola health care planners and 
policy makers for effective planning and resource allocation.   
Keywords-GIS; Spatial analysis; Health care facilities; Yola; 
Nigeria. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The idea that all people are entitled to have their physical 
needs satisfied is at the heart of the human rights movement. 
This includes the right to survive and to live without 
preventable suffering. The Declaration of Human Rights 
details the right to adequate health in Article 25 as follows:  
“Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the 
health and well-being of himself and of his family, including 
food, clothing, housing and medical care…” [1]. 
 
Nigeria recognises the right to health and has committed 
itself to health protection by assuming obligations from 
international treaties and domestic legislations that mandate 
specific conduct regarding the health of individuals within 
Nigeria. Prior to the economic efforts in the mid-1980s, the 
health sector witnessed robust growth, mainly because of 
unfettered government support and assistance from 
international donor agencies. During this time frame, access 
to free health care was readily available at public hospitals 
and clinics in urban areas. However, this positive 
development suddenly stopped by 1985 because of multiple 
factors. Of these factors, the two most notable factors were 
the precipitous economic decline and the military usurpation 
of power. The military usurpation of power marked the 
genesis of many intractable challenges that impacted the 
Nigerian health system [2]. Since then, the geographic mal-
distribution of regional, urban, and rural health care 
facilities in Nigeria has occurred. Moreover, the existing 
facilities are haphazardly distributed. This situation may be 
corrected by using reliable data with the Geographic 
Information System (GIS). These systems contain important 
tools that can help in health delivery service planning and 
decision-making processes. These tools include database 
management, planning, risk assessment, service area 
mapping, location identification, and accessibility tools [3]. 
For example, [4, 5] conducted hospital service area 
delineations, [6] calculated changes in the person-to-bed 
ratios within hospital catchment areas, [7] proposed a new 
location-allocation structure for primary health care centres 
by using a multi-criteria approach in a GIS environment, 
and [8, 9] computed the accessibility of physician locations 
and the physician-to-population ratio. The same principle 
was applied by [10], except non-spatial factors of health 
care accessibility were added, such as age and social class. 
[11, 12] used gravity models to define the population flow 
to health centres and to produce a combined accessibility 
indicator of distance and availability. Several of these 
studies are well acknowledged by researchers from Western 
European and other developed countries. In contrast, most 
health authorities, practitioners and researchers in Nigeria 
have not explored the potential use of GIS for improving the 
performance of essential public health services. 
 
Thus, the aim of this study was to explore the use of GIS 
for modelling the spatial distribution and accessibility of the 
health care delivery system in Yola, Nigeria. This study was 
conducted to identify the underserved and over served areas 
and to create a model to guide health care planners and 
regulators in their creation of future proposals. The specific 
objectives of the study are to i) inventory all public and 
private health facilities, ii) create a GIS database of the 
existing health care centres, iii) characterise and identify the 
spatial pattern of the existing health care facilities, iv) map 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the  health facility services, and v) model the accessibility of 
health care facilities for Yola residents. 
 
Considering the advantages of GIS relative to traditional 
analysis methods, the major contribution of this study is to 
demonstrate that spatial GIS information can be used to 
reach desired quality decisions in a short time frame and at a 
low cost. In addition, GIS will enable the establishment of a 
health care facility database, which can be easily retrieved 
and analysed at any time. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Study Area 
Yola is the administrative capital of Adamawa State, 
Nigeria. Yola is a twin settlement that encompasses Jimeta 
(the administrative and commercial centre) and Yola-Town 
(the traditional settlement). Yola is located at a latitude of 
9°14″ N and a longitude of 12°28′ E (Figure 1), and has a 
total population of 395,871. Specifically, Jimeta and Yola-
Town have populations of 199,674 and 196,197, respectively 
[13]. The estimated population projection for 2011 is 
399,598.  
Yola has a tropical climate with rainy and dry seasons. 
The maximum and minimum temperatures can reach 40°C 
and 18°C in April and between December and January, 
respectively. The mean annual rainfall is less than 1,000 mm 
[14].  
 
 
Figure 1. The study area. 
B. Data and Methods 
Several digital and non-digital data sets that contain 
spatial data were collected through a literature review and 
from field work. The spatial data sets included analogue 
maps of the road network and administrative boundaries, 
global positioning system (GPS) coordinates of strategic 
road junctions (Table I) [15], and a Google earth satellite 
image of the study area. The GPS coordinates were used as a 
georeference for the analogue maps. The Google image was 
used to update the analogue maps and to identify the health 
facility locations. To depict the service supply environment, 
an inventory of all health care facilities (public and private) 
in the study area was conducted. This inventory was 
conducted by compiling an exhaustive list of facilities that 
were documented by [16] and the Adamawa State Ministry 
Health and Health Service Management Board in their 
official records. 
TABLE I.  
THE GPS COORDINATES OF THE YOLA ROAD JUNCTIONS 
[15]. 
Road Junctions 
Northing 
Easting 
Altitude 
(meters) 
Abuja Road/Modibbo Adama Way 
1019260 
221732 
123.72 
Abuja Road/Polo Road Junction 
1019062 
223734 
129.30 
Abuja Road/Modibbo Adama Way 
1018700 
224418 
134.42 
Modibbo Adama way/Bye pass 
Junction 
1017959 
225980 
143.72 
Mafias Quarters Road/Bye – pass 
1017551 
224029 
144.42 
Madaki Street/Bye – pass Junction 
1017397 
223757 
153.45 
Madaki Street/Modibbo Adama 
Way 
1018452 
223818 
153.02 
Sokoto Street/Modibbo Adama way 
1018549 
223374 
145.58 
Chiroma street/Modibbo Adama 
way 
1018473 
222953 
148.60 
Modibbo Raji/Bye – pass (Phase I 
Road Junction) 
1017483 
223298 
141.63 
Phase II Road/Bye – pass 
1017513 
227780 
146.74 
Abdullahi Bashir/Yola Road (80 
Unit Junction) 
1021929 
220437 
136.51 
Police Round About 
1024445 
220536 
157.21 
Justice Buba Ardo/Ibrahim Kashim 
(Gov’t House Junction) 
1024520 
221890 
169.30 
Zaki Crescent/Abdullahi Bashir 
Road 
1023508 
222318 
160.93 
This study used the ArcGIS® 9.3 software. Thus, all data 
sets were transformed into the ArcGIS®
i. 
The road network layer: describes the road network 
patterns and contains the road name, length, width, 
class, and condition. This layer enables health 
planners to understand the spread of a city network 
and can be overlaid onto a health centre location 
map to examine their relationships. 
 data format 
(shapefile). Each of the analogue maps was scanned and 
georeferenced to UTM zone 32 N and to the “Minna-
Nigeria” datum by using the GPS data (Table 1) as ground 
control points. In addition, the spatial data were captured and 
organised into different layers with on-screen digitisation as 
described below. Figure 2 shows the methodology schematic. 
Finally, a database was created and filled for each of the 
layers. 
ii. 
The health care facility location layer: contains a 
record of health centre locations in Yola. In addition, 
this layer contains the following attributes: (a) 
general information regarding the health facility 
(including name, ownership, ward and local 
government, legal status, and bed capacity), and (b) 
medical personnel data (for physicians, pharmacists, 
technicians, and nurses/midwives). Health centres 
can be classified by any of these attributes and then 
used for comparing the functional differences 
between the different health centres. 
iii. 
The administrative boundary or service extent of 
the health centre layer: is a polygon layer that 
divides Yola into 20 different administrative wards. 
Each ward shows the spatial extent of the health 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

centres. Attributes of population, area, and density 
were linked to this layer. Because population census 
data on a ward basis is lacking, the 2007 voters 
register from the Independent Nigerian Electoral 
Commission (INEC) [17] and the 2006 population 
census data of Yola were used to derive the ward 
populations. Population data help health planners to 
define the catchment area of each health centre and 
indicate whether these centres can offer adequately 
serve a population of a certain size.  
 
Figure 2. Methodology. 
C. Methods   
i. 
Symbols: are used on maps to represent various 
geographic phenomena that are related to location, 
distance, volume, movement, function, process, and 
correlation. These phenomena can be classified into 
the four following basic categories: point (non-
dimensional data), line (one-dimensional data), 
area (two-dimensional data), and volume (three-
dimensional data) [18]. In this study, the point 
category is used to represent the health care 
facilities. 
ii. 
Overlay operation: is a spatial operation that 
combines different geographic layers to generate 
new information. This operation is performed in 
raster and vector domains by using arithmetic, 
boolean, and relational operators [19]. However, in 
this study, this operation is only applied in the 
vector domain. Detailed descriptions of the overlay 
operations can be found in standard GIS textbooks, 
such as those by [20, 21, 22]. Furthermore, [23, 24] 
describe these principles in more detail and [25] 
detail some of the key overlay algorithms. 
iii. 
Kernel density estimation (KDE): estimates the 
density by using a “kernel function” K and a 
smoothing parameter h. Generally, the estimated 
density does not depend on the kernel function 
choice, but is strongly affected by the smoothing 
parameter value. Larger smoothing parameters 
obscure small irregularities and smaller smoothing 
parameters result in a bumpy density surface [26]. 
There are two types of KDE functions, fixed and 
adaptive kernels. The fixed kernel function is 
usually less computationally intensive than the 
adaptive kernel function and uses an optimal spatial 
kernel 
(bandwidth) 
over 
the 
study 
space. 
Unfortunately, this method produces high local 
estimation variance in areas where data are sparse, 
which may mask subtle local variations in areas 
where data are dense [27, 28, 29]. In contrast, the 
adaptive kernel function ensures that a certain 
number of nearest neighbours are considered as 
local samples, which better represents the degree of 
spatial heterogeneity [28]. In this study, the 
Gaussian adaptive kernel function found in the 
ArcGIS®
( )
2
1
1
n
is
i
d
s
k
r
r
λ
π
=


=




∑
 9.3 Spatial Analyst Tool was used. The 
general form of the KDE is given by [30] as follows:  
 
 
 
     (1) 
where ( )
λ s
is the density at location s, r is the search radius 
(bandwidth) of the KDE (only points within r are used to 
estimate ( ),
λ s
and k is the weight of point i at a distance 
of
is
d , which is used to locate s. 
iv. 
Buffer: involves drawing an Euclidean buffer 
around each facility. Areas within the buffer limits 
are considered accessible to a facility, while those 
outside of the limits are considered inaccessible. 
Areas where overlapping buffers are abundant may 
represent areas of over service (and vice-versa) [31]. 
This method can provide a useful access indicator 
for certain circumstances [32]. For example, this 
method is useful for assessing the feasible walking 
range of facilities. However, for many purposes, 
this method does not sufficiently account for the 
constraints of availability or transport infrastructure. 
v. 
The Raster calculator: allows one to create and 
execute a Map Algebra expression that will output a 
raster. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Classification and spatial distribution of health care 
facilities in Yola  
Three categories of health care facilities exist in Yola. 
These categories include primary, secondary, and tertiary 
facilities. Furthermore, these facilities are owned by Federal, 
State, and Local governments, and by private individuals or 
organisations.  
i. 
Primary health care: provision of health care at this 
level is largely the responsibility of local 
governments and is supported by the State ministry 
of health.  
ii. 
Secondary health care: this level of health care 
provides specialised services to patients who are 
referred from the primary health care level. These 
services are provided through out-patient and in-
patient hospital services, which include general 
medical, 
surgical, and 
paediatric 
cases 
and 
community health services. Secondary health care is 
available at the district, divisional and zone levels of 
the State. Adequate supportive services, such as 
laboratory, diagnostics, blood bank, rehabilitation 
and physiotherapy are also provided.  
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

iii. 
Tertiary health care: consists of highly specialised 
services, such as orthopaedic, eye, psychiatric, and 
paediatric cases. These services are provided by 
education and at specialist hospitals. Appropriate 
support 
services 
are 
incorporated 
into 
the 
development of these tertiary facilities to provide 
effective referral services. There are two such 
facilities in Yola, the Federal Medical Centre (FMC) 
and the Specialists Hospital. 
Generally, maps that depict the locations of health 
facilities are very useful for health planners. For example, 
these maps help planners to quickly identify the spatial 
distribution of health facilities within a community. In 
addition, these maps allow planners to determine which 
areas lack such facilities. However, such maps do not exist 
in Yola. Using Symbology from the Spatial Analyst Tool, 
the health care facilities in Yola were mapped based on 
different classes (i.e., dispensaries, clinics, and general 
hospitals) and ownership (public and private). Presently, 
there are 56 health care facilities in Yola, of which 64% are 
public and 36% are private. Forty of these facilities are 
located in Jimeta (i.e., the administrative and commercial 
centre). It can also be observed that the northern and 
western parts of Jimeta, and southern part of Yola-Town are 
underserved (Figure 3).   
 
Figure 3. Public health care centres in Yola. 
From Figure 4, it can be observed that only three private 
health care facilities are found in Yola-Town. This means 
that the residents of Yola-Town have very few options in 
terms of private health care services or rather they have to 
travel beyond 10 kilometers to access these facilities in 
Jimeta. This is quite different for residents of Jimeta that 
have access within a distance of less than 2,000 m or few 
kilometers. Though, the majority of the facilities is 
concentrated in the central part of the city. 
 
Figure 4. Private health care centres in Yola. 
In addition, a KDE was applied by using a search radius 
of 1,000 m and a cell size output of 100 to determine the 
density of health care facilities in Yola (Figure 5). The 
results showed a high concentration of health care facilities 
in Jimeta, especially in the city centre (i.e., a lopsided 
distribution pattern which hinders good access to health care 
service in the city).  
 
Figure 5. Density surface of health care centres in Yola. 
B. Population distribution 
Population variables impact the level, nature, type, and 
variety of health service demands and the resulting service 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

provisions. Thus, knowledge regarding these demographic 
variables is essential for the development and delivery of 
health services because it is used to plan and target service 
provisions. This observation is particularly true for 
population based and location based health care planning and 
community health programs [33, 34].  
In an attempt to understand the spatial distribution of the 
Yola population, the projected 2009 population based on the 
political ward was used to generate a population density 
surface by applying the KDE. After several trials, a search 
radius of 1,500 m with a cell size output of 100 was selected 
as the most suitable for this application. The result showed 
that the high density area cover parts of the Rumde, Yelwa, 
Alkalawa, Luggere, Nassarawo and Doubeli wards in Jimeta. 
In addition, the Mbamoi, Makama A and B, and Toungo 
wards were identified in Yola-Town (Figure 6). As expected, 
these wards are generally high density residential areas, 
while the low population density areas comprised of medium 
and low density residential areas. The spatial pattern of the 
Yola population indicated an increased density in the old city 
centres and a decreased density in the southern and western 
areas of Jimeta and in the southern area of Yola-Town. This 
increasing population density in the old city centres suggests 
that the demand for health care services in these areas is high 
relative to other parts of the city. 
 
 
Figure 6. Population density surface of Yola. 
C. Examining the accessibility of health facilities 
The simplest definition of accessibility for a given 
location considers how easy it is to get to the location. 
Defining accessibility to health care centres is an important 
task for health planners [9]. The concept of health care 
accessibility is one of the most analysed and debated 
concepts in public health [35, 36, 37]. The debate on this 
issue was framed by researchers in terms of economic, 
structural, infrastructural, and behavioural aspects. This 
study is concerned with geographic proximity, which is a 
form of potential spatial accessibility [35, 36].  
i) 
Proximity to health facilities 
In this study, a buffer analysis is applied to define the 
proximity to health care facilities. Buffers were created 
around all of the facilities in the study area by using the 
Municipal planning standard with a radius of 1 kilometre in 
the catchment area of the health care facilities (Figure 7). 
The results show that some areas in Yola are located outside 
of the 1 kilometre accessibility zones, especially in the 
western and northern parts of Jimeta. In addition, it is clear 
that the existing health care centres must serve a catchment 
area that is larger than the standard size. Based on this 
output, different parts of Yola were determined to have low 
health care accessibility. Health care planners can use this 
model to make decisions regarding where to build new 
health centres in Yola. For example, areas beyond the 1,000 
m accessibility zones can be used as a reference for 
determining potential locations for additional health care 
centres in Yola.  
 
Figure 7. Proximity to health care facilities in Yola from using the Euclidian 
buffer. 
ii) Density of physician in Yola 
An adequate supply of well-trained and geographically 
distributed doctors is critical for providing patients access to 
high-quality medical care. Moreover, physicians make many 
of the key decisions regarding the diagnosis and treatment of 
patients, and they orchestrate the demand for human and 
other resources in health care [38]. Figure 8 is a KDE map 
showing the density of physicians based on physician 
available at each health care centre. Although 71.43% of 
health care facilities are located in Jimeta, Yola-Town has a 
higher density of physicians. This distribution pattern is 
attributed to two factors. First, if a health care centre has a 
larger number of physicians, then its surrounding areas 
would have a higher provider density. This scenario was in 
the case in Yola-Town where the FMC had three times as 
many available physicians than were available in the 
Specialist Hospital that is located in Jimeta. Secondly, the 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

closer the health centres are to each other, the higher the 
provider density. This scenario was mainly found in Jimeta, 
where several health centres are located close to each other 
that have a comparatively larger supply of physicians than 
those located in other parts of the city, except for the FMC. 
In addition, it is important to note that areas with lowest 
physicians (eastern and western) parts of Jimeta comprised 
of medium and low density residential areas. On the other 
hand, it is the high and medium residential densities in the 
case of Yola-Town.  
 
Figure 8. Density of physicians per square kilometre. 
D. Health centre-to-population ratio 
One way of define the accessibility of health centres is to 
identify the provider-to-population ratios. This measure is 
useful for gross supply comparisons between geopolitical 
units and service areas and is used by policy analysts to set 
the minimum local supply standards and to identify under-
served areas [11]. GIS can be used to compute these ratios by 
using the KDE, as in [36], or the buffer and overlay 
functions, as in [8]. 
The health care centre density and population results 
(Figures 5 and 6) was analysed by using a raster calculator 
tool to perform mathematical operations. This type of GIS 
function was used to assign weights to the raster data for 
suitability analysis. The population density (in persons per 
square kilometre) was divided by the density of health care 
centres per square kilometre. This step was achieved by 
using the ArcGIS® model builder, which was based on the 
arithmetic overlay function (Figure 9). The output showed 
that the majority of in the Yola areas are not well served by 
health care facilities. This scenario reflects the imbalance of 
health care facility provisions in the central part of Jimeta 
and Yola-Town, which have larger population sizes but a 
limited supply of health care centres. Thus, the existing 
model(s) that were used by health care planners to providing 
health care facilities in Yola failed to achieve its ultimate 
goal. Therefore, several parts of Yola need additional health 
care facilities. These areas are located in the northern and 
southern city central districts. This model will be useful if 
local health authorities plan to increase the supply of health 
care facilities. 
 
Figure 9. The Population-to- Health centre ratios. 
E. Physicians-to-population ratio 
For most developing countries, service use and health 
status data are lacking at an individual level. Thus, the use 
of the physician/population ratio as a proxy to measure the 
availability of health services and to assess health needs is 
tested here [38]. Providing the appropriate number of 
physicians at each location is a prime concern of most 
health planners, especially when planning the future 
development of health care systems [39].  
Using the population and physician density results 
(Figures 6 and 8), the same approach that was discussed in 
section D was applied. The output showed that a gross 
shortage of physicians occurs in both Jimeta and Yola-Town 
(Figure 10).  
 
Figure 10. The Population-to-Physicians ratios. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

IV. 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
In this study, we explore the potential use of GIS for 
modeling the spatial distribution and accessibility of the 
health care delivery system in Yola. Several digital and non-
digital data sets were collected and transformed into GIS 
data. The GIS tools used in this study included symbols, 
overlays, KDEs, buffers, and a raster calculator. 
Based on the analysis in this study, a gross inadequacy 
of health care facilities and physicians occurs in Yola. Thus, 
this study recommends the following: i) The urgent 
improvement of the health care delivery system in Yola for 
the benefit of the general public should be conducted by 
providing new health care facilities, upgrading some of the 
low level health care centres to a higher level, rehabilitating 
the existing facilities to an international standard, employing 
more qualified physicians and other supporting personnel, 
providing incentives for private individuals or organisations 
to encourage investment in the health sector, and by 
formulating new policies. ii) The adoption of GIS 
technology by health care planners in Yola. 
The study demonstrated that access to spatial GIS 
information and analysis will help planners make better 
decisions quicker and at a lower cost than required for the 
traditional methods. In addition, GIS will enable the 
establishment of a health care facilities database that can 
easily be retrieved for analysis at any time.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
A.B. Ismaila wishes to thank The Scientific and 
Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBİTAK) for 
supporting him during his PhD program.  
REFERENCES 
[1] United Nations (UN), “Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights”, G.A. res. 217A (III), U.N. Doc A/810, 1948. 
[2] O. Nnamuchi, Kleptocracy and its Many Faces: The 
Challenges of Justifiability of the Right to Health care in 
Nigeria, Journal of African Law, vol. 5, no. 2(1), pp. 1-42, 
2008. 
[3] K. Prathumchai and L. Samarakoo, 2003, “Applications of 
GIS 
in 
Health 
care 
Planning 
of 
Lao 
PDR”, 
http://www.geoinfo.ait.ac.th/research/researchproject.php#20
03 (Accessed on 29/09/2012. 
[4] A. P. Marks,  G. I. Thrall, and M. Arno, “Siting hospitals to 
provide cost-effective health care”, GeoInfo Systems,vol. 2, 
no. 8, pp. 58-66, 1992.  
[5] S. J. Walsh, P. H. Page, and W. M. Gesler, “Normative 
models and health care planning: Network based simulations 
within a geographic information system environment”, Health 
Services Research, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 243-260, 1997. 
[6] M. Zwarenstein, D. Krige and B. Wolff, “The use of a 
geographic information system for hospital catchment area 
research in Natal/KwaZulu”, South African Medical Journal, 
vol. 80, no. 10, pp. 497-500, 1991. 
[7] P. Mitropoulos, and I. Mitropoulos, I. Giannikos, and A. 
Sissouras, “A biobjective model for the locational planning of 
hospitals and health centres”, Health care and Management 
Science, vol. 9, pp. 171–179, 2006. 
[8] W. Luo, “Using a gis-based floating catchment method to 
assess areas with shortage of physicians”, Health & Place, 
vol. 10, pp. 1-11, 2004. 
[9] A. A. Murad, A gis application for modeling accessibility to 
health care centres in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, In GIS for Health 
and the Environment Development in the Asia-Pacific 
Region, edited by P. C. Lai, and S. H. Mak, Springer: Berlin, 
2007, pp. 57-70. 
[10] F. Wang, and W. Luo, “Assessing spatial and non spatial 
factors for health care access: towards an integrated approach 
to defining health professional shortage areas”. Health & 
Place, vol. 11, pp. 131-146, 2004. 
[11] M. Guagliardo, C. Ronzio, I. Cheung, E. Chacko, and J. 
Joseph, Physician accessibility: an urban case study of 
pediatric providers, Health & Place, vol. 10, pp. 273-283, 
2003. 
[12] A. A. Murad, Creating a gis application for health services at 
Jeddah city, Computers in Biology and Medicine, vol. 37, pp. 
879-889, 2007. 
[13] National Bureau of Statistics, “Annual Abstract of Statistics 
2006”, Federal Republic of Nigeria, 2006. 
[14] A. A. Adebayo and A. L. Tukur, “Adamawa State in Maps”, 
Paraclete Publishers, Yola, Nigeria, 1999. 
[15] M. A. Husain, and A. B. Ismaila, “The routines and 
requirements for the creation of a geographical information 
system (GIS): The case of GIS database for the Water Board 
Corporation, Yola”, Environ: Journal of Environmental 
Studies, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 47 -56, 2006. 
[16] National 
Bureau 
of 
Statistics, 
“Directory 
of 
health 
establishments in Nigeria, Federal Republic of Nigeria”, 
2007. 
[17] INEC 2007, Official records, INEC Adamawa State Chapter, 
Unpublished. 
[18] J. K. Wright, 'Crossbreeding' Geographical Quantities, 
Geographical Review, 45, 52-65, 1955.  
[19] ICMOD, http://geoportal.icimod.org/TrainingandEducations/ 
GISforBeginners/p1ch7/ (Accessed on 10/09/2012). 
[20] P. A. Burrough, R.A. McDonnell, Principles of geographical 
information systems: New York, Oxford University Press, 
1998. 
[21] I. Heywood, S. Cornelius, S. Carver, Introduction to 
geographical information systems. Pearson Prentice Hall, 
New York, 2006. 
[22] P. A. Longley, M. F. Goodchild, D. J. Maguire, D. W. Rhind, 
Geographical information systems, West Sussex, England, 2nd
[23] Y. Chou, Exploring spatial analysis in geographic information 
systems. Onward Press, Santa Fe, 1997. 
 
edition: John Wiley and Sons, 2005. 
[24] D. O’Sullivan, D. J. Unwin, Geographic information analysis, 
John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersy, USA, 2003. 
[25] S. Wise, GIS basics, Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2002. 
[26] N. Donthu, R. T. Rust, Estimating geographic customer 
densities using kernel density estimation, Markering Science, 
vol. 8, no. 2, pp.191-203, 1989. 
[27] A. S. Fotheringham, C. Brunsdon, M. E. Charlton, 
Geographically weighted regression: the analysis of spatially 
varying relationships. John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester, 
UK, 2002. 
[28] A. Páez, T. Uchida, K. Miyamoto, A general framework for 
estimation 
and inference 
of 
geographically 
weighted 
regression models: 2. spatial association and model 
specification tests. Environment and Planning A, vol. 34, no. 
5, pp. 883-904, 2002. 
[29] E. D. Yaylaci, A. B. Ismaila, O. Uşkay, Ş. Düzgün, Spatial 
analyses of electricity supply and consumption in Turkey for 
effective energy management and policy-making, Energy and 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Natural Resources Policy-Distributional Justace, Springer-
Verlag, p.151-166, 2011. 
[30] Z. Xie, J. Yan, Kernel Density Estimation of traffic accidents 
in a network space. Computers, Environment and Urban 
Systems, vol. 32, pp. 396–406, 2008. 
[31] J. Spencer, and G. Angeles, “Kernel density estimation as a 
technique for assessing availability of health services in 
Nicaragua”, Health Service Outcomes Research Method, vol. 
7, pp. 145–157, 2007. 
[32] C. S. Phibbs, and H. S. Luft, “Correlation of travel time on 
roads versus straight-line distance”, Medical Care Research 
and Review, vol. 52, pp. 532-542, 1995. 
[33] D. A. Dzewaltowski, P. A. Estabrooks, L. M. Klesges, S. 
Bull, and R. E. Glasgow, Behavior change intervention 
research in community settings: how generalizable are the 
results?, Health Promotion International, vol. 19, pp. 235–
245, 2004.  
[34] D. A. Yeboah, Arab studies quarterly,  http://www.britannica. 
com/bps/additionalcontent/18/25057327/IMPACT-OF-
POPULATION-VARIABLES-ON-HEALTH-SERVICES-
DEMAND-AND-PROVISION-IN-THE-UNITED-ARAB-
EMIRATES (Accessed 05/01/2010), 2007. 
[35] A. E. Joseph, D. R. Phillips, “Accessibility and utilization: 
geographical perspectives on health care delivery”, Harper & 
Row, New York, 1984. 
[36] M. F. Guagliardo, Spatial accessibility of primary care: 
concepts, methods and challenges, International Journal 
Health Geography, vol. 3, no. 3, 2004, doi:  10.1186/1476-
072X-3-3. 
[37] N. Chayovan, A. Hermalin, and J. Knodel, “Measuring 
accessibility to family planning services in rural Thailand”, 
Stud. Fam. Planning, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 201-211, 1984. 
[38] OECD, “Health at a glance 2007 - OECD Indicators, 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development”, 
2007. 
[39] T. L. Hall, “Why plan human resources for health?”, Human 
Resources for Health Development Journal, vol. 2, pp. 77-86, 
1998.
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

