A Method to Identify Aggressive Driver Behaviour
Based on Enriched GPS Data Analysis
Marcio Geovani Jasinski
Department of Applied Research
Senior Sistemas – SA
Blumenau, Santa Catarina – Brazil
Email: marcio.jasinski@senior.com.br
Fabiano Baldo
Computer Science Department
Santa Catarina State University – UDESC
Joinville, Santa Catarina – Brazil
Email: fabiano.baldo@udesc.br
Abstract—The main cause of road casualties is related to the
driver behavior. The identiﬁcation of unsafe driving is an im-
portant step in order to take actions to change this situation. A
novel approach to address driver behavior is called naturalistic
driving. This approach tries to understand drivers’ behavior
during everyday trips by analyzing their moving recorded data
through non intrusive GPS gathering devices. Based on that
premise, this paper presents a method aimed at identifying
aggressive behavior in order to reduce the risk of accidents.
As a consequence, it is expected to improve drivers awareness
about theirs drive behaviors as well as to notify transportation
and insurance companies about the driver’s way of driving. The
proposed method is composed of four steps, which includes data
gathering, pre-processing, semantic enrichment and Trajectory
Aggressivity Indicator (TAI) calculation. This indicator varies
from 0 to 100 where 0 means no aggressive behavior and
100 means very aggressive behavior. The main contribution is
to provide an adaptive approach that considers environmental
conditions as weather and trafﬁc to better estimate the TAI.
Preliminary results pointed out that the method can identify
aggressive behavior almost in a real-time manner, which might
be used to notify dangerous behavior before an accident happen.
Keywords–Naturalistic driving; Driver proﬁle; Aggressive driv-
ing; GPS; Speed; Acceleration.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The number of fatal casualties on road crashes reached 1.25
million people in 2015 and it is the main cause of death among
people aged 15 – 29 years old [1]. More than 95% of such
accidents are caused or contributed by driver behavior factors
[2]. However, even with several governmental actions devoted
to reducing trafﬁc accidents, until now there is no signal of
trafﬁc deaths declination worldwide [1].
As driver’s behavior is the main cause of road casualties,
the identiﬁcation of unsafe driving attitudes is an important
step towards taking actions to reduce them. Several methods
have been studied in order to obtain a better understanding
of driver behavior. However, as pointed out by Ellison et
al. [3], research methods using demographic proﬁles, self-
reported behavior and personal risk perceptions tend to assume
homogeneity of behavior within groups. Moreover, self-reports
and questionnaires are sensitive to user perspective, which
might give a false sense of secure/insecure manners.
A novel approach to address driver behavior is called
Naturalistic Driving Study (NDS). The NDS can be deﬁned as
“A study undertaken to provide insight into driver behaviour
during everyday trips by recording details of the driver, the
vehicle and the surroundings through nonintrusive data gath-
ering equipment and without experimental control” [4]. This
approach uses equipment like GPS device, video camera and
audio recorder to obtain daily data. However, it is important to
enforce the unobtrusive requirement in order to gather natural
behavior for long periods of time.
The most common approaches to naturalistic behavior
analysis are based on Global Positioning System (GPS) data
and video recording. This work analyses naturalistic driving
over data from GPS devices embedded into a smartphone. This
approach has been chosen because smartphones are largely
used by drivers and have all the required features to collect
and transfer positioning information. In this work, these data
concern the so-called trajectories.
Although GPS data already bring meaningful trajectory
information, when combined with other extra information it
is possible to leverage the positioning contextualization. Some
of the information that can contribute to bringing context of
driving movement are weather condition and road speed limits.
Such information is crucial to better calculate the driver’s
behavior indicator. So, in this work it is assumed that the
identiﬁcation of drivers’ behavior can be better deﬁned when
GPS trajectory data are enriched with weather and speed limit
contextualization.
Based on the aforementioned assumptions, the objective
of this work is to identify drivers’ aggressive behavior based
on the analysis of their trajectories enriched with weather
and speed limit data, using a naturalistic approach. As a
consequence, it is expected to contribute to improve drivers
awareness about theirs driving behaviors as well as to notify
transportation and insurance companies about the driver’s way
of driving.
This paper is structured as follows. Section II presents the
related works. Section III details the proposed method and
its conceptual characteristics. Section IV presents the results
assessment. Finally, Section V contains conclusions and further
works.
II.
RELATED WORK
Driving behavior is a subject of extensive research in
psychology, as stated in works like [5] and [6]. In contrast,
naturalistic driving research is relatively new, but are gaining
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 1. Proposed method to evaluate driver’s trajectories
special attention due to the emerging of new technologies to
data gathering. In this section, the most signiﬁcant works on
natural driving will be discussed.
Carboni [7] proposes a method that identiﬁes drivers’ be-
haviours considering three anomalies over accelerations and di-
rections: a) abrupt movements (acceleration and deceleration);
b) lane changes; c) Excessive speed. As result, the algorithm
is capable of classifying drivers in the following categories:
careful, distracted, dangerous and very dangerous. It was
evaluated using a low number of trajectories collected from
buses and cars in a very restricted area. Its main contribution is
the identiﬁcation of anomalous behavior, drivers classiﬁcation
and dangerous places.
Ellison et al. [8] propose the Driver Behavior Proﬁle
(DBP) evaluated through the Temporal and Spatial Identiﬁers
(TSI) indicator. The temporal factors considered are purpose,
date and time, the day of week and number of passengers.
Behavioral factors considered are speed, acceleration and de-
celeration. Results indicate that different road environments
elicit different behavioral responses. The authors also suggest
that DBP might be used to test the effectiveness of changes to
infrastructure, education campaigns or legislation proposals.
Siqueira [9] evaluates chase behavior comparing the trajec-
tory of two objects. The proposed method considers a target
and a pursuer trajectory and compares both against space and
time using algorithms to identify pursuit (TRA-CHASE) and
another to classify pursuit type (CLASS-CHASE). Its main
contribution is the deﬁnition of the following chase patterns:
a) Detective; b) Meeting; c) Capture; d) Assault; e) Hunting.
Based on the literature review, it can be seen that the
assessment of drivers’ behaviours using their trajectory data
is a fresh and open research ﬁeld. Moreover, as far as it was
possible to search, it was not found any work that addresses
the identiﬁcation of aggressivity proﬁles based on weather and
local speed constraints on a near real time manner as it is
proposed in this work.
III.
PROPOSED METHOD
As showed in Figure 1, the proposed method is composed
of four phases: i) Data gathering; ii) Pre-processing; iii)
Segment enrichment and iv) Aggressiveness evaluation. The
following subsection describes in details each one of this
phases.
The method enriches and evaluate a trajectory trough a set
of a segment of 1 km long. Thus, a trajectory with 25 km
will be composed of 25 segments. Every segment is enriched
individually with its own speed limit, weather details and
important places.
The aggressive behavior is evaluated considering speed and
acceleration maneuvers. To obtain an aggressiveness index, a
speed and acceleration stratiﬁcation is proposed. The speed is
based on the trafﬁc violations of the Brazilian Transit Code
(BTC). An incremental ﬁne is issued to the driver accordingly
the percentage of excessive speed based on the local speed
limit. Table I presents the current penalties of BTC with
respective ﬁne and penalties.
TABLE I. SPEED VIOLATION AND FINES FROM BRAZILIAN
TRAFFIC CODE
Violation
Severity
Fine
Up to 20%
Medium
USD 25.37 / 4 points
From 20% up to 50%
Severe
USD 37.91 / 5 points
Over 50%
Very Severe
USD 171.34 / 7 points / Suspension
Several researchers addressed acceleration limits associated
with causalities and high risk of being involved in an accident.
According to [10] a risk of collision starts from −4m/s2.
Similar conclusions were obtained by [11] with a risk of
accident involvement around −5m/s2. Considering mentioned
works, we propose a stratiﬁcation of acceleration according to
Table II. A total of eight groups is considered to evaluate driver
speeding up and breaking.
TABLE II. ACCELERATION DISTRIBUTION BY SEVERITY
Severity
Acceleration m/s2
Dangerous
[-9.0 a -14.0]
Aggressive
[-5.5 a -9.0)
Normal
[-3.0 a -5.5)
Safe
[0 a -3.0)
Safe
[0 a 1.5)
Normal
[1.5 a 3.5)
Aggressive
[3.5 a 7.0)
Dangerous
[7.0 a 12.0]
A. Data Gathering
The data gathering is enabled by an Android application
that periodically collects the driver’s current geo-positioning
and time. The application was developed to collect data as a
background service using one second time interval to request
the GPS sensor as well as the clock. This strategy enforces the
approach to register the driving behavior as more naturalistic
as possible because the driver does not need to open the
application on every journey since it is always tracking the
smartphone position. The collected data is sent as a stream
over Internet, or mobile communication like 3G or 4G, to the
server periodically within intervals of 60 seconds.
B. Pre-processing
The pre-processing phase includes trajectory cleaning, seg-
mentation and transportation mean identiﬁcation. The trajec-
tory cleaning is performed by the DBScan clustering algo-
rithm. It is a density based algorithm proposed by Ester et
al. [12], which classiﬁes every point as CORE, BORDER or
NOISE. Such classiﬁcation is based on the input parameters
minPts and ϵ. Every point which has at least minPts in a
ϵ radius will be classiﬁed as CORE. A BORDER is a point
which does not satisfy the CORE criteria but it is connected to
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

a CORE. Every point which is neither a CORE nor a BORDER
is classiﬁed as NOISE.
Regarding
the
trajectory
segmentation,
the
proposed
method considers two ways of segmenting a trajectory. The
ﬁrst one is a result of the absence of GPS signal, which
might occur due to several situations like the impossibility of
GPS device to contact enough satellites, localization service
disabled or smartphone turned off. As consequence of the
inability to collect GPS coordinates, the data will have a time
interval without any position. Based on empirical evaluation,
it was deﬁned a number of points threshold (NPT=10) and
a time frame (TF=30s) to identify time stops and thus split
a trajectory into sub-trajectories. A stop is considered if the
number of coordinates collected during latest TF is less or
equal to NPT.
The second way of segmentation is used to ﬁnd situations
where the driver remains stopped in a certain place for a
predeﬁned time interval. This segmentation tries to identify
whether the driver is moving or not (i.g. fueling at gas a
station). Based on empirical evaluation over data previously
collected, it has been deﬁned 300 meters as distance threshold
within 5 minutes of time threshold. Those values are able to
identify a fast food stop and still avoid to split the trajectory
in every semaphore.
The last step of the pre-processing is the identiﬁcation
and distinction of transportation mean between Motorized
Transport (MT) and Non-Motorised Transport (NMT). This is
necessary since the data gathering is performed by smartphone
and thus several means of transportation are presented in the
trajectories. The proposed method applies a classiﬁer in order
to identify the transport mean splitting trajectory accordingly.
The classiﬁer was trained with 55% of the Geolife dataset[13]
using the J48 algorithm from Weka [14]. The output from J48
is a decision tree which indicates that motorized movements
usually will present speed over 15 km/h. However, during a
heavy trafﬁc, semaphores and crossings it is possible that an
MT coordinates might be confused as an NMT. To ensure that
trajectory will not be split on every crossing, a threshold for
MT and NMT was deﬁned based on data gathered during real
experiments. A minimum of 5 coordinates over 15 km/h is
enough to identify a MT while a minimum of 15 is necessary
to detect an NMT.
C. Semantic Enrichment
The semantic enrichment intends to attach additional in-
formation in the trajectory in order to help the calculation of
more accurate driver’s aggressive behaviour. There are several
external factors that affect trafﬁc safety and that can not be
extracted by GPS device itself. Some of the currently supported
ones are road speed limit, weather conditions and important
places surrounding. These factors impact in the aggressiveness
analysis over speed and acceleration limits.
There are three types of trajectory semantic enrichment
currently supported: weather, road speed limit and important
place. Every semantic element impacts the aggressiveness
analysis over speed and acceleration.
During a trajectory, the driver may travel through different
roads with different speed limits. To gather this information
the method makes requests to external APIs of services like
Google Maps. However, as the speed limit of certain roads
would not be available through an API service, several strate-
gies are applied in order to deﬁne to speed limit:
•
Speed limit API – Consists of requesting to a special-
ized web service the speed limit of a speciﬁc road;
•
Inverse geocoding and database query – The road
name is obtained through inverse geocoding. Thus,
a query is performed against an internal database
of registered roads and its respective speed limit is
retrieved.
•
Inverse geocoding and road type deﬁnition – Roads
which are not registered in the internal database have
the speed limit deﬁned accordingly to its preﬁxes. In
Brazil, there are ﬁve type of roads formerly deﬁned
by national authorities as shown in Table III.
•
Average speed evaluation – This approach guess the
maximum speed based on previous segment speed
average. The speed will be limited according to Table
III, which means that a segment with an average speed
of 33 km/h will be classiﬁed as max speed of 40 km/h.
TABLE III. SPEED LIMIT BASED ON BRAZILIAN TRAFFIC CODE
Road Type
Speed Limit
Highway
110 km/h
Roadway
80 km/h
Arterial roadway
60 km/h
Municipal streets
40 km/h
Local streets
30 km/h
Although there is not formal law deﬁning the impact of
weather conditions on the road, the public authorities are
allowed to issue a ﬁne in case of driver conducts the vehicle in
a dangerous manner. The BTC stands that “a ﬁne is applicable
if the driver is driving with incompatible speed considering
the road conditions”. Weather is one of the aspects that affects
the road conditions and hence the driving safety. In order to
consider the weather in driver’s behaviour, every segment is
enriched with weather conditions through calls to Weather API.
Depending on the weather condition, a reduction over speed
limit and acceleration is applied according to Table IV and
Table V.
TABLE IV. WEATHER IMPACT OVER ROAD SPEED LIMIT
Weather
Speed Reduction factor
Drizzle
10%
Light rain
15%
Moderate rain
20%
Heavy intensity rain
25%
Very heavy rain
30%
The speed reduction is based on the principle that traveling
at 95 km/h on a sunny day is secure considering a highway
with speed limit of 110 km/h. However, such speed might
be dangerous under heavy rain. Since it has not been found
speciﬁc reduction values in the literature, Table IV has been
deﬁned based on automotive specialists recommendations [15].
The wet road also has an important impact on the car
friction to gain speed and mainly to reduce speed. Hence,
the same acceleration intensity for the dry road will be more
dangerous if applied to the wet road. To obtain the reduction
factors presented on Table V a model based on Newtonian
classical physics was designed. This model considered a well
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 2. Important place mismatch by street name
balanced car and a simple friction model between the road
and the car tires. As result, the relationship of acceleration
and road friction was obtained according to (1), where a is the
acceleration, µ is the road friction and g is the gravity of earth.
Applying a road friction coefﬁcient for each weather condition
(1) it was possible to obtain the acceleration reduction factor
for each one of them, respectively.
TABLE V. WEATHER IMPACT OVER DRIVER ACCELERATION
Weather
Friction
Reduction factor
Dry weather
0.85
-
Drizzle
0.80
6%
Light rain
0.7
18%
Moderate rain
0.6
29%
Heavy intensity rain
0.5
41%
Very heavy rain
0.4
53%
a = gµ/2
(1)
Finally, as last semantic enrichment, a search for important
places is performed in order to identify buildings which require
speed reduction. An external service from Google [16] is used
to retrieve important places near to a speciﬁc coordinate. These
important places include schools, universities, hospitals, and
health care institutions. Once an important place is found
within a circular area of 1 km radius distance from driver’s
current position, the maximum speed is reduced to 30 km/h
ever.
To indeed consider a found important place as a speed
limit reducer, the important place must be on the same road
where the driver is traveling. One example of such situation is
presented in Figure 2. This is ensured by matching the driver’s
current street name and the name of the street where each one
of the found important places is located.
D. Aggressiveness Evaluation
The evaluation phase calculates the aggressiveness indi-
cator using speed and acceleration values combined with the
semantic enrichment done previously. The indicator varies
from 0 to 100 where 0 means no aggressivety and 100 high
aggressivety. Currently, the method considers BTC deﬁnitions
to obtain the indicator, but it can be conﬁgured to any other
country and laws. In the same way, BTC increases the ﬁne
according to the level of the transit violation, the method
applies stronger weights to highlight the driver aggressiveness.
Those weights were deﬁned considering BTC rules and ad-
justed using hit and try over real trajectories. Table VI presents
weights for speed violations and Table VII presents weights to
acceleration categories.
TABLE VI. WEIGHT ACCORDING TO SPEED BEHAVIOR
Speed behavior
Weight
1
Under speed limit
0
2
Up to 20% over the limit
1.5
3
From 20% to 50% over the limit
3.0
4
Over 50% over the limit
5.0
TABLE VII. WEIGHT ACCORDING TO ACCELERATION BEHAVIOR
Acceleration Type
Weight
1
Safe
0
2
Normal
1.5
3
Aggressive
3.0
4
Dangerous
5.0
During a full trajectory, the aggressive behavior might
appear occasionally. However, those speciﬁc moments are the
most common situations of accidents. So, a segment indicator
is obtained by the composition of two sub-indexes: exclusive
aggressive index and mean index. A segment is evaluated
considering speed and acceleration by calculating Segment
Aggressiveness Indicator (SAI) accordingly to (2).
SAI = ((ASEI ∗ pas) + (MSI ∗ pms))
2
+((AAEI ∗ paa) + (MAI ∗ pma))
2
(2)
ASEI = Aggressive speed exclusive index
MSI = Mean speed index
AAEI = Aggressive acceleration exclusive index
MAI = Mean acceleration index
pas = Aggressive speed percentage
pms = Non aggressive speed percentage
paa = Aggressive acceleration percentage
pma = Non aggressive acceleration percentage
Every coordinate of a segment is evaluated individually
to be classiﬁed according to speed and acceleration using
classiﬁcation presented in Table I and Table II.
The ASEI and MSI indexes are obtained accordingly to
(3) and (4). Equation 3 discard safe values, so pak is the
percentage k class considering only aggressive behavior, wk
is the weight of class k and avgk the average speed of k
class aggressive coordinates. On the order hand, Equation 4
considers all coordinates, so pmk is the percentage k class
and avgk the average speed of k class coordinates.
ASEI =
4
X
k=2
wk ∗ pak ∗ avgk
(3)
MSI =
4
X
k=1
wk ∗ pmk ∗ avgk
(4)
The acceleration indexes are obtained in the same way as
speed. The Exclusively Acceleration Index (AAEI) is obtained
by (5). The equation is composed of the sum of aggressive
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

acceleration evaluation and the sum of aggressive deceleration.
The wk is the weight, pak is the percentage and avgk is the
acceleration average for class k. Similarly, (6) gives the mean
acceleration evaluation.
AAEI =
3
X
k=1
(wk ∗ pak ∗ avgk) +
8
X
k=6
(wk ∗ pak ∗ avgk) (5)
MAI =
8
X
k=1
wk ∗ pk ∗ avgk
(6)
The Trajectory Aggressiveness Indicator (TAI), presented
in (7), is composed of all segment indicators and it reﬂects the
general behavior of a driver in a speciﬁc trajectory.
TAI =
nP
i=1
SAIi
n
(7)
IV.
ASSESSMENT
In order to assess the proposed method, it has been col-
lected a set of trajectories surrounding the city of Blumenau,
in the so-called Itajai River Valley Area, Brazil, from February
to October 2016, summing up 7.911 kilometers. Currently,
the data set contains more than 2.000 hours of 10 drivers
performing daily activities, such as going to work, to the gym,
to restaurants and to home. However, there are also several
trips in highways like BR-101 and BR-470.
Results indicate aggressiveness tendency once drivers join
the roadways (max speed of 80km/h) and highways (max speed
of 110km/h) with an average TAI of 36.87. Urban trajectories
resulted in a lower TAI average of 17.98. This can be explained
by the fact that urban roads usually prevent drivers of speeding
with semaphores, heavy trafﬁc, pedestrians and radar speeds.
The method is able to correctly identify driver aggres-
siveness considering external conditions like weather condi-
tions and important places closeness. This result could be
analyzed in the scenario of a trip from Governador Celso
Ramos/SC/Brazil to Blumenau/SC/Brazil during a rainy day
between 08:21:15 PM - 9:57:36 PM comprising 106.26km.
The trip starts at a highway limited by 110 km/h in a light
rain night. Since light rain was identiﬁed, the method applies
a speed reduction factor of 18% resulting in 90.2 km/h max
speed. Later, the driver join the SC-412 roadway, which is
limited to 80 km/h, and thus the speed limit was reduced to
65,6 km/h. Finally, an urban area is reached and so the speed
limit was reduced from 50 km/h to 41 km/h. In the same
way, the acceleration limits were also reduced accordingly to
Table VIII for all segments.
The aggressiveness evaluation results to a TAI of 29, 91,
which can be described as a moderate aggressive driving.
However, such indicator was only obtained due to the weather
conditions. Otherwise, in a sunny day, the TAI would be 18, 96.
So, without the weather condition enrichment, the driver would
be considered a safe conductor one during this trajectory.
Table IX and Table X show in details the speed distribution
and acceleration distribution, respectively. Table IX shows that
without semantic enrichment 86.34% of speed coordinates
would be considered safe, however considering the weather
TABLE VIII. ACCELERATION LIMITS CHANGED BY REDUCTION
FACTOR (18%)
Classiﬁcation
Standard Limit
Reduced Limit (18%)
Dangerous
[-9,0 a -14,0]
[-7,38 a -11,48]
Aggressive
[-5,5 a -9,0)
[-4,51 a -7,38)
Intermediate
[-3,0 a -5,5)
[-2,46 a -4,51)
Safe
[0 a -3,0)
[0 a -2,46)
Safe
[0 a 1,5)
[0 a 1,14)
Normal
[1,5 a 3,5)
[1,23 a 2,87)
Intermediate
[3,5 a 7,0)
[2,87 a 5,74)
Dangerous
[7,0 a 12,0]
[5,74 a 9,84]
condition the safe speed coordinates reduce to 46.50%. A
similar effect can be seen over acceleration, Table X presents
that intermediate accelerations increased 0.62%, as well as
aggressive accelerations appeared in wet road.
TABLE IX. SPEED DISTRIBUTION CONSIDERING WET AND DRY
ROAD
Classiﬁcation
% Wet road
% Dry Road
Under limit
46,50%
86,34%
Up to 10%
27,13%
8,25%
From 10% to 20%
14,78%
1,67%
From 20% to 50%
8,28%
1,31%
Over 50%
3,32%
2,43%
TABLE X. ACCELERATION DISTRIBUTION CONSIDERING WET
AND DRY ROAD
Classiﬁcation
% Wet Road
% Dry Road
Safe
97,65%
98,40%
Intermediate
2,22%
1,60%
Aggressive
0,13%
0%
Dangerous
0%
0%
The aggressiveness evaluation indicates that the driver
rarely applies abrupt movements. However, the majority of
the trajectory is performed using a considerable dangerous
speed. During the trip, a maximum speed of 120.71 km/h was
registered while the speed average was 75.37 km/h. Also, few
accelerations associated with risk of accidents were registered
mainly on deceleration with the max of −5.03 m/s2.
Several scenarios were evaluated in details in order to
assess the method accuracy in a qualitative approach. Due to
space limitation, it was not possible to present all of them,
but the method obtained satisfactory results considering urban
trajectories, roadway trajectories and also hybrid ones.
During the assessment, it was identiﬁed some improve-
ments and limitations that need to be addressed in further
works. For instance, the road speed limit is susceptible to errors
due to the lack of GPS accuracy. The impact of such errors
is considerable when the algorithm has to deﬁne the speed
limit by inverse geocoding. Figure 3 presents a speed limit
changed from 80 km/h to 50 km/h due to an incorrect inverse
geocoding query. As consequence, the segment 53 evaluated
the driver behavior as very aggressive (limited at 50 km/h),
although he/she was not driving aggressively in the correct
street (limited at 80 km/h).
Some scenarios indicate that the segment size of 1 km
should be reduced in order to obtain more accurate results.
Otherwise, the veriﬁcation of the important place street does
not match with the driver’s current street due to road changes.
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 3. Junction compromising speed limit of a segment
Figure 4. Five important places missed by 1 km segment using ﬁrst
coordinate street name
Figure 4 present this situation where the segment street name
is deﬁned by its ﬁrst coordinate. However, the driver changes
streets passing in front of an important place, which is placed
in a different street name. The situation is ignored by the
method since the segment street name and important place
street name do not match.
Finally, the pre-processing phase seems to be effective but
has several improvements that may be done. The DBScan
cleaner is able to remove noises distant 30 meters from the
core, but this is not sufﬁcient to clean noises under such limit.
To solve this situation another approach must be used since
the noise under 30 meters are common on GPS devices.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a naturalistic driver method to
identify driver’s aggressive behavior. The method is composed
of four steps that are capable of gather, clean, enrich and
analysis the drivers’ trajectories in order to identify aggressive
behaviours in a near real time response. The main advantage
of such method is its adaptive approach that considers environ-
mental conditions as weather and road speed limits to better
estimate the driver aggressivity indicator. This indicator varies
between 0 and 100 where 0 means no aggressivity while 100
means the highest aggressivity possible. Moreover, the method
can bring fast feedback to the drivers about their aggressive
behaviours on speciﬁc situations and can help them to change
habits in order to avoid accidents.
Another contribution is that the aggressivity indicator might
be adapted according to every demand. This approach might
be useful to transportation companies willing to improve the
safety of their drivers. Moreover, identifying aggressive drivers
allow insurance companies to offer discounts accordingly to
every driver proﬁle.
Although the proposed method is already under exper-
imental usage, several improvements are possible. For in-
stance, abrupt movements like passing or crossing lanes are
no considered yet and can be added in future works. Another
improvement might be explored information available for other
sensors from the smartphone such as accelerometer. Finally, it
is also important to conduct a massive evaluation to improve
weather reduction values based on real data.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Global status report on road safety 2015,” 2015, [Retrieved: Feb.,
2017]. [Online]. Available: http://www.who.int
[2]
E. Petridou and M. Moustaki, “Human factors in the causation of
road trafﬁc crashes,” European Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 16,
no. 9, 2000, pp. 819–826, [Retrieved: Jan., 2017]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3581952
[3]
A. B. Ellison, S. P. Greaves, and M. C. Bliemer, “Driver behaviour pro-
ﬁles for road safety analysis,” Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 76,
2015, pp. 118 – 132, [Retrieved: Jan., 2017]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0001457515000202
[4]
“Naturalistic driving: observing everyday driving behaviour,” 2010,
[Retrieved: Feb., 2017]. [Online]. Available: http://www.udrive.eu
[5]
G. Underwood, C. P., S. Wright, and D. Crundall, “Anger while driving,”
Transportation Research, vol. 2, no. 1, 1999, pp. 55–68.
[6]
E. Gulian, G. Matthews, A. I. Glendon, D. R. Davies, and L. M. Debney,
“Dimensions of driver stress,” Ergonomics, vol. 32, no. 6, 1989, pp.
585–602.
[7]
E. M. Carboni, “Analysis of drivers behaviour through moving object
trajectories,” Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina,
2014, dissertao de Mestrado - Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina
- UFSC.
[8]
A.
B.
Ellison,
M.
C.
Bliemer,
and
S.
P.
Greaves,
“Evaluating
changes
in
driver
behaviour:
A
risk
proﬁling
approach,”
Accident
Analysis
&
Prevention,
vol.
75,
2015,
pp.
298
–
309,
[Retrieved:
Feb.,
2017].
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0001457514003972
[9]
F. de Lucca Siqueira, “Discover of pursue patterns in moving object
trajectories,” Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina,
2012, dissertao de Mestrado - Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina
- UFSC.
[10]
O. Bagdadi and A. Vrhelyi, “Jerky drivingan indicator of accident
proneness?” Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 43, no. 4, 2011,
pp. 1359 – 1363, [Retrieved: Feb., 2017]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0001457511000236
[11]
T. A. Dingus, S. Klauer, V. Neale, A. Petersen, S. Lee, J. Sudweeks,
M. Perez, J. Hankey, D. Ramsey, and S. Gupta, “The 100-car naturalistic
driving study, phase ii-results of the 100-car ﬁeld experiment,” Virginia
Tech Transportation Institute, Tech. Rep., 2006.
[12]
M. Ester, H. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based algorithm
for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,” in Proced-
ings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining.
AAAI Press, 1996, pp. 226–231.
[13]
Y.
Zheng,
X.
Xie,
and
W.-Y.
Ma,
“Geolife:
A
collaborative
social
networking
service
among
user,
loca-
tion
and
trajectory,”
IEEE
Database
Engineering
Bulletin,
June
2010,
[Retrieved:
Feb.,
2017].
[Online].
Available:
http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/default.aspx?id=131038
[14]
M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and
I. H. Witten, “The weka data mining software: An update,” SIGKDD
Explorations, vol. 11, no. 1, 2009.
[15]
R.
Jenkins,
“Driving
in
rain,”
http://www.driving-test-
success.com/driving-articles/driving-in-rain.htm,
2015,
[Retrieved:
Jan., 2017].
[16]
“Google places api,” 2017, [Retrieved: Feb., 2017]. [Online]. Available:
https://developers.google.com/places
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

