 
Conflation in Geoprocessing Framework – Case Studies 
Recent development and looking ahead
Dan Lee, Weiping Yang, and Nobbir Ahmed 
Geoprocessing 
Esri, Inc 
Redlands, USA 
e-mail: dlee@esri.com; wyang@esri.com; nahmed@esri.com 
 
 
Abstract—Multiple sources of geographic information systems 
(GIS) data have been more easily and frequently produced and 
updated than ever. Yet, the traditional problem of data 
inconsistency spatially and in attribution, as the result of 
different ways of collecting and modeling data over time, 
remains obstacles in using the data for analysis and mapping. 
Efficient tools for data conflation have become a necessity for 
GIS users. Our recent work on conflation tools for the 10.2.1 
desktop release of ArcGIS (the commercial GIS software by 
Esri Inc.) focused on linear feature matching techniques for 
identifying matching and no-match features.  The initial results 
have proven time-saving in reconciling data for better 
positional and attribute quality and harmonization. Future 
challenges lay in formalizing data preparation, handling other 
feature types, and optimizing feature matching and workflows. 
Keywords-conflation; 
geoprocessing, 
feature 
matching; 
change 
detection; 
spatial 
adjustment; attribute 
transfer; 
workflow. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
GIS data maintained by many organizations and 
government agencies or obtained from data providers often 
need to be used together for multiple purposes of analysis 
and mapping. However, you may find that when displaying 
spatially overlapping or adjacent data, features representing 
the same ground locations or objects don’t line up even in 
the same map projection; or that a spatially up-to-date data 
lacks the desired attributes that only exist in another data 
source. Conflation is the process of matching corresponding 
features and making spatial adjustment or attribute transfer 
between them to improve data quality and consistency. 
Within the geoprocessing framework, six new tools, 
shown in Fig. 1, have been developed for the 10.2.1 desktop 
release of ArcGIS. This development is an advance from the 
legacy technology used in Esri’s earlier product [1]. 
Figure 1.  Conflation tools (by the tool icon 
) inside Editing and Data 
Management toolboxes in ArcGIS. 
Good conflation outcome is achievable as a result of high 
feature matching accuracy; inspection and editing may be 
necessary as part of the workflows. The automation and the 
significantly reduced manual work enable GIS users to move 
away from living with imperfect data and to reach higher 
standards in geographic data integration, analysis, and 
mapping more efficiently. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II briefly 
reviews the feature matching processes and associated tools. 
Our initial efforts have focused on linear features. Section III 
presents a few conflation scenarios and workflows used to 
accomplish the tasks with success and efficiency. Section IV 
gives conclusions and thoughts on future work. 
II. 
FEATURE MATCHING IN CONFLATION TOOLS 
At the core of conflation is feature matching, either 
between overlapping datasets or between adjacent datasets. 
Feature matching accuracy relies highly on data quality, 
similarity, and complexity. The feature matching techniques 
used in the conflation tools are briefly described below. 
A. Feature matching of overlapping datasets 
There 
have 
been 
many 
research 
papers 
and 
implementations on feature matching of overlapping 
datasets. Some examples include: a five-step statistical 
approach with the use of a merit function to compute unique 
combinations of matching pairs among potential but 
ambiguous matching pairs [2]; a delimited stroke oriented 
algorithm consisting of four processes for the matching of 
road networks [3], and an optimization model for linear 
feature matching which takes into account all potential 
matched pairs simultaneously by maximizing the total 
similarity of all matched features [4]. 
The feature matching technique we choose to use is 
based on the fundamental analysis of the topological 
structures and feature pattern recognition. The key processes 
are: (1) analyzing feature topology, i.e., to find nodes and 
joining lines in linear features, (2) building structures (paths 
and patterns), (3) matching structures, and (4) matching 
features within structures. More details on this feature 
matching approach are given in a separate paper [5]. 
The matching information can be written out to a match 
table with five fields: SRC_FID (source feature ID), 
TGT_FID (target feature ID), FM_GRP (feature match 
group ID), FM_MN (matching relationship in the form of 
m:n, where m and n represent the numbers of source features 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
 
and target features respectively in a match group and can be 
greater or equal to 1), and FM_CONF (feature matching 
confidence level with values between 0 and 100). This 
feature matching process is the basis for the following tools 
which help perform conflation tasks on overlapping datasets 
that cover the same geographic areas: 
 
Detect Feature Changes (DFC) identifies spatial and 
attributes changes between update and base features. 
The output change types include: S for spatial 
change, A for attribute change, SA for spatial and 
attribute changes, NC for no change, N for new 
update feature, and D for potentially to-be-deleted 
base feature. See the illustration in Fig. 2–(a). 
 
Generate Rubbersheet Links (GRL) generates 
rubbersheet links, including regular links (lines 
going from matching source to target locations) and 
identity links (points where source and target 
locations are identical and not being moved in 
rubbersheeting adjustment). The tool Rubbersheet 
Features (RF) does rubbersheeting adjustment using 
the generated links to align source features with 
target. See the illustration in Fig. 2–(b). 
 
Transfer Attributes (TA) transfers feature attributes 
from source to matching target features. See the 
illustration in Fig. 2–(c). By design when multiple 
source features match one or more target features, 
attributes from the first picked source feature are 
transferred to all matched target features. 
Figure 2.  Feature matching based tools for conflation of overlapping 
datasets. 
B. Edgematching - matching features of adjacent data 
areas 
Edgematching is the process of identifying corresponding 
features along the edge (meeting locations) of adjacent (side-
by-side) datasets. The key processes are: (1) finding features 
within the specified search distance to each other along their 
meeting areas, (2) evaluating the geometric characteristics 
and continuity from input to adjacent features and vice versa, 
and (3) determining the best fit pairs of corresponding 
features. The tools for edgematching are: 
 
Generate Edgematch Links (GEL), which generates 
edgematch links, followed by Edgematch Features 
(EF) to adjust features to new connecting locations 
guided by the links. See the illustrations in Fig. 3. 
Figure 3.  Edgematching by moving endpoints (one of the available 
options) of features to new connecting locations. 
C. Challenges in feature matching 
No matter how sophisticated the feature matching 
techniques are, the reality of geographic data is often more 
challenging than the automatic analysis can handle. The 
main factors causing difficulties and errors in feature 
matching include: 
 
Invalid feature topology, such as gaps, overshoots, 
undershoots, overlaps, and duplicates. 
 
Differences in feature representations and data 
modeling of the same ground objects, especially 
between overlapping data sources, ranging from 
variations in their geometric characteristics to 
distinctions in their structural formations. For 
example: round vs. squared corners of parcel 
boundary lines in Fig. 4–(a), one vs. separate road 
intersections in Fig. 4–(b), and different collections 
of road merging or splitting around complex 
highway interchange areas in Fig. 4–(c). 
 
Features with different levels of details for multiple 
map scales. See the illustrations in Fig. 4–(c) and (d). 
The more dissimilar the corresponding features the 
harder to make the right feature matching decisions. The 
conflation tools can take into account common attributes 
between input datasets to help determine the right match, but 
the common attributes are often either unavailable or 
incomplete. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

          
 
(a)  Parcel corners (LA Co. DPW).   (b)  Road intersections (ODOT). 
 
 
(c)  Highway interchange formations (ICC). 
 
 
(d)  Rivers in different levels of details (NZ). 
Figure 4.  Examples of dissimilar overlapping features. 
Given the highly automated conflation tools and the 
possibility of some mistakes in the results, the question we 
need to address is what it will take to find and correct errors 
and to complete the conflation tasks.  That leads to the 
discussion on conflation workflows. Due to the length 
limitation of the paper, the discussion focuses on conflation 
of overlapping data sources. 
III. 
CONFLATION WORKFLOWS 
Conflation tasks may be as simple as to make spatial 
adjustment or attribute transfer from one data source to 
another for better positional accuracy and attribute 
consistency, or as comprehensive as to unify information 
from multiple data sources for the best combined result. In 
general a conflation workflow may consist of three 
components: (1) preprocessing to eliminate input data issues 
and to exclude irrelevant features from participating in the 
conflation process; (2) automated processes using the 
conflation tools to produce mostly correct results and 
conflation evaluation tools to derive information that help 
identify potential mismatched features and find locations that 
need attention; and (3) interactive review and editing based 
on the automatically derived information, as well as visual 
inspection, to improve the result to satisfaction. 
A few workflows are examined below using real world 
data. But before getting into that, it is necessary to briefly 
explain the preprocessing and conflation evaluation tools 
mentioned above. 
Preprocessing is common to all conflation tasks. A few 
generic guidelines and possible geoprocessing tools to use 
are given below and are not repeated for every workflow 
scenario: 
 
Fix invalid geometry (Repair Geometry tool) 
 
Validate feature topology (Topology Tools) 
 
Remove overshoots and undershoots (Trim Line and 
Extend Line tools) 
 
Delete unwanted duplicates (Delete Identical tool) 
 
Break 
unintended 
long-running 
features 
at 
intersections (Feature To Line tool) 
 
Exclude irrelevant features from participating in 
conflation processes. (Select By Attributes or Select 
By Location) 
Other data specific preprocessing may also be necessary; 
it is important to identify data issues and use appropriate 
tools to resolve them. 
The conflation evaluation tools mentioned in workflow 
component (2) above have been built either by Python 
scripting or by chaining together existing geoprocessing 
tools. They produce information to help understand the 
conflation results, identify potential errors, and facilitate the 
interactive review and editing processes. They are 
supplementary tools and do not come with the release. Here 
are the main evaluation tools: 
 
Check Feature Matching (CFM) – analyzes the 
feature matching information produced by DFC, 
GRL, or TA tools and flags questionable matched 
conditions, for instance, the multiple source or target 
features in a m:n match group don’t belong to the 
same line or the matched source and target features 
may be too far apart to be the right match. 
 
DFC and Evaluation – runs DFC tool and checks for 
potential change type errors caused by mismatches; 
it is especially helpful to verify change types D and 
N so their source features can be excluded from 
participating in GRL and TA processes as needed. 
The tool also makes a bar graph for change types. 
 
GRL and Evaluation – runs the GRL tool and 
produces point features at locations where the 
generate rubbersheet links intersect or where no 
links are generated. It also adds source (from-point) 
and target (to-point) vertex types to the links. The 
vertex types are simply: 0 for in-line vertex, 1 for 
dangle end, 2 for pseudo node, 3 for T-node, 4 for 
cross-node, 5 for node with 5 joining lines, and so 
on. This information is intended to facilitate the 
inspection, especially at major intersections, for 
example if a link starts at type 4 and ends at 1, it may 
not be linking corresponding locations. 
 
RF and Assessment – It runs RF tool to perform 
rubbersheeting adjustment and produces additional 
data and information to help compare the source data 
and its adjusted result and to assess the location 
accuracy improvement. 
 
TA and Evaluation – It runs TA tool and produces 
additional data and information to help inspect no 
transfer and potentially mis-transferred cases. 
Using real world test data, two conflation scenarios and 
workflows were examined: A. rubbersheeting spatial 
adjustment workflow; B. a more comprehensive workflow 
requiring both spatial and attribute unification. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

   
 
(a) Data setA (orange lines) and setB (black lines) on the left; change 
types from DFC tool on the right. 
 
     
 
(b)  A complex area with different source and target line breaks 
(orange and black dots respectively), and corner styles. 
 
   
 
(c) Rubbersheet links (green arrows).      (d) Reviewed locations. 
 
    
(e) Rubbersheeting result (blue lines). 
 
 
(f) Comparison of source-target distance distributions before (upper) 
and after (lower) rubbersheeting adjustment. 
A. Rubbersheeting spatial adjustment workflow 
The data used to demonstrate this workflow are two sets 
of parcel lines (provided by LA Co. DPW); let’s name them 
setA (3779 lines) and setB (3840 lines) as shown in the left 
image of Fig. 5-(a); preprocessing details are omitted here. 
The goal was to spatially adjust setA towards the more 
accurate setB. The workflow steps, actions, and results are: 
 
Step 1: Ran the DFC and Evaluation tool – see 
change types in the right image of Fig. 5-(a). Notice 
that both setA and setB contain lines that were not 
parcel lines and didn’t have corresponding features. 
They ended up being N and D change types. Actions 
were taken to verify them and exclude them from 
GRL process in Step 2 for better result. 
-  Through flagged information and visual inspection, 
86% of the Ns (not matched in setA) were 
confirmed; others corrected. Most of the errors 
occurred in one large area with not only 
complex feature shapes but also a big contrast in 
the number of line breaks (orange dots for 
source line breaks; black dots for target line 
breaks) and corner styles, shown in Fig. 5-(b). 
-  Through flagged information and visual inspection, 
99% of the Ds (not matched in setB) were 
confirmed; others corrected. 
-  Selected 3056 matched lines from setA and 2915 
from setB, excluding the verified Ns and Ds 
respectively, as inputs for Step 2 below. 
 
Step 2: Ran the GRL and Evaluation tool - total 
4413 regular rubbersheet links (see Fig. 5-(c) for a 
close up) and 0 identity link were generated. 
-  Reviewed the flagged no link locations (red dots in 
Fig. 5-(d), mostly concentrated in the southwest 
area, i.e., the complex area shown in Fig. 5-(b)), 
and added 65 critical links. 
-  Through flagged intersecting links (brown dots in 
Fig. 5-(d)) and other hints and inspections, total 
104 links were modified and 29 deleted. 
-  Analyzed the feature matching result; the estimated 
accuracy value breakdowns are presented in 
Table I. A 98.34% high accuracy was reached 
among matched features, while the overall 
accuracy 93.84% was largely affected by the no 
match cases in the complex area. 
 
Step 3: Ran the RF and Assessment tool – setA was 
adjusted, as shown in Fig. 5-(e), using total 4449 
rubbersheet links. Among many possible ways of 
measuring positional  alignment improvement, the 
following two are simple and effective: 
-  Compared rubbersheet link counts from Step 2 and 
from rerun of GRL after rubbersheeting: regular 
link count reduced from 4413 to 1200; identity 
link count increased from 0 to 3102. This 
indicates over 70% of source locations are 
perfectly adjusted to target locations. 
-  Compared source to target (source-target) distance 
distributions through the lengths of the regular 
links: the distances were obviously more 
concentrated 
in 
the 
shorter 
range 
after 
rubbersheeting adjustment; see Fig. 6-(f). 
Figure 5.  Rubbersheeting workflow (LA Co. DPW parcel data). 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

   
(a)  State roads (orange lines) and local roads (black lines). 
 
 
(b) Attributes (ROUTE_CD values) transferred from setA to setC. 
 
    
 
(c)  Rubbersheet links & Ns of setA.  (d) Adjusted Ns merged in setC. 
TABLE I.  
ESTIMATED FEATURE MATCHING ACCURACY IN STEP 2 
Matched Feature Groups 
Match 
Relation
-ship 
Group 
Count 
(Gc) 
Correct  
group 
count 
(Cgc) 
Error 
group 
count 
(Egc) 
Accuracy 
(percentage of 
Cgc/Gc) 
1:1 
2267 
2244 
7 
98.99% 
m:n 
384 
363 
21 
94.53% 
Total 
2651 
2607 
28 
98.34% 
Unmatched Features 
Match 
Relation
-ship 
Feature 
count 
(Fc) 
Correct 
feature 
count 
(Cfc) 
Error 
feature 
count 
(Efc) 
Accuracy 
(percentage of 
Cfc/Fc) 
1:0a 
116 
5 
111 
4.31% 
0:1b 
26 
9 
17 
34.62% 
Total 
142 
14 
128 
9.86% 
Grand 
total 
2793 
2621 
156 
93.84% 
a. Change type N features of DFC output.  b. Change type D features in DFC output. 
This test data was intentionally chosen for its challenging 
conditions including the seemingly CAD-imported features 
with no attributes to separate road centerlines and other 
features from the parcel lines and the inconsistent data 
modeling. Also on purpose, only minor preprocessing was 
done so the strengths and weaknesses of the conflation tools 
could be tested using near raw data. Although unaccounted 
errors may exist and would slightly lower the estimated 
accuracy levels, this exercise produced encouraging result. 
B. Workflow of unifying datasets for the best outcome 
The data used to demonstrate this workflow are two 
subsets of state and local roads in northeast area of Meigs 
County (provided by Ohio DOT) as shown in Fig. 6-(a). 
Let’s name them setA (775 lines) and setB (827 lines), 
knowing that setB is spatially more up-to-date and accurate 
than setA. The goal was to produce a unified output with the 
spatial accuracy of setB, the uncommon attributes from both 
sets for matched features, and all unmatched features of both 
sets properly positioned keeping their original attributes. 
There could be various ways to get there; all would be 
quite comprehensive. Below is one of the possible 
workflows attempted in this study. Good preprocessing was 
done to break lines where necessary, especially for route 
features in setA, and to improve the topological consistency 
between the two sets; details are omitted here. The conflation 
workflow strategy was to: (1) make a setC by copying setB 
so it has the spatial accuracy and attributes of setB intact, (2) 
transfer desired attributes from setA to setC for matched 
features, (3) identify unmatched features in setA, (4) 
spatially adjust the unmatched features of setA towards setC, 
and (5) merge the adjusted unmatched features of setA into 
setC. Here are the details: 
 
Step 1: Copied setB to setC and ran DFC and 
Evaluation tool – Actions were taken to verify N and 
D change types and to exclude them from TA 
process in Step 2 for better result. 
-  Through flagged information and visual inspection, 
58 of the 61 Ns (unmatched in setA) were 
confirmed, 3 corrected; 109 of the 117 Ds 
(unmatched in setC) were confirmed; 8 
corrected. 
-  Selected 717 matched lines from setA and 718 
from setC, excluding the verified Ns and Ds 
respectively, as inputs for Step 2 below. 
 
Step 2: Ran TA and Evaluation tool – see the 
example result of attribute transfer (ROUT_CD) in 
Fig. 6-(b), which is superimposed with change types 
from Step 1. Actions were taken to verify TA result: 
-  Reviewed the only 4 no transfer records in setC. 
Manual transfer was needed. 
-  For each of the 39 m:n match cases, attributes from 
one of the m features were transferred to all n 
features in the match group by design. Review 
of the flagged cases and corrections would be 
needed, if the default transfers were undesired. 
-  Analyzed the feature matching result; the estimated 
accuracy value breakdowns are presented in 
Table II. A 100% accuracy was reached among 
matched features, while the slightly lower 
overall accuracy 98.74% was mainly affected by 
the few mistakenly unmatched cases. 
 
Step 3: Ran GRL tool - total 12322 regular 
rubbersheet links and 19 identity links were 
generated.  
 
Figure 6.  Unifying multiple data sources for best outcome. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

TABLE II.  
ESTIMATED FEATURE MATCHING ACCURACY IN STEP 2 
Matched Feature Groups 
Match 
Relation
-ship 
Group 
Count 
(Gc) 
Correct  
group 
count 
(Cgc) 
Error 
group 
count 
(Egc) 
Accuracy 
(percentage of 
Cgc/Gc) 
1:1 
656 
656 
0 
100% 
m:n 
39 
39 
0 
100% 
Total 
695 
695 
0 
100% 
Unmatched Features 
Match 
Relation
-ship 
Feature 
count 
(Fc) 
Correct 
feature 
count 
(Cfc) 
Error 
feature 
count 
(Efc) 
Accuracy 
(percentage of 
Cfc/Fc) 
1:0a 
61 
58 
3 
95.08% 
0:1b 
117 
109 
8 
93.16% 
Total 
178 
167 
11 
93.83% 
Grand 
total 
873 
862 
11 
98.74% 
a. Change type N features of DFC output.  b. Change type D features in DFC output. 
-  Reviewed the links focusing on where the Ns of 
setA were to be adjusted to connect with 
features in setC, see the example in Fig. 6-(c). 
All 58 Ns had links to target locations. 
 
Step 4: Ran RF tool to adjust the N features using 
the generated rubbersheet links. 
 
Step 5: Append the adjusted Ns (highlighted) of setA 
onto setC (blue lines), as shown in Fig. 6-(d). 
This test data was chosen for its clean topology and 
relatively high similarity. The test results indeed proved a 
close correlation between high quality starting data and 
accurate conflation result. Subsequently, very little manual 
work was needed in this case study. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND THOUGHTS ON FUTURE WORK 
Through the two case studies using real world data, the 
new 
conflation 
tools 
developed 
for 
ArcGIS 
were 
successfully tested and produced high quality results. The 
first case study proved that the very costly and nearly 
impossible task of generating thousands of rubbersheeting 
links 
one-by-one 
manually 
could 
be 
done 
mostly 
automatically with small amount of interactive editing. The 
second case study gave a good consensus on how the 
ultimate goal of conflation, i.e., the fusion of multiple source 
information for the best unified single outcome can be 
achieved efficiently. 
The development of highly automated conflation tools 
for linear features is a major step forward in supporting the 
reconciliation of multiple data sources – an important 
process for data integration and data sharing demanded and 
embarked on by GIS and mapping agencies [6][7]. Our 
future efforts will focus on the following areas: 
 
Enhancements on feature matching with additional 
pattern recognitions and richer output information. 
 
New tools for other feature types (point and 
polygon) and contextual conflation. 
 
Integrated interactive conflation inspection and 
finishing environment. 
 
Streamlining of workflows by testing more real 
world scenarios and making conflation support tools 
available 
at 
ArcGIS 
Resources 
Center: 
http://resources.arcgis.com/en/home/. 
 
Investigations on harmonizing spatially related 
features, such as utility lines and other boundaries 
spatially associated with parcel lines. 
 
Extending the use of conflation tools in other areas, 
such as data quality checking, linking multi-scale 
geospatial 
databases 
and 
cartographic 
representations for incremental updating. 
 
Potential of using image and other information 
sources in feature matching [8]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thanks to the many Geoprocessing team members for 
their support and to the following organizations for sharing 
their data for testing and creating illustrations in this paper: 
Parcel datasets, sourced from the Department of Public 
Works (DPW), Los Angeles County, USA. 
Road datasets, sourced from Institut Cartogràfic de 
Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain. 
River datasets, sourced from National Institute for Water 
and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) and Land Information 
New Zealand (LINZ). Crown Copyright Reserved. 
Meigs county road data, sourced from Ohio State 
Department of Transportation, USA. 
Also thanks to Mark Hollingshead, Esri St. Louis Office, 
USA, for providing well-prepared Meigs road data. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. E. Lupien and W. H. Moreland, “A general approach to 
map conflation”, Proceedings of AutoCarto 8, March 30 - 
April 2, 1987, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, pp. 630-639. 
[2] V. Walter and D. Fritsch, “Matching spatial data sets: a 
statistical approach”, International Journal of Geographical 
Information and science, vol. 3(5, 1999), pp. 445-473. 
[3] M. Zhang and L. Meng, “Delimited stroke oriented algorithm 
– working principle and implementation for the matching of 
road networks”, Journal of Geographic Information Sciences, 
vol. 14(1), June, 2008, pp. 44-53. 
[4] L. Li and M. Goodchild, “An optimization model for linear 
feature 
matching 
in 
geographical 
data 
conflation”, 
International Journal of Image and Data Fusion, vol. 2(4), 
2011, pp. 309-328. 
[5] W. Yang, D. Lee, and N. Ahmed, “Pattern Based Feature 
Matching for Geospatial Data Conflation”, submitted to 
GEOProcessing, 2014, Barcelona, Spain. 
[6] L. Stanislawski, C. Nelson, and M. Hamann, “Automated 
Conflation of Reach Data for the National Hydrography 
Dataset”, 
http://proceedings.esri.com/library/userconf/proc02/pap1207/
p1207.htm, [retrieved: Nov. 26, 2013]. 
[7] Y. Li and C. Liu, “Spatial approaches for conflating GIS 
roadway datasets”, Sustainable Transportation Systems, 2012, 
pp. 290-298, doi:10.1061/9780784412299.0035. 
[8] C. Chen, C. Knoblock, and C. Shahabi, “Automatically 
conflating 
road 
vector 
data 
with 
orthoimagery”, 
GeoInformatica, 10(4), 2006, pp. 495-530. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

