Using Geosynchronization for Incremental Update of INSPIRE Service Databases 
 
Lassi Lehto, Eero Hietanen and Pekka Latvala 
Department of Geoinformatics and Cartography 
Finnish Geodetic Institute 
Masala, Finland 
lassi.lehto@fgi.fi, eero.hietanen@fgi.fi, pekka.latvala@fgi.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Opening of governmental geospatial datasets has 
lead to the creation of multitude of copies of these datasets, 
used as source information for various value adding services. 
Obligations set forth by the INSPIRE directive bring new data 
resources available via service databases, copied from the 
original sources. Without proper updating procedure these 
copy datasets become fast out-of-date. The Geosynchronization 
Service (GSS) proposal of the Open Geospatial Consortium 
(OGC) is a promising approach for resolving this problem. As 
an example, GSS is investigated in this paper as a tool for 
synchronizing 
INSPIRE 
datasets 
and 
keeping 
service 
databases up-to-date in a multi-provider situation. 
Keywords-geosynchronization; incremental update; service 
database; open data; INSPIRE. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Opening of governmental data resources is one of the 
most important trends affecting the provision of geospatial 
services in Europe. As datasets become freely available, 
many different actors, also in private sector, are able to 
simply download a dataset, combine it with some 
application-specific content or another open public sector 
dataset and create a dedicated online customer service that 
may have thousands of active users. 
Without proper handling of updates the service databases 
may become quite fast out-of-date. In some cases the 
governmental datasets are being updated on a weekly or even 
daily basis. A copied service database can often be left 
untouched for a long time. This can potentially create a huge 
data quality problem. 
In the context of the INSPIRE directive, European 
providers of spatial datasets are obliged to develop 
standardized services for content themes that in many cases 
involve multiple separate institutions [1][2]. In this situation, 
it is usually necessary to set up separate service databases, in 
which the content is integrated, harmonized and brought to 
the specified common schema. Again, the problem of data 
decay over time is obvious. The services become fast out-of-
date, unless the service databases are regularly updated from 
the original sources. 
A full data download and a complete replacement of the 
service database contents is often unpractical, due to vast 
data volumes, or local additions made in the copy dataset. 
Thus partial, feature level update of the service database 
becomes a necessity. The principles of incremental update 
have been investigated over the years in various research 
projects. The latest action in this area is the work of Open 
Geospatial Consortium (OGC) to specify a service type 
called Geosynchronization Service (GSS) that would allow 
incremental update of data resources over the network [3]. In 
this paper, the GSS approach is tested in the context of an 
INSPIRE service development project, in which the service 
database is composed of content coming from two separate 
data providers. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II discusses the past work done in the area of 
incremental update and synchronization of geospatial data. 
Section III describes the principles of the OGC’s GSS 
specification. Section IV describes the context of the case 
study and the implementations developed in it. Section V 
concludes the paper with discussion on the lessons learnt and 
prospects for the future work. 
II. 
PREVIOUS WORK 
Incremental update has long been studied as a 
mechanism for synchronizing geospatial datasets across 
organizational borders [4][5]. Mostly these studies did not 
consider network-based solutions. Milanović et al. describe 
an example of an early service-oriented implementation [6]. 
In this experiment general OGC service standards were used 
to synchronize datasets among participating data providers. 
The examples, in which GSS specification has been adopted 
as a solution for data synchronization include distributed 
maintenance of the National Hydrography Dataset in Indiana 
[7] 
and 
New 
Hampshire 
[8]. 
 
A 
few 
software 
implementations have been developed based on the GSS 
specification, like CarbonCloud Sync of Carbon Project Inc. 
[9], userSmarts of ImageMatters [10] and GeoGig of 
Boundless [11]. 
III. 
OGC’S GEOSYNCHRONIZATION SERVICE 
A. Principles 
The Geosynchronization specification of OGC is based 
on the idea of collaborative capture of geographic 
information, in which one party acts as a Publisher proposing 
changes to be made to the target database [12]. Another 
important role is that of a Reviewer, who checks the 
proposed changes and either accepts or rejects them, based 
on some well-established quality criteria. The third role is a 
Subscriber, a party that is interested in receiving the 
authorized changes made to the target database to keep a 
copied dataset up-to-date, i.e. synchronized with the original. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

These functionalities are formulated as a set of Web Service 
interfaces that support the needs of the identified actor roles. 
The main workflow of the Geosynchronization Service is 
depicted in the Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The main Geosynchronization Service workflow. 
The Geosynchronization workflow commences with a 
Publisher proposing a change to be made in the target 
database (action number 1). This proposal is fed into the 
ATOM stream called the Change Feed. Looking into the 
change proposal from the Change Feed the Reviewer makes 
a decision, whether the change should be accepted or 
rejected (2). Thus the Reviewer represents the organization 
having responsibility and authority on the target database. If 
a given change proposal gets accepted by the Reviewer, 
information on the decision is sent to the respective 
Publisher via the Resolution Feed (3), the change is 
committed to the database (5) and the corresponding record 
of the change is created to the Replication Feed (6). If the 
change is rejected, only note of this decision is returned to 
the Publisher and no other action is taken. Finally, if a third 
party is interested in the changes happening in the target 
database, that party can register as a Subscriber to receive the 
changes from the Replication Feed (7). 
All the important information in the Geosynchronization 
Service is conveyed through standard ATOM feeds [13]. 
These include Change Feed to manage the proposed updates, 
Resolution Feed to convey information on the validation 
decisions, and Replication Feed for synchronizing a remote 
copy of the dataset with the master database managed within 
the Geosynchronization Service. This mechanism facilitates 
a standards-based approach for retrieving only items that 
have been created since the previous request. The change 
requests are encoded as Web Feature Service (WFS) 
Transaction operations [14]. 
Main use cases of the Geosynchronization Service 
include maintenance of multi-resolution datasets by 
organizations on different levels of administration hierarchy 
(for instance municipality proposing updates on a dataset 
managed by a state level authority) and crowd-sourced 
provision of updates to a governmental dataset. In both cases 
an outside actor (Publisher) proposes changes to be made on 
a dataset managed by an authority (Reviewer) that has to 
validate the changes before they are committed to the 
database. A further third party can then act as a Subscriber to 
keep a copied instance of the dataset up-to-date by checking 
the Replication Feed regularly and applying the changes to 
the copy dataset. The Replication Feed can be queried with 
full filtering capabilities, so that the Subscriber can only 
receive changes that are relevant for his purposes. If deemed 
appropriate, a GSS can be configured to automatically 
commit all changes directly to the Subscriber’s database. A 
Subscriber can also opt for receiving only change proposals 
with information of their validity (Resolution Feed). 
B. Status of the Specification 
The Geosynchronization Service specification has been 
initially drafted in the context of the OGC Interoperability 
Program as a Canadian Geospatial Data Infrastructure 
(CGDI) pilot in 2007 - 2008. Since then the specification has 
been amended and refined in other OGC and local Canadian 
programs. The candidate standard was published as OGC 
Engineering Report in 2011. Since 2011 the GSS 
specification has not advanced in the OGC process and the 
official standard is not yet available. 
IV. 
CASE: INSPIRE SERVICES IN A MULTI-PROVIDER 
SITUATION 
The case implementation of the GSS specification 
described in this paper has been developed in the context of 
the European INSPIRE directive and the requirement it sets 
for EU member states to establish standardized services on 
geospatial content, as defined in common data specifications 
and content schemas. In many cases, the content specified in 
one single INSPIRE theme, like Hydrography (HY), 
involves 
datasets 
maintained 
by 
many 
state 
level 
organizations. The commonly agreed European level content 
schemas also often significantly differ from the data 
structures used in national datasets. All this necessitates 
maintenance of separate service databases, in which content 
is integrated from different data provider organizations and 
the data structures are designed to support INSPIRE 
schemas. This environment represents an ideal use case for a 
GSS piloting. On one hand, the data provider organizations 
involved need to keep their datasets synchronized, otherwise 
the quality of the resulting service output would be severely 
degraded. On the other hand, the service database has to be 
kept up-to-date by replicating to the service database the 
changes made in the original datasets. 
In the case implementation discussed here, the 
organizations involved in the provision of INSPIRE 
Hydrography theme are the National Land Survey of Finland 
(NLS), the official national mapping authority, and the 
Finnish Environmental Institute (SYKE), a governmental 
organization responsible for supporting the state activities 
related to the protection of environment. The mapping 
authority maintains an up-to-date geometric representation of 
the physical hydrologic features and the environmental 
institute manages a rich record of data values describing the 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

status of those physical features. SYKE also maintains a 
network representation of the hydrography system, so there 
is a need to synchronize spatial geometries between the two 
organizations too. 
The test implementation was designed according to the 
principles of the GSS, predominantly to synchronize the 
hydrography network geometries managed by SYKE, based 
on the frequently updated geometries of physical waters, 
maintained by NLS (see Figure 2). To facilitate the flow of 
updates 
from 
NLS 
to 
SYKE, 
a 
prototype 
GSS 
implementation was developed. As the data updates in this 
case 
can 
be 
seen 
as 
authoritative 
changes, 
the 
review/validation step was not included in the prototype and 
is thus not further discussed in the paper. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The GSS prototype implementation architecture. 
The GSS prototype uses PostGIS/PostgreSQL database 
(Changes DB) for storing the proposed changes. In the 
demonstration environment, the changes are produced using 
OpenLayers-based client application that formulates the 
changes as WFS-T messages (1). Once the GSS prototype 
receives a WFS-T message, it parses the message extracting 
all relevant information, and stores everything to the 
Changes database (2). This functionality is implemented as a 
Java Servlet. The Replication Feed is produced by another 
Java Servlet that, once receiving a replication request, 
processes it, retrieves the needed pieces of information from 
the Changes database and then formulates the response in the 
form of an ATOM feed (3). 
The Changes database was designed to be simple. One 
single table contains all data items related to proposed 
changes. A record in the table corresponds to one change 
proposed to an individual feature. The columns of this 
database table are described in Table I. 
The fields stored in the Changes database table are 
carefully selected to support efficient serving of the 
Replication Feed queries. The WFS-T DELETE operation 
represents a special challenge, as it does not contain the 
attributes of the deleted feature, but only its identification. 
As the approach requires the geometry of the affected feature 
before the change to be stored into the change table, this 
information has to be acquired elsewhere. In the prototype 
implementation this is done by requesting the feature 
information from the target database before the change in 
question is applied to it. To improve storage efficiency, the 
geometry of the feature in the Transaction column could also 
be removed and dynamically generated from the Geom 
column when needed. 
TABLE I.  
COLUMNS OF THE CHANGES DATABASE TABLE. 
Column 
Data type 
Description 
GID 
integer 
Unique identifier of the feature 
Type 
string 
Name of the feature class 
ChangeTime 
date/time 
Timestamp of the change 
Operation 
string 
INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE 
Transaction 
string 
The change, encoded as a WFS-T 
transaction message 
Geom 
geometry 
Geometry of the feature after the change. 
If operation is DELETE, then before the 
change. 
EntryID 
integer 
Unique identifier of the change 
Author 
string 
Publisher of the change 
 
As the Changes database’s Transaction column contains 
a complete representation of the affected feature after the 
change in every UPDATE operation, the Changes database 
also serves as a fully versioned data store. All known 
versions of a given feature can be requested from the GSS 
Replication Feed using the FEATUREID parameter. If the 
initial creation of the feature is also recorded as an INSERT 
operation, then the full history of the feature is available 
from the GSS. 
The Replication Feed can be queried from the service by 
GetEntries operation. In this query the calling application 
can limit the result set by the following predicates: 
STARTTIME/ENDTIME (limits for the change timestamp), 
BBOX/GEOM (spatial extent inside which the changes are 
requested, as a rectangular bounding box or free form 
polygon), FEATUREID (returns changes related to the given 
feature or features), ENTRYID (returns the indicated 
change). The resulting Replication Feed is formatted as an 
XML-encoded ATOM feed, following the principles 
established in the GSS specification. 
To facilitate illustrative visualization of the changes in a 
map display, an extra GetEntryIdObjectGeometry operation 
has been added to the prototype as an extension for the GSS 
specification. This enables geometries of an identified 
change to be requested from the Changes database. As the 
original change messages are stored in a separate column 
(Transaction), the Replication Feed can be quite efficiently 
generated. 
Two OpenLayers-based map viewer user interfaces have 
been developed to demonstrate the functionality of the GSS. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

One is used to initiate changes. The source dataset is queried 
via a WFS interface from the NLS DB and the transactions 
resulting from the edits done on the features in the map 
window are redirected to the prototype GSS instance. The 
other map viewer is used to visualize features from the 
SYKE’s target database that is being synchronized with the 
original NLS database. By the client application a user can 
visualize the contents of the target database, together with 
the changes requested from the Changes database via the 
GSS instance (4). The user can then interactively select the 
changes that seem appropriate for the target database. Finally 
the selected changes are applied to the database through the 
WFS-T interface (5). The edits done on the SYKE’s target 
database will again trigger change requests in the GSS’s 
Change Feed, relating to the feature types maintained by 
SYKE (6) 
In a similar fashion, the GSS Replication Feed can be 
accessed to keep a remote service database up-to-date (7). 
This could be a completely automated process as all the 
changes are authoritative and can be copied without further 
consideration to the service database. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The prototype GSS implementation described in the 
paper has been developed in the context of an INSPIRE 
Download Service piloting project. The experiences gained 
in the work point out that the GSS approach can be utilized 
to synchronize two databases for achieving consistent 
representation of geospatial datasets and thus for facilitating 
the integration of INSPIRE content in multi-provider 
environment. At the same time the GSS serves as a tool for 
keeping the copied service database up-to-date. 
The GSS developed in the project is essentially based on 
standardized approaches. The update information is 
transmitted and stored as standard WFS-T transactions. GSS 
response messages are formulated as ATOM-conformant 
feeds. OGC-compliant service interfaces are used to access 
the data stores, both to retrieve and to modify the contents of 
the backend databases. The selected approach facilitates 
integration and usage of the proposed system with various 
off-the-shelf commercial and open source solutions. 
An interactive process has been developed for selecting 
relevant updates using the capable filtering options of the 
GSS query interface. A map interface-based tool is used for 
fine-tuning the set of updates to be applied to the target 
database. These functions enable highly varied application 
needs to be taken into account in the update process. 
The experiences gained in developing the GSS 
implementation confirm that the approach taken in the 
OGC’s Geosynchronization activity is usable and can be 
adopted in the context of multi-provider INSPIRE Download 
Service provision. 
Future developments could involve for instance adding of 
schema transformation capabilities to the GSS to enable 
synchronization among heterogeneous schema structures. 
Another need for further investigation is the scalability of the 
proposed approach in case of larger data volumes and 
various types of data, and the methods, by which this could 
be ensured. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work described in this paper has been co-funded by 
the National Land Survey of Finland, the Finnish 
Environmental Institute, the Finnish Ministry of Agriculture 
and Forestry and the Finnish Geodetic Institute. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] European Commission, “INSPIRE Directive", 2007. at: 
http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2007:108
:0001:0014:EN:PDF [accessed: 2014-10-09]. 
[2] European Commission, “COMMISSION REGULATION 
(EC) No 976/2009 of 19 October 2009 implementing 
Directive 2007/2/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council as regards the Network Services”, 2009. at: http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX: 
02009R0976- 20101228&from=EN. [accessed: 2014-10-09]. 
[3] Open Geospatial Consortium, Specifications Working Group 
on 
GeoSynchronization 
Home 
Page. 
at: 
http://www.opengeospatial.org/projects/groups/geosyncswg 
[accessed: 2014-10-09]. 
[4] M. Scheu, W. Effenberg, and I. P. Williamson, “Incremental 
update and upgrade of spatial data”, 2000. Zeitschrift fur 
Vermessungswesen, 125(4), 2000, pp. 115-120. 
[5] A. Cooper and A. Peled, “Incremental Updating and 
Versioning”, 
2001. 
20th 
International 
Cartographic 
Conference, Beijing, Vol 4, 2001, pp. 2804-2809. 
[6] A. Milanović, J. Guimet, E. Rodellas, and M. A. Bolívar, 
“Interorganizational 
Geo-Synchronization 
Using 
Open 
Geospatial Consortium's (OGC) Technologies to Share and 
Harmonize Data in Catalonia”, INSPIRE Conference 2010, 
Krakow, 
at: 
http://geoportal.cat/geoportal/eng/documents/ 
articles/Ponencia_INSPIRE_2010.pdf [accessed: 2014-10-
13]. 
[7] J. Sparks, “Indiana High & Local-Resolution NHD Update 
Geosynchronization”. Framework Data Exchange through 
Automated Geosynchronization , Final Report, 2011. at: 
https://www.fgdc.gov/grants/2010CAP/InterimFinalReports/2
42-10-2-IN-FinalReport.pdf [accessed: 2014-10-13]. 
[8] R. Chormann and J. Harrison, “New Hampshire NHD 
GeoSynchronization Network“, 2010 NSDI CAP Final 
Report, 
2012, 
at: https://www.fgdc.gov/grants/2010CAP 
/InterimFinalReports/238-10-2-NH-FinalReport.pdf 
[accessed: 2014-10-10]. 
[9] N. Goldstein, “GeoSynchronization – Synchronization of 
Geo-Databases 
through 
Interoperability”, 
2010. 
at: 
http://proceedings.esri.com/library/userconf/feduc10/papers/u
ser/goldstein.pdf [acessed: 2014-10-10]. 
[10] ImageMatters, 
userSmarts 
Home 
Page, 
at: 
http://www.imagemattersllc.com/products/usersmarts.php 
[accessed: 2014-10-13]. 
[11] GeoGig Home page, at: http://geogig.org [accessed 2014-10-
13]. 
[12] Open Geospatial Consortium, “OWS 7 Engineering Report – 
Geosynchronization 
Service”, 
2011. 
at: 
http://portal.opengeospatial.org/files/?artifact_id=39476 
[accessed: 2014-10-09]. 
[13] M. Nottingham and R. Sayre [eds.], “The Atom Syndication 
Format”, 2005. at: http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4287 [accessed: 
2014-10-09]. 
[14] P. A. Vretanos [ed.], “OpenGIS Web Feature Service 2.0 
Interface Standard”, 2011. at: http://portal.opengeospatial.org 
/files/?artifact_id=39967 
[accessed: 
2014-10-09].
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

